Philosophical Rudiments concerning GOVERNMENT and Civil SOCIETY (...).

By Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury

To: Vaughan sculp:



Philosophical Rudiments CONCERNING Government and Society. OR, A DISSERTATION
Concerning MAN in his several habitudes and respects, as the Member of a
Society, first Secular, and then Sacred.

Containing The Elements of Civil Polity in the Agreement which it has both
with Natural and Divine Laws. In which is demonstrated, Both what the Origin
of Justice is, and wherein the Essence of Christian Religion does consist.
Together with The Nature, Limits, and Qualifications both of Regiment and
Subjection.

By THO: HOBBES.

LONDON Printed by J. G. for R. ROYSTON, at the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1651.

TO THE Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Earl of Devonshire, My most honored Lord.
May it please your Lordship,
IT was the speech of the Roman people (to whom the name of King had been
rendered odious, as well by the tyranny of the Tarquins, as by the Genius and
Decretals of that City) 'Twas the speech I say of the Public, however
pronounced from a private mouth, (if yet Cato the Censor were no more then
such) That all Kings are to be reckoned amongst ravenous Feasts. But what a
Beast of Prey was the Roman people, whilst with its conquering Eagles it
erected its* proud Trophee^ so far and wide over the world, bringing the
Africans, the Asiaticks, the Macedomans, and the Achaeans, with many other
despoyled. Nations, into a specious bondage, with the pretense of preferring
them to be De^zons of Rome? So that if Cato's saying were a wise one, 'twas
every whit as wise that of Pontiue Telesinus; who flying about with open mouth
through all the Companies of his Army, (in that famous encounter which he had
with Sylla) cried out, That Rome her self, as well as Sylla, was to be razed;
for that there would always be Wolves and Depraedatours of their Liberty,
unless the Forest that lodged them were grubb'd up by the roots. To speak
impartially, both sayings are very true; That Man to Man is a kind of God; and
that Man to Man is an arrant Wolf: The first is true, if we compare Citizens
amongst themselves; and the second, if we compare Cities. In the one, there is
some analogy of similitude with the Deity, to wit, Justice and Charity, the
twin-sisters of peace: But in the other, Good men must defend themselves by
taking to them for a Sanctuary the two daughters of War, Deceit and Violence:
that is in plain terms a mere brutall Rapacity: which a^ong^ men object to
one another; as a reproach, by an inbred custom which they have of beholding
their own actions in the persons of other men, wherein, as in a Mirroir, all
things on the left side appear to be on the right, and all things on the right
side to be as plainly on the left; yet the natural right of Preservation which
we all receive from the uncontrollable Dictates of Necessity, will not admit it
to be a Vice, though it confess it to be an Unhappiness. Now that with Cato
himself, (a Person of so great a renown for wisdom) Animosity should so
prevail instead of Judgment, and Partiality instead of Reason, that the very
same thing which he thought equal in his Popular State, he should censure as
unjust in a Monarchical, other men perhaps may have leisure to admire. But I
have been long since of this opinion, That there was never yet any
more-then-vulgar-prudence that had the luck of being acceptable to the Giddy
People; but either it has not been understood, or else having been so, has
been levelled and cried down. The more eminent Actions and Apothegms both of
the Greeks and Romans have been indebted for their Eulogies not so much to the
Reason, as to the Greatness of them, and very many times to that prosperous
usurpation (with which our Histories do so mutually upbraid each other) which
as a conquering Torrent carries all before it, as well public Agents as
public Actions, in the stream of Time. Wisdom properly so called is nothing
else but this, The perfect knowledge of the Truth in all matters whatsoever.
Which being derived from the Registers and Records of Things, and that as
'twere through the Conduit of certain definite Appellations, cannot possibly be
the work of a sudden Acuteness, but of a wellballanc'd Reason, which by the
Compendium of a word, we call Philosophy. For by this it is, that a way is
opened to us, in which we travel from the contemplation of particular things
to the Inference or result of universal Actions. Now look how many sorts of
things there are which properly fall within the cognizance of humane reason,
into so many branches does the tree of Philosophy divide it self. And from the
diversity of the matter about which they are conversant, there has been given
to those branches a diversity of Names too: For treating of Figures, it is called
Geometry; of motion, Physic; of natural right, Moralls; put all together, and
they make up Philosophy. Just as the British, the Atlantic, and the Indian
Seas, being diversely christened from the diversity of their shoares, do
notwithstanding all together make up The Ocean. And truly the Geometricians
have very admirably performed their part. For whatsoever assistance does accrue
to the life of man, whether from the observation of the Heavens, or from the
description of the Earth, from the notation of Times, or from the remotest
Experiments of Navigation; Finally, whatsoever things they are in which this
present Age does differ from the rude simpleness of Antiquity, we must
acknowledge to be a debt which we owe merely to Geometry. If the Moral
Philosophers had as happily discharged their duty, I know not what could have
been added by humane Industry to the completion of that happiness, which is
consistent with humane life. For were the nature of humane Actions as
distinctly known, as the nature of Quantity in Geometrical Figures, the
strength of Avarice and Ambition, which is sustained by the erroneous opinions
of the Vulgar, as touching the nature of Right and Wrong, would presently faint
and languish; And Mankind should enjoy such an Immortal Peace, that (unless
it were for habitation, on supposition that the Earth should grow too narrow
for her Inhabitants) there would hardly be left any pretense for war. But now
on the contrary, that neither the Sword nor the Pen should be allowed any
Cessation; That the knowledge of the Law of Nature should lose its growth, not
advancing a whit beyond its ancient stature; that there should still be such
siding with the several factions of Philosophers, that the very same Action
should be decryed by some, and as much elevated by others; that the very same
man should at several times embrace his several opinions, and esteem his own
Actions far otherwise in himself then he does in others; These I say are so
many signs, so many manifest Arguments, that what has hitherto been written
by Moral Philosophers, has not made any progress in the knowledge of the
Truth; but yet have took with the world, not so much by giving any light to the
understanding, as entertainment to the Affections, whilst by the successful
Rhetorications of their speech they have confirmed them in their rashly
received opinions. So that this part of Philosophy has suffered the same
destiny with the public Ways, which lie open to all passengers to traverse up
and down or the same lot with high ways and open streets; Some for
divertisement, and some for business; so that what with the Impertinencies of
some, and the Altercations of others, those ways have never a seeds time, and
therefore yield never a harvest. The only reason of which unluckines should
seem to be this; That amongst all the writers of that part of Philosophy, there
is not one that has used an idoneous Principle of Tractation. For we may not,
as in a Circle, begin the handling of a Science from what point we please.
There is a certain Clue of Reason, whose beginning is in the dark, but by the
benefit of whose Conduct, we are led as 'twere by the hand into the clearest
light, so that the Principle of Tractation is to be taken from that Darkness,
and then the light to be carried thither for the irradiating its doubts. As
often therefore as any writer, does either weakly forsake that Clue, or
wilfully cut it asunder, he describes the Footsteps, not of his progress in
Science, but of his wandering from it. And upon this it was, that when I applied
my Thoughts to the Investigation of Natural Justice, I was presently
advertised from the very word Justice, (which signifies a steady Will of giving
every one his Own) that my first enquiry was to be, from whence it proceeded,
that any man should call any thing rather his Own, then another man's. And when
I found that this proceeded not from Nature, but Consent, (for what Nature at
first laid forth in common, men did afterward distribute into several
Impropriations, I was conducted from thence to another Inquiry; namely to what
end, and upon what Impulsives, when all was equally every man's in common, men
did rather think it fitting, that every man should have his Enclosure; And I
found the reason was, that from a Community of Goods, there must needs arise
Contention whose enjoyment should be greatest, and from that Contention all
kind of Calamities must unavoydably ensue, which by the instinct of Nature,
every man is taught to shun. Having therefore thus arrived at two maxims of
humane Nature, the one arising from the concupiscible part, which desires to
appropriate to it self the use of those things in which all others have a
joint interest, the other proceeding from the rational, which teaches every
man to fly a contre-naturall Dissolution, as the greatest mischief that can
arrive to Nature; Which Principles being laid down, I seem from them to have
demonstrated by a most evident connection, in this little work of mine, first
the absolute necessity of Leagues and Contracts, and thence the rudiments both
of moral and of civil Prudence. That Appendage which is added concerning the
Regiment of God, has been done with this intent, that the Dictates of God
Almighty in the Law of nature, might not seem repugnant to the written Law,
revealed to us in his word. I have also been very wary in the whole tenor of
my discourse, not to meddle with the civil Laws of any particular nation
whatsoever, That is to say, I have avoided coming a shore, which those Times
have so infosted both with shelves, and Tempests. At what expense of time and
industry I have been in this scrutiny after Truth, I am not ignorant; but to
what purpose, I know not. For being partial Judges of our selves we lay a
partial estimate upon our own productions. I therefore offer up this Book to
your Lordships, not ^avour* but censine first, as having found by many
experiments, that it is not the credit of the Author* ^or the newness of the
work, nor yet the ornament of the style, but only the weight of Reason, which
recommends any Opinion to your Lordships Favor and Approbation. If it fortune
to please, that is to say, if it be sound, if it be useful, if it be vulgar; I
humbly offer it to your Lordship as both my Glory, and my Protection; But if in
any thing I have erred, your Lordship will yet accept it as a Testimony of my
Gratitude, for that the means of study which I enjoyed by your Lordships
Goodness, I have employed to the procurement of your Lordships Favor. The God
of Heaven crown your Lordship with length of Days in this earthly Station, and
in the heavenly. Jerusalem, with a crown of Glory.

Your Honors most THO. HOBBS.

THE AUTHORS PREFACE TO THE READER.
READER, I promise thee here such things, which ordinarily promised, do seem
to challenge the greatest attention, and I lay them here before thine eyes,
whether thou regard the dignity or profit of the matter treated of, or the
right method of handling it, or the honest motive, and good advice to undertake
it, or lastly the moderation of the Author. In this Book thou shall find
briefly described the duties of men, First as Men, then as Subjects, Lastly, as
Christians; under which duties are contained not only the elements of the Laws
of Nature, and of Nations, together with the true original, and power of
Justice, but also the very essence of Christian Religion it selfe^, so far
forth as the measure of this my purpose could well bear it.

Which kind of doctrine (excepting what relates to Christian Religion) the
most ancient: Sages did judge fittest to be delivered to posterity, either
curiously adorned with Verse, or clouded with Allegories, as a most beautiful
and hallowed mystery of Royal (...) h^^ity; left by the disputations of p^e
men, it might be de filed; Other Philosophers in the mean time, to the
advantage of mankind, did contemplate the faces, and motions of things,
others, without disadvantage; their natures, and causes. But in after times.
Socrates is said to have been the first, who truly loved this civil Soience,
although hitherto not thoroughly understood, yet glimmering forth as through a
cloud in the government of the Common weal, and that he set so great a value
on this, that utterly abandoning, and despising all other parts of Philosopy,
he wholly embraced this, as judging it only worthy the labor of his mind.
After him comes Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, and other Philosophers, as well
Greek, as Latin, and now at length all men of all Nations, not only
Philosophers, but even the vnlgar, have, and do still deal with this as a
matter of ease, exposed and prostitute to every Motherwit, and to be attained
without any great care or study, and which makes mainly for its dignity, those
who suppose themselves to have it, or are in such employment, as they ought to
have it, do so wonderfully please themselves in its Idaea, as they easily
brook the followers of other arts to be esteemed and styled ingenuous,
learned, skillful, what you will; except prudent: for this Name, in regard of
civil knowledge, they presume to be due to themselves only. Whether therefore
the worth of arts is to be weighed by the worthiness of the Persons who
entertain them, or by the number of those who have written of them, or by the
judgment of the wisest; certainly this must carry it, which so nearly relates
to Princes, and others engaged in the government of mankind, in whose
adulterate Species also the most part of me^ do delight themselves, and in
which the most excellent wits of Philosophers have been conversant. The benefit
of it when rightly delivered (that is) when derived from true Principles by
evident connection, we shall then best discern, when we shall but well have
considered the mischiefs that have befallen mankind in its counterfeit and
babbling form; for in such matters as are speculated for the exercise of our
wits, if any error escape us, it is without hurt; neither is there any loss,
but of time only: but in those things which every man ought to meditate for
the steerage of his life, it necessarily happens; that not only from errors,
but even from ignorance it self, there arise offenses, contentions, nay even
slaughter it self. Look now, how great a prejudice these are, such, and so
great is the benefit arising from this doctrine of morality, truly declared.
How many Kings (and those good men too) has this one error, That a Tyrant
King might lawfully be put to death, been the slaughter of? How many throats
has this false position cut, That a Prince for some causes may by some certain
men be deposed? And what bloodshed has not this erroneous doctrine caused,
That Kings are not superiors to, but administrators for the multitude? Lastly,
how many rebellions has this opinion been the cause of, which teaches that
the knowledge whether the commands of Kings be just or unjust, belongs to
private men; and that before they yield obedience, they not only may, but ought
to dispute them? Besides, in the moral Philosophy now commonly received, there
are many things no less dangerous then those, which it matters not now to
recite. I suppose those ancients foresaw this, who rather chose to have the
Science of Justice wrapped up in fables, then openly exposed to disputations: for
before such questions began to be moved, Princes did not sue for, but already
exercised the supreme power. They kept their Empire entire, not by arguments,
but by punishing the wicked, and protecting the good; likewise Subjects did not
measure what was just by the sayings and judgments of private men, but by the
Laws of the Realm; nor were they kept in peace by disputations, but by power
and authority: yea they reverenced the supreme power, whether residing in one
man or in a council, as a certain visible divinity; therefore they little used
as in our days, to join themselves with ambitious, and hellish spirits, to the
utter ruin of their State; for they could not entertain so strange a fancy
as not to desire the preservation of that by which they were preserved; in
truth, the simplicity of those times was not yet capable of so learned a piece
of folly. Wherefore it was peace, and a golden age, which ended not before that
Saturn being expelled, it was taught lawful to take up arms against Kings.
This I say, the Ancients not only themselves saw, but in one of their fables,
they seem very aptly to have signified it to us; for they say, that when Ixion
was invited by Jupiter to a banquet, he fell in love, and began to court Juno
her self; offering to embrace her, he clasp't a clowd, from whence the
Centaures proceeded, by nature half men, half horses, a fierce, a fighting,
and unquiet generation; which changing the names only, is as much as if they
should have said, that private men being called to Counsels of State, desired
to prostitute justice, the only sister and wife of the supreme, to their own
judgments, and apprehensions, but embracing a false and empty shadow instead
of it, they have begotten those hermophrodite opinions of moral Philosophers,
partly right and comely, partly brutall and wild, the causes of all
contentions, and blood-sheds. Since therefore such opinions are daily seen to
arise, if any man now shall dispell those clouds, and by most firm reasons
demonstrate that there are no authentical doctrines conccening right and
wrong, good and evil, besides the constituted Laws in each Realm, and
government; and that the question whether any future action will prove just or
unjust, good or ill, is to be demanded of none, but those to whom the supreme
has committed the interpretation of his Laws; surely he will not only show us
the high way to peace, but will also teach us how to avoid the close, dark,
and dangerous bypath of faction and sedition, then which I know not what can
be thought more profitable.

Concerning my Method, I thought it not sufficient to use a plain and evident
style in what I had to deliver, except I took my beginning from the very matter
of civil government, and thence proceeded to its generation, and form, and the
first beginning of justice; for every thing is best understood by its
constitutive causes; for as in a watch, or some such small engine, the matter,
figure, and motion of the wheels, cannot well be known, except it be taken in
sunder, and viewed in parts; so to make a more curious search into the rights
of States, and duties of Subjects, it is necessary, (I say not to take them in
sunder, but yet that) they be so considered, as if they were dissolved, (i. e.)
that we rightly understand what the quality of humane nature is, in what
matters it is, in what not fit to make up a civil government, and how men must
be agreed among themselves, that intend to grow up into a well-grounded State.
Having therefore followed this kind of Method; In the first place I set down
for a Principle by experience known to all men, and denied by none, to wit,
that the dispositions of men are naturally such, that except they be restrained
through fear of some coercive power, every man will distrust and dread each
other, and as by natural right he may, so by necessity he will be forced to
make use of the strength he has, toward the preservatio^ of himself. You will
object perhaps, that there are some who deny this, truly so it happens, that
very many do deny it. But shall I therefore seem to fight against my self
because I affirm that the same men confess, and deny the same thing? In truth
I do not, but they do, whose actions disavow what their discourses approve of.
We see all countries though they be at peace with their neighbors, yet
guarding their Frontiers with armed men, their Towns with Walls and Ports, and
keeping constant watches. To what purpose is all this, if there be no fear of
the neighboring power? We see even in well-governed States, where there are
laws and punishments appointed for offenders, yet particular men travel not
without their Sword by their sides, for their defenses, neither sleep they
without shutting not only their doors against their fellow Sebjects, but also
their Trunks and Coffers for fear of domestiques. Can men give a clearer
testimony of the distrnst they have each of other, and all, of all? How since
they do thus, and even Countries as well as men, they publicly profess
their mutual fear and diffidence; But in disputing they deny it, that's as
much as to say, that out of a desire they have to contradict others, they
gainsay themselves. Some object that this principle being admitted, it would
needs follow, not only that all men were wicked (which perhaps though it seem
hard, yet we must yield to, since it is so clearly declared by holy writ) but
also wicked by nature (which cannot be granted without impiety) But this, that
men are evil by nature, follows not from this principle; for though the
wicked were fewer then the righteous, yet because we cannot distinguish them,
there is a necessity of suspecting, heeding, anticipating, subjugating,
selfe-defending, ever incident to the most honest, and fairest conditioned;
much less does it follow that those who are wicked are so by nature, for
though from nature, that is from their first birth, as they are merely sensible
Creatures, they have this disposition, that immediately as much as in them
lies, they desire and do whatsoever is best pleasing to them, that either
through fear they fly from, or through hardness repel those dangers which
approach them, yet are they not for this reason to be accounted wicked; for the
affections of the mind which arise only from the lower parts of the soul are
not wicked themselves, but the actions thence proceeding may be so sometimes,
as when they are either offensive, or against duty. Unless you give Children
all they ask for, they are peevish, and cry, I and strike their Patents
sometimes, and all this they have from nature, yet are they free from guilt,
neither may we properly call them wicked; first, because they cannot hurt;
next, because wanting the free use of reason they are exempted from all duty;
these when they come to riper years having acquired power whereby they may do
hurt, if they shall continue to do the same things, then truly they both begin
to be, and are properly accounted wicked; In so much as a wicked man is almost
the same thing with a child grown strong and sturdy, or a man of a childish
disposition; and malice the same with a defect of reason in that age, when
nature ought to be better governed through good education and experience.
Unless therefore we will say that men are naturally evil, because they
receive not their education and use of reason from nature, we must needs
acknowledge that men may derive desire, fear, anger, and other passions from
nature, and yet not impute the evil effects of those unto nature. The
fonndation therefore which I have laid standing firm, I demonstrate in the
first place, that the state of men without civil society (which state we may
properly call the state of nature) is nothing else but a mere war of all
against all; and in that war all men have equal right unto all things; Next,
that all men as soon^ as they arrive to understanding of this hateful
condition, do desire (even nature it self compelling them) to be freed from
this misery. But that this cannot be done except by compact, they all quitt
that right which they have unto all things. Furthermore I declare, and confirm
what the nature of compacts is; how and by what means the right of one might
be transferred unto another to make their compacts valid; also what rights, and
to whom they must necessarily be granted for the estabishling of Peace, I mean
what those dictates of reason are, which may properly be termed the Laws of
nature; and all these are contained in that part of this book which I entitle
Liberty.

These grounds thus laid, I show farther what civil government, and the
supreme power in it, and the diverse kinds of it are; by what means it becomes
so, and what rights particular men, who intend to constitune this civil
government, must so necessarily transfer from themselves on the supreme power,
whether it be one man, or an assembly of men, that except they do so it will
evidently appear to ^e no civil government, but the rights which all men have
to all things, that is the rights of War will still remain. Next, I
distinguish the diverse kinds of it, to wit, Monarchy, Aristocratie,
Democratie, and paternall Dominion, and that of Masters over their Servants, I
declare how they are constituted, and I compare their several conveniences and
inconveniences each with other: furthermore, I unfold what those things are
which destroy it, and what his or their duty is who rule in chief. Last of
all, I explicate the natures of the Law, and of sin, and I diginguish Law
from Counsel, from compact' from that which I call Right; all, which I
comprehend under the title of Dominion.

In the last part of it which is entitled Religion, lest that right which by
strong reason I had confirmed the Sovereign powers in the preceding discourse
have over their Subjects, might seem to be repugnant to the sacred Scriptures,
I show in the first place how it repugns not the Divine right, for as much as
God overrules all rulers by nature, (i. e.) by the Dictates of natural reason.
In the second, for as much as God himself had a peculiar dominion over the
Jews by virtue of that ancient Covenant of Circumcision. In the third, because
God does now rule over us Christians by virtue of our Covenant of Baptism; and
therefore the authority of Rulers in chief, or of civil government, is not at
all, we see, contrary to Religion.

In the last place I declare what duties are necessarily required srom us, to
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; and of those I plainly demonstrate, and
conclude out of evident testimonies of holy writ, according to the
interpretation made by all, that the obedience which I have affirmed to be due
from particular Christian Subjects unto their Christian Princes cannot possibly
in the least sort be repugnant unto Christian Religion. You have seen my
Method, receive now the reason which moved me to write this; I was studying
Philosphie for my mind sake, and I had gathered together its first Elements in
all kinds, and having digested them into three Sections by degrees, I thought
to have written them so as in the first I would have treated os a body, and its
general properties; in the second of man and his special faculties, and
affections; in the third, of civil government and the duties of Subjects:
Wherefore the first Section would have contained the first Philosophy, and
certain elements os Physic; in it we would have considered the reasons os
Time, Place, Cause, Power, Relation, Proportion, Quantity, Figure, and motion.
In the second we would have been conversant about imagination, Memory,
intellect, ratio^ination, appetite, Will, good and Evil, honest and dishonest,
and the like; what this last Section handles, I have now already showed you.
Whilst I contrive, order, pensively and slowly compose these matters, for I
only do reason, I dispute not. It so happened in the interim, that my Country
some few years before the civil Wars did rage, was boiling ^ot with
questions concerning the rights of Dominion, and the obedience due from
Subjects, the true forerunners of an approaching War; And was the cause which
(all those other matters deferred) ripened, and plucked from me this third part.
Therefore it happens that what was last in order, is yet come forth first in
time, and the rather, because I saw that grounded on its own principles
sufficiently known by experience it would not stand in need of the former
Sections. I have not yet made it out of a desire of praise (although if I had,
I might have defended my selse with this fair excuse, that very few do things
laudably, who are not affected with commendation) but for your sakes Readers,
who I persuaded my selse, when you should rightly apprehend and thoroughly
understand this Doctrine I here present you with, would rather choose to brook
with patience some inconveniences under government (because humane affairs
cannot possibly be without some) then self opiniatedly disturb the quiet of
the public; That, weighing the justice of those things you are about, not by
the perswa^ion and advise of private men, but by the Laws of the Realm, you
will no longer suffer ambitious men through the streams of your blood to wade
to their own power; That you will esteem it better to enjoy your selves in
the present state, though perhaps not the best, then by waging War, endeavor
to procure a reformation for other men in another age, your selves in the mean
while either killed, or consumed with age; Farthermore, for those who will not
acknowledge themselves subject to the civil Magistrate, and will be exempt
from all public burdens, and yet will live under his Jurisdiction, and looks
for protection from the violence and injuries of others, that you would not
look on them as fellow Subjects, but esteem them for enemies, and spies, and
that ye rashly admit not for Gods Word all which either openly or privately
they shall pretend to be so. I say more plainly, if any Preacher, Confessor,
or Casuist, shall but say that this doctrine is agreeable with Gods word, namely,
That the chief ruler, nay any private man may lawfully be put to death without
the chiefes command, or that Subjects may resist, conspire, or covenant against
the supreme power, that ye by no means believe them, but instantly declare
their names. He who approves of these reasons, will also like my intention in
writing this book.

Last of al, I have propounded to my self this rule through this whole
discourse; First, not to define ought which concerns the justice of single
actions, but leave the^ to be determined by the laws. Next not to dispute the
laws of any government in special, that is, not to point which are the laws of
any country, but to declare what the laws of all countries are. Thirdly not to
seem of opinion, that there is a less proportion of obedience due to an
Aristocraty or D^mocraty, then a Monarchy; for though I have endeavored by
arguments in my tenth Chapter to gain a belief in men, that Monarchy is the
most commodious government (which one thing alone I confess in this whole book
not to be demonstrated, but only probably stated) yet every where I expressly
say, that in all kind of Government whatsoever, there ought to be a supreme and
equal power. Fourthly, not in any wise to dispute the positions of Divines,
except th^se which strip Subjects of their obedience, and shake the foundations
of civil government. Lastly, lest I might imprudently set forth somewhat of
which there would be no need, what I had thus written, I would not presently
expose to public interest, wherefore I got some few copies privately dispersed
among some of my friends, that discrying the opinions of others, if any things
appeared erroneous, hard, or obscure, I might correct, soften, and explain them.

These things I found most bitterly excepted against: that I had made the
civil powers too large, but this by Ecclesiastical Persons; that I had
utterly taken away liberty of conscience, but this by Sectaries; that I had set
Princes above the civil Laws, but this by Lawyers; wherefore I was not much
moved by these men's reprehensions, (as who in doing this did but do their own
business) except it were tie those knots somewhat faster.

But for their sakes who have a little been staggered at the Principles
themselves, to wit the nature of men, the authority or right of nature, the
nature of compacts and contracts, and the original of civil government,
because in finding fault they have not so much followed their Passions, as
their common sense, I have therefore in some places added some annotations
whereby I presumed I might give some satisfaction to their differing thoughts;
Lastly I have endeavored to offend none beside those whose Principles these
contradict, and whose tender minds are lightly offended by every difference of
opinions.

Wherefore if ye shall meet with some things which have more of sharpness, and
less of certainty then they ought to have, since they are not so much spoken
for the maintenance of parties, as the establishment of peace, and by one whose
just grief for the present calamities of his country, may very charitably be
allowed some liberty, it is his only request to ye Readers, ye will deign to
receive them with an equal mind.

The Index of the Chapters under the titles of LIBERTY.
CHAP. I. OF the State of men without civil society. 1 CHAP. II. Of the Law of
nature concerning contracts. 16 CHAP. III. Of the other Laws of nature. 34
CHAP. IV. That the Law of nature is a divine Law. 58
EMPIRE.
CHAP. V. OF the causes, and first Original, of civil government. 73 CHAP.
VI. Of the right, whether we consider it in an Assembly, or in one Person,
(...) which he has who is endued with supreme authority. 82 CHAP. VII. Of the
three kinds of government, Democraty, Aristocraty, and Monarchy. 100 CHAP.
VIII. Of the right which Lords and Masters have over their Servants. 126 CHAP.
IX. Of the rights which Parents have over their children, and of a Kingdom
Paternall. 173 CHAP. X. A comparison of the three kinds of government each with
other, according to the inconveniences of each one. 146 CHAP. XI. The places
and examples of Scripture concerning the right of government, which make for
proof of the foresaid Doctrines. 165 CHAP. XII. Of the inward causes which
dissolve all civil government. 172 CHAP. XIII. Of the duties of those men who
sit at the Helm of State. 189 CHAP. XIV. Of Laws, and Sins. 208
RELIGION.
CHAP. XV. OF Gods government by nature. 135 CHAP. XVI. Of his government by
the old Covenant. 261 CHAP, XVII. Of his government by the new Covenant. 287
CHAP. XVIII. Of those things which are necessary for our entrance into the
Kingdom of Heaven. 339
Rex est qui posuit metus,
Et diri mala poctoris?
Quom non ambitio^pot^ns
Et nun quam stabilis favor
Vulgi praecipitis mouet
Qui tuto positus ^oco
Infra se vi^et. omnia


Philosophical Elements OF A true Citizen.
LIBERTY.
CHAP. I. Of the state of men without Civil Society.
I. The Introduction. II. That the beginning of Civil Society is from mutual
fear. III. That men by nature are all equal. IV. Whence the will of
Mischieving arises. V. The Discord arising from comparison of Wills. VI. From
the Appetite many have to the same thing. VII. The definition of Right. VIII. A
right to the end gives a right to the means necessary to that end. IX. By the
right of nature every man is judge of the means which tend to his own
preservation. X. By Nature all men have equal right to all things. XI. This
right which all men have to all things is unprofitable. XII. The state of men
without civil society is a mere State of War; The definitions of Peace and
War. XIII. War is an adversary to man's preservation. XIV. It is lawful for
any man by natural right to compel another whom he has gotten in his power
to give caution of his future obedience. XV. Nature dictates the seeking after
Peace.

I. THe faculties of Humane The Introduction.
nature may be reduced unto four kinds; Bodily strength, Experience, Reason,
Passion. Taking the beginning of this following Doctrine from these, we will
declare in the first place what manner of inclinations men who are endued with
these faculties bare toward each other, and whether, and by what faculty they
are born, apt for Society, and so preserve themselves against mutual violence;
then proceeding, we will show what advice was necessary to be taken for this
business, and what are the conditions of S^ciety, or of Humane Peace; that is
to say, (changing the words only) what are the fundamental Laws of Nature.

II. The greatest part of those men who That the beginning of mutual society
is from f^ar.
have written ought concerning Commonwealths, either suppose, or require us,
or beg of us to believe, That Man is a Creature (*) born sit for Society: The
Greek, call him (...); and on this foundation they so build up the Doctrine of
Civil Society, as if for the preservation of Peace, and the Government of
Mankind there were nothing else necessary, then that Men should agree to make
certain Covenants and Conditions together, which themselves should then call
Laws. Which Axiom, though received by most, is yet certainly False, and an
Error proceeding from our too slight contemplation of Humane Nature; for they
who shall more narrowly look into the Causes for which Men come together, and
delight in each others company, shall easily find that this happens not because
naturally it could happen no otherwise, but by Accident: For if by nature one
Man should Love another (that is) as Man, there could no reason be returned why
every Man should not equally Love every Man, as being equally Man, or why he
should rather frequent those whose Society affords him Honor or Profit. We do
not therefore by nature seek Society for its own sake, but that we may receive
some Honor or Profit from it; these we desire Primarily, that Secondarily: How
by what advice Men do meet, will be best known by observing those things which
they do when they are met: For if they meet for Traffic, it is plain every
man regards not his Fellow, but his Business; if to discharge some Office, a
certain Marketfriendship is begotten, which has more of Jealousy in it then
True love, and whence Factions sometimes may arise, but Good will never; if for
Pleasure, and Recreation of mind, every man is wont to please himself most with
those things which stir up laughter, whence he may (according to the nature
of that which is Ridiculous) by comparison of another man's Defects and
Infirmities, pass the more current in his own opinion; and although this be
sometimes innocent, and without offense; yet it is manifest they are not so
much delighted with the Society, as their own Vain glory. But for the most
part, in these kind of meetings, we wound the absent, their whole life,
sayings, actions are examined, judged, condemned; nay, it is very rare, but
some present receive a fling before they part, so as his reason was not ill,
who was wont always at parting to go out last. And these are indeed the true
delights of Society, unto which we are carried by nature. (i. e.) by those
passions which are incident to all Creatures, until either by sad experience,
or good precepts, it so fall out (which in many never happens) that the
Appetite, of present matters, be dul'd with the memory of things past, without
which, the discourse of most quick and nimble men, on this subject, is but cold
and hungry.

But if it so happen, that being met, they pass their time in relating some
Stories, and one of them begins to tell one which concerns himself; instantly
every one of the rest most greedily desires to speak of himself too; if one
relate some wonder, the rest will tell you miracles, if they have them, if not,
they will feign them: Lastly, that I may say somewhat of them who pretend to be
wiser then others; if they meet to talk of Philosophy, look how many men, so
many would be esteemed Masters, or else they not only love not their f^llowes,
but even persecute them with hatred: So clear is it by experience to all men
who a little more narrowly consider Humane affairs, that all free congress
arises either from mutual poverty, or from vain glory, whence the parties met,
endeavor to carry with them either some benefit, or to leave behind them that
same (...) some esteem and honor with those, with whom they have been
conversant: The same is also collected by reason out of the definitions
themselves, of Will, Good, Honor, Profitable. For when we voluntarily contract
Society, in all manner of Society we look after the object of the Will, i. e.
that, which every one of those, who gather together, propounds to himself for
good; now whatsoever seems good, is pleasant, and relates either to the
senses, or the mind, but all the minds pleasure is either Glory, (or to have a
good opinion of ones self) or referres to Glory in the end; the rest are
Sensual, or conducing to sensuality, which may be all comprehended under the
word Conveniences. All Society therefore is either for Gain, or for Glory, (i.
e.) not so much for love of our Fellows, as for love of our Selves: but no
society can be great, or lasting, which begins from Vain Glory; because that
Glory is like Honor, if all men have it, no man has it, for they consist in
comparison and precellence; neither does the society of others advance any whit
the cause of my glorying in my self; for every man must account himself, such
as he can make himself, without the help of others. But though the benefits of
this life may be much farthered by mutual help, since yet those may be better
attained to by Dominion, then by the society of others: I hope no body will
doubt but that men would much more greedily be carried by Nature, if all fear
were removed to obtain Dominion, then to gain Society. We must therefore
resolve, that the Original of all great, and lasting Societies, consisted not
in the mutual good will men had toward each other, but in the (*) mutual
fear they had of each other.

Born sit] Since we now see actually a constituted Annotation.
Society among men, and none living out of it, since we discern all desirous of
congresse, and mutual correspondence, it may seem a wonderful kind of
stupidity, to lay in the very threshold of this Doctrine, such a stumbling
block before the Readers, as to deny Man to be born sit for Society: Therefore
I must more plainly say, That it is true indeed, that to Man, by nature, or as
Man, that is, as soon as he is born, Solitude is an enemy; for Infants have
need of others to help them to live, and those of riper years to help them to
live well, wherefore I deny not that men (even nature compelling) desire to
come together. But civil Societies are not mere Meetings, but Bonds, to the
making whereof, Faith and Compacts are necessary: the Virtue whereof to
Children, and Fools, and the Profit whereof to those who have not yet tasted
the miseries which accompany its defects, is altogether unknown; whence it
happens, that those, because they know not what Society is, cannot enter into
it; these, because ignorant of the benefit it brings, care not for it. Manifest
therefore it is, that all men, because they are born in Infancy, are born unapt
for Society. Many also (perhaps most men) either through defect of mind, or
want of education remain unfit during the whole course of their lives; yet have
they Infants, as well as those of riper years, an humane nature; wherefore Man
is made sit for Society not by Nature, but by Education: furthermore, although
Man were born in such a condition as to desire it, it follows not, that he
therefore were Born sit to enter into it; for it is one thing to desire,
another to be in capacity ^it for what we desire; for even they, who through
their pride, will not stoop to equal conditions; without which there can be no
Society, do yet desire it.

The mutual fear] It is objected: It is so Annotation.
improbable that men should grow into civil Societies out of fear, that if
they had been afraid, they would not have endured each others looks: They
presume, I believe, that to fear is nothing else then to be affrighted: I
comprehend in this word Fear, a certain foresight of future evil; neither do
I conceive flight the sole property of fear, but to distrust, suspect; take
heed, provide so that they may not fear, is also incident to the fearful.
They, who go to Sleep, shut their Doors, they who Travel carry their Swords
with them, because they fear Theives. Kingdoms guard their Coasts and
Frontiers with Forts, and Castles, Cities are compast with Walls, and all for
fear of neighboring Kingdoms and Towns; even the strongest Armies, and most
accomplish^^ for Fight, yet sometimes Parley for peace, as fearing each others
power, and lest they might be overcome. It is through fear that men secure
themselves, by flight indeed, and in corners, if they think they cannot escape
otherwise, but for the most part by Arms, and Defensive Weapons; whence it
happens, that daring to come forth, they know each others Spirits; but then, if
they fight, Civil Society arises from the Victory, if they agree, from their
Agreement.

III. The cause of mutual fear consists partly in the natural equality of
men, partly That men by nature are all equal.
in their mutual will of hurting: whence it comes to pass that we can neither
expect from others, nor promise to our selves the least security: For if we
look on men fullgrown, and consider how brittle the frame of our humane body
is, (which perishing, all its strength, vigor, and wisdom it self perishes
with it) and how easy a matter it is, even for the weakest man to kill the
strongest, there is no reason why any man trusting to his own strength should
conceive himself made by nature above others: they are equals who can do
equal things one against the other; but they who can do the greatest things,
(namely kill) can do equal things. All men therefore among themselves are by
nature equal; the inequality we now discern, has its spring from the Civil
Law.

IV. All men in the State of nature have a Whence the will of mischieving each
other arises.
desire, and will to hurt, but not proceeding from the same cause, neither
equally to be condemned, for one man according to that natural equality which
is among us, permits as much to others, as he assumes to himself (which is an
argument of a temperate man, and one that rightly values his power) another
supposing himself above others, will have a License to do what he lists, and
challenges Respect, and Honor, as due to him before others, (which is an
Argument of a fiery spirit:) This man's will to hurt arises from Vain glory,
and the false esteem he has of his own strength; the others, from the
necessity of defending himself, his liberty, and his goods against this man's
violence.

V. Furthermore, since the combat of The discord from comparison of wits.
Wits is the fiercest, the greatest discords which are, must necessarily arise
from this Contention; for in this case it is not only odious to contend
against, but also not to consent; for not to approve of what a man says is no
less then tacitly to accuse him of an Error in that thing which he speaks;
as in very many things to dissent, is as much as if you accounted him a fool
whom you dissent from; which may appear hence, that there are no Wars so
sharply waged as between Sects of the same Religion, and Factions of the same
Commonweal where the Contestation is: Either concerning Doctrines, or
Politic Prudence. And since all the pleasure, and jollity of the mind
consists in this; even to get some, with whom comparing it, may find somewhat
wherein to Triumph, and Vaunt it self; its impossible but men must declare
sometimes some mutual scorn and contempt either by Laughter, or by Words, or
by Gesture, or some sign or other; then which there is no greater vexation of
mind; and then from which there cannot possibly arise a greater desire to do
hurt.

VI. But the most frequent reason why From the Appetite many have to the same
thing.
men desire to hurt each other, arises hence, that many men at the same time
have an Appetite to the same thing; which yet very often they can neither enjoy
in common, nor yet divide it, whence it follows that the strongest must have
it, and who is strongest must be decided by the Sword.

VII. Among so many dangers therefore, The definition of Right.
as the natural lusts of men do daily threaten each other withal, to have a
care of ones self is not a matter so scornfully to be looked upon, as if so be
there had not been a power and will left in one to have done otherwise; for
every man is desirous of what is good for him, and shuns what is evil, but
chiefly the chiefest of natural evils, which is Death; and this he does, by a
certain impulsion of nature, no less then that whereby a Stone moves downward:
It is therefore neither absurd, nor reprehensible; neither against the dictates
of true reason for a man to use all his endeavors to preserve and defend his
Body, and the Members thereof from death and sorrows; but that which is not
contrary to right reason, that all men account to be done justly, and with
right; Neither by the word Right is any thing else signified, then that liberty
which every man has to make use of his natural faculties according to right
reason: Therefore the first foundation of natural Right is this, That every
man as much as in him lies endeavor to protect his life and members.

VIII. But because it is in vain for a A right to to the end gives also a
right to the means.
man to have a Right to the end, if the Right to the necessary means be denied
him; it follows, that since every man has a Right to preserve himself, he
must also be allowed a Right to use all the means, and do all the actions,
without which he cannot preserve himself

IX. Now whether the means which he is By the right of nature every man is
judge of the means which tend to his preservation.
about to use, and the action he is performing, be necessary to the
preservation of his Life, and Members, or not, he himself, by the right nature,
must be judge; for say another man, judge that it is contrary to right reason
that I should judge of mine own peril: why now, because he judges of what
concerns me, by the same reason, because we are equal by nature, will I judge
also of things which do belong to him; therefore it agrees with right reason
(that is) it is the right of nature that I judge of his opinion, (i. e.)
whether it conduce to my preservation, or not.

10. Nature has given to every one a By right of nature all men have equal
right to all things.
right to all (That as it was lawful for every man in the (*) bare state of
nature, or before such time as men had engaged themselves by any Covenants, or
Bonds, to do what he would, and against whom he thought fit, and to possess,
use, and enjoy all what he would, or could get. Now because whatsoever a man
would, it therefore seems good to him because he wills it, and either it really
does, or at least seems to him to contribute toward his preservation, (but we
have already allowed him to be judge in the foregoing Article whether it does
or not, in so much as we are to hold all for necessary whatsoever he shall
esteem so) and by the 7. Article it appears that by the right of Nature those
things may be done, and must be had, which necessarily conduce to the
protection of life, and members, it follows, that in the state of nature, To
have all, and do all is lawful for all. And this is that which is meant by
that common saying, Nature has given all to all, from whence we understand
likewise, that in the state of nature, Profit is the measure of Right.

In the mere state of Nature] This is thus Annotation
to be understood: What any man does in the bare state of Nature is injurious
to no man; not that in such a State he cannot offend God, or break the Laws of
Nature; for Iujustice against men presupposes Humane Laws, such, as in the
State of Nature there are none: Now the truth of this proposition thus
conceived is sufficiently demonstrated to the mindful Reader in the Articles
immediately foregoing; but because in certain cases the difficulty of the
conclusion makes us forget the premises, I will contract this Argument, and
make it most evident to a single view; every man has right to protect himself,
as appears by the seventh Article. The same man therefore has a right to use
all the means which necessarily conduce to this end by the eight Article: But
those are the necessary means which he shall judge to be such by the ninth
Article. He therefore ^ath a right to make use of, and to do all whatsoever he
shall judge requisite for his preservation: wherefore by the judgment of him
that does it, the thing done is either right, or wrong; and therefore right.
True it is therefore in the ^are State of Nature, etc but if any man pretend
somewhat to tend necessarily to his preservation, which yet he himself does not
confidently believe so, he may offend against the Laws of Nature, as in the
third Chapter of this Book is more at large declared It has been objected by
some: If a Son kill his Father, does he him no injury? I have answered, That
a Son cannot be understood to be at any time in the State of Nature, as being
under the power and command of them to who^ he ownes his protection as soon as
ever he is born, namely either his Fathers, or his Mothers, or his that
nourisht him, as is demonstrated in the ninth Chapter.

XI. But it was the least benefit for men The right of all to all is
unprofitable.
thus to have a common Right to all things; for the effects of this Right are
the same, almost, as if there had been no Right at all; for although any man
might say of every thing, This is mine, yet could he not enjoy it, by reason of
his Neighbor, who having equal Right, and equal power, would pretend the
same thing thing to be his. The state of men without Society is a state of War.


XII. If now to this natural proclivity of men, to hurt each other, which they
derive from their Passions, but chiefly from a vain esteem of themselves: You
add, the right of all to all, wherewith one by right invades, the other by
right resists, and whence arise perpetual jealousies and suspicions on all
hands, and how hard a thing it is to provide against an enemy invading us, with
an intention to oppress, and ruin, though he come with a small Number, and no
The definition of War, and Pace.
great Provision, it cannot be denied but that the natural state of men,
before they entr'd into Society, was a mere War, and that not simply, but a War
of all men, against all men; for what is WAR, but that same time in which the
will of contesting by force, is fully declared either by Words, or Deeds? The
time remaining, is termed PEACE.

XIII. But it is easily judged how disagreeable War is an adversary to man's
preservation.
a thing to the preservation either of Mankind, or of each single Man, a
perpetual War is: But it is perpetual in its own nature, because in regard of
the e^uality of those that st^ive, it cannot be ended by Victory; for in this
state the Conqueror is subject to so much danger, as it were to be accounted a
Miracle, if any, even the most strong should close up his life with many years,
and old age. They of America are Examples hereof, even in this present Age:
Other Nations have been in former Ages, which now indeed are become Civil, and
Flourishing, but were then few, fierce, short-lived, poor, nasty, and destroyed
of all that Pleasure, and Beauty of life, which Peace and Society are wont to
bring with them. Whosoever therefore holds, that it had been best to have
continued in that state in which all things were lawful for all men, he
contradicts himself; for every man, by natural necessity desires that which is
good for him: nor is there any that esteems a war of all against all, which
necessarily adheres to such a State, to be good for him, and so it happens that
through fear of each other we think it fit to rid our selves of this
condition, and to get some fellows; that if there needs must be war, it may
not yet be against all men, nor without some helps.

XIV. Fellows are gotten either by constraint, That by the right of nature it
is lawful for any man to compel him whom he has in his power to give him
caution for his future obedience.
or by consent; By Constraint, when after fight the Conqueror makes the
conquered serve him either through fear of death, or by laying fetters on him:
By consent, when men enter into society to help each other, both parties
consenting without any constraint. But the Conqueror may by right compel the
Conquered, or the strongest the weaker, (as a man in health may one that is
sick, or he that is of riper years a child) unless he will choose to die, to
give caution of his future obedience. For since the right of protecting our
selves according to our own wills proceeded from our danger, and our danger
from our equality, its more consonant to reason, and more certain for our
conservation, using the present advantage to secure our selves by taking
caution; then, when they shall be full grown and strong, and got out of our
power, to endeavor to recover that power again by doubtful fight. And on the
other side, nothing can be thought more absurd, then by discharging whom you
already have weak in your power, to make him at once both an enemy, and a
strong one. From whence we may understand likewise as a Corollarie in the
natural state of men, That a sure and irresistible power confers the right of
Dominion, and ruling over those who cannot resist; insomuch, as the right of
all things, that can be done, adheres essentially, and immediately unto this
omnipotence hence arising.

XV. Yet cannot men expect any lasting preservation continuing thus in the
state of nature (i. e.) of War, by reason of that equality of power, and other
humane faculties they are endued withal. Wherefore to seek Peace, where there
is any hopes of obtaining it, and where there is none, to enquire out for
Auxiliaries of War, is the dictate of right Reason; that is, the Law of Nature,
as shall be showed in the next Chapter.

CHAP. II. Of the Law of Nature concerning Contracts.
I. That the Law of Nature is not an Agreement of Men, but the Dictate of
Reason. II. That the fundamental Law of Nature is to seek Peace where it may
be had, and where not, to defend our selves. III. That the first special Law
of Nature is not to retain our Right to all things. IV. What it is to quit our
Right, what to transfer it. V. That in the transferring of our right the will
of him that receives it is necessarily required. VI. No words but those of the
present tense transfer any right. VII. Words of the future, if there be some
other tokens to signify the will are valid in the translation of Right. VIII.
In matters of free gift our Right passes not from us, through any words of the
future. IX. The definition of Contract, and Compact. X. In Compacts our Right
passes from us, through words of the future. XI. Compacts of mutual faith in
the State of Nature are of no effect, and vain; but not so in Civil
Government. XII. That no man can make Compacts with Beasts, nor yet with God
without Revelation. XIII. Nor yet make a Vow to God. XIV. That Compacts oblige
not beyond our outmost endeavor. XV. By what means we are freed from our
Compacts. XVI. That promises extorted through fear of death in the State of
Nature are valid. XVII. A latter Compact contradicting the former, is invalid.
XVIII. A Compact not to resist him that shall prejudice my Body is invalid.
XIX. A Compact to accuse ones self is invalid. XX. The definition of Swearing.
XXI. That Swearing is to be conceived in that form which he uses that takes
the Oath. XXII. An Oath superaddes nothing to the Obligation which is made by
Compact. XXIII. An Oath ought not to be pressed, but where the breach of Compacts
may be kept private, or cannot be punished, but from God himself.

I. ALL Authors agree not concerning That the Law of nature is not an agreement
of men, but the Dictates of Reason.
the definition of the Natural Law, who notwithstanding do very often* make
use of this term in their Writings. The Method therefore, wherein we begin
from definitions, and exclusion of all equivocation, is only proper to them who
leave no place for contrary Disputes; for the rest, if any man say, that
somewhat is done against the Law of Nature, one proves it hence, because it was
done against the general Agreement of all the most wise, and learned Nations:
But this declares not who shall be the judge of the wisdom and learning of all
Nations: Another hence, That it was done against the General consent of all
Mankind; which definition is by no means to be admitted; for then it were
impossible for any but Children, and Fools, to offend against such a Law; for
sure, under the notion of Mankind, they comprehend all men actually endued
with Reason. These therefore either do Naught against it, or if they do
Ought, it is without their joint accord, and therefore ought to be excused, but
to receive the Laws of Nature from the Consents of them, who oftener Break,
then Observe them, is in truth unreasonable: besides, Men condemn the same
things in others, which they approve in themselves; on the other side, they
publicly commend what they privately condemn; and they deliver their Opinions
more by Hearsay, then any Speculation of their own; and they accord more
through hatred of some object, through fear, hope, love, or some other
perturbation of mind, then true Reason. And therefore it comes to pass, that
whole Bodies of people often do those things by General accord, or
Contention, which those Writers most willingly acknowledge to be against the
Law of Nature. But since all do grant that is done by RIGHT, which is not done
against Reason, we ought to judge those Actions only wrong, which are repugnant
to right Reason, (i. e.) which contradict some certain Truth collected by
right reasoning from true Principles; but that Wrong which is done, we say it
is done against some Law: therefore True Reason is a certain Law, which (since
it is no less a part of Humane nature, then any other faculty, or affection of
the mind) is also termed natural. Therefore the Law of Nature, that I may
define it, is the Dictate of right (*) Reason, conversant about those things
which are either to be done, or omitted for the constant preservation of Life,
and Members, as much as in us lies.

Right Reason.] By Right Reason in the Annotation.
natural state of men, I understand not, as many do, an infallible faculty,
but the act of reasoning, that is, the peculiar and true ratiocination of every
man concerning those actions of his which may ^r redound to the damage, or
benefit of his neighbors. I call it Peculiar, because although in a Civil
Government the reason of the Supreme (i. e. the Civil Law) is to be received
by each single subject for the right; yet being without this Civil Government,
(in which state no man can know right reason from false, but by comparing it
with his own) every man's own reason is to be accounted not only the rule of
his own actions which are done at his own peril, but also for the measure of
another man's reason, in such things as do concern him. I call it True; that
is, concluding from true principles rightly framed, because that the whole
breach of the Laws of Nature consists in the false reasoning, or rather folly
of those men who see not those duties they are necessarily to perform toward
others in order to their own conservation; but the Principles of Right
reasoning about such like duties are those which are explained in the 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, and 7. Articles of the first Chapter.

II. But the first and fundamental Law That is the fundamental Law of Nature
to seek Peace where it may be had, and where not, to defend our* selves.
of Nature is, That Peace is to be sought after where it may be found; and
where not, there to provide our selves for helps of War: For we showed in the
last Article of the foregoing Chapter, that this precept is the dictate of
right reason; but that the Dictates of right reason are natural Laws, that
has been newly proved above; But this is the first, because the rest are
derived from this, and they direct the ways either to Peace, or self-defence.

III. But one of the Natural Laws derived The first special Law of Nature is,
That our Rights to all things ought not to be retained.
from this fundamental one is this, That the right of all men, to all things,
ought not to be retained, but that some certain rights ought to be transferred,
or relinquisht: for if every one should retain his right to all things, it must
necessarily follow, that some by right might invade; and others, by the same
right, might defend themselves against them, (for every man, by natural
necessity, endeavors to defend his Body, and the things which he judges
necessary toward the protection of his Body) therefore War would follow. He
therefore acts against the reason of Peace, (i. e.) against the Law of Nature,
whosoever he be, that does not part with his Right to all things.

IV. But he is said to part with his right, What it is to quit our right, what
to convey (...) it.
who either absolutely renounceth it, or conveys it to another. He absolutely
renounceth it, who by some sufficient Sign, or meet Tokens, declares that he
is willing that it shall never be lawful for him to do that again, which
before, by Right, he might have done; but he conveys it to another, who by some
sufficient Sign, or meet Tokens, declares to that other, that he is willing it
should be unlawful for him to resist him, in going about to do somewhat in the
performance where he might before, with Right, have resisted him; but that the
conveyance of Right consists merely in not resisting, is understood by this,
that before it was conveyed, he, to whom he conveyed it, had even then also a
right to all, whence he could not give any new Right: But the resisting Right
he had, before he gave it, by reason whereof the other could not freely enjoy
his Rights, is utterly abolisht: Whosoever therefore acquires some Right in the
natural state of men, he only procures himself security, and freedom from
just molestation in the enjoyment of his Primitive Right: As for example, if
any man shall sell, or give away a Farm, he utterly deprives himself only from
all Right to this Farm, but he does not so from others also.

V. But in the conveyance of Right the The will of the receiver must
necessarily be declared before the right be conveyed.
will is requisite not only of him that conveys, but of him also that accepts
it. If either be wanting, the Right remains: for if I would have given what
was mine, to one who refused to accept of it, I have not therefore either
simply renounced my Right, or conveyed it to any man; for the cause which moved
me to part with it to Words convey not, except they relate to the time present.
this Man was in him only, not in others too.

VI. But if there be no other Token extant of our will either to quit, or
convey our Right, but only Words; those words must either relate to the
present, or time past; for if they be of the future only, they convey nothing:
for example, he that speaks thus of the time to come, I will give to morrow,
declares openly that yet he has not given it; so that all this day his right
remains, and abides to morrow too, unless in the interim he actually bestows
it: for what is mine, remains mine till I have parted with it. But if I shall
speak of the time present, suppose thus; I do give, or have given you this to
be received to morrow, by these words is signified that I have already given
it, and that his Right to receive it to morrow, is conveyed to him by me to day.

VII. Nevertheless, although words alone Words of the future suffice to
convey, if other testimonies of our will be not wanting.
are not sufficient tokens to declare the Will; if yet to words relating to the
future, there shall some other signs be added, they may become as valid, as if
they had been spoken of the present: If therefore, as by reason of those other
signs, it appear, that he that speaks of the future, intends those words
should be effectual toward the perfect transferring of his Right, they ought
to be valid; for the conveyance of right depends not on words, but (as has
been instanced in the 4. Article) on the declaration of the Will.

VIII. If any man conveigh some part In matters of free gift words of the
fi^ure ^onveigh no Right.
of his right to another, and does not this for some certain benefit received,
or for some compact, a conveighance in this kind is called a Gift, or free
Donation. B^t in free donation those words only oblige us which signify the
p^esent, or the time past; for if they respect the future, they oblige not as
words, for the reason given in the foregoing Article: It must needs therefore
be, that the Obligation arise from some other tokens of the Will: But, because
whatsover is voluntarily done, is done for some good to him that wills it; there
can no other token be assigned of the Will to give it, except some benefit
either already received, or to be acquired; but is supposed, that no such
benefit is acquired, nor any compact in being; for if so, it would cease to be
a free gift: It remains therefore, that a mutual good turn without agreement
be expected; but no sign can be given, that he, who used future words toward
him who was in no sort engaged to return a benefit, should desire to have his
words so understood, as to oblige himself thereby. Nor is it suitable to
Reason, that those who are easily inclined to do well to others, should be
obliged by every promise, testifying their present good affection: And for this
cause, a promiser in this kind, must be understood to have time to deliberate,
and power to change that affection as well as he to whom he made that promise,
may alter his desert. But he that deliberates, is so far forth free, nor can
be said to have already given: But if he promise often, and yet give seldom,
he ought to be condemned of levity, and be called not a Donour, but Doson.

IX. But the act of two, or more, mutually The definition of Contract, and
Covenant.
conveighing their Rights, is called a Contract. But in every Contract, either
both parties instantly perform what they contract for, insomuch as there is no
trust had from either to other; or the one performs, the other is trusted, or
neither perform. Eeither both parties perform presently, there the Contract
is ended, as soon as it is performed; but where there is credit given either to
one, or both, there the party trusted promises after-performance; and this
kind of promise is called a COVENANT.

X. But the Covenant made by the party In Covenants we pass away our Rights by
words signifying the future.
trusted with him, who has already performed, although the promise be made by
words pointing at the future, does no les^e transfer the right of future time,
the^ if it had been made by words signifying the present, or time past: for the
others performance is a most manifest sign that he so understood the speech of
him whom he trusted, as that he would certainly make performance also at the
appointed time; and by this sign the party trusted knew himself to be thus
understood, which, because he hindered not, 'twas an evident token of his Will
to perform. The promises therefore which are made for some benefit received
(which are also Covenants) are Tokens of the Will; that is, (as in the
foregoing Section has been declared) of the last act of deliberating, whereby
the liberty of nonperformance is abolisht, and by consequence are obligatory;
for where Liberty cease, there begins Obligation.

XI. But the Covenants, which are Covenants in the state of nature are in vain,
and of none effect, not so in Civil Government.
made in contract of mutual^ trust, neither party performing out of hand, if
there (*) arise a just suspicion in either of them, are in the state of nature
invalid: for he that first performs by reason of the wicked disposition of the
greatest part of men studying their own advantage, either by right, or wrong,
exposes himself to the perverse will of him with whom he has Contracted; for
it suites not with reason, that any man should perform first, if it be not
likely that the other will not make good his promise after; which, whether it
be probable, or not, he that doubts it, must be judge of, as has been showed
in the foregoing Chapter in the 9. Article. Thus, I say, things stand in the
state of nature, but in a Civil State, when there is a power which can compel
both parties, he that has contracted to perform first, must first perform;
because, that since the other may be compelled, the cause which made him fear
the others nonperformance, cease.

Arise] For, except there appear some new Annotation
cause of fear, either from somewhat done, or some other token of the Will not
to perform from the other part, it cannot be judged to be a just fear; for the
cause which was not sufficient to keep him from making Compact, must not
suffice to authorize the breach of it, being made. That no man can make
Compacts with Beasts, neither with God without Revelation.


XI. But from this reason, that in all Free-gifts, and Compacts, there is an
acceptance of the conveighance of Right required: it follows, that no man can
Compact with him who does not declare his acceptance; and therefore we cannot
compact with Beasts, neither can we give, or take from them any manner of
Right, by reason of their want of speech, and understanding. Neither can any
man Covenant with God, or be obliged to him by Vow, except so far forth as it
appears to him by Holy Scriptures, that he has substituted certain men who
have authority to accept of such like Vows and Covenants, as being in Gods
stead.

XIII. Those therefore do vow in vain, Nor yet Vow to God.
who are in the state of nature, where they are not tied by any Civil Law,
(except by most certain Revelation the Will of God to accept their Vow, or
Pact, be made known to them) for if what they Vow, be contrary to the Law of
Nature, they are not tied by their Vow, for no man is tied to perform an
unlawful act, but if what is vowed, be commanded by some Law of nature, it is
not their Vow, but the Law it self which ties them; but if he were free before
his vow, either to do* it, or not do it, his liberty remains, because that
the openly declared Will of the obliger is requisite to make an obligation by
Vow, which in the case propounded is supposed not to be: Now I call him the
Obliger to whom any one is tied, and the Obliged him who is tied.

XIV. Covenants are made of such Compacts oblige not beyond our utmost
endeavors.
things only as fall under our deliberation, for it can be no Covenant without
the Will of the Contractor, but the Will is the last act of him who
deliberates; Wherefore they only concern things possible, and to come; no man
therefore, by his Compact, obliges himself to an impossibility. But yet,
though we often Covenant to do* such things as then seemed possible when we
promised them, which yet afterward appear to be impossible, are we therefore
freed from all obligation? the reason whereof is, that he who promises a
future, incertainty receives a present benefit; on condition, that he return
another for it: for his Will, who performs the present benefit has simply
before it; for its object, a certain good valuable with the thing promised; but
the thing it self not simply, but with condition if it could be done; but if
it should so happen, that even this should prove impossible, why then he must
perform as much as he can. Covenants therefore oblige us not to perform just
the thing it self covenanted for, but our utmost endeavor; for this only is,
the things themselves are not in our power.

XV. We are freed from Covenants two In what manner we are freed from Compacts.
ways, either by performing, or by being forgiven: By performing, for beyond
that we obliged not our selves. By being for-given, because he whom we obliged
our selves to by forgiving, is conceived to return us that Right which we past
over to him; for, forgiving, implies giving: that is, by the fourth Article of
this Chapter, a conveyance of Right to him to whom the gift is made.

XVI. Its an usual question, Whether Promises forced from us through fear of
death are not valid in the state of nature.
Compacts extorted from us, through fear, do oblige, or not: For example, If to
redeem my life, from the power of a Robber, a promise to pay him 100^. next
day; and that I will do no act whereby to apprehend, and bring him to Justice,
whether I am tied to keep promise, or not? but though such a Promise must
sometimes be judged to be of no effect, yet it is not to be accounted so,
because it proceeded from fear, for then it would follow that those promises
which reduced men to a civil life, and by which Laws were made, might
likewise be of none effect, (for it proceeds from fear of mutual slaughter,
that one man submits himself to the Dominion of another:) And he should play
the fool finely, who should trust his captive covenanting with the price of his
redemption. It holds universally true, that promises do oblige when there is
some benefit received; and that to promise, and the thing promised, be lawful:
But it is lawful, for the redemption of my life, both to promise, and to give
what I will of mine own to any man, even to a Thief. We are obliged therefore
by promises proceeding from fear, except the Civil Law forbid them, by virtue
whereof, that which is promised becomes unlawful.

XVII. Whosoever shall contract with A latter Compact contradicting the former
is invalid.
one to do, or omit somewhat, and shall after Covenant the contrary with
another; he makes not the former, but the latter Contract unlawful: for, he
has no longer Right to do, or to omit ought, who by former Contracts has
conveyed it to another; wherefore he can conveigh no Right by latter Contracts,
and what is promised, is promised without Right: He is therefore tied only to
his first Contract; to break which is unlawful.

XVIII. No man is obliged by any A promise not to resist him that prejudices my
Body is invalid.
Contracts whatsoever not to resist him who shall offer to kill, wound, or any
other way hurt his Body; for there is in every man a certain high degree of
fear, through which he apprehends that evil which is done to him to be the
greatest, and therefore by natural necessity he shuns it all he can, and it is
supposed he can do no otherwise: When a man is arrived to this degree of fear,
we cannot expect but be will provide for himself either by slight, or fight.
Since therefore no man is tied to impossibilities, they who are threatened
either with death, (which is the greatest evil to nature) or wounds, or some
other bodily hurts, and are not stout enough to bear them, are not obliged to
endure them. Farthermore, he that is t^ed by Cont^act is trusted, (for Faith
only is the Bond of Contracts) but they who are brought to punishment, either
Capital, or more gentle, are f^ttered, or strongly guarded, which is a most
certain sign that they seemed not sufficiently bound from non resistance by
their Contracts. Its one thing if I promise thus: If I do it not at the day
appointed, kill me. Another thing if thus: If I do it not, though you should
offer to kill me, I will not resist: All men, if need be, contract the first
way; but there is need sometimes. This second way, none, neither is it ever
needful; for in the mere state of nature, if you have a mind to kill, that
state it self affords you a Right; insomuch as you need not first trust him,
if for breach of trust you will afterward kill him. But in a Civil State,
where the Right of life, and death, and of all co^po^all punishment is with the
Supreme; that same Right of killing cannot be granted to any private person.
Neither need the Supreme himself contract with any man patiently to yield to
his punishment, but only this, that no man offer to def^nd others from him. If
in the state of nature, as between two Realms, there should a Contract be
made, on condition of killing, if it were not performed, we must presuppose
another Contract of not killing before the appointed day. Wherefore on that
day, if there be no performance, the right of War returns; that is, an
hostile state, in which all things are lawful, and therefore resistance also.
Lastly, by the contract of not resisting, we are obliged of two Evils to make
choice of that which seems the greater; for certain Death is a greater evil
then Fighting; but of two Evi^ls it is impossible not to choose the least: By
such a Compact therefore we should be tied to impossibilities, which is
contrary to the very nature of compacts.

XIX. Likewise no man is tied by any The Compact of selfaccusation is invalid.
Compacts whatsoever to accuse himself, or any other, by whose damage he is
like to procure himself a better life, wherefore neither is a Father obliged
to bear witness against his Son, nor a Husband against his Wife, nor a Son
against his Father; nor any man against any one, by whose means he has his
subsistence; for in vain is that testimony which is presumed to be corrupted
from nature; but although no man be tied to accuse himself by any compact, yet
in a public trial he may, by torture, be forced to make answer; but such
answers are no testimony of the fact, but helps for the searching out of truth;
insomuch as whether the party tor^u^'d his answer be true, or false, or whether
he answer not at all, whatsoever he does, he does it by Right.

XX. Swearing is a speech joined to a The desinition of an ^ath.
promise, whereby the promiser declares his renouncing of Gods mercy, unless
he perform his word; which definition is contained in the words themselves,
which have in them the very essence of an Oath, to wit, so God help me, or
other equivalent, as with the Romans, Doc thou Jupiter so destroy the deceiver,
as I slay this same Beast: neither is this any let, but that an Oath may as
well sometimes be affirmatory, as promissory; for he that confirms his
affirmation with an Oath, promises that he speaks truth. But though in some
places it was the fashion for Subjects to Swear by their Kings; that custom
took its Original hence, That those Kings took upon them Divine Honor; for
Oaths were therefore introduced that by Religion, and consideration of the
Divine Power men might have a greater dread of breaking their Faiths, then that
wherewith they fear men, from whose eyes their actions may lie hid. The
Swearing must be conceived in that fashion which he uses, who takes it.


XXI. Whence it follows, that an Oath must be conceived in that form which he
uses, who takes it; for in vain is any man brought to Swear by a God whom he
believes not, and therefore neither fears him. For though by the light of
nature it may be known that there is a God, yet no man thinks he is to Swear by
him in any other fashion, or by any other name then what is contained in the
precepts of his own proper, that is, (as he who Swears imagines) the true
Religion.

XXII. By the definition of an Oath we Swearing adds nothing to the Obligation
which is by Compact.
may understand, that a bare Contract obliges no less, then that to which we
are Sworn; for it is the contract which binds us, the Oath relates to the
Divine punishment, which it could not provoke, if the breach of contract were
not in its self unlawful; but it could not be unlawful if the Contract were
not obligatory. Furthermore, he that renounceth the mercy of God obliges
himself not to any punishment, because it is ever lawful to deprecate the
punishment howsoever provoked, and to enjoy Gods Pardon if it be granted. The
only effect therefore of an Oath is this, To cause men who are naturally
inclined to break all manner of faith, through fear of punishment, to make the
more Conscience of their words and actions.

XXIII. To exact an Oath, where the An Oath is not to be pressed but where the
breach of Contract can either be kept private, or not be punished but from God
alone.
breach of contract, if any be made, cannot but be known, and where the party
compacted, withal wants not power to punish, is to do some what more then is
necessary unto self-defence, and shows a mind desirous not so much to benefit
it self, as to prejudice another. For an Oath, out of the very form of
swearing, is taken in order to the provocation of Gods anger, that is to say,
of him that is Omnipotent against those who therefore violate their Faith,
because they think, that by their own strength they can escape the punishment
of men; and of him that is Omniscient against those, who therefore usually
break their trust, because they hope that no man shall see them.

CHAP. III. Of the other Laws of Nature.
I. The second Law of Nature is to perform Contracts. II. That trust is to be
held with all men without exception. III. What injury is. IV. Injury can be
done to none but those with whom we Contract. V. The distinction of Justice
into that of men, and that of Actions. VI. The distinction of commutative, and
distributive Justice examined. VII. No injury can be done to him that is
willing. VIII. The third Law of Nature concerning Ingratitude. IX. The fourth
Law of Nature, That every man render himself useful. X. The fifth Law, Of
Mercy. XI. The sixth Law, That punishments regard the future only. XII. The
seventh Law, Against reproach. XIII. The eighth Law, Against pride. XIV. The
ninth Law, Of humility. XV. The tenth, Of equity, or against acceptance of
persons. XVI. The eleventh, Of things to be had in common. XVII. The twelfth,
Of things to be divided by Lot. XVIII. The thirteenth, Of birth right, and
first possession. XIX. The fourteenth, Of the safeguard of them who are
Mediators for Peace. XX. The fifteenth, Of constituting an Umpire. XXI. The
sixteenth, That no man is judge in his own Cause. XXII. The seventeenth, That
Umpires must be without all hope of reward from those whose Cause is to be
judged. XXIII. The eighteenth, Of witnesses. XXIV. The nineteenth, That there
can no Contract be made with the Umpire. XXV. The twentieth, Against Glutony;
and all such things as hinder the use of Reason. XXVI. The Rule by which we may
presently know, whether, what we are doing, be against the Law of Nature, or
not. XXVII. The Laws of Nature oblige only in the Court of Conscience. XXVIII.
The Laws of Nature are sometimes broke by doing things answerable to those
Laws. XXIX: The Laws of Nature are unchangeable. XXX. Whosoever endeavors to
fulfill the Laws of Nature is a just man. XXXI. The natural and moral Law
are one. XXXII. How it comes to pass, that what has been said of the Laws of
nature is not the same with what Philosophers have delivered concerning the
virtues. XXXIII. The Law of Nature is not properly a Law, but as it is
delivered in Holy Writ.

I. ANother of the Laws of Nature is, The second Law of nature to perform
Contracts.
to perform Contracts, or to keep trust; for it has been showed in the
foregoing Chapter that the Law of Nature commands every man, as a thing
necessary, to obtain Peace; to conveigh certain rights from each to other, and
that this (as often as it shall happen to be done) is called a Contract: But
this is so far forth only conducible to peace, as we shall perform our
selves, what we contract with others, shall be done, or omitted; and in vain
would Contracts be made, unless we stood to them. Because therefore, to stand
to our Covenants, or to keep faith, is a thing necessary for the obtaining of
peace, it will prove by the second Article of the second Chapter to be a
precept of the natural Law.

Neither is there in this matter, any exception That Faith is to be kept with
all men without exception.
of the persons, with whom we Contract, as if they keep no faith with others;
or hold, that none ought to be kept, or are guilty of any other kind of vice:
for he that Contracts, in that he does contract, denies that action to be in
vain, and it is against reason for a knowing man to do a thing in vain; and
if he think himself not bound to keep it, in thinking so, he affirms the
Contract to be made in vain: He therefore, who Contracts with one with whom he
thinks he is not bound to keep faith, he does at once think a Contract to be a
thing done in vain, and not in vain, which is absurd. Either therefore we
must hold trust with all men, or else not bargain with them; that is, either
there must be a declared War, or a sure and faithful Peace.

III. The breaking of a Bargain, as also Injury defined.
the taking back of a gift, (which ever consists in some action, or omission)
is called an INJURY: But that action, or omission, is called unjust, insomuch
as an injury; and an unjust action, or omission, signify the same thing, and
both are the same with breach of Contract and trust: And it seems the word
Injury came to be given to any action, or omission, because they were without
Right; he that acted, or omitted, having before conveyed his Right to some
other. And there is some likeness between that, which in the common course of
life we call Injury; and that, which in the Schools is usually called Absurd.
For even as he, who by Arguments is driven to deny the Assertion which he first
maintained, is said to be brought to an Absurdity; in like manner, he who
through weakness of mind does, of omits that which before he had by Contract
promised not to do, or omit, co^mits an Injury* and falls into no less
contradiction, then he, who in the Schools is reduced to an Absurdity. For by
contracting for some future action, he wills it done; by not doing it, he wills
it not done, which is to will a^thing done, and not done at the same time,
which is a contradiction. An Injury therefore is a kind of absurdity in
conversation, as an absurdity is a kind of injury in disputation.

IV. From these grounds it follows, that an (*) injury can be done to no man
but An injury can only be done to him with whom we Contract.
him with who^ we enter Covenant, or to who^ somewhat is made over by deed of
gift, or to whom somewhat is promised by way of bargain, and therefore damaging
and injuring are often disjoined: for if a Master command his Servant, who has
promised to obey him, to pay a sum of money, or carry some present to a third
man; the Servant, if he do it not, has indeed damaged this third party, but
he injured his Master only. So also in a civil government, if any man offend
another, with whom he has made no Contract, he damages him to whom the evil
is done, but he injures none but him to whom the power of government belongs:
for if he, who receives the hurt, should expostulate the mischief; and he that
did it, should answer thus, What art thou to me? Why should I rather do
according to yours, then mine own will, since I do not hinder, but you may do
your own, and not my mind? In which speech, where there has no manner of
pre-contract past, I see not, I confess, what is reprehensible.

Injury can be done against no man] Annotation.
The word injustice relates to some Law: Injury to some Person, as well as some
Law. For what is unjust, is unjust to all; but there may an injury be done, and
yet not against me, nor thee, but some other; and sometimes against no private
person, but the Magistrate only; sometimes also neither against the Magistrate,
nor any private man, but only against God; for through Contract, and
conveighance of Right, we say, that an injury is done against this, or that
man. Hence it is (which we see in all kin^ of Government) that what private men
contract between themselves by word, or writing, is rel^ast again at the will
of the Obliger. But those mischiefs which are done against the Laws of the
Land, as theft, homicide, and the like, are punished not as he wills, to whom
the hurt is done, but according to the will of the Magistrate; that is, the
constituted Laws.

V These words just, and unjust, as also The distinction of Justice into that
of men and actions.
justice, and injustice, are equivocall; for they signify one thing when they
are attributed to Persons, another when to actions: When they are attributed to
Actions, Just signifies as much as what is done with Right, and unjust, as
what is done with injury: he who has done some just thing is not therefore said
to be a just Person, but guiltless, and he that has done some unjust thing,
we do not therefore say he is an unjust, but guilty man. But when the words
are applied to Persons; to be just, signifies as much as to be delighted in
just dealing, to study how to do righteousness, or to endeavor in all things
to do that which is just; and to be unjust, is to neglect righteous dealing,
or to think it is to be measured not according to my contract, but some present
benefit; so as the justice or injustice of the mind, the intention, or the man,
is one thing; that of an action, or omission, another; and innumerable actions
of a just man may be unjust, and of an unjust man, just: But that man is to be
accounted just, who does just things because the Law commands it, unjust things
only by reason of his infirmity; and he is properly said to be unjust who does
righteousness for fear of the punishment annexed unto the Law, and
unrighteousness by reason of the iniquity of his mind.

VI. The justice of actions is commonly distinguished into two kinds;
Commutative, The distinction of commutative and distributive Justice examined.
and Distributive, the former whereof they say consists in Arithmeticall, the
latter in Geometrical proportion, and that is conversant in exchanging, in
buying, selling, borrowing, lending, location, and conduction, and other acts
whatsoever belonging to Contracters, where, if there be an equal return made,
hence they say springs a commutative justice: But this is busied about the
dignity, and merits of men; so as if there be rendered to every man (...) more
to him who is more worthy, and less to him that deserves less, and that
proportionably, hence they say arises distributive justice: I acknowledge here
some certain distinction of equality; to wit, that one is an equality simply
so called, as when two things of equal value are compared together, as a pound
of silver with twelve ounces of the same silver; the other is an equality,
secundum qu^d, as when a 1000. pound is to be divided to an hundred men, 600.
pounds are given to 60. men, and 400. to 40. where there is no equality between
600. and 400. but when it happens, that there is the same inequality in the
number of them to whom it is distributed, every one of them shall take an
equal part, whence it is called an equal distribution: But such like equality
is the same thing with Geometrical proportion. But what is all this to
Justice? for neither, if I sell my goods for as much as I can get for them, do
I injure the buyer, who sought, and desired them of me? neither if I divide
more of what is mine to him who deserves le^se, so long as I give the other
what I have agreed for, do I wrong to either? which truth our Savior himself,
being God, testifies in the Gospel. This therefore is no distinction of
Justice, but of equality; yet perhaps it cannot be denied, but that Justice is
a certain equality, as consisting in this only* that since we are all equal
by nature, one should not arrogate more Right to himself, then he grants to
another, unless he have fairly gotten it by Compact. And let this suffice to
be spoken against this distinction of Justice, although now almost generally
received by all, lest any man should conceive an injury to be somewhat else,
then the breach of Faith, or Contract, as has been defined above.

VII. It is an old saying, Volenti non No injury can be done to him that is
willing.
fit iniuria (the willing man receives no injury) yet the truth of it may be
derived from our Principles. For grant, that a man be willing that that should
be done, which he conceives to be an injury to him; why then that is done by
his will, which by Contract was not lawful to be done; but he being willing
that should be done, which was not lawful by Contract, the Contract it self
(by the 15 Article of the foregoing Chapter) becomes void: The Right therefore
of doing it returns, therefore it is done by Right; wherefore it is no injury.

VIII. The third precept of the Natural The third Law of nature of ingratitude.
Law, is, That you suffer not him to be the worse for you, who out of the
confidence he had in you, first did you a good a turn; or that you accept not a
gift, but with a mind to endeavor, that the giver shall have no just occasion
to repent him of his gift. For without this he should act without reason that
would confer a benefit where he sees it would be lost; and by this means all
beneficence, and trust, together with all kind of benevolence would be taken
from among men, neither would there be ought of mutual assistance among them,
nor any commencement of gaining grace and favor; by reason whereof the state
of War would necessarily remain, contrary to the fundamental Law of Nature:
But because the breach of this Law is not a breach of trust, or contract, (for
we suppose no Contracts to have passed among them) therefore is it not usually
termed an injury, but because good turns and thanks have a mutual eye to each
other; it is called INGRATITUDE.

IX. The fourth precept of Nature, is, The fourth Law of nature, that every man
render himself useful.
That every man render himself useful unto others: which, that we may rightly
understand, we must remember that there is in men, a diversity of dispositions
to enter into society, arising from the diversity of their affections, not
unlike that which is found in stones, brought together in the Building, by
reason of the diversity of their matter, and figure; for as a stone, which in
regard of its sharp and angular form takes up more room from other stones then
it fills up it self, neither because of the hardness of its matter cannot well
be pressed together, or easily cut, and would hinder the building from being
fitly compacted, is cast away, as not fit for use: so a man, who for the
harshness of his disposition in retaining superfluities for himself, and
detaining of necessaries from others; and being incorrigible, by reason of the
stubbornness of his affections, is commonly said to be useless, and
troublesome unto others. Now, because each one not by Right only, but even by
natural necessity is supposed, with all his main might, to intend the
procurement of those things which are necessary to his own preservation; if any
man will contend on the other side for superfluities, by h^s default there will
arise a War, because that on him alone there lay no necessity of contending,
he therefore acts against the fundamental Law of Nature: Whence it follows
(which we were to show) that it is a precept of nature; That every man
accommodate himself to others. But he who breaks this Law may be called
useless, and troublesome. Yet Cicero opposes inhumanity to this usefulness,
as having regard to this very Law.

X. The fifth precept of the Law of nature The fifth Law of nature of
mercifulness
is: That we must forgive him who repents, and asks pardon for what is past;
having first taken caution for the time to come. The pardon of what is past, or
the remission of an offense, is nothing else but the granting of peace to him
that asks it, after he has warred against us, and now is become penitent.
But Peace granted to him that repents not, that is, to him that retains an
hostile mind, or that gives not caution for the futures that is, seeks not
peace, but opportunity, is not properly peace but fear, and therefore is not
commanded by nature. Now to him that will not pardon the penitent, and that
gives future caution, peace it self it seems is not pleasing; which is
contrary to the natural Law.

XI. The sixth precept of the natural The sixth Law that punishments only
regard the future.
Law is, That in revenge and punishments we must have our eye not at the evil
past, but the future good. That is: It is not lawful to inflict punishment for
any other end, but that the offender may be corrected, or that others warned by
his punishment may become better. But this is confirmed chiefly from hence,
that each man is bound by the law of nature to forgive one another, provided he
give caution for the future, as has been showed in the foregoing Article.
Furthermore, because revenge, if the time past be only considered, is nothing
else but a certain triumph, and glory of mind, which points at no end, (for it
contemplates only what is past; but the end is a thing to come) but that which
is directed to no end is vain; That revenge therefore which regards not the
future, proceeds from vain glory, and therefore without reason. But to hurt
another without reason introduces a war, and is contrary to the fundamental
Law of Nature; It is therefore a precept of the Law of nature, that in revenge
we look not backwards but forward. Now the breach of this Law, is commonly
called CRUELTY.

XII. But because all signs of hatred, The seventh Law of nature against
slander.
and contempt provoke most of all to brawling and fighting, insomuch as most
men would rather lose their lives, (that I say not their Peace) then suffer
slander, it follows in the seventh place, That it is prescribed by the Law of
nature, that no man either by deeds, or words, countenance, or laughter, do
declare himself to hate, or scorn another. The breach of which Law is called
Reproach. But although nothing be more frequent then the scostes and jeers of
the powerful against the weak, and namely of Judges against guilty persons,
which neither relate to the offense of the guilty, nor the duty of the Judges,
yet these kind of men do act against the Law of nature, and are to be esteemed
for contumelious.

XIII. The question whether of two The eight Law against pride
men be the more worthy, belongs not to the natural, but civil state, for it
has been showed before, Chap. 1. Art. 3. that all men by nature are equal,
and therefore the inequality which now is, suppose from riches, power, nobility
of kindred, is come from the civil Law. I know that Aristotle in his first
book of Politiques affirms as a foundation of the whole political science,
that some men by nature are made worthy to command, others only to serve, as
if Lord and Master were distinguished not by consent of men, but by an
aptness, that is, a certain kind of natural knowledge, or ignorance; which
foundation is not only against reason (as but now has been showed) but also
against experience: for neither almost is any man so dull of understanding as
not to judge it better to be ruled by himself, then to yield himself to the
government of another; neither if the weaker and stronger do contest, have
these ever, or after the upper hand of those. Whether therefore men be equal
by nature, the equality is to be acknowledged, or whether unequal, because
they are like to contest for dominion, its necessary for the obtaining of
Peace, that they be esteemed as equal, and therefore it is in the eight place
a precept of the Law of nature, That every man be accounted by nature equal to
another, the contrary to which Law is PRIDE.

XIV. As it was necessary to the conservation The ninth Law of humility.
of each man, that he should part with some of his Rights, so it is no less
necessary to the same conservation, that he retain some others, to wit the
Right of bodily protection, of free enjoyment of air, water, and all
necessaries for life. Since therefore many common Rights are retained by those
who enter into a peaceable state, and that many peculiar ones are also
acquired, hence arises this ninth dictate of the natural Law, to wit, That
what Rights soever any man challenges to himself, he also grant the same as
due to all the rest: otherwise he frustrates the equality acknowledged in the
former Article. For what is it else to acknowledge an equality of persons in
the making up of society, but to attribute equal Right and Power to those whom
no reason would else engage to enter into society? But to ascribe equal things
to equals, i^ the same with giving things proportional to proportionals, The
observation of this Law is called MEEKNES, the violation (...), the breakers by
the Latins are styled Immoditi and immodesti.

XV. In the tenth place it is commanded by The eleventh law, of things to be
had in common.
the Law of nature, That every man in dividing Right to others, show himself
equal to either party. By the foregoing Law we are forbidden to assume more
Right by nature to our selves, then we grant to others. We may take less if we
will, for that sometimes is an argument of modesty. But if at any time matter
of Right be to be divided by us unto others, we are forbidden by this Law to
favor one more or less then another. For he that by favoring one before
another, observes not this natural equality, reproaches him whom he thus
undervalues: but it is declared above, that a reproach is against the Laws of
Nature. The observance of this Precept is called EQUITY; the breach, Respect of
Persons. The Greeks in one word term it (...).

XVI. From the foregoing Law is collected The 11. law, of things to be had in
common.
this eleventh. Those things which cannot be divided, must be used in common,
(if they can) and (that the quantity of the matter permit) every man as much as
he lists, but if the quantity permit not, then with limitation, and
proportionally to the number of the users: for otherwise that equality can by
no means be observed, which we have showed in the forgoing Article to be
commanded by the Law of Nature.

XVII. Also what cannot he divided, nor The 12. law, of things to be divided
by* lot.
had in common, it is provided by the Law of nature (which may be the twelfth
Precept) that the use of that thing be either by turns, or adjudged to one
only by lot, and that in the using it by turns, it be also decided by lot who
shall have the first use of it; For here also regard is to be had unto
equality: but no other can be found, but that of lot.

XVIII. But all lot is twofold; arbitrary, The 13. law, of birthright and
first possession.
or natural; Arbitrary is that which is cast by the consent of the Contenders,
and it consists in mere chance (as they say) or fortune. Natural is
primogeniture (in Greek (...), as it were given by lot) or first possession.
Therefore the things which can neither be divided, nor had in common, must be
granted to the first possessour, as also those things which belonged to the
Father are due to the Son, unless the Father himself have formerly
conveyed away that Right to some other. Let this therefore stand for the
thirteenth Law of Nature.

XIX. The 14 Precept of the Law of The 14. law, of the safety of those who are
Mediators for Peace.
nature is, That safety must be assured to the Mediators for Peace. For the
reason which commands the end, commands also the means necessary to the end.
But the first dictate of Reason is Peace; All the rest are means to obtain it,
and without which Peace cannot be had. But neither can Peace be had without
mediation, nor mediation without safety; it is therefore a dictate of Reason,
that is, a Law of nature, That we must give all security to the Mediators for
Peace.

XX. Furthermore, because, although The 15. law, of appointing an umpire.
men should agree to make all these, and whatsoever other Laws of Nature, and
should endeavor to keep them, yet doubts, and controversies would daily arise
concerning the application of them unto their actions, to wit, whether what was
done, were against the Law, or not, (which we call, the Question of Right)
whence will follow a fight between Parties, either sides supposing themselves
wronged; it is therefore necessary to the preservation of Peace (because in
this case no other fit remedy can possibly be thought on) that both the
disagreeing Parties refer the matter unto some third, and oblige themselves by
mutual compacts to stand to his judgment in deciding the controversy. And he
to whom they thus refer themselves is called an Arbiter. It is therefore the
15. Precept of the natural Law, That both parties disputing concerning the
matter of right submit themselves The 16. law, that no man must be judge in his
own cause.
unto the opinion and judgment of some third.

XXI. But from this ground, that an Arbiter or Judge is chosen by the differing
Parties to determine the controversy, we gather, that the Arbiter must not be
one of the Parties: for every man is presumed to seek what is good for himself
naturally, and what is just, only for Peaces sake, and accidentally; and
therefore cannot observe that same equality commanded by the Law of nature so
exactly as a third man would do: It is therefore in the sixteenth place
contained in the Law of nature, That no man must be Judge or Arbiter in his own
cause.

XXII. From the same ground sollowes The 17. law, that Arbiters must be without
all hope of reward from the parties whose cause is to be judged. The 10. law,
of witnesses.
in the seventeenth place, That no man must be Judge who propounds unto himself
any hope of profit, or glory, from the victory of either part: for the like
reason swayes here, as in the foregoing Law.

XXIII. But when there is some controversy of the fact it self, to wit,
whether that be done or not, which is said to be done, the natural Law
wills, that the Arbiter trust both Parties alike, that is, (because they affirm
contradictories) that he believe neither: He must therefore give credit to a
third, or a third and fourth, or more, that he may be able to give judgment of
the fact, as often as by other signs he cannot come to the knowledge of it.
The 18. Law of nature therefore injoynes Arbiters, and Judges of fact, That
where firm and certain ^ignes of the fact appear not, there they rule their
sentence by such witnesses, as seem to be indifferent to both Parts.

XXIV. From the above declared definition The 19. law, that no contract is to
be made with the judge.
of an Arbiter may be furthermore understood, That no contract or promise must
paste between him and the parties whose Judge he is appointed, by virtue
whereof he may be engaged to speak in favor of either part, nay, or be obliged
to judge according to equity, or to pronounce such sentence as he shall truly
judge to be equal. The Judge is indeed hound to give such sentence as he shall
judge to be equal by the Law of Nature re-counted in the 15. Article. To the
obligation of which Law nothing can be added by way of Compact. Such compact
therefore would be in vain. Besides, if giving wrong judgment, he should
contend for the equity of it, except such Compact be of no force, the
Controversy would remain after Judgment given, which is contrary to the
constitution of an Arbiter, who is so chosen, as both parties have obliged
themselves to stand to the judgment which he should pronounce. The Law of
Nature therefore commands the Judge be to dis-eng^g'd, which is its 19 precept.

XXV. Farthermore, forasmuch as the The 20. Law, against Gluttony, and such
things as hinder the use of Reason.
Laws of Nature are naught else but the dictates of Reason, so as, unless a
man endeavor to preserve the faculty of right reasoning, he cannot observe the
Laws of Nature, it is manifest, that he, who knowingly, or willingly, does
ought, whereby the rational faculty may be destroyed, or weakened, he
knowingly, and willingly, breaks the Law of nature: For there is no difference
between a man who performs not his Duty, and him who does such things
willingly, as make it impossible for him to do it. But they destroy and weaken
the reasoning faculty, who do that which disturbs the mind from its natural
state; that which most manifestly happens to Drunkards and Gluttons: we
therefore sin in the 20 place against the Law of Nature by Drunkenness.

XXVI. Perhaps some man, who sees all these precepts of Nature derived by a
certain The rule by which a man may presently know whether what he is about to
act, be against the law of nature, or not.
artifice from the single dictate of Reason advising us to look to the
preservation, and safeguard of our selves, will say, That the deduction of these
Laws is so hard, that it is not to be expected they will be vulgarly known,
and therefore neither will they prove obliging: for Laws, if they be not
known, oblige not, nay, indeed are not Laws. To this I answer, it is true, That
hope, fear, anger, ambition, covetousness, vain glory, and other perturbations
of mind, do hinder a man so, as he cannot attain to the knowledge of these
Laws, whilst those passions prevail in him: But there is no man who is not
somettmes in a quiet mind; At that time therefore there is nothing easier for
him to know, though he benever so rude and unlearned, then this only Rule, That
when he doubts, whether what he is now doing to another, may be done by the Law
of Nature, or not, he conceive himself to be in that others st^ad. Here
instantly those perturbations which persuaded him to the fact, being now cast
into the other scale, dissuade him as much: And this Rule is not only easy,
but is Anciently celebrated in these words, Quod tibi ^ieri non vis, alteri ne
feceris: Do not that to others, you would not have done to your self.

XXVII. But because most men, by The laws of nature oblige only in the court
of Conscience.
reason of their perverse desire of present profit, are very unapt to observe
these Laws, although acknowledged by them, if perhaps some others more humble
then the rest should exercise that equity and usefulness which Reason
dictates, those not practicing the same, surely they would not follow Reason in
so doing; nor would they hereby procure themselves peace, but a more certain
quick destruction, and the keepers of the Law become a mere prey to the
breakers of it. It is not therefore to be imagined, that by Nature, (that is,
by Reason) men are obliged to the (*) exercise of all these Laws in that state
of men wherein they are not practiced by others. We are obliged yet in the
interim to a readiness of mind to observe them whenever their observation
shall seem to conduce to the end for which they were ordained. We must
therefore conclude, that the Law of Nature does always, and every where oblige
in the internal Court, or that of Conscience, but not always in the external
Court, but then only when it may be done with safety.

The exercise of all these Lawes] Nay Annotation.
among these Laws some things there are, the omission whereof (provided it be
done for Peace, or Self-preservation) seems rather to be the fulfilling, then
breach of the Natural Law; for he that does all things against those that do
all things, and plunders plunderers, does equity; but on the other side, to do
that which in peace is an handsome action, and becoming an honest man, is
dejectedness, and poorness of spirit, and a betraying of ones self in the
time of War. But there are certain natural Laws, whose exercise cease not
even in the time of War it self; for I cannot understand what drankennesse, or
cruelty (that is, Revenge which respects not the future good) can advance
toward peace, or the preservation of any man. Briefly, in the state of nature,
what is just, and unjust, is not to be esteemed by the Actions, but by the
Counsel, and Conscience of the Actor. That which is done out of necessity, out
of endeavor for peace, for the preservation of our selves, is done with Right;
otherwise every damage done to a man would be a breach of the natural Law, and
an injury against God.

XXVIII. But the Laws which oblige The Laws of Nature are sometimes broken by
an act agreeable to those Laws.
Conscience, may be broken by an act, not only contrary to them, but also
agreeable with them, if so be that he who does it be of another opinion: for
though the act it self be answerable to the Laws, yet his Conscience is
against them.

XXIX. The Laws of Nature are immutable, and eternal: What they forbid, can
The Laws of Nature are immutable.
never be lawful; what they command, can never be unlawful: For pride,
ingratitude, breach of Contracts, (or injury) inhumanity, contum^ly, will never
be lawful; nor the contrary virtues to these ever unlawful, as we take them
for dispositions of the mind, that is, as they are considered in the Court of
Conscience, where only they oblige, and are Laws. Yet actions may be so
diversified by circumstances, and the Civil Law, that what is done with equity
at one time, is guilty of iniquity at another; and what suits with reason at
one time, is contrary to it another. Yet Reason is still the same, and changes
not her end, which is Peace, and Defense; nor the means to attain them, to
wit, those virtues of the mind which we have declared above, and which cannot
be abrogated by any Custom, or Law whatsoever.

XXX. It Is evident by what has hitherto He who endeavors to fulfill the Laws
of Nature, is just.
been said, how easily the Laws of Nature are to be observed, because they
require the endeavor only, (but that must be true and constant) which who so
shall perform, we may rightly call him JUST. For he who tends to this with his
whole might, namely, that his actions be squared according to the precepts of
Nature, he shows clearly that he has a mind to fulfill all those Laws,
which is all we are obliged to by rational nature. Now he that has done all
he is obliged to, it a Just Man.

XXXI. All Writers do agree that the The natural Law is the same with the
moral.
Natural Law is the same with the Moral. Let us see wherefore this is true.
We must know therefore, that Good and Evil are names given to things to
signify the inclination, or aversion of them by whom they were given. But the
inclinations of men are diverse, according to their diverse Constitutions,
Customs, Opinions; as we may see in those things we apprehend by sense, as by
tasting, touching, smelling; but much more in those which pertain to the common
actions of life, where what this man commends, (that is to say, calls Good) the
other undervalues, as being Evil; Nay, very often the same man at diverse
times, praises, and dispraises the same thing. Whilst thus they do, necessary
it is there should be discord, and strife: They are therefore so long in the
state of War, as by reason of the diversity of the present appetites, they mete
Good and Evil by diverse measures. All men easily acknowledge this state as
long, as they are in it, to be evil, and by consequence that Peace is good.
They therefore who could not agree concerning a present, do agree concerning a
future Good, which indeed is a work of Reason; for things present are obvious
to the sense, things to come to our Reason only. Reason declaring Peace to be
good, it follows by the same reason, that all the necessary means to Peace be
good also, and therefore, that Modesty, Equity, Trust, Humanity, Mercy (which
we have demonstrated to be necessary to Peace) are good Manners, or habits,
(that is) Virtues. The Law therefore, in the means to Peace, commands also Good
Manners, or the practice of Virtue: And therefore it is called Moral.

XXXII. But because men cannot put off Whence it comes to pass, that what has
been said concerning the Law, is not the same with what has been delivered by
Philosophers concerning the Virtues.
this same irrational appetite, whereby they greedily prefer the present good
(to which, by strict, consequence, many unfore-seenevills do adhere) before
the future, it happens, that though all men do agree in the commendation of
the foresaid virtues, yet they disagree still concerning their Nature, to wit,
in what each of them does consist; for as often as another good action
displeases any man, that action has the name given of some neighboring vice;
likewise the bad actions, which please them, are ever entitled to some Virtue;
whence it comes to pass that the same Action is praised by these, and called
Virtue, and dispraised by those, and termed vice. Neither is there as yet any
remedy found by Philosophers for this matter; for since they could not observe
the goodness of actions to consist in this, that it was in order to Peace, and
the evil in this, that it related to discord, they built a moral Philosophy
wholly estranged from the moral Law, and unconstant to it self; for they would
have the nature of virtues seated in a certain kind of mediocrity between two
extremes, and the vices in the extremes themselves; which is apparently false:
For to dare is commended, and under the name of fortitude is taken for a
virtue, although it be an extreme, if the cause be approved. Also the quantity
of a thing given, whether it be great, or little, or between both, makes not
liberality, but the cause of giving it. Neither is it injustice, if I give any
man more, of what is mine own, then I owe him. The Laws of Nature therefore
are the sum of Moral Philosophy* whereof I have only delivered such
precepts in this place, as appertain to the preservation of our selves against
those dangers which arise from discord. But there are other precepts of
rational nature, from whence spring other virtues: for temperance also is a
precept of Reason, because intemperance tends to sickness, and death. And so
fortitude too, (that is) that same faculty of resisting stoutly in present
dangers, (and which are more hardly declined then overcome) because it is a
means tending to the preservation of him that resists.

XXXIII. But those which we call the The Law of nature is not properly a law,
but as it is delivered in holy Scripture.
Laws of nature (since they are nothing else but certain conclusions
understood by Reason, of things to be done, and omitted; but a Law to speak
properly and accurately, is the speech of him who by Right commands somewhat to
others to be done, or omitted) are not (in propriety of speech) Laws, as they
proceed from nature; yet as they are delivered by God in holy Scriptures, (as
we shall see in the Chapter following) they are most properly called by the
name of Laws: for the sacred Scripture is the speech of God commanding over
all things by greatest Right.

CHAP. IV. That the Law of Nature is a Divine Law.
I. THE same Law which is Natural, The natural, and moral law (...) divine.
and Moral, is also wont to be called Divine, nor undeservedly, as well
because Reason, which is the law of Nature, is given by God to every man for
the rule of his actions; as because the precepts of living which are thence
derived, are the same with those which have been delivered from the divine
Majesty, for the LAWS of his heavenly Kingdom, by our Lord Jesus Christ, and
his holy Prophets and Apostles. What therefore by reasoning we have understood
above concerning the law of nature, we will endeavor to confirm the same in
this Chapter by holy writ.

II. But first we will show those places in Which is confirmed in Scripture in
general.
which it is declared, that the Divine Law is seated in right reason. Psalm 37.
31, 32. The^ mouth of the righteous will be exercised in wisdom, and his
tongue will be talking of Judgment: The law of God is in his heart. Jerem. 31.
33. I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts.
Psalm. 19. 7. The law of the Lord is an undefiled law, converting the soul.
ver. 8. The Commandment of the Lord is pure, and gives light unto the eyes.
Deuteron. 30. 11. This Commandment which I command thee this day, it is not
hidden from thee, neither is it far of, etc. verse. 14. But the word is very
nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thine heart; that thou may do it. Psalm.
119. 14. Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law. verse. 105. Thy word
is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my paths. Proverbs 9. 10. The
knowledge of the holy is understanding. John 1. 1. Christ the Lawgiver
himself is called the word. verse. 9. The same Christ is called the true light
that lights every man that comes in the world. All which are descriptions of
right reason, whose dictates, we have showed before, are the laws of nature.

III. But that which we set down Specially in regard of the fundamental law
of nature in seeking of peace.
for the fundamental law of nature, namely, that Peace was to be sought for,
is also the sum of the divine law, will be manifest by these places. Romans 3.
17. Righteousness, (which is the sum of the law) is called the way of Peace.
Psalm. 85. 10. Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other. Matthew. 5. 9.
Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God. And
after Saint Paul in his 6. Chapter to the Hebrews, and the last verse had
called Christ (the Legislator of that law we treat of) an High Priest for ever
after the order of Melehizedeck; he adds in the following Chapter, the first
verse, This Melchizedeck was King of Salem, Priest of the most high God, etc.
verse. 2. First being by interpretation King of Righteousness, and after that
also King of Salem, which is, King of peace. Whence it is clear, that Christ
the King in his Kingdom places Righteousness and Peace together. Psalm. 34.
13. Eschew evil and do good, seek peace and ensue it. Isaiah 9. 6, 7. Unto us
a child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the government shall be upon bis
shoulder, and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God,
the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace. Isaiah 52. 7. How beautiful upon
the mountains are the feet of him that brings good tidings, that publishes
peace, that brings good tidings of good, that publishes salvation, that
says unto Sion, thy God reigns? Luke 2. 14. In the Nativity of Christ, the
voice of them that praised God saying, Glory be to God on high, and in earth
peace, good will toward men. And Isaiah 53. 5. The Gospel is called the
chastisement of our peace. Isay 59. 8. Righteousness is called the way of
Peace. The way of peace they know not, and there is no judgment in their
goings. Micah 5. 4, 5. speaking of the M^ssias, he says thus, He shall stand
and food in the strength of the Lord, in the Majesty of the name of the Lord
his God, and they shall abide, for now shall he be great unto the end of the
earth; And this man shall be your Peace, etc. Prove. 3. 12. My son forget not
my law, but let thine heart keep my Commandments, for length of days, and
long life, and peace, shall they add to thee,

IV. What appertains to the first law of Also in regard of the first law of
nature in abolishing all things to be had in common.
abolishing the community of all things, or concerning the introduction of meum
and tuum, We perceive in the first place how great an adversary this same
Community is to Peace, by those words of Abraham to Lot, Genesis 13. 8. Let there
be no strife I pray thee, between thee and me, and between thy heard-men, and
my heard-men, for we be bretbren. Is not the whole land before thee? Separate
thy self I pray thee from me. And all those places of Scripture by which we
are forbidden to trespass upon our neighbors, as, Thou shall not kill, thou
shall not commit adultery, thou shall not steal, etc. do confirm the law of
distinction between Mine, and Thinc; for they suppose the right of all men to
all things to be taken away.

V. The same precepts establish the second Also the second law of nature,
concerning faith to be kept.
law of nature of keeping trust: for what does, Thou shall not invade another
right, import, but this? Thou shall not take possession of that, which by thy
contract cease to be thine; but expressly set down, Psalm. 15. verse. 1. To
him that asked, Lord who shall dwell in thy Taberna^l^? It is answered, verse.
5. He that swears unto his neighbor, and disappointeth him not; and Prove. 6.
1. My son if thou be surety for thy friend, if thou have stricken thy hand
with a stranger, Thou art snared with the words of thy mouth. Also of the third
law, of thankfulness.


VI. The third Law concerning gratitude is proved by these places, De^t. 25. 4.
Thou shall not muzzle the Ox when he treads out the corn; which Saint Paul
1. Cor. 9. 9. interprets to be spoken of men, not Oxen only. Prove. 17. 13. Who
so rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house. And Deuteronomy.
20. 10, 11. When thou come nigh unto a city to fight against it, then
proclaim peace unto it. And it shall be if it make thee answer of peace, and
open unto thee, then it shall be that all the people that is so^nd therein,
shall be tributaries unto thee, and they shall serve thee. Proverbs 3. 29.
Devise not evil against thy neighbor, seeing he dwells securely by thee.

VII. To the fourth Law of accommodating Also the fourth law, of rendering our
selves useful.
our selves, these precepts are conformable, Exodus 23. 4, 5. If thou meet thine
enemies Ox, or his Ass^ going astray, thou shall surely bring it back to him
again; if thou see the Ass of him that hates thee lying under his burden, and
would forbear to help him, thou shall surely help with him, verse. 9. Also,
thou shall not oppress a stranger. Prove. 3. 30. Strive not with a man without
a cause, if he have done thee no harm. Prove. 15. 18. A wrathful man stirs
up strife, bus he that is slow to anger, appeaseth strif^. 18. 24. There is a
friend that sticks closer then a brother. The same is confirmed, Luke 10. By
the Parable of the S^maritan, who had compassion on the Jew that was wounded by
thieves, and by Christ's precept, Matthew. 5. 39. But I say unto you, that ye
resist not evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to
him the Also of the fifth law, concerning mercy.
other also, etc.

VIII. Among infinite other places which prove the fifth law, these are some.
Matthew. 6. 14. If you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will
also forgive you^ but if you forgive not men their trespasses, neither will
your Father forgive your trespasses. Math. 18. 21. Lord how often shall my
Brother sin against me, and I forgive him? till seven times? Jesus says unto
him, I say not till seven times, but till seventy times seven times: that is,
toties quoties.

IX. For the confirmation of the sixth Also of the sixth law, that punishment
only looks at the future.
law, all those pla^es are pertinent which command us to show mercy; such as
Mat. 5, 7. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. Levit. 19.
18. Thou shall not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of thy
people. But there are, who not only think this law is not proved by Scripture,
but plainly disproved from hence, that there is an eternal punishment reserved
for the wicked after death, where there is no place either for amendment, or
example. Some resolve this objection by answering, That God, whom no law
restrains, refers all to his glory, but that man must not do so; as if God
sought his glory, (that is to say) pleased himself in the death of a sinner.
It is more rightly answered, that the institution of eternal punishment was
before sin, and had regard to this only, that men might dread to commit sin
for the time to come.

X. The words of Christ prove this seventh, Also of the seventh law, concerning
slander.
Matthew. 5. 22. But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother
without a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment, and whosoever shall say
unto his Brother Racha, shall be in danger of the Counsel, bi^ whosoever shall
say, thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire. Prove. 10. 18. He that
utters a slander is a fool. Prove. 14. 21. He that despises his neighbor,
finneth. 15. 1. Grievous words stir up anger. Prove. 22. 10. Cast out the
scorner, and contention shall go out, and reproach shall cease.

XI. The eighth law of acknowledging Al^o of the eighth, against pride
equality of nature, that is, of humility, is established by these places. Mat.
5. 3. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven.
Prove. 6. 16, 19. These six things does the Lord hate, yea seven are an
abomination unto him: A proud look, etc. Prove. 16. 5. Every one that is proud
is an abomination unto the Lord, though hand join in hand, he shall not be
unpunished. 11. 2. When pride comes, then comes shame, but with the lowly, is
wisdom. Thus Isay 40. 3. (where the coming of the Messiah is showed forth,
for preparation toward his Kingdom) The voice of him that cried in the
wilderness, was this: Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make strait in the
de^art a high way for our God. Every valley shall be exalted, and every
mountain, and hill, shall be made low; which doubtless is spoken to men, and
not to mountains.

XII. But that same Equity which we Al^o of the ninth, of equity.
proved in the ninth place to be a Law of Nature, which commands every man to
allow the same Rights to others they would be allowed themselves, and which
contains in it all the other Laws besides, is the same which Moses sets down,
Levit. 19. 18. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; and our Savior calls
it the sum of the moral Law, Mat. 22. 36. Master, which is the great
Commandment in the Law? Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind; this is the
first and great Commandment, and the second is like unto it, Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self. On these two Commandments hang all the Law and the
Prophets. But to love our neighbor as our selves, is nothing else, but to grant
him all we desire to have granted to our selves.

XIII. By the tenth Law respect of persons Also the 10. against respect of
Persons.
is forbid; as also by these places following, Mat. 5. 45. That ye may be
children of your Father which is in Heaven; for he makes the sun to rise on
the Evil, and on the Good, etc. Collos. 3. 11. There is neither Greek, nor
Jew, circumcision, nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, or Scythian, bond, or free,
but Christ is all, and in all. Acts 10. 34. Of a truth, I perceive, that God is
no respecter of Persons. 2 Chronicles. 19. 7. There is no iniquity with the Lord our
God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts Ecclus. 35. 12. The Lord is
Judge, and with him is no respect of Persons. Romans 2. 11. For Also of the 11.
Law, Of having those things in common which cannot be divided.
there is no respect of persons with God.

XIV. The eleventh Law, which commands those things to be held in common which
cannot be divided, I know not whether there be any express place in Scripture
for it, or not; but the practice appears every where in the common use of Wels,
Ways, Rivers, sacred things, etc. for else men could not live.

XV. We said in the twelf^h place, that Also of the 12. Of things to be divided
by Lot.
it was a Law of Nature, That where things could neither be divided, nor
possessed in common, they should be disposed by lot, which is confirmed as by
the example of Moses, who by Gods command, Numb. 6. 34. divided the several
parts of the land of promise unto the Tribes by Lot: So Acts 1. 24. by the
example of the Apostles, who received Matthias, before Justus, into their
number, by casting Lots, and saying, Thou Lord, who know the hearts of all
men, show whether of these two thou have chosen, etc. Prove. 16. 33. The lot is
cast into the lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord. And which
is the thirteenth Law the Succession was due unto Esau, as being the Firstborn
of Isaac, if himself had not sold it, (Genesis 25. 30.) or that the Father had not
otherwise appointed.

XVI. Saint Paul writing to the Corinthians, Also of appointing a Judge.
Epist. 1. Chap. 6. reprehends the Corinthians of that City for going to Law
one with another before infidel Judges who were their enemies, calling it a
fault, that they would not rather take wrong, and suffer themselves to be
defrauded; for that is against that Law, whereby we are commanded to be helpful
to each other. But if it happen the Controversy be concerning things
necessary, what is to be done? Therefore the Apostle, Ver. 5. speaks thus, I
speak to your shame. Is it so that there is not one wise man among you, no, not
one that shall be able to judge between his brethren? He therefore, by those
words confirms that Law of Nature which we called the fifteenth, to wit, Where
Controversies cannot be avoided, there by the consent of Parties to appoint
some Arbiter, and him some third man; so as (which is the 16 Law) neither of
the Parties may be judge in his own Cause.

XVII. But that the Judge, or Arbiter, Also of the 17. Law, That the Arbiters
must receive no reward for their Sentence.
must receive no reward for his Sentence, (which is the 17. Law) appears, Exodus
23. 8. Thou shall take no gift; for the gift blinds the wise, and pervert^th
the words of the righteous. Ecclus. 21. 29. Presents and gifts blind the eyes
of the wise. Whence it follows; that he must not be more obliged to one part
then the other, which is the 19. Law, and is also confirmed, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. Ye
shall not respect persons in Judgment, ye shall hear the small as well as the
great; and in all those places which are brought against respect of Persons.

XVIII. That in the judgment of Fact, Also of the 18. concerning Witnesses.
witnesses must be had, (which is the 18. Law) the Scripture not only
confirms, but requires more then one, Deuteronomy. 17. 6. At the mouth of two
witnesses, or three witnesses, shall he that is worthy of death be put to
death. The same is repeated, Deuteronomy. 19. 15.

XIX. Drunkenness, which we have therefore in the last place numbered among
Also of the 20. Law, against Drunkenness.
the breaches of the Natural Law, because it hinders the use of right Reason,
is also forbid in sacred Scripture for the same reason. Prove. 20. 1. Wine is a
mocker, strong drink is raging, whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise. And
Chap. 31. 4, 5. It is not for Kings to drink wine, lest they drink, and forget
the Law, and pervert the judgment of any of the afflicted: but that we might
know that the malice of this vice consisted not formally in the quantity of the
drink, but in that it destroys Judgment and Reason, it follows in the next
Verse, Give strong drink to him that is ready to perish, and wine to those that
be heavy of heart. Let him drink, and forget his poverty, and remember his
misery no more. Christ uses the same reason in prohibiting drunkenesse, Luke
21. 34. Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged
with s^rsetting and drunkenness.

XX. That we said in the foregoing Also in respect of that which has been
said, that the Law of Nature is eternal. Also that the Laws of Nature do
pertain to Conscience.
Chapter, The Law of Nature is eternal, is also proved out of the fifth of S.
Matthew. 18. Verily I say unto you, till Heaven and Earth pass, one jot, or one
tittle, shall in no wise pass from the Law, and Psalm. 119. v. 160. Every one
of thy rightcous judgments endures for ever.

XXI. We also said, That the Laws of Nature had regard chiefly unto
Conscience; that is, that he is just, who by all possible endeavor strives to
fulfill them. And although a man should order all his actions (so much as
belongs to external obedience) just as the Law commands, but not for the Laws
^ake, but by reason of some punishment annexed unto it, or out of Vain glory,
yet he is unjust. Both these are proved by the Holy Scriptures. The first, Esaias
55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and unrighteous man his thoughts, and
let him return unto the Lod, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God,
for he will abundantly pardon. Ezekiel. 18. 31. Cast away from you all your
transgressions where by you have transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a
new spirit; for why will you die O house of Israel? By which, and the like
places, we may sufficiently understand that God will not punish their deeds
whose heart is right. The second out of the 29. of Isay 13. The Lord said,
Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do
honor me, but have removed their heart far from me, therefore I will proceed,
etc. Mat. 5. 20. Except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven;
and in the following verses our Savior explains to them how that the commands
of God are broken, not by Deeds only, but also by the Will; for the Scribes and
Pharisees did in outward act observe the Law most exactly, but for Glories sake
only; else they would as readily have broken it. There are innumerable places
of Scripture in which is most manifestly declared that God accepts Also that
the laws of nature are easily observed. Lastly in respect of the Rule by which
a man may presently know whether what he is about to act be against the law of
nature, or not. The law of Christ is the law of nature.
the Will for the Deed, and that as well in good, as in evil actions.

XXII. That the Law of Nature is easily kept, Christ himself declares in the
11. Chapter of Saint Matthew 28, 29, 30. Come unto me, etc. Take my yoke upon
you, and learn of me, etc. for my yoke is easy, and my burden light.

XXIII. Lastly, the Rule by which I said any man might know whether what he was
doing, were contrary to the Law, or not, to wit, what thou would not be done
to, do not that to another, is almost in the self same words delivered by our
Savior, Mat. 7. 12. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should
do unto you, do you even so to them.

XXIV. As the law of nature is all of it Divine, so the Law of Christ by
conversion, (which is wholly explained in the 5, 6, and 7. Chapter of S.
Matthewes Gospel) is all of it also (except that one Commandment of not
marrying her who is put away for adultery, which Christ brought for explication
of the divine positive Law, against the Jews, who did not rightly interpret
the Mosaicall Law) the doctrine of Nature: I say the whole Law of Christ is
explained in the forenamed Chapters, not the whole Doctrine of Christ; for
Faith is a part of Christian Doctrine, which is not commprehended under the
title of a Law; for Laws are made, and given, in reference to such actions as
follow our will, not in order to our Opinions, and Belief, which being out of
our power, follow not the Will.

Quisquamne regno gaudet? O fallax bonum!
Quantum malorum front quam blanda tegis?
Necesse est ut multos timeat, quem multi timent.
Auro venexum bibitur: expertus loquor.


DOMINION.
CHAP. V. Of the causes, and first beginning of civil Government.
I. That the Laws of Nature are not sufficient to preserve Peace. II. That the
Laws of Nature, in the state of nature; are silent. III. That the security of
living according to the Laws of Nature consists in the concord of many
Persons. IV. That the concord of many Persons is not constant enough for a
lasting Peace. V. The reason why the government of certain bruit creatures
stands firm in concord only, and why not of men. VI. That not only consent,
but union also, is required to establish the Peace of men. VII. What union is.
VIII. In union the Right of all men is conveyed to one. IX. What civil
society is. X. What a civil Person is. XI. What it is to have the supreme
power, and what to be a subject. XII. Two kinds of Cities, natural, and by
institution.

IT is of it self manifest, that the actions of men That the Laws of nature
suffice not for the co^servation of Peace.
proceed from the will, and the will from hope, and fear, insomuch as when
they shall see a greater good, or less evil, likely to happen to them by the
breach, then observation of the Laws, they will wittingly violate them. The hope
therefore, which each man has of his security, and self-preservation, consists
in this, that by force or craft he may disappoint his neighbor, either openly,
or by stratagem. Whence we may understand, that the natural laws, though well
understood, do not instantly secure any man in their practice, and
consequently, that as long as there is no caution had from the inva^ion of
others, there remains to every man that same primitive Right of selfe-defence,
by such means as either he can or will make use of (that is) a Right to all
things, or the Right of war; and it is sufficient for the fulfiling of the
natural law, that a man be prepared in mind to embrace Peace when it may be
had.

II. It is a fond saying, That all laws That the Laws of nature, in the state
of nature, are silent.
are silent in the time of war, and it is a true one, not only if we speak
of the civil, but also of the natural laws, provided they be referred not to
the mind, but to the actions of men, by the third Chapter, Act. 29. and we mean
such a war as is of all men against all men; such as is the mere state of
nature; although in the war of nation against nation a certain mean was wont
to be observed. And therefore in old time there was a manner of living, and as
it were a certain economy, which they called (...), living by Rapine, which
was neither against the law of nature, (things then so standing) nor void of
glory to those who exercised it with valor, not with cruelty. Their custom
was, taking away the rest, to spare life, and abstain from Oxen fit for plough,
and every instrument serviceable to husbandry, which yet is not so to he taken,
as if they were bound to do thus by the law of nature, but that they had
regard to their own glory herein, left by too much cruelty, they might be
suspected guilty of fear.

III. Since therefore the exercise of the That the security of living according
to the Laws of nature, consists in the agreement of many.
natural law is necessary for the preservation of Peace, and that for the
exercise of the natural law security is no less necessary, it is worth the
considering what that is which affords such a security: for this matter nothing
else can be imagined, but that each man provide himself of such meet helps, as
the inv^sion of one on the other may be rendered so dangerous, as either of
them may think it better to refrain, then to meddle. But first it is plain,
that the consent of two or three cannot make good such a security; because that
the addition but of one, or some few on the other side, is sufficient to make
the victory undoubtedly sure, and hartens the enemy to attacque us. It is
therefore necessary, to the end the security sought for may be obtained, that
the number of them who conspire in a mutual assistance be so great, that the
accession of some few to the enemies party may not prove to them a matter of
moment sufficient to assure the victory.

IV. Farthermore, how great soever the number of them is who meet on
selfe-defence, That the agreement of many is not constant enough to preserve a
lasting Peace.
if yet they agree not among themselves of some excellent means whereby to
compass this, but every man after his own manner shall make use of his
endeavors, nothing will be done; because that divided in their opinions they
will be an hinderance to each other, or if they agree well enough to ^ome one
action through hope of victory, spoil, or revenge, yet afterward through
diversity of wits, and Counsels, or emulation, and envy, with which men
naturally contend, they will be so torn and rent, as they will neither give
mutual help, nor desire peace, except they be constrained to it by some common
fear. Whence it follows, that the consent of many, (which consists in this
only, as we have already defined in the foregoing section, that they direct
all their actions to the same end, and the common good) that is to say, that
the society proceeding from mutual help only, yields not that security which
they seek for, who meet, and agree in the exercise of the abovenamed laws of
nature; but that somewhat else must be done, that those who have once consented
for the common good, to peace and mutual help, may by fear be restrained, le^t
afterward they again dissent, when their private Interest shall appear
discrepant from the common good.

V. Aristole reckons among those animals Why the government of some bruit
creatures stands firm in concord alone, and not so of men.
which he calls Politic, not man only, but diverse others; as the Ant, the
Be, etc. which though they be destitute of reason, by which they may contract,
and submit to government, notwithstanding by consenting, (that is to say)
ensuing, or eschewing the same things, they so direct their actions to a common
end, that their meetings are not obnoxious unto any seditions. Yet is not their
gathering together a civil government, and therefore those animals not to be
termed political, because their government is only a consent, or many wills
concurring in one object; not (as is necessary in civil government) one will.
It is very true that in those creatures, living only by sense and appetite,
their consent of minds is so durable, as there is no need of any thing more to
secure it, and (by consequence) to preserve peace among them, then barely their
natural ^nclination. But among men the case is otherwise. For first among them
there is a contestation of honor and preferment; among beasts there is none:
whence hatred and envy, out of which arise sedition and war, is among men,
among beasts no such matter. Next, the natural appetite of Bees, and the like
creatures, is conformable, and they desire the common good which among them
differs not from their private; but man scarce esteems any thing good which
has not somewhat of eminence in the enjoyment, more then that which others do
possess. Thirdly, those creatures which are void of reason, see no defect, or
think they see none, in the administtation of their Commonweals; but in a
multitude of men there are many who supposing themselves wiser then others,
endeavor to innovate, and diverse Innovators innovate diverse ways, which is a
mere distraction, and civil war. Fourthly, these brute creatures, howsoever
they may have the use of their voice to signify their affections to each other,
yet want they that same art of words which is necessarily required to those
motions in the mind, whereby good is represented to it as being better, and
evil as worse then in truth it is: But the tongue of man is a trumpet of
war, and sedition; and it is reported of Pericles, that he sometimes by his
elegant speeches thundered, and lightened, and confounded whole Greece it
self. Fifthly, they cannot distinguish between injury and harm; Thence it
happens that as long as it is well with them, they blame not their fellows:
But those men are of most trouble to the Republique, who have most leisure to
be idle; for they use not to contend for public placcs before they have
gotten the victory over hunger, and cold. Last of all, the consent of those
brutall creatures is natural, that of men by compact only, (that is to say)
artificial; it is therefore no matter of wonder if somewhat more be needful
for men to the end they may live in peace. Wherefore consent, or contracted
society, without some common power whereby particular men may be ruled through
fear of punishment, does not suffice to make up that security which is
requisite to the exercise of natural justice.

VI. Since therefore the conspiring of many That not only consent, but union
also is required to establish the peace of men.
wills to the same end does not suffice to preserve peace, and to make a
lasting defense, it is requisite that in those necessary matters which concern
Peace and selfe-defence, there be but one will of all men. But this cannot be
done, unless every man will so subject his will to some other one, to wit,
either Man or Counsel, that whatsoever his will is in those things which are
necessary to the common peace, it be received for the wills of all men in
general, and of every one in particular. Now the gathering together of many
men who deliberate of what is to be done, or not to be done, for the common
good of all men, is that which I call a COUNSEL.

VII. This submission of the wills of all those What Un^on is.
men to the will of one man, o^ one Counsel, is then made, when each one of
them obliges himself by contract to every one of the rest, not to resist the
will of that one man, or counsel, to which he has submitted himself; that
is, that he refuse him not the use of his wealth, and strength, against any
others whatsoever (for he is supposed still to retain a Right of defending
himself against violence) and this is called UNION. But we understand that to
be the will of the counsel, which is the will of the major part of those men
of whom the Counsel consists.

VIII. But though the will it self be not voluntary, In union, the Right of all
men is transferred to one.
but only the beginning of voluntary actions (for we will not to will, but to
act) and therefore falls least of all under deliberation, and compact; yet he
who submits his will to the will of an other, conveighs to that other the Right
of his strength, and faculties; insomuch as when the rest have done the same,
he to whom they have submitted has so much power, as by the terror of it he
can conform the wills of particular men unto unity, and concord.

IX. Now union thus made is called a City, What civil society is.
or civil society, and also a civil Person; for when there is one will of all
men, it is to be esteemed for one Person, and by the word (one) it is to be
known, and distinguished from all particular men, as having its own Rights and
properties: insomuch as neither any one Citizen, nor all of them together (if
we except him whose will stands for the will of all) is to be accounted the
City. A CITY therefore (that we may define it) is one Person, whose will, by
the compact of many men, is to be received for the will of them all; so as he
may use all the power and faculties of each particular person, to the
maintenance of peace, and for common defense.

X. But although every City be a civil What a civil Person is.
Person, yet every civil Person is not a City; for it may happen that many
Citizens, by the permission of the City, may join together in one Person, for
the doing of certain things. These now will be civil Persons, as the companies
of Merchants, and many other Convents; but Cities they are not, because they
have not submitted themselves to the will of the company simply, and in all
things, but in certain things only determined by the City; and on such terme^
as it is lawful for any one of them to contend in judgment against the body
it self of the sodality, which is by no means allowable to a Citizen against
the City: such like societies therefore are civil Persons subordinate to the
City.

XI. In every city, That Man, or Counsel, What it is to have the supreme
power, what to be subject.
to whose will each particular man has subjected his will (so as has been
declared) is said to have the SUPREME POWER, or CHIEF COMMAND, or DOMINION;
which power, and Right of commanding, consists in this, that each Citizen has
conveyed all his strength and power to that man, o^ Counsel; which to have
done (because no man can transfer his power in a natural manner) is nothing
else then to have parted with his Right of resisting. Each Citizen, as also
every subordinate civil Person, is called the SUBJECT of him who has the
chief command.

XII. By what has been said, it is sufficiently Two kinds of Cities,
natural, and by institution.
showed, in what manner, and by what degrees many natural persons, through
desire of preserving themselves, and by mumutuall fear, have grown together
into a civil Person, whom we have called a City; But they who submit
themselves* to another for fear, either submit to him whom they fear, or some
other whom they confide in for protection; They act according to the first
manner who are vanquished in war, that they may not be slain; they according
to the second, who are not yet overcome, that they may not be overcome. The
first manner receives its* beginning from natural power, and may be called the
natural beginning of a City; the latter from the Counsel, and constitution of
those who meet together, which is a beginning by institution. Hence it is, that
there are two* kinds of Cities, the one natural, such as is the paternall, and
despoticall; the other institutive, which may be also called political. In the
first* the Lord acquires to himself such Citizens as he will, in the other the
Citizens by their own wills appoint a Lord over themselves, whether he be one
man, or one company of men endued with the command in chief. But we will speak
in the first place of a City political or by institution, and next of a City
natural.

CHAP. VI. Of the right of him, whether Counsel, or one Man only, who has
the supreme power in the City.
I. There can no^ Right be attributed to a multitude out of civil society, nor
any action to which they have not under seal consented. II. The Right of the
greater number consenting, is the beginning of a City. III. That every man
retains a Right to protect himself according to his own free will, so long as
there is no sufficient regard had to his security. IV. That a coercive power is
necessary to secure us. V. What the Sword of Justice is. VI. That the Sword of
Justice belongs, to him who has the chief command. VII. That the Sword of War
belongs to him also. VIII. All Judicature belongs to him too. IX. The
Legislative power is his only. X. The naming of Magistrates and other Officers
of the City belongs to him. XI. Also the Examination of all doctrines. XII.
Whatsoever he does is unpunishable. XIII. That the command his Citizens have
granted is absolute, and what proportion of obedience is due to him. XIV. The
Laws of the City bind him not. XV. That no man can challenge a propriety to
any thing against his will. XVI. By, the Laws of the City only we come to
know what theft, murder, adultery, and injury is. XVII. The opinion of those
who would constitute a City, where there is no body should have an absolute
power. XVIII. The marks of Supreme Authority. XIX. If a City be compared with a
Man, he that has the Supreme Power is in order to the City, as the humane soul
is in relation to the Man. XX. That the Supreme Command cannot by Right be
dissolved through their consents by whose Compacts it was first constituted.

I. WE must consider first of all There can no Right ^e attributed to a
multitude considered out of civil society, nor any action to which they have
not given their particular consents.
what a (*) multitude of men (gathering themselves of their own free wills
into society) is, namely, that it is not any one body, but many men, whereof
each one has his own will, and his peculiar judgment concerning all things
that may be proposed. And though by particular Contracts each single man may
have his own Right, and Propriety, so as one may say This is mine, the other,
That is his; yet will there not be any thing of which the whole multitude, as a
Person distinct from a single man, can rightly say, This is mine, more then
another. Neither must we ascribe any action to the multitude, as it is one, but
(if all, or more of them do agree) it will not be an Action, but as many
actions, as Men. For although in some great Sedition, it is commonly said, That
the People of that City have taken up. Arms; yet is it true of those only who
are in Arms, or who consent to them. For the City, which is one Person, cannot
take up Arms against it self. Whatsoever therefore is done by the multitude,
must be understood to be done by every one of those by whom it is made up; and
that he, who being in the Multitude, and yet consented not, nor gave any helps
to the things that were done by it, must be judged to have done nothing.
Besides, in a multitude not yet reduced into one Person, in that manner as has
been said, there remains that same ^te of nature in which all things belong to
all men, and there is no place for Meum and Tuum, which is called Dominion, and
Propriety, by reason that that security is not yet extant which we have
declared above to be necessarily requisite for the practice of the Natural
Laws.

Multitude, etc.] The Doctrine of the Annotation.
power of a City over it is Citizens, almost wholly depends on the understanding
of the difference which is between a multitude of men ruling, and a multitude
ruled: For such is the nature of a City, That a multitude, or company of
Citizens, not only may have command, but may also be subject to command, but
in diverse senses; which difference I did believe was clearly enough explained
in this first Article; but by the objections of many against those things which
follow, I discern otherwise; wherefore it seemed good to me, to the end I might
make a fuller explication, to add these few things.

By Multitude, because it is a collective word, we understand more then one, so
as a multitude of me^ is the same with many me^; The same word, because it is
of the singular number, signifies one thing, namely, one multitude; but in
neither sense can a multitude be understood to have one will given to it by
nature, but to either a several; and therefore neither is any one action
whatsoever to be attributed to it: Wherefore a Multitude cannot promis^,
contract, acquire Right, conveigh Right, act, have, possess, and the like,
unless it be every one apart, and Man by Man; so as there must be as many
promises, compacts, rights, and actions, as Men. Wherefore a Multitude is no
natural Person; but if the same Multitude do Contract one with another, that
the will of one man, or the agreeing wills of the major part of them, shall be
received for the will of all, then it becomes one Person; for it is endu'd with
a will, an^ therefore can do voluntary actions, such as ar^ Commanding, making
Laws, acquiring and transferring of Right, and so ^orth; and it is oftener
called the People, then the Multitude. We must therefore distinguish thus. When
we say the People, or Multitude, wills, commands, or does any thing, it is
understood that the City which Commands, Wills and Acts by the will of one, or
the concurring wills of more, which cannot be done, but in an Assembly* But as
often as any thing is said to be done by a Multitude of Men, whether great, or
small, without the will of that man, or assembly of men, that is understood to
be done by a subjected People, that is, by many single Citizens together, and
not proceeding from one Will, but from diverse wills of diverse men, who are
Citizens, and Subjects, but not a City.

II. Next, we must consider that every The beginning of a City is the Right of
the major part agreeing.
one of the Multitude (by whose means there may be a beginning to make up the
City) must agree with the rest, that in those matters which shall be propounded
by any one in the Assembly, that be received for the will of all which the
major part shall approve of; for otherwise there will be no will at all of a
Multitude of Men, whose Wills and Votes differ so variously. Now if any one
will not consent, the rest notwithstanding shall among themselves constitute
the City without him: Whence it will come to pass, that the City retains its
primitive Right against the Dissentour, that is, the Right of War, as against
an Enemy.

III. But because we said in the foregoing That every man retains a right of
protecting himself according to ^is own judgment, as long as he is not
secured.
Chapter, the sixth Article, That there was required to the security of men,
not only their Consent, but also the Subjection of their wills in such things
as were necessary to Peace and Defense; and that in that Union, and Subjection,
the nature of a City consisted; We must discern now in this place, out of
those things which may be propounded, discussed and stated in an Assembly of
men, (all whose wills are contained in the will of the major part) what things
are necessary to Peace, and common defense: But first of all, it is necessary
to Peace, that a man be so far forth protected against the violence of
others, that he may live securely, that is, that he may have no just cause to
fear others, so long as he does them no injury. Indeed, to make men altogether
safe from mutual harms, so as they cannot be hurt, or injuriously killed, is
impossible, and therefore comes not within deliberation, but care may be had
there be no just cause of fear; for security is the end wherefore men submit
themselves to others, which if it be not had, no man is supposed to have
submitted himself to ought, or to have quitted his Right to all things, before
that there was a care had of his security.

IV. It is not enough to obtain this security, That a co^r^ive po^er is
^^cessary for security.
that every one of those who are now growing up into a City, do^ covenant with
the rest, either by words, or writing, Not to steal, not to kill, and to
observe the like Laws; for the pravity of humane disposition is manifest to
all, and by experience too well known how little (removing the punishment) men
are kept to their duties, through conscience of their promises. We must
therefore provide for our security, not by Compacts, but by Punishments; and
there is then sufficient provision made, when there are so great punishments
appointed for every injury, as apparently it prove a greater evil to have done
it, then not to have done it: for all men, by a necessity of nature, choose that
which to them appears to be the less evil.

V. Now the right of punishing is then What the Sword of Justice is.
understood to be given to any one, when every man Contracts not to assist him
who is to be punished. But I will call this Right, The Sword of Justice. But
these kind of contracts men observe well enough, for the most part, till either
themselves, or their n^ar friends are to suffer.

VI. Because therefore for the security of That the Sword of Justice belongs to
him who has the chief command.
particular men, and, by consequence for the common peace, it is necessary that
the right of using the Sword for punishment, be transferred to some Man or
Counsel, that Man or Counsel is necessarily understod by Right to have the
supreme power in the City. For he that by Right punishes at his own
discretion, by Right compells all men to all things which he himself wills;
then which a greater command cannot be imagined.

VII. But in vain do they worship peace That the Sword of War belongs to him
also.
at home, who cannot defend themselves against forrainers; neither is it
possible for them to protect themselves against forrainers, whose forces are
not united; and therefore it is necessary for the preservation of particulars,
that there be some one Counsel, or one man, who has the Right to arm, to
gather together, to unite so many Citizens in all dangers, and on all
occasions, as shall be needful for common defense against the certain number,
and strength of the enemy; and again, (as often as he shall find it expedient)
to make peace with them. We must understand therefore, that particular Citizens
have conveyed their whole Right of War, and Peace, unto some one Man or
Counsel; And that this right (which we may call ^he Sword of War) belongs to
the same Man, or Counsel, to whom the Sword of Justice belongs; for no Man can
by Right compel Citizens to take up arms, and be at the expenses of War,
but he who by Right can punish him who does not obey. Both Swords therefore, as
well this of War, as that of Justice, even by the constitution it self of a
City, and essentially, do belong to the chief command.

VIII. But because the right of the Sword is nothing else but to have power by
The power of Judicature belongs to him.
right to use the sword at his own will, it follows, that the judgment of its
right use pertaines to the same party: for if the power of judging were in one,
and the power of executing in another, nothing would be done. For in vain would
he give judgment, who could not execute his commands, or if he executed them
by the power of another, he himself is not said to have the power of the
Sword, but that other, to whom he is only an Officer. All judgment therefore
in a City belongs to him who has the swords, (i. e.) to him, who has the
supreme authority.

IX. Furthermore, since it no less, nay it much more conduces to Peace to
prevent The Legislative power is his also.
brawles from arising, then to appease them being risen; and that all
controversies are bred from hence, that the opinions of men differ concerning
Meum and Tuum, just and unjust, profitable and unprofitable, good and evil,
honest and dishonest, and the like, which every man esteems according to his
own judgment; it belongs to the same chief power to make some common Rules
for all men, and to declare them publicly, by which every man may know what
may be called his, what another, what just, what unjust, what honest, what
dishonest, what good, what evil, that is summarily, what is to be done, what
to be avoided in our common course of life. But those Rules and measures are
usually called the civil Laws, or the Laws of the City, as being the
Commands of him who has the supreme power in the City. And the CIVIL LAWS
(that we may define them) are nothing else but the commands of him who has the
chief authority in the City, for direction of the future actions of his
Citizens.

X. Furthermore, since the affairs of That the naming of Magistrates and
Officers, belongs to him also.
the City, both those of War, and Peace, cannot possibly be all administered
by one man, or one Counsel, without Officers and subordinate Magistrates, and
that it appertains to Peace, and common defense, that they to whom it belongs
justly to judge of controversies, to search into neighboring counsels,
prudently to wage war, and on all hands warily to attend the benefit of the
City, should also rightly exercise their offices; it is consonant to reason,
that they depend on, and be chosen by him who has the chief command both in
War, and in Peace.

XI. It is also manifest, that all voluntary actions have their beginning from,
and The Examination of doctrines belongs to him likewise.
necessarily depend on the will, and that the will of doing, or omitting ought,
depends on the opinion of the good and evil of the reward, or punishment,
which a man conceives he shall receive by the act, or omission; so as the
actions of all men are ruled by the opinions of each; wherefore by evident and
necessary inference, we may understand that it very much concerns the interest
of Peace, that no opinions or doctrines be delivered to Citizens, by which they
may imagine, that either by Right they may not obey the Laws of the City, that
is, the commands of that man, or Counsel, to whom the supreme power is
committed, or that it is lawful for to resist him, or that a less punishment
remains for him that denies, then him that yields obedience. For if one
command somewhat to be done under penalty of natural death, another forbids it
under pain of eternal death, and both by their own Right, it will follow that
the Citizens, although innocent, are not only by Right punishable, but that
the City it self is altogether disolved; for no man can serve two Masters: nor
is he less, but rather more, a Master, whom we believe we are to obey for
fear of damnation, then he whom we obey for fear of temporal death. It
follows therefore, that this one, whether Man, or Court, to whom the City has
committed the supreme power, have also this Right, That he both (*) judge what
opinions and doctrines are enemies unto peace, and also that he forbid them to
be taught.

Judge what opinions, etc.] There is scarce any Principle, neither in the
worship of God, Annotation.
nor humane sciences, from whence there may not spring dissentions, discords,
reproaches, and by degrees war it self; neither does this happen by reason of
the falsehood of the Principle, but of the disposition of men, who seeming wise
to themselves, will needs appear such to all others* But though such
dissentions cannot be hindered from arising, yet may they be restrained by the
exercise of the supreme power, that they prove no hinderance to the public
peace. Of these kind of opinions therefore I have not spoken of in this place.
There are certain doctrines wherewith Subjects being tainted, they verily
believe that obedience may be refused to the City, and that by Right they may,
nay ought, to oppose, and fight against chief Princes, and dignities. Such are
those, which whether directly, and openly, or more obscurely, and by
consequence require obedience to be given to others beside them to whom the
supreme authority is committed. I deny not, but this reflects on that power
which many living under other government, ascribe to the chief head of the
Church of Rome, and also on that, which elsewhere out of that Church, Bishops
require in theirs, to be given to them; and last of all, on that liberty which
the lower sort of Citizens under pretense of Religion do challenge to
themselves; for what civil war was there ever in the Christian world, which
did not either grow from, or was nourisht by this Root? The judgment therefore
of doctrines, whether they be repugnant to civil obedience or not, and if they
be repugnant, the power of prohibiting them to be taught, I do here attribute
to the civil authority; for since there is no man who grants not to the City
the judgment of those things which belong to its Peace, and defense, an^ it is
manifest, that the opinions which I have already recited do relate to its
Peace, it follows necessarily, that the examination of those opinions, whether
they be such, or not, must be referred to the City, that is, to him who has
the supreme authority. Whatsoever he does is unpunishable.


XII. Last of all, from this. consideration, that each Citizen has submitted
his Will to his who has the Supreme Command in the City, so as he may not
employ his strength against him; it follows manifestly, that whatsoever shall
be done by him who commands, must not be punished; for as he who has not power
enough, cannot punish him naturally; so neither can he punish him by Right, who
by Right has not sufficient power.

XIII. It is most manifest by what has That be has an absolute dominion
granted him by his Citizens, and what proportion of obedience is due unto him.
been said, That in every perfect City (that is, where no Citizen has Right to
use his faculties, at his own discretion, for the preservation of himself, or
where the Right of the private Sword is excluded) there is a Supreme power in
some one, greater then which cannot by Right be conferred by men, or greater
then which no mortal man can have over himself. But that power, greater then
which cannot by men, be conveyed on a man, we call (*) ABSOLUTE: for
whosoever has so submitted his will to the will of the City, That he can,
unpunisht, d^e any thing, make Laws, judge Controversies, set Penalties, make
use, at his own pleasure, of the strength, and wealth of men, and all this by
Right, truly he has given him the greatest dominion that can be granted. This
same may be confirmed by experience in all the Cities which are, or ever have
been; for though it be sometimes in doubt, what Man, or Counsel, has the
Chief Command, yet ever there is such a Command, and always exercised, except
in the time of Sedition, and Civil War, and then there are two Chief Commands
made out of one: Now those seditious persons who dispute against absolute
Authority, do not so much care to destroy it, as to conveigh it on others; for
removing this power, they together take away Civil Society, and a confusion of
all things returns. There is so much obedience joined to this absolute Right
of the Chief Ruler, as is necessarily required for the Government of the City,
that is to say, so much as that Right of his may not be granted in vain. Now
this kind of obedience, although for some reasons it may sometimes, by Right,
be denied, yet because a greater cannot be performed, we will call it SIMPLE.
But the obligation to perform this grows not immediately from that Contract
by which we have conveyed all our Right on the City, but mediately from
hence, That, without obedience, the Cities Right would be frustrate, and by
consequence there would be no City constituted. For it is one thing if I say, I
give you Right to Command what you will; another, if I say, I will do
whatsoever you Command; and the Command may be such, as I would rather die then
do it; forasmuch therefore as no man can be bound to will being killed, much
less is he tied to that, which to him is worse then death: if therefore I be
commanded to kill my self, I am not bound to do it; for though I deny to do
it, yet the Right of dominion is not frustrated, since others may be found, who
being commanded, will not refuse to do it; neither do I refuse to do that
which I have contracted to do. In like manner, if the Chief Ruler command any
man to kill him, he is not tied to do it, because it cannot be conceived that
he made any such Covenant; nor if he command to execute a Parent, whether he be
innocent, or guilty, and condemned by the Law, since there are others, who,
being commanded, will do that, and a Son will rather die, then live infamous,
and hated of all the world. There are many other cases, in which, since the
Commands are shameful to be done by some, and not by others, Obedience may, by
Right, be performed by these, and refused by those; and this, without breach of
that absolute Right which was given to the Chief Ruler. For in no case is the
Right taken away from him, of slaying those who shall refuse to obey him. But
they who thus kill men, although by Right given them from him that has it, yet
if they use that Right otherwise then right Reason requires, they sin against
the Laws of Nature, (that is) against God.

Absolute] A popular state openly challenges Annotation.
absolute dominion, and the Citizens oppose it not, for in the gathering
together of many men, they acknowledge the face of a City; and even the
unskilful understand, that matters there are ruled by Counsel. Yet Monarchy
is no less a City, then Democra^y, and absolute Kings have their Counselors,
from whom they will take advice, and suffer their power, in matters of greater
consequence, to be guided, but not recalled. But it appears not to most men how
a City is contained in the Person of a King; and therefore they object against
Absolute Command: First, that if any man had such a Right, the condition of the
Citizens would be miserable: For thus they think, He will take all, spoil all,
kill all; and every man counts it his only happiness that he is not already
spoiled and killed. But why should he do thus? not because he can; for unless
he have a mind to it, he will not do it. Will he, to please one, or some few,
spoil all the rest? First, though by Right, that is, without injury to them, he
may do it, yet can he not do it justly, that is, without breach of the
Natural Laws, and injury against God. And therefore there is some security
for Subjects in the Oaths which Princes take. Next, if he could justly do it,
or that he made no account of his Oath, yet appears there no reason why he
should desire it, since he finds no good in it. But it cannot be denied but a
Prince may sometimes have an inclination to do wickedly; but grant then that
thou had given him a power which were not absolute, but so much only as
sufficed to defend thee from the injuries of others, which, if thou will be
safe, is necessary for thee to give; are not all the same things to be feared?
for he that has strength enough to protect all, wants not sufficiency to
oppress all. Here is no other difficulty then, but that humane affairs cannot
be without some inconvenience. And this inconvenience it self is in the
Citizens, not in the Government; for if men could rule themselves, every man by
his own command, that is to say, could they live according to the Laws of
Nature, there would be no need at all of a City, nor of a common coercive
power. Secondly, they object, That there is no Dominion in the Christian world
Absolute; which indeed is not true, for all Monarchies, and all other States,
are so; for although they, who have the chief Command, do^ not all those things
they would, and what they know profitable to the City, the reason of that is
not the defect of Right in them, but the consideration of their Citizens, who
busied about their private interest, and careless of what tends to the
public, cannot sometimes be drawn to perform their duties without the hazard
of the City. Wherefore Princes sometimes forbear the exercise of their Right,
and prudently remit somewhat of the act, but nothing of their Right.

XIV. Neither can any man give somewhat to himself; for he is already That he
is not tied to observe the Laws of the City.
supposed to have what he can give himself; nor can he be obliged to himself,
for the same Party being both the obliged, and the Obliger, and the Obliger
having power to release the obliged, it were merely in vain for a man to be
obliged to himself, because he can release himself at his own pleasure; and he
that can do this, is already actually free. Whence its plain, that the City
is not tied to the Civil Laws; for the Civil Laws are the Laws of the
City, by which, if she were engaged, she should be engaged to her self.
Neither can the City be obliged to her Citizen, because, if he will, he can
free her from her obligation; and he will, as often as she wills, (for the will
of every Citizen is in all things comprehended in the will of the City) the
City therefore is free when she pleases, that is, she is now actually free;
but the will of a Council, or one who has the Supreme Authority given him, is
the will of the City; he therefore contains the wills of all particular
Citizens: Therefore neither is he bound to the Civil Laws (for this is to be
bound to himself) nor to any of his Citizens.

XV. Now because (as has been shown That no man can challenge a propriety in
ought against him who has the Supreme Power.
above) before the constitution of a City all things belonged to all men, nor
is there that thing which any man can so call his, as any other may not, by the
same Right, claim as his own, (for where all things are common, there can be
nothing proper to any man) it follows, that (*) propriety received its
beginning when Cities received theirs, and that that only is proper to each
man which he can keep by the Laws, and the power of the whole City, (that is)
of him on whom its chief command is conferred. Whence we understand, that each
particular Citizen has a propriety, to which none of his fellow-Citizens has
Right, because they are tied to the same Laws; but he has no propriety in
which the Chief Ruler (whose Commands are the Laws, whose will contains the
will of each man, and who, by every single person, is constituted the Supreme
Judge) has not a Right. But although there be many things which the City
permits to its Citizens, and therefore they may sometimes go to Law against
their Chief; yet is not that action belonging to Civil Right, but to Natural
Equity; neither is it concerning what (*) by Right he may do^ who has the
Supreme Power, but what he has been willing should be done, and therefore he
shall be judge himself, as though (the equity of the cause being well
understood) he could not give wrong judgment.

Propriety received its beginning, etc.] Annotation.
What Is objected by some, That the propriety of goods, even before the
constitution of Cities, was found in Fathers of Families, that objection is
vain, because I have already declared, That a Family is a little City: For the
Sons of a Family have a propriety of their goods granted them by their
Father, distinguished indeed from the rest of the Sons of the same Family, but
not from the propriety of the Father himself; but the Fathers of diverse
Families, who are subject neither to any common Father, nor Lord, have a common
Right in all things.

What by Right he may do, etc.] As Annotation.
often as a Citizen is granted to have an action of Law against the Supreme, i.
e. against the City, the question is not in that action, whether the City may,
by Right, keep possession of the thing in controversy, but whether by the
Laws formerly made she would keep it; for the Law is the declared will of the
Supreme: since then the City may raise money from the Citizens under tow
Titles, either as Tribute, or as Debt, in the former case there is no action of
Law allowed; for there can be no question whether the City have Right to
require Tribute: in the latter it is allowed, because the City will take
nothing from its Citizens by fraud, or cunning, and yet if need require, all
they have, openly; and therefore he that condemns this place, saying, That by
this doctrine it is casie for Princes to free themselves from their Debts, he
does it impertinently.

XVI. Theft, Murder, Adultery, and all It is known by the civil Laws what
theft, murder, adultery, and injury are.
injuries are forbid by the Laws of nature, but what is to be called Theft,
what Murder, what Adultery, what injury in a Citizen, this is not to be
determined by the natural, but by the civil Law: for not every taking away of
the thing which another possesses, but only another man's goods is the^ but
what is ours, and what another, is* a question belonging to the civil Law. In
like manner, not every killing of a man is Murder, but only that which the
civil Law forbids; neither is all encounter with women Adultery, but only
that which the civil Law prohibits. Lastly, all breach of promise is an
injury, where the promise it self is lawful, but where there is no Right to
make any compact, there can be no conveighance of it, and therefore there can
no injury follow, as has been said in the second Chapter, Artic. 17. Now what
we may contract for, and what not, depends wholly upon the civil Laws. The
City of Laced^mon therefore rightly ordered that those young men who could so
take away certain goods from others as not to be caught, should ^oe unpunisht;
for it was nothing else, but to make a Law that what was so acquired should be
their own, and not another. Rightly also is that man every where s^ain, whom we
kill in war, or by the necessity of selfe-defence. So also that copulation
which in one City is Matrimony, in another will be judged Adultery. Also those
contracts which make up Marriage in one Citizen, do not so in another,
although of the same City; because that he who is forbidden by the City (that
is by that one man, or Council, whose the supreme power is) to contract ought,
has no Right to make any contract, and therefore having made any, it is not
valid, and by consequence, no Marriage. But his contract which received no
prohibition, was therefore of force, and so was Matrimony: neither adds it any
force to any unlawful contracts, that they were made by an Oath, (*) or
Sacrament, for those add nothing to the strenghning of the contract, as has
been said above Chap. 2. Artic. 22. What therefore Theft, what Murder, what
Adultery, and in general what injury is, must be known by the civil Laws,
that is, the commands of him who has the supreme authority.

That they were made by an Oath or Sacrament, Annotation
etc.] Whether Matrimony be a Sacrament (in which sense that word is used by
some Divines) or not, it is not my pu^pose to dispute: Only I say, that the
legitimate contract of a man and woman to live together, i. e. granted by the
civil Law, whether it be a Sacrament, or not, is surely a legitimate Marriage;
but that copulation which the City has prohibited is no marriage, since it is
of the essence of Marriage to be a legitimate contract. There were legitimate
marriages in many places, a^ among the Jews, the Grecians, the Romans, which
yet might be dissolved; but with those who permit no such contracts, but by a
Law that they shall never be broke, Wedlock cannot be dissolved, and the reason
is, because the City has commanded it to be indissoluble, not because
Matrimony is a Sacrament. Wherefore the ceremonies which at weddings are to be
performed in the Temple, to bless, or (if I may say so) to consecrate the
husband and wife, will pe^haps belong only to the office of Clergymen, all the
rest, namely who, when, and by what contracts Marriages may be made, pertains
to the Laws of the City.

XVII. This same supreme command, and The opinion of those who would constitute
a City, where there should not be any one endued with absolute power.
absolute power, seems so harsh to the greatest part of men, as they hate the
very naming of them; which happens chiefly through want of knowledge, what
humane nature, and the civil Laws are, and partly also through their default,
who when they are invested with so great authority, abuse their power to their
own lust. That they may therefore avoid this kind of supreme authority, some of
them will have a City well enough constituted, if they who shall be the
Citizens convening, do agree concerning certain Articles propounded, and in
that convent agitated and approved; and do command them to be observed, and
punishments prescribed to be inflicted on them who shall break them: to which
purpose, and also to the repelling of a foreign enemy, they appoint a certain
and limited return, with this condition, that if that suffice not, they may
call a new convention of estates. Who sees not in a City thus constituted, that
the Assembly who prescribed those things had an absolute power? If therefore
the Assembly continue, or from time to time have a certain day, and place of
meeting, that power will be perpet^all. But if they wholly dissolve, either the
City dissolves with them, and so all is returned to the state of War, or else
there is some where a power left to punish those who shall transgress the
Laws, whosoever, or how many soever they be that have it, which cannot
possibly be without an absolute power: for he that by right has this might
given, by punishments to restrain what Citizens he pleases, has such a power,
as a greater cannot possibly be given by any Citizens.

XVIII. It is therefore manifest, that The notes of supreme authority.
in every City there is some one man, or Council, or Court, who by Right has
as great a power over each single Citizen, as each man has over himself
considered out of that civil state, that is, supreme and absolute, to be
limited only by the strength and forces of the City it self, and by nothing
else in the world: for if his power were limited, that limitation must
necessarily proceed from some greater power; For he that prescribes limits,
must have a greater power then he who is confined by them; now that confining
power is either without limit, or is again restrained by some other greater
then it self, and so we shall at length arrive to a power which has no other
limit, but that which is the terminus ultimus of the forces of all the Citizens
together. That same is called the supreme command, and if it be committed to a
council, a supreme council, but if to one man, the supreme Lord of the City.
Now the notes of supreme command are these, To make and abrogate Laws, To
determine War and Peace, to know, and judge of all controversies, either by
himself, or by Judges appointed by him; to elect all Magistrates, Ministers,
and Counselors. Lastly, if there be any man who by Right can do some one
action which is not lawful for any Citizen or Citizens to do beside himself,
that man has obtained the supreme power: For those things which by Right may
not be done by any one or many Citizens, the City it self can only do: He
therefore that does those things uses the Cities Right, which is the supreme
power.

XIX. They who compare a City and If the City be compared with a man, he who
has the supreme command, is in order to the City, a^ the hu^ soul is to the
man, By Chap. (...). Artic. 1.
its Citizens, with a man and his members, almost all say, that he who has the
supreme power in the City, is in relation to the whole City, such as the head
is to the whole man; But it appears by what has been already said, that he
who is endued with such a power, (whether it be a man, or a Court) has a
relation to the City, not as that of the head, but of the soul to the body.
For it is the soul by which a man has a will, that is, can either will, or
nill; so by him who has the supreme power, and no otherwise, the City has a
will, and can either will or nill. A Court of Counselors is rather to be
compared with the head, or one Counselor, whose only Counsel (if of any one
alone) the chief Ruler makes use of in matters of greatest moment: for the
office of the head is to counsel, as the souls is to command.

XX. For as much as the supreme command That the supreme power cannot by Right
be dissolved by their consents, by whose co^pacts it was co^tuted.
is constituted by virtue of the compacts which each single Citizen, or
subject, mutually makes with the other; but all contracts, as they receive
their force from the contractors, so by their consent they lose it again, and
are broken; perhaps some may infer hence, that by the consent of all the
subjects together, the supreme authority may be wholly taken away. Which
inference if it were true, I cannot discern wha^ danger would thence by Right
arise to the supreme Commanders. For since it is supposed, that each one has
obliged himself to each other, if any one of them shall refuse, whatsoever the
rest shall agree to do, he is bound notwithstanding; neither can any man
without injury to me, do that which by contract made with me, he has obliged
himself not to do. But it is not to be imagined that ever it will happen,
that all the subjects together, not so much as one excepted, will combine
against the supreme power, wherefore there is no fear for Rulers in chief,
that by any Right they can be despoyled of their authority. If notwithstanding
it were granted, that their Right depended only on that contract which each
man makes with his fellow-citizen, it might very easily happen, that they might
be robbed of that Dominion under pretense of Right; for subjects being called
either by the command of the City, or seditiously flocking together, most men
think that the consents of all are contained in the votes of the greater part;
which in truth is false; for it is not from nature that the consent of the
major part should be received for the consent of all, neither is it true in
tumults, but it proceeds from civil institution, and is then only true, when
that Man or Court which has the supreme power, assembling his subjects, by
reason of the greatness of their number, allows those that are elected a
power of speaking for those who elected them, and will have the major part of
voices, in such matters as are by him propounded to be discust, to be as
effectual as the whole. But we cannot imagine that he who is chief, ever
convened his subjects with intention that they should dispute his Right,
unless, weary of the burden of his charge, he declared in plain terms, that
he renounces and abandons his government. Now because most men through
ignorance esteem not the consent of the major part of Citizens only, but even
of a very few, provided they be of their opinion, for the consent of the whole
City, it may very well seem to them, that the supreme authority may by right be
abrogated, so it be done in some great Assembly of Citizens by the votes of the
greater number; But though a government be constituted by the contracts of
particular men with particulars, yet its Right depends not on that obligation
only, there is another tie also toward him who commands; for each Citizen
compacting with his fellow, says thus, I conveigh my Right on this Party, upon
condition that you pass yours to the same; by which means* that Right which
every man had before to use his faculties to his own advantage, is now wholly
translated on some certain man, or Council, for the common benefit; wherefore
what by the mutual contracts each one has made with the other, what by the
donation of Right which every man is bound to ratify to him that commands, the
government is upheld by a double obligation from the Citizens, first that which
is due to their fellow citizens, next that which they owe to their Prince.
Wherefore no subjects how many soever they be, ^an with any Right despoyle him
who bears the chief Rule, of his authority, even without his own consent.

CHAP. VII. Of the three kinds of Government, Democraty, Aristocraty,
Monarchy.
I. That there are three kinds of Government only, Democraty, Ariristocraty,
Monarchy. II. That Oligarchy is not a diverse form of government distinct from
Aristocraty, nor Anarchy any Form at all. III. That a Tyranny is not a diverse
state from a legitimate Monarchy. IV. That there cannot be a mixed state
fashioned out of these several species. V. That Democraty, except there be
certain times and places of meeting prefixed, is dissolved. VI. In a Democraty
the intervalls of the times of meeting must be short, or the administration of
Government during the intervall committed to some one. VII. In a Democraty
particulars Contract with particulars to obey the People; the People is obliged
to no man. VIII. By what acts Aristocraty is constituted. IX. In an Aristocraty
the Nobles make no Compact, neither are they obliged to any Citizen, or to the
whole People. X. The Nobles must necessarily have their set meetings. XI. By
what acts Monarchy is constituted. XII. Monarchy is by Compact obliged to none
for the Authority it has received. XIII. Monarchy is ever in the readiest
capacity to exercise all those acts which are requisite to good Government.
XIV. What kind of sin that is, and what sort of men are guilty of it, when the
City performs not its office toward the Citizens, nor the Citizens toward
the City. XV. A Monarch made without limitation of time has power to elect his
successor. XVI. Of limited Monarchs. XVII. A Monarch retaining his Right of
Government, cannot by any promise whatsoever be conceived to have parted with
his Right to the means necessary to the exercise of his Authority. XVIII. How
a Citizen is freed from subjection.

I. WE have already spoken of a There are three kinds of Government only.
Democraty, Aristocraty, and Monarchy.
City by institution in its Genus; we will now say somewhat of its species. As
for the difference of Cities, it is taken from the difference of the Persons,
to whom the Supreme Power is committed; this power is committed either to one
Man, or Council, or some one Court consisting of many men. Furthermore, a
Council of many men, consists either of all the Citizens, (insomuch as every
man of them has a Right to Vote, and an interest in the ordering of the
greatest affairs, if he will himself) or of a part only; from whence there
arise three sorts of Government: The one, when the Power is in a Council,
where every Citizen has a right to Vote, and it is called a DEMOCRATY. The
other, when it is in a Council, where not all, but some part only have their
suffrages, and we call it an ARISTOCRATY. The third is that, when the Supreme
Authority rests only in one, and it is styled a MONARCHY. In the first, he
that governes is called (...), The PEOPLE. In the second, the NOBLES. In the
third, the MONARCH.

II. Now, although Ancient Writers of Politiques have introduced three other
Oligarchie is no state of a City distinct from Aristocratie; neither is
Anarchie any state at all.
kinds of Government opposite to these, to wit, Anarchy or confusion to
Democraty, Oligarchy, that is, the command of some few, to Aristocracy, and
Tyranny to Monarchy, yet are not these three distinct forms of Government, but
three diverse Titles given by those who were either displeased with that
present Government, or those that bare Rule. For men, by giving names, do
usually, not only signify the things themselves, but also their own
affections, as love, hatred, anger, and the like, whence it happens that what
one man calls a Democraty, another calls an Anarchy; what one counts an
Aristocraty, another esteems an Oligarchie; and whom one titles a King,
another styles him a Tyrant; so as we see these names betoken not a diverse
kind of Government, but the diverse opinions of the Subjects concerning him
who has the Supreme Power. For first, who sees not that Anarchy is equally
opposite to all the forenam'd Forms? For that word signifies that there is no
Government at all, that is, not any City. But how is it possible that no City
should be the species of a City? Farthermore, what difference is there between
an Oligarchie, which signifies the Command of a few, or Grand^^s, or an
Aristocraty, which is that of the Prime, or Chief Heads, more then that men
differ so among themselves, that the same things seem not good to all men?
whence it happens, that those persons, who by some are looked on as the best,
are die others esteemed to be the worst of all men.

III. But men, by reason of their passions, That a Tyranny is not a diverse
state from alegitimate Monarchy.
will very hardly be persuaded that a Kingdom, and Tyranny, are not diverse
kinds of Cities, who though they would rather have the City subject to one,
then many, yet do they not believe it to be well governed unless it accord
with their judgments: But we must discover by Reason, and not by Passion, what
the difference is between a King, and a Tyrant: but first, they differ not in
this, That a Tyrant has the greater power, for greater then the Supreme cannot
be granted; nor in this, That one has a limited power, the other not; for he,
whose authority is limited, is no King, but his Subject that limits him.
Lastly, neither differ they in their manner of acquisition; for if in a
Democraticall, or Aristocraticall Government some one Citizen should, by force,
possess himself of the Supreme Power, if he gain the consent of all the
Citizens, he becomes a legitimate Monarch; if not, he is an Enemy, not a
Tyrant. They differ therefore in the sole exercise of their command, insomuch
as he is said to be a King, who governs well, and he a^ Tyrant that does
otherwise. The case therefore is brought to this pass, That a King
legitimately constituted in his Government, if he seem to his Subjects to Rule
well, and to their liking, they afford him the appellation of a King, if not,
they count him a Tyrant: Wherefore we see a Kingdom, and Tyranny, are not
diverse Forms of Government, but one and the self-same Monarch has the name
of a King given him in point of Honor, and Reverence to him, and of a Tyrant
in way of contumely, and reproach. But what we frequently find in books said
against Tyrants, took its original from Greek, and Roman Writers, whose
Government was partly Democraticall, and partly Aristocraticall, and therefore
not Tyrants only, but even Kings were odious to them.

IV. There are, who indeed do think it That there can no mixed state be formed
out of these fore-nam'd kinds of Government.
necessarily, That a Suprem^ Command should be somewhere extant in a City; but
if it should be in any one, either Man, or Council, it would follow (they say)
that all the Citizens must be slaves. Avoiding this condition, they imagine
that there may be a certain Form of Government compounded of those three kinds
we have spoken of, yet different from each particular, which they call a mixed
Monarchy, or mixed Aristocraty, or mixed Democraty, according as any one of
these three sorts shall be more eminent then the rest: For example, if the
naming of Magistrates, and the arbitration of War, and Peace, should belong to
the King, Judicature to the Lords, and contribution of Moneys to the People,
and the power of making Laws too altogether, this kind of State would they
call a mixed Monarchy forsooth. But if it were possible that there could be
such a State, it would no whit advantage the liberty of the subject; for as
long as they all agree, each single Citizen is as much subject as possibly he
can be; but if they disagree, the State returns to a Civil War, and the Right
of the private Sword, which certainly is much worse then any subjection
whatsoever: (*) But that there can be no such kind of Government has been
sufficiently demonstrated in the foregoing Chapter, Artic: 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12.

But that there can be no such kind of Annotation.
Government] Most men grant, That a Government ought not to be divided, but
they would have it moderated, and bounded by some limits. Truly it is very
reasonable it should be so; but if these men, when they speak of moderating,
and limiting, do understand dividing it, they make a very fond distinction.
Truly, for my part, I wish that not only Kings, but all other Persons endued
with Supreme Authority would so temper themselves as to commit no wrong, and
only minding their charges contain themselves within the limits of the
natural, and divine Laws: But they who distinguish thus, they would have the
chief power bounded, and restrained by others; which, because it cannot be
done, but that they who do set the limits, must needs have some part of the
power, whereby they may be enabled to do it, the Government is properly
divided, not moderated.

V. Let us see a little now in the constituting That Democraty, except it have
certain times and places of meeting prescribed, is dissolved.
of each Form of Government, what the constitutours do. Those who met together
with intention to erect a City, were almost in the very act of meeting a
Democraty; for in that they willingly met, they are supposed obliged to the
observation of what shall be determined by the major part: which, while that
convent lasts, or is adjourned to some certain days, and places, is a clear
Democraty; for that convent, whose will is the will of all the Citizens, has
the Supreme Authority; and because in this Convent every man is supposed to
have a Right to give his voice, it follows, that it is a Democraty by the
definition given in the first Article of this Chap. But if they depart, and
break up the Convent, and appoint no time, or place, where, and when they shall
meet again, the public weal returns to Anarchy, and the same state it stood in
before their meeting, that is, to the state of all men warring against all. the
People therefore retains the supreme power no longer then there is a certain
day and place publicly appointed, and known, to which whosoever will, may
resort. For except that be known and determined, they may either meet at diverse
times, and places, that is in factions, or not at all; and then it is no longer
(...), the People, but a dissolute multitude, to whom we can neither attribute
any Action, or Right: Two things therefore frame a Democratie, whereof one (to
wit the perpetual prescription of Convents) makes (...), the People, the other
(which is a plurality of voices) (...) or the power.

VI. Furthermore, it will not be sufficient In Democratie, the Intervals of the
times of conve^ing must be short, or the administration of the government
committed to some one.
for the People, so as to maintain its supremacy, to have some certain known
times, and places of meeting, unless that either the intervals of the times be
of less distance, then that any thing may in the mean time happen whereby (by
reason of the defect of power) the City may be brought into some danger, or at
least that the exercise of the supreme authority be, during the intervall,
granted to some one man, or Council. For unless this be done, there is not
that wary care, and heed taken for the defense and Peace of single men which
ought to be, and therefore will not deserve the name of a City, because that in
it for want of security, every man's Right of defending himself at his own
pleasure, returns to him again.

VII. Democraty is not framed by contract of particular Persons with the
People, but by mutual compacts of single men each with other. But hence it
appears in the first place, that the Persons contracting, must be in being
before the contract it self, but the People is not in being before the
constitution of government, as not being any Person, but a multitude of single
Persons; wherefore there could then no contract pass between the People and
the Subject. Now, if after that government is framed, the subject make any
contract with the People, it is in vain, because the People contains within its
will, the will of that subject to whom it is supposed to be obliged; and
therefore may at its own will and pleasure disengage it self, and by
consequence is now actually free. But in the second place, that single Persons
do contract each with other may be inferred from hence, that in vain sure
would the City have been constituted, if the Citizens had been engaged by no
contracts to do, or omit what the City should command to be done or omitted.
Because therefore such kind of compacts must be understood to pass as
necessary to the making up of a City, but none can be made (as is already
showed) between the Subject and the People, it follows, that they must be made
between single Citizens, namely that each man contract to submit his will to
the will of the major part, on condition that the rest also do the like, as if
every one should say thus, I give up my Right unto the People for your sake, on
condition, that you also deliver up yours, for mine.

VIII. An Aristocraty, or Council of By what acts an Aristocraty is framed.
Nobles endued with supreme authority, receives its original from a
Democraty, which gives up its Right unto it, where we must understand that
certain men distinguished from others, either by eminence of title, blood, or
some other Character, are propounded to the People, and by plurality of voices
are elected, and being elected, the whole Right of the People, or City, is
conveigh^d on them, insomuch as whatsoever the People might do before, the
same by Right may this Court of elected Nobles now do; which being done, it is
clear that the People, considered as one Person, (its supreme authority being
already transferred on these) is no longer now in being.

IX. As in Democraty the People, so in an In an Aristocraty the Nobles make no
contract, nor are they obliged to any citizen, or to the whole People.
Aristocraty the Court of Nobles is free from all manner of obligation; for
seeing subjects not contracting with the People, but by mutual compacts among
themselves, were tied to all that the People did, hence also they were tied to
that act of the People in resigning up its Right of government into the hands
of Nobles. Neither could this Court, although elected by the People, be by it
obliged to any thing; for being erected, the People is at once dissolved, as
was declared above, and the authority it had as being a Person utterly
vanishes. Wherefore the obligation which was due to the Person must also
vanish, and perish together with it.

X. Aristocraty has these considerations, The Nobles must necessarily have
their set meetings.
together with Democraty; First, that without an appointment of some certain
times, and places, at which the Court of Nobles may meet, it is no longer a
Court, or one Person, but a dissolute multitude without any supreme power;
Secondly, that the times of their assembling cannot be disjoined by long
intervalls, without prejudice to the supreme power, unless its administration
be transferred to some one man: Now the reasons why this happens, are the same
which we set down in the fifth Article.

XI. As an Aristocratie, so also a Monarchy By what acts a Monarchy is framed.
is derived from the Power of the People, transferring its Right, (that is) its
Authority on one man: Here also we must understand, that some one man, either
by name, or some other token, is propounded to be taken notice of above all the
rest, and that by a plurality of voices the whole Right of the People is
conveyed on him, insomuch as whatsoever the People could do before he were
elected, the same in every Respect may he by Right now do, being elected;
which being done, the People is no longer one Person, but a ^u^e multitude, as
being only one before by virtue of the supreme command, whereof they now have
made a conveyance from themselves on this one Man.

XII. And therefore neither does the That the Monarch is by compact obliged to
none, for the authority he has received.
Monarch oblige himself to any for the command he receives, for he receives it
from the People; but as has been showed above, the People, as soon as that act
is done, cease to be a Person, but the Person vanishing, all obligation to
the Person vanishes. The subjects therefore are tied to perform obedience to
the Monarch, by those compacts only by which they mutually obliged themselves
to the observation of all that the People should command them, (that is) to
obey that Monarch, if he were made by the People.

XIII. But a Monarchy differs as well A Monarch is ever in the readier capacity
to exercise all those acts which are requisite to well governing.
from an Aristocraty, as a Democratie, in this chiefly, that in those there
must be certain set times and places for deliberation, and consultation of
affairs, that is, for the actual exercise of it in all times, and places; For
the People, or the Nobles not being one natural Person must necessarily have
their meetings. The Monarch who is one by nature, is always in a present
capacity to execute his authority.

XIV. Because we have declared above What kind of sin that is, and what sort of
men are guilty of it, when the City performs not its office to the Citizens,
not the Citizens toward the City.
in the 7. 9. and 12. Articles, that they who have gotten the supreme command
are by no compacts obliged to any man, it necessarily follows, that they c^n
do no injury to the subjects; for injury according to the definition made in
the third Article of the third Chapter, is nothing else but a breach of
contract: and therefore where no contracts have part, there can be no injury.
Yet the People, the Nobles, and the Monarch may diverse ways transgress
against the other Laws of nature, as by cruelty, iniquity, con^umely, and
other like vices, which come not under this strict, and exact notion of injury.
But if the subject yield not obedience to the supreme, he will in propriety of
speech be said to be injurious as well to his fellow subjects, because each man
has compacted with the other to obey, as to his chief Ruler in resuming that
Right, which he has given him, without his consent. And in a Democraty, or
Aristocracy, if any thing be decreed against any Law of nature, the City it
self (i. e.) the civil Person sins not, but those subjects only by whose
votes it was decreed for sin, is a consequence of the natural express will,
not of the political, which is artificial; for if it were otherwise, wise,
they would be guilty, by whom the decree was absolutely disliked: But in a
Monarchy, if the Monarch make any decree against the Laws of nature, he sins
himself, because in him the civil will and the natural are all one.

XV. The people who are about to make A Monarch made without limitation of time
may elect his successors.
a Monarch, may give him the supremacy either simply without limitation of
time, or for a certain season, and time determined; if simply, we must
understand that he who receives it, has the self* same power which they had,
who gave it, on the same grounds: therefore that the People by Right could make
him a Monarch, may he make another Monarch: insomuch as the Monarch to whom the
command is simply given, receives a Right not of possession only, but of
succession also, so as he may declare whom he pleases for his successor.

XVI. But if the power be given for a Of limited Monarchs.
time limited, we must have regard to somewhat more then the bare gift only:
First, whether the People converghing its authority, left it self any Right to
meet at certain times, and places, or not. Next, if it have reserved this
power, whether it were done, so as they might meet before that time were
expired, which they prescribed to the Monarch. Thirdly, whether they were
contented to meet only at the will of that temporary Monarch and not
otherwise. Suppose now the People had delivered up its power to some one man
for term of life only; which being done, let us suppose in the first place,
that every man departed from the Counsel without making any order at all
concerning the place where (after his death) they should meet again to make a
new elect on. In this case it is manifest by the fifth Article of this Chapter,
that the People cease to be a Person, and is become a dissolute multitude,
every one whereof has an equal, to wit, a natural Right to meet with whom he
lists at diverse times, and in what places shall best please him; nay, and if he
can, engrosse the supreme power to himself, and settle it on his own head.
What Monarch soever therefore has a command in such a condition, he is bound
by the Law of nature (set down in the Article of the third Chapter of not
returning evil for good) prudently to provide, that by his death the City
suffer not a dissolution, either by appointing a certain day, and place, in
which those subjects of his who have a mind to it may assemble themselves, or
else by nominating a successor: whether of these shall to him seem most
conducible to their common benefit. He therefore who on this foresaid manner
has received his command during life, has an absolute power, and may at his
discretion dispose of the succession. In the next place, if we grant that the
people departed not from the election of the temporary Monarch, before they
decreed a certain time and place of meeting after his death, then the Monarch
being dead, the authority is confirmed in the people, not by any new acts of
the subjects, but by virtue of the former Right, for all the supreme com^and
(as Dominion) was in the People, but the use, and exercise of it was only in
the temporary Monarch, as in one that takes the benefit, but has not the
Right. But if the People after the election of a temporary Monarch, depart not
from the Court before they have appointed certain times, and places to convene,
during the time prescribed him (as the Dictators in ancient times were made by
the People of Rome) such an one is not to be accounted a Monarch, but the Prime
Officer of the People; and if it shall seem good, the People may deprive him of
his office even before that time, as the People of Rome did, when they
conferred an equal power on Minutius Master of the horse, with Quintus Fabius
Maximus, whom before they had made Dictator. The reason whereof is, that it is
not to be imagined, that, whether Man or Counsel who has the readiest, and
most immediate power to act, should hold his command on such terms as not to
be able actually to execu^e it; for command is nothing else but a Right of
commanding, as often as nature allows it possible. Lastly, if the People having
declared a temporary Monarch, depart from the Court on such terms, as it shall
not be lawful for them to meet without the command of the Monarch, we must
understand the People to be immediately dissolved, and that his authority who
is thus declared, is absolute; forasmuch as it is not in the power of all the
subjects to frame the City a new, unless he give consent who has now alone
the authority. Nor matters it, that he has perhaps made any promise to
assemble his Subjects on some certain times, since there remains no Person now
in being, but at his discretion, to whom the promise was made. What we have
spoken of these four cases of a People electing a Temporary Monarch will be
more clearly explained by comparing them with an absolute Monarch, who has no
heir apparent; for the People is Lord of the subject in such a manner as there
can be no Heir but whom it self does appoint. Besides, the spaces between the
times of the subjects meeting may be fi^ly compared to those times wherein the
Monarch sleeps, for in either the Acts of commanding ceases, the Power
remains: Farthermore, to dissolve the convent, so as it cannot meet again, is
the death of the People; just as sleeping, so as he can never wake more, is the
death of a man: As therefore a King, who has no Heir, going to his rest, so as
never to rise again, (i. e.) dying, if he commit the exercise of his Regal
Authority to any one till he awake, does by consequence give him the
Succession; the People also electing a Temporary Monarch, and not reserving a
power to convene, delivers upto him the whole Dominion of the Country:
Furthermore, as a King going to sleep for some season, entrusts the
administration of his Kingdom to some other, and waking takes it again; so the
people having elected a Temporary Monarch, and with all retaining a right to
meet at a certain day, and place, at that day receives its supremacy again. And
as a King who has committed the execution of his Authority to another, himself
in the mean while waking, can recall this commission again when he pleases;
so the People, who during the time prescribed to the Temporary Monarch, does by
Right convene, may if they please, deprive the Monarch of his Authority.
Lastly, the King, who commits his Authority to another while himself sleeps,
not being able to wake again till he whom he entrusted, give consent, loses at
once both his power, and his life; so the people, who has given the Supreme
Power to a temporary Monarch in such sort as they cannot assemble without his
command is absolutely dissolved, and the power remains with him whom they have
chosen.

XVII. If the Monarch promise ought to A Monarch retaining his Right of
Government, cannot by any promise whatsoever, be conceived to have parted with
his Right to the means necessary to the exercise of his Authority.
any one, or many subjects together, by consequence whereof the exercise of his
power may suffer prejudice, that Promise or Compact whether made by Oath, or
without it, is null: for all Compact is a conveyance of Right, which by what
has been said in the fourth Article of the second Chapter, requires meet, and
proper signs of the Will in the conveyer. But he who sufficiently signifies
his will of retaining the end, does also sufficiently declare that he quits not
his Right to the means necessary to that end. Now he who has promised to part
with somewhat necessary to the Supreme Power, and yet retains the Power it
self, gives sufficient tokens, That he no otherwise promised it then so far
forth as the power might be retained without it* Whenever therefore it shall
appear that what is promised cannot be performed without prejudice to the
power, the promise must be valued as not made, (i. e.) of no effect. my what
Beans a Subject is freed from his subjection.


XVIII. We have seen how Subjects, nature dictating, have obliged themselves by
mutual Compacts to obey the Supreme Power. We will see now by what means it
comes to pass that they are released from these bonds of obedience. And first
of a^l this happens by rejection, namely, if a man cast off, or forsake, but
conveigh not the Right of his Command on some other; for what is thus rejected,
is openly exposed to all alike, catch who catch can; whence again, by the Right
of nature, every subject may heed the preservation of himself according to his
own judgment. In the second place, If the Kingdom fall into the power of the
enemy, so as there can no more opposition be made against them, we must
understand that he, who before had the Supreme Authority, has now lost it: For
when the Subjects have done their full endeavor to prevent their falling into
the enemies hands, they have fulfilled those Contracts of obedience which they
made each with other, and what, being con^uer'd, they promise afterward, to
avoid death, they must, with no less endeavor, labor to perform. Thirdly,
in a Monarchy, (for a Democra^y, and Aristocraty cannot fail) if there be no
successor, all the subjects are discharged from their obligations; for no man
is supposed to be tied he knows not to whom, for in such a case it were
impossible to perform ought. And by these three ways all subjects are restored
from their civil subjection to that liberty, which all men have to all things,
to wit, natural, and salvage, (for the natural state has the same proportion
to the Civil, I mean liberty to subjection, which Passion has to Reason, or a
Beast to a Man:) Furthermore, each subject may lawfully be freed from his
subjection by the will of him who has the Supreme Power, namely, if he change
his soil, which may be done two ways, either by permission, as he, who gets
license to dwell in another Country; or Command, as he, who is Banished: In both
cases he is free from the Laws of his former Country, because he is tied to
observe those of the latter.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Rights of Lords over their Servants.
I. What Lord and Servant signify. II. The distinction of Servants into such
as upon trust enjoy their natural liberty, or slaves, and such as serve, being
imprisoned, or bound in fetters. III. The Obligation of a Servant arises from
the liberty of body allowed bim by his Lord. IV. Servants that are bound are
not by any Compacts tied to their Lords. V. Servants have no propriety in their
goods against their Lord. VI. The Lord may sell his Servant, or alienate him by
Testament. VII. The Lord cannot injure his Servant. VIII. He that is Lord of
the Lord, is Lord also of his Servants. IX. By what means Servants are freed.
X. Dominion over Beasts belongs to the Rights of nature.

I. IN the two foregoing Chapters we What Lord and Servant are.
have treated of an institutive, or framed Government, as being that which
receives its original from the consent of many, who by Contract and Faith
mutually given, have obliged each other. Now follows, what may be said,
concerning a natural Government, which may also be called, Acquired, because
it is that which is gotten by power, and natural force. But we must know in
the first place by what means the Right of Dominion may be gotten over the
Persons of men. Where such a Right is gotten, there is a kind of a little
Kingdom; for to be a King, is nothing else b^t to have Dominion over many
Persons; and thus a Great Family is a Kingdom, and a Little Kingdom a Family.
Let us return again to the state of nature, and consider men as if but even now
sprung out of the earth, and suddenly (like Mushromes) come to full maturity
without all kind of engagement to each other: There are but three ways only
whereby one can have the Dominion over the Person of another; whereof the first
is, if by mutual Contract made between themselves (for Peace, and
self-defences sake) they have willingly given up themselves to the Power and
Authority of some man, or Council of Men, and of this we have already spoken.
The 2d is, If a man taken Prisoner in the Wars, or overcome; or else
distrusting his own forces, (to avoid Death) promises the Conqueror, or the
stronger Party, his Service, i. e. to do all whatsoever he shall command him;
in which Contract the good which the vanquished, or inferior, in strength does
receive, is the grant of his life, which by the Right of War in the natural
st^te of men he might have deprived him of, but the good which he promises, is
his service and obedience. By virtue therefore of this promise, there is as
absolute service and obedience due from the vanquished, to the vanquisher, as
possibly can be, excepting what repugns the Divine Laws; for he who is obliged
to obey the Commands of any man before he knows what he will command him, is
simply, and without any restriction tied to the performance of all Commands
whatsoever. Now he that is thus tied, is called a SERVANT, he to whom he is
tied, a LORD. Thirdly, there is a Right acquired over the Person of a Man, by
Generation; of which kind of acquisition somewhat shall be spoken in the
following Chapter.

II. Every one that is taken in the War, The distinction of Servants unto such
as upon trust enjoy their natural liberty; or Slaves, and such as serve, being
imprisoned or settered.
and has his life spared him, is not supposed to have Contracted with his
Lord, for every one is not trusted with so much of his natural liberty, as to
be able, if he desired it, either to fly away, or quit his service, or
contrive any mischief to his Lord. And these serve indeed but within P^isons,
or bound within Irons, and therefore they were called not by the common name of
Servant only, but by the peculiar name of Slave, even as now at this day un
serviteur, and un serf, or un esclave have diverse significations.

The obligation therefore of a Servant The obligation of a Servant arises from
that freedom which is granted him by his Lord.
to his Lord aris^th not from a simple grant of his life, but from hence
rather, That he keeps him not bound, or imprisoned, for all obligation derives
from Contract; but where is no trust, there can be no Contract, as appears by
the 2. Chap. Artic. 9. where a Compact is defined to be the promise of him who
is trusted. There is therefore a confidence and trust which accompanies the
benefit of pardoned life, whereby the Lord affords him his corporal liberty;
so that if no obligation, nor bonds of Contract had happened, he might not
only have made his escape, but also have killed his Lord, who was the
preserver of his life.

IV. Wherefore such kind of Servants Servants that are bound are not obliged to
their Lord by any Contract.
a^ are restrained by imp^isonm^nt, o^bonds, are not comprehended in that
definition of Servants given above, because those serve not for the Contracts
sake, but to the end they may not suffer; and therefore if they fly, or kill
their Lord, they offend not against the Laws of Nature, for to bind any man is
a plain sign, that the binder supposes him that is bound not to be
sufficiently tied by any other obligation.

V. The Lord therefore has no less Dominion Servants have no propriety in
their goods against their Lord.
over a Servant that is not, then over one that is bound, for he has a Supreme
Power over both, and may say of his Serva^t no less then of another thing,
whether animate, or inanimate, This is mine; whence it follows, that
whatsoever the Servant had before his servitude, that afterward becomes the
Lords; and whatsoever he has gotten, it was gotten for his Lord: for he that
can by Right dispose of the Person of a man, may surely dispose of all those
things which that Person could dispose of. There is therefore nothing which the
Servant may retain as his own against the will of his Lord; yet has he, by
his Lords distribution, a propriety, and Dominion over his own goods, insomuch
as one Servant may keep, and defend them against the invasion of his fellow
Servant, in the same manner as has been showed before, that a subject has
nothing properly his own against the will of the Supreme Authority, but every
subject has a propriety against his fellow subject.

VI. Since therefore both the Servant The Lord may sell his Servant, or
alienate him by Testament.
himself, and all that belongs to him are his Lords, and by the Right of Nature
every man may dispose of his own in what manner he pleases; the Lord may
either sell, lay to pledge, or by Testament conveigh the Dominion he has over
his Servant, according to his own will and pleasure.

VII. Farthermore, what has before The Lord cannot be injurious to his Servant.
been demonstrated concerning subjects in an institutive Government, namely,
that he who has the Supreme Power can do his subject no injury; is true also
concerning Servants, because they have subjected their will to the will of the
Lord; wherefore, whatsoever he does, it is done with their wills, but no injury
can be done to him that wills it.

VIII. But if it happen that the Lord He that i^ Lord of the Lord, is Lord also
of the Servants.
either by captivity, or voluntary subjection does become a Servant or Subject
to another, that other shall not only be Lord of him, but also of his
Servants, Supreme Lord over these, immediate Lord over him. Now because not the
Servant only, but also all he has are his Lords; therefore his Servants now
belong to this man, neither can the mediate Lord dispose otherwise of them then
shall seem good to the Supreme. And therefore, if sometime in civil
Governments, the Lord have an absolute power over his Servants, that is supposed
to be derived from the Right of Nature, and not constituted, but slightly
passed over by the Civil Law.

IX. A servant is by the same manner freed By what means servants are freed.
from his servitude, that a Subject in an institutive government, is freed from
his subjection; First, if his Lord enfranchize him, for the Right which the
servant transferred to his Lord over himself, the same may the Lord restore to
the servant again. And this manner of bestowing of liberty is called
MANUMISSION; which is just as if a City should permit a Citizen to conveigh
himself under the jurisdiction of some other City. Secondly, if the Lord cast
off his servant from him, which in a City is banishment; neither differs it
from Manumission in effect, but in manner only: for there, liberty is granted
as a favor, here, as a punishment: In both, the Dominion is renounced.
Thirdly, if the servant be taken prisoner, the old servitude is abolished by
the new; for as all other things; so servants also are acquired by war, whom
in equity the Lord must protect, if he will have them to be his. Fourthly, the
servant is freed for want of knowledge of a successor, the Lord dying
(suppose) without any Testament, or Heir, for no man is understood to be
obliged, unless ^e know to whom he is to perform the obligation. Lastly, she
servant that is put in bonds, or by any other means deprived of his corporal
liberty, is freed from that other obligation of contract, for there can be no
contract where there is no trust, nor can that faith be broken which is not
given, but the Lord who himself serves another, cannot so free his servants,
but that they must still continue under the power of the supreme, for, as has
been showed before, such servants are not his, but the supreme Lords.

X. We get a right over irrational Creatures The Dominion over beasts is by
the Right of nature.
in the same manner, that we do over the Persons of men, to wit, by force and
natural strength; for if in the state of nature it is lawful for every one,
by reason of that war which is of all against all, to subdue, and also to
kill men as often as it shall seem to conduce unto their good, much more will the
same be lawful against ^rutes; namely at their own dis^retion, to reduce those
to servitude which by a^t may be tamed, and ^^tted for use, and to persecute
and destroy the rest by a perpe^uall war, as dangerous and no^ious. Our
D^mi^io^ therefore over beasts, has its original from the right of nature,
not from divine positive Right: for if such a Right had not been before the
publishing of the sacred Scriptures, no man by right might have killed a beast
for his food, but he to whom the divine pleasure was made manifest by holy
Writ; a most hard condition for men indeed whom the beasts might devour
without injury, and yet they might not destroy them: Forasmuch therefore as it
proceeds from the right of nature, that a beast may kill a man; it is also by
the same Right, that a man may slay a beast.

CHAP. IX. Of the right of Parents over their children, and of hereditary
Government.
I. Paternall Dominion arises not from generation. II. Dominion over Infants
belongs to him or her who first has them in their power. III. Dominion over
infants is originally the Mothers. IV. The exposed infant is his from whom he
receives his preservation. V. The child that has one Parent a Subject, and the
other a Sovereign, belongs to him, or her in authority. VI. In such a
conjunction of man and woman, as neither has command over the other, the
children are the Mothers, unless by compact or civil Law, it be otherwise
determined. VII. Children are no less subject to their Parents, then Servants
to their Lords, and Subjects to their Princes. VIII. Of the honor of Parents,
and Lords. IX. Wherein Liberty consists, and the difference of Subjects and
Servants. X. There is the same Right over Subjects in an hereditary Government,
which there is an institutive Government. XI. The question concerning the right
of Succession, belongs only to Monarchy. XII. A Monarch may by his Will and
Testament, dispose of his supreme authority. XIII. Or give it; or sell it. XIV.
A Monarch dying without Testament, is ^ver supposed to will that a Monarch
should succeed him. XV. And some one of his children. XVI. And a male rather
then female. XVII. And the eldest rather then the younger. XVIII. And his
Brother if he want issue before all others. XIX* In the same manner that men
succeed to the power, do they also succeed to the right of succession.

I. SOcrate^ is a man, and therefore a living Paternact Dominion rises not
from generation.
creature, is a right seasoning, and that most evident, because there is
nothing needful to the acknowledging of the truth of the consequence, but that
the word Man, be understod, because a living creature is in the definition it
self of a Man, and every one makes up the proportion which was desired, namely
this, Man is a living Creature; And this, Sop^roniscus is Socrates his Father,
and therefore his Lord, is perhaps a true inference, but not evident, because
the word Lord is not in the definition of a Father: wherefore it is necessary
to make it more evident, that the connection of Father and Lord be somewhat
unfolded. Those that have hitherto endeavored to prove the Dominion of a
Parent over his children, have brought no other argument then that of
generation, as if it were of it self evident, that what is begotten by me, is
mine; just as if a man should think, that because there is a triangle, it
appears presently without any farther discourse, that its angles are equal to
two Rights. Besides, since Dominion (that is) supreme power is indivisible,
insomuch as no man can serve two Masters, but two Persons male and female, must
conc^rre in the act of generation, its impossible that Dominion should at all
be acquired by generation only. Wherefore we will with the more diligence in
this place, enquire into the original of paternal Government.

II. We must therefore return to the Dominion over Infants belongs to him who
who first has the^ in his power.
state of nature, in which, by reason of the equality of nature all men of
riper years are to be accounted equal; There by right of nature the Conqueror
is Lord of the conquered: by the Right therefore of nature, the Dominion over
the In^ant first belongs to him who first has him in his power, but it is
manifest that (...) who is newly born is in the Mothers power before any
others, insomuch as she may rightly, and at her own will, either breed him up,
or adventure him to fortune.

III. If therefore she breed him (because Dominion over Infants is originally
the Mothers.
the state of nature is the state of war) she is supposed to bring him up on
this condition, that being grown to full age he become not her enemy; (which
is) that he obey her. For since by natural necessity w^ all desire that which
appears good unto us, it cannot be understood that any man has on such terms
afforded life to another, that he might both get strength by his years, and at
once become an enemy; but each man is an enemy to that other whom he neither
obeys nor commands. And thus in the state of nature, every woman that bear^
children, becomes both a Mother, and a Lord. But what some say, that in this
case, the Father by reason of the preeminence of sex, and not the Mother,
becomes Lord, signifies nothing, for both reason shows the contrary, because
the inequality of their natural forces is not so great, that the man could get
the Dominion over the woman without warr^, and custom also contradicts not;
for women, namely Amazo^s, have in former times waged war against their
adversaries, and disposed of their children at their own wills, and at this day
in diverse places, women are invested with the principal authority. Neither do
their husbands dispose of their children, but themselves; which in truth they
do by the right of ^ture; fo^asmuch as they who have the supreme power, are not
tied at all (as has bin showed) to the civil laws. Add also that in the
state of nature it cannot be known who is the Father, but by the testimony of
the Mother; the child therefore is his whose the Mother will have it, and
therefore hers; Wherefore original Dominion over children belongs to the
Mother, and among men no less then other creatures: The birth follows the
belly.

IV. The Dominion passes from the Mother The exposed Infant is his that
preserves him.
to others, diverse ways, first, if she quit and forsake her Right by exposing
the child. He therefore that shall bring up the child thus exposed, shall have
the same Dominion over it, which the Mother had. For that life which the Mother
had given it (not by getting, but nourishing it) she now by exposing, takes
from it; Wherefore the obligation also which arose from the benefit of life, is
by this exposition made void. Now the preserved, owes all to the preserver,
whether in regard of his education as to a Mother, or of his service, as to a
Lord; for although the Mother in the state of nature, where all men have a
right to all things. may recover her son again (namely by the same Right that
any body else might do it) yet may not the So^n^ rightly transfer himself
again unto his Mother.

V. Secondly, if the Mother be taken prisoner, The son of a Subject and
chief, is his that commands.
her Son is his that took her, because that he who has Dominion over the
Person, has also Dominion over all belonging to the Person, Wherefore over the
Son also, as has been showed in the foregoing Chapter, in the fifth Article.
Thirdly, if the Mother be a subject under what government soever, he that has
the supreme authority in that government, will also have the Dominion over him
that is born of her, for he is Lord also of the Mother; who is bound to obey
him in all things. Fourthly, if a woman for society sake give her self to a
man on this condition; that be shall bear the sway; he that receives his being
from the contribution of both Parties, is the Fathers, in regard of the command
he has over the Mother; but if a woman bearing rule shall have children by a
Subject, the children are the Mothers: for otherwise the woman can have no
children without prejudice to her authority. And universally, if the society of
the male and female be such an union, as the one have subjected himself to the
other, the children belong to him or her that commands. In such a conjunction
of male and female, as neither has the commanding power over the other, the
children are the Mothers, except by pact, or civil law, it be otherwise
determined.


VI. But in the state of nature, if a man, and woman contract so, as neither is
subject to the command of the other, the children are the Mothers for the
reasons above given in the third Article, unless by pacts it be otherwise
provided. For the Mother may by pact dispose of her Right as she lists, as
heretofore has been done by the Amazons, who of those children which have been
begotten by their neighbors, have by pact allowed them the males, and retained
the females to themselves; but in a civil government, if there be a contract
of marriage between a man and woman, the children are the Fathers; because in
all Cities, viz. constituted of Fathers, not Mothers governing their families,
the domestical command belongs to the man, and such a contract, if it be made
according to the civil Laws, is called MATRIMONY; but if they agree only to
lie together, the children are the Fathers, or the Mothers variously, according
to the differing civil Laws of diverse Cities.

VII. Now because by the third Article Children are no less subject to their
Parents, then servants to their Lords, and subjects to their City.
the Mother is originally Lord of her Children, and from her the Father, or
some body else by derived Right, it is manifest that the Children are no less
subject to those by whom they are nourisht, and brought up, then Servants to
their Lords, and Subjects to him who bears the Supreme Rule, and that a Parent
cannot be injurious to his Son as long as he is under his power. A Son also
is freed from subjection on the same manner as a subject and servant are. For
emancipation is the same thing with manumission, and abdication with banishment.

VIII. The enfranchised son, or released Of the honor due to Parents and Lords.
servant, do now stand in less fear of their lord and Father being deprived
of his natural and lordly power over them, and (if regard be had to true and
inward Honor) do Honor him less, then before. For Honor (as has been said
in the section above) is nothing else but the estimation of another power; and
therefore he that has least power, has always least Honor. But it is not to
be imagined that the enfranchiser ever intended so to ma^ch the enfranchised
with himself, as that he should not so much as acknowledge a benefit, but
should so carry himself in all things, as if he were become wholly his equal;
It must therefore be ever understood, That he who is freed from subjection,
whether he be a servant, son, or some colony, does promise all those
external signs, at least whereby Superiors used to be Honored by their
inferiors. From whence it follows, That the precept of honoring our Parents,
belongs to the law of nature, not only under the title of Gratitude, but also
of Agreement.

IX What then, will some one demand, Wherein liberty does consist, and the
difference between subjects and servants.
is the difference between a son, or between a subject, and a servant?
Neither do I know that any W^iter has fully declared what liberty, and what
slavery is. Commonly to do all things according to our own phancies, and that
without punishment, is esteemed to be liberty; not to be able to do this, is
judged bondage; which in a Civil Government, and with the peace of mankind
cannot possibly be done, because there is no City without a Command, and a
restraining Right. LIBERTY, that we may define it, is nothing else but an
absence of the lets, and hindrances of motion, as water shut up in a vessel
is therefore not at liberty, because the vessel hinders it from running out,
which the vessel being broken, is made free. And every man has more or less
liberty, as he has more or less space in which he employes himself: as he
has more liberty, who is in a large, then he that is kept in a close prison.
And a man may be free toward one part, and yet not toward anothert as the
traveller is bounded on this, and that side with hedges, or stone walls, lest
he spoil the vines, or corn, neighboring on the high way. And these kind of
le^s are external, and absolute; in which sense all Servants, and Subjects are
free, who are not fettered and imprisoned. There are others which are
arbitrary, which do not absolutely hinder motion, but by accident; to wit, by
our own choice, as he that is in a ship is not so hindered, but he may cast
himself into the Sea, if he will: and here also the more ways a man may move
himself, the more liberty he has, and herein consists civil liberty; for no
man, whether subject, son, or servant, is so hindered by the punishments
appointed by the City, the Father, or the Lord, how cruel soever, but that he
may do all things, and make use of all means necessary to the preservation of
his life and health: for my part therefore I cannot find what reason a mere
servant has to make complaints, if they relate only to want of liberty,
unless he count it a^misery to be restrained from hurting himself, and to
receive that life, (which by war, or misfortune, or through his own idleness
was forfeited) together with all manner of sustenance, and all things necessary
to the conservation of health, on this condition only, that he will be ruled:
for he that is kept in by punishments laid before him, so as he dares not let
loose the reins to his will in all things; is not oppressed by servitude, but is
governed and sustained. But this privilege free subjects and sons of a
family, have above servants, (in every government, and family, where servants
are) that they may both undergo the more honorable offices of the City or
family, and also enjoy a larger possession of things superfluous. And herein
lays the difference between a f^ce subject, and a servant, that he is FREE
indeed, who serves his City only; but a SERVANT is he who also serves* his
fellow subject: all other liberty is an exemption from the Laws of the City,
and proper only to those that bear Rule. There is the same Right in an
hereditary, which there is in an institutive government.


X. A Father, with his sons and scrvants grown into a civil Person by
virtue of his paternall jurisdiction, is called a FAMILY. This family, if
through multiplying of children, and acquisition of servants, it becomes
numerous, insomuch as without casting the uncertain dye of war, it cannot be
subdued, will be termed an Hereditary Kingdom; which though it differ from an
institutive Monarchy, being acquired by force in the original, and manner of
its constitution; yet being constituted, it has all the same properties, and
the Right of authority is every where the same, insomuch as it is not needful
to speak any thing of them apart.

XI. It has been spoken, by what Right The question concerning the Right of
succession, belongs only to Monarchy.
supreme authorities are constituted. We must now briefly tell you by what
right they may be continued. Now the Right by which they are continued, is that
which is called the right of SUCCESSION. Now because in a Democratie, the
supreme authority is with the People, as long as there be any subjects in
being, so long it rests with the same Person; for the People has no
Successor. In like manner in an Aristocra^y, one of the Nobles ^ying, some
other by the rest is substituted in his place, and therefore except they all
dye together, which (...) suppose will never happen, there is no succession.
The Querie therefore of the Right of Succession takes place only in an
absolute Monarchy. For they who exercise the supreme power for a time only,
are themselves no Monarchs, but Ministers of state.

XII. But first, if a Monarch shall by Testament A Monarch may dispose of the
command of his government by Testament.
appoint one to succeed him, the Person appointed shall succeed; for if he be
appointed by the People, he shall have all the Right over the City which the
People had, as has been showed in the 7. Chap. Art. 11. but the People might
choose him, by the same Right therefore may he choose another; but in an
hereditary Kingdom there are the same Rights as in an institutive; wherefore,
every Monarch may by his will make a successor.

XIII. But what a man may transfer on another by Testament, that by the same
Or give it away, or sell it.
Right may he yet living, give, or sell away* To whomsoever therefore he shall
make over the supreme power, whether by gift, or sale, it is rightly made. A
Monarch dying without Testament, is ever understood to will, that a Monarch
should succeed him.


XIV. But if living, he have not declared his will concerning his successor by
Testament, not otherwise, it is supposed, First, that he would not have his
Government reduced to an Anarchy, or the state of war, (that is) to the
destruction of his subjects; as well because he could not do that without
breach of the Laws of nature, whereby he was obliged to the performance of all
things necessarily conducing to the preservation of Peace, as also because if
that had been his will, it had not been hard for him to have declared that
openly. Next, because the Right passes according to the will of the Father, we
must judge of the successor according to the signs of his will. It is
understood therefore, that he would have his subjects to be under a
Monarchical Government rather then any other, because he himself in ruling,
has before approved of that state by his example, and has not afterward
either by any word or deed condemned it.

XV. Furthermore, because by natural And some one of his (...) children.
necessity all men wish them better from whom they receive glory, and honor,
then others; but every man after death receives honor and glory from his
children, sooner then from the power of any other men: hence we gather, that a
father intends better for his children, then any other persons. It is to be
understood therefore, that the will of the father, dying without Testament,
was, that some of his children should succeed him, yet this is to be understood
with this prov^so, that there be no more apparent tokens to the contrary: of
which kind, after many successions, custom may be one, for he that makes no
mention of his succession, is supposed to consent to the customs of his Realm.

XVI. Among children the Males carry the pre-eminence, in the beginning
perhaps, And a male rather then female.
because for the most part (although not always) they are ^itter for the
administration of (...) matters, but specially of wars; but afterward, when it
was grown a custom, because that custom was not contradicted; and therefore
the will of the Father, unless some other custom or sign do clearly repugne
it, is to be interpreted in favor of them.

XVII. Now because the Sons are And of the males, the eldest rather then the
younger.
equal* and the power cannot be divided, the eldest shall succeed; for if
there be any difference by reason of age, the eldest is supposed more worthy,
for nature being judge, the most in years (because usually it is so) is the
wisest. But other judge there cannot be had. But if the Brothers must be
equally valued, the succession shall be by lot, but primogeniture is a natural
lot, and by this the eldest is already preferred, nor is there any that has
power to judge, whether by this, or any other kind of lots the matter is to be
decided. Now the same reason which contends thus for the firstborn son, does
no less for the first born daughter.

XVIII. But if he have no children, then the And his Brother if he want issue
before all others.
command shall pass to his Brothers and Sisters, for the same reason, that the
children should have succeeded if he had had them: for those that are nearest
to us in nature, are supposed to be nearest in benevolence; and to his
brothers, sooner then his sisters, and to the elder sooner then the younger; for
the reason is the same for these which it was for the children.

XIX. Furthermore, by the same reason In the same manner that men succeed to
the power, do they also succeed to the Right of Succession.
that men succeed to the power, do they also succeed to the Right of
succession: for if the firstborn dye before the Father, it will be judged,
that he transferred his Right of suc cession unto his children, unless the
Father have otherwise decreed it, and therefore the Nephews will have a fairer
pretense to the succession, then the Uncles. I say all these things will be
thus, if the custom of the place (which the Father by not contradicting, will
be judged to have con^ented to) do not hinder them.

CHAP. X. A comparison between 3. kinds of government, according to their
several inconveniences.
I. A comparison of the natural state with the civil. II. The conveniences
and inconveniences of the Ruler and his Subjects are alike. III. The praise of
Monarchy. IV. The Government under one cannot be said to be unreasonable in
this respect, namely because one has more power then all the rest. V. A
Rejection of their opinion, who say that a Lord with his Servants cannot make a
City. VI. Exactions are more grievous under a popular State, then a Monarchy.
VII. Innocent Subjects are less exposed to penalties under a Monarch, then
under the People. VIII. The liberty of single Subjects is not less under a
Monarch, then under a People. IX. It is no disadvantage to the Subjects, that
they are not all admitted to public deliberations. X. Civil deliberations are
unadvisedly committed to great Assemblies, by reason of the unskilfulnes of the
most part of men. XI. In regard of eloquence. XII. In regard of faction. XIII.
In regard of the unstablenes of the Laws. XIV. In regard of the want of
secrecy. XV. That these inconveniences adhere to Democraty, forasmuch as men
are naturally delighted with the esteem of wit. XVI. The inconveniences of a
City arising from a King that is a child. XVII. The power of Generals, is an
evident sign of the excellence of Monarchy. XVIII. The best state of a City is
that, where the Subjects are the Rulers inheritance. XIX. The nearer
Aristocraty draws to Monarchy, the better it is, the further it keeps from it,
the worse.

I. What Democraty, Aristocraty, and A comparing the state of nature with the
civil.
Monarchy are, has already been spoken, but which of them tends most to the
preservation of the subjects Peace, and procuring their advantages, we must see
by comparing them together; but first let us set forth the advantages, and
disadvantages of a City in general, lest some perhaps should think it better,
that every man be left to live at his own will, then to constitute any civil
society at all. Every man indeed out of the state of civil government has a
most entire, but unfruitful liberty; because that he who by reason of his own
liberty acts all at his own will, must also by reason of the same liberty in
others, suffer al at another will; but in a constituted City, every subject
retains to himself as much freedom as suffices him to live well, and quietly,
and there is so much taken away from others, as may make them not to be feared.
Out of this state, every man has such a Right to all, as yet he can enjoy
nothing in it, each one securely enjoyes his limited Right; Out of it, any man
may rightly spoil, or kill one another; in it, none but one. Out of it we are
protected by our own forces; in it, by the power of all. Out of it no man is
sure of the fruit of his labors; in it, all men are. Lastly, out of it, there
is a Dominion of Passions, war, fear, poverty, slovinlinesse, solitude,
barbarism, ignorance, cruelty. In it, the Dominion of reason, peace, security,
riches, decency, society, elegancy, sciences, and benevolence.

II. Aristotle in his seventh book, and The gains and losses of the
fourteenth Chapter of his Politiques says, that there are two sorts of
governments, whereof the one relates to the benefit of the Ruler, the other to
that of the Subjects; as if where Subjects are severely dealt wi^h, there were
one, and where more mildly, there were another form of government; which
opinion may by no means be subscribed to, for all the profits and disprofits
arising from government are the same, and common both to the Ruler, and the
Subject; The Damages which befall some particular subjects through misfortune,
folly, negligence, sloth, or his own luxury, may very well be severed from
those which concern the Ruler, but those relate not to the government it self,
being such as may happer in any form of government whatsoever. If these same
happen from the first institution of the City, they will then be truly called
the inconveniences of government, but they will be common to the Ruler with
his subjects, as their benefits are common; but the first and greatest benefit,
Peace, and defense, is common to both, for both he that commands, and he who is
commanded, to the end that he may defend his life, makes use at once of all the
forces of his fellow subjects; and in the greatest inconvenience that can
befall a City, namely the slaughter of subjects, arising from Anarchy, both the
Commander, and the Parties commanded, are equally concerned. Next, if the Ruler
levy such a sum of vast moneys from his subjects, as they are not able to
maintain themselves, and their families, nor conserve their bodily strength,
and vigor, the disadvantage is as much his, as theirs, who with never so great
a stock, or measure of riches, is not able to keep his authority or his riches
without the bodies of his subjects; but if he raise no more then is sufficient
for the due administration of his power, that is a benefit equal to himself
and his subjects, tending to a common Peace, and defense; nor is it imaginable
which way public treasures can be a grievance to private subjects, if they be
not so exhausted, as to be wholly deprived from all possibility to acquire,
even by their industry, necessaries to sustain the strength of their bodies,
and minds; for even thus the grievance would concern the Ruler, nor would it
arise from the ill institution, or ordination of the government, (because in
all manner of governments subjects may be oppressed) but from the ill
administration of a well established government.

III. Now that Monarchy of the soresaid The praise of Monarchy.
forms, of Democraty, Aristocraty, and Monarchy, has the pre-eminence, will
best appear by comparing the conveniences and inconveniences arising in each
one of them. Those arguments therefore that the whole universe is governed by
one God; that the Ancients preferred the Monarchical state before all others,
ascribing the Rule of the Gods to one Jupiter; that in the beginning of
affairs, and of Nations, the decrees of Princes were held for Laws; that
paternall government instituted by God himself in the Creation, was
Monarchical; that other governments were compacted * by the artifice of men
out of the ashes of Monarchy, after it had been ruined with seditions; and that
the people of God were under the jurisdiction of Kings, although I say these
do^ hold forth Monarchy as the more eminent to us, yet because they do it by
examples and testimonies, and not by solid reason, we will pass them over.

Compacted by the artifice of men, etc.] Annotation
It seems the Ancients who made that same fable of Prometheus pointed at this.
They say, that Prometheus having stolen fire from the Sun, formed a man out
of clay, and that for this deed he was tortured by Jupiter with a perpetual
gnawing in his liver, which is, that by humane invention (which is signified by
Prometheus) Laws and Justice were by imitation taken from Monarchy, by virtue
whereof (as by fire removed from its natural orb) the multitude (as the dirt
and dregs of men) was as it were quickened and formed into a civil Person,
which is termed Aristocraty, or Democraty; but the Author* and Abettors being
found, who might securely and quietly have lived under the natural
jurisdiction of Kings, do thus smart for it, that being exposed still to
alteration, they are tormented with perpetual cares, suspicions, and
dissentions.

IV. Some there are who are discontented The government of one cannot be said
to be evil in this respect, namely because one has more power then all the
rest.
with the government under one, for no other reason, but because it is under
one; as if it were an unreasonable thing that one man among so many, should so
far excel in power, as to be able at his own pleasure to dispose of all the
rest; these men sure, if they could, would withdraw themselves from under the
Dominion of one God. But this exception against one is suggested by envy,
while they see one man in posaession of what all desire: for the same cause
they would judge it to be as unreasonable, if a few commanded, unless they
themselves either were, or hoped to be of the number; for if it be an
unreasonable thing that all men have not an equal Right, surely an Aristocraty
must be unreasonable also; but because we have showed that the state of
equality is the state of war, and that therefore inequality was introduced by
a general consent; this inequality whereby he, whom we have voluntarily given
more to; enjoyes more, is no longer to be accounted an unreasonable thing. The
inconveniences therefore which attend the Dominion of one man, attend his
Person, not his Unity. Let us therefore see whether brings with it the greater
grievances to the subject, the command of one man, or of many.

V. But first, we must remove their opinion Rejection of their opinion, who say
that a Lord with his servants cannot make a City.
who deny that to be any City at all, which is compacted of never so great a
number of servants under a common Lord. In the 9. Artic. of the 5. Chapter, a
City is defined to be one Person made out of many men, whose will by their own
contracts is to be esteemed as the wills of them all, insomuch as he may use
the strength and faculties of each single Person for the public Peace and
safety; and by the same article of the same Chapter, One Person is that, when
the wills of many are contained in the will of one, but the will of each
servant is contained in the will of his Lord, as has been declared in the 5.
Article of the 8. Chapter, so as he may employ all their forces and faculties
according to his own will, and pleasure; it follows therefore that that must
needs be a city, which is constituted by a Lord, and many servants; neither can
any reason be brought to contradict this which does not equally combat against
a City constituted by a Father, and his Sons; for to a Lord who has no
children, servants are in the nature of sons; for they are both his honor,
and safeguard; neither are servants more subject to their Lords, then children
to their Parents, as has been manifested above in the 5. Article of the 8.
Chapter.

VI. Among other grievances of supreme The exactions are more grievous under
command of the people, then under the Monarch.
authority one is, that the Ruler, beside those moneys necessary for public
charges, as the maintaining of public Ministers, building, and defending of
Castles, waging wars, honorable sustaining his own household, may also, if he
will, exact others through his lust, whereby to enrich his sons, kindred,
favorites, and flatterers too. I confess this is a grievance, but of the
number of those which accompany all kinds of government, but are more
tolerable in a Monarchy then in a Democraty; for though the Monarch would
enrich them, they cannot be many, because belonging but to one, but in a
Democraty, look how many Demagoges, (that is) how many powerful Orators there
are with the people (which ever are many, and daily new ones growing) so many
Children, Kinsmen, friends, and Flatterers, are to be rewarded; for every of
them desire not only to make their families as potent, as illustrious in
wealth, as maybe, but also to oblige others to them by benefits for the better
strengthening of themselves. A Monarch may in great part satisfy his Officers
and Friends, because they are not many, without any cost to his Subjects, I
mean, without robbing them of any of those Treasures given in for the
maintenance of War, and Peace; In a Democraty; where many are to be satisfied,
and always new ones, this cannot be done without the Subjects oppression.
Though a Monarch may promote unworthy Persons, yet often times he will not do
it; but in a Democraty all the popular men are therefore supposed to do it,
because it is necessary; for else, the power of them who did it would so
increase, as it would not only become dreadful to those others, but even to
the whole City also.

VII. Another grievance is, that same Innocent Subjects are less obnoxious to
punishment under a Monarch then under the People.
perpetual fear of death which every man must necessarily be in, while he
considers with himself that the Ruler has power not only to appoint what
punishments he lists on any Transgressions, but that he may also in his wrath,
and sensuality, slaughter his innocent Subjects, and those who never offended
against the Laws. And truly this is a very great grievance in any form of
Government wheresoever it happens: (for it is therefore a grievance because it
is; not, because it may be done) but it is the fault of the Ruler, not of the
Government; For all the acts of Nero are not essential to Monarchy; yet
Subjects are less often undeservedly condemned under one Ruler, then under the
People: For Kings are only severe against those who either trouble them with
impertinent Counsels, or oppose them with reproachful words, or control
their Wills; but they are the cause that that excess of power which one
Subject might have above another becomes harmless; wherefore some Nero or
Caligula reigning, no men can undeservedly suffer, but such as are known to
him, namely Courtiers, and such as are remarkable for some eminent Charge, and
not all neither, but they only who are possessed of what he desires to enjoy;
for they that are offensive, and contumelious, are deservedly punished;
whosoever therefore in a Monarchy will lead a retired life, let him be what he
will that Reigns, he is out of danger: for the ambitious only suffer, the
rest are protected from the injuries of the more potent: but in a popular
Dominion there may be as mane Nero's, as there are Orators who sooth the
People; for each one of them can do as much as the People, and they mutually
give way to each others appetite (as it were by this secret pact, Spare me to
day, and I Will spare thee to morrow) while they exempt those from punishment, who
to satisfy their lust, and private hatred, have undeservedly slain their
fellow subjects. Furthermore, there is a certain limit in private power, which
if it exceed, it may prove pernicious to the Realm, and by reason whereof it
is necessary sometimes for Monarchs to have a care that the commonweal do
thence receive no prejudice. When therefore this power consisted in the
multitude of Riches, they lessened it by diminishing their heaps, but if it
were in popular applause, the powerful party without any other crime laid to
his charge, was taken from among them. The same was usually practiced in
Democraties; for the Athenians inflicted a punishment of ten years banishment
on those that were powerful, merely because of their powers, without the guilt
of any other crime, and those who by liberal gifts did seek the favor of the
common people, were put to death at Rome, as men ambitious of a Kingdom. In
this Democraty and Monarchy were eaven; yet differed they much in same, because
fame derives from the People, and what is done by many, is commended by many:
and therefore what the Monarch does, is said to be done out of envy to their
virtues, which if it were done by the People, would be accounted Polity.

VIII. There are some who therefore Single Persons have no less liberty under
a Monarch, then under the People.
imagine Monarchy to be more grievous then Democraty, because there is less
liberty in that, then in this. If by liberty they mean an exemption from that
subjection which is due to the Laws (i e.) the commands of the People, neither
in Democraty, nor in any other state of government whatsoever, is there any
such kind of liberty. If they suppose liberty to consist in this, that there be
few laws, few prohibitions, and those too such, that except they were
forbidden, there could be no Peace; then I deny that there is more liberty in
Democraty then Monarchy; for the one as truly consists with such a liberty,
as the other: for although the word liberty, may in large, and ample letters be
written over the gates of any City whatsoever, yet is it not meant the
Subjects, but the Cities liberty, neither can that word with better Right be
inscribed on a City which is governed by the people, then that which is ruled
by a Monarch; but when private men or subjects demand liberty, under the name
of liberty, they ask not for liberty, but dominion, which yet for want of
understanding, they little consider; for if every man would grant the same
liberty to another, which he desires for himself, as is commanded by the law
of nature, that same natural state would return again, in which all men may by
Right do all things, which if they knew, they would abhor, as being worse then
all kind of civil subjection whatsoever; but if any man desire to have his
single freedom, the rest being bound, what does he else demand but to have the
Dominion? for who so is freed from all bonds, is Lord over all those that still
continue bound. Subjects therefore have no greater liberty in a Popular, then
in a Monarchical State, That which deceives them, is the equal participation
of command, and public places; for where the Authority is in the People,
single subjects do so far forth share in it as they are parts of the People
ruling; and they equally partake in public Offices so far forth as they have
equal voices in choosing Magistrates, and public Ministers. And this is that
which Aristotle aimed at, himself also, through the custom of that time,
mis-calling Dominion liberty, in his sixth Book, and second Chapter of Poli. In
a popular State there is liberty by supposition; which is a spe^ch of the
vulgar, as if no man were free out of this State. From whence, by the way, we
may collect, That those Subjects, who in a Monarchy deplore their lost liberty,
do only stomach this, that they are not received to the steerage of the
Commonweal.

IX. But perhaps for this very reason It is no disadvantage to the Subjects
that they are not all admitted to the public deliberations.
some will say, That a Popular State is much to be preferred before a
Monarchical; because that, where all men have a hand in public businesses,
there all have an opportunity to show their wisdom, knowledge, and eloquence,
in deliberating matters of the greatest difficulty and moment, which by reason
of that desire of praise which is bred in humane nature, is to them who excel
in such like faculties, and seem to themselves to exceed others, the most
delightful of all things; but in a Monarchy, this same way to obtain praise,
and honor, is shut up to the greatest part of Subjects; and what is a
grievance, if this be none? I Will tell you: To see his opinion whom we scorn,
preferred before ours; to have our wisdom undervalued before our own faces;
by an uncertain trial of a little vain glory, to undergo most certain
enmities (for this cannot be avoided, whether we have the better, or the worse)
to hate, and to be hated, by reason of the disagreement of opinions; to lay
open our secret Counsels, and advises to all, to no purpose, and without any
benefit; to neglect the affairs of our own Family: These, I say, are
grievances. But to be absent from a trial of wits, although those trialls are
pleasant to the Eloquent, is not therefore a grievance to them, unless we will
say, that it is a grievance to valiant men to be restrained from fighting,
because they delight in it.

X. Besides, there are many reasons why Civil deliberations are unadvisedly
committed to many, by reason of the unskilfulnesse of most men.
deliberations are less successful in great Assemblies, then in lesser
Counsels; whereof one is, that to advise rightly of all things conducing to
the preservation of a Commonweal, we must not only understand matters at
home, but Foreign Affairs too; at Home, by what goods the Country is
nourished, and defended, and whence they are fetched; what places are fit to
make Garrisons of; by what means Soldiers are best to be raised, and
maintained; what manner of affections the Subjects bear toward their Prince, or
Governors of their Country, and many the like: Abroad, what the power of each
neighboring Country is, and wherein it consists; what advantage, or
disadvantage we may receive from them; what their dispositions are both to
usward, and how affected to each other among themselves, and what Counsel
daily passes among them. Now, because very few in a great Assembly of men
understand these things, being for the most part unskilful (that I say not
incapable) of them, what can that same number of advisers with their
impertinent Opinions contribute to good Counsels, other then mere letts and
impediments?

XI. Another reason why a great Assembly By reason of their Eloquence.
is not so ^it for consultation is, because every one who delivers his opinion
holds it necessary to make a long continued Speech, and to gain the more esteem
from his Auditors, he polishes, and adornes it with the best, and smoothest
language, now the nature of Eloquence is to make Good and Evil, Profitable and
Unprofitable, Honest and Dishonest, appear to be more or less then indeed they
are, and to make that seem just, which is unjust, according as it shall best
suit with his end that speaks. For this is to persuade; and though they
reason, yet take they not their rise from true Principles, but from vulgar
received opinions, which, for the most part, are erroneous; neither endeavor
they so much to fit their speech to the nature of the things they speak of, as
to the Passions of their minds to whom they speak, whence it happens that
opinions are delivered not by right reason, but by a certain violence of mind.
Nor is this fault in the Man, but in the nature it self of Eloquence, whose
end (as all the Masters of Rhetoric teach us) is not truth (except by chance)
but victory, and whose property is not to inform, but to allure.

XII. The third reason why men advise By reason of Faction.
less succefully in a great convent is, because that thence arise Factions in
a commonweal, and out of Factions, Seditions, and Civil War; for when equal
Orators do combat with contrary Opinions, and Speeches, the conquered hates
the Conqueror, and all those that were of his side, as holding his Counsel,
and wisdom in scorn: and studyes all means to make the advice of his
adversaries prejudicial to the State, for thus he hopes to see the glory taken
from him, and restored unto himself: farthermore, where the Votes are not so
unequal, but that the conquered have hopes by the accession of some few of
their own opinion at another sitting to make the stronger Party, the chief
heads do call the rest together, they advise a part how they may abrogate the
former judgment given, they appoint to be the first and earliest at the next
convent, they determine what, and in what order each man shall speak, that the
same business may again be brought to agitation, that so what was confirmed
before by the number of their then present adversaries, the same may now in
some measure become of no effect to them, being negligently absent, and this
same kind of industry and diligence which they use to make a people, is
commonly called a faction; but when a faction is inferior in votes, and
superior, or not much inferior in power, then what they cannot obtain by
craft, and language, they attempt by force of arms, and so it comes to a
civil war. But some will say, these things do not necessarily, nor often
happen; he may as well say, that the chief Parties are not necessarily desirous
of vain glory, and that the greatest of them seldom disagree in great matters.

XIII. It follows hence, that when the By reason of the unsetlednesse of the
Laws.
legislative power resides in such convents as these, the Laws must needs be
inconstant, and change, not according to the alteration of the state of
affairs, nor according to the changeableness of men's minds, but as the major
part, now of this, then of that faction, do convent; insomuch as the Laws do
flote here, and there, as it were upon the waters.

XIV. In the fourth place, the counsels For want of secrecy.
of great assemblies have this inconvenience, that whereas it is often of great
consequence, that they should be kept secret, they are for the most part
discovered to the enemy before they can be brought to any effect, and their
power, and will, is as soon known abroad, as to the People it self commanding
at home.

XV. These inconveniences which are These inconveniences do adhere to
Democraty, forasmuch as men are naturally delighted with an opinion of wit.
found in the deliberations of great assemblies do so far forth evince
Monarchy to be better then Democraty, as in Democraty affairs of great
consequence are oftener trusted to be distrust by such like Committees, then in
a Monarchy, neither can it easily be done otherwise; for there is no reason
why every man should not naturally rather mind his own private, then the
public business, but that here he sees a means to declare his eloquence,
whereby he may gain the reputation of being ingenuous, and wise, and returning
home to his friends, to his Parents, to his wife, and children, rejoice, and
triumph in the applause of his dexterous behavior: As of old all the delight
Marcus Cariclanus had in his warlike actions, was, to see his praises so well
pleasing to his Mother. But if the People in a Democraty would bestow the power
of deliberating in matters of War, and Peace, either on one, or some very
few, being content with the nomination of Magistrates, and public Ministers,
that is to say, with the authority without the ministration, then it must be
confessed, that in this particular, Democraty and Monarchy would be equal.

XVI. Neither do the conveniences or inconveniences The inco nveniences of
government proceeding from a King who is a child.
which are found to be more in one kind of government then another, arise from
hence, namely, because the government it self, or the administration of its
affairs, are better committed to one, then many; or on the other side, to many,
then to some few; for Government, is the power, the administration of it, is
the act, now the power in all kind of government is equal; the acts only
differ, that is to say the actions, and motions of a commonweal, as they flow
from the deliberations of many, or few, of skillful, or impertinent men. Whence
we understand, that the conveniences, or inconveniences of any government,
depend not on him in whom the authority resides, but on his Officers, and
therefore nothing hinders, but that the commonweal may be well governed,
although the Monarch be a woman, or youth, or infant, provided that they be fit
for affairs, who are endued with the public Offices, and charges; And that
which is said, Woe to the land whose King is a child, does not signify the
condition of a Monarchy to be inferior to a Popular state, but contrariwise,
that by accident it is the grievance of a Kingdom, that the King being a
child, it often happens, that many by ambition, and power, intruding
themselves into public counsels, the government comes to be administered in a
Democraticall manner, and that thence arise those infelicities which for the
most part accompany the Dominion The power of Generals is an argument of the
excellency of Monarchy.
of the People.

XVII. But it is a manifest sign, that the most absolute Monarchy is the best
state of government, that not only Kings, but even those Cities which are
subject to the people, or to Nobles, give the whole command of war to one
only, and that so absolute, as nothing can be more (wherein by the way this
must be noted also, that no King can give a General greater authority over his
army, then he himself by Right may exercise over all his subjects) Monarchy
therefore is the best of all governments in the Camps. But what else, are many
Commonwealths, then so many Camps strengthened with arms, and men against
each other, whose state (because not restrained by any common power, howsoever
an uncertain peace, like a short truce, may pass between them) is to be
accounted for the state of nature, which is the state of War.

XVIII. Lastly, since it was necessary The best state of a Commonweal, is
that where the subjects are the Rulers inheritance.
for the preservation of our selves to be subject to some Man, or Council, we
cannot on better condition be subject to any, then one whose interest depends
upon our safety, and welfare; and this then comes to pass when we are the
inheritance of the Ruler; for every man of his own accord endeavors the
preservation of his inheritance. But the Lands, and Moneys of the Subjects are
not only the Princes Treasure, but their bodies, and wildy minds; which will
be easily granted by those who consider at how great rates the Dominion of
lesser Countries is valued, and how much easier it is for men to procure money,
then money men; nor do we readily meet with any example that shows us when
any subject, without any default of his own, has by his Prince been despoiled
of his life, or goods, through the sole licenciousnesse of his Authority.

XIX. Hitherto we have compared a Aristocraty is so much better by how much it
approaches nearer to Monarchy, the worse by how much it is more distant from
it.
Monarchical, with a Popular State; we have said nothing of Aristocracy; we
may conclude of this, by what has been said of those, that, that which is
hereditary, and content with the election of Magistrates; which transmits its
deliberations to some few, and those most able; which simply imitates the
government of Monarchs most, and the People least of all, is for the Subjects
both better, and more lasting then the rest.

CHAP. XI. Places and Examples of Scripture of the Rights of Government
agreeable to what has been said before.
I. The beginning of institutive Government from the consent of the People. II.
Judicature and Wars depend on the will of Supreme Commanders. III. That they
who have the Chief Authority are by Right unpunishable. IV. That without a
Supreme Power there is no Government, but Anarchy. V. That from Servants and
Sons there is a simple obedience due to their Lords, and Parents. VI. Absolute
Authority proved by most evident places as well of the New* as the Old
Testament.

I. WE have in the 6. Chapter, and The beginning of institutive Government
from the consent of the People.
the 2. Article, so derived the Original of institutive, or political
Government from the consent of the Multitude, that it appears they must either
all consent, or be esteemed as Enemies. Such was the beginning of Gods
Government over the Jews instituted by Moses, If ye will obey my voice
induced, etc. Ye shall be unto me a Kingdom of Priests, etc. And Moses came,
and called the Elders of the People, etc. And all the people answered, and
said: All that the Lord has spoken we will do, Exodus 19. ver. 5, 6, 7, 8. Such
also was the beginning of Moses his power under God, or of his Vicegerency.
And all the people saw the thunderings and lightenings, and the noise of the
Trumpet, etc. And they said unto Moses, speak thou unto us, and we will hear.
Exodus 20. 18, 19. The like beginning also had Saul's Kingdom. When ye saw that
Nahash King of the children of Ammon came out against you, ye said unto me,
nay, but a King shall reign over us, when the Lord your God was your King; Now
therefore behold the King whom ye have chosen* and whom ye have desired. 1 Samuel 12. 12. But the major part only consenting, and not all (for there were
certain Sons of Belial, who said, How shall this man save us? and they despised
him, 1 Samuel 10. 27.) those who did not consent were put to death as Enemies;
And the people said unto Samuel, Who is he that said, shall Saul reign over us?
Bring the men that we may put them to death. 1 Samuel 11. 22.

II. In the same 6. Chapter, the 6. and The power of judicature, and
determination of wars, depend on the will of the supreme Officer.
7. Articles, I have showed, that all Judgment and Wars depend upon the will
and pleasure of him who bears the Supreme Authority; that is to say, in a
Monarchy, on a Monarch, or King; and this is confirmed by the Peoples own
judgment. We also will be like all the Nations, and our King shall JUDGE us,
and go out before us, and fight our BATTLES. 1 Samuel (...). 20. And what
pertaines to Judgments, and all other matters, whereof there is any
controversy, whether they be Good, or Evil, is confirmed by the testimony of
King Solomon. Give therefore thy Servant an understanding heart to JUDGE thy
People, that I may discern between GOOD and EVIL, 1. Kings 3. 9. And that of
Absalom, There is no man deputed of the King to hear thee. 2. Sam. 15. 3.

III. That Kings may not be punished They who have the supreme authority, are
by Right unpunishable.
by their subjects, as has been showed above in the sixth Chapter, and the
twelfth Article, King David also confirms, who, though Saul sought to stay
him, did notwithstanding refrain his hand from killing him, and forbad Abishai,
saying, Destroy him not; for who ca^^ stretch forth his hand against the Lords
Anointed, and be innocent? 1 Samuel 22. v. 9. And when he had cut off the skirt
of his garment, The Lord forbid (says he) that I should do this thing unto my
Master the Lords Anointed, to stretch forth mine hand against him. 1 Samuel 24.
7. And commanded the Amaleki^e, who for his sake had slain Saul, to be put to
death. 2 Samuel 1. 15.

IV. That which is said in the 17. Chapter That without a supreme power, there
is no government ^ut confusion.
of Judges, at the 6. verse. In those days there was no King in Israel, but
every man did that which was right in his own eyes (as though where there were
not a Monarchy, there were an Anarchy or confusion of all things) may be
brought as a testimony to prove the exexcellency of Monarchy above all other
forms of government, unless that by the word King may perhaps be understood,
not one man only, but also a Court, provided that in it there reside a supreme
power, which if it be taken in this sense, yet hence it may follow, that
without a supreme and absolute power (which we have endeavored to prove in the
sixth Chapter) there will be a liberty for every man to do what he has a
mind, or whatsoever shall seem right to himself; which cannot stand with the
preservation of mankind, and therefore in all Government whatsoever, there is
ever a supreme power understood to be somewhere existent.

V. We have in the 8. Chapter, the 7. and 8. Article, said, that Servants must
yield That servants and sons, owe their Lords and Parents simple obedience.
a simple obedience to their Lords, and in the 9. Chapter, Article 7. that
Sons owe the same obedience to their Parents. Saint Paul says the same thing
concerning Servants, Servants obey in all things your Masters according to the
flesh, not with eye service, as menpleasers, but in singleness of heart,
fearing God. Colos. 3. 22. Concerning Sons, Children obey your Parents in all
things, for this is well pleasing unto the Lord. Colos. 3. 20. Now as we by
simple obedience understand ALL THINGS which are not contrary to the Laws of
God; so in those cited places of Saint Paul, after the word ALL THINGS, we must
suppose, excepting those which are contrary to the Laws of God.

VI. But that I may not thus by piece* The absolute power of Princes proved by
most evident testimonies of the Scripture, as w^ll new as old.
meal prove the right of Princes, I will now instance those testimonies which
altogether establish the whole power, (namely that there is an absolute and
simple obedience due to them from their subjects) And first out of the new
Testament. The Scribes and Pharis^es sit in Moses seat; all therefore,
whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe, and do^. Mat. 23. 2. Whatsoever
they bid you, (says he) observe, that is to say, obey simply. Why? Because
they sit in Moses seat; namely, the civil Magistrates, not Aaron, the
Priests. Le^ every soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power
but of God, the powers that be are ordained of God; whosoever therefore
resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall
receive to themselves damnation. Romans 13. 1. Now because the powers that were
in Saint Paul's time were ordained of God, and all Kings did at that time
require an absolute entire obedience from their subjects, it follows that such
a power was ordained of God. Submit your selves unto every ordinance of man for
the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto Governors, as
unto them that are sent by him, for the punishment of wicked doers, and for the
praise of them that do well, for so is the will of God. 1 Pet. 2. 13. Again
Saint Paul to Titus, Put them mind to be subject to Principalitiies and
Powers, to obey Magistrates, etc. Chap. 3. verse. 1. What Principalities? Was it
not to the Principalities of those times, which required an absolute obedience?
Furthermore, that we may come to the example of Christ himself, to whom the
Kingdom of the Jews belonged by hereditary Right, derived from David
himself; He when he lived in the manner of a subject, both paid tribute unto
Caesar, and pronounced it to be due to him. Give unto Caesar (says he) the
things which are Caesar's, and unto God, the things which are Gods. Mat. 22. 21.
When it pleased him to show himself a King, he required entire obedience Go
(said he) into the village over against you, and straightway ye shall find an
Assetyed, and a Colt with her, loose them, and bring them unto me; and if any
man say ought unto you, yec shall say the Lord has need of them. Mat. 14. 2.
This he did therefore by the right of being Lord, or a King of the Jews. But
to take away a subjects goods on this pretense only, because the Lord has
need of them, is an absolute power. The most evident places in the old
Testament are these, Go thou near, and hear ALL that the Lord our God shall
say, and speak thou unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee,
and we will hear it, and do it. Deuteronomy. 5. 27. But under the word all, is
contained absolute obedience. Again to Joshua. And they answered Joshua saying,
ALL that thou command us, we will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us, we
will go; according as we hearkened unto Moses in ALL things, so will we
hearken unto thee, only the Lord thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses;
whosoever he be that does rebel against thy Commandment, and will not
hearken unto thy words in ALL that thou command him, he shall be put to
death. Joshua 1. 16, 17, 18. And the Parable of the Bramble. Then said all the
trees unto the Bramble, Come thou, and reign over us; And the Bramble said unto
the trees, If in truth ye anoint me King over you, then come and put your
trust in my shadow; and if not, let sire come out of the Bramble, and devour
the Cedars of Lebanon. Juages 9. verse. 14, 15. The sense of which words is,
that we must acquiese to their sayings, whom we have truly constituted to be
Kings over us, unless we would choose rather to be consumed by the fire of a
civil war. But the Regal authority is more particularly described by God
himself, in the 1. Sam. 8. verse. 9. etc. Show them the Right of the King that
shall reign over them, etc. This shall be the Right of the King that shall
reign over you; he will take your Sons, and appoint them for himself, for his
Chariots, and to he his horsemen, and some shall run before his Chariots,
etc. And he will take your daughters to be confectionaries, etc. And he will
take your vineyards, and give them to his Servants, etc. Is not this power
absolute? And yet it is by God himself styled the KINGS RIGHT; neither was any
man among the Jews, no not the High Priest himself, exempted from this
obedience. For when the King (namely Solomon) said to Abiathar the Priest, Get
thee to Anathoth unto thine ^wn fields, for thou art worthy of death, but I
will not at this time put thee to death, because thou ^arest the Ark of the
Lord God before David my father, and because then have been afflicted in all
wherein my Father was afflicted. So Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being
Priest unto the Lord. 1 Kings. 2. 26. It cannot by any argument be proved, that
this act of his displeased the Lord; neither read we, that either Solomon was
reproved, or that his Person at that time was any whit less acceptable to God.

CHAP. XII. Of the internal causes, tending to the dissolution of any
Government.
I. That the judging of good and evil belongs to private Persons, is a
seditious opinion. II. That subjects do^ sin by obeying their Princes, is a
seditious opinion. III. That Tyrannicide is lawful, is a seditious opinion.
IV. That those who have the supreme power, are subject to the civil Laws, is
a seditious opinion. V. That the supreme power may be divided, is a seditious
opinion. VI. That faith, and sanctity, are not acquired by study and reason,
but always supernaturally infused, and inspired, is a^ seditious opinion. VII.
That each subject has a propriety, or absolute Dominion of his own goods, is
a seditious opinion. VIII. Not to understand the difference between the People
and the Multitude, prepares toward sedition. IX. Too great a Tax of moneys,
though never so just and necessary, prepares toward sedition. X. Ambition
disposes us to sedition. XI. So does the hope of success. XII. El^quence
alone without wisdom, is the only faculty needful to raise seditions. XIII.
How the folly of the common people, and the eloquntion of ambitious men, concur
to the destruction of a Commonweal.

I. HItherto has been spoken by what That the judgment of good and evil
belongs to private Persons, is a seditious opinion.
causes, and Pacts, Common-weals are constituted, and what the Rights of
Princes are over their subjects; Now we will briefly say somewhat concerning
the causes which dissolve them, or the reasons of seditions. Now as in the
motion of natural bodies, three things are to be considered, namely, internal
disposition, that they be susceptible of the motion to be produced; the
external Agent, whereby a certain and determined motion may in act be
produced; and the action it self: So also in a Commonweal where the subjects
begin to raise tumults, three things present themselves to our regard; First
the Doctrines and the Passions contrary to Peace, wherewith the minds of men
are ^itted and disposed; next their quality and condition who solicit,
assemble, and direct them already thus disposed, to take up arms, and quit
their allegiance; Lastly, the manner how this is done, or the faction it self:
But one, and the first which disposes them to sedition, is this, That the
knowledge of good and ^vili belongs to ^ach single man. In the state of nature
indeed, where every man lives by equal Right, and have not by any mutual
Pacts submitted to the command of others, we have granted this to be true, nay
in the first Chapter, Article 9. that the civil Laws were the Rules of good
and evil, just and unjust, honest and dishonest; that therefore what the
Legislator commands, must be held for good, and what he forbids for evil; and
the Legislator is ever that Person who has the supreme power in the
Commonweal, that is to say, the Monarch in a Monarchy. We have confirmed the
same truth in the eleventh Chapter, Article 2. out of the words of Solomon; for
if private men may pursue that as good, and ^n that as evil which appears to
them to be so, to what end serve those words of his? Give therefore unto thy
servant an understanding heart to judge thy People, that I may discern between
good and evil. Since therefore it belongs to Kings to discern between good
and evil, wicked are those, though usual sayings, that be only is a King who
does righteously, and that Kings must not be obeyed, unless they command us
just things, and many other such like. Before there was any government, just
and unjust had no being, their nature only being relative to some command, and
every action in its own nature is indifferent; that it becomes just, or unjust,
proceeds from the right of the Magistrate: Legitimate Kings therefore make the
things they command, just, by commanding them, and those which they forbid,
unjust, by forbidding them; but private men while they assume to themselves the
knowledge of good and evil, desire to be even as Kings, which cannot be with
the safety of the Common weal. The most ancient of all Gods commands is, Genesis
2. 15. Thou shall not eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil; and the
most ancient of all diabolical tentations, Chap. 3. verse. 5. Ye shall be as
Gods, knowing good and evil; and* Gods first expostulation with man, verse. 11.
Who told thee that thou were naked? Have thou eaten of the tree, whereof I
commanded thee that thou should not ^at? As if he had said, how come thou
to judge that nakedness, wherein it seemed good to me to create thee, to be
shameful, except thou have arrogated to thy self the knowledge of good and
evil?

II. Whatsoever any man does against That subjects do sin in obeying their
Princes, is a seditious opinion.
his conscience is a sin, for he who does so, contemns the Law. But we must
distinguish; That is my sin indeed, which committing, I do believe to be my
sin, but what I believe to be another man's sin, I may sometimes do that
without any sin of mine; for if I be commanded to do that which is a sin in
him who commands me, if I do it, and he that commands me be by Right, Lord
over me, I sin not; for if I wage war at the Commandment of my Prince,
conceiving the war to be unjustly undertaken, I do not therefore do
unjustly, but rather if I refuse to do it, arrogating to my self the
knowledge of what is just and unjust, which pertains only to my Prince. They
who observe not this distinction, will fall into a necessity of sinning, as often
as any thing is commanded them, which either is, or seems to be unlawful to
them: for if they obey, they sin against their conscience, and if they obey
not, against Right. If they sin against their conscience, they declare that
they fear not the pains of the world to come; if they sin against Right,
they do as much as in them lies, abolish humane society, and the civil life
of the present world. Their opinion therefore who teach, that subjects sin
when they obey their Princes commands, which to them seem unjust, is both
erroneous, and to be reckoned among those which are contrary to civil
obedience; and it depends upon that original error which we have observed
above in the foregoing Article; for by our taking upon us to judge of good and
evil, we are the occasion, that as well our obedience, as disobedience,
becomes sin unto us.

III. The third seditious doctrine springs That Tyrannicide is lawful, is a
seditious opinion.
from the same root, That a Tyrannicide is lawful; Nay, at this day it is by
many Divines, and of old it was by all the Philosophers, Plato, Aristo^ls,
Cicero, Seneca, Plutarch, and the rest of the maintainers of the Greek, and
Roman Anarchies, held not only unlawful, but even worthy of the greatest
contempt. And under the title of Tyrants, they mean not only Monarchs, but all
those who bear the chief rule in any Government whatsoever; for not Pisistratus
only at Athens, but those thirty also who succeeded him, and ruled together,
were all called Tyrants. But he, whom men require to be put to death as being a
Tyrant, commands either by Right, or without Right; if without Right, he is an
enemy, and by Right to be put to death; but then this must not be called the
killing a Tyrant, but an enemy: if by Right, then the divine interrogation
takes place, Who has told thee that he was a Tyrant, have thou eaten of the
tree whereof I commanded thee that thou should not eat^ For why do thou
call him a Tyrant, whom God has made a King, except that thou being a private
Person, usurpest to thy self the knowledge of good and evil* But how
pernicious this opinion is to all governments, but espcially to that which is
Monarchieall, we may hence discern, namely, that by it every King, whether
good or ill, stands exposed to be condemned by the judgment, and slain by the
hand of every ^rtherous villain.

IV. The fourth adversary opinion to That even they who have the Supreme power
are subject to the Civil Laws, is a seditious Opinion,
Civil Society, is theirs, who hold, That they who bear Rule are Subject also
to the Civil Laws; which has been sufficiently proved before not to be true
in the 6. Chap. Ar^ic. 14. from this Argument, That a City can neither be bound
to it self, nor to any subject; not to it self, because no man can be obliged
except it be to another; not to any Subject, because the single wills of the
Subjects are contained in the will of the City, insomuch, that if the City will
be free from all such obligation, the Subjects will so too; and by consequence
she is so; But that which holds true in a City, that must be supposed to be
true in a man, or an assembly of men, who have the Supreme Authority, for they
make a City, which has no being but by their Supreme Power. Now that this
Opinion cannot consist with the very being of Government, is evident from
hence, that by it the knowledge of what is Good and Evil, that is to say, the
definition of what is, and what is not against* the Laws, would return to each
single Person: Obedience therefore will cease as often as, any thing seems to be
commanded contrary to the Civil Laws, and together with it, all coercive
jurisdiction, which cannot possibly be without the destruction of the very
essence of Government; Yet this Error has great props, Aristotle, and others;
who, by reason of humane infirmity, suppose the Supreme Power to be committed
with most security to the Laws only; but they seem to have looked very
shallowly into the nature of Government, who thought that the constrainning
Power, the interpretation of Laws, and the making of Laws, (all which are
powers necessarily belonging to Government) should be left wholly to the Laws
themselves. Now although particular Subjects may sometimes contend in
judgment, and go to Law with the Supreme Magistrate, yet this is only then,
when the question is not what the Magistrate may, but what by a certain Rule he
has declared he would do; As, when by any Law the Judges sit upon the life of
a Subject, the question is not whether the Magistrate could by his absolute
Right deprive him of his life; but whether by that Law his will was that he
should be deprived of it; but his will was, he should, if he brake the Law,
else, his will was he should not: This thetefore, that a Subject may have an
action of Law against his Supreme Magistrate, is not strength of Argument
sufficient to prove that he is tied to his own Laws. On the contrary, it is
evident, that he is not tied to his own Laws, because no man is bound to
himself. Laws therefore are set for Titius, and Caius, not for the Ruler:
however, by the ambition of Lawyers, it is so ordered, that the Laws, to
unskilful men seem not to depend on the Authority of the Magistrate, but
their Prudence.

V. In the fifth place, That the Supreme That the Supreme Power may be divided
is a seditious opinion.
Authority may be divided, is a most fatal Opinion to all Commonweals. But
diverse men divide it diverse ways. For some divide it so as to grant a
Supremacy to the Civil Power in matters pertaining to Peace, and the benefits
of this life, but in things concerning the salvation of the Soul they transfer
it on others; Now, because justice is of all things most necessary to
Salvation, it happens, that Subjects measuring justice, not as they ought, by
the Civil Laws, but by the precepts and doctrines of them, who in regard of
the Magistrate, are either private men, or strangers, through a superstitious
fear dare not perform the obedience due to their Princes, through fear falling
into that which they most feared: Now what can be more pernicious to any state,
then that men should, by the apprehension of everlasting torments, be deterred
from obeying their Princes, that is to say, the Laws, or from being just?
There are also some who divide the Supreme Authority so as to allow the power
of War, and Peace, unto one, (whom they call a Monarch) but the right of
raising Moneys they give to some others, and not to him: But because moneys are
the sinews of War, and Peace, they who thus divide the Authority, do either
really not divide it at all, but place it wholly in them, in whose power the
money is, but give the name of it to another, or if they do really divide it,
they dissolve the Government: for neither upon necessity can War be waged, nor
can the public Peace be preserved without Money.

VI. It is a common doctrine, That faith That faith and holiness are not
acquired by study and reason, but are ever supernaturally infused and inspired,
is a seditious Opinion.
and holiness are not acquired by study, and natural reason, but are always
supernaturally infused, and inspired into m^n: which, if it were true, I
understand not why we should be commanded to give an account of our faith; or
why any man, who is truly a Christian, should not be a Prophet; or lastly; why
every man should not judge what is fit for him to do, what to avoid, rather out
of his own inspiration, then by the precepts of his Superiors, or right
Reason. A return therefore must be made to the private knowledge of Good and
Evil; which cannot be granted without the ruin of all Governments. This
Opinion has spread it self so largely through the whole Christian world, that
the number of Apostates from natural reason is almost become infinite, and it
sprang from sick-brained men, who having gotten good store of Holy Words by
frequent reading of the Scriptures, made such a connection of them usually in
their preaching, that their Sermons signifying just nothing, yet to unlearned
men seemed most divine; for he whose nonsense appears to be a Divine speech,
must necessarily seem to be inspired from above.

VII. The seventh Doctrine opposite That single Subjects have any propriety, or
absolute Dominion over their own goods, is a seditious Opinion.
to Government, is this, That each subject has an absolute Dominion over the
goods be is in possession of. That is to say, such a propriety as excludes not
only the right of all the rest of his fellow subjects to the same goods, but
also of the Magistrate himself, which is not true; for they who have a Lord
over them, have themselves no Lordship, as has been proved, Chap. 8. Artic. 5.
Now the Magistrate is Lord of all his Subjects, by the constitution of
Government. Before the yoke of Civil Society was undertaken, no man had any
proper Right; all things were common to all men; tell me therefore, how gottest
thou this propriety but from the Magistrate? How got the Magistrate it, but
that every man transferred his Right on him? and thou therefore have also given
up thy Right to him; thy Dominion therefore, and Propriety, is just so much as
he will, and shall last so long as he pleases; even as in a Family, each Son
has such proper goods, and so long lasting, as seem good to the Father. But
the greatest part of men who profess Civil Prudence, reason otherwise; we are
equal (say they) by nature; there is no reason why any man should by better
Right take my goods from me, then I his from him; we know that money sometimes
is needful for the defense and maintenance of the public; but let them, who
require it, show us the present necessity, and they shall willingly receive it.
They who talk thus, know not, that what they would have, is already done from
the beginning in the very constitution of Government, and therefore speaking as
in a dissolute multitude, and yet not fashishioned Government, they destroy the
frame.

VIII. In the last place, it is a great Not to know the difference between a
People and a Multitude prepares to Sedition.
hindrance to Civil Government, especially Monarchical, that men distinguish
not enough between a People and a Multitude. The People is somewhat that is
one, having one will, and to whom one action may be attributed; none of these
can properly be said of a Multitude. The People rules in all Governments, for
even in Monarchies the People Commands; for the People wills by the will of one
man; but the Multitude are Citizens, that is to say, Subjects. In a Democraty,
and Aristocraty, the Citizens are the Multitude, but the Court is the People.
And in a Monarchy, the Subjects are the Multitude, and (however it seem a
Paradox) the King is the People. The common sort of men, and others who little
consider these truths, do always speak of a great number of men, as of the
People, that is to say, the City; they say that the City has rebelled against
the King (which is impossible) and that the People will, and nill, what
murmuring and discontented Subjects would have, or would not have, under
pretense of the People, stirring up the Citizens against the City, that is to
say, the Multitude against the People. And these are almost all the Opinions
wherewith Subjects being tainted do easily Tumult. And forasmuch as in all
manner of Government Majesty is to be preserved by him, or them who have the
Supreme Authority, the crimen laesae Majestatis naturally cleaves to these
Opinions.

IX. There is nothing more afflicts the Too great a Tax of Money, though never
so just and necessary, disposes men to Sedition.
mind of man then Poverty, or the want of those things which are necessary for
the preservation of life, and honor; and though there be no man but knows
that riches are gotten with industry, and kept by fruga^ty, yet all the poor
commonly lay the blame on the Evil Government, excusing their own sloth, and
luxury, as if their private goods forsooth were wasted by public exactions;
But men must consider, that they who have no patrimony, must not only labor
that they may live, but fight too, that they may labor, Every one of the
Jews, who in Esdras his time built the Walls of Jerusalem, did the work with
one band, and held the Sword in the other. In all Government we must conceive
that the hand which holds the Sword is the King, or Supreme Council, which is
no less to be sustained, and nourisht, by the Subjects care and industry, then
that wherewith each man procures himself a private fortune; and that Custom^s,
and Tributes, are nothing else but their reward who watch in Arms for us, that
the labors and endeavors of single men may not be molested by the incursion
of enemies; and that their complaint, who impute their poverty to public
Persons, is not more just, then if they should say that they are become in want
by paying of their d^bts: But the most part of men consider nothing of these
things, for they suffer the same thing with them who have a disease they call
an Incubus, which springing from Gluttony, it makes men believe they are
invaded, oppressed, and stifled with a great weight: Now it is a thing manifest
of it self, that they who seem to themselves to be burdened with the whole
load of the Commonweal, are prone to be Seditious; and that they are affected
with change, who are distasted at the present st^e of things.

X. Another noxious disease of the Ambition disposes men to Sedition.
mind is theirs, who having little employment, want Honor and Dignity. All men
naturally strive for Honor, and Preferment, but chiefly they who are least
trouroubled with caring for necessary things; for these men are invited by
their vacancy sometimes to disputation among themselves concerning the
Commonweal, sometimes to an easy reading of Histories, Politiques, Orations,
Poems, and other pleasant Books, and it happens, that hence they think
themselves sufficiently furnished both with wit, and learning, to administer
matters of the greatest consequence. Now because all men are not what they
appear to themselves, and if they were, yet all (by reason of the multitude)
could not be received to public Offices, its necessary that many must be
passed by. These therefore conceiving themselves affronted, can desire nothing
more, partly out of envy to those who were preferred before them, partly out of
hope to overwhelm them, then ill success to the public Consultations; and
therefore its no marvel if with greedy appetites they seek for occasions of
innovations.

XI. The hope of overcomming is also to be So does the hope of success.
numbered among other seditious inclinations; for let there be as many men as
you will, infected with opinions repugnant to Peace, and civil Government, let
there be as many as there can, never so much wounded and torn with aff^onts,
and calumnies, by them who are in Authority, yet if there be no hope of having
the better of them, or it appear not sufficient, there will no sedition follow;
every man will dissemble his thoughts, and rather content himself with the
present burden, then hazard an heavier weight; There are four things
necessarily requisite to this hop^. Numbers, Instruments, mutual trust, and
Commanders. To resist public Magistrates without a great number, is not
Sedition, but Desperation. By Instruments of war I mean all manner of arms,
munition, and other necessary provision, without which Number can do nothing,
nor Arms neither without mutual trust; Nor all these without union under under
some Commander, whom of their own accord, they are content to obey; not as
being engaged by their submission to his command (for we have already in this
very Chapter, supposed these kind of men not to understand, being obliged
beyond that which seems right and good in their own eyes) but for some opinion
they have of his virtue, or military skill, or resemblance of humors. If these
^our be near at hand to men grieved with the present state, and measuring the
justice of their actions by their own judgments, there will be nothing wanting
to sedition and confusion of the Realm, but one to stir up and quicken them.

XII. Salust his Character of Cataline, Eloquence alone without wisdom is the
only faculty needful to raise seditions.
(then whom there never wa^ a greater Artist in raising seditions) is this,
That he had great eloquence, and little wisdom; he separates wisdom from
eloquence, attributing this as necessary to a man born for commotions,
adjudging that as an instructresse of Peace, and quietness. Now, eloquence is
twofold. The one is an elegant, and clear expression of the conceptions of the
mind, and rises partly from the contemplation of the things themselves, partly
from an understanding of words taken in their own proper, and definite
signification; the other is* a commotion of the Passions of the mind (such as
are hope, fear, anger, pity) and derives from a metaphorical use of words
fitted to the Passions: That forms a speech from true Principles, this from
opinions already received, what nature soever they are of. The art of that is
Logic, of this Rhetoric, the end of that is truth, of this victory. Each has
its use, that in deliberations, this in exhortations; for that is never
disjoined from wisdom, but this almost ever. But that this kind of powerful
eloquence, separated from the true knowledge of things, that is to say, from
wisdom, is the true character of them who solicit, and stir up the people
to innovations, may easily be gathered out of the work it self which they have
to do; for they could not poison the people with those absurd opinions
contrary to Peace and civil society, unless they held them themselves, which
sure is an ignorance greater then can well befall any wise man, for he that
knows not whence the Laws derive their power, which are the Rules of just and
unjust, honest and dishonest, good and evil, what makes and preserves Peace
among men, what destroys it, what is his, and what another, Lastly, what he
would have done to himself (that he may do the like to others) is surely to
be accounted but meanly wis^; but that they can turn their Auditors out of
fools into madmen; that they can make things to them who are ill-affected seem
worse, to them who are well-affected seem evil; that they can enlarge their
hopes, lessen their dangers beyond reason: this they have from that sort of
eloquence, not which explains things as they are, but from that other, which by
moving their minds, makes all things to appear to be such as they in their
minds prepared before, had already conceived them.

XIII. Many men who are themselves How the folly of the common people, and the
eloquence of ambitious men, concur to the dissolution of a Commonweal.
very well affected to civil society, do through want of knowledge, cooperate
to the disposing of subjects minds to sedition, whilst they teach young men a
doctrine conformable to the said opinions in their Schools, and all the people
in their P^lpits: now they who desire to bring this disposition into Act, place
their whole endeavor in this, First, that they may join the ill affected
together into faction and conspiracy; next, that themselves may have the
greatest stroke in the faction: They gather them into faction, while they make
themselves the relators, and interpretors of the counsels and actions of single
men, and nominate the Persons and Places, to assemble and deliberate of such
things whereby the present government may be reformed, according as it shall
seem best to their interests. Now to the end that they themselves may have the
chief rule in the faction, The faction must be kept in a faction, that is to
say, they must have their secret meetings apart with a few, where they may
order what shall afterward be propounded in a general meeting, and by whom, and
on what subject, and in what order each of them shall speak, and how they may
draw the powerfullest, and most popular men of the faction to their side: and
thus when they have gotten a faction big enough, in which they may rule by
their eloquence, they move it to take upon it the managing of affairs, and
thus they sometimes oppress the Commonwealth, namely where there is no other
faction to oppose them, but for the most part they rend it, and introduce a
civil war, for folly and eloquence concur in the subversion of government
in the same manner (as the ^able has it) as heretofore the daughters of Palias
King of Thessaly, conspired with Medea against their father; They going to
restore the decrepit old man to his youth again, by the counsel of Medea, they
cut him into pieces, and set him in the fire to boil, in vain expecting when
he would live again; So the common people through their folly (like the
daughters of Palias) desiring to renew the ancient government, being drawn
away by the eloquence of ambitious men, as it were by the witchcraft of Medea,
divided into faction, they consume it rather by those flames, then they reform
it.

CHAP. XIII. Concerning the duties of them who bear Rule.
I. The Right of supreme authority is distinguished from its exercise. II. The
safety of the people is the supreme Law. III. It behooves Princes to regard the
common benefit of many, not the propriety of this, or that Man. IV. That by
safety is understood all manner of conveniences. V. A Querie, Whether it be
the duty of Kings to provide for the salvation of their Subjects souls, as
they shall judge best according to their own consciences. VI. Wherein the
safety of the people consists. VII. That discoverers are necessary for the
defense of the people. VIII. That to have soldiers, arms, garrisons, and
moneys in a readiness, in time of Peace, is also necessary for the defense of
the People. IX. A right instruction of subjects in civil doctrines, is
necessary for the preserving of Peace. X. Equal distributions of public
Offices, conduces much to the preservation of Peace. XI. It is natural equity
that moneys be taxt according to what every man spends, not what he posaesses.
XII. It conduces to the preservation of Peace, to keep down ambitious men.
XIII. And to break factions. XIV. Laws whereby thriving Arts are cherisht, and
great costs restrained, conduce to the enriching of the Subject. XV. That more
ought not to be defined by the Laws, then the benefit of the Prince and his
Subjects requires. XVI. That greater punishments must not be inflicted, then
are prescribed by the Laws. XVII. Subjects must have Right done them against
corrupt Judges.

I. BY what has hitherto been said, The Right of supreme authority is
distinguished from its ex^r^ise.
the duties of Citizens and Subjects in any kind of government whatsoever, and
the power of the supreme Ruler over them are apparent; but we have as yet said
nothing of the duties of Rulers, and how they ought to behave themselves
toward their Subjects; We must then distinguish between the Right, and the
exercise of supreme authority, for they can be divided; as for example, when he
who has the Right, either cannot, or will not be present in judging
trespasses, or deliberating of affairs* For Kings sometimes by reason of their
age cannot order their affairs, sometimes also though they can do it
themselves, yet they judge it fitter, being satisfied in the choice of their
Officers and Counselors, to exercise their power by them. Now where the Right
and exercise are severed, there the government of the Commonweal, is like the
ordinary government of the world, in which God, the mover of all things,
produces natural effects by the means of secondary causes; but where he, to
whom the Right of ruling does belong, is himself present in all judicatures,
consultations, and public actions, there the administration is such, as if
God beyond the ordinary course of nature, should immediately apply himself unto
all matters; we will therefore in this Chapter summarily and briefly speak
somewhat concerning their duties who exercise authority, whether by their own
or others Right. Nor is it my purpose to descend into those things, which being
diverse from others, some Princes may do, for this is to be left to the
Political Practices of each Commonweal.

II. Now all the duties of Rulers are contained in this one sentence, The
safety The safety of the People is the supreme Law.
of the people is the supreme Law; for although they who among men obtain the
chiefest Dominion, cannot be subject to Laws properly so called, that is to
say, to the will of men, because to be chief, and subject, are contradictories;
yet is it their duty in all things, as much as possibly they can, to yield
obedience unto right reason, which is the natural, moral, and divine Law; But
because dominions were constituted for Peaces sake, and Peace was sought after
for safeties sake, he, who being placed in authority, shall use his power
otherwise then to the safety of the people, will act against the reasons of
Peace, that is to say, against the Laws of nature; Now as the safety of the
People dictates a Law by which Princes know their duty, so does it also teach
them an art how to procure themselves a benefit; for the power of the Citizens,
is the power of the City, that is to say, his that bears the chief Rule in any
state.

III. By the people in this place we understand, It is the duty of Princes to
respect the common benefit of many, not the peculiar interest of this, or that
man.
not one civil Person, namely the City it self which governs, but the
multitude of subjects which are governed; for the City was not instituted for
its own, but for the subjects fake; and yet a particular care is not required
of this or that man; for the Ruler (as such) provides no otherwise for the
safety of his people, then by his Laws, which are universal; and therefore he
has fully discharged himself, if he have thoroughly endeavored by wholesome
constitutions, to establish the welfare of the most part, and made it as
lasting as may be; and that no man suffer ill, but by his own default, or by
some chance which could not be prevented; but it sometimes conduces to the
safety of the most part, that wicked men do suffer,

IV. But by safety must be understood, By safety is understood all manner of
benefits.
not the sole preservation of life in what condition soever, but in order to
its happiness. For to this end did men freely assemble themselves, and institute
a government, that they might, as much as their humane condition would afford,
live delightfully. They therefore who had undertaken the administration of
power in such a kind of government, would sin against the Law of nature
(because against their trust who had committed that power unto them) if they
should not study, as much as by good Laws could be effected, to furnish their
subjects abundantly, not only with the good things belonging to life, but also
with those which advance to delectation. They who have acquired Dominion by
arms, do all desire that their subjects may be strong in body and mind, that
they may serve them the better, wherefore if they should not endeavor to
provide them, not only with such things whereby they may live, but also with
such whereby they may grow strong and lusty, they would act against their own
scope and end.

V. And first of all, Princes do believe Query, Whether it be the duty of
Kings to provide for the salvation of their subjects souls, as they shall
judge best in their own c^nsciences.
that it mainly concerns eternal salvation, what opinions are held of the
Deity, and what manner of worship he is to be adored with; which being
supposed, it may be demanded, whether chief Rulers, and whosoever they be,
whether one or more, who exercise supreme authority, sin not against the Law of
nature, if they cause not such a doctrine, and worship, to be taught and
practiced (or permit a contrary to be taught and practiced) as they believe
necessarily conduces to the eternal salvation of their subjects? It is
manifest that they act against their conscience, and that they will, as much as
in them lies, the eternal perdition of their subjects; for if they willed it
not, I see no reason why they should suffer, (when being supreme they cannot be
compelled) such things to be taught and done, for which they believe them to be
in a damnable state. But we will leave this difficulty in Wherein the safety of
the People consists.
suspense.

VI. The benefits of subjects respecting this life only, may be distributed
into four kinds. 1. That they be defended against foreign enemies. 2. That
Peace be preserved at home. 3. That they be enrich't as much as may consist
with public security. 4. That they enjoy a harmless liberty; For supreme
Commanders can confer no more to their civil happiness, then that being
preserved from foreign and civil wars, they may quietly enjoy that wealth
which they have purchased by their own i^dustry.

VII. There are two things necessary That discoverers are necessary for the
defense of the People.
for the Peoples defense; To be warned, and to be forearmed; for the state of
Commonwealths considered in themselves, is natural, that is to say, hostile;
neither if they cease from fighting, is it therefore to be called Peace, but
rather a breathing time, in which one enemy observing the motion and
countenance of the other, values his security not according to the Pacts, but
the forces and counsels of his adversary; And this by natural Right, as has
been showed in the second Chapter, 10. Artic. from this, that contracts are
invalid in the state of nature, as often as any just fear does intervene; It is
therefore necessary to the defense of the City, First, that there be some who
may as near as may be, search into, and discover the counsels and motions of
all those who may prejudice it; for discoverers to Ministers of State, are like
the beams of the Sun to the humane soul, and we may more truly say in
vision political, then natural, that the sensible, and intelligible Species
of outward things, not well considered by others, are by the air transported
to the soul, (that is to say to them who have the Supreme Authority) and
therefore are they no less necessary to the preservation of the State, then
the rays of the light are to the conservation of man; or if they be compared
to Spiders webs, which extended on all sides by the finest threads, do warn
them, keeping in their small holds, of all outward motions; They who bear Rule
can no more know what is necessary to be commanded for the defense of their
Subjects without Spies, then those Spiders can when they shall go forth, and
whether they shall repair, without the motion of those threads.

VIII. Farthermore, its necessarily requisite To have Soldiers, Arms,
Garrisons, and Money, in readiness in times of Peace, is necessary for the
Peoples defense.
to the peoples defense, that they be fore-armed. Now to be fore-armed is to be
furnished with Soldiers, Arms, Ships, Forts and Moneys, before the danger be
instant; for the listing of Soldiers, and taking up of Arms after a blow is
given, is too late, at least if not impossible. In like manner, not to raise
Forts, and appoint Garrisons in convenient places, before the Fromiers are
invaded, is to be like those Country Swains (as Demosthenes said) who ignorant
of the art of Fencing, with their Bucklers guarded those parts of the body
where they first f^lt the smart of the strokes. But they who think it then
seasonable enough to raise Moneys for the maintenance of Soldiers, and other
Charges of War, when the danger begins to show it self, they consider not
surely how difficult a matter it is to wring suddenly out of close* fisted men
so vast a proportion of Moneys; for almost all men, what they once reckon in
the number of their goods, do judge themselves to have such a right and
propriety in it, as they conceive themselves to be injured whenever they are
forced to employ but the least part of it for the public good. Now a
sufficient stock of moneys to defend the Country with Arms, will not soon be
raised out of the treasure of Imposts, and Customs; we must therefore, for
fear of War, in time of Peace hoord up good sums, if we intend the safety of
the Commonweal. Since therefore it necessarily belongs to Rulers for the
Subjects safety to discover the Enemies Counsel, to keep Garrisons, and to
have Money in continual readiness, and that Princes are by the Law of Nature
bound to use their whole endeavor in procuring the welfare of their Subjects,
it follows, that its not only lawful for them to send out Spies, to maintain
Soldiers, to build Forts, and to require Moneys for these purposes, but also,
not to do thus, is unlawful. To which also may be added, whatsoever shall
seem to conduce to the lesning of the power of forraigners whom they suspect,
whether by sleight, or force. For Rulers are bound according to their power to
prevent the evils they suspect, lest peradventure they may happen through A
right instruction of Subjects in civil doctrines is necessary for the
preserving of Peace.
their negligence.

IX. But many things are required to the conservation of inward Peace, because
many things concur (as has been showed in the foregoing Chapter) to its
perrurbation. We have there showed, that some things there are which dispose
the minds of of men to sedition, others which move and quicken them so
disposed. Among those which dispose them, we have reckoned in the first place
certain perverse doctrines. Its therefore the duty of those who have the chief
Authority; to root those out of the minds of men, not by commanding, but by
teaching; not by the terror of penalties, but by the perspicuity of reasons;
the Laws whereby this evil may be withstood are not to be made against the
Persons erring, but against the Errors themselves. Those errors which in the
foregoing Chapter we affirmed were inconsistent with the quiet of the
Commonweal, have crept into the minds of ignorant men, partly from the
Pulpit, partly from the daily discourses of men, who by reason of little
employment, otherwise, do find leisure enough to study; and they got into
these men's minds by the teachers of their youth in public schools.
Wherefore also, on the other side, if any man would introduce sound Doctrine,
he must begin from the Academies: There, the true, and truly demonstrated
foundations of civil Doctrine are to be laid, wherewith young men being once
endued, they may afterward both in private and public instruct the vulgar.
And this they will do so much the more cheerfully, and powerfully, by how much
themselves shall be more certainly convinced of the truth of those things they
profess, and teach; for seeing at this day men receive propositions, though
false, and no more intelligible, then if a man should join together a company
of terms drawn by chance out of an urne, by reason of the frequent use of
hearing them; how much more would they for the same reason entertain true
doctrines suitable to their own understandings, and the nature of things? I
therefore conceive it to be the duty of Supreme Officers to cause the true
elements of civil Doctrine to be written, and to command them to be taught in
all the Colleges of their several Dominions.

X. In the next place we showed that Equal distribution of public burdens
conduces much to the preservation of peace.
grief of mind a^ising from want did dispose the Subjects to Sedition, which
want, although derived from their own luxury, and sloth, yet they impute it to
those who govern the Realm, as though they were drained and oppressed by public
Pensions. Notwithstanding it may sometimes happen that this complaint may be
just, namely, when the burdens of the Realm are unequally imposed on the
Subjects; For that which to all together is but a light weight, if many
withdraw themselves, it will be very heavy, nay, even intolerable to the rest:
Neither are men wont so much to grieve at the burden it self, as at the
inequality. With much earnestnes therefore men strive to be freed from taxes,
and in this conflict the less happy, as being overcome, do envy the more
fortunate. To remove therefore all just complaint, its the interest of the
public quiet, and by consequence it concerns the duty of the Magistrate, to
see that the public burdens be equally born. Furthermore, since what is
brought by the subjects to public use, is nothing else but the price of their
bought Peace, its reason good, that they who equally share in the peace, should
also pay an equal part either by contributing their Moneys, or their labors
to the Commonweal; now it is the Law of Nature (by the 15. Article of the 3.
Chapter) that every man in distributing right to others, do carry himself
equal to all; wherefore Rulers are by the natural Law obliged to lay the
burdens of the Commonweal equally on their Subjects.

XI. Now in this place we understand an equality, not of Money, but of Burden,
that is to say, an equality of reason between the Burdens, and the Benefits.
For although Its natural equity that Moneys be ^axt according to what every
man speuds, not to what ^e posseseth.
all equally enjoy Peace, yet the benefits springing from thence, are not
equal to all; for some get greater possessions, others less; and again, some
consume less, others more. It may therefore be demanded whether Subjects ought
to contribute to the public, according to the rate of what they gain, or of
what they spend, that is to say, whether the persons must be taxt, so as to pay
contribution according to their wealth, or the goods themselves, that every man
contribute according to what he spends. But if we consider, where Moneys are
raised according to wealth, there they who have made equal gain, have not
equal possessions, because that one preserves what he has got by frugality,
another wastes it by luxury, and therefore equally rejoicing in the benefit of
Peace, they do not equally sustain the Burdens of the Commonweal: and on
the other side, where the goods themselves are taxt, there every man, while he
spends his private goods, in the very act of consuming them he undiscernably
pays part due to the Commonweal, according to, not what he has, but what by
the benefit of the Realm he has had; it is no more to be doubted* but that the
former way of commanding moneys is against equity, and therefore against the
duty of Rulers, the latter is agreeable to reason, and the exercise of their
authority.

XII. In the third place, we said that It conduces to the preservation of
peace, to depresse the ambitious.
that trouble of mind which rises from ambition was offensive to public
Peace. For there are some who seeming to themselves to be wiser then others,
and more sufficient for the managing of affairs then they who at present do
govern, when they can no otherwise declare how profitable their virtue would
prove to the Commonweal, they show it, by harming it; but because ambition
and greediness of honors cannot be rooted out of the minds of men, its not
the duty of Rulers to endeavor it; but by constant application of rewards, and
punishments, they may so order it, that men may know that the way to honor is,
not by contempt of the present government, nor by factions, and the popular
air, but by the contraries. They are good men who observe the Decrees, the
Laws and Rights of their Fathers; if with a constant order we saw these
adorned with honors, but the factions punished, and had in contempt by those
who bear command, there would be more ambition to obey, then withstand;
notwithstanding it so happens sometimes, that as we must stroke a horse by
reason of his too much fierceness, so a stiff neckt subject must be flattered
for fear of his power; but as that happens when the rider, so this, when the
Commander is in danger of falling. But we speak here of those, whose authority
aund power is entire. Their duty (I say) it is to cherish obedient subjects,
and to depresse the factious all they can; nor can the public power be
otherwise preserved, nor the subjects quiet without it.

XIII. But if it be the duty of Princes And to dissolve factious.
to restrain the factious, much more does it concern them to dissolve and
dissipate the factions themselves. Now I call a faction, a multitude of
subjects gathered together, either by mutual contracts among themselves, or by
the power of some one, without his or theirs who bear the supreme Rule: A
faction therefore is as it were a City in a City; for as by an Union of men in
the state of nature a City receives its being, so by a new union of subjects,
there arises a faction. According to this definition, a multitude of subjects
who have bound themselves simply to obey any foreign Prince, or Subject, or
have made any Pacts, or Leagues of mutual defense between themselves against
all men, not excepting those who have the supreme power in the City, is a
faction. Also favor with the vulgar if it be so great, that by it an Army may
be raised, except public caution be given, either by hostages, or some other
pledges, contains faction in it; The same may be said of private wealth, if it
exceed, because all things obey money. Forasmuch therefore as it is true, that
the state of Cities among themselves is natural, and hostile, those Princes
who permit factions, do as much as if they received an enemy within their
walls, which is contrary to the subjects safety, and therefore also against the
Law of nature.

XIV. There are two things necessary Laws whereby gaining arts are cherisht,
and great expenses restrained, do^ conduce much to the enriching of the subject.
to the enriching of Subjects, Laobur and thrife; there is also a third which
helps, to wit the natural increase of the earth, and water, and there is a
fourth too, namely the Militia, which sometimes augments, but more frequently
lessens the subjects stock. The two first are only necessary. For a City
constituted in an Island of the Sea, no greater then will serve for dwelling,
may grow rich without sowing, or fishing, by merchandise, and handicrafts only;
but there is no doubt if they have a territory, but they may be richer with the
same number, or equally rich, being a greater number; but the fourth, namely
the Militia, was of old reckoned in the number of the gaining Ar^s, under the
notion of Booting or taking prey; and it was by mankind, (dispersed by families)
before the constitution of civil societies, accounted just and honorable; for
preying, is nothing else but a war waged with small forces; And great
Commonweals, namely that of Rome, and Athens, by the spoils of war,
foreign tribute, and the territories they have purchased by their arms, have
sometimes so improved the Commonwealth, that they have not only not required
any public moneys from the poorer sort of subjects, but have also divided to
each of them both moneys and lands. But this kind of increase of riches, is not
to be brought into rule and fashion: For the Militia in order to profit, is
like a Dye wherewith many lose their estates, but few improve them. Since
therefore there are three things only, the fruits of the earth and water,
Labor and Thrif^, which are expedient for the enriching of subjects, the duty
of Commanders in chief, shall be conversant only about those three. For the
first, those laws will be useful which countenance the arts that improve the
increase of the earth, and water, such as are husbandry, and fishing. For the
second, all Laws against idleness, and such as quicken industry, are
profitable; the ar^ of Navigation (by help whereof the commodities of the whole
world, bought almost by labor only, are brought into one City) and the
Mechanics, (under which I comprehend all the arts of the most excellent
workmen) and the Mathemacicall sciences, the fountains of navigatory and
mechanic employments, are held in due esteem and honor. For the third, those
laws are useful, whereby all inordinate expense, as well in meats, as in
clothes, and universally in all things which are consumed with usage, is
forbidden. Now because such laws are beneficial to the ends above specified,
it belongs also to the Office of supreme Magistrates, to establish That more
ought not to be determined by the Laws, then the benefit of Prince and
Subjects require.
them.

XV. The liberty of subjects consists not in being exempt from the Laws of the
City, or that they who have the supreme power cannot make what Laws they have a
mind to; but because all the motions and actions of subjects, are never
circumscribed by Laws, nor can be, by reason of their variety; it is necessary
that there be infinite cases, which are neither commanded, nor prohibited, but
every man may either do, or not do them, as he lifts himself. In these, each
man is said to enjoy his liberty, and in this sense liberty is to be understood
in this place, namely, for that part of natural Right, which is granted and
left to Subjects by the civil Laws. As water enclosed on all hands with
banks, stands still and corrupts; having no bounds, it spreds too largely, and
the more passages it finds, the more freely it takes its current; so subjects,
if they might do nothing without the commands of the Law would grow dull, and
unwildly, if all, they would be dispersed, and the more is left undetermined by
the Laws, the more liberty they enjoy. Both extremes are faulty, for Laws
were not invented to take away, but to direct men's actions, even as nature
ordained the banks, not to stay, but to guide the course of the stream. The
measure of this liberty is to be taken from the subjects, and the Cities good;
wherefore in the first place it is against the charge of those who command, and
have the authority of making laws, that there should be more laws then
necessarily serve for good of the Magistrate, and his Subjects; for since men
are wont commonly to debate what to do, or not to do, by natural reason,
rather then any knowledge of the Laws, where there are more Laws then can
easily be remembered, and whereby such things are forbidden, as reason of it
self prohibites not of necessity, they must through ignorance, without the
least evil i^tention, fall within the compass of Laws, as gins laid to
entrap their harmless liberty, which supreme Commanders are bound to preserve
for their subjects by the Laws of nature.

XVI. It is a great part of that liberty which That greater punishments must
not be inflicted, then are prescribed by the Laws.
is harmless to civil government, and necessary for each subject to live
happily, that there be no penalties dreaded, but what they may both foresee,
and look for; and this is done, where there are either no punishments at all
defined by the Laws, or greater not required then are defined; where there are
none defined, there he that has first broken the Law, expects an in definite
or arbitrary punishment, and his fear is supposed boundless, because it
relates to an unbounded evil; now the Law of nature commands them who are not
subject to any civil Laws, (by what we have said in the third Chapter, Artic.
11.) and therefore supreme Commanders, that in taking revenge and punishing,
they must not so much regard the past evil, as the future good, and they sin,
if they entertain any other measure in arbitrary punishment, then the public
benefit; but where the punishment is defined, either by a Law prescribed, as
when it is set down in plain words, that he that shall do thus, or thus, shall
suffer so and so; or by practice, as when the penalty, (not by any Law
prescribed, but arbitrary from the beginning) is afterward determined by the
punishment of the first delinquent (for natural equity commands that equal
transgressors be equally punished) there to impose a greater penalty then is
defined by the Law, is against the Law of nature. For the end of punishment is
not to compel the will of man, but to fashion it, and make it such as he would
have it who has set the penalty. And deliberation is nothing else but a
weiging, as it were in scales, the conveniences, and inconveniences of the
fact we are attempting; where, that which is more weighty, does necessarily
according to its inclination prevail with us. If therefore the Legislator does
set a less penalty on a crime, then will make our fear more considerable with
us, then our lust; that excess of lust above the fear of punishment, whereby
sin is committed, is to be attributed to the Legislator (that is to say) to
the supreme, and therefore if he inflict a greater punishment, then himself
has determined in his Laws, he punishes that in another, which he sinned
himself.

XVII. It pertaines therefore to the Subjects must have right restored to them
against corrupt Judges
harmless and necessary liberty of subjects, that every man may without fear,
enjoy the rights which are allowed him by the Laws; for it is in vain to have
our own distinguished by the Laws from another, if by wrong judgment,
robbery, theft, they may be again confounded; but it falls out so, that these
do happen where Judges are corrupted; for the fear whereby men are deterred
from doing evil, arises not from hence, namely, because penalties are set,
but because they are executed; for we esteem the future by what is past,
seldom expecting what seldom happens. If therefore Judges corrupted either by
Gifts, Favor, or even by pity it self, do often forbear the execution of the
Penalties due by the Law, and by that means put wicked men in hope to pass
unpunisht: honest Subjects encompast with murderers, thieves and knaves, will
not have the liberty to converse freely with each other, nor scarce to stir
abroad without hazard; nay, the City it self is dissolved, and every man's right
of protecting himself at his own will returns to him. The Law of Nature
therefore gives this precept to Supreme Commanders, that they not only do
righteousness themselves, but that they also by penalties cause the Judges, by
them appointed, to do the same; that is to say, that they hearken to the
complaints of their Subjects; and as often as need requires, make choice of some
extraordinary Judges, who may hear the matter debated concerning the ordinary
ones.

CHAP. XIV. Of Laws and Trespasses.
I. How Law differs from Counsel. II. How from Covenant. III. How from Right.
IV. Division of Laws into Divine and Humane: the Divine into Natural and
Positive; and the Natural into the Laws of single-men, and of Nations. V. The
Division of humane, that is to say, of Civil Laws into Sacred and Secular. VI.
Into Distributive and Vindicative. VII. That Distributive, and Vindicative, are
not species, but parts of the Laws. VIII. All Law is supposed to have a
penalty annex^ to it. IX. The precepts of the Decalogue of honoring Parents,
of murder, adultery, theft, falsewitnesse, are Civil Laws. X. Its impossible
to command ought by the Civil Law contrary to the Law of Nature. XI. Its
essential to a Law, both that it self, and also the Lawgiver be known. XII.
Whence the Lawgiver comes to be known. XIII. Publishing, and Interpretation,
are necessary to the knowledge of a Law. XIV. The Division of the Civil Law
into written, and unwritten. XV. The Natural Laws are not written Laws;
neither are the wi^e Sentences of Lawyers, nor Custom, Laws of themselves,
but by the consent of the Supreme Power. XVI. What the word Sin most largely
taken, signisies* XVII. The definition of Sin. XVIII. The difference between a
Sin of Infirmity, and Malice. XIX. Under what kind of sin Atheism is
contained. XX. What Treason is. XXI. That by Treason, not the Civil, but the
Natural Laws are broken. XXII. And that therefore it is to be punished not by
the right of Dominion, but by the right of War. XXIII. That obedience is not
rightly distinguished into active, and passive.

I. THey who less seriously consider the How Law differs from Counsel.
force of words, do sometimes confound Law with Counsel, sometimes with
Covenant, sometimes with Right. They confound Law with Counsel, who think, that
it is the duty of Monarchs not only to give ear to their Counselors, but
also to obey them, as though it were in vain to take Counsel, unless it were
also followed. We must fetch the distinction between Counsel, and Law, from the
difference between Counsel, and Command. Now COUNSEL is a precept in which
the reason of my obeying it, is taken from the thing it self which is advised;
but COMMAND is a precept in which the cause of my obedience depends on the will
of the Commander. For it is not properly said, Thus I will, and thus I Command,
except the will stand for a Reason; Now when obedience is yielded to the Laws,
not for the thing it self, but by reason of the advisers will, the Law is not a
Counsel, but a Command, and is defined thus, LAW is the command of that Person
(whether Man, or Court) whose precept contains in it the reason of obedience;
as the Precepts of God in regard of Men, of Magistrates in respect of their
Subjects, and universally of all the powerful in respect of them who cannot
resist, may be termed their Laws; Law and Counsel therefore differ many ways;
Law belongs to him who has power over them whom he advises, Counsel to them
who have no power. To follow what is prescribed by Law, is duty, what by
Counsel, is free will. Counsel is directed to his end that receives it, Law,
to his that gives it. Counsel is given to none but the willing, Law even to
the unwilling. To conclude, the right of the Counselor is made void by the
will of him to whom he gives Counsel, the right of the Lawgiver is not
abrogated at the pleasure of him who has a Law imposed.

II. They confound Law, and Covenant, How it differs from a Covenant.
who conceive the Laws to be nothing else but certain (...), or forms of
living, determined by the common consent of men: Amongst whom is Aristotle, who
defines Law on this manner, (...) that is to say, Law is a speech limited
according to the common consent of the City, declaring every thing that we
ought to do; which definition is not simply of Law, but of the Civil Law; for
it is manifest that the Divine Laws sprang not from the consent of men, nor
yet the Laws of Nature; for if they had their original from the consent of
men, they might also by the same consent be abrogated; but they are
unchangeable. But indeed that is no right definition of a Civil Law; for in
that place a City is taken either for one civil person, one will, or for a
multitude of men who have each of them the liberty of their private wills; if
for one person, those words, common consent, are ill placed here, for one
person has no common consent; neither ought he to have said, (declaring what
was needful to be done) but commanding; for what the City deolares, it
commands its Subjects. He therefore by a City understood a multitude of men
declaring by common consent (imagine it a writing confirmed by Votes) some
certain forms of living; but these are nothing else but some mutual contracts
which oblige not any man (and therefore are no Laws) before that a Supreme
Power being constituted which can compel, have sufficient remedy against the
rest, who otherwise are not likely to keep them. Laws therefore, according to
this definition of Aristotle, are nothing else, but naked, and weak contracts,
which then at length, when there is one who by right does exercise the Supreme
Power, shall either become Laws, or no Laws, at his will and pleasure:
Wherefore he confounds Contracts with Laws, which he ought not to have done;
for Contract is a promise, Law a command. In Contracts we say, I will do this;
In Laws, Do this. (*) Contracts oblige us, Laws vie us fast, being obliged.
A Contract obliges of it self, The Law holds the party obliged by virtue of
the universal Contract of yielding obedience; Therefore in Contract its first
determined what is to be done, before we are obliged to do it; But in Law we
are first obliged to perform, and what is to be done, is determined
afterward. Aristotle therefore ought to have defined a civil law thus, A
civil law is a speech limited by the will of the City, commanding every thing
behoofefull to be done, which is the same with that we have given above in the
6. Chap. art. 9. to wit, that the civil laws are the command of him (whether
man, or Court of men) who is endued with supreme power in the city, concerning
the future actions of his Subjects.

Contracts oblige us.] To be obliged, Annotation
and to be tied being obliged, seems to some men to be one, and the same thing,
and that therefore here seems to be some distinction in words, but none indeed.
More clearly therefore, I say the, That a man is obliged ^y his contracts, that
is, that he ought to perform for his promise sake; but that the Law ties him
being obliged, that is to say, it compells him to make good his promise, for
fear of the punishment appointed by the Law.

III. They confound Laws with Right, How it differs from Right.
who continue still to do what is permitted by divine Right, notwithstanding
it be forbidden by the civil Law: That which is prohibited by the divine Law,
cannot be permitted by the civil, neither can that which is commanded by the
divine Law, be prohibited by the civil, notwithstanding that which is
permitted by the divine Right, that is to say, that which may be done by divine
Right, does no whit hinder why the same may not be forbidden by the civil
Laws; for inferior Laws may restrain the liberty allowed by the superior,
although they cannot enlarge them: now natural liberty is a Right not
constituted, but allowed by the Laws. For the Laws being removed, our liberty
is absolute; This is first restrained by the natural, and divine Laws, the
residue is bounded by the civil Law, and what remains may again be restrained
by the constitutions of particular Towns, and Societies; There is great
difference therefore between Law, and Right. For Law is a setter, Right is
freedom, and they differ like contraries.

IV. All Law may be divided, first according The division of laws into divine
and humane, and of the divine into natural and positive, and of the natural
into those laws of single men, and those of Nations.
to the diversity of its Authors into Divine and humane, the Divine, according
to the two ways whereby God has made known his will unto men, is twofold,
natural (or moral) and positive; natural is that which God has declared to
all men by his eternal word borne with them, to wit, their natural Reason;
and this is that Law which in this whole book I have endeavored to unfold;
Positive is that, which God has revealed to us by the word of Prophecy,
wherein he has spoken unto men as a man: Such are the Laws which he gave to
the Jews concerning their government, and divine worship, and they may be
termed the Divine civil Laws, because they were peculiar to the civil
government of the Jews, his peculiar people. Again, the natural Law may be
divided into that of Men, which alone has obtained the title of the I aw of
nature, and that of Cities, which may be called that of Nations, but vulgarly
it is termed the Right of Nations. The precepts of both are alike, but because
Cities once instituted do put on the personal proprieties of men, that Law,
with speaking of the duty of single men, we call natural, being applied to
whole Cities, and Nations, is called the Right of Nations. And the same
Elements of natural law, and Right, which have hitherto been spoken of, being
transferred to whole Cities and Nations, may be taken for the Elements of the
laws, and Right of Nations.

V. All humane law is civil. For the The division of humane, that is to say,
civil laws, into secular and sacred.
state of men considered out of civil society, is hostile, in which, because
one is not subject to another, there are no other Laws, beside the dictates of
natural reason, which is the divine Law. But in civil government the City
only, that is to say, that man, or Court, to whom the supreme power of the
City is committed, is the Legislator, and the Laws of the City are civil. The
civil Laws may be divided according to the diversity of their subject matter,
into sacred, or secular; sacred are those which pertain to Religion, that is to
say, to the ceremonies, and worship of God (to wit what Persons, things,
places, are to be consecrated, and in what fashion, what opinions concerning
the Deity are to be taught publicly, and with what words, and in what order
supplications are to be made, and the like) and are not determined by any
divine positive Law. For the civil sacred Laws are the humane Laws (which
are also called Ecclesiastical) concerning things sacred; but the secular
under a general notion, are usually called the civil Laws.

VI Again, the civil Law (according to Into distributive and vindicative
the two offices of the Legislator, whereof one is to judge; the other to
constrain men to acquiesce to his judgments) has two parts; the one
distributive, the other vindicative, or penal. By the distributive it is, that
every man has his proper Right, that is to say, it sets forth Rules for all
things, whereby we may know what is properly ours, what another man's; so as
others may not hinder us from the free use and enjoyment of our own; and we may
not interrupt others in the quiet possession of theirs; and what is lawful for
every man to do or omit, and what is not lawful. Vindicative is that whereby
it is defined what punishment shall be inflicted on them who break the Law.

VII. Now distributive, and vindicative, Distributive and vindicative are not
two Species of the Laws.
are not two several Species of the Laws, but two parts of the same Law. For
if the Law should say no more, but (for example) whatsoever you take with your
net in the Sea, be it yours, i^s in vain; For although another should take that
away from you which you have caught, it hinders not, but that it still remains
yours; for in the state of nature where all things are common to all, yours,
and others, are all one, insomuch as what the Law defines to be yours, was
yours even before the Law, and after the Law ceases not to be yours, although
in another man's possession. Wherefore the Law does nothing, unless it be
understood to be so yours, as all other men be forbidden to interrupt your
free use, and secure enjoyment of it at all times, according to your own will,
and pleasure. For this is that which is required to a propriety of goods, not
that a man may be able to use them, but to use them alone, which is done by
prohibiting others to be an hinderance to him. But in vain do they also
prohibit any men, who do not withal strike a fear of punishment into them; in
vain therefore is the Law, unless it contain both parts, that which forbids
iujuries to be done, and that which punishes the doers of them. The first of
them which is called distributive, is Prohibitory, and speaks to all, the
second which is styled vindicative, or paenary, is mandatory, and only speaks
to public Ministers.

VIII. From hence also we may understand, All Law is supposed to have a Penalty
annexed to it.
that every civil Law has a penalty annexed to it, either explicitly, or
implicitly; For where the penalty is not defined, neither by any writing, nor
by example of any one who has suffered the punishment of the transgressed Law,
there the penalty is understood to be arbitrary, namely, to depend on the will
of the Legislator, that is to say, of the supreme Commander. For in vain is
that Law which may be broken without punishment.

IX. Now because it comes from the civil Laws, both that every man have his
The Precepts of the Decalogue of honoring Parents, of murder, adultcry,
these, false witness, are the civil Laws.
proper Right, and distinguished from another, and also that he is forbidden to
invade another Rights, it follows, that these Precepts (Thou shall not refuse
to give the honor defined by the Laws unto thy Parents: Thou shall not kill
the man whom the Laws forbid thee to kill: Thou shall avoid all copulation
forbidden by the Laws: Thou shall not take away another goods against the
Lords will: Thou shall not frustrate the Laws and Judgments by false
testimony) are Civil Law^s. The natural Laws command the same things but
implicitly; for the law of nature (as has been said in the 3. Chap. Art. 2.)
commands us to keep contracts, and therefore also to perform obedience when we
have covenanted obedience, and to abstain from another goods when it is
determined by the civil Law what belongs to another; but all Subjects (by the
13. Art. of the 6. Chap.) do covenant to obey his commands who has the supreme
power, that is to say the the civfll Laws, in the very constitution of
government, even before it is possible to break them; For the Law of nature did
oblige in the state of nature, where first (because nature has given all
things to all men) nothing did properly belong to another, and therefore it was
not possible to invade another right; next, where all things were common, and
therefore all carnal copulations lawful; Thirdly, where was the state of*
War, and therefore lawful to kill; Fourthly, where all things were
determined by every man's own judgment, and therefore paternall respects also:
Lastly, where there were no public judgments, and therefore no use of
bearing witness, either true, or false.

X. Seetng therefore our obligation to observe those* aws, is more ancient then
the It is not possible to command ought by the civil Law, contrary to o^e
Laws of nature.
promulgation of the Laws themselves, as being contained in the very
eonst^t^tion of the City, by the virtue of the natural Law which forbids
breach of Covenant, the Law of nature commands us to keep all the civil Laws;
for where we are ^tyed to obedience, before we know what will be commanded us,
there we are universally tied to obey in all things; whence it follows, that
no civil Law whatsoever, which tends not to a reproach of the Dei^y (in respect
of whom, Citie^ themselves have no right of their own, and cannot be said to
make Laws) can possibly be against the Law of nature; for though the Law of
nature forbid theft, adultery, etc. yet if the civil Law command us to invade
any thing, that invasion is not theft, adultery, etc. For when the I
acedemonians of old permitted their youths by* a certain Law, to take away
other men's goods, they commanded that these goods should not be accounted
other men's, but their own who took them; and therefore such surreptions were no
thefts. In like manner, copulations of heathen Sexes, according to their Laws,
were lawful marriages.

XI. Its necessary to the essence of a It is essential to a Law, that both it
and the Legislator be known.
Law, that the Subjects be acquainted with two things, First, what man or Court
has the supreme power, that is to say, the Right of making Laws. Secondly,
what the Law it self says; for he that neither knew either to whom or what he
is tied to, cannot obey, and by consequence is in such a condition, as if he
were not tied at all. I say not that it is necessary to the essence of a Law,
that either one, or the other be perpetually known, but only that it be once
known; and if the Subject afterward forget either the Right he has who made
the Law, or the Law it self, that makes him no less^ tied to ohey, since he
might have remembered Whence the Legislator is known.
it, had he had a will to obey.

XII. The knowledge of the Legislator depends on the Subject himself; for the
right of making Laws could not be conferred on any man without his own
consent, and covenant, either expressed, or supposed; expressed, when from the
beginning the Citizens do themselves constitute a form of governing the City,
or when by promise they submit themselves to the Dominion of any one; or
supposed at least, as when they make use of the benefit of the Realm, and
Laws, for their protection and conservation against others; for to whose
Dominion we require our fellow Subjects to yield obedience for our good, his
Dominion we acknowledge to be legitimate by that very request; and therefore
ignorance of the power of making Laws, can never be a sufficient excuse; for
every man knows what he has done himself.

The knowledge of the laws depends on the Promulgation and interpretation are
necessary to the knowledge of a Law.
Legislator, who must publish them, for otherwise they are not Laws; for Law
is the command of the Lawmakers, and his command is the Declaration of his
Will; it is not therefore a Law, except the will of the Lawmakers be declared,
which is done by promulgation. Now in promulgation two things must be manifest,
whereof one is, that he or they who publish a Law, either have a right
themselves to make Laws, or that they do it by authority derived from him or
them who have it; the other is the sense of the Law it self. Now, that the
first, namely published Laws proceed from him who has the supreme command,
cannot be manifest (speaking exactly and philosophically) to any, but them who
have received them from the mouth of the Commander, the rest believe, but the
reasons of their belief are so many, that it is scarce possible they should
not believe. And truly in a Democratical City where every one may be present at
the making of Laws if he will, he that shall be absent, must believe those that
were present; but in Monarchies and Aristocraties, because its granted but to
few to be present, and openly to hear the commands of the Monarch or the
Nobles, it was necessary to bestow a power on those few of publishing them to
the rest; And thus we believe those to be the Edicts and Decrees of Princes,
which are propounded to us for such, either by the writings, or voices of them,
whose office it is to publish them; But yet when we have these causes of
belief, that we have seen the Prince, or supreme Council constantly use such
Counselors, Secretaries, publishers, and scales, and the like arguments for
the declaring of his will; that he never took any authority from them; that
they have bin punished who not giving credit to such like promulgations have
transgrest the Law; not only he who thus believing shall not obey the Edicts
and Decrees set forth by them is every where accused, but he that not
believing, shall not yield obedience, is punished; for the constant permission
of these things is a manifest sign enough, and evident declaration of the
Commanders will; provided there be nothing contained in the Law, Edict or
Decree, derogatory from his supreme power: For it is not to be imagined that he
would have ought taken from his power by any of his Officers as long as he
retains a will to govern. Now the sense of the law, when there is any doubt
made of it, is to be taken from them to whom the supreme authority has
committed the knowledge of causes, or Judgments; for to judge is nothing else
then by interpretation to apply the laws to particular cases; now we may know
who they are that have this Office granted them, in the same manner, as we know
who they be that have authority given them to publish Laws.

XIV. Again the civil law according to The civil Law divided into written
and unwritten.
its two fold manner of publishing, is of two sorts, written and unwritten; By
written, I understand that which wants a voice, or some other sign of the will
of the ^egislator that it may become a Law: For all kind of Laws are of the
same age with mankind, both in nature, and time, and therefore of more
antiquity then the invention of letters, and the Art of writing; wherefore not
a writing, but a voice is necessary for a written law, this alone is requisite
to the being, that to the Remembrance of a Law; for we read, that before
letters were found out for the help of memory, that Laws contracted into
Meetre, were wont to be sung. The unwritten is that which wants no other
publishing then the voice of nature, or natural reason, such are the laws of
nature. For the natural Law although it be distinguished from the civil, for
as much as it commands the Will, yet so far forth as it relates to our
actions it is civil; for* example, this same, Thou shall not covet, which
only appertains to the mind, is a natural Law only, but this, Thou shall
not invade, is both natural and civil; for seeing it is impossible to
prescribe such universal Rules, whereby all future contentions which perhaps
are infinite, may be determined, its to be understood that in all cases not
mentioned by the written laws, the law of ^aturall equity is to be followed,
which commands us to distribute equally to equals; and this by the virtue of
the civil law, which also punishes those who knowingly and willingly do
actually transgress the laws of nature.

XV. These things being understood, it appears first, That the Laws of
Nature, although they were described in the Books That the natural laws are
not written laws, neither are the sentences of lawyers, or custom, laws of
themselves, but by the consent of the supreme power. What the word Sin* taken
in its largest sense signifies.
of some Philosophers, are not for that reason to be termed Written laws: and
that the Writings of the Interpreters of the Laws, were no Laws, for want of
the Supreme Authority; nor yet those orations of the Wise, (that is to say)
Judges, but so far forth as by the consent of the Supreme power they part
into custom, and that then they are to be received among. the Written laws,
not for the Customs sake (which by its own force does not constitute a Law)
but for the Will of the Supreme Commander, which appears in this, that he has
suffered his Sentence, whether equal, or unequal, to pass into custom.

XVI. Sin, in its largest signification, comprehends every deed, word and
thought, against right reason: for every man by reasoning seeks out the means
to the end which he propounds to himself. If therefore he reason right (that
is to say, beginning from most evident principles, he makes a discourse out of
consequences continually necessary,) he will proceed in a most direct way;
otherwise he will go astray, that is to say, he will either do, say, or
endeavor. somewhat against his proper end, which when he has done, he will
indeed in reasoning be said to have erred, but in action and will to have
sinned, for sin follows error, just as the Will does the understanding: And
this is the most general acception of the word, under which is contained every
imprudent action, whether against the Law, as to overthrow another man's house,
or not against the Law, as to build his own upon the Sand.

XVII. But when we speak of the Laws, The definition of Sin.
the word Sin is taken in a more strict sense, and signifies not every thing
done against right reason, but that only which is blameable, and therefore is
called malum culpae, the evil of fault; but yet if any thing be culpable it is
not presently to be termed a sin, or fault, but only if it be blameable with
reason. We must therefore enquire what is to be blameable with reason, what
against reason. Such is the nature of man, that every one calls that good which
he desires, and evil which he eschewes; and therefore through the diversity of
our affections, it happens that one counts that good, which another counts
evil; and the same man what now he esteemed for good, he immediately looks on
as evil; and the same thing which he calls good in himself, he terms evil
in another; for we all measure good and evil by the pleasure or pain we
either feel at present, or expect hereafter; Now seeing the prosperous actions
of enemies (because they increase their honors, goods, and power) and of
equals, (by reason of that strife of honors which is among them) both seem
and are irksome, and therefore evil to all; and men use to repute those
evil, that is to say, to lay some fault to their charge from whom they receive
evil; its impossible to be determined by the consent of single men whom the
same things do not please and displease, what actions are, and what not to be
blamed. They may agree indeed in some certain general things, as that theft,
adultery, and the like are sins, as if they should say that all men account
those things evil to which they have given names which are usually taken in an
evil sense; but we demand not whether theft be a Sin, but what is to be
termed theft, and so concerning other in like manner, For as much therefore as
in so great a diversity of censurers, what is by reason blameable, is not to
be measured by the reason of one man more then another, because of the
equality of humane nature, and there are no other reasons in being, but only
those of particular men, and that of the City, it follows, that the City is to
determine what with reason is culpable: so as a fault, that is to say, a SIN,
is that, which a man does, omits, says, or wills, against the reason of the
City, that is, contrary to the Laws. The difference between a sin of
infirmity and malice.


XVIII. But a man may do somewhat against the Laws through humane infirmity,
although he desire to fulfill them, and yet his action as being against the
Laws, i^ rightly blamed, and called a Sin: But there are some, who neglect
the Laws, and as often as any hope of gain and impunity does appear to them, no
conscience of contracts and betrothed faith can withhold them from their
violation. Not only the deeds, but even the minds of these men are against the
Laws. They who sin only through infirmity, are good men even when they
sin; but these even when they do not sin, are wicked; for though both the
action, and the mind be repugnant to the Laws, yet those repugnancies are
distinguished by different appellations, for the irregularity of the action is
called (...), unjust deed; that of the mind (...), and (...), injustice, and
malice; that is, the infirmity of a disturbed soul, this the pravity of a
sober mind.

XIX. But seeing there is no sin which Under what kind of sin A^h^isme is
contained.
is not against some Law, and that there is no Law which is not the command of
him who has the supreme power, and that no man has a supreme power which is
not bestowed on him by our own consent; in what manner will he be said to
sin, who either denies that there is a God, or that he governs the world, or
casts any other reproach upon him? for he will say, that he never submitted his
will to Gods will, not conceiving him so much as to have any being. And
granting that his opinion were erroneous, and therefore also a sin, yet were it
to be numbered among those of imprudence or ignorance, which by right cannot be
punished. This speech seems so far forth to be admitted, that though this
kind of sin be the greatest and most hurtful, yet is it to be referred (*) to
sins of imprudence; but that it should be excused by imprudence or ignorance,
is absurd. For the Atheist is punished either immediately by God himself, or by
Kings constituted under God; not as a Subject is punished by a King, because he
keeps not the Laws, but as one enemy by another, because he would not accept
of the Laws; that is to say, by the Right of war, as the Giants warring
against God: For whosoever are not subject either to some common Lord, or one
to another, are enemies among themselves.

(Yet is it to be referred to sins of imprudence) Annotation.
Many find fault that I have referred Atheism to imprudence, and not to
injustice; yea by some it is taken so, as if I had not declared my self an
enemy bitter enough against Atheists: They object farther, that since I had
elsewhere said that it might be known there is a God, by natural reason, I
ought to have acknowledged that they sin at least against the Law of nature,
and therefore not only guilty of imprudence, but injustice too; but I am so
much an enemy to Atheists, that I have both diligently sought for, and
vehemently desired to find so ^e Law whereby I might condemn them of
injustice; but when I found none, I enquired next what name God himself did
give to men so detested by him. Now God speaks thus of the Atheist: The fool
has said in his heart, there is no God. Wherefore I placed their sin in that
rank which God himself referres to; next, I show them to be enemies of God.
But I conceive the name of an enemy to be sometimes somewhat sharper, then that
of an unjust man. Lastly, I affirm that they may under that notion be justly
punish both by God, and supreme Magistrates, and therefore by no means excuse
or extenuate this sin. Now that I have said that it might be known by
natural reason that there is a God, is so to be understood, not as if I had
meant that all men might know this, except they think that because Archimedes
by natural reason found out what proportion the circle has to the square, it
follows thence, that every one of the vulgar could have found out as much. I
say therefore, that although it may be known to some by the light of reason
that there is a God, yet men that are continually engaged in pleasures, or
se^king of riches and honor, also men that are not wont to reason aright, or
cannot do it, or ^are not to do it, lastly, fools, in which number are
Atheists, cannot know this.

XX. Seeing that from the virtue of the What the sin of Treason is.
Covenant whereby each Subject is tied to the other to perform absolute and
universal obedience (such as is defined above Chap. 6. art. 13.) to the City,
that is to say, to the Sovereign power, whether that be one man or Council,
there is an obligation derived to observe each one of the civil Laws, so that
that Covenant contains in it self all the Laws at once; it is manifest that the
subject who shall renounce the general Covenant of obedience, does at once
renounce all the Laws; which trespass is so much worse then any other one
sin, by how much to sin always, is worse then to sin once; And this is
that sin which is called TREASON; and it is a word or deed whereby the Citizen,
or Subject, declares that he will no longer obey that man or Court to whom the
supreme power of the City is entrusted, and the Subject declares this same will
of his by deed, when he either does, or endeavors to do violence to the
Sovereigns Person, or to them who execute his commands, of which sort are
Traitors, Regicides, and such as take up arms against the City, or during a
war, fly to the enemies side; and they show the same will in word, who
flatly deny that themselves or other subjects are tied to any such kind of
obedience, either in the whole, as he who should say that we must not obey him
(keeping the obedience which we owe to God entire) simply, absolutely, and
universally; or in part, as he who should say, that he had no Right to wage
war at his own will, to make Peace, list soldiers, levy moneys, electing
Magistrates, and public Ministers, enacting Laws, deciding controversies,
setting penalties, or doing ought else, without which the State cannot stand,
and these and the like words and deeds are Treason by the natural, not the
civil Law. But it may so happen, that some action which before the civil Law
was made, was not Treason, yet will become such, if it be done afterward. As
if it be declared by the Law, that it shall be accounted for a sign of
renouncing public obedience (that is to say for Treason) if any man shall
coin moneys, or forge the Privi^ Seal, he that after that Declaration shall
do this, will be no less guilty of Treason then the other, yet he sins
less, because he breaks not all the Laws at once, but one Law only; for the
Law by calling that Treason which by nature is not so, does indeed by Right set
a more odious name, and perhaps a more grievous punishment on the guilty
persons, but it makes not the sin it self more grievous.

XXI. But that sin which by the Law Treason breaks not the civil, but the
natural Law.
of nature is Treason, is a Transgression of the natural, not the civil Law,
for since our obligation to civil obedience, by virtue whereof the civil
Laws are valid, is before all civil Law, and the sin of Treason is naturally
nothing else but the breach of that obligation; it follows that by the sin of
Treason, that Law is broken which preceded the civil Law, to wit, the
natural, which forbids us to violate Covenants, and betrothed ^aith. But if
some Sovereign Prince should set sorth a Law on this manner, Thou shall not
rebel, he would effect just nothing: For except Subjects were before obliged
to obedience, that is to say, not to rebel, all Law is of no force; now the
obligation which obligetto what we were before obliged to, is superfluous.

XXII. Hence it follows, that Rebels, And therefore is punished not by the
Right of Sovereignty, but by the Right of War. Obedience not rightly
distinguished into Active and Passive.
Traitors, and all others convicted of Treason, are punished not by civil, but
natural Right, that is to say, not as civil Subjects, but as Enemies to the
Government, not by the Right of Sovereignty, and Dominion, but by the Right of
War.

XXIII. There are some who think that those acts which are done against the
Law, when the punishment is determined by the Law it self, are exp^ated, if
the punished willingly undergo the punishment; and that they are not guilty
before God of breaking the natural Law (although by breaking the civil Laws,
we break the natural too, which command us to keep the civil) who have
suffered the punishment which the Law required, as if by the Law, the fact were
not prohibited, but a punishment were set instead of a price, whereby a license
might be bought of doing what the Law forbids; by the same reason they might
infer too, that no transgression of the Law were a sin, but that every man
might enjoy the liberty which he has bought by his own peril. But we must
know that the words of the Law may be understood in a twofold sense, the one as
containing two parts (as has been declared above in the seventh Art.) namely,
that of absolutely prohibiting, as, Thou shall not do this; and revenging, as,
he that does this, shall be punished; The other, as containing a condition, for
example, Thou shall not do this thing, unless thou will suffer punishment;
and thus, the Law forbids not simply, but conditionally. If it be understood in
the first sense, he that does it, sins, because he does what the Law forbids to
be done, if in the second, he sins not, because he cannot be said to do what
is forbidden him, that performs the condition; For in the first sense, all men
are forbidden to do it; in the second, they only who keep themselves from the
punishment. In the first sense, the vindicative part of the Law obliges not
the guilty, but the Magistrate to require punishment; in the second, he
himself that owes the punishment is obliged to exact it, to the payment
whereof, if it be capital, or otherwise grievous, he cannot be obliged. But in
what sense the Law is to be taken, depends on the will of him who has the
Sovereignty. When there is therefore any doubt of the meaning of the Law, since
we are sure they sin not who do it not, it will be sin if we do it,
howsoever the Law may afterward be explained; for so to do that which a man
doubts whether it be a sin or not, when he has freedom to forbear it, is a
contempt of the Laws, and therefore by the 28. Art. of the third Chapter, a
sin against the Law of nature. Vain therefore is that same distinction of
obedience into Active and Passive, as if that could be expiated by penalties
constituted by humane decrees, which is a sin against the Law of nature,
which is the Law of God; or as ^though they sinned not, who sin at their own
peril.

Integer vitae sce^erisque pur^s
Non eget Mauri jaculis nec are^,
Nec venenatis gravida sagittis
Fusce pharetra.
Sive per Syrtes iter aestuosas,
Sive facturus per inhospital^
Caucasum, vel quae loca fabulosus
Lambit Hidaspis.


RELIGION.
CHAP. XV. Of the Kingdom of God, by Nature.
I. The Proposition of the following contents. II. Over whom God is said to
rule by nature. III. The word of God threefold; Reason, Revelation, Prophecy.
IV. The Kingdom of God twofold; Natural, and Prophetique. V. The Right
whereby God reigns, is seated in his omnipotence. VI. The same proved from
Scripture. VII. The obligation of yielding obedience to God, proceeds from
humane infirmity. VIII. The Laws of God in his natural Kingdom, are those
which are recited above in the 2. and 3. Chapter. IX. What Honor and Worship
is. X. Worship consists either in attributes, or in actions. XI And there is
one sort natural, another arbitrary. XII. One commanded, another voluntary.
XIII. What the end, or scope of worship is. XIV. What the natural Laws are,
concerning Gods attributes. XV. What the actions are, whereby naturally we do
give worship. XVI. In Gods natural Kingdom, the City may appoint what worship
of God it pleases. XVII. God ruling by nature only, the City, that is to say,
that man or Court who under God has the sovereign authority of the Cioy, is
the Interpreter of all the Laws. XVIII. Certain doubts removed. XIX. What Sin
is in the natural Kingdom of God; and what Treason against the divine Majesty.

I. WE have already in The Proposition of the following contents
the foregoing Chapters, proved both by reason, and testimonies of holy Writ,
that the estate of nature, that is to say, of absolute liberty, such as is
theirs, who neither govern, nor are governed, is an Anarchy, or hostile state;
that the precepts whereby to avoid this state, are the Laws of nature; that
there can be no civil government without a Sovereign; and that they who have
gotten this Sovereign command must be obeyed simply, that is to say, in all
things which repugne not the Commandments of God: There is this one thing only
wanting to the complete undestanding of all civil duty, and that is, to know
which are the Laws and Commandments of God; for else we cannot tell whether
that which the civil power commands us, be against the Laws of God, or not;
whence it must necessarily happen, that either by too much obedience to the
civil authority, we become stubborn against the divine Majesty; or for fear
of sinning against God, we run into disobeditnce against the civil power: To
avoid both these rocks, its necessary to know the Divine Laws; now because the
knowledge of the Laws, depends on the knowledge of the Kingdom, we must in
what follows, speak somewhat concerning the Kingdom of God.

II. The Lord is King, the earth may be Over whom God is said to reign.
glad thereof, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 97. v. 1. And again the same
Psalmist, Psalm. 99. v. 1. The Lord is King, be the People never so unpatient,
he s^teth between the Cherubins, ^e the Earth never* so unquiet, to wit,
whether men will, or not, God is THE King over all the Earth, nor is he moved
from his Throne, if there be any who deny either his existence, or his
providence. Now although God govern all men* so by his power, that none can
do any thing which he would not have done, yet this, to speak properly, and
accurately, is not to reign, for he is said to reign, who rules not by
acting, but speaking, that is to say, by precepts and threatenings; And
therefore we account not inanimate, nor irrational bodies, for Subjects in the
Kingdom of God, although they be subordinate to the Divine power; because they
understand not the commands, and threats of God; nor yet the Atheists, because
they believe not that there is a God, nor yet those who believing there is a
God; do not yet beleeeve that he rules these Inferior things; for even these,
although they be governed by the power of God, yet do they not acknowledge any
of his Commands, nor stand in awe of his threats. Those only therefore are
supposed to belong to Gods Kingdom, who acknowledge him to be the Governor of
all things, and that he has given his Commands to men, and appointed
punishments for the transgressors; The rest, we must not call Subjects, but
Enemies of God.

III. But none* are said to govern by commands, but they who openly declare
them The word of God three fold, Reason, Revelation, Prophesy.
to those who are governed by them, for the Commands of the Rulers are the
Laws of the Ruled, but laws they are not, if not perspicuously published, in
so much as all excuse of Ignorance may be taken away. Men indeed publish their
Laws by word or voice, neither can they make their will universally known any
other way; But Gods laws are declared after a threefold manner: first, by the
tacit dictates of Right reason, next, by immediate revelation, which is
supposed to be done either by a supernatural voice, or by a vision or drcame,
or divine inspiration: Thirdly, by the voice of one man whom God recommends to
the rest, as worthy of belief, by the working of ^rue miracles; Now he whole
voice* God thus makes use of to signify his will unto others, is called a
PROPHET. These three manners may be termed the threefold word of God, to wit
the Rational word, the sensible word, and the word of Prophecy: To which
answer, the three nanners whereby we are said to hear God, Right reasoning,
sense, and faith. Gods sensible word has come but to few; neither has God
spoken to men by Revelation except particularly to some, and to diverse
diversely; neither have any Laws of his Kingdom been published on this manner
unto any people.

IV. And according to the difference The Kingdom of God twofold: Natural and
Prophetique.
which is between the Rational word and the word of Prophecy, we attribute a
twofold Kingdom unto God: Natural, in which he reigns by the dictates of
right reason, and which is universal over all who acknowledge the Divine
power, by reason of that rational nature which is common to all; and
Prophetical, in which he rules also by the word of Prophecy, which is
peculiar, because he has not given positive Laws to all men, but to his
peculiar people, and some certain men elected by him.

V. God in his natural Kingdom has a The Rigbt whereby God governs is seated
in his omn p^te^^e.
Right to rule, and to punish those who break his Laws, from his sole
irresistible power; for all Right over others is either from nature, or from
Contract. How the Right of governing springs from Contract, we have already
showed in the 6. Chapter. And the same Right is derived from nature, in this
very thing, that it is not by nature taken away; for when by nature all men had
a Right over all things, every man had a Right of ruling over all as ancient as
nature it self; but the reason why this* was abolisht among men, was no other
but mutual fear, as has been declared above in the second Chapter, the 3.
art. reason namely dictating that they must foregoe that Right for the
preservation of mankind, because the equality of men among themselves
according to their strength and natural powers was necessarily accompanied
with war, and with war joins the destruction of mankind. Now if any man
had so far exceeded the rest in power, that all of them with joined forces
could not have resisted him, there had been no cause why he should part with
that Right which nature had given him; The Right therefore of Dominion over all
the rest, would have remained with him, by reason of that excess of power
whereby he could have preserved both himself and them. They therefore whose
power cannot be resisted, and by consequence God Almighty, derives his Right of
Sovereignty from the power i^ self. And as often as God punishes, or slayes a
sinner, although he therefore punish him because he sinned, yet may we not say
that he could not justly have punished or killed him although he had not sinned.
Neither, if the will of God in punishing, may perhaps have regard to some sin
antecedent, does it therefore follow, that the Right of afflicting, and
killing, depends not on divine power, but on ^si^s.

VI. That question made famous by The same proved from Scripture.
the disputations of the Ancients, why evil things befell the good, and good
things the evil, is the same with this of ours, by what Right God dispenses
good and evil things unto men, and with its difficulty, it not only staggers
the faith of the vulgar concerning the divine providence, but also of
Philosophers, and which is more, even of holy men. Psalm. 73. v. 1, 2, 3. Truly
God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart; but as for me, my
feet were almost gone, my steps bad well nigh slipped. And why? I was grieved at
the wicked, I do^ also see the ungodly in such prosperity. And how bitterly did
Job expostulate with God, that being just, he should yet be afflicted with so
many calamities? God himself with open voice resolved this difficulty in the
case of Job, and has confirmed his Right by arguments drawn not from Jobs
sin, but from his own power. For Job and his friends had argued so among
themselves, that they would needs make him guilty, because he was punished; and
he would reprove their accusation by arguments fetched from his own innocence:
But God when he had heard both him and them, refutes his expostulation, not by
condemning him of injustice, or any sin, but by declaring his own power, Job.
38. v. 4. Where wast thou (says he) when I laid the foundation of the earth,
etc. And for his friends, God pronounces himself angry against them, Job. 42.
v. 7. Because they had not spoken of him the thing that is right, like his
servant Job. Agreeable to this is that speech of our Saviors in the man's case
who was born blind, when, his Disciples asking him whether he or his Parents
had sinned, that he was born blind, he answered, John 9. v. 3. Neither has
this man sinned, nor his Parents, but that the works of God should be manifest
in him; for though it be said, Romans 5. 12. That death entered into the world by
sin, it follows not, but that God by his Right might have made men subject
to diseases, and death, although they had never sinned, even as he has made
the other animalls mortal, and sickly, although they cannot sin.

VII. Now if God have the Right of The obligation of yielding obedience unto
God, proceeds from humane infirmity.
Sovereignty from his power, it is manifest, that the obligation of yielding
him obedience lies on men by reason of their * weakness; for that obligation
which rises from Contract, of which we have spoken in the second Chapter, can
have no place here, where the Right of Ruling (no Covenant passing between)
rises only from nature. But there are two Species of natural obligation, one
when liberty is taken away by corporal impediments, according to which we say
that heaven and earth, and all Creatures, do obey the common Laws of their
Creation: The other when it is taken away by hope, or fear, according to which
the weaker despairing of his own power to resist, cannot but yield to the
stronger. From this last kind of obligation, that is to say from fear, or
conscience of our own weakness (in respect of the divine power) it comes to
pass, that we are obliged to obey God in his natural Kingdom; reason
dictating to all, acknowledging the divine power and providence, that there is
no kicking against the pricks.

(By reason of their weakness) If this shall seem hard to any man, I desire
him with a Annotation
silent thought to consider, if there were two Omnipotents, whether were bound
to obey; I believe he will confess that neither is bound: if this be true,
then it is also true what I have set down, that men are subject unto God
because they are not omnipotent. And truly our Savior admonishing Paul (who at
that time was an enemy to the Church) that he should not kick against the
pricks, seems to require obedience from him for this cause, because he had not
power enough to resist.

VIII. Because the word of God ruling by The Laws of God in his natural
Kingdom, are those which are above set down in the second and third Chapters.
nature only, is supposed to be nothing else but right reason, and the Laws of
Kings can be known by their word only, its manifest that the Laws of God ruling
by nature alone, are only the natural Laws, namely those which we have set
down in the second and third Chapters, and deduced from the dictates of reason,
Humility, Equity, Justice Mercy, and other Moral virtues befriending Peace,
which pertain to the discharge of the duties of men one toward the other, and
those which right reason shall dictate besides, concerning the honor and
worship of the Divine Majesty. We need not repeat what those Natural Laws, or
Moral virtues are, but we must see what honors, and what divine worship, that
is to say, what sacred Laws, the same natural reason does dictate.

IX. Honor, to speak properly, is nothing What honor and worship are.
else but an opinion of another power joined with goodness, and to honor a
man, is the same with highly esteeming him, and so honor is not in the Party
honored, but in the honourer; now three Passions do necessary follow honor
thus placed in opinion; Love, which referres to goodness; hope, and fear,
which regard power. And from these arise all outward actions, wherewith the
powerful are appeased, and become Propitious, and which are the effects, and
therefore also the natural signs of honor it self. But the word honor is
transferred also to those outward effects of honor, in which sense, we are
said to honor him, of whose power we testify our selves, either in word, or
deed, to have a very great respect; insomuch as honor is the same with worship
Now WORSHIP is an outward act, the sign of inward honor; and whom we endeavor
by our homage to appease, if they be angry, or howsoever to make them
favorable to us, we are said to worship.

X. A^l signs of the mind are either words Worship consists either in
attributes, or in actions.
or deeds, and therefore all worship consists either in words or deeds; now
both the one and the other are referred to three kinds; whereof the first is
Praise, or public declaration of goodness; The second, a public
declaration of present power, which is to magnify (...); The third, is a
public declaration of happiness, or of power, secure also for the future,
which is called (...). I say, that all kinds of honor may be discerned, not
in words only, but in deeds too; but we then praise, and celebrate in words,
when we do it by way of Proposition, or Dogmatically, that is to say by
Attributes, or Titles, which may be termed praising, and celebrating,
categorically, and plainly, as when we declare him whom we honor to be
liberal, strong, wise; And then, in deeds, when it is done by consequence, or
by hypothesis, or supposition, as by Thanksgiving, which supposes goodness;
or by Obedience, which supposes power; or by Congratulation, which supposes
happiness.

XI. Now whether we desire to praise a man And there is one sort natural, and
another arbitrary.
in words, or deeds, we shall find some things which signify honor with all
men, such as among attributes, are the general words of virtues and powers,
which cannot be taken in ill sense, As Good, Fair, Strong, Just, and the like;
and among actions, Obedience, Thanksgiving, Prayers, and others of that kind,
by which an acknowledgement of virtue and power is ever understood: Others,
which signify honor, but with some, and scorn with others, or else neither;
such as in Attributes, are those words which according to the diversity of
opinions, are diversely referred to virtues or vices, to honest or dishonest
things; As that a man slew his enemy, that he fled, that he is a Philosopher,
or an Orator, and the like, which with some are had in honor, with others in
contempt. In deeds, such as depend on the custom of the place, or
prescriptions of civil Laws, as in saluting to be bareheaded, to put off the
shoes, to bend the body; to petition for any thing standing, prostrate,
kneeling, forms of ceremony, and the like. Now that worship which is always,
and by all men accounted honorable, may be called Natural, the other, which
follows places, and customs, Arbitrary.

XII. Furthermore, worship may be enjoined, One commanded, another voluntary.
(...)
to wit by the command of him that is worshipped, and it may* be voluntary,
namely such as seems good to the worshipper: If it be enjoined, the actions
expressing it, do not signify honor, as they signify actions, but as they are
enjoined: for they signify obedience immediately, obedience power; insomuch as
worship enjoined consists in obedience, voluntary is honorable only in the
nature of the actions, which if they do signify honor to the bebolders, it is
worship, if not, it is Reproach. Again worship may be either public or
private, but public, respecting each single worshipper, may not be voluntary,
respecting the City it may; for seeing that which is done voluntarily, depends
on the will of the Doer, there would not one worship be given, but as many
worships as worshippers, except the will-of all men were united by the command,
of one; but Private worship may be voluntary, if it be done secretly, for what
is done openly is restrained, either by Laws, or through modesty, which is
contrary to the nature of a voluntary action.

XIII. Now that we may know what the scope and end of wopshipping others is, we
What the end or aim of worship i^.
must consider the cause why men delight in worship: And we must grant what we
have showed elsewhere, that Joy consists in this, that a man contemplate
virtue, strength, science, beauty, friends, or any power whatsoever, as being,
or as though it were his own, and it is nothing else but a Glory, or Triumph of
the mind conceiving it self honored, that is to say, loved and feared, that
is to say, having the services and assistances of men in readiness. Now
because men believe him to be powerful whom they see honored (that is to say)
esteemed powerful by others, it falls out that honor is increased by worship,
and by the opinion of power, true power is acquired; His end therefore who
either commands, or suffers himself to be worshipped, is, that by this meaus he
may acquire as many as he can, either through love, or fear, to be obedient
unto him.

XIV. But that we may understand what manner of Worship of God natural What
the natural Laws are concerning Gods attributes. (...)
reason does assign us, let us begin from his Attributes: where, first it is
manifest, that existence is to allowed him; for there can be no will to honor
him, who, we think, has no being. Next, those Philosophers who said, that God
was the World, or the worlds Soul, (that is to say, a part of it) spoke
unworthily of God, for they attribute nothing to him, but wholly deny his
being. For by the word God we understand the Worlds cause; but in saying that
the World is God, they say, that it has no cause, that is as much, as there is
no God. In like manner, they who maintain the world not to be created, but
eternal; because there can be no cause of an eternal thing, In denying the
world to have a Cause, they deny also that there is a God. They also have a
wretched apprehension of God, who imputing idleness to him, do take from him
the Government of the world, and of mankind; for say they should acknowledge
him omnipotent, yet if he mind not these inferior things, that same thread
bare Sentence will take place with them, Quod supra nos, nihil ad nos; What is
above us, does not concern us; and seeing there is nothing for which they
should either love, or fear him, truly he will be to them as though he were not
at all. Moreover in Attributes which signify Greatness, or Power, those which
signify some finite, or limited thing, are not signs at all of an honoring
mind: for we honor not God worrhily* if we ascribe less power, or greatness
to him then possible we can; but every finite thing is less then we can, for
most easily we may always assign and attribute more to a finite thing; No
shape therefore must be assigned to God, for all shape is finite; nor must he
be said to be conceived, or comprehended by imagination, or any other faculty
of our soul; for whatsoever we conceive is finite: And although this word
Infinite signify a conception of the mind, yet it follows not, that we have
any conception of an infinite thing: For when we say that a thing is infinite,
we signify nothing really, but the impotency in our own mind, as if we should
say we know not whether, or where it is limited: Neither speak they honorably
enough of God, who say we have an Idea of him in our mind; for an Idea is our
conception, but conception we have none, except of a finite thing: Nor they,
who say that he has Parts, or that he is some certain in^ire thing, which are
also attributes of finite things: Nor that he is in any place; for nothing can
be said to be in a place, but what has bounds and limits of its greatness on
all sides: Not that he is moved, or* is at rest; for either of them suppose a
being in some place: Nor that there are more Gods, because not more infinites.
Farther more concerning attributes of happiness, those are unworthy of God
which signify sorrow (unless they be taken not for any Passion, but by a
Me^onomy for the effect) such as Repentance, anger, Pity: Or Want, as Appetite,
Hope, Concupiscence, and that love which is also called lust, for they are
signs of Poverty, since it cannot be understood, that a man should desire,
hope, and wish for ought, but what he wants and stands in need of: Or any
Passive faculty; for suffering belongs to a limited power, and which depends
upon another. When we therefore attribute a will to God, it is not to be
conceived like unto ours, which is called a rational desire; for if God
desires, he wants, which for any man to say, is a con^lie; but we must suppose
some resemblance which we cannot conceive. In like manner when we attribute
fight and other acts of the senses to him, or knowledge, or understanding,
which in us are nothing else but a tumult of the mind raised from outward
objects pressing the Organes, we must not think that any such thing befalls
the Deity; for it is a sign of power depending upon some other, which is not
the most blessed thing. He therefore who would not ascribe any other titles to
God, then what reason commands, must use such as are either Negative, as
infinite, eternal; incomprehenfible, etc. or superlative, as most good, most
great, most powerful, etc. or Indefinite, as good, just, strong, Creat^ur,
King, and the like, in such sense, as not desiring to declare what he is (which
were to circumscribe him within the narrow limits of our fantasy) but to
confess his own admiration, and obedience, which is the property of humility,
and of a mind yielding all the honor it possibly can do. For Reason dictates
one name alone, which does signify the nature of God (i. e.) Existent, or
simply, that he is; and one in order to, and in relation to us, namely God,
under which i^ contained both King, and Lord, and Father.

XV. Concerning the outward actions What those actions are, whereby, naturally
we do give worship.
wherewith God is to be worshipped (as also concerning his Titles) its a most
general command of Reason, that they be s^gnes of a mind yielding honor;
under which are contained in the first place, Prayers. Qui fingi^ sacros ^uro,
vel (...) more vult^,
Non f^^it ille De^s, qui rog^t, ill^ f^cit.


For Prayers are the signs of hope, and hope is an acknowledgement of the
divine power, or goodness.

In the second place, Than^giving; which is a sign of the same* affection, but
that prayers go^ before the bene^it, and thanks follow it.

In the third, (...), that is to say oblations and sacrifices, for these are
thanksgivings.

In the fourth, not to s^re by any other; For a man's Oath* is an Imprecation of
his wrath against him if he deceive, who both knows whether he do, or not,
and can punish him if he do, though he be never so powerful* which only
belongs to God: for if there were any man from whom his subjects malice could
not lie hid, and whom no humane power could resist, plig^ted faith would
suffice without swearing, which, broken, might be punished by that Man; and for
this very reason (...) would be no need of an Oath.

In the fifth place, To speak w^^ily of God; for that is a sign of fear, and
fear is an acknowledgement of power. It follows from this precept: That we
may not take the name of God in vain, or use it rashly; for either are
inconsiderate. That we^ must not swear where there is no ^eed; for that is in
vain; but need there is none, unless it be between Cities to avoid or take
away contention by force, which necessarily must arise, where there is no faith
kept in pro^ses, or in a City, for the better certainty of Judicature. Also,
That we must not di^ute of the Divine ^ure: For it is supposed that all things
in the natural Kingdom of God are enquired into by reason only, that is to
say, out of the Principles of natural Science; but we are so far off by these
to attain to the knowledge of the nature of God, that we cannot so much as
reach to the full understanding of all the qua^^ties of our own bodies, or of
any other Creatures. Wherefore there comes nothing from these disputes, but a
rash imposition of names to the divine Majesty, according to the small measure
of our conceptions. It follows also (which belongs to the Right of Gods
Kingdom) that their speech, is inconsiderate, and rash, who say, That this, or
that, does not stand with divine justice; for even men count it an affront that
their children should dispute their Right, or measure their justice otherwise
then by the rule of their Commands.

In the sixth* Whatsoever is offered up in prayers, thanksgivings, and
sacrifices, must in its kind be the best, and most ^ning honor; namely,
Prayers must not be rash, or light, or vulga^, but beautiful, and well
composed.

For though it were absurd in the Heathen to worship God in an image, ye^ was
it not against reason to use Poetry, and Music, in their Churches.

Also Oblations must be clean, and Presents sumptuous and such as are
significative either of submission, or gratitude, or commemorative of benefits
received; for all these proceed from a desire of honoring.

In the seventh. That God must be worship^ not privately only, but openly, and
publicly in the sight of a^^ men; because that worship is so much more
acceptable, by how much it begets honor, and esteem in others (as has been
declared before in the 13. a^.) unless others therefore see it, that which is
most pleasing in our worship, vanishes.

In the last place That we use our best c^deavour to keep the Laws of Nature.
For the undervaluing of our Masters command, exceeds all other affronts
whatsoever; as on the other side, Obedience is more acceptable then all other
sacrifices. And these are principally the natural Laws concerning the worship
of God, those I mean which Reason dictates to every Man; but to whole C^es,
every one whereof is one Person, the same natural Reason farther command^ an
uniformity of public worship. For the actions done by particular Persons,
according to their private Reasons, are not* the Cities actions, and therefore
not the Cities worship; but what is done by the City, is understood to be done
by the command of of him, or them who have the Sovereignty, wherefore also
together with the consent of all the subjects, that is to say, Uniformly.

XVI. The natural Laws set down in In the natural kingdom of God the City
may appoint what worship it pleases.
the foregoing Article concerning the divine worship, only command the giving
of natural signs of honor; but we must consider that there are two kinds of
signs, the one natural, the other done upon agreement, o^ by express, or
tacit composition. Now because in every language, the use of words, and names,
come by appointment, it may also by appointment be altered; for that which
depends on, and derives its force from the will of men, can by the will of the
same men agreeing be changed again, or abolisht. Such names therefore as are
attributed to God by the appointment of men, can by the same appointment be
taken away; now what can be done by the appointment of men, that the City may
do; The City therefore by Right (that is to say, they who have the power of
the whole City) shall judge what names or appellations are more, what less
honorable for God, that is say, what doctrines are to be held and professed
concerning the nature of God, and his operations. Now actions do signify not
by men's appointment, but naturally, even as the effects are signs of their
causes, whereof some are always signs of scorn to them before whom they are
committed, as those, whereby the bodies uncleanness is discovered, and
whatsoever men are ashamed to do before those whom they respect; Others are
always signs of honor, as ^o draw near, and discourse decently and humbly,
to give way, or to yield in any matter of private benefit: In these actions the
City can after nothing, but there are infinite others, which, as much as
belongs to honor, or reproach, are indifferent; now these, by the institution
of the City, may both be made signs of honor, and being made so, do in very
deed become so. From whence we may understand, that we must obey the City in
whatsoever it shall command to be used for a sign of honoring God, that is to
say, for Worship; provided it can be instituted for a sign of honor, because
that is a sign of honor, which by the Cities command is used for such.

XVII. We have already declared which God ruling by nature only, the City,
that is say, that man or Court which under God has the Sovereignty, is the
Interpreter of all the Laws.
were the Laws of God, as well sacred as secular, in his government by the way
of Nature only. Now because there is no man but may be deceived in reasoning,
and that it so falls out, that men are of different opinions concerning the
most actions, it may be demanded farther, whom God would have to be the
Interpreter of right Reason, that is to say, of his Laws. And as for the
Secular Laws, I mean those which concern justice, and the carriage of men
toward men, by what has been said before of the constitution of a City, we
have demonstratively showed it agreeable to reason, that all Judicature belongs
to the City, and that Judicacature is nothing else but an Interpretation of the
Laws, and by consequence, that everywhere Cities, that is to say, those who
have, the Sovereign power, are the Interpreters of the Laws, As for the Sacred
Laws, we must consider what has been before demonstrated in the fifth Chap.
the 13. art. that every Subject has transferred as much right as he could on
him, or them, who had the supreme authority: but he could have transferred his
right of judging the manner how God is to be honored, and therefore also he
has done it; That he could, it appears hence, that the manner of honoring
God before the constitution of a City was to be fetched from every man's private
Reason; but every man can subject his private Reason to the Reason of the whole
City: Moreover, if each Man should follow his own reason in the worshipping of
God, in so great a diversity of worshippers, one would be apt to judge another
worship uncomely, or impious; neither would the one seem to the other to honor
God: Even that therefore which were most consonant to reason, would not be a
worship, because that the nature of worship consists in this, that it be the
sign of inward honor; but there is no sign but whereby somewhat becomes known
to others, and therefore is there no sign of honor but what seems so to
others; Again, that is a true sign which by the consent of men becomes a sign,
therefore also that is honorable, which by the consent of men, that is to say,
by the command of the City, becomes a sign of honor. It is not therefore
against the will of God, declared by the way of reason only, to give him such
signs of honor as the City shall command; wherefore Subjects can transfer
their Right of judging the manner of Gods worship on him or them who have the
Sovereign power; nay, they must do it, for else all manner of absurd opinions,
concerning the nature of God, and all ridiculous ceremonies which have been
used by any Nations, will be seen at once in the same City, whence it will
fall out, that every man will believe that all the rest do offer God an
affront; so that it cannot be truly said of any that he worships God; for no
man worships God, that is to say, honors him outwardly, but he who does those
things, whereby he appears to others for to honor him. It may therefore be
concluded, that the Interpretation of all Laws, as well Sacred, as Secular,
(God ruling by the way of nature only) depends on the authority of the City,
that is to say, that man, or council, to whom the Sovereign power is
committed, and that whatsoever God commands, he commands by his voice. And on
the other side, that whatsoever is commanded by them, both concerning the
manner of honoring God, and concerning secular assaires, is commanded by God
himself. Certain doubts removed.


XVIII. Against this, some Man may demand, first, Whether it does not follow,
that the City must be obeyed if it command us directly to affront God, or
forbid us to worship him? I say, it does not follow, neither must we obey; for
to affront, or not to worship at all, cannot by any Man be understood for a
manner of worshipping; neither also had any one, before the constitution of a
City, of those who acknowledge God to rule, a Right to deny him the honor
which was then due unto him; nor could he therefore rransfer a Right on the
City of commanding any such things. Next, if it be demanded whether the City
must be obeyed if it command somewhat to be said, or done, which is not a
disgrace to God directly, but from whence by reasoning disgraceful
consequences may be derived: as for example, if it were commanded to worship
God in an image, before those who account that honorable? Truly it is to be
(*) done. For Worship is instituted in sign of Honor, but to Worship him
thus, is a sign of honor, and increases Gods Honor among those who do so
account of it; Or if it be commanded to call God by a name which we know not
what it signifies, or how it can agree with this word, God? That also must be
done, for what we do for Honors sake, (and we know no better) if it be taken
for a sign of Honor, it is a sign of Honor, and therefore if we refuse to
do it, we refuse the enlarging of Gods Honor. The same judgment must be had
of all the Attributes and Actions about the merely rational Worship of God
which may be controverted, and dispu^ed; for though these kind of commands may
be sometimes contrary to right reason, and therefore sins in them who command
them, yet are they not against right reason, nor sins in Subjects, whose right
reason in points of Controversy is that, which submits its self to the reason
of the City. Lastly, if that Man, or Council, who has the Supreme Power,
command himself to be Worshipped with the same Attributes, and Actions, where
with God is to be Worshipped, the question is, whether we must obey? There are
many things which may be commonly attributed both to God, and Men; for even Men
may be Praised, and Magnified; and there are many actions whereby God, and Men,
may be Worshipped; But the significations of the Attributes, and Actions, are
only to be regarded: Those Attributes therefore, whereby we signify our selves
to be of an opinion, that there is any man endued with a Sovereignty
independent from God, or that he is immortal, or of in^inite power, and the
like, though commanded by Princes, yet must they be abstained from; as also
from those Actions signifying the same, as Prayer to the absent; to ask those
things which God alone can give, as Rain, and Fair weather; to offer him what
God can only accept, as Oblations, Holocausts; or to give a Worship, then
which a greater cannot be given, as Sacrifice; for these things seem* to tend
to this end, that God may not be thought to rule, contrary to what was supposed
from the beginning; but genuflection, prostration, or any other act of the body
whatsoever, may be lawfully used even in civil Worship; for they may signify
an acknowledgment of the civil power only; for Divine Worship is distinguished
from civil, not by the motion, placing, habit, or gesture of the Body, but by
the declaration of our opinion of him whom we do Worship* as if we cast down
our selves before any man, with intention of declaring by that Sign that we
esteem him as God, it is Divine Worship; if we do the same thing as a Sign
of our acknowledgment of the civil Power, it is civil Worship. Neither is the
Divine Worship distinguished from Civil by any action usually understood by by
the words (...) and (...) whereof the former marking out the Duty of Servants,
the latter their Destiny, they are words of the same action in degree.
Annotation*


Truly it is to be done] We said in the 14. Article of this Chapter, That they
who attributed limits to God, transgrest the natural Law concerning Gods
Worship* now they who worship him in an Image, assign him limits, wherefore
they do that which they ought not to do, and this place seems to contradict
the former. We must therefore know first, that they who are constrained by
Authority, do not set God any boonds, but they who command them; for they who
worship unwillingly, do worship in very deed, but they either stand or fall
there, where they are commanded to stand or fall by a lawful Sovereign;
Secondly, I say it must be done, not at all times, and every where, but on
supposition that there is no other rule of worshipping God beside the dictates
of humane reason; for then the will of the City stands for Reason: but in the
Kingdom of What is sin in the natural Kingdom of God, and what Treason
against the divine Majesty.
God by way of Covenant, whether old, or new, where idolatry is expressly
forbid, though the City commands us to worship thus, yet must we not do it;
which, if he shall consider, who conceived some repugnancy between this, and
the 14. Article, will surely cease to think so any longer.

XIX. From what has been said may be gathered, that God reigning by the way of
natural reason only, Subjects do sin, First, if they break the moral
Laws, which are unfolded in the second and third Chapters. Secondly, if they
break the Laws, or commands of the City in those things which pertain to
Justice. Thirdly, if they worship not God, (...). Fourthly, if they confess
not before men, both in words, and deeds, that there is one God most good, most
great, most blessed, the Supreme King of the World, and of all worldly Kings,
that is to say, if they do not worship God. This fourth sin in the natural
Kingdom of God, by what has been said in the foregoing Chapter, in the second
Article, is the sin of Treason against the Divine Majesty; for it is a
denying of the Divine Power, or Atheism; for sins proceed here, just as if
we should suppose some man to be the Sovereign King, who being himself absent,
should rule by his Viceroy, against whom sure they would transgress who
should not obey his Viceroy in all things, except he usurpt the Kingdom to
himself, or would give it to some other, but they who should so absolutely obey
him, as not to admit of this exception, might be said to be guilty of Treason.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Kingdom of God under the Old Covenant.
I. Superstition possessing Foreign Nations, God institued the true Religion by
the means of Abraham. II. By the Covenant between God and Adam, all dispute is
forbidden concerning the Commands of Sur^ours. III. The manner of the Covenant
between God and Abraham. IV. In that Covenant is contained an acknowledgement
of God, not simply, but of him who appeared unto Abraham. V. The Laws unto
which Abraham was tied, were no other beside those of Nature, and the Law of
Circumcision. VI. Abraham was the Interpreter of the Word of God, and of all
Laws among those that belonged to him. VII. Abraham's subjects could not sin
by obeying him. VIII. Gods Covenant with the Hebrews at Mount Sinai. IX. From
thence, Gods Government took the name of a Kingdom. X. What Laws were by God
given to the Jews. XI. What the Word of God is, and how to be known. XII. What
was held the written Word of God among the Jews. XIII. The power of
interpreting the Word of God, and the supreme civil power were united in
Moises while he lived. XIV. They were also united in the High Priest, during
the life of Joshuah. XV. They were united too in the High Priest until King
S^uls time. XVI. They were also united in the Kings until the captivity. XVII.
They were so in the High Priests after the captivity. XVIII. Denial of the
Divine Providence, and Idolatry, were the only Treasons against the Divine
Majesty among the Jews, in all things else they ought to obey their Princes.

I. MAnkind, from conscience of its own Superstition possessing foreign
Nations, God ^nstituted the true Religion by the means of Abraham.
weakness, and admiration of natural events, has this, that most men believe
God to be the invisible Maker of all invisible things, whom they also fear,
conceiving that they have not a sufficient protection in themselves; but the
imperfect use they had of their Reason, the violence of their Passions did so
clowd them, that they could no^ rightly worship him. Now the fear of invisible
things, when it is severed from right reason is superstition. It was therefore
almost impossible for men without the the special assistance of God to avoid
both Rocks of Atheism and Superstition: for this proceeds from fear without
right reason, that, from an opinion of right reason, without fear.

Idolatry therefore did easily fasten upon the greatest part of men, and almost
all nations did worship God in Images, and resemblances of finite things; and
they worshipped spirits, or vain visions, perhaps out of fear calling them
Devils. But it pleased the Divine Majesty (as we read it written in the sacred
history) out of all mankind to call forth Abraham, by whose means he might
bring men to the true worship of him, and to reveal himself supernaturally to
him, and to make that most famous Covenant with him and his seed, which is
called the old Covenant, or Testament; He therefore is the head of true
Religion; he was the first that after the Deluge taught, that there was one
God, the Creator of the Universe; And from him the Kingdom of God by way of
By the Covenant between God, and Adam, all dispute is forbidden concerning the
commands of superiors
Covenants, takes its beginning. Joseph. Antiq. Jews. lib. 1. cap. 7.

II. In the beginning of the world God reigned indeed, not only naturally, but
also by way of Covenant, over Adam, and Eve, so as it seems he would have no
obedience yielded to him, beside that which natural Reason should dictate; but
by the way of Covenant, that is to say, by the consent of men themselves. Now
because this Covenant was presently made void, nor ever after renewed, the
original of Gods Kingdom (which we treat of in this place) is not to be taken
thence. Yet this is to be noted by the way, that by that precept of not eating
of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil (whether the judicature of good
and evil, or the eating of the fruit of some tree were forbidden) God did
require a most simple obedience to his commands, without dispute whether that
were good, or evil, which was commanded; for the fruit of the tree, if the
Command be wanting, has nothing in its own nature, whereby the eating of it
could be morally evil, that is to say, a sin. The manner of the Covenant
between God and Abraham.


III. Now the Covenant between God and Abraham, was made in this manner. Genesis
17. v. 7, 8. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed
after thee in their generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto
thee, and to thy seed after thee. And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed
after thee, the Land wherein thou art a stranger, all the Land of Canaan, for
an everlasting possession, and I will be their God. Now it was necessary to
institute some sign whereby Abraham and his seed should retain the memory of
this Covenant; wherefore Circumcision was added to the Covenant, but yet as a
sign only. verse. 20. This is my Covenant which ye shall keep between me and
thee, and thy seed after thee, every man-child among you shall be circumcised,
and ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be a token of
the Covenant between me and you. It is therefore Covenanted,* that Abraham
shall acknowledge God to be his God, and the God of his seed, that is to say,
that he shall submit himself to be governed by him, and that God shall give
unto Abraham the inheritance of that Land wherein he then dwelt, but as a
Pilgrim, and that Abraham for a memorial sign of this Covenant, should take
care to see himself, and his male seed circumcised.

IV. But seeing that Abraham even before In that Covenant is contained an
acknowledgement of God, not simply, but of him who appeared unto Abraham.
the Covenant acknowledged God to be the Creator and King of the world, (for
he never doubted either of the being, or the Providence of God) how comes it
not to be superfluous, that God would purchase to himself with a price, and by
contract, an obedience which was due to him by nature, namely by promising
Abraham the Land of Canaan, upon condition that he would receive him for his
God, when by the Right of nature he was already so? By those words therefore,
To be a God unto thee and to thy seed after thee, we understand not that
Abraham satisfied this Covenant by a bare acknowledgement of the power, and
Dominion which God had naturally over men, that is to say, by acknowledging God
indefinitely, which belongs to natural reason, but he must definitely
acknowledge him, who said unto him, Genesis 12. v. 34. Get thee out of thy
Country, etc. Genesis 13. v. 14. Li^t up thine eyes. etc. who appeared unto him,
Genesis 18. v. 1. in the shape of three celestial men, and Genesis 15. v. 1. In a
vision; and verse. 13. In a dream, which is matter of faith. In what shape God
appeared unto Abraham, by what kind of sound he spoke to him, is not expressed,
yet it is plain that Abraham believed that voice to be the voice of God, and a
true Revelation; and would have all his to worship him, who had so spoken unto
him, for God the Creator of the world, and that his faith was grounded on
this, not that he believed God to have a being, or that he was true in his
promises, that which all men believe, but that he doub^ed not him to be God,
whose voice, and promises he had heard, and that the God of Abraham signified
not simply God, but that God which appeared unto him, even as the worship which
Abraham owed unto God in that notion, was not the worship of reason, but of
Religion, and Faith, and that, which not reason, but God had supernaturally
revealed.

V. But we read of no Laws given by God to Abraham, or by Abraham to his
family, The Laws to which Abraham was tied, were no other, but those of
nature, and that of Circumcision. Abraham among his own was the Interpreter of
the word of God, and of all Laws.
either then, or after, secular, or sacred (excepting the Commandment of
Circumcision, which is contained in the Covenant it self) whence it is
manifest, that there were no other Laws, or worship, which Abraham was obliged
to, but the Laws of nature, rational worship, and circumcision.

VI. Now Abraham was the Interpreter of all Laws, as well sacred as secular,
among those that belonged to him, not merely naturally, as using the Laws of
nature only, but even by the form of the Covenant it self, in which obedience
is promised by Abraham not for himself only, but for his seed also; which had
been in vain, except his children had been tied to obey his Commands: And how
can that be understood, which God says Genesis 18. verse. 18. 19. (All the Nations
of the earth shall be blessed in him; for I know him, that he will command his
children, and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord
to do justice, and judgment) unless his children and his household were
supposed to be obliged to yield obedience unto his Commands.

VII. Hence it follows, that Abraham's Abraham's subjects could not sin in
obeying him.
subjects could not sin in obeying him, provided that Abraham commanded them
not, to deny Gods Existence, or Providence, or to do somewhat expressly
contrary to the honor of God. In all other things, the word of God was to be
fetched from his lips only, as being the Interpreter of all the Laws, and words
of God. For Abraham alone could teach them who was the God of Abraham, and in
what manner he was to be worshipped. And they who after Abraham's death were
subject to the Sovereignty of Isaac or Jacob; did by the same reason obey them
in all things without sin, as long as they acknowledged, and professed the God of
Abraham to be their God; for they had submitted themselves to God simply,
before they did it to Abraham, and to Abraham before they did it to the God of
Abraham; again, to the God of Abraham before they did it to Isaac: In Abraham's
subjects therefore, To deny God was the only Treason against the Divine
Majesty, but in their posterity it was also Treason to deny the God of Abraham,
that is to say, to worship God otherwise then was instituted by Abraham, to
wit, in Images (*) made with hands, as other Nations did, which for that reason
were called Idolators. And hitherto subjects might easily enough discern what
was to be observed, what avoided in the Commands of their Princes.

[In Images made with hands] In the 15. Annotation
Chap. 14. Article, There we have showed such a kind of worship to be
irrational; but if it be done by the command of a City to whom the written
word of God is not known, nor received, we have then showed this worship in the
15. Chap. art. 18. to be rational. But where God reigns by way of Covenant, in
which it is expressly warned not to worship thus, as in the Covenant made with
Abraham, there, whether it be with, or without the Command of the City, it is
ill done.

VIII. To go on now, following the Gods Covenant with the Hebrews at Mount
Sinai.
guidance of the holy Scripture, The same Covenant was renewed, Genesis 26. verse.
3, 4. with Isaac, and Genesis 28. verse. 14. with Jacob, whote God styles himself
not simply God, whom nature does dictate him to be, but distinctly the God of
Abraham and Isaac, afterward being about to renew the same Covenant, by Moysos,
with the whole People of Israel, Exodus 3. v. 6. I am says h^ the God of thy
Father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Afterward
when that People, not only the freest, but also the greatest enemy to humane
subjection, by reason of the fresh memory of their Ae gyptian bondage, abode in
the wilderness near mount Si^ai, that anti^^t Covenant was propounded to them
all to be renewed in this manner, Exodus 19. ver. 5. Therefore if ye will obey
my voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, (to wit, that Covenant which was made
with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob) then shall ye be a peculiar Treasure unto me,
above all People; for all the earth is mine, and ye shall be to me a Kingdom
of Priests, and an holy Nation. And all the People answered together, and said,
All that the Lord has spoken, will we do, verse. 8.

IX. In this Covenant, among other things, we must consider well the
appellation From thence Gods government was called a Kingdom.
of Kingdom not used before; for although God both by nature and by Covenant
made with Abraham, was their King, yet owed they him an obedience and worship
only natural, as being his subjects; and religious such as Abraham instituted,
as being the Subjects of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, their natural Princes; For
they had received no word of God beside the natural word of right reason,
neither had any Covenant past between God and them, otherwise then as their
wills were included in the will of Abraham, as their Prince; But now by the
Covenant made at mount Sinai, the consent of each man being had, there becomes
an institutive Kingdom of God over them. That Kingdom of God so renowned in
Scriptures and writings of Divines, took its beginning from this time, and
hither tends that which God said to Samuel, when the Israelites asked a King,
1. Sam. 8. 7. Yhey have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I
should not reign over them; and that which Samuel told the Israelites, 1. Sam.
12. 12. Ye said unto me, nay, but a King shall reign over us, when the Lord
your God was your King, and that which is said, Jer. 31. verse. 31. I will make
a new Covenant, etc. Although I was an husband unto them; And the doctrine also
of Judas Galil^us, where mention is made in Joseph. Antiq. of the Jews, 18.
Book, 2. Chap. in these words. But Judas Galilaeus was the first author of
this fourth way of those who followed the study of wisdom. These agree in all
the rest with the Pharisees, excepting that they burn with a most constant
desire of liberty, believing God alone to be held for their Lord and Prince,
and will sooner endure even the most exquisite kinds of torments, together with
their kins folks, and dearest friends, then call any mortal man their Lord.

X. The Right of the Kingdom being What laws were by God given to the Jews.
thus constituted by way of Covenant, let us see in the next place, what laws
God propounded to them; now those are known to all, to wit, the Decalogue, and
those other, as well judicial as* ceremonial laws, which we find from the
20. Chap. of Exodus to the end of Deuteronomie, and the death of Moses. Now of
those laws delivered in general by the hand of Moses, some there are which
oblige naturally, being made by God, as the God of nature, and had their force
ever before Abraham's time; others there are which oblige by virtue of the
Covenant made with Abraham, being made by God as the God of Abraham, which had
their force even before Moses his time, by reason of the former Covenant; but
there are others which oblige by virtue of that Covenant only which was made
last with the people themselves, being made by God, as being the Peculiar King
of the Israelites. Of the first so^t are all the Precepts of the Decalogue
which pertain unto manners, such as, Honor thy Parents, thou shall not Kill,
thou shall not commit Adultery, thou shall not Steal, thou shall not ^eare
false witness, thou shall not Covet; For they are the Laws of n^e; Also the
precept of not taking Gods name in vain, for it is a part of natural worship,
as has been declared in the foregoing Chap. Art. 15. In like manner the
second Commandment of not worshipping by way of any Image made by themselves;
for this also is a part of natural Religion, as has been showed in the same
Article. Of the second sort is the first Commandment of the Decalogue, Of not
having any other Gods; for in that consists the essence of the Covenant made
with Abraham, by which God requires nothing else, but that he should be his
God, and the God of his seed: Also the Precept of keeping holy the Sabbath;
for the Sanctification of the seventh day is instituted in memorial of the six
days Creation, as appears out of these words, Exodus 31. ver. 16, 17. It is a
perpetual Covenant, (meaning the Sabbath) and a sign between me, and the
Children of Israel for ever, for in six days the Lord made Heaven, and Earth;
and on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed. Of the third kind are the
Politic, judicial and Ceremonial laws, which only belonged to the Jews.
The laws of the first and second sort written in Tables of stone, to wit the
Decalogue, was kept in the Ark it self. The rest written in the volume of the
whole Law, were laid up in the side of the Arc. Deuteronomy. 3. ver. 26 For these
retaining the faith of Abraham might be changed, those could not.

XI. All Gods Laws are Gods Word; but all Gods Word is not his Law. I am the
What the word of God is, and how to be known.
Lord the God which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, is the word of God
(...) is no Law: Neither is all that which for the better deolaring of Gods
Word is pronounced, or written together with it, instantly to be taken for Gods
Word: For, Thus says the Lord, is not the voice of God, but of the Preacher or
Prophet; All that, and only that, is the word of God which a true Prophet has
declared God to have spoken. Now the writings of the Prophets comprehendng as
well those things which God, as which the Prophet himself speaks, are
therefore called the word of God, because they contain the word of God. Now
because all that, and that alone, is the Word of God which is recommended to us
for such, by a true Prophet, it cannot be known what Gods Word is, before we
know who is the true Prophet; nor can we believe Gods Word, before we believe
the Prophet. Moses was believed by the People of Israel for two things, His
Miracles, and his Faith; for how great, and most evident Miracles soever he had
wrought, yet would they not have trusted him, at least he was not to have been
trusted, if he had called them out of Egypt to any other worship then the
worship of the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob their Fathers. For it had been
contrary to the Covenant made by themselves with God. In like manner two things
there are, to wit, supernatural Praediction of things to come, which is a
mighty miracle, and Faith in the God of Abraham their deliverer out of Egypt,
which* God proposed to all the Jews to be kept for marks of a true Prophet. He
that wants either of these is no Prophet, nor is it to be received for Gods
word which he obtrudes for such. If Faith be wanting, he is rejectin these
words, Deuteronomy. 13. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. If there arise among you a Prophet, or a
dreamer of dreams, and gives thee a sign, or a wonder, and the sign or the
wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, Let us go after
other Gods, etc. That Prophet, or that dreamer of dreams shall be put to
death. If Praediction of events be wanting, he is condemned by these, Deuteronomy. 18.
ver. 21, 22. And if thou say in thine heart, how shall we know the word which
the Lord has not spoken? When a Prophet speaks in the name of the Lord, if
the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which the Lord has
not spoken, but the Prophet has spoken it presumptuously. Now, that that is
the word of God which is published for such by a true Prophet, and that he was
held to be a true Prophet among the Jews, whose faith was true, and to whose
praedictions the events answered, is without controversy; but what it is to
follow other Gods, and whether the events which are affirmed to answer their
praedictions, do truly answer them, or not, may admit many controversies,
specially in praedictions which obscurely, and aenigmatically foretell the
Event such, as the praedictions of almost all the Prophets are, as who saw not
God apparently like unto Moses, but in dark speech^s, and in figures. Numb.
12. ver. 8. But of these we cannot judge otherwise then by the way of natural
reason; because that Judgment depends on the Prophets interpretation, and on
its proportion with the Event.

XII. The Jews did hold the book of What was held for the written word of God
among the Jews.
the whole Law which was called Deuteronomie, for the written word of God, and
that only, (forasmuch as can be collected out of sacred history) until the
Captivity, for this book was delivered by Moses himself to the Priests to be
kept, and laid up in the side of the Ark of the Covenant, and to be copyed out
by the Kings; and the same a long time after by the authority of King Josiah
acknowledged again for the Word of God. 2 Kings 23. ver. 2. But it is not
manifest when the rest of the books of the Old Testament were first received
into Canon, but what concerns the Prophets, Isaiah and the rest, since they
foretold no other things then what were to come to pass, either in or after
the Captivity, their writings could not at that time be held for Prophetique,
by reason of the Law cited above. Deuteronomy. 18. ver. 21, 22. Whereby the Israelites
were commanded not to account any man for a true Prophet but him whose
Prophecies were answered by the events; And hence peradventure it is that the
Jew^ esteemed the writings of those whom they slew when they Prophesied; for
Prophetique afterward, that is to say, for the word of God.

XIII. It being known what Laws The power of interpreting the word of God, and
^he supreme civil power were united in Moses while he lived.
there were under the old Covenant, and that Word of God received from the
beginning; we must farthermore consider with whom the authority of judging,
whether the writings of the Prophets arising afterward, were to be received for
the Word of God, that is to say, whether the Events did answer their
praedictions or not, and with whom also the authority of interpreting the Laws
already received, and the written Word of God, did reside; which thing is to be
trac't through all the times, and several changes of the Commonwealth of
Israel. But it is manifest that this power during the life of Moses, was
entirely in himself; for if he had not been the Interpreter of the Laws and
Word, that office must have belonged either to every private person, or to a
congregation, or Synagogue of many, or to the High Priest, or to other
Prophets. First, that that office belonged not to private men, or any
Congregation made of them, appears hence, that they were not admitted, nay
they were prohibited, with most heavy threats, to hear God speak, otherwise
then by the means of Moses; for it is written, Let not the Priests and the
people break through to come up unto the Lord, lest he break forth upon them.
So Moses went down unto the people, and spoke unto them. Exodus 19. 24, 25. It
is farther manifestly, and expressly declared, upon occasion given by the
Rebellion of Core, Dathan and Abiram, and the two hundred and fifty Princes of
the Assembly, that neither private men, nor the Congregation should pretend
that God had spoken by them, and by Consequence that they had the right of
interpreting Gods Word; for they contending, that God spoke no less by them
then by Moses, argu^ thus, Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the
Congregation are holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them; wherefore
then lift ye up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord? Numb. 16. ver.
3. But how God determined this controversy is easily understood by the 33. and
35. verses of the same Chapter, where Corah, Dathan, and Ahiram went down
alive into the Pit, and there came out fire from the Lord, and consumed the two
hundred and fifty men that offered Incense. Secondly, that Aaron the high
Priest had not this authority, is manifest by the like controversy between
him (together with his Sister Miriam) and Moses; For the Question was, whether
God spoke by Moses only, or by them also, that is to say, whether Moses
alone, or whether they also were interpreters of the Word of God. For thus they
said, Has the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses? Has he not also spoken by
us? Numb 12. ver. 2. But God reproved them, and made a distinction between
Moses and other Prophets, saying, If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord
will make my self known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a
dream: My Servant Moses is not so, etc. For with him will I speak mouth to
mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeche^, and the Similitude of the
Lord shall he behold, wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my
Servant Moses? Ibid. ver. 6, 7, 8. Lastly, that the interpretation of the Word
of God as long as Moses lived, belonged not to any other Prophets whatsoever,
is collected out of that place which we now cited concercerning his eminency
above all others, and out of natural reason, for as much as it belongs to the
same Prophet who brings the Commands of God to unfold them too; but there was
then no other Word of God, beside that which was declared by Moses; and out of
this also, that there was no other Prophet extant at that time, who Prophesied
to the people, excepting the 70. Elders who Prophesied by the Spirit of Moses;
and even that Joshu^h, who was then Moses his Servant, his successor
afterward, believed to be injuriously done, till he know it was by Moses his
Consent, which thing is manifest by Text of Scripture, And the Lord came down
in a clowd, etc. and took of the spirit that was upon Moses, and gave it unto
the 70. Elders. Numb. 11. ver. 25. Now after it was told that they Prophesied,
Joshuah said unto Moses, Forbid them my Lord: But Moses answered, Why enviest
thou for my sake? Seeing therefore Moses alone was the Messenger of Gods Word,
and that the authority of interpreting it pertain'd neither to private men, nor
to the Synagogue, nor to the High Priest, nor to other Prophets, it remains,
that Moses alone was the Interpreter of Gods Word, who also had the supreme
power in civil matters; and that the conventions of Corah with the rest of his
accomplices against Moses, and Aaron, and of Aaron with his Sister against
Moses, were raised, not for the salvation of their souls, but by reason of
their ambition, and desire of Dominion over the People.

XIV. In Joshuahs time the interpretation They were also united in the High
Priest during the life of Joshuah.
of the Laws, and of the Word of God, belonged to Ele^zar the High Priest, who
was also under God, their absolute King; which is collected first of all out of
the Covenant it self, in which the Commonwealth of Israel is called a
Priestly Kingdom, or as it is recited in the 1 Pet. 2. 9. A Royal Priesthood,
which could in no wise be said, unless by the institution and Covenant of the
People, the regal power were understood to belong to the High Priest. Neither
does this repugne what has been said before, where Moses, and not Aaren, had
the Kingdom under God; since it is necessary that when one man institutes the
form of a future Commonwealth, that one should govern the Kingdom which he
institutes, during his life, (whether it be Monarchy, Aristocraty, or
Democraty) and have all that power for the present, which he is bestowing on
others for the future; Now, that Eleazar the Priest, had not only the
Priesthood, but also the Sovereignty, is expressly set down in Joshuahs call
to the administration; for thus it is written. Take thee Joshuah the Son of
Nun, a man in whom is the Spirit, and lay thine hand upon him, and set him
before Eleazer the Priest, and before all the Congregation, and give him a
charge in their sight, and thou shall put some of thine honor upon him, that
all the Congregation of the Children of Israel may be obedient, and he shall
stand before Eleazar the Priest, who shall ask Counsel for him after the
judgment of Urim, before the Lord, at his word shall they go out, and at his
word shall they come in, and all the Children of Israel with him, even all the
Congregation. N^m. 27. v^r. 18, 19, 20, 21. where to ask Counsel of God for
whatsoever is to be done, (that is) to interpret Gods word, and in the name of
God to Command in all matters, belongs to Eleazar; and to go out, and to come
in at his word; that is to say, to obey, belongs both to Joshua^, and to all
the People. Its to be observed also, that that speech, Part of thy glory;
clearly denotes that Joshuah had not a power equal with that which Moses
had. In the mean time it is manifest, that even in Ioshuahs time, the Supreme
power and authority of interpreting the word of God, were both in one Person.

XV. After Ioshuahs death follow the times of the Judges until King Saul, in
They were also united in the High Priest, until King Saul's time.
which it is manifest that the right of the Kingdom instituted by God,
remained with the High Priest; for the Kingdom was by Covenant Priestly, that
is to say, Gods government by Priests; and such ought it to have been until
that form with Gods consent were changed by the people themselves, which was
not done, before that requiring a King God consented unto them, and said unto
Samuel, Hearken unto the voice of the people in all that they say unto thee;
for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me that I should not
reign over them. 1. Sam. 8. 7. The supreme civil power was therefore Rightly
due by Gods own institution to the High Priest; but actually that power was in
the Prophets, to whom (being raised by God in an extraordinary manner) the
Israelites (a people greedy of the Prophets) submitted themselves to be
protected, and judged, by reason of the great esteem they had of Prophecies;
The Reason of this thing, was, because that though penalties were set, and
Judges appointed in the institution of Gods priestly Kingdom, yet, the Right
of inflicting punishment, depended wholly on private judgment, and it belonged
to a dissolute multitude, and each single Person, to punish or not to punish
according as their private zeal should stir them up. And therefore Moses by
his own command punished no man with death; but when any man was to be put to
death, one or many stirred up the multitude against him or them, by divine
authority, and saying, Thus says the Lord. Now this was conformable to the
nature of Gods peculiar Kingdom. For there God reigns indeed where his Laws
are obeyed, not for fear of men, but for fear of himself; and truly, if men
were such as they should be, this were an excellent state of civil government,
but as men are, there is a coercive power (in which I comprehend both right and
might) necessary to rule them; and therefore also God from the beginning
prescribed Laws by Moses for the future Kings. Deuteronomy. 17. verse. 14. and Moses
foretold this in his last words to the people, saying, I know that after my
death ye will utterly corrupt your selves, and turn aside from the way that I
have commanded you, etc. Deuteronomy. 31. 29. when therefore according to this
prediction there arose another generation who knew not the Lord, nor yet the
works which he had done for Ispael, the children of Israel did evil in the
sight of the Lord, and served B^laam, Iud. 2. 10, 11. to wit, they cast off
Gods government, that is to say, that of the Priest, by whom God ruled, and
afterward, when they were overcome by their enemies, and oppressed with bondage,
they looked for Gods will, not at the hands of the Priest any more, but of the
Prophets. These therefore actually judged* Israel, but their obedience was
rightly due to the High Priest; Although therefore the Priestly Kingdom after
the death of Moses, and Ioshuah, was without power, yet was it not without
Right. Now that the interpretation of Gods word did belong to the same High
Priest, is manifest by this, That God, after the Tabernacle, and the Ark of the
Covenant was consecrated, spoke no more in mount; Sinai, but in the Tabernacle
of the Covenant, from the propitiatory which was between the Cherubims, whether
it was not lawful for any to aproach except the High Priest; If therefore
regard be had to the Right of the Kingdom, the supreme civil power, and the
authority of interpreting Gods word, were joined in the High Priest; If we
consider the fact, they were united in the Prophets who judged Israel; For as
Judges, they had the civil authority, as Prophets, they interpreted Gods word,
and thus every way hitherto these two powers continued inseparable.

XVI. Kings being once constituted, its They were united in the Kings until
the Captivity.
no doubt but the civil authority belonged to them, for the Kingdom of God by
the way of Priesthood, (God consenting to the request of the Israelites) was
ended, which Hierom also marks speaking of the books of Samuel, Samuel (says
he) Eli being dead, and Saul slain, declares the old Law abolisht; Furthermore
the Oaths of the new Priesthood, and new Sovereignty in Zadok, and David, do
testify* that the Right whereby the Kings did rule, was founded in the very
concession of the People. The Priest could* Rightly do whatsoever every man
could rightly do himself; for the Israelites granted him a Right to judge of
all things, and to wage war for all men; in which two are contained all Right
whatsoever can be conceived from man to man. Our King (say they) shall judge
us, and go out before us, and fight our battails, 1. Sam. 8. 20. Judicature
therefore belonged to the Kings, but to judge is nothing else then by
interpreting to apply the* facts to the Laws; to them therefore belonged the
interpretation of Laws too: and because there was no other written word of God
acknowledged beside the Law of Moses, until the Captivity, the authority, of
interpreting Gods word, did also belong to the Kings; Nay, forasmuch as the
word of God must be taken for a Law, if there had been another written word
beside the Mosaicall Law, seeing the interpretation of Laws belonged to the
Kings, the interpretation of it must also have belonged to them. When the book
of Deuteronomie (in which the whole Mosaicall Law was contained) being a long
time lost, was found again, the Priests indeed asked Counsel of God concerning
that book, but not by their own authority, but by the Commandment of Josiah,
and not immediately neither, but by the means of Holda the Prophetess; whence
it appears that the authority of admitting books for the word of God, belonged
not to the Priest; neither yet follows it that that authority belonged to the
Prophetess, because others did judge of the Prophets whether they were to be
held for true, or not; for to what end did God give signs, and tokens to all
the People, whereby the true Prophets might be discerned from the false,
namely, the event of predictions, and conformity with the Religion ^stablisht
by Moses, if they might not use those marks? The authority therefore of
admitting books for the word of God belonged to the King, and thus that book of
the Law was approved, and received again by the authority of King Josiah, as
appears by the fourth book of the Kings, 22. 23. Chap. where it is reported
that he gathered together all the several degrees of his Kingdom, the Elders,
Priests, Prophets, and all the people, and he read in their cares all the words
of the Covenant, that is to say, he caused that Covenant to be acknowledged for
the Mosaicall Covenant^, that is to say, for the word of God, and to be again
received, and confirmed by the Israclites; The civil power therefore, and the
power of discerning Gods word from the word of men, and of interpreting Gods
word even in the days of the Kings was wholly belonging to themselves.
Prophets were sent not with authority, but in the form, and by the Right of
Proclaimers, and Preachers, of whom the hearers did judge; and if perhaps these
were punished who did not listen to them plainly, teaching easy things, it does
not thence follow, that the Kings were obliged to follow all things which they
in Gods name did declare, were to be followed: for though Iosiab the good King
of Judah were slain because he obeyed not the word of the Lord from the mouth
of Neobo King of Egypt, that is to say, because he rejected good Counsel
though it seemed to come from an enemy, yet no man I hope will say that Josiah
was by any bond either of divine, or humane Laws obliged to believe Pharaoh
Neobo King of Egypt, because he said that God had spoken to him. But what some
man may object against Kings, that for want of learning, they are seldom able
enough to interpret those books of antiquity in the which Gods word is
contained, and that for this cause it is not reasonable that this office should
depend on their authority, he may object as much against the Priests, and all
mortal men, for they may err; and although Priests were better instructed in
nature, and arts then other men, yet Kings are able enough to appoint such
interpreters under them; and so, though Kings did not themselves interpret the
word of God; yet the office of interpreting them might depend on their
authority; and they who therefore refuse to yield up this authority to Kings,
because they cannot practice the office it self, do as much as if they should
say that the authority of teaching Geometry must not depend upon Kings, except
they themselves were Geometricians. We read that Kings have prayed for the
People, that they have blessed the people, that they have consecrated the Temple,
that they have commanded the Priests, that they have removed Priests from their
office, that they have constituted others: Sacrifices indeed they have not
offered, for that was hereditary to Aaron, and his sons; but it is manifest,
as in Moses his life time, so throughout all ages from King Saul to the
captivity of Babylon, that the Priesthood was not a Maistry, but a Ministry.

XVII. After their return from Babylonian The same were united in the Priests
after the Captivity.
bondage, the Covenant being renewed, and signed, the Priestly Kingdom was
restored to the same manner it was in from the death of Ioshuah to the
beginning of the Kings; excepting that it is not expressly set down that the
returned Jews did give up the Right of Sovereignty either to Esdras (by whose
directions they ordered their State) or to any other, beside God himself. That
reformation seems rather to be nothing else then the bare promises, and vows
of every man to observe those things which were written in the book of the
Law; notwithstanding, (perhaps not by the Peoples intention) by virtue of the
Covenant which they then renewed, (for the Covenant was the same with that
which was made at Mount Sinai) that same state was a Priestly Kingdom, that is
to say, the supreme civil authority, and the sacred were united in the
Priests; Now, howsoever through the ambition of those who strove for the
Priesthood, and by the interposition of foreign Princes, it was so troubled
till our Savior Jesus Christ's time, that it cannot be understood out of the
histories of those times, where that authority resided; yet it is plain, that
in those times, the power of interpreting Gods Word was not severed from the
supreme civil power.

XVIII. Out of all this, we may easily Among the Jews the denial of the
Divine providence, and Idolatry, were the only Treasons against the Divine
Majesty: in all other things they ought to obey their Princes.
know how the ^ewes in all times ^om Abraham unto Christ were to behave
themselves in the Commands of their Princes; for as in Kingdoms merely humane
men must obey a subordinate Magistrate in all things, excepting when his
Commands contain in them some Treason, so in the Kingdom of God the I^we^
were bound to obey their Princes, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, the Priest,
the King, every one du^ng their time in all things, except when their commands
did contain some treason against the Divine Majesty. Now treason against the
Divine Majesty was, first the denial of ^is divine providence, for this was to
deny God to be a King by nature; next, Idolatry, or the worship not of other
(for there is but one God) but of strange Gods, that is to say, a worship
though of one God, yet under other Titles, Attributes, and Rites, then what
were established by Abraham, and Moses, for this was to deny the God of Abraham
to be their King by Covenant made with Abraham, and themselves; in all other
things they were to obey; and if a King or Priest having the Sovereign
authority, had commanded somewhat else to be done which was against the Laws,
that had been his sin, and not his subjects, whose duty it is, not to
dispute, but to obey the Commands of his superiors.

Of the Kingdom of God by the new Covenant.
I. The Prophesies concerning Christ's Dignity. II. The Prophesies coneerning
his Humility and Passion. III. That Jesus was THAT CHRIST. IV. That the
Kingdom of God by the new Covenant, was not the Kingdom of Christ, as Christ,
but as God. V. That the Kingdom by the new Covenant is heavenly, and shall
begin from the day of Judgment. VI. That the government of Christ in this
world, was not a Sovereignty, but Counsel, or a government by the way of
doctrine, and persuasion. VII. What the promises of the new Covenant are, on
both parts. VIII. That no Laws are added by Christ, beside the institution of
the Sacraments. IX. Repent ye, be baptized, keep the Commandments, and the
like forms of speech, are not Laws. X. It pertains to the civil authority to
define what the sin of injustice is. XI. It pertains to the civil authority
to define what conduces to the Peace, and defense of the City. XII. It pertains
to the civil authority to judge (when need requires) what definitions, and
what inferences are true. XIII. It belongs to the Office of Christ to teach
morally, not by the way of speculation, but as a Law; to forgive sins; and to
teach all things whereof there is no science properly so called. XIV. A
distinction of things temporal from spiritual. XV. In how many seveverall
sorts the word of God may be taken. XVI. That all which is contained in holy
Scripture, belongs not to the Canon of Christian Faith. XVII. That the word of
a lawful Interpreter of holy Scriptures, is the word of God. XVIII. That the
authority of interpreting Scriptures, is the same with that of determining
controversies of Faith. XIX. Diverse significations of a Church. XX. What a
Church is to which we attribute Rights, Actions, and the like personal
Capacites. XXI. A Christian City is the same with a Christian Church. XXII.
Many Cities do not constitute one Church. XXIII. Who are Ecclesiastical
Persons. XXIV. That the Election of Ecclesiastical Persons, belongs to the
Church, their consecration to Pastors. XXV. That the power of remitting the
sins of the penitent, and retaining those of the impenitent, belongs to the
Pastors, but that of judging concerning repentance belongs to the Church. XXVI.
What Excommunication is, and on whom it cannot pass. XXVII. That the
Interpretation of Scripture depends on the authority of the City. XXVIII. That
a Christian city ought to interpret Scriptures by Ecclesiastical Pastors.

I. THere are many clear prophesies exta^t The Prophesies of Christ's dignity.
in the old Testament concerning our Savior Jesus Christ, who was to restore
the Kingdom of God by a new Covenan^, partly foretelling his regal Dignity,
partly his Humility and Passion. Among others concerning his Dignity, these;
God blessing Abraham, ^akes him a promise of his son Isaac, and ^ddes, And
Kings of People shall be of him, Gen 17. verse. 15. Jacob blessing his son
Judah* The Scepter (quoth be) shall not depart from Judah, Genesis 49. verse. 10.
G^d to Moses, A Prophet (says he) will I raise them up from among their
brethren like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak
unto them all that I shall command him, and it shall come to pass, that
whosoever will not bearken unto my words, which he shall speak in my name, I
will require it of him, Deuteronomy. 18. verse. 18. Isaias, The Lord himself shall
give thee a sign, Behold a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and shall
call his name Emanuel, Isai 7. v. 14. The same Prophet, Unto us a child is
born, unto us a Son is given, and the government shall he upon his shoulders;
and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the
Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, Isai 9. verse. 9. And again, There
shall come forth a Rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out
of his roots; the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, etc. he shall not
judge* after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his
cares, but with righteousness shall he judge the poor, etc. and he shall smite
the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he
slay the wicked, Isay 11. verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Furthermore in the 51, 52, 53,
54, 56, 60, 61, 62. Chapter of the same Isay, there is almost nothing else
contained but a description of the coming, and the works of Christ. Jeremias,
Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new Covenant with the
house of Israel, and with the house of Judah, Jerem. 31. 31. And Baruch, This
is our God. etc. Afterward did he show himself upon earth, and conversed with
men, Baruch 3. verse. 35, 37. Ezekiel, I will set up one Shepherd over them,
and he shall feed them, even my Servant David, And I will make with them a
Covenant of Peace, etc. Ezekiel. 24. verse. 2, 3, 25. Daniel, I saw in the night
visions, and behold one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven,
and came to the anti^ut of days, and they brought him near before him, and
there was given him Dominion, and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all People,
Nations, and Languages should serve him, his Dominion is an everlasting
Dominion, etc. Dan. 7. verse. 13, 14. Haggai, Yet once it is a little while, and
I will shake the Heaven, and the Earth, and the Sea, and the dry Land, and I
will shake all Nations, and the desire of all Nations shall come, Haggai 2. v.
8. Zachariah, Under the type of Joshuah the High Priest: I will bring forth my
servant the Branch, etc. Zach. 3. v. 8. And again, Behold the man whose name is
the Branch, Zach. 6. v. 12. And again, Rejoice greatly O Daughter of Sion,
Shout O Daughter of Jerusalem, behold thy King comes to thee, he is just,
having salvation, Zach 9. v. 9. The Jews moved by these, and other Prophesies,
expected Christ their King to be sent from God, who should redeem them, and
furthermore bear rule over all Nations. Yea this Prophecy had spread over the
whole Roman Empire (which Vespasian too, though falsely, interpreted in favor
of his own enterprises) That out of Judea should come he that should have
dominion.

II Now the Prophesies of Christ's Humility and Passion, amongst others are
these. Isa 53. The Prophesies of Christ's Humility and Passion.
v. 4 He has born our grieses, and carried our sorrows; yet we did esteem him
stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted, and by and by, He was appressed, he
was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; He is brought as a Lamb to the
slaughter, and as a sheep before her Shearer is dumb, so opened he not his
mouth, etc. verse. 7. And again, He was cut out of the Land of the living, for
the transgression of my People was be stricken, etc. verse. 8. Therefore will I
divide him a portion with the great, and be shall divide the spoil with the
strong, because he has poured ou^ hi^ soul unto death, and he was numbered
with the transgressors, and he (...) the sin of many, and made intercession
for the transgressors, verse. 12. And that of Zachery, He is lowly, riding upon
an Ass, and upon a Cols the foale of an Ass. Zach. 9. verse. 9.

III. In the reign of Ti^^rius Caesar, JESUS That Jesus was the Christ.
our Savior a Galil^^n began to preach, the son (as was supposed) of Joseph,
declaring to the people of the Jews, that the Kingdom of God expected by
them, was now come, and that himself was a King, that is to say, THE CHRIST:
Explaining the Law, choosing twelve Apostles, and seventy Disciples, after the
number of the Princes of the Tribes, and seventy Elders (according to the
pattern of Moses) to the Ministry; teaching the way of salvation by himself
and them; purging the Temple, doing great signs, and fulfilling all those
things which the Prophets had foretold of Christ to come, That this man, hated
of the Pharisees, (whose false doctrine and hypocritical sanctity he had
reproved) and by their means, of the People accused of unlawful seeking for
the Kingdom, and crucified, was the true CHRIST, and King promised by God, and
sent from his father to renew the new Covenant between them and God, both the
Evangelists do show (describing his Genealogy, nativity, life, doctrine,
death, and resurrection) and by comparing the things which he did, with those
which were foretold of him, all Christians do consent to.

IV. Now from this, That CHRIST That the Kingdom of God by the new Covenant was
not the Kingdom of Christ, as Christ, but as God.
was sent from God his Father to make a Covenant between him and the people, it
is manifest, that though Christ were equal to his Father according to his
nature, yet was he in^erior according to the Right of the Kingdom; for this
office to speak properly, was not that of a King, but of a Viceroy, such as
Moses his Government was; for the Kingdom was not his, but his Fathers; which
CHRIST himself signified when he was baptized as a subject, and openly
professed, when he taught his Disciples to pray, Our Father, Thy Kingdom come,
etc. And when he said, I will not drink of the blood of the grape, until that
day when I shall drink it new with you in the Kingdom of my Father, Mat. 26.
ve^^. 29. And Saint Paul. As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made
alive; but every man in his own order; Christ the first fruits* afterward they*
that are Christ's, who believed in his coming; Then comes the end when he shall
have d^livered up the Kingdom to Goa even his Father, etc. 1. Cor. 15. verse.
22, 23, 24. The same notwithstanding is also called the Kingdom of Christ: for
both the Mother of the sons of Ze^^die petitioned Christ, saying, Grant that
these my two sons may fit, the one on thy right hand, the other on thy left,
in thy Kingdom, Mat. 20. verse. 21. And the Thief on the Cross, Lord remember
when me thou come into thy Kingdom, Luke 23. verse. 42. And Saint Paul, For
this know ye, that no whormonger, etc. shall enter into the Kingdom of God,
and of Christ, Ephesians. 5. ver. 5. And elsewhere, I charge thee before God, and
the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and dead at his appearing, and
his Kingdom, etc. 2 Timothy 4. ver. 1. And the Lord shall deliver me from every
evil work, and will preserve me unto his heavenly Kingdom, ver. 18. Nor is
it to be marvelled at, that the same Kingdom is atttibured to them both, since
both the Father, and the Son, are the same God, and the new Covenant concerning
Gods Kingdom, is not propounded in the Name of the FATHER, but in the name of
the FATHER, of the SON, and of the HOLY GHOST, as of one God.

V. But the Kingdom of God, for restitution whereof CHRIST was sent That the
Kingdom of God by the (...) Covenant is heavenly, and begins from the day of
Judgment.
from God his Father, takes not its beginning before his second coming, to
wit, from the day of Judgment, when he shall come in Majesty accompanied with
his Angels: For it is promised the Apostles, that in the Kingdom of God, they
shall judge the twelve tribes of Israel. Ye which have followed me in the
regeneration, when the Soune of man shall sit in the Throne of his glory, ye
also shall sit upon twelve Thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel, Mat.
19. ver. 28. which is not to be done till the day of judgment; CHRIST
therefore is not yet in the throne of his Majesty, nor is that time when CHRIST
was conversant here in the world called a Kingdom, but a regeneration, that is
to say a renovation, or restitution of the Kingdom of God, and a calling of
them who were hereafter to be received into his Kingdom; And where it is said,
When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him,
then shall he set upon the throne of his glory, and before him shall be
gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as a
Shepherd divides his Sheep from the Goats, Mat. 25. ver* 31. We may
manifestly gather, that there will be no local separation of Gods Subjects
from his Enemies, but that they shall live mixed together until CHRIST'S second
coming; which is also confirmed by the comparison of the Kingdom of heaven,
with wheat mingled with Darnell, and with a net containing all sorts of fish:
But a multitude of men, Enemies and Subjects, living promis^uously together,
cannot properly be termed a Kingdom. Besides, the Apostles, when they asked our
Savior, Whether he would at that time when he ascended into heaven, restore
the Kingdom unto Israel? did openly testify, that they then, when CHRIST
ascended, thought the Kingdom of God not to be yet come. Farthermore, the
words of CHRIST, My Kingdom is not of this world; And, I will not drink, etc,
till the Kingdom of God come: And, God has not sent his Son into the World,
to judge the World, but that the World through him might be saved. And, If any
man hear not my words, and keep them, I judge him not; for I came not to
judge the World, but to save the World. And, Man, who made me a judge or
divider between you? And the very Appellation of the Kingdom of Heaven
testifies as much. The same thing is gathered out of the words of the Prophet
Jeremiah, speaking of the Kingdom of God by the new Covenant, They shall teach
no more every man his Neighbo^r, sayi^g, (...) the Lord, for they shall all k^
me (...) the least of them, to the greatest of the^, says the Lord, ^er. ^4.
which cannot be understood of a Kingdom in this World. The Kingdom of God
therefore, for the restoring whereof CHRIST came into the world, of which the
Prophets did Prophecy, and of which praying we say, Thy Kingdom come, (if it
must have Subjects locally separated from Enemies, if judicature, if Majesty,
according as has been foretold,) shall begin from that time, wherein God
shall separate the Sheep from the Goats, wherein the Apostles shall judge the
twelve Tribes of Israel; wherein CHRIST shall come in Majesty, and glory;
wherein lastly, all men shall so know God, that they shall not need to be
taught, that is to say, a^ CHRIST his second coming, or the day of Judgment;
But if the Kingdom of God were now already restored, no reason could be
rendered why CHRIST having completed the work for which he was sent, should
come again, or why we should pray, Thy Kingdom come.

V I. Now, although the Kingdom of The government of Christ in this world was
not a Sovereignty, but Counsel, or a government by way of doctrine, and
persuasion
God by CHRIST to be established with a new Covenant, were Heavenly, we must not
therefore think, that they, who believing in CHRIST would make that Covenant,
were not so to be governed here on the Earth too, as that they should persevere
in their faith, and obedience proms^'d by that Covenant. For in vain had the
Kingdom of heaven been promised, if we were not to have been led into it; but
none can be led, but those who are directed in the way. Moses, when he had
instituted the Priestly Kindome, himself though he were no Priest, yet ruled,
and conducted the People all the time of their P^reg^ination until their
entrance into the promised Land; In the same manner is it our Saviors office
(whom God in this thing would have like unto Moses) as he was sent from his
Father, so to govern the future Subjects of his heavenly Kingdom in this
life, that they might attain to, and enter into that, although the Kingdom
were not properly his, but his Fathers. But the government whereby CHRIST rules
the faithful ones in this life, is not properly a Kingdom, or Dominion, but a
Pastoral charge, or the Right of teaching, that is to say, God the father gave
him not a power to judge of Me^m and T^^m as he does to the Kings of the Earth;
no^ a Coercive power, nor legislative; but of showing to the world, and
teaching them the way, and knowledge of Salvation, that is to say, of
Preaching, and declaring what they were to do, who would enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. That CHRIST had received no power from his father to judge
in Questions of Me^m and T^um, that is to say, in all Questions of Right among
those who believed no^, those words above cited do sufficiently declare: Man,
who made me a judge, or divider between you? And it is confirmed by reason;
for seeing CHRIST was sent to make a Covenant between God and men, and no man
is ob^'d to perform obedience before the ^ontract be made, if he should have
judged (...) Questions of Right, no man h^d been ^ed to obey his sentence. But
that the dis^erning of Right was not committed to CHRIST in this world, neither
among the faithful, nor among infidels, is apparent in this, that that Right
without all controversy belongs to* Princes as long as it is not by God
himself derogated from their authority; But it is not derogated before the day
of Judgment, as appears by the words of Saint Paul, speaking of the day of
Judgment, Then comes the end when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to
God even the Father, when he shall have put down all rule, and all authority,
and power, 1 Cor. 15. ver. 24. Secondly, the words of our Savior reproving
Jamos, and John, when they had said, VVilt thou that we call for Fire from
Heaven, that it may consume them (namely the Samaritans, who had denied to
receive him going up to Jerusalem) and replying, The Son of Man is not come to
destroy souls, but to save them; And those words, Behold I send you as Sheep
among Wolves; Shake off the dust of your Feet, and the like; And those words,
God seut not his Son into the world, to judge the world, but that the world
through him might be saved; and those, If any man hear my words, and keep them
not, I judge him not, for I ca^e not to judge the world, etc. do all show,
that he had no power given him, to condemn or punish any man. We read indeed
that the Father judges no Man, but has committed all judgment to the Son,
but since that both may, and must be understood of the day of future judgment,
it does not at all repugne what has been said before. Lastly, that he was
not sent to make new Laws, and that therefore by his Office, and mission, he
was no Legislatour properly* so called, nor Moses neither, but a bringer and
Publisher of his Fathers Laws, (for God only, and neither Moses, nor CHRIST,
was a King by Covenant) is collected hence, that he said, I came not to
destroy (to wit the Laws before given from God by Moses, which he presently
interprets) but to fulfill; And, He that shall break one of the least of these
Commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called least in the Kingdom
of Heaven. CHRIST therefore had not a Royal, or Sovereign power committed to
him from his Father in this world, but consiliary, and doctrinal^ only; which
himself signifies, as well then when he calls his Apostles, not Hunters, but
Fishers of men; as when he compares the Kingdom of God to a grain of mustard
seed, and to a little Leaven hid in meal.

VII. God promised unto Abraham What the Promises of the new Covenant are on
both parts.
first, a numerous seed, the possession of the Land of Canaan, and a blessing
upon all Nations in his seed, on this Condition, that he, and his seed should
serve him; next unto the seed of Abraham according to the flesh, a Priestly
Kingdom, a Government most free, in which they were to ^e Subject to no humane
power, on this Condition, that they should serve the God of Abraham on that
fashion which Moses should teach. Lastly, both to them, and to all Nations, a
heavenly, and eternal Kingdom, on Condition that they should serve the God of
Abraham, on that manner which Christ should teach. For by the new, that is to
say, the Christian Covenant, it is covenanted on men's part, to serve the God of
Abraham, on that manner which JESUS should teach* On Gods part, to pardon their
(...), and bring them into his ^stiall Kingdom. We have already spoken of the
quality of the heavenly Kingdom above in the 5. Article; but it is usually
called, sometimes the Kingdom of Heaven, sometimes the Kingdom of Glory,
sometimes the life Eternal. What Is required on men's part, namely to serve God
as CHRIST should teach, contain^s two things, Obedience to be performed to God,
(for this is to serve God) and Faith in JESUS, to wit, That we believe JESUS TO
BE THAT CHRIST who was promised by God: for that only is the cause why his
Doctrine is to be followed, rather then any others. Now in holy Scriptures,
Rep^ntance is often put in stead of Obedience, because Christ teaches every
where, that with God the Will is taken for the de^d* but Repentance is an
infallible sign of an obedient mind. These things being understood, it will
most evidently appear out of many places of sacred Scripture, that those are
the Conditions of the Christian Covenant which we have named, to wit, giving
remission of sins, and eternal life on Gods part, and Repenting, and Believing
in JESUS CHRIST, on Men's part. First, the words, The Kingdom of God is at hand:
Repent ye and believe the Gospel, Mark 1. 15. contain the whole Covenant: In
like manner those, Thu^ it is written, and thus i^ (...) Christ to suffer, and
to rise from the dead the third day; and that repentance, and r^mission of
s^nne^ should be preached in his Name among all Nations, beginning a^ Jerusalem,
Luke 24. verse. 46, 47. And those* Repent and be converted, that your sin^ may
be: bl^tted ou^, when the timos of refreshing shall come, etc. Acts 3. verse.
19. And sometimes one part is expressly propounded, and the other understood, as
here, He that believes in the Son, has everlasting life; He that believes
not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him, John 3.
verse. 36. Where Faith is expressed, Repentance not mentioned; and in CHRIST'S
preaching, Repent, for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand, Mat. 4. 17. Where
Repentance is expressed, Faith is understood. But the parts of this new Contract
a^ most manifestly, and formally set down there, where a certain Ruler
bargaining as it were for the Kingdom of God, asks our Savior, Good Master,
what shall I do^ to inher it eternal life, Luke 18. v. 18. But CHRIST first
propounds one one part of the price, namely observation of the Commandments,
or obedience, which when he answered that he had kept, he adjoynes the other,
saying, Yet lackest thou one thing; Sell all that thou last, and distribute to
the poor, and thou shall have Treasune in Heaven, and come, follow me, v. 22.
This was matter of Faith. He therefore not giving sufficient credit to CHRIST,
and his heavenly Treasures, went away sorrowful. The same Covenant is
contained in these words: He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved,
he that believes not, shall be damned, Mark 16. verse. 15, 16. Where Faith is
expressed, Repentance is supposed in those that are baptized; and in these words,
Except a man be born again of water, and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, John 3. verse. 5. Where to be born of water, is the same
with regeneration, that is to say, Conversion to CHRIST. Now that Baptism is
required in the two places cited just before, and in diverse others, we must
understand, that what Circumcision was to the old Covenant, that Baptism is to
the new: Seeing therefore, that was not of the Essence, but served for a
memorial of the old Covenant, as a Ceremony or sign (and was omitted in the
wilderness) in like manner this also is used, not as pertaining to the
Essence, but in memory, and for a sign of the New Covenant which we make with
God; and provided the will be not wanting, the Act through necessity may be
omitted; but Repentance and Faith, which are of the Essence of the Covenant,
are always required. There are no Laws added by Christ, beside the
institution of the Sacraments.


VIII. In the Kingdom of God after this life there will be no Laws; partly
because there is no room for Laws, where there is none for sin; partly
because Laws were given us from God, not to direct us in Heaven, but unto
Heaven Let us now there fore enquire what Laws CHRIST) established not himself,
for he would not take upon him any Legislative authority, as has been declared
above in the sixth Article, but) propounded to us for his Fathers. We have a
place in Scripture, where he contracts all the Laws of God published till that
time, into two Preceps, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart,
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, this is the greatest, and first
Commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy Neighbo^r as
thy self. On these two Commandments hangs all the Law, and the Prophets, Mat.
22. verse. 37, 38, 39, 40. The first of these was given before by Moses in the
same words, Deuteronomy. 6. verse. 5. And the second even before Moses, for it is the
natural Law, having its beginning with rational nature it self; and both
together is the sum of all Laws: for all the Laws of divine natural
worship, are contained in these words, Thou shall love God; and all the Laws
of divine worship due by the old Covenant, in these words, Thou shall love thy
God, that is to say God, as being the peculiar King of Abraham, and his seed;
and all the Laws natural, and civil, in these words, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self; for he that loves God and his neighbor, has a mind
to obey all Laws, both divine, and humane. But God requires no more then a
mind to obey. We have another place, where CHRIST interprets the Laws,
namely, the ^ifth, sixth, and seventh entire Chapters of Saint Mutthewes
Gospel. But all those Laws are set down, either in the Decalogue, or in the
moral Law, or are contained in the faith of Abraham, as that Law of not
putting away a wife is contained in the faith of Abraham: for that same, Two
shall be one flesh, was not delivered either by CHRIST first, or by Moses, but
by Abraham, who first published the Creation of the world. The Laws therefore
which CHRIST contracts in one place, and explaines in another, are no other
then those to which all mortal men are obliged, who acknowledge the God of
Abraham. Beside these, we read not of any Law given by CHRIST, beside the
institution of the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Eucharist.

IX. What may be said then of these That these and the like forms, Repent, be
baptized, keep the Commandments, are not Laws.
kind of Precepts, Repent, Be Baptized, Keep the Commandments, Believe the
Gospel, Come unto me, S^ll all that thou have, give to the poor, follow me,
and the like? We must say that they are not Laws, but a calling of us to the
faith, such as is that of Isa* Come, buy wine, and milk without money, and
without Price, Isai 55. ve^s. 1. neither if they come not, do they therefore
sin against any Law, but against prudence only; neither shall their
infidelity be punished, but their former sins. Wherefore Saint John says of
the unbeleever, The wrath of God abides on him; he says not, The wrath of God
shall come upon him; And, He that believes not, is already judged; he says
not, shall be judged, but is already judged. Nay it cannot be well conceived,
that remission of sins should be a benefit arising from faith, unless we
understand also on the other side, that the punishment of sins is an hurt
proceeding from infidelity.

X. From hence, that our Savior has It belongs to the civil authority to
define what the sin of injustice is.
prescribed no distributive Laws, to the Subjects of Princes, and Citizens of
Cities, that is to say, has given no rules whereby a Subject may know, and
discern what is his own, what another man's, nor by what form^, words, or
circumstances, a thing must be given, delivered, invaded, possessed, that it may
be known ^y Right to belong to the Receiver, Invader, or Possessour, we must
necessarily understand that each single subject (not only with unbeleevers,
among whom CHRIST himself denied himself to be a judge and distributer, but
even with Christians) must take those rules from his City, that is to say, from
that Man, or Council, which has the supreme power; It follows therefore,
that by those Laws, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou
shall not steal^^, Honor thy Father and Mother, nothing else was commanded,
but that Subjects, and Citizens, should absolutely obey their Princes in all
questions concerning Meum and Tuum, their own and others Right; for by that
Precept, Thou shall not kill, all s^ughter is not prohibited; for he that said,
Thou shall not kill, said also, Whosoever does work upon the Sabbath, shall be
put to death, Exodus 35. verse. 2. No, nor yet all slaughter the cause not being
heard; for he said, Slay every man his Brother, and every man his Companion,
and overy man his Neighbor, Ex^. 32. v. 27. And there fell of the People about
three thousand men, v. 28. Nor yet all slaughter of an innocent Person; for
Iephte vowed, Whosoever comes forth, etc. I will offer him up for a burnt
offering unto the Lord, Jud. 11. verse. 31. and his vow was accepted of God.
What then is forbidden? Only this: that no man kill another, who has not a
Right to kill him, that is to say, that no man kill, unless it belong to him
to do so. The Law of CHRIST therefore concerning killing, and consequently all
manner of hurt done to any man, and what penalties are to be set, commands us
to obey the City only* In like manner, by that Precept, Thou shall not commit
adultery, all manner of Copulation is not forbidden, but only that of lying
with another man^ wife, but the judgment which is another man's wife, belongs to
the City, and is to be determined by the rules which the City prescribes: This
precept therefore commands both male and female to keep that faith entire which
they have mutually given, according to the statutes of the City. So also by the
precept, Thou shall not steal, all manner of invasion, or secret surreption is
not forbidden, but of another man's only: The subject therefore is commanded
this only, that he invade not, nor take away ought which the City prohibits to
be invaded or taken away; and universally not to call any thing murder,
adultery, or theft, but what is done contrary to the civil Laws. Lastly,
seeing CHRIST has commanded us to honor our Parents, and has not prescribed,
with what Rites, what appellations, and what manner of obedience they are to be
honored, it is to be supposed that they are to be honored with the will
indeed, and inwardly, as Kings and Lords over their Children, but outwardly,
not beyond the Cities permission, which shall assign to every man (as all
things else, so also) his honor; But since the nature of justice consists in
this, that every Man have his own given him, its mauifest, that it also belongs
to a Christian City to determine what is justice, what injustice, or a sin
against justice; Now what belongs to a City, that must be judged to belong to
him or them who have the Sovereign power of the City.

XI. Moreover, because our Savior It belongs to civil authority to define
what conduces to the Peace and safety of the City.
has not showed Subjects any other Laws for the government of a City beside
those of nature, that is to say, beside the Command of obedience, no Subject
can privately determine who is a public friend, who an enemy, when War,
when Peace, when Truce is to be made, nor yet what Subjects, what authority,
and of what men, are commodious, or prejudicial to the safety of the
Commonweal. These, and all like matters therefore are to be learned, if need
be, from the City, that is to say, from the Soneraign powers.

XII. Furthermore, all these things, to build Castles, Houses, Temples; to
move, It belongs to the civil authority to judge (when need requires) what
definitions and what inferences are true.
carry, take away mighty weights; to send securely over Seas; to contrive
engines, serving for all manner of uses; to be well acquainted with the face of
the whole world, the Courses of the Stars, the seasons of the year, the
accounts of the times, and the nature of all things; to understand perfectly
all natural and civil Rights; and all manner of of Sciences, which
(comprehended under the Title of Philosophy) are necessary partly to live,
partly to live well; I say, the understanding of these (because CHRIST has not
delivered it) is to be learnt from reasoning, that is to say by making
necessary consequences, having first taken the beginning from experience; but
men's reasonings are sometimes right, sometimes wrong, and consequently that
which is concluded, and held for a truth, is sometimes truth, sometimes error;
now, errors even about these Philosophical points do sometimes public
hurt, and give occasions of great seditions, and injuries: It is needful
therefore, as often as any controversy arises in these matters contrary to
public good, and common Peace, that there be some body to judge of the
reasoning, that is to say, whether that which is inferred, be rightly inferred
or not, that so the controversy may be ended; But there are no rules given by
CHRIST to this purpose, neither came he into the world to teach Logic. It
remains therefore that the Judges of such controversies be the same with those
whom God by nature had instituted before, namely those who in each City are
constituted by the Sovereign. Moreover, if a controversy be raised of the
accurate and proper signification (i. e.) the definition of those names or
appellations which are commonly used, in so much as it is needful for the
peace of the City, or the distribution of right, to be determined, the
determination will belong to the City; for men by reasoning do search out such
kind of definitions in their observation of diverse conceptions, for the
signification whereof, those appellations were used at diverse times, and for
diverse causes; but the decision of the question whether a man do reason
rightly, belongs to the City. For Example. If a woman bring forth a Child of an
unwonted shape, and the Law forbid to kill a man, the question is, whether the
Child be a man. It is demanded therefore what a man is. No man doubts, but the
City shall judge i^, and that without taking an account of Aristotle's
definition, that man is a rational Creature. And these things (namely Right,
Polity, and natural Sciences) are Subjects concerning which CHRIT denies that
it belongs to his Office to give any Praecepts, or teach any thing, beside this
only, that in all Controversies about them, every single Subject should obey
the Laws, and determinations of his City. Yet must we remember this, that the
same Christ as God could not only have taught, but also commanded what he
would. It belongs to the Office of Christ to teach morality, not as a
speculation, but as a Law; to forgive sins, and to teach all things whereof
there is no science properly so called.


XIII. The sum of our Saviors Office was to teach the way, and all the
means of Salvation, and aeternall life; but Justice and civil obedience, and
observation of all the natural Laws is one of the means to Salvation; now
these may be taught two ways; one, as Theorems by the way of natural reason,
by drawing Right and the natural Laws from humane Principles, and contracts;
and this Doctrine thus delivered is subject to the censure of civil powers:
The other, as Laws, by divine authority, in showing the will of God to be
such; and thus to teach, belongs only to him to whom the Will of God is
supernaturally known, that is to say, to Christ. Secondly, it belonged to the
Office of Christ to forgive sins to the Penitent, for that was necessary for
the Salvation of men who had already sinned; neither could it be done by any
other; for remission of sins follows not Repentance naturally, (as a Debt)
but it depends (as a free gift) on the will of God supernaturally to be
revealed. Thirdly, it belongs to the Office of Christ to reach all those
Commandments of God, whether concerning his worship, or those points of faith
which cannot be understood by natural reason, but only by revelation, of
which nature are those that he was the Christ; that his Kingdom was not
terrestrial, but celestial; that there are rewards, and punishments after
this life; that the soul is immortal; that there should be such, and so many
Sacraments, and the like.

XIV. From what has been said in A distinction of things temporal from
spiritual.
the foregoing Chapter, it is not hard to distinguish between things
Spiritual, and Temporal, for since by Spiritual, those things are
understood; which have their foundation on the authority, and Office of CHRIST,
and unless CHRIST had taught them, could not have been known, and all other
things are temporal, it follows, that the definition, and determination of
what is just, and unjust, the cognizance of all controversies about the means of
Peace, and public defense, and the Examiuation of doctrines, and books in all
manner of rational science, depends upon the temporal Right, but those which
are mysteries of faith, depending on CHRIT his word, and authority only, their
judgments belong to spiritual Right; But it is reasons inquisition, and
pertaines to temporal Right to define what is spiritual, and what temporal,
because our Savior has not made that distinction; For although Saint Paul in
many places distinguish between spiritual thiugs, and carnal things, and
calls those things spiritual, which are of the spirit, to wit, the word of
wisdom, the word of knowledge, says, the gift of healing, the working of
miracles, Prophecy, diverse kinds of tongues, interpretation of tongues, Romans
8. 5. 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9. All supernaturally inspired by the Holy Ghost, and such
as the carnal man understands not, but he only who has known the mind of
CHRIST, 2. Cor. 2. 14, 15, 16. And those things carnal which belong to worldly
wealth, Romans 15. 27. And the men carnal men, 1 Cor. 3. verse. 1, 2, 3. yet has
he not defined, nor given us any rules whereby we may know what proceeds from
natural reason, what from supernatural inspiration.

XV. Seeing therefore it is plain that our Savior has committed to, or rather
not The word of God many ways taken.
taken away from Princes, and those who in each City have obtained the
Sovereignty, the supreme authority of judging and determineing al manner of
controversies about temporal matters, we must see henceforth to whom he has
left the same authority in matters spiritual. Which because it cannot be
known, except it be out of the word of God, and the Tradition of the Church, we
must enquire in the next place what the word of God is, what to interpret it,
what a Church is, and what the will and command of the Church, To omit that the
word of God is in Scripture taken sometimes for the Son of God, it is used,
three manner of ways, First, most properly for that which God has spoken;
Thus whatsoever God spoke unto Abraham, the Patriar^hs, Moses, and the
Prophets, our Savior to his Disciples, or any others, is the word of God.
Secondly, whatsoever has been uttered by men on the motion, or by Command of
the Holy Ghost; in which sense we acknowledge the Scriptures to be the word of
God. Thirdly, in the New Testament indeed the word of God most frequently
signifies the Doctrine of the Gospel, or the word concerning God, or the word
of the Kingdom of God by CHRIST: as where it is said that CHRIST preached the
Gospel of the Kingdom, Mat. 4. verse. 23. Where the Apostles are said to
preach the word of God, Acts 13. verse. 46. Where the word of God is called the
word of life, Acts 5. verse. 20. The word of the Gospel, Acts 15. verse. 7. The
word of faith, Romans 10. verse. 8. The word of truth, that is to say, (adding an
interpretation) The Gospel of salvation, Ephesians. 1. 13. And where it is called the
word of the Apostles; For Saint Paul says, If any man obey not our word, etc.
2 Thessalonians. 3. verse. 14. which places cannot be otherwise meant then of the
doctrine Evang^licall. In like manner where the word of God is said to be
sown, to increase, and to be multiplied, Acts 12. verse. 24. and Chap. 13.
verse. 49. it is very hard to ceive this to be spoken of the voye^ of God, or of
his Apostles; but of their doctrine, easy. And in this third acception is all
that doctrine of the Christian faith which at this day is preached in Pulpi^s,
and contained in the hooks of divines, the word of God.

XVI. Now the sacred Seripture is All things contained in Scripture, belong not
to the Canon of christian faith.
entirely the word of God in this second acception, as being that which we
acknowledge to be inspired from God; and innumerable places of it, in the
first: and seeing the greatest part of it is conversant either in the
prediction of the Kingdom of Heaven, or in prefigurations before the
incarnation of CHRIST, or in Evangelization, and explication after, The sacred
Scripture is also the word of God, and therefore the Canon and Rule of all
Evangelicall Doctrine, in this third signification, where the word of God is
taken for the word concerning God, that is to say, for the Gospel. But because
in the same Scriptures we read many things Political, Historical, Moral,
Physical, and others which nothing at all concern the Myste^ies of our faith,
those places although they contain true doctrine, and are the Canon of such
kind of doctrines, yet can they not be the Canon of the Mysteries of Christian
Religion.

XVII. And truly it is not the dead The word of a lawful Interpreter of
Scriptures, is the word of God.
voice, or letter of the word of God, which is the Canon of Christian doctrine,
but a true and genui^e determination; For the mind is not governed by
Scriptures, unless they be understood. There is need therefore of an
Interpreter to make the Scriptures Canon, and hence follows one of these two
things, that either the word of the Interpreter is the word of God, or that the
Canon of Christian doctrine is not the word of God: The last of these must
necessarily be false; for the rule of that doctrine which cannot be known by
any humane reason, but by divine revelation only, cannot be less then divine;
for whom we acknowledge not to be able to discern whether some doctrine be true
or not, its impossible to account his opinion for a rule in the same doctrine.
The first therefore is true, That the word of an Interpreter of Scriptures, is
the word of God.

XVIII. Now that Interpreter whose The authority of interpreting Scriptures, is
the same with that of determining controversies of faith.
determination has the honor to be held for the word of God, is not every one
that translates the Scriptures out of the Hebrew, and Greek tongue, to his
Latin Auditors in Latin, to his French, in French, and to other Nations in
their mother tongue; for this is not to interpret. For such is the nature of
speech in general, that although it deserve the chief place among those
signs whereby we declare our conceptions to others, yet cannot it perform that
office alone without the help of many circumstances; For the living voice has
its interpreters present, to wit, time, place, countenance, gesture, the
Counsel of the Speaker, and himself unfolding his own meaning in other words
as often as need is. To recall these aids of interpretation, so much desired in
the writings of old time, is neither the part of an ordinary wit, nor yet of
the quaintest, without great learning, and very much skill in antiquity; It
suffices not therefore for interpretation of Scriptures, that a man understand
the language wherein they speak* Neither is every one an authentic
Interpreter of Scriptures, who writes Comments upon them: For men may err,
they may also either bend them to serve their own ambition, or even resisting.
draw them into bondage by their forestallings; whence it will follow that an
erroneous sentence must be held for the word of God. But although this could
not happen, yet as soon as these Commentators are departed, their Commentaries
will need explications, and in process of time, those explications,
expositions; those expositions new Commentaries without any end: so as there
cannot in any written Interpretation whatsoeve be a Canon, o^ Rule of Christian
doctrine, whereby the Controversies of Religion may be determined. It remains,
that there must be some Canonical Interpreter whose legitimate Office it is
to end Controversies begun, by explaining the word of God in the judgments
themselves, and whose authority therefore must be no less obeyed, then theirs
who first recommended the Scripture it self to us for a Canon of faith; and
that one, and the same Person be an Interpreter of Scripture, and a supreme
Judge of all manner of doctrines.

XIX. What concerns the word Ecclesia, or Church, originally it signifies the
Diverse significations of a Church.
same thing that Concio, or a congregation does in Latin; even as Ecclesiastes,
or Churchman, the same that concionator, or Preacher, that is to say, He who
speaks to the Congregation: In which sense we read in the Acts of the
Apostles, of a Church confused, and of a Lawful Church, Acts 19. verse. 32, 39.
That, taken for a Concourse of people meeting in way of tumult; this, for a
convocated Assembly. But in holy writ by a Church of Christians, is sometimes
understood the Assembly, and sometimes the Christians themselves, although not
actually assembled, if they be permitted to enter into the Congregation, and to
communicate with them. For example. Tell it to the Church, Mat. 18. verse. 17.
is meant of a Church assembled; for otherwise it is impossible to tell any
thing to the Church* But He laid waste the Church, Acts 8. verse. 3. is
understood of a Church not assembled. Sometimes a Church is taken for those who
are baptized, or for the professors of the Christian ^aith, whether they be
Christians inwardly, or feignedly, as when we read of somewhat said or writ^n
to the Church, or said or decreed, or done by the Church; sometimes for the
Elect only, as when it is called holy, and without blemish, Ephesians. 5. verse.
27. But the Elect, as they are militant, are not properly called a Church; for
they know not how to assemble, but they are a future Church, namely in that day
when severed from the reprobate, they shall be triumphant. Again a Church may
be ^ometimes taken (for all Christians collectively,) as when Christ is called
the head of his Church, and the head of his body the Church, Ephesians. 5. verse. 23.
Colos. 1. verse. 18. sometimes for its parts, as the Church of Ephesus, The
Church which is in his house, the seven Churches, etc. Lastly, a Church as it
is taken for a Company actually assembled, according to the diverse ends of
their meeting, signifies sometimes those who are met together to deliberate,
and judge, in which sense it is also called a Council, and a Synod; sometimes
those who meet together in the house of prayer to worship God, in which
signification it is taken in the 1 Cor. 14. verse. 4, 5. 23. 28. etc.

XX. Now a Church which has personal What a Church is to whom we attribute
Rights, actions, and the like appellations proper to a Person.
Rights, and proper actions attributed to it, and of which that same must
necessarily be understood, Tell it to the church, and, he that obeys not the
church, and all such like ^ormes of speech, is to be defined so, as by that
word may be understood, A Multitude of men who have made a new Covenant with
God in Christ, (that is to say, a multitude of them who have taken upon them
the Sacrament of Baptism) which multitude, may both lawfully be called
together by some one into one place, and he so calling them, are bound to be
present either in Person, or by others. For a multitude of men, if they cannot
meet in assembly, when need requires, is not to be called a Person; For a
Church can neither speak, nor discern, nor hear, but as it is a congregation.
Whatsoever is spoken by particular men, (to wit, as many opinions almost as
heads) that is the speech of one man, not of the Church; farthermore, if an
assembly be made, and it be unlawful, it shall be considered as ^^ll. Not any
one of these therefore who are present in a tumult shall be tied to the decree
of the rest, but specially if he dissent; and therefore neither can such a
Church make any decree; for then a multitude is said to decree somewhat, when
every man is obliged by the decree of the major part. We must therefore grant
to the definition of a Church (to whith we attribute things belonging to a
Person) not only a possibility of assembling, but also of doing it lawfully.
Besides, although there be some one who may lawfully call the rest together,
yet if they who are called may lawfully not appear (which may happen among men
who are not subject one to another) that same Church is not one Person. For by
what Right they, who being called to a certain time, and place, do meet
together, are one Church; by the same, others flocking to another place
appointed by them, are another Church. And every number of men of one opinion
is a Church, and by Consequence there will be as many Churches as there are
diverse opinions, that is to say, the same multitude of men will at once prove
to be one, and many Churches. Wherefore a Church is not one, except there be a
certain, and known, that is to say, a lawful power, by means whereof every
man may be obliged to be present in the Congregation, either himself in
person, or by Proxy; and that becomes One, and is capable of personal
functions, by the union of a lawful power of convocating Synods, and
assemblies of Christians; not by uniformity of Doctrine* and otherwise, it is a
multitude; and Persons in the plural, howsoever agreeing in opinions. A
Christ^ City is the same with a Christian Church.


XXI. It follows what has been already said by necessary connection, that a
City of Christian men, and a Church, is altogether the same thing, of the same
men, termed by two names, for two causes: For the matter of a City and a Church
is one, to wit the same Christian men. And the form which consists in a
Lawful power of assembling them is the same too; for it is manifest that every
Subject is obliged to come thither, whither he is summoned by his City. Now
that which is called a City, as it is made up of men, the same, as it consists
of Christians, is styled a Church.

XXII. This too is very cohaerent with Many Cities do^ not constitute one
church.
the same points, If there he many Christian Cities, they are not altogether
personally one church: they may indeed by mutual consent become one Church,
but no otherwise, then as they must also become one City; For they cannot
assemble but at some certain time, and to some place appointed. But Persons,
places, and times, belong to civil Right, neither can any Subject or stranger
lawfully set his foot on any place, but by the permission of the City, which is
Lord of the place. But the things which cannot lawfully be done but by the
permission of the City, those, if they be lawfully done, are done by the Cities
authority. The Universal church is indeed one mystical body, whereof CHRIST
is the head, but in the same manner, that all men together acknowledging God
for the Ruler of the world, are one Kingdom, and one C^ty, which
notwithstanding is neither one Person, nor has it one common action, or
determination. Farthermore where it is said that CHRIST is the head of his body
the Church, it manifestly appears, that that was spoken by the Apostle of the
Elect, who as long as they are in this world, are a Church only in potentia,
but shall not actually be so before they be separated from the reprobate, and
gathered together among themselves, in the day of Judgment. The Church of Rome
of old was very great, but she went not beyond the bounds of her Empire, and
therefore neither was she Universal, unless it were in that sense, wherein it
was also said of the City of Rome, Orbem jam totum victor Romanus habebat, when
as yet he had not the twentieth part of it. But after that the civil Empire
was divided into parts, the single Cities thence arising were so many Churches,
and that power which the Church of Rome had over them, might perhaps wholly
depend on the authority of those Churches, who having cast off the Emperors
were yet content to admit the Doctors of Rome.

XXIII. They may be called Churchmen Who are Clergymen.
who exercise a public office in the Church. But of offices there was one a
Ministry, another a Maistery; The office of the Ministers was to serve Tables,
to take care of the temporal goods of the Church, and to distribute (at that
time when all propriety of riches being abolisht, they were fed in common) to
each man his portion; The Masters according to their order, were called some
Apostles, some Bishops, some Presbyters, that is to say, Elders; yet not so, as
that by the name of Presbyter, the age, but the office might be d^stinguisht;
For Timothy was a Presbyter although a young man; but because for the most part
the Elders were received into the Maistership, the word, denoting age, was used
to signify the office. The same Masters, according to the diversity of their
employments were called some of them Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists,
some Pastors or Teachers. And the Apostolical work indeed was universal; the
Prophetical to declare their own revelations in the Church; the Evangelicall
to preach, or to be publishers of the Gospel among the infidels; that of the
Pastors to teach, confirm, and rule the minds of those who already believed.

XXIV. In the Election of Churchmen The Election of Churchmen belongs to the
Church, their consecration to the Pastors.
two things are to be considered, the Election of the Persons, and their
consecration, or institution, which also is called ordination. The first twelve
Apostles CHRIST himself both elected, and ordained. After CHRIST'S asc^nsion
Matthias was elected in the room of Judas the Traitor, the Church (which at
that time consisted of a Congregation of about one hundred and twenty men)
choosing two men: And they appointed two, Joseph and Matthias; but God himself
by lot approving of Ma^^ias. And Saint Paul calls these twelve the first, and
great Apostles, also the Apostles of the Circumcision. Afterward were added two
other Apostles, Paul, and Barnabas, ordained indeed by the Doctors, and
Prophets of the Church of A^h, (which was a particular Church) by the
imposition of hands, but elected by the command of the Holy Ghost. That they
were both Apostles is manifest in the 13. of the Acts v. 2, 3. That they
received their Apostleship from hence, namely because they were separated by
command of the spirit for the work of God, from the rest of the Prophets, and
Doctors of the Church of Antioch, Saint Paul himself shows, who calls
himself for distinctions sake an Apostle separated unto the Gospel of God,
Romans 1. ver. 1. But if it be demanded, further by what authority it came to
pass that that was received for the command of the Holy Ghost, which those
Prophets and Doctors did say proceeded from him, it must necessarily be
answered; by the Authority of the church of Antioch: for the Prophets and
Doctors must be examined by the Church before they be admitted; For Saint John
says, Believe not every Spitit, but try the Spirits, whether they are of God,
because many false Prophets are gone out into the world; but by what Church,
but that to which that Epistle was written? In like manner Saint Paul reprooves
the Churches of Galatia, because they Judaized, Gal. 2. v. ^4. although they
seemed to do so by the Authority of Peter, for when he had told them that he
had reprehended Peter himself with these words, If thou being a Jew, live
after the manner of Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compellest thou the
Gentiles to live as do^ the Jews? Not long after he questions them, saying,
This only would I learn of you: Received ye the Spirit by the works of the
Law, or by the hearing of faith? Gal. 3. ver^. Where it is evident, that it was
Judaisme which he reprehended the Galathians for, notwithstanding that the
Apostle Peter compelled them to Judaize. Seeing therefore it belonged to the
Church, and not to Peter, and therefore also not to any man, to determine what
Doctors they should follow, it also pertained to the authority of the Church of
Antioch to elect their Prophets and Doctors. Now because the Holy Ghost
separated to himself the Apostles Paul and Barnabas, by the imposition of hands
from Doctors thus elicted, its manifest, that imposition of hands, and
consecration, of the prime Doctors in each Church, belongs to the Doctors of
the same Church. But Bishops, who were also called Presbyters, although all
Presbyters were not Bishops, were ordained sometimes by Apostles (for Paul and
Barnabas when they had taught in Derbe, Lystra, and I^onium, ordained Elders in
every Church, Acts 14. v. 23.) sometimes by other Bishops, for Titus was by
Paul left in Crete, that he should ordain Elders in every City, Tit. 1. v. 5.
And Timothy was advised not to neglect the gift that was in him, which was
given him by Prophesy with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, 1.
Tim. 4. v. 14: And he had rules given him concerning the Election of
Presbyters. But that cannot be understood otherwise, then of the ordination of
those who were elected by the Church; for no man could constitute a Doctor in
the Church, but by the Churches permission. For the duty of the Apostles
themselves was not to command, but to teach; and although they who were
recommended by the Apostles, or Presbyters, were not rejected, for the esteem
that was had of the recommenders, yet seeing they could not be elected without
the will of the Church, they were also supposed elected by the authority of the
Church. In like manner Ministers, who are called Deacons, were ordained by the
Apostles; yet elected by the Church; for when the seven Deacons were to be
elected, and ordained, the Apostles elected them not, but look ye out, (say
they) among you Brethren seven men of honest report. etc. And they chose
Stephen, etc. And they set them before the Apostles, Acts 6. verse. 13. 6. It is
apparent therefore by the custom of the Primitive Church under the Apostles,
that the ordination, or consecration of all Churchmen, which is done by
prayer, and imposition of hands, belonged to the Apostles, and Doctors; but the
Election of those who were to be consecrated, to the Church.

XXV. Concerning the power of binding, The power of remitting sins to the
penitent, and retaining those of the impenitent, belongs to the Pastors, but
judgment of the repentance to the Church.
and loosing, that is to say of remitting, and retaining of sins, there is no
doubt, but it was given by Christ to the Pastors then yet for to come, in the
same manner as it was to the present Apostles: now the Apostles had all the
power of remitting of sins given them, which Christ himself had; As the Father
has sent me (says Christ) so send I you, John 20. verse. 21. and he adds,
Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted, and whose soever sins ye
retain, they are retained. verse. 23. But what binding and loosing, or remitting
and retaining of sins, is, admits of some scruple. For first, to retain his
sins who being baptized into remission of sins, is truly penitent, seems to
be against the very Covenant it self of the new Testament, and therefore could
not be done by Christ himself, much less by his Pastors, and to remit the
impenitent, seems to be against the will of God the Father, from whom Christ
was sent to convert the world, and to reduce men unto obedience; Furthermore,
if each Pastor had an authority granted him to remit and retain sins in this
manner, all awe of Princes, and civil Magistrates, together with all kind of
civil Government would be utterly destroyed. For Christ has said it* nay even
nature it self dictates, that we should not fear them who slay the body, but
cannot kill the soul, but rather fear him who can ca^t both soul and body
into hell, Mat. 10. verse. 28. Neither is any man so mad as not to choose to
yield obedience rather to them who can remit, and retain their sins, then to
the powerfullest Kings. Nor yet on the other side, it is to be imagined, that
remission of sins is nothing else but an exemption from Ecclesiastical
punishments; for what evil has excommunication in it, beside the eternal
pains which are consequent to it? or what benefit is it to be received into the
Church if there were salvation out of it? We must therefore hold, That Pastors
have power, truly, and absolutely to forgive sins, but, to the penitent, and
to retain them, but, of the impenitent. But while men think that to Repent, is
nothing else but that every one condemn his Actions, and change those Counsels
which to himself seem sinful, and blameable, there is an opinion risen, that
there may be repentance before any Confession of sins to men, and that
repentance is not an effect, but a cause of Confession, and thence, the
difficulty of those who say that the sins of the penitent are already forgiven
in Baptism, and theirs who repent not, cannot be forgiven at al, is against
Scripture, and contrary to the words of Christ, Whose soever sins ye remit*
etc. We must therefore ^o resolve this difficulty know in the first place, that
a true acknowledgement of sin is Repentance, for he that knows he has sinned,
knows he has erred, but to will an error is impossible, therefore he that
knows he has sinned, wishes he had not done it, which is to repent. Farther,
where it may be doubtful, whether that which is done be a sin or not, we must
consider, that repentance does not precede confession of sins, but is
subsequent to it: for there is no repentance but of sins acknowledged. The
penitent therefore must both acknowledge the fact, and know it to be a sin,
that is to say, against the Law. If a man therefore think, that what he has
done, is not against the Law; its impossible he should repent of it. Before
repentance therefore, its necessary there be an applicacation of the facts unto
the Law, but its in vain to apply, the facts unto the Law without an
Interpreter; for not the words of the Law, but the sentence of the Lawgiver is
the rule of men's actions; but surely either one man, or some men are the
Interpreters of the Law, for every man is not judge of his own fact whether it
be a sin or not, wherefore the fact of which we doubt whether it be a sin or
not, must be unfolded before some man or men, and the doing of this is
confession. Now when the Interpreter of the Law has judged the fact to be a
sin, if the sinner submit to his judgment, and resolve with himself not to
do so any more, it is repentance; and thus, either it is not true repentance, or
else it is not antecedent, but subsequent to confession. These things being
thus explained, it is not hard to understand what kind of power that of
binding and loosing is; for seeing in remission of sins there are two things
considerable, one the Judgment or Condemnation whereby the fact is judged to
be a sin; the other, (when the Party condemned does acquiesce, and obey the
sentence, that is to say, Repents) the remission of the sin, or, (if he
repent not) the Retention: The first of these, that is to say, the Judging
whether it be a sin or not, belongs to the Interpreter of the Law, that is,
the Sovereign Judge* the second, namely Remission, or retention of the sin,
to the Pastor, and it is that concerning which the power of binding and loosing
is conversant. And that this was the true meaning of our Savior Christ in the
institution of the same power, is apparent in the 18. of Mat. verse. 15, 16, 17,
18. thus, He there speaking to his Disciples, says. If thy Brother sin
against thee, go, and tell him his fault between thee and him alone, (where
we must observe by the way, that if thy Brother sin against thee, is the same
with, if he do thee injury; and therefore Christ spoke of those matters which
belonged to the civil Tribunal) he adds, if he hear thee not (that is to
say, if he deny that he has done it, or if having confessed the fact, he denies
it to be unjustly done) take with with thee yet one or two, and if he refuse to
hear them, tell it the Church. But why to the Church, except that she might
judge whether it were a sin or not? But if he refuse to hear the Church, that
is, if he do not submit to the Churches sentence, but shall maintain that to
be no sin, which She Judges to be a sin, that is to say, if he repent not
(for certain it is that no man repents himself of that action which She
conceives not to be a sin) he says not, Tell it to the Apostles, that we
might know that the definitive sentence in the question, whether it were a sin
or not, was not left unto them, but to the Church; but let him be unto thee
(says he) as an Heathen, or Publican, that is, as one out of the Church, as
one that is not baptized, that is to say, as one whose sins are retained. For
all Christians were baptized into remission of sins. But because it might
have been demanded who it was that had so great a power, as that of withholding
the benefit of Baptism from the impenitent, Christ shows that the same
Persons to whom he had given authority to baptize the penitent into the
remission of sins, and to make them of heathen men, Christians, had also
authority to retain their sins who by the Church should be adjudged to be
impenitent, and to make them of Christian men Heathens; and therefore presently
subjoynes, Verily I say unto you, Whose soever sins ye shall bind upon
Earth, they shall ^ee bound also in Heaven, and whose soever sins ye shall
loose upon Earth, they shall be ^oosed also in Heaven: Whence we may
understand, that the power of binding, and loosing, or of remitting, and
retaining of sins, which is called in another place, the power of the keys,
is not different from the power given in another place in these words, Go, and
teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28. ver. 19. And even as the Pastors cannot refuse
to Baptize him whom the Church judges worthy, so neither can they retain his
sins whom the Church holds fitting to be absolved, nor yet remit his sins
whom the Church pronounces disobedient. And it is the Churches part to judge
of the sin, the Pastors, to cast out, or to receive into the Church those
that are judged. Thus Saint Paul to the Church of Corinth, Do not ye judge,
says he, of those that are within? Yet he himself pronounced the sentence of
Excommunication against the incestuous Person, I indeed (says he) as absent in
body, but present in Spirit, etc.

XXVI. The act of retaining sins is What excommunication is, and on whom it
cannot pass.
that which is called by the Church Excommunication, and by Saint Paul,
delivering over to Satan, the word Excommunication, ^ounding the same with
(...), easting out of the Synagogue, seems to be borrowed from the Mosaicall
Law, wherein they who were by the Priest adjudged ^eprous, were commanded to be
kept a part out of the Camp, until by the judgment of the Priest they were
again pronounced clean, and by certain rights (among which the washing of
the body was one) were purified, Levit. 13. ver. 46. From hence in process of
time it became a custom of the Jews, not to receive those who passed from
Gentilisme to Judaisme, (supposing them to be unclean) unless they were first
washed, and those who dissented from the Doctrine of the Synagogue, they cast
out of the Synagogue; By resemblance of this custom, those that came to
Christianity, (whether ^hey were Jews, or Gentiles) were not received into the
Church without Baptism; and those that dissented from the Church were deprived
of the Churches Communion. Now, they were therefore said to be delivered over
to Satan, because all that was out of the Church, was comprehended within his
Kingdom The end of this kind of Discipline was, that being destitute for a
time of the grace* and spiritual privileges of the Church, they might be
humbled to salvation; but the effect in regard of secular matters, that being
excommunicated, they should not only be prohibited all Congregations, or
Churches, and the participation of the mysteries, but as heing contagious they
should be avoided by all other Christians, even more then Heathen: for the
Apostle allowed to accompany with Heathen, but with these not so much as to
eat, 1 Cor. 5. ver. 10, 11. Seeing then the effect of Excommunication is such,
it is manifest in the first place, that a Christian city cannot be
excommunicated, for a Christian City is a Christian Church, as has been
declared above in the 21. Art. and of the same extension; but a Church cannot
be excommunicated; For either she must excommunicate her self, which is
impossible; or she must be excommunicated by some other Church, and this,
either universal, or particular. But seeing an Universal Church is no Person,
(as has been proved in the 22. Artic.) and therefore neither acts, nor does
any thing, it cannot excommunicate any man; and a particular church by
excommunicating another Church does nothing; for where there is not one common
Congregation, there cannot be any Excommunication. Neither if some one Church
(suppose that of Jerusalem) should have excommunicated an other (suppose that
of Rome) would it any more have excommunicated this, then her self: for he
that deprives another of his Communion, deprives himself also of the Communion
of that other. Secondly, No man can excommunicate the subjects of any absolute
government all at once, or forbid them the use of their Temples, or their
public worship of God; for they cannot be excommunicated by a Church which
themselves do constitute; for if they could, there would not only not remain
a Church, but not so much as a commonweal, and they would be dissolved of
themselves; and this were not to be excommunicated, or prohibited: but if they
be excommunicated by some other Church, that church is to esteem them as
Heathen; but no christian Church by the doctrine of Christ, can forbid the
Heathen to gather together, and Communicate among themselves, as it shall seem
good to their Cities, especially if they meet to worship Christ, although it be
done in a singular custom, and manner: therefore also not the excommunicated,
who are to be dealt with as Heathen. Thirdly, a Prince who has the Sovereign
power, cannot be excommunicated; for by the doctrine of Christ, neither one,
nor many subjects together can in^erdict their Prince any public, or private
places, or deny him entrance into any Assembly whatsoever, or prohibit him the
doing of what he will within his own jurisdiction; for it is Treason among all
Cities, ^o^any one, or many subjects jointly to arrogate to themselves any
authority over the whole City; but they who arroga^e to themselves an authority
over him who has the supreme power of the City, do arrogate the same
authority over the City it self. Besides, a Sovereign Prince, if he be a
Christian, has this farther advantage, that the City whose Will is contained
in His, is that very thing which we call a Church; the Church therefore
excommunicates no man, but whom it excommunicates by the authrity of the
Prince: but the Prince excommunicates not himself, his subjects therefore
cannot do it. It may be indeed that an Assembly of rebellious Citizens or
Traitors* may pronounce the sentence of excommunication against their Prince,
but not by Right. Much less can one Prince be excommunicated by another, for
this would prove not an excommunication, but a provocation to War by the way
of affront: For since that is not one church which is made up of Citizens
belonging to two absolute Cities, for want of power of lawfully assembling
them, (as has been declared before in the 22* Art.) they who are of one Church
are not bound to obey an other, and therefore cannot be excommunicated for
their disobedience. Now, what some may say, that Princes, being they are
members of the Universal church, may also by the authority of the Universal
church be excommunicated, signifies nothing: because the Universal church (as
has been showed in the 22. Art.) is not one Person, of whom it may be said
that she acted, decreed, determined excommunicated, absolved, and the like
personal attributes, neither has she any Governor upon Earth at whose
command she may assemble, and deliberate: For to be guide of the Universal
church, and to have the power of assembling her, is the same thing as to be
Governor* and Lord over all the Christians in the world, which is granted to
none, but God only.

XXVII. It has been showed above The interpretation of Scripture depends on
the authority of the Ci^y.
in the 18. Art. that the authority of interpreting the Holy Scriptures
consisted not in this, that the interpreter might without punishment, expound,
and explicate his sentence and opinion taken thence, unto others, either by*
writing, or by his own voice; but, that others have a not Right to do, or
teach ought contrary to his sentence; insomuch as the interpretation we speak
of is the same with the power of defining in all manner of controversies to be
determined by sacred Scriptures: Now we must show that that power belongs to
each Church, and depends on his, or their authority who have the Supreme
command, provided that they be Christians; for if it depend not on the civil
authority, it must either depend on the opinion of each private Subject, or
some foreign authority; but among other reasons, the inconveniences that
must follow private opinions cannot suffer its dependence on them; of which
this is the chief, that not only all civil obedience would be taken away
(contrary to Christ his praecept) but all humane society and peace would be
dissolved (contrary to the Laws of nature;) for seeing every man is his own
interpretet of Scripture, that is to say, since every man makes himself judge
of what is pleasing and displeasing unto God, they cannot obey their Princes
before that they have judged whether their commands be conformable to the Word
of God, or not; And thus either they obey not, or they obey for their own
opinions sake, that is to say, they obey themselves, not their Sovereign;
civil obedience therefore is lost. Again, when every man follows his own
opinion, it is necessary that the controversies which rise among them will
become innumerable, and indeterminable; whence there will breed among men (who
by their own natural inclinations do account all dissension an affront) first
hatred, then brawles and wars, and thus all manner of peace and society would
vanish. We have farthermore for an example, that which God under the old Law
required to be observed concerning the book of the Law, namely, that it should
be transcribed, and publicly used, and he would have it to be the Canon of
Divine doctrine, but the controversies about it not to be determined by private
Persons, but only by the Priests. Lastly, it is our Saviors Prec^pt, that if
there be any matter of offense between private Persons, they should hea^ the
Church. Wherefore it is the Churches duty to define controversies, it therefore
belongs not to private men, but to the Church, to interpret Scriptures. But
that we may know that the authority of interpreting Gods Word, that is to say,
of determining all questions concerning God, and Religion, belongs not to any
foreign Person whatsoever, we must consider first what esteem such a power
carries in the minds of the subjects, and their civil actions: for no man can
be ignorant that the voluntary actions of men by a natural necessity, do
follow those opinions which they have concerning good, and evil, Reward, and
Punishment; whence it happens that necessarily they would choose rather to obey
those by whose judgment they believe that they shall be eternally happy, or
miserable. Now, by whose judgment it is appointed what Doctrines are necessary
to salvation, by their judgment do men expect their eternal bliss, or
perditidition; they will therefore yield them obedience in all things. Which
being thus, most manifest it is that those subjects who believe themselves
bound to acquiesce to a foreign authority in those Doctrines which are
necessary to salvation, do not per se constitute a City, but are the subjects
of that foreign power. Nor therefore although some Sovereign Prince should by
writing grant such an authority to any other, yet so, as he would be understood
to have retained the civil power in his own hands, shall such a Writing be
valid, or transfer ought necessary for the retaining, o^ good administration
of his command; for by the 2. Chap. 4. art^^. no man is said to transfer his
Right, unless be give some proper sign, declaring his Will to transfer it;
but he who has openly declared his will to keep his Sovereignty, cannot have
given a sufficient sign of transferring the means necessary for the keeping it.
This kind of Writing therefore will not be a sign of Will, but of Ignorance in
the contractors. We must consider ne^t how absurd it is for a City, or
Sovereign, to commit the ruling of his Subjects consciences to an enemy; for
they are, as has been showed above in the 5. Chap. 6. artic. in an hostile
state, whosoever have not joined themselves into the unity of one Person. Nor
contradicts it this truth that they do not always fight: (for tr^ces are made
between enemies) It is sufficient for an hostile mind, that there is
suspicion, that the Frontiers of Cities, Kingdoms, Empires, strengthened with
Garrisons, do with a fighting posture and countenance, though they strike not,
yet as enemies mutually he hold each other. Lastly, how unequal is it to
demand that, which by the very reason of your demand, you confess belongs to
another Right? I am the Interpreter of Scriptures to you who are the Subject
of another Realm. Why? By what Covenants past between you and me? By Divine
authority. Whence known? Out of holy Scripture. Behold the Book, read i^ in
vain, unless I may also interpret the same for my self; That interpretation
therefore does by Right belong to me, and the rest of my private
fellow subjects; which we both deny: It remains therefore that in all christian
Churches, that is to say, in all christian Cities, the interpretation of sacred
Scripture depend on, and derive from the authority of that man, or Council,
which has the Sovereign power of the City.

XXVIII. Now because there are A christian city must interpret Scriptures by
clergymen.
two kinds of controversies, the one about spiritual matters, that is to say,
questions of faith, the truth whereof cannot be searched into by natural
reason, such are the questions concerning the nature, and office of Christ, of
rewards and punishments to come, of the Sacraments, of outward worship, and the
like: the other, about questions of humane science, whose truth is sought out
by natural reason, and Syllogismes, drawn from the Covenants of men, and
definitions (that is to say, significations received by use, and common consent
of words) such as are all questions of Right, and Philosophy; for example, when
in matter of Right its questioned whether there be a Promise, and Covenant, or
not? that is nothing else, but to demand, whether such words spoken in such a
manner be by common use, and consent of the Subjects, a Promise or Covenant;
which if they be so called, then it is true that a Contract is made, if not,
then it is false: that truth therefore depends on the compacts, and consents of
men. In like manner when it is demanded in Philosophy whether the same thing
may entirely be in diverse places at once; the determination of the question
depends on the knowledge of the common consent of men about the signification
of the word entire: for if men when they say a thing is entirely^somewhere do
signify by common consent that they understand nothing of the same to be
elsewhere, it is false that the same thing is in diverse places at once: that
truth therefore depends on the consents of men, and by the same reason in all
other questions concerning Right, and Philosophy: And they who do judge that
any thing can be determined, (contrary to this common consent of men concerning
the appellations of things) out of obscure places of Scripture, do also judge
that the use of speech, and at once all humane society, is to be taken away;
for he who has sold an whole field, will say, he meant one whole ridg^, and
will retain the rest as unsold; nay, they take away reason it self, which is
nothing else but a searching out of the truth made by such consent. These kind
of questions therefore need not be determined by the City by way of
interpretation of Scriptures, for they belong not to Gods Word, in that sense
wherein the Word of God is taken for the Word concerning God, that is to say,
for the Doctrine of the Gospel; neither is he who has the Sovereign power in
the Church, obliged to employ any Ecclesiastical Doctors for the judging of
any such kind of matters as these; but for the deciding of questions of Faith,
that is to say, concerning God, which transcend humane capacity, we stand in
need of a divine blessing (that we may not be deceived at least in necessary
points) to be derived from CHRIST himself by the imposition of hands. For,
seeing to the end we may attain to aeternal Salvation, we are obliged to a
supernatural Doctrine, and which therefore it lis impossible for us to
understand, to be left so destitute, as that we can be deceived in necessary
points, is repugnant to aequity. This infallibility our Savior Christ promised
(in those things which are necessary to Salvation) to his Apostles until the
day of judgment; that is to say, to the Apostles, and Pastors succeeding the
Apostles who were to be consecrated by the imposition of hands. He therefore
who has the Sovereign power in the City, is obliged as a Christian, where
there is any question concerning the Mysteries of Faith, to interpret the Holy
Scriptutes by Clergyman lawfully ordained. And thus in Christian Cities the
judgment both of spiritual and temporal matters belongs unto the civil
authority: And that man, or council who has the Supreme power, is head both
of the City, and of the Church; for a Church, and a Christian City is but one
thing.

CHAP. XVIII. Concerning those things which are necessary for our entrance into
the Kingdom of Heaven.
I. The difficulty propounded concerning the repugnancy of obeying God, and Men
is to be removed by the distinction between the points necessary and not
necessary to Salvation. II. All things necessary to Salvation are contained in
Faith, and Obedience. III. What kind of Obedience that is which is required of
us. IV. What Faith is, and how distinguished from profession, from science,
from opinion. V. What it is to believe in CHRIST. VI. That that Article alone
THAT JESUS IS THE CHRIST, is necessary to Salvation, is proved from the scope
of the Evangelists. VII. From the preachings of the Apostles. VIII. From the
easiness of Christian Religion. IX. From this also, that it is the foundation
of Faith. X. From the most evident words of CHRIST and his Apostles. XI. In
that Article is contained the Faith of the Old Testament. XII. How Faith, and
Obedience concur to Salvation. XIII. In a Christian City there is no
contradiction between the commands of God, and of the City. XIV. The Doctrines
which this day are controverted ab^^t Religion do for the most part relate to
the Right of Dominion.

I. IT was ever granted that all authority The difficulty propounded concerning
the repugnaney of obeying God, and men, is to be removed by the distinction
between the points necessary, and not necessary to Salvation.
in secular matters derived from him who had the Sovereign power, whether he
were one Man, or an Assembly of Men, that the same in spiritual matters
depended on the authority of the Church, is manifest by the next foregoing
proofs; and besides this, that all Christian Cities are Churches endu^d with
this kind of authority: From whence a man though but dull of apprehension may
collect, that in a Christian City, (that is to say, in a City whose Sovereignty
belongs to a Christian Prince, o^ Council) all power, as well spiritual, as
secular, is united under Christ, and therefore it is to be obeyed in all
things; but on the other side, because we must rather obey God then Men, there
is a difficulty risen, how obedience may safely be yielded to them, if at any
time somewhat should be commanded by them to be done which CHRIST has
prohibited. The reason of this difficulty is, that seeing God no longer speaks
to us by CHRIST, and his Prophets in open voice, but by the holy Scriptures,
which by diverse men are diversely understood, they know indeed what Princes, and
a congregated Church do command, but whether that which they do command be
contrary to the word of God, or not, this they know not, but with a wavering
obedience between the punishments of temporal, and spiritual death, as it
were sailing between Scilla and Cary^^is, they often run themselves upon both:
But they who rightly distinguish between the things necessary to Salvation*
and those which are not necessary, can have none of this kind of doubt, for if
the command of the Prince, or City be such, that he can obey it without hazard
of his aeternnll Salvation, it is unjust not to obey them, and the Apostles
praecepts take place: Servants in all things obey your Masters according to the
flesh. Children obey your Parents in all things. Col. 3. v. 20, 22. And the
command of CHRIST, The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chair, all things
therefore whatsoever they command you, that observe, and do. Mat. 23. v. 2. On
the contrary, if they command us to do those things which are punished with
aeternall death, it were madness not rather to choose to dye a natural death,
then by obeying, to dye eternally; and then comes in that which CHRIST says,
Fear not them who kill the body, but cannot kill the Soul. Mat. 10. v. 28. We
must see therefore what all those things are, which are necessary to Salvation.

II. Now all things necessary to Salvation All things necessary to Salvation
are contained in Faith, and Obedience.
are comprehended in two virtues, Faith, and Obedience: The latter of these if
it could be perfect would alone suffice to preserve us from damnation; but
because we have all of us been long since guilty of disobedience against God
in Adam, and besides we our selves have since actually sinned, Obedience is not
sufficient without remission of sins; but this, together with our entrance
into the Kingdom of Heaven is the reward of Faith, nothing else is requisite
to Salvation; for the Kingdom of Heaven is shut to none but sinners, that is
to say, those who have not performed due Obedience to the Laws; and not to
those neither, if they believe the necessary articles of the Christian Faith.
Now, if we shall know in what points Obedience does consist, and which are the
necessary articles of the Christian Faith, it will at once be manifest what we
must do, and what abstain from, at the commands of Cities, and of Princes.

III. But by Obedience in this place is What kind of Obedience that is which is
required of us.
signified not the fact, but the Will and desire wherewith we purpose, and
endeavor as much as we can to obey for the future: in which sense the word
Obedience is aequivalent to Repentance, for the virtue of repentance consists
not in the sorrow which accompanies the remembrance of sin; but in our
conversion to the way, and full purpose to sin no more, without which that
sorrow is said to be the sorrow not of a Penitent but a desperate person: But
because they who love God cannot but desire to obey the divine Law, and they
who love their Neighbors cannot but desire to obey the moral Law, which
consists as has been showed above in the 3. Chapter, in the prohibition of
Pride, ingratitude, contumely, inhumanity, cruelty, injury, and the like
offenses, whereby our Neighbors are prejudic't, therefore also Love or charity
are aequivalent to Obedience. Justice also (which is a constant will of giving
to every man his due) is aequivalent with it. But that Faith and Repentance are
sufficient for Salvation, is manifest by the Covenant it self of Baptism; for
they who were by Peter converted on the day of Pentecost, demanding him what
they should do? He answered, Repent, and he Baptized over^ one of you in the
name of Jesus for the remission of your Sins. Act. 2. v. 38. There was nothing
therefore to be done for the obtaining of Baptism, that is to say, for to
enter into the Kingdom of God, but to Repent, and believe in the Name of
JESUS; For the Kingdom of Heaven is pro^is'd by the Covenant which is made in
Baptism* farthermore, by the words of CHRIST answering the Lawyer who a^k^ him
what ^e should do to inherit eternal life, Thou know the the
Commandments, Thou shall not Kill, Thou shall not commit Adultery, etc. which
refer to Obedience; and, Sell all that thou ^ast, and come, and f^llow me,
which relates to ^aith, Luke 18. ver. 20. Mar. 10. ver. 18. And by that which
is said, The just shall live by Faith, (no^ every man, but the just) for
Justice is the same disposition of Will which Repent^ and Obedience are; And by
the words of Saint Mark, The ^ime is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God is at
hand, Repent ye, and believe the Gospel, by which words is not obscurely
signified that there is no need of other Virtues, for our entrance into the
Kingdom of God, excepting those of Repentance and Faith: The Obedience
therefore which is necessarily required to Salvation is nothing else but the
Will, or endeavor to obey, that is to say, of doing according to the Laws of
God, that is the moral Laws, which are the same to all men, and the civil
Laws, that is to say, the commands of Sovereigns in temporal matters, and
the Ecclesiastical Laws in spiritual; which two kinds of Laws are diverse in
diverse Cities, and Churches, and are known by their promulgation, and public
sentences.

IV. That we may understand what the What Faith is, and how distinguished from
profession, from science, and from opinion.
Christian Faith is, we must define Faith in general, and distinguish it from
those other acts of the mind wherewith commonly it is confounded. The object
of Faith universally taken, namely for that which is believed, is evermore a
proposition, (that is to say a speech affirmative, or negative) which we grant
to be true: but because Propositions are granted for diverse causes, it falls
out, that these kind of concessions are diversely called: But we grant
Propositions sometimes which notwithstanding we receive not into our minds;
and this either for a time, to wit, so long, till by consideration of the
consequencies, we have well examined the truth of them, which we call
supposing* or also simply, as through fear of the Laws, which is to profess,
or confess by outward tokens; or for a voluntary compliance sake, which men
use out of civility to those whom they respect, and for love of Peace to
others, which is absolute yielding: Now the Propositions which we receive for
truth, we always grant for some reasons of our own, and these are derived
either from the Proposition it self, or from the ^^rson propounding; they are
derived from the Proposition it self, by calling to mind what things those
words which make up the Proposition do by common consent usually signify: if
so, then the a^t which we give is called knowledge, or Science: but if we
cannot remember what is certainly understood by those words, but sometimes one
thing, sometimes another seem to be apprehended by us, then we are said to
think; for example, if it be propounded that two and three ^akes five; and by
calling to mind the order of those numerall words, that it is so appointed by
the common consent of them who are of the same language with us, (as it were by
a certain contract necessary for humane society) that five shall be the name
of so many unities as are contained in two and three taken together, a man
assents, that this is therefore true because two and three together, are the
same with five. This assent shall be called knowledge, and to know this truth
is nothing else but to acknowledge that it is made by our selves; For by whose
will and rules of speaking the number.. is called two,... is called three,
and..... is called five, by their will also it comes to pass, that this
Propositionis true, Two and three taken together makes five. In like manner if
we remember what it is that is called theft, and what injury, we shall
understand by the words themselves, whether it be true that theft is an injury,
or not. Truth is the same with a true Proposition, but the Proposition is true
in which the word consequent, which by Logicians is called the praedicate,
embraces the word antecedent in its amplitude, which they call the Subject,
and to know truth is the same thing as to remember that it was made by our
selves in the common use of words: Neither was it rashly, or unadvisedly said
by Plato of old, that knowledge was memory: But it happens sometimes that words
although they have a certain, and defined signification by constitution, yet
by vulgar use either to adorn, or deceive, they are so wrested from their own
significations, that to remember the conceptions for which they were first
imposed on things is very hard, and not to be maistered but by a sharp
judgment, and very great diligence. It happens too, that there are many words
which have no proper, determined, and every where the same signification; and
are understood not by their own, but by virtue of other signs used together
with them. Thirdly, there are some words of things unconceivable; of those
things therefore whereof they are the words, there is no conception; and
therefore in vain do we seek for the truth of those Propositions, which they
make out of the words themselves: In these cases, while by considering the
definitions of words we search out the truth of some proposition, according to
the hope we have of finding it, we think it sometimes true, and sometimes
false; either of which apart is called thinking, and also believing; both
together, doubting. But when our reasons for which we assent to some
Proposition, derive not from the Proposition it self, but from the person
Propounding, whom we esteem so learned that he is not deceived, and we see no
reason why he should deceive us, our assent, because it grows not from any
confidence of our own, but from another man's knowledge, is called Faith: And*
by the confidence of whom, we do believe, we are said to trust them, or to
trust in them. By what has been said, the difference appears first between
Faith, and Profession; for that is always joined with inward asse^* this not
always (...) That is an inward persuasion of the mind, this an outward
obedience. Next, between Faith, and Opinion; for this depends on our own^
reason, that on the good esteem we have of another. Lastly between Faith and
Knowledge; for this deliberately takes a proposition broken, and chewed; that
swallows down whole and enti^^. The explication of words, whereby the matter
inquired after is propounded, is conducible to knowledge; ^ay, the only way to
(...), is by de^: but this is prejudicial to Faith; for those things which
exceed humane capacity, and are propounded to believed, are never more evident
by explication, but on the contrary more obscure, and harder to be credited.
And the same thing befalls a man who endeavors to demonstra^^ the mysteries of
Faith by natural reason, which happens to a sick man, who will needs chew
before he will swallow his wholesome, but bi^r Pill^, whence it comes to pass,
that he presently brings them up again, which perhaps would otherwise, if he
had taken them well down, have proved his remedy.

V. We have seen therefore what it is What it is to believe in Christ.
to believe. But what is it to believe in CHRIST? Or what Proposition is that
which is the object of our Faith in CHRIST? For when we say, I believe in
CHRIST, we signify indeed Whom, but not What we believe. Now, to believe in
CHRIST is nothing else but to believe that JESUS IS THE CHRIST, namely He, who
according to the Prophesies of Moses, and the Prophets of Israel, was to come*
into this world to institute the Kingdom of God: And this sufficiently
appears out of the words of CHRIST himself to Martha: I am (says he) the
Resurrection and the life, HE THAT BELIEVES IN ME, though he were dead, yet he
shall live, and WHOSOEVER LIVES, AND BELIEVES IN ME, shall never dye.
Beleevest thou this? She says unto him, Yea Lord, I believe that THOU ART THE
CHRIST the So^ of God, which should come into the world. John 11. ver. 25, 26,
27. In which words we see that the question BELEEVEST THOU IN ME? is expounded
by the answer, THOU ART THE CHRIST. To believe in CHRIST therefore is nothing
else but to believe JESUS HIMSELF saying that he is THE CHRIST.

VI. Faith and Obedience both necessarity That that article alone, that Jesus
is the Christ, is necessary to Salvation, is proved out of the scope of the
Evangelists.
concurring to Salvation, what kind of Obedience that same is, and to whom
due, has been showed above in the 3. Article: But now we must en^^i^e what
articles of Faith are requisite: And (*) I say, that to a Christian there is no
other article of Faith requisite as necessary to Salvation, but only this, THAT
JESUS IS THE CHRIST. But we must distinguish (as we have already done before in
the 4. Article) between Faith, and Profession. A Profession therefore of more
articles (if they be commanded) may be necessary; for it is a part of our
obedience due to the Laws; but we enquire not now what Obedience, but what
Faith is necessary to salvation. And this is proved first out of the scope of
the Evangelists which was by the description of our Saviors life to establish
this one Article; and we shall know that such was the scope, and counsel of
the Evangelists, if we observe but the History it self. Saint Matthew
beginning at his Genealogy shows that JESUS was of the lineage of David, borne
of a Virgin, Chap. 1. that He was adored by the Wise men as King of the Jews;
that Herod for the same cause sought to slay him, Chap. 2. That his Kingdom
was Preached both by John the Baptist, and Himself, Chap. 3, 4. That He taught
the Laws, not as the Scribes, but as one having authority, Chap. 5, 6, 7. That
he cured diseases miraculously, Chap. 8, 9. That He sent his Apostles the
Preachers of his Kingdom throughout all the parts of Judea, to proclaim his
Kingdom, Chap. 10. That He commanded the Messengers sent from John to enquire
whether he were the CHRIST or not, to tell him what they had seen, namely the
miracles which were only competible with CHRIST, Chap. 11. That he proved and
declared his Kingdom to the Pharisees, and others by arguments, parables and
signs, Chap. 12. and the following Chapters to the 21. That He maintained
himself to be the Christ against the Pharisees, That He was saluted with the
title of King, when he entered into Jerusalem, Chap. 21. That he forewarned
others of false Christ's, and That He showed in Parables what manner of Kingdom
his should be, Chap. 22, 23, 24, 25. That He was taken, and accused for this
reason, because He said He was a King; and that a Title was written on his
Cross, THIS IS JESUS, THE KING OF THE JEWS, Chap. 26, 27. Lastly, that after
his resurrection, He told his Apostles that all power was given unto Him both
in Heaven, and in Earth, Chap. 28. All which tends to this end, That we should
believe Jesus to be the Christ. Such therefore was the Scope of Saint Matthew
in describing his Gospel; but such as his was, such also was the rest of the
Evangelists, which Saint John sets down expressly in the end of his Gospel,
These things (says He) are written, that ye may know that Jesus is the Christ,
the Son of the living God. John 29. verse. 31.

I say, that to a Christian.] Although I Annotation
conceive this assertion to be sufficiently proved by the following reasons,
yet I thought it worth my labor to make a more a^ple explication of it,
because I perceive that being somewhat new, it may possibly be distasteful to
many Divines. First therefore when I say this Article, That Jesus is the
Christ, is necessary to salvation; I say not that Faith only is necessary, but
I require Justice also, or that Obedience which is due to the Laws of God,
that is to say, a Will to live righteously. Secondly, I deny not but the
profession of many Articles, (provided that that profession be commanded by the
Church) is also necessary to salvation; but seeing Faith is internal,
Profession external, I say that the former only is properly Faith; the latter
a part of Obedience; insomuch as that Article alone suffices for inward
belief, but is (...) sufficient for the outward profession of a Christian.
La^^ly, even as if I ^ad said that true and inward R^pentance of ^innes was
only necessary to salvation, yet were it not to be held for a Part, because we
suppose Justice, Obedience, and a mind reformed in all manner of virtues to be
contained in it: so when I say that the Faith of one Article i^ sufficient
(...) salvation, it may well be less wondered at, seeing that in it so many
other Articles are contained* for these words, Jesus is the Christ, do signify
that Jesus was that Person whom God bad promised by* his Prophets, should come
into the world to establish his Kingdom, that is to say, that Jesus is the
Son of God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, born of a Virgin, dying for the
sins of them who should believe in Him; that He^ was Christ, that is to say a
King; that He revived (for else He were not like* to reign) to judge the world,
and to reward every one according to his works, for otherwise he cannot be a
King; also that men shall rise again, for otherwise they are not like to come
to judgment. The whole Symbol of the Apostles is therefore contained in this
one Article; which notwithstanding I thought reasonable to contract thus,
because I found that many men for this alone, without the rest, were admitted
into the Kingdom of God, both by Christ, and his Apostles; as the Thief on the
Cross, the Eu^uch baptized by Philip, the two thousand men converted to the
Church at once by Saint Peter. But if any man be displeased that I do not
judge all those eternally damned, who do not inwardly assent to every Article
defined by the Church (and yet do not contradict, but if they be commanded,
do submit) I know not what I shall say to them* for the most evident
Testimonies of Holy Writ which do follow, do wit^^old me from altering my
opinion.

VII. Secondly, this is proved by the By the Apostles Sermons.
preaching of the Apostles. For they were the Proclamers of his Kingdom,
neither did Christ send them to preach ought but the Kingdom of God, Luke 9.
verse. 2. Act. 15. verse. 6. And what they did after Christ his As^^n^^on may be
understood by the accusation which was brought against them, They drew Jason
(sa^ Saint Luke) and certain Brethren unto the Rulers of the City, ^rying,
These are the men that have turned the world upside down, and are come hither
also, whom Jason has received; and these all do contrary to the decrees of
Caesar, saying that there is another King, one Jesus. Acts 17. verse 6, 7. It
appears also what the subject of the Apostles Sermons was, out of these words:
Opening, and alleging out of the Scriptures (to wit, of the old Testament)
that Christ must needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead, and that
THIS JESUS IS THE CHRIST. Acts 17. verse. 2, 3.

VIII. Thirdly, By the places in which the easiness of those things which are
required By the easiness of christian Religion.
by Christ to the attaining of salvation, is declared. For if an internal
assent of the mind were necessarily required to the truth of all and each
Proposition which this day is controverted about the Christian Faith, or by
diverse Churches is diversely defined, there would be nothing more difficult then
the Christian Religion; and how then would that be true, My yoke is easy, and
my burden light? Mat. 11. verse. 30. and that little ones do believe in Him?
Mat. 18. verse. 6. and that it pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching, to
save those that believe? 1 Cor. 1. verse. 21. or how was the thief hanging on
the Cross sufficiently instructed to salvation? The confession of whose Faith
was contained in these words, Lord remember me when thou come into thy
Kingdom; or how could Saint Paul himself, from an enemy, so soon become a
Doctor of Christians?

IX. Foutthly, by this, that that Article is the foundation of Faith, neither
rests it By this, that it is the foundation of Faith.
on any other foundation. If any man shall say unto you, Lo here is Christ, or
He is there, believe it ^ot, for there shall arise false Christ's, and false
Prophets, and shall show great signs, and wonders, etc. Mat. 24. verse 23.
Whence it follows, that for the Faiths sake which we have in this Article, we
must not believe any signs, and wonders. Although we, or an Augell from Heaven
(says the Apostle) should preach to you any other Gospel, then what we have
preached, let him be accursed. Gal. 1. 8. By reason of this Article therefore we
might not trust the very Apostles, and Angels themselves (and therefore I
conceive not the Church neither) if they should teach the contrary. Beloved,
believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God, because
many false Prophets are gone out into the world, hereby know ye the spirit of
God, every spirit that confesses Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God,
etc. 1 John 4. verse. 1, 2. That Article therefore is the measure of the Spitits
whereby the authority of the Doctors, is either received, or rejected. It
cannot be denied indeed, but that all who at this day are Christians, did learn
from the Doctors, that it was Jesus who did all those things whereby he might
be acknowledged* to be the Christ; yet it follows not that the same Persons
believed that Article for the Doctors, or the Churches, but for Jesus his own
sake* for that Article was before the Christian Church, although all the rest
were after it, and the Church was founded upon it, not it upon the Church. Mat.
16. verse. 18. Besides, this Article, that Jesus is the Christ, is so
fundamental, that all the rest are by Saint Paul said to be built upon it, For
other foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ
(that is to say, that Jesus is the Christ) now if any man build upon this
foundation, gold, silver, precious stone, wood, hay, stubble; every man's work
shall be made manifest; if a^y man's work abide which he has built thereupon,
he shall receive a reward; if any man's work shall be bu^nt, he shall suffer
loss, ^ut he himself shall be sa^ed. 1 Cor. 3* verse. 11, 12, 13. etc. From
whence it plainly appears, that by foundation is understood this Article, THAT
JESUS IS THE CHRIST: For gold, and silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble
(whereby the Doctrines are signified) are not built upon the Person of Christ;
and also, that false Doctrines may be raised upon this foundation, yet not so,
as they must necessarily be By the plai^ words of Christ and his Apostles
damned who teach them.

X. Lastly, that this Article alone is needful to he inwardly believed, may be
most evidently proved out of many places of holy Scriptures, let who will be
the Interpreter: Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal
life; and they are they which testify of me. John 5. 39. But Christ meant the
Scriptures of the old Testament only, for the new was then not yet written.
Now, there is no other testimony concerning Christ in the old Testament, but
that an eternal King was to come in such a place, that He was to be born of
such Parents, that He was to teach, and do such things; whereby, as by certain
signs, he was to be known* All which testify this one thing, that JESUS who
was so born, and did teach, and do such things, was THE CHRIST. Other Faith
then was not required to attain eternal life, besides this Article. Whosoever
lives and believes in me, shall never dye. John 11. verse. 25. But to believe
in Jesus (as is there expressed) is the same with believing that JESUS WAS THE
CHRIST; He therefore that believes that, shall never dye, and by consequence,
that Article alone is necessary to salvation. These are written that ye might
believe that JESUS IS THE CHRIST the Son of God, and that believing ye might
have life through his name. Jo. 20. verse 31. Wherefore he that believes thus,
shall have eternal life, and therefore needs no other Faith. Every spirit that
confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God. 1 Jo. 4 v. 2. And
Whosoever believes that JESUS IS THE CHRIST, is born of God, 1 Jo. 5. verse. 1.
And, Who is he that overcomes the world, but he that believes that JESUS is
the Son of God? 1 Jo. v. 5. If therefore there be no need to believe any thing
else, to the end a man may be of God, born of God, and (...) the world, then
that JESUS IS THE CHRIST; that one Article then is sufficient to salvation.
See, here is water, what does ^inder me to be baptiz^d? And Philip said, If
thou beleevest with all thine ^e^, thou m^ist. And he an^^ered and sai^, I
believe that JESUS CHRIST is the (...) of God. Act^ 8. verse. 36, 37. If then
this Article being believed with the whole heart, (that is to say, with inward
Faith) was sufficient for Baptism, it is also sufficient for salvation.
Besides these places there are innumerable others which do clearly, and
expres^y affirm the same thing. Nay, wheresoever we read that our Savior
commended the Faith of any one, or that he said, Thy Faith has ^^ved thee, or
that he healed any one for his Faiths sake; there the Proposition believed was
no other but this, JESUS IS THE CHRIST, either directly, or consequently.

XI. But because no man can believe In this Article is contained the Faith of
the old Testament.
JESUS TO BE THE CHRIST, who, when he knows that by Christ is understood that
same King who was promised from God by Moses, and the Prophets, for to be the
King, and Savior of the world, does not also believe Moses, and the Prophets,
neither can he believe these, who believes not that God is, and that he governs
the world; it is necessary that the Faith of God, and of the old Testament be
contained in this Faith of the new. Seeing therefore that Atheism, and the
denial of the Divine Providence, were the only treason against the Divine
Majesty in the Kingdom of God by Nature, but Idolatry also in the Kingdom of
God by the Old Covenant; now in this Kingdom wherein God rules by way of a new
Covenant, apostasy is also added, or the renunciation of this article once
received, that JESUS IS THE CHRIST: Truly other Doctrines, provided they have
their determination from a lawful Church, are not to be contradicted; for that
is the sin of disobedience, but it has been fully declared before that they
are not needful to be believed with an inward Faith.

XII. Faith and Obedience have diverse parts in accomplishing the salvation of a
How Faith and Obedience do con^ur to Salvation.
Christian; for this contributes the power, or capacity, that the Act, and
either is said to justify in its kind. For Christ forgives not the sins of
all men, but of the Penitent, or the Obedient, that is to say the just, I say
not the guiltless, but the just; for justice is a Will of obeying the Laws,
and may be consistent with a sinner, and with Christ the Will to obey is
Obedience; for not every man, but the just shall live by Faith: Obedience
therefore justifies because it makes just in the same manner as temperance
makes temperate, Prudence Prudent: Chastity chaste, namely essentially; and
pu^^ a man in such a state, as makes him capable of pardon. Again, Christ has
not promised forgiveness of sins to all just men, but only those of them w^o
believe Hi^ to be the Christ. Faith therefore just^fies in such a sense as a
judge may be said to justify who absolves, namely by the sentence which
actually saves a man; And in this acception of justification (for it is an
aequivocall term) Faith alone justifies, but in the other, Obedience only:
but neither Obedience alone nor Faith alone do save us, but both together.

XIII. By what has been said hitherto, In a Christian City there is no
contrariety be ween the Command of God, and of the City.
it will be easy to discern what the duty of Christian Subjects is toward
their Sovereigns, who as long as they profess themselves Christians cannot
command their Subjects to deny Christ, or to offer him any contumely; for if
they should command this, they would profess themselves to be no Christians:
For seeing we have showed both by natural reason, and out of holy Scriptures,
that Subjects ought in all things to obey their Princes and Governors,
excepting those which are contrary to the command of God; and that the commands
of God in a Christian City concerning temporal affairs, (that is to say, those
which are to be discust by humane reason) are the Laws and sentence of the
City delivered from those who have received authority from the City to make
Laws, and judge of controversies; but concerning spiritual matters, (that is
to say those which are to be defined by the holy Scripture) are the Laws, and
sentences of the City, that is to say the Church (for a Christian City, and a
Church (as has beeen showed in the foregoing Chapter in the 10. Arr. are the
same thing) deliv'rd by Pastors lawfully ordained, and who have to that end
authority given them by the City; it manifestly follows, that in a Christian
Common weal, Obedience is due to the Sovereign in all things, as well
Spiritual, as Temporal, and that the same obedience even from a Christian
subject is due in all temporal matters to those Princes who are no Christians,
is without any controversy; but in matters spiritual, that is to say those
things which concern Gods worship, some christian Church is to be followed; for
it is an hypothesis of the Christian Faith, that God speaks not in things
supernatural, but by the way of Christian Interpreters of holy Scriptures. But
what? Must we resist Prince^ when we cannot obey them? Truly no; for this is
contrary to our civil Covenant. What must we do then? Go to Christ by
Martyrdom; which if it seem to any man to be an hard saying, most certain it
is that he believes not with his whole heart THAT JESUS IS THE CHRIST the Son
of the living God (for he would then desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ) but he would by a feigned Christian Faith elude that obedience which he
has contracted to yield up unto the City. The Doctrines which this day are
controverted about Religion, do for the most part belong to the Right of
Dominion.


XIV. But some men perhaps will wonder, if, (excepting this one Article, that
JESUS IS THE CHRIST, which only is necessary to salvation in relation to
internal faith) all the rest belong to obedience, which may be performed,
although a man do not inwardly believe, (so he do but desire to believe, and
make an outward profession, as often as need requires, of whatsoever is
propounded by the Church) how it comes about that there are so many Tenets
which are all held so to concern our Faith, that except a man do inwardly
believe them, He cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: But if he consider
that in most controversies the contention is about humane Sovereignty; in some,
matter of gain, and profit; in others, the glory of Wits; he will surely wonder
the less. The question about the propriety of the Church, is a question about
the Right of Sovereignty; for, it being known what a Church is, it is known at
once to whom the Rule over Christians does belong: for if every Christian City
be that Church which Christ himself has commanded every Christian subject to
that city, to hear, then every subject is bound to obey his City, that is to
say, Him, or them who have the supreme power, not only in temporal but also in
spiritual matters; but if every Christian City be not that Church, then is
there some other Church more universal, which must be obeyed. All Christians
therefore must obey that Church just as they would obey Christ if He came upon
Earth. She will therefore rule either by the way of Monarchy, or by some
Assembly: This question then concerns the Right of ruling. To the same end
belongs the question concerning infallibility; for whosoever were truly, and
internally believed by all mankind, that he could not err, would be sure of
all Dominion, as well temporal as spiritual, over all mankind, unless
himself would refuse it; for if he say that he must be obeyed in temporalls,
because it is supposed he cannot err, that Right of Dominion is immediately
granted him. Hither also tends the privilege of interpreting Scriptures. For
he to whom it belongs to interpret the controversies arising from the diverse
interpretations of Scriptures, has authority also simply and absolutely to
determine all manner of controversies whatsoever; but he who has this, has
also the command over all men who acknowledge the Scriptures to be the Word of
God. To this end drive all the disputes about the power of remining, and
retaining sins; or the authority of excommunication. For every man, if he be
in his wits, will in all things yield that man an absolute obedience, by virtue
of whose sentence he believes himself to be either saved, o^ damned. Hither
also tends the power of instituting societies; for they depend on him by whom
they subsist, who has as many subjects as Monks, although living in an Enemies
City. To this end also refers the question concerning the Judge of lawful
Matrimony; for he to whom that judicature belongs, to him also pertains the
knowledge of all those cases which concern the inheritance, and succession to
all the goods, and Rights, not of private men only, but also of Sovereign
Princes. And hither also in some respect tends the Virgin-life of
Ecclesia^ticall Persons; for unmarried men have less coherence then others
with civil society: and besides, it is an inconvenience not to be slighted,
that Princes must either necessarily forgo the Priesthood (which is a great
bond of civil obedience) or have no hereditary Kingdom. To this end also
tends the canouization of Saints which the Hea^he^ called Apotheosis; for he
that can allure foreign subjects with so great a reward, may bring those who
are greedy of such glory to dare, and do any thing. For what was it but an
honorable Name with posterity? which the Decii and other Romans sought after,
and a thousand others who cast themselves upon incredible perils? The
controversies about Purgatory, and indulgencies, are matter of gain. The
questions of Free Will, Justification, and the manner of receiving Christ in
the Sacrament, are Philosophical. There are also questions concerning some
Rites not introduced, bur left in the Church not sufficiently purged from
gentilisme; but we need reckon no more. All the world knows that such is the
nature of men, that dissenting in questions which concern their power, or
profit, or preeminence of Wit, they slander, and curse each other. It is not
therefore to be wondered at, if almost all tenets (after men grew hot with
disputings) are held forth by some or other to be necessary to salvation, and
for our entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven; insomuch as they who hold them
not, are not only condemned as guilty of disobedience (which in truth they are
after the Church has once defined them) but of Infidelity, which I have
declared above to be wrong out of many evident places of Scripture; to which I
add this one of Saint Paul's, Let not him that eats, despise him that eats
not, and let not him that eats not, judge him that eats; for God has
received him. One man esteems one day above another, another esteems every
day alike. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind, Romans 14. v. 3, 5.

FINIS.

