The FIRST BOOK OF Homer's Iliads. Translated by THOMAS GRANTHAM, Professor of
the speedy way of teaching the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin tongues in LONDON, at
the Golden-Ball in Carter-Lane.



LONDON, Printed by T. Lock, for the Author, 1659.

To the Reader.
Reader,
THE Sun is called the Heart of the Planets, all receive their light and
influence from him; the Moon is dark and obscure, but when the Sun shines upon
her, she shows so glorious, that men worship her as a goddess; her influence is
over sea and land, over men, (whom God himself calls gods) witness the
Lunatic. Homer he is the heart, the sun, the light of all the Poets, without
him they are like Dials without the Sun; like candles unlighted. He is painted
vomiting, and all the poets lapping like little Dogs what comes from him. Ovid
brings him in attended with all the Muses.

Homer with all the Muses graced, if poor
He chance to come, they will thrust him out of door.
But whilst I am commending Homer, I remember Ulysses pleading for the Armor
of Achilles against Ajax, he sets out all his valiant actions in what luster,
and shadows, and colors he can possible; but when he came at last to the
stealing of the Image of Pallas, he says little or nothing at all of that, but
pulls it out of his bosom before all the Army, he knew that would speak for it
self; For there was a Prophecy, Troy should never be conquered till that was
stolen out of the Temple. Homer is here present to speak for himself, and it
becomes me to sit silent in admiration.

The FIRST BOOK OF Homer's Iliads.
The ARGUMENT:
The Prayers and Gifts of Chryses this Book sings,
The Plague that Phoebus sent, the wrath of Kings.
A Chilles son of Peleus Gods sing,
His baneful wrath which to the Greeks did bring,
Unnumbred greifs, brave souls to hell did send,
Their noble bodies Fouls and Dogs did rend;
Jove willed all this, he these to strife did bring,
God-like Achilles and Atreides King.
Which of the gods enflamed these to fight?
Phoebus (Jove's Son) did owe the King * spite,
And made a Plague through all the Army fly, Agamemnon and Menelaus (the two
Sons of Atreus) ruled all then.

'Cause Chryses his own Priest he did defy,
Who to the Fleet unvalued Presents brought,
When he the freedom of his Daughter sought;
With Phoebus Crown and Scepter in his hands,
He prayed the Greeks, and those that bore Commands;
Oh Princes! Oh ye Greeks with glorious Arms! Chryses (the Priest of Apollo)
his speech to them and the other Graecians.

Let gods in Heaven but listen to my Charms,
And send ye home, when ye have raised the Town
Of Priam; only grant me what is mine own,
Mine own dear Daughter; ye the Son of Jove
Worship, by taking tokens of my love.
The Greeks (with Acclamations) all embrace
These Gifts, and think them a sufficient Grace.
But Agamemnon (raged with mighty Ire)
Threatened the Priest, made him with speed retire.
Doterd be gone, linger not on our shore; Agamemnon slights the Priest, and
gives him base language and threats.

And being gone, I charge thee nere come more;
Neither thy Scepter, nor thy God-head's Crown
Shall profit thee; I Will keep her as mine own,
Till age deform her; In my Court shall she
Spin, and adorn my Bed with Gallantrie.
This said, the Priest obeyed the Kings Command,
And walking silent all along the Sand;
Phoebus, fair-hair'd Latonaes Son, my Vow The Prayer of Chryses the Priest, to
Phoebus his god.

Hear, O my God, that bear the silver Bow
That Chrysa Guards, Rules Tenedos that strongly walks the round
Of Divine Cilla, A Name of Phoebus.
Smyntheus; if ever I have crowned
With Sacrifices thy rich Phane; if ever I did fire
Fat Thighs of Oxen, and of Goats, grant me now my desire;
Revenge my Tears, with Shafts the Graecians pay.
And thus he prayed, and Phoebus heard him pray.
Who (vexed) came down from Heaven and brought his Bow, Phoebus the Priests God,
sends the plague amongst the Greeks. Ye see here how he comes down ragingmad
from heaven.

With quiver covered round, his hands did throw
These on his shoulders: The Arrows gave a sound,
Rattling about him as he trod the ground;
Silent as Night, with Silver Bow he shot,
His Arrows twang'd again, they flew so hot:
He first of all shot both the Mules and Hounds;
The Graecians after that received their wounds;
The Fires of death nine days did burn, so long the Shafts did fly;
The tenth, Achilles called a Court of chosen men, and high.
Juno (the white-arm'd Queen) does mourn for Greeks,
Achilles therefore now a Council seeks;
Being moved by her: swift-foot Achilles then
Rose up to speak in the Great Court of Men.
Atreides, now I see we go astray, Achilles his speech to Agamemnon, called
Atreides, because Atreus was his Father.

We must return, if we can escape away;
The Plague and War does many Greeks destroy,
Let us some Priest or Prophet now employ,
Or Dream-Interpreter, Dreams come from Jove,
He Will show how we have lost Apollo's Love;
If that for Hecatombs, or unpaid Vows;
Or if for Lambs and Goats he knits his brows;
These he shall have, if he our men shall mend,
And bring this Plague unto a speedy end.
This said, he sat; Chalchas starts up to them, Chalchas the Prophet.

(Sir named Thestorides) who was supreme,
He knew things present, past, to come, was honored in that age,
To rule the Fleet at Ilion, for his Prophetic rage;
Apollo gave him Achilles loved of God;
Shall I (said he) show why Apollo's Rod
Does plague us so? Then Covenant with Oath, Chalchas to Achilles.

That with thy Words and powerful Actions both,
Thou Wilt help me speaking; for I know their reigns
A man that much my Prophecy disdains;
A King's a powerful man, he in his hate
May bring me speaking to a wretched state,
Although that day he seems not to chide,
And may a little his fierce Anger hide.
But if hereafter he shall angry be,
Resolve me now if thou will succor me?
Then said Achilles, Speak whatsoever thou knows, Achilles to Chalchas.

For by Apollo I have made my Vows,
There Is none shall wrong thee, Agamemnon King,
Dare not his hands unto this quarrel bring,
Although thou Name him. Then the Prophet bold
Began the Graecians griefs for to unfold.
It Is not for unpaid Vows, nor Sacrifice,
This Plague so long amongst us raging lies; Chalchas reveals the cause of the
plague amongst the Graecians.

But Agamemnon did the Priest despise,
Who for his Daughter brought sufficient prise;
Therefore Apollo darting far his Darts,
Sends you these griefs unto your mortal hearts,
And he will plague you more, and not refrain,
Till he his black-eyd Daughter have again.
Let her with Sacrifice be freely sent,
Perhaps with this the High Priest may be bent.
This said* he sat; But Agamemnon (then
The chief Commander over all the men) Agamemnon angry at Chalcas.

Vexed at the heart with madness, and his eyes
Sparkling with fire, thus the Priest defies:
Prophet of Ill, it never pleased thee
To speak the best, but rather worst of me.
Thou chides because these gifts I did not take,
And says this plague came for the Maiden's sake,
Whom before Clytemnestra I prefer,
Who was a Virgin when I courted her;
In those two Lines are all that can be desired in a
She Is full as fair, as witty, and as kind,
Her Huswiferies does much content my mind:
But I will send her back, only I crave
That I my Armies welfare now may have;
But a fair Mistress give me, none thinks fit,
That I deprived should solitary sit.
To him swift-foot, God-like Achilles then Achilles to Agamemnon.

Answered, Atreides, thou of all the men
That breath, we know to be most covetous,
And of all Kings, the most ambitious.
Thy lost prize, none of all the great soul'd Greeks
Will out of theirs supply; for now all seeks
To keep their own; but when the Well-wald Troy
Is raised, we'll trebble Quadruple thy joy.
Then Agamemnon to Achilles said, Agamemnon to Achilles.

Think you it fit you should enjoy a Maid
And I have none? I will come personally
Unto you soon, and all my want supply;
The Love of Ajan, Ulysses.
Ithacus, or thine,
I will bring home, she shall be called mine:
And let him rage hereafter, we can these
Order; but now it is fit we put to Seas
With most choice Rowers: Chryse's mine envied prize,
Shall go aboard with a great Sacrifice;
Ithacus, Ajax, Idomeneus shall,
Or stern Achilles.
Peleides be the General:
Ulisses the Commander, he shall see,
That all these holy Acts performed be*
Which Phoebus please; Achilles with a frown,
This bold and haughty mind did soon bring down.
What man can fly with valor on his Foe, Achilles to Agamemon.

For such a Wretch? I was not injured so
By all Troy's Force: In Phithia I enjoy
My Corn and People: Why should I annoy
These men whom Hills and Seas keep from me far,
And cannot come to wrong me in a War?
Thee and thy Brothers Vengeance we sustain,
And Triumphs make with Bonefires of our slain.
Thou impudent, thou Dogs-eyes does employ
Us with our ruin, for to ruin Troy:
And now thou threats to take my hearts delight,
Whom all the Greeks did give me for my Fight:
When any Town is sacked, the Prize for me
Is lesser far, then that which is for thee:
But I Will ship home, contented with what is mine,
And spend no more in any cause of thine.
To him then Agamemnon King replied, Agamemnon to Achilles.

Get thee gone hence, it shall not be denied;
Here Is others honor me, the most wise Jove,
In him both I, and other Princes move,
And nourisht are; but thou my greatest Foe,
Delightst in Blood, Battles, and Strife and Woe:
If thou be very strong, God gave it thee,
Get thee gone hence with all thy company,
And Ships, and Myrmidons, I do not care,
Nor fear thy Wrath; yet of my threats beware:
Because fair-cheekt Chryseis Phoebus seeks,
I Will send her home with many of my Greeks:
But thy fair-cheekt Bryseis home I Will bring,
And thou shall know how powerful a King
Is above all, and every one shall see
There is great danger to contend with me:
Achilles hearing this, was vexed at heart, Achilles enraged against Agamemnon.

Brisled his Bosom, his discoursive part,
Sometime did think with Sword to lay about,
Sometimes he thought to sit his anger out:
Whilst thus Achilles stood in doubtful mind,
And drew his Sword, Pallas about him shined,
Being sent from Heaven by the white-wristed queen
Juno, for she had to both loving been:
Achilles by the yellow Curls she took,
Standing behind him, only gave a look
To him alone; he turning back his eye,
Was struck amazed in every faculty.
He knew her by her eyes sparkling with fire,
With winged words he craved her desire:
Daughter of Jove, who does his Helmet bear, Achilles to Pallas.

Tell me why thou descendest from thy Sphere;
Would thou the pride of Agamemnon know?
Then see him gasping at this deadly blow.
Gray-ey'd Pallas. She speaks to Achilles.
Minerva answered him again,
I Am come from Heaven thine anger to refrain;
White-wrested Juno sent me, she is loath
There should be any quarrel 'twixt you both:
Show thy respects to us, cease to contend,
Put up thy Sword, and so this quarrel end:
Chide, but not fight.
Give him most bitter words, take this from me,
The time will come when thou must courted be,
When thrice the worth shall be unto thee sent
For recompense, when that he shall repent.
Swift-foot Achilles answered and did speak, Here you see Achilles in the
height of anger yields obebedience to Pallas.

Goddess I will not your Commandment break
Although I Am very angry; for I know
Unto the Gods I do obedience owe:
They Will hear my Prayers: Then he put up his Sword
Close in his Sheath, just at Minerva's word.
To Jove the rough Shield-bearing Pallas then
Went up to sit with other gods in heaven
Peleides then to Agamemnon spoke
With bitter words, and out his anger brake.
Thou Wine-sot, ever steept in Wine, thy heart
Thou Dogs face, is as fearful as a Heart; Achilles to Agamemnon.

In ambush thou wilt not lie, nor dare thou go
In Arms with us, ever to fight thy Fo,
These are as death to thee; all thy delight
Is to rob those that blame thee, of their right:
On servile Spirits thou do tyrannise,
Thou subject-eating King I thee despise:
Atreides (for the wrong thou offer'st now)
I Will tell thee plainly, and will make a Vow
By this same Scepter, which can never give
Branches and Leaves, I know it cannot live
Since it was cut from Mountains, Grecians seek,
And judges to, by it our Laws to keep,
Which came from Jove, and a great Oath I Will take,
I Will never fight for any Graecians sake:
When Hector slayes thy men, then thou wilt repent
That thou have wronged thy Armies Ornament:
Thus angry, he his Scepter flung to the ground,
Stuck with his golden Studs; then the profound
Sweet-spoken Nestor up himself did raise,
Who with the Pylians was of mighty praise;
The Words were sweeter which from him did come,
Then was the Honey, or the Honey comb;
Whilst he did live, two Ages were increased
In sacred Pylos, and both these deceased,
The third he reigned in, being a Prince of skill,
He showed how discord must needs breed much ill.
Oh Gods! What sorrows does our Land sustain, Nestor's speech to Agamemnon and
Achilles.

Priam, and Priam's Sons to see us slain
By one another? Oh how they will rejoice,
And all Troy shout with a victorious voice
To see those which in Arms and Arts excel,
Differ! Now therefore be advised well,
I am older, stronger, no Age did ever hear
Of such brave men as my Companions were;
Pyrithius, Cynius, Drias, prince of men;
Exadius, Theseus, and Polypheme,
Like to a God; these Heroes often fought
With Mountain-Beasts, for men in strength were naught,
Compared with them, they fought and overcame:
I was Companion to these men of Fame;
I came from Pylos, and bore Arms with these,
My Speeches and my Counsels did them please:
I will persuade you now from any jar,
Although you're strong, by no means make a War;
Give him his Mistress, all the Greeks consent,
Then 'twixt you both there will be great content.
Achilles be at peace, no King by Lot,
So mighty honor from great Jove has got:
It Is true, You are strong, a Goddess brought you forth,
Yet he is a powerful King, of greater worth.
Atreides, cease thine anger, thou shall see
Achilles with my Prayers will moved be,
Who is our Hedge against the Force of Troy,
Our Armies Ornament and only joy.
To this the King made answer, and did say, Agamemnon's speech to Nestor.

Sir, you speak right, but he will bear the sway
Over us all, and domineer as King,
There Is none shall make me grant him such a thing;
What if the gods have made him strong, shall he
Fling his reproaches, and his scorns on me?
Achilles answered, Men will hold me base, Achilles speech.

And I should go away with great disgrace
If I should yield to thee in every thing,
(Others command, and be to them a King)
I will not fight now for my Mistress sake
With thee or others; but this from me take,
If thou do rob my Ships, then shall this Lance
Strike to thy heart; Upon this variance
The Princes being angry, all arose, The Council dissolved.

And to his quarters great Achilles goes,
With his Patroclus, and his faithful Mates;
Then Agamemnon knowing well the Fates,
Did launch the Ship, and gave a Sacrifice,
With fair Cryseis his beloved prize.
Ulysses was the Captain, he did then
Ascend the ship with twenty chosen men,
Which through the moist ways rowed her; then the King
Bad all the Host their Sacrifices bring,
Of Bulls and Goats, into the deep they cast
The Offol left, thus was Apollo graced;
Thick fumes and vapors mounted from the shore
Of the unfruitful Seas, to Heaven they bore
Enwrapped savours. Atreides could not yet
Forgive Achilles, or his wrong forget.
Then vented he unto Eur^bates,
And to Talbythius, these Messages;
Go to Achilles Tent, fair Briseis bring,
If he deny to give her to his King,
I Will come with many more, he will find it worse,
And will be plagued with a heavier Curse.
This said, they straight obeyed his Command,
And vvalk'd unwilling all along the Sand
Of the unfruitful Sea; just as they went
They found Achilles sitting in his Tent;
They struck with fear and awe, stood dumb and sad,
Nor was Achilles then to see them glad;
He knew for what they came, Heralds (said he)
Of Gods and Men, come nearer unto me;
I blame you not, I know the King did send
For Bris'is; now Patrodus (my dear friend)
Bring her; but by the immortal gods I swear,
(And mortal men, witness all ye that is here)
If your dishonored King should for me send,
That I against this plague, my help should lend;
He is raging mad, things past he cannot tell,
Nor things to come, nor can he govern well:
This said, Patroclus came to Briseis Tent,
Brought her to the Heralds, to the Ships they went;
She was unwilling: Achilles wept full sore,
And with his tears his Mother did implore,
And lifting up his hands, Mother, (said he)
My life, though short, yet should it honored be:
But Jove no honor gives; great Atreus Son
Has taken my Prize, and I am quite undone.
He weeping spoke; his honored Mother heard,
(Sitting in the deeps) and straight above appeared
Like to a Mist; her hand did stroke her Son,
Tell me (said she) from whence this strife begun.
Mother (said he) you do my sorrows know,
I need not tell you whence my griefs do grow:
We came to Thebes, City of Etion,
Sacked it, and did divide to every Son
Of Greece his share Atreides Chryseis had,
Chryses, Apollo's Priest at this grew sad,
Who to the Fleet unvalued Presents brought,
When he the freedom of his Daughter sought,
With Phoebus Crown and Scepter in his hand,
He prayed the Greeks, and those that bore Commands:
The Greeks with Acclamations all embrace
These Gifts, and think them a sufficient grace;
But Agamemnon (raged with mighty ire)
Threatened the Priest, he angry did retire;
Him praying as he went, Phoebus did hear,
For he of Phoebus was accounted dear;
He sent his Darts, and many Greeks did dye
Through all the Camp, so fierce his Arrows fly.
When our learned Prophet to us the cause did tell,
I gave command to please Apollo well;
Atreides angry, did his threatenings send,
And now we see his threatenings at an end:
The black-ey'd Greeks then sent Chryseis home
Unto her Father with a Hecatomb;
Atreides then for my Bryseis sent,
Whom all the Greeks gave me with one consent:
Now scale Olympus, and great Jove implore,
If thou by word or deed did ere restore
Joy to his heart; I have often heard thee vaunt
In our own Court how thou wast conversant
In saving of our black-Cloud-gathering Jove,
Whom Pallas, Neptune, and the great Queen (above)
Of Heaven would bind, thou callst the hundred-hands
Briareus to rescue Jove from bands;
Gods call him so, Egeon amongst men
He is called, surpast, and was as strong again
As his own Father; He by Jove did sit
In Heaven; the Immortals did not envy it.
Mind him of this, sit and embrace his knee,
And ask if that Troy's succor he will be,
And beat the Greeks unto their Ships and Sea,
Some slain, let others their great King obey;
And the far-ruling-King this fault shall know,
That to the best he did no honor show.
She weeping said, Oh thou my dearest Son! Thetis her speech.

Woe's me, I brought thee forth, thy fates begun.
Sit without weeping, and endure this wrong,
For now thy wretched life will not be long:
I Will climb Olympus that is crowned with snow,
And see if thundering Jove will hear thy Woe:
Sit by the ships, thine anger now refrain,
And by no means go to the War again.
Jove and the gods went yesterday to feast
With Blameless Ethiops in the deep Oceans breast;
The Twelft he will come again, then will I see
His Brass-pav'd-Court, and beg with humble knee,
I think he will hear me, Thus she spoke, and there
Left him in anger for his fairest Dear
Forced away from him. Then did Ulysses come
To Chryses shore, bringing a Hecatomb
To the deep Haven, when they all did come,
Some struck the sails, others they did make room
For Topmast and for Ores, some Anchor cast
Against the storms, for drifting made her fast;
They come ashore, and bring the Hecatomb
To Phoebus, darting far, they welcome home
Chryseis, whom the wise Ulysses brought
Unto her Father, and thus him besought,
(Standing at the Altar) Agamemnon sends
Thy Daughter, and unto the gods commends Ulysses speech to the Priest.

A sacrifice for to appease your King,
Who on us does his fiercest sorrows Fling;
Thus he resigns her; Chryses with joy does take
His Daughter, and a sacrifice does make
Upon the Altar, then salt Cakes he took,
With voice and hands lift up, to Heaven did look,
And prayed; Oh hear my God, thou that do bend The Priest's prayer.

Thy silver Bow, and Cilla do defend;
And Tenedos, thou heard'st me pray before,
Thou honor'dst me, and hurt the Graecians sore:
But oh my God, grant me now my desire,
And from the Graecians turn thy raging ire.
He prayed, and Phoebus heard him: Others did pray,
And cast salt Cakes, others did Oxen slay,
Which (cut in pieces) on the fire did lie,
And these the Priest (with generous Wine) did frye;
Some roasted, and some others boild the meat,
And every man unto his fill did eat:
Young men crowned Cups of Wine, some drunk about,
Some saw the Health go round, some poured out,
Some all the day sung Paeans, pleased the ear
Of great Apollo, when they sung so clear:
But when the Sun was set, and night was come,
To sleep on Cables every man made room,
Till that the Rosie-fingered-Morn retired,
Then Phoebus with fair Winds their Bark insp'ir'd;
They topmast hoisted, and the sails set up,
The ship the parted Waves swiftly did cut;
When to the Camp they came, and sandy shore,
They all took quarters as they did before.
Swift-foot Achilles near the Navy sat
Angry, and left the Councels of Estate;
Which honor men, he never trod the field,
Pind, called for War, his stomach could not yield.
Twelve Morns being past, the gods did follow Jove,
And Mount Olympus, him did Thetis move;
Rising from sea at the Morns first light,
She climbed Olympus, in supremest height
Of that high Hill, she spied out Saturns Son
Set from the rest, in his free Seat alone;
She sat before him, her left hand did hold
His Knees, the right his Chin, then did unfold
Her sons Petition: If to thee I Have stood
In word or deed, grant me now this same good:
King Agamemnon to my son did bring
A great disgrace, revenge me this same thing;
Send help to Troy; and let them overrun
The Greeks, till they give honor to my son.
Cloud-gathering Jove said naught, but Thetis sat
Holding his knee, and still did him entreat;
Grant, or deny (said she) just now my suite,
Thou fear none, why do thou sit thus mute
On my disgrace? Cloud-gathering Jove replied,
Come what ills will, thou shall not be denyd; Jove's promise to Thetis.

Let Juno storm, chide me amongst the gods,
And say my help gives to the Trojans odds:
But now be gone, lest angry Juno see
My Promise, and what care I take of thee;
I Will nod my Head, then will the gods divine
That I do yield to any suit of thine;
And when I nod, there is none that can recall
The thing I nod to, if I nod at all.
This said, the black-eye-browd, and mighty god,
Did shake Olympus when he did but nod.
Then Thetis parting, did from the light Heaven go
To Neptunes Kingdom, diving down below:
Jove did go home, and all the gods did meet
Him as he went, and kindly did him greet*
But Juno saw Thetis in Joves Throne,
Discoursing with him when he was alone;
Then she revild him, Thy secrets thou do speak
To others, but to me do never break
What thou intends. Father of gods and men,
To angry Juno then replied again,
Hope not that thou shall all my counsels know,
Although my Wife; for I will never show
To god or man, but what I fitting see,
No god nor man shall sooner know then thee.
Then Ox-eyd Juno answered, Cruel Jove,
Does these same speeches show to me thy love?
I never asked before; do thou not sit
Quiet from me, and wills what thou thinks fit?
But I fear Thetis (with her silver feet)
Held you by th'knees, and early did you greet;
And I suspect that you Achilles fain
Would honor, though many of Greeks were slain,
Then did Cloud-gathering Jove reply, Oh Wife!
Wretched art thou, to make with me this strife:
To know my Deeds it will no profit be,
But rather take away my love from thee:
Then sit thou down, and now obey my word,
For if that thou and I do not accord,
Then all the gods in Heaven cannot withstand
When I on thee do lay my conquering hand.
This said, the honored oxe-eyd Juno then
Sat silent, and durst not reply again:
Then all the gods in Heaven this ill did take,
Till Vulcan pleaded for his Mothers sake: Vulcan's speech.

These works are deadly, whilst that you do spend
These words, you make the gods themselves contend;
This Banquet will to us no pleasure be,
But rather grief if you do not agree;
But I will pray my Mother now to cease
Her chiding, least that she does Jove displease;
For if he thunder, he can us then throw
From the high Heaven unto the earth below:
But speak him fair, then I do hope that he
Will to us all very propitious be:
This said, he rose, the double-handed Cup
Into his Mothers hands he straight did put,
And spoke unto her, Mother, Suffer, bear,
I grieve to see you beat, you are so dear:
I cannot help you, none was ever known
To strive with Jove sitting upon his Throne;
When once I helped, he caught me by the heel,
And flung me down from Heaven; I could not feel
Ground all the day; But when the black Night came,
The Sintij straight did take me up again.
VVhite-wristed Juno smiling took the Cup,
And drank about, lame Vulcan filled up;
Nectar to all loud laughter went about,
To see lame Vulcan pour in and out.
The Banquet held all day, till Sun was set,
And every one unto his fill did eat;
Apollo did upon his fair Harp play,
The Muses answered, singing all the day:
But after that the fair Sun's light was set,
Then every one unto his home did get,
Which Vulcan (lame on both feet) made, for he
Had built a House for every Deity;
Heavens-thundring- Jove unto his Bed did high,
And Juno on her golden Throne stepped nigh.
The end of the first Book.
THese first six Verses I translated thus, and showed them and others to many
Scholars; but because I found one Gentleman something curious, I altered them,
as you see in the beginning.

Goddess the wrath of great Achilles sing,
Who griefs unnumbred to the Greeks did bring,
And many valiant souls to hell did send,
Their noble Bodies Fouls and Dogs did rend.
Jove willed all this, from him this strife begun,
Of Agamemnon, and great Pel'us Son.
Verses upon General BLAKE, his Funeral.
VOwels do make the sound, Letters alone
Cannot be read, nor understood by none.
The Vowels are the same in Drake, and Blake,
Some think these two should equal honor take:
Drake conquered by lame Vulcan; such a toy
An Ape might do, or every little boy,
Fire a sleepy Navy. But Blake's fight
Did the Sea Monsters, and great Neptune fright,
In the black Trojan-storm, his Trident there
He used, but now he let it fall for fear*
The Butter-boxes melted with great heat,
And drunken Dutchmen stunck in grease and sweat;
Spaniard and Turk, both these together quake,
And yield their Captives up to dreadful Blake:
Mars feared a Conquest from the factious gods,
And sent for thee, knowing he should have odds
Against them all: Jove did Achilles fear;
Behold a greater then Achilles there.
IN the Country (this last Summer) I taught a Gentleman's Son and he being
gone a hunting, or coursing, I had great leisure, and began to translate Homer;
at the first I translated sixteen verses, every time more or less, till I came
almost to Nestor's Speech: I read them to some scholars, and they persuaded me
to finish the first Book, which (by God's assissance) I did, to whom be glory
for ever.

FINIS.

