SIR JOHN HOLLAND HIS SPEECH in Parliament.

Declaring the great and manifold Grievances of this Kingdom, both in Church
and Commonwealth.

Occasioned by the wicked practices and Arbitrary power of the disturbers and
subverters of our Peace, our Liberties, and our Laws.

Published by a true Copy.

LONDON, Printed for John Thomas, 1641.

SIR JOHN HOLLANDS SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT.
Mr. Speaker,
TImes of Action, are not for Rethorick and Elocution, which emboldens me to
rise, and although I cannot but know and acknowledge my self, to be one of the
youngest Scholars, and meanest Proficients, in this great School of wisdom;
yet I cannot but think it part of my duty at this time, to deliver both my
sense, and Conscience; which I shall do (under the favor of this Honorable
Assembly) with all sincerity.

We are called hither (Mr. Speaker) by the Kings Regal power, We sit here by
his Majesty's Grace and favor, And since his Majesty have been so graciously
pleased, to entrust the government of all in our hands, I doubt not, but we
shall lay such a foundation, in the beginning of this Parliament, that we
shall make it a happy and long lived one; Since the Eminent dangers of these
times; the present distempers of this State, and herein, both his Majesty's and
our own necessities, yea, and the Kingdoms safety too, requires it.

Sir, it appears by the Report you have so faithfully made of his Majesty's
gracious Declaration, that we are now called hither for these four principal
Causes.

1. For the supply of his Majesty's present wants. 2. For the relief of our
Brethren in the Northern parts. 3. For the remo^ve of the Scotch forces; And
4. For the redress of our own Grievances.
That his Majesty's wants are great and many Sir, I think there is no man
doubts it, and it is as certain, our Grievances are so too;

They are great and many; as well in the Church as the Commonwealth; I shall
but touch them in either, in regard they have already been remonstrated in both.

In the Church; By the Usurped power and practice, of some Prelates and their
Adherents.

By which means, many great, many dangerous Innovations, of Doctrine, of
Discipline, of Government have been thrust upon us.

In the Church; By the public sufferance of Priests and Jesuits, not only
to come, but to abide in the Land.

By which means, the Number of Romish Catholics are dangerously multiplied.

Idolatry increased and Gods heavy Judgments, highly provoked.

In the Commonwealth; By the late and great inundations of the Prerogative
Royal, which has broke out and almost overturned all our liberties, even
those that were, best and strongliest fortified. The Grand-Charter it self
(Sir) That, which has been so often, so solemnly confirmed, in the succession
of so many Princes, ratified in the beginning of his Majesty's Reign, Founded
by the wisdom of former ages, purposely to keep the Beam even and right
between Sovereignty and Subjection; Even this (Mr. Speaker) the choice and
dearest part of our Inheritance, have been infringed, broken, and set at naught.

In the Commonwealth. By the over-potency of some few Great-ones, secreat
Councillors of State, from whose advises ('it is thought) the greatest part of
those distempers, under which the body of this Commonwealth at this time
labors derives their originalls.

In the Commonwealth. By the mischievous practices and policies of many and
subtle Projectours, who under the title of the Kings profit, and the public
good, have raised to themselves large revenues, and that by the damage of the
whole Kingdom.

They are (Sir) the very Mothes and Cankers that have fretted and eaten our all
Trade, all Commerce, the very Beauty, strength, health and life of this famous
Island.

In the Commonwealth, By the long and large entertainment of Forrainers and
strangers, and that at his Majesty's excessive charges; By which means. His
Majesty's Coffers are emptied, his Revenues shortened and the Kingdom many
other ways oppressed.

But (Sir) J shall travail my self no further in this so large, so wide a
field, but shall now only crave favor to present you with mine own weak
apprehensions for our progression in those particulars for which we have been
called, and in all humility submit them.

And, First in the supply of his Majesty's Wants.

J do humbly desire we may proceed therewith, in its due time, and then, with
as much loyalty, duty, and liberality, as ever people expressed toward so good a
Prince. And truly Sir, J think I may with confidence say the present affairs
of the Kingdom requires it.

In the Relief of our Brethren in the Northern parts; With a sense of Charity
and fellow-feeling of their miseries, afflictions and losses.

Jn the remove of the Scotch Forces.

With a soft and tender hand, of Mediation, Pacification, and Reconciliation,
if possibly it may be wrought, with his Majesty's Honor and this Kingdoms
safety; If not? And that they shall still refuse to depart in Peace. Then (Mr.
Speaker) to repel and expulse them, with stout and resolute Spirits, with
valiant and united Hearts and Hands, such; as shall best suite with our duty to
God, our King, our Country, such, as shall best become the Honor and ancient
Renown of the English Nation.

In the Redress of our Grievances.

Jn those of the Church, which ought to have priority in our Consultations, as
well in respect of necessity, as dignity; A love Principuum, In these I desire
Sir, and J doubt not but we shall proceed, with all true Piety, well tempered
and right guyded zeal, toward God, his House, his Truth.

In those of the Commonwealth; With a Religious care of our Countries
freedom, in the faithful performance of that trust reposed in us, by those
that sent us, in the preservation of our Rights, our ancient Rights, the Rights
of our Inheritances.

Our Liberties, our Privileges, our Proprieties. Yet in all Sir, J do humbly
desire we may proceed, as best suiting with the Nature, and condition of these
troublesome times; as best becoming the Honor, Dignity, and Wisdom of this
so great a Court, so great a Counsel, with all Temper, Modesty, and due
Moderation.

FINIS.

