A SPECIAL HELP TO ORTHOGRAPHIE: OR, The True-writing of English.

Consisting of such Words as are alike in sound, and unlike both in their
signification and Writing:

As also, Of such Words which are so near alike in sound, that they are
sometimes taken one for another.

Whereunto are added diverse Orthographical observations, very needful to be
known.

Published by RICHARD HODGES, a Schoolmaster, dwelling in Southwark, at the
Midle-gate within Mountagueclose, for the benefit of all such as do affect
TRUE-WRITING.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Cotes. 1643.

To the Reader.
HAving duly considered (Courteous Reader) with what great difficulty, the
True-writing of English is attained, and withal perceiving the causes thereof,
I have for many years together, taken no little pains, to show how they may be
taken away; and having now finished the Work, my desire is, that every one whom
it concerns, may receive benefit thereby A piece whereof (not one of the least)
J do here present unto thee; by giving thee a sight of such words, as are alike
in sound, and unlike both in their signification and writing: as also of such
words, which are so near alike in sound, that they are sometimes taken one for
another: all which words (of either kind) are so plainly distinguished, by
different Letters, in all the examples, that they may be well known the one from
the other. Whereunto J have added many needful observations, for a farther help
to True-writing: which if (with the rest) they find acceptance, J shall be
encouraged yer long, to publish the rest of the Work, (that is in part of
another kind) which concerns not only True-writing, but also, to show such an
easy and speedy way, for the True-pronouncing and Reading of English (which will
be so exceedingly useful, both to our own Nation and Strangers) as the like
has never yet bin published. In the mean time, commending this which J have now
done, with all my former labors, to the Blessing of God, and thy favorable
acceptance, I rest

Thine (as thou giv'st me any encouragement) to do thee farther service,
RICHARD HODGES.

A SPECIAL HELP TO ORTHOGRAPHIE.
Such words as are alike in sound, and unlike both in their signification and
writing, are expressed by different Letters, in these examples following.
A.
TO assent or agree. An ascent or going up. A sent or savor. A piece to shoot
withal. A piece of bread. Two loaves apiece. Let him that has a loud voice,
be allowed to speak aloud. I have not received aught thereof. You ought not to
do it. The air is clear. The heir of all his goods. He shot an arrow, into a
narrow place. An eye to see withal. A nigh or near kinsman. An I and a U will
either of them make a syllable alone. Take a note of it. Take an oat-cake for
your supper. A notion or an inward knowledge. An ocean of water. To tithe Mint
and Annise. Agnes, a woman's Christen name. An idle person ought not to eat.
Anne, a woman's Christen name. Alas, that ever I did it! A less, or a Maid. An
altar for sacrifice. To alter ones mind. A ledge of a Table. Allege what thou
can against me. A lie, or a false speech. My near allie, or kinsman. A light
in a dark place. Alight from thy horse. To cast a lot. To allot, or appoint
for ones share. A loan, or lending of money. Why do you sit alone? A lure for
a Hawk. To allure or entice. Adieu, or farewell. A due debt ought to be paid. He
adjoined me to do it. A joyn'd-stool. A Judge of a Court. Adjudge him to be
worthy of it. As Soon as she came in, she fell into a swoun. That which the
Shoemaker got with his awl, he spent it al, (all) To assault or set upon. A
salt-eel. To assign. To give a sign. Attainted of treason. A tainted piece of
flesh. She was sumptuously attired. A tired Jade. A mate or companion. To
amate or daunt. A maze, or an intricate way, or labyrinth. To amaze. A rest for
a Musket. Arrest him for the debt. A pease blossom. Appease his wrath. A peal
well rung. Appeal to Caesar. A tract, or discourse. Attract the iron with the
lodestone. An abbetter, or upholder. A better color than the other. Appear
the next Court-day. A Peer of the Realm. A wait-player. A wait his coming. A
weight to weigh withal. Tread not awry. A wry-mouthed Plaise. Such a queint
discourse, as I shall acquaint you withal.
B.
To bow the knee. The bough of a tree. If you be comne so soon to work, it will
also become you to be diligent therein. The boughs of trees. He boweth his
knees. To bowze or tiple (tipple) The sweat of his brows. The bullock did
browze. Barbary, a Country so called. Barbara, a woman's Christen name.
Barberie, a red fruit so called. Brute, a man's name. A brute beast. A bruit, or
report. To baul, or to make a rude noise in speaking. Baal, an idol so called.
A bal to play with. Bal, a man's name (Ball, ball) Good and bad. Who bade him
do it? A bead. Bid, a man's name. A beaker to drink in. Becher, one of the
sons of Benjamin. The hawk did beak her self. Ale and beer. A biere to carry a
dead corpse. A Straw- berie. Sud- bury, Canter- bury, etc. By whose authority
was it done? Buy it for me in the Market. Set meat on the board. Let the hole
be bored. The bird was bill'd like a hawk. To build a house. To bolt the door.
To boult, or sift meal. To be well bred, or brought up. To earn his own bread.
He was weary in beholding of it. You are much beholden to him. A Coney- burrow.
The Borough of Southwark. Coney- Burrows. Boroughs or Towns. A blue-colour. The
wind blew it away.
C.
Cox, a man's surname. Cocks and Hens. Cocketh up the hay. A coat of diverse
colors. A sheep- cote. To quote a place of Scripture. Cotes, a man's name.
Childrens coats. He quoteth the place. The clause of a sentence. The bird
claweth him with her claws. The Butcher did call, for the caul of the liver.
(call) Take your course. Let them bury the corpse. To take good courses. He
courseth his horse. Dead corpses. I cooled his courage. I could not do it. The
collar of a coat. I will cool your choler. A culler of Apples. A color, died in
grain. A cousin or near kinsman, will sometimes cozen his near kindred. The
Kings Council. Give him good counsel. It is a common thing for men, to commune
or talk one with another. The Wheat is full of cockle and darnel. A cochle-shel.
He behaved himself like a valiant Champion, in the champain field. To choose a
fit companion. The Ox cheweth the cud. A wicked crew or company. The cock crew.
The hounds did chase the Deer, which were in the Chase. You come but now, but
he is comne already. Wicked crues or companies. A cruse or pot to drink in. A
cruel master to his servants. A cap wrought with crewel. He gave his consent,
to have a concent of music.
D.
The young birds sit under their dam. To damn or condemn. A fallow- deer. A
dear friend. A deep pit or hole. Diep, a town so called. There are diverse men
which are skilful diverse. A buck and a do. His cake is dough. Concerning the
word descension, there has been much dissension. It is not worth a dollar.
Full of dolor and grief. There is a fish that is called a dolphin. The
Daulphine of France. Who was the deviser of this, to multiply the quotient by
the divisour?
E.
Easter and Whitsontide. Queen Hester and Mordecai. John Eaton has eaten up
all the meat. A Scholar of Aeton. There were eight swans eggs found in the ait.
(islet) Can thou earn thy bread? His bowels did yern. Emerods, a kind of
disease. Emeralds, a kind of precious stone. He does exercise himself in
reading. To exercise or adjure. I eat my meat to day, better than I ate it
yesterday.
F.
The cattle did feed. His Attorney was fee'd. Pay your fees. She feeth her
Attorney. I would fain finish my work. She did feign her self sick. They did
find much gold. They were fined very much. Their naves and their felloes, were
not fellows. Take heed lest Philip give you a fillip. Put the sheep into the
fold, when the Mare has foal'd. I fore-tel this unto thee, that I will restore
him fourfold. To set forth a man's praise, to the fourth degree. Heat the oven
with furze. He furreth his gown rich with furs. Our hearts are very foul. Fish
and fowl. His son Francis and his daughter Frances came to see him. If it
freeze, put on your friese-jerkin. She freeth him from danger. To kill a flea.
To flay of the skin. (off) Lice and fleas. She fleaeth her clothes. She flayeth
the Rabbet. To fleer and laugh. A flee'r away in battle. A sweet smelling
flour. The finest wheat flower. Sweet smelling flours. The beer floureth in the
cup.
G.
I guest, that he would be a very welcome ghest. A ghost or spirit. Thou go
but lamely. Some take delight in their foolish jests. Gests or worthy acts. He
jesteth, and takes delight in foolish jesting. Ox- gals. The gauls upon the
horses back. He gauleth his horse. A gage or pledge. To gawge a vessel. A
gilt-cup. The guilt of sin troubles the conscience. She did sigh and groan
because her corn was not well- grown. To glister like gold. The Physician has
prescribed a clyster. A guise or fashion. Mr. Guy's man told me of it.
H.
Heart, a man's name, or the name of a beast. Man's heart is deceitful. A hard
heart must be broken. I heard his voice. The hounds do hunt the hare. Men are
forbidden to wear long hair. Hie thee home. High and low. Heigh-ho. Thou hiest
thee about thy work. The highest fourm in the School. Hide not thy talent. She
hied her about her work. Make haste to do it. Why have thou done it? A hole
wherein things are hidden. A part for the whole. Holy men and women are Saints.
A work that is wholly finished. When he was in the hollow, he began to whoop and
hollaw. Stay not long from home. To whom shall I give it? A holme tree. To go
to their long homes. Holmes, a man's name. I hope to see my work finished. I
holp him to do his work. The hoops of a tub. He hoopeth the tub. He whoopeth
and hollaweth. Let him sing the hymn, that can sing best. The bread does hoar.
She played the whore. Avoid the company of whores. The bread, or any thing that
hoareth. To change his hue. Hughe, a man's Christen-name. They have changed
their hues. Hughes, a man's surname. A herald of arms belonging to King Harold.
If he come well and happily home, I may happily come and see him.
I.
I and thou are well agreed. Eye me in the doing of it. To incite or provoke
one to do a thing. To be always in sight. Inure thy self to do it. Put this
in ure. In your account it is but folly.
J.
Not in earnest but in jest. A Gest or worthy act. In their Gests they used too
many jests. She loves to jet up and down. A jeat-stone. The juice or sap of
any thing. A joice to bear up the boards. Let the house be made a jakes, for
Mr. Jaques. She is of a gentle or mild disposition. A gentil, or magot. A
jointer, a tool to work withal. A woman's jointure during her life. A jurdon, or
chamber pot. The river Jordan.
K.
Mr. Knox, he knocks many knocks at the door. A kennel for dogs. Sweep the
chanel very clean. Give me leave to kill a deer. The bricks are in the brick-
kilne.
L.
The Latine-tongue is very useful. A latten-ladle. The cow lowed after her calf
very loud. Take the least and leave the greatest, lest he be angry. Lemans or
concubines. Lemons and Orenges. If he cannot teach him his lesson well, you
must lessen his wages. The litter of whelps, were carried in the horse- licter.
The (...) of wine or oil. To leese, or loose ones labor. (...) that can leap
very well. Lepers that are full of leprosy. (...) in the fittest time. High and
low, rich and poor. (...), or command. One that is lower of stature. A (...)
after evil things. A bright luster or shining. The man that was out- laned,
deserved neither laud nor praise.
M.
At his Maneur-house, al things were done in a very good manner. He hanged his
mantle upon the mantel-tree of the chimney. The Medes and Persians. Meads or
Meadows. Meat and drink must be had. A mete-yard to mete withal. The Lawyer
sent a message, concerning the message. A meater that gives meat to the
cattle. A corn- meter. A meteor in the air. Martin, a man's surname. Marten, the
name of a fowl. Mr. Marshal had good skill in martial discipline. He did moan
and bewail himself, when his corn was mowen. More or more. Take the sith to
mow it down. The cat will mouse well, when she is amongst the corn- moughs.
Hawks- mites. He mueth his hawk. To muse or meditate. The poor widows mite. We
have no might nor power of our selves. If he had had a good mind, he would
not have so under- mined me. His man Maurice did dance the morice. Murrain, a
disease amongst cattle. Murion, a headpiece. Thousands and Millions. Musk-
melons.
N.
Nash, a man's surname. To gnash the teeth. It was not for naught, that the figs
were so naught. Yea and nay. The horse did neigh.
O.
O my friend remember me. Oh that my friend would remember me! Owe nothing to
any but love. Gold- ore. The water-mans oar. The ower of a debt. A pair of
oars. The owers of debts. The ordure was laid upon the ground in good order.
Our life being so short, every hour thereof ought to be well spent. Neither
ours nor yours, will be done in three hours.
P.
To pare the cheese. A pair of turtle doves. To pause a little. The lions paws.
The lion paweth with his paw. The palate of his mouth was down, when he lay upon
his pallet. Peter and Paul. Pal, a kind of robe so called. (Pall) A Parson or
Vicar, may either of them be a comely person. A faithful Pastor, will feed his
sheep in a good pasture. (...) is not seemly for a fool. The lions preys. The
lion preyeth upon the lamb. He prays for help from above. The Judge of the
Common pleas, cannot please every one. Mr. Pierce, did pearce it with a sword.
The scholar did perse and constru^ his lesson. She wears her patens, and
she has obtained Letters patents. Pillars to up-hold a building. Cater-
pillars. Pride goes before destruction. He pried or looked into it. What
profit can we receive, by a false Prophet? The propper of it up, was a very
proper man. He has no power to power it out.
R.
The rain that refreshes the earth. The rein of a bridle. The Reign of a King
The reins of the back. The Reigns of Kings. The King reigns. If it raineth
get into a house. He that was of a noble race, did raze the walls. The rays of
the Sun. It is not good to raise contention. Some herbs are ranker than other.
Rancour and malice. A red color. What Authors have thou read? A reddish
color. A radish root. Can you give a reason, why a fig is better than a
raisin? Strong reasons. He reasons very well. Figs and raisins. It is as good
a ream of paper, as any is in the whole Realm. Reams of paper. Realms well
governed. Rhemes, the name of a place. Mr. Ri^e took a rise, and leapt over,
where the rice was sold. A rite or a ceremony. Right and wrong. To write and
read. A wheel- vright. Wright, a man's surname. Rites and ceremonies. Men will
defend their rights. Wheel- wrights. He righteth himself. He writes a letter.
The rine wherein the brain lies. The rind of a pomegranate. The river Rhine.
Roe, a man's surname. A roe-buck. A row of trees. The ro^ and hindes of the
field. Rows of trees. He roweth upon the water. A red- rose. Rose a woman's
Christen-name. When there was a rot amongst the sheep, I wrote him a letter.
He^ ^^aught it from of the shelf, when he wrought with me. (off) I had a
riding rod in my hand, when I rode upon the highway. When I rode along the
road, I bought some fish that were hard- roed; and I discerned, that the
Watermen, which carried my daughter Rhode, rowed apace. The roads, or common
highways, that are in the I Will of Rhodes. (Isle) The highest room in any house,
of the City of Rome. (room) She went round about, and rowned him in his ear.
She that did wear a tiffany- ruf, did also wear a rough garment. (ruff) When
she hears the bells ring, she will wring her hands. When the bells were rung,
thee wrung her hands. He rued the time, that ever he was so rude. He that had
so many cheeses in the cheese- rack, did also suffer Ship- wrack.
S.
He that made slight of it, had a slight in the doing of it. He was no saver
in buying such commodities, though they had a sweet- savor. Savors and
loosers. Sweet savours. He savoureth not that which is good. The Seas have
diverse names. To seize upon a man's goods. Ceasing from strife. Cessing him to
pay a great sum. (sum) Will you not cease talking? Why do you ces him so much?
(cesse) The buyer and the seller do oftentimes offend. A wine- cellar. The one
Sutler, was subtiller than the other. There was no sign, either of a sine or
tangent. A Censor or reformer of manners. Aarons censer. To censure or judge.
The third Centurie. An herb that is called centory. He did sheer the sheep,
which he had in Buckingham- shire. Cite him to appear. The sight of the eye.
The fite of an house. He was cited to appear. Quick- sighted. A house well
sited. A siren or mermaid. Simon of Cyrene. A lute and a cittern. A lemon or a
citron. Mount- Sion. A scion or graf which is to be grafted into a stock.
(graffe) A sink to convey the water. The Cinque Ports. Why will you have it so?
To sow the seed. To sewe a garment. The sole of a shoo. The soul and body.
The soles of his shoos. He soleth his shoos. Souls and bodies. Bought and
sold. The shoos were sol'd. His body was very sound. He fell into a swoun. I was
in such a strait, that I was forced to take the crooked for the straight A
sloe-tree. He goes but a slow pace. A sore which cannot be healed. He swore
or swear an oath. A sly-fellow. Sligh, a man's surname. A hedge and a style. A
style or form of writing. The hawk did soar aloft. The sower did sow the seed.
To shoot an arrow. A suit of apparel. A suit in Law. Shute, a man's surname He
had three shoots with his bow. Suits of apparel. Suits in Law. He shoots
with his bow. He suteth himself with apparel. He non- suiteth him at the
Law. What succor can we look for, from a blood- sucker? Some would be glad, if
they had but such a sum of money. (sum) When the Sun shines, my Son will walk
into the field. (Sun, Son.)
T.
To make a wild beast tame. Them, a town so called. A tamer beast than the
other. Thamar, Judahs daughter in law. A tax or tribute. He tacketh it
together with ta^ks. The treble and the tenor. A tenor or form of words. The
tenure whereby a man holds his land. There was one, that was of their
acquaintance. He had more knowledge in hens and turkeys, than he had in an
emerald or a turquois. We ought to redeem the time. Thyme, an herb so called.
Take heed you loose not the tide. The horses were tied together. A foot and a
toe. She spinneth flax and towe. The feet and toes. Be careful how you tose
the wool. A toad. Fingred and toed. He towed his Barge. Go tole the bell. To
pay tol or tribute. (toll) I told him of it when I toled the bell. It is too
much for two men, to write in one day. A tract or little treatise. I trackt him
home to his house. A small treatise, containing diverse treaties, concerning
peace. I had then more work than I could do. The King was thrown from his
throne. It was through your help, that I came through. His throat will be in
danger, if he throw't away.
V.
It is a vain thing, to let blood in a wrong vein. A venture or utterer of
commodities. To venture or hazard. Venters of commodities. Ventures at Sea. He
ventureth it. When you filled the vial, I played upon the viol.
W.
A way to walk in. A weigh of cheese. Ways to walk in. Weighs of cheese. He
weighs the cheese. Fire and water are good servants. Walter, a man's Christen
name. Deep waters. He waters his garden. Walters, a man's surname To wait
upon his master. To sell by weight. The waits, or wait players of the City. Just
weights and bal^es. He waits his turn. If you were wise, you would wear
warmer clothes. A wich-tree and a hasel-tree. A witch ought not to live. When
you go to the wood, I would go along with you. When he wooed her, he was almost
wood. A wad of straw to lie upon. Woad to die withal.
Y.
A bow made of yew. You and I are good friends. V and I are vowels. Yews, or
yew-trees. Use thy friends courteously. Your friends are well. Put this in ure.
A basin and ewre. Neither ours nor yours. Basins and ewres. He in- ureth
himself to it. Ye that are wise, use yea and nay in your communication.
Such words which are so near alike in sound, as that they are sometimes taken
one for another; are also expressed by different Letters, in these examples
following.
A.
ASk the carpenter for his ax, whereby he has done such strange ac^ Abel was
not able to do it. It will amase you, to see him carry a mace. It is al-one,
whether it be in company or alone. His actions were not answerable to his
axioms. Bows and arrows. Cloth of arras. Give your advice, and advise me for
the best. The valley of Achor. An acre of ground. The ant is a wise creature.
An uncle and an aunt. Since I learned my Accidence, there have bin strange
accidents. Some are in their behavior, as a wild as. (ass)
B.
To play at bowls. To drink in boles. An Earl and a Baron. A barren womb. A
wheel- barrow. To lend and borrow. The Borough of Southwark. He spent so much
upon barley, that he went but barely. Boyse, a man's surname. Boys and girls. A
bath to bathe in. The voluntary Bands were unwilling to come in bonds. A
thread- bare garment. To bear a burden. The child did begin, to pull of his
biggin. (off) Our breath is the cause why we breathe. If he loose his bauble in
going to Babel, he will babble. (babble) His bile brake, when the pot did boil.
John Bruce did bruise his leg, when he ate the brewis in the brewhouse. The
little child began to batle, when his father went to the battle. I did bore a
hole, through the nose of the wild boar. Who will send an arrant knave, to do
an errand? Bows and arrows. Boughs and branches. The sause for the bittern,
was made very bitter. Proud boasters, may sometimes want pillows and bolsters
for their beds. They both went into a boothe. You think that you have taken the
best, but another beast may be as good Your book is not so well bost, that you
should have cause to boast. They put on their boots, when they went into their
boats.
C.
Write your copies, and get you to play in the copise. If you cannot leave
coughing, you will soon be put into a coffin. When he cough't, I caught him
by his coat. To tithe mint and cummin. To be long in coming. Before I played
at ches, I unlockt the chests. (chesse) His chaps were full of chops. It was a
good chare, to set him in a chair, and give him good cheer. A capital or great
offense. The Capitol, a place in Rome. Currants to carry away the water. Raisins
and corrants. By a necessary consequence, they may prove dangerous consequents.
Spare no cost, to travel into every coast. What were the causes, that the
causeys were no better looked unto?
D.
The dun color was well done. He was but a dunse, that knew not the duns from
the other colors. Comely and decent. Of a noble descent. To dissent or
disagree. Concerning the word descension, there has bin much dissension. When
you discomfite your enemies, it is no discomfort to me. Bucks and does. Let
him take but one dose. It was such a fine device, as none could devise a
better. Before his decease, he was sick of a dangerous disease. Thou art but
dust and ashes, why do thou lift up thy self? In the time of a dearth, not
long before his death, he was so deaf that he could not hear. It was not
without desert, that he was robbed in the Desert.
E.
In looking toward the East, she spilt her yeest. She does earn her living,
by spinning of yarn. You must either take out of the hedge, the either or the
stake. His ears were deaf, for many years together. If you had not measured so
many else, you should else have wronged your self. The most eminent man, was in
the most imminent danger. When I was with him but even now, he gave me good
words inow, but money little enough. The two sons of Eli. The I Will of Ely.
(Isle)
F.
It was a false report, that you had so many falls by the way. The Cook has
more skill in a froise, than a phrase. The watermen had many fares, to carry to
the fairs. His house in the fens, was without a fence. When I fought with him,
I committed a fault. The hounds do follow the fallow deer. A gown lined with
fur. A fir tree. (furre, fur) To farm or make clean. A form of words. A fourm
to sit upon. Pharez, a man's name. Fairies and hobgoblins. The Farmer sold his
former years crop. A small fly may flee into a narrow place. The fishes had
fins and scales. The fiends of hell.
G.
The Gallants did drink many gallons of wine. The child went into the garden,
and there he found his Guardian. A glass to drink in. To set a fair glos upon
any thing. (glass, gloss) It was but a foolish gesture, that was used by the
jester. The carman that did wear a jerking, never left jerking his horse.
H.
John Howel did howl, when he was thrown into the hole. Whose hose and shoos
are these? He was but a homely man, which read the Homily. To hallow or make
holy. A hollow place in the ground. I do gues that I shall have ghests. (guess)
The beadle that whipped the whores, being very hoarse, when he went away he rode
upon a horse. She took away all that was his. The serpents and the snakes did
his. (hiss) Let them drive away the hens from hence. Holly and Ivy. Holy men
and women are despised in this world. Hepher, a man's name. A young heifer.
I.
His man James, did break the jambs of the wall. (wall) A man that is ingenious
and witty, ought also to be ingenuous and Gentleman-like. The way is not
impassable, nor the thing is not impossible. It does imply as much, as that he
ought to employ himself well. Why is it not yet done? An idol is not to be
worshipped. An idle person ought not to eat. As you have work enough to do, so
you have men inow to do it. His eyes cannot see the ice. Joice, a woman's
Christen-name. The joys of heaven.
K.
I know that the dog can gnaw a bone. It is well known, that the bone was well
gnawn. The knots are fast tied. The gnats are very busy in hot weather.
L.
The lines are fairly written. His loins are girded about. A man of a low
stature. The Ox did low. A man of lower stature. Why do you lowre upon me? When
the lead was laid, he led me by the hand. The leas were added to his lease.
He that told many lies, his clothes were full of lice. I was very loath to do
it, yea, I did loathe to do it. When the leases are made, give them to the
Leassees.
M.
The day before Marie did marry, she appointed the bones that were full of
marrow, to be boiled on the morrow. They that wrought in the mines, made
known their minds. To mince the meat. The Mints where money is coined. I did
mis the fight of him, by reason of the mists. (miss) To mow down the corn. A
mough of corn. The maids went to gather rushes in the meads. The one mower did
mow more than the other. Moles that cast up the earth. Moulds wherein metals
are cast. When he had the myrrh and aloes, he was full of mirth. A rat and a
mouse. Barley moughs. To rise betimes in the morning, in a day of mourning. The
hawks- mues. A muse. Her mistres did reveal many mysteries. (mistress)
N.
It is neither you nor I, that can lift the nether millstone. The nones of a
moonth. It was done for the nonce. (month) Some of the needles which she
used, were needles. (needless) His niece did neese very much. I was never a
whit the near, for all the labor which I bestowed.
O.
He thought it enough to do it once, but every ones mind is not alike. He
that was the owner of it, gained much honor by it. You ought to have done it
very often. He did own one of them on the first day, but not on the second.
P.
Pare the aple, but not the pear. The woman that went upon her patens, had
very good paterns. Such as are Patients, have much need of patience. The
feathers of the pullen, were ready for pulling. The way is passable; and the
thing is possible. He had more pens to write withal, than he had pence in his
purse. In taking away the beans and pease, he disturbed the peace. He laid a
plot, how to take away his plat of ground. The principal man of al others,
taught the first principle. Forget not to power out thy drink to the thirsty,
and to relieve the poor. A Prince is to be honored. The prints may easily
be seen. Kings and Princes. A Princes, the daughter of a King. (Princess) He
removed out of his place, that the plaise might be dressed for supper. The time
was past, before the paste could be made. Before he came into his presence,
he sent him many presents. He sold that for a good price, which he had taken
before as a prise. He had many pulls at the bel-rope. Let me feel your pulse.
Written both in verse and prose. A man full of prowes. (prowess) To pearce it
with a sword. The Peers of the Realm. Pontius Pilate. A skilful Pilot to guide
a ship. They laid a plot for his life. A pleasant plat of ground. A parasite,
is not altogether so bad as a paricide. The leaves of a poplar. A popular
applause. In all his promises, he had no respect to the premises. Some folks
are hard to please. Plays are out of request. The heads upon the Bridge are set
upon poles. Paul's steeple. Some when they have played al day, will plead for
themselves.
R.
To trust in a broken reed. To read and write. He wrought hard when he wrote
his copy, but he learned his lesson by rote. To raze the walls. To raise the
siege. A barbers rasour. A raiser of sedition. A mouse and a rat. The sheep die
of the rot. A man that is real in his word. It is worth a ryal. The blood-
royal. A child reverent to his Parents. A reverend or grave man. He was wroth,
because she was full of wrath, so rathe.
S.
When they had filled their sives, with onions and cives. They whetted their
sithes: and being full of grief, they fetched many sighs. It belonged to his
science, to have knowledge in grafs and scions. I lent him my signet, when I
gave him the cygnet. Cypres-trees. (Cypress) Cipers hatbands. To stand for
ciphers. Go to sir, Sir John will talk with you, when you come into Surrey.
When you sow your seed, drive out the sow and her pigs. When the sower went to
sow his seed, I gave him a bunch of sour grapes. When the sows had pigs, all the sowse was eaten. Their sores were al healed. A sourse. He put eight
sleaves of silk, into his wide sleeves. She sees that the pot is ready to
seethe. To say well and do well. The Sea is never quiet. A woman is the weaker
sex. There are several sects. When the steed is stolen, he will stand you in no
stead. At his work he is very slow. He is fallen into a slough. I gave unto
the spies, great store of spice. They sawed them with saws. The Cook made good
sause. The sense of the words must be understood. Sweet sents. The Seas are
dangerous. When will you cease talking? Seizing upon his goods. Ceasing from
strife. Why do you wear out your shoos, to see the shows? Have no society with
him. The satietie of the rich hurts them. When they gathered sloes, they fell
into the sloughs. Sir John sent for the Surgeon. (Surgeon) His daughter
Cicelie, went into the Country of Sicilie: and afterward she journeyed from
Cilicia, into Silesia. All the sheep were carried into the ship. He has bin
very sorry for his sins, ever since.
T.
Counted by tens. Mood and tense. To dwell in tents. To pay the tenths. The
fire-shovel and the tongs. We do often offend with our tongues. A trough for
cattle to drink in. A trophie, as a token of victory. The first tome of a book.
An epitaph upon a tomb. To be tossed up and down. Make a toast for the ale.
When thy thigh is out of joint, send for the Surgeon. The scholar had more skill
in a trope, than in a troop. (troup) Thou desire to do it, though it be to
thy hinderance.
U.
The volley of shot, which they gave in the valley, was of little value. When
she was in the vale, she put a vail over her face. In all the long vacation,
he followed his vocation. The verges or brims of things. The verjuice and the
vinegar. His vitals began to fail for want of victuals.
W.
The wilde-man, was able to wield a great sword. The dog was weary, when he
did wory the sheep. Whether of these two will ye have? Whither will ye go? By
their subtle wiles, they drew them into the wilds. They took away the
fisher-mens weels, against their wills. The wines were al cast away, by reason
of the winds. The wick of a candle. The days in a week. Thou wast unwise to
make so much waste. He did a wicked deed, in opening the wicket. He did wrest
his wrist. The man that was in the wood, was almost wood. I wist not that he
was there, but I wished that he might be there.
Examples of some words, wherein one sound is expressed diverse ways in writing.
Sea-ted, con- cei-ted, cea-sing, sei-zing, se-rious, Sce-va, ce-dar, Manas-
seh Phari- see, Wool-(...) sche-dule.

See-ded, suc- cee-ded, sie-sings, over- se-ers, pur- sey or fat men, mer- cie,
(or mer- cy)

Si-nister, sy-nagogue, Sci-pio, Scy-thian, Cy-prian, ci-vil, Ce-cil, Se-vern,
pur- sui-vant.

Si-lence, ci-ted, quick- sigh-ted, sig-ning, sci-ence, sy-ren, Cy-rene, sa-
ti-ety.

These syllables aforegoing, may suffice, to give a taste, of all the others in
this kind.

Some special observations, very needful to be known, for the help of
True-writing.
TAke heed that you never put a double consonant with an e, in the end of any
word: for there is no necessity thereof. And the rather we may be the bolder
so to do, because the Learned, both in Printing and Writing, do daily practice
it. Therefore, you must not write such words as these, thus, ladde, bed,
lidde, rod, budde, but thus, lad, bed, lid, rod, bud: and in like manner, you
are to write al other words which end with any other consonant: as al, hal,
bal, wall, gal, call, stal: only for your satisfaction heerin, you are to know,
that whenever a comes before l, in the end of any word, it must be
pronounced like au: and then, what need will there be of a double l, in the word
call, when it signifies as a verb, to call, more than there is in caul, the
substantive, when it signifies a caul or tire to wear upon the head? Besides,
forasmuch as we use to write the word al, with a single l, in al-most, and
al-together, by the same reason, we may as well write al with a single l, when
it is a simple word, as when it is compounded. Only in such words, as end with
f, or s, they are commonly written, with a double f and an e, and with a double
s and an e, as in chafe and brass: yet I see no reason, why custom should be
offended, if the two words aforegoing were written thus, chaf and bras; and so,
al other words of this kind: but I submit my self to the judgment of the
Learned: and therefore, howsoever I have practiced the same, in the Work
aforegoing, yet I have withal, set do^n each word, as it is the other way
written, that so both ways may be known.

Howsoever (as I said before) there is no neces^y, why a double consonant with
an e, should be put in the end of a word, yet for some Proper names, there is
an exception, as in these two, Anne and Emme; but though they are so written,
they must be pronounced like An and Em.

But I must not here forget to tell you, that the observations aforegoing, which
were for the writing of a single consonant always, in the end of a word, are
meant only of such consonants, whose forces are certainly known, and not of
such as are not: for there are some, whose forces are very uncertain, as g in
tar-get, has a different force from g, in the last syllable of gor-get: and
therefore our custom is, that whenever the force which g has in the last
syllable of gor-get, does come in the end of any word, with a short vowel
before it, it is expressed by dge, as in badge, ledge, ridge, lodge, judge: and
not thus, bag, leg, rig, log, jug: for, the force which g has in the last
syllable of gor-get, is not expressed in the latter words, but it is according to
the force of g in tar-get. And therefore I wish, that every one would take
special notice heerof, that they may see how needful it is, to have all the
letters so distinguished, as that their sounds and forces, might be certainly
known, the one from the other: for, then such words as these, which were
mentioned before, bag, leg, rig, log, jug, (if custom would allow it) might be
pronounced, as if they were written thus, badge, ledge, ridge, lodge, judge: but
as for things of this kind, I have spoken at large, in another Work, which I
intend yer long to publish. As I have showed before, how uncertain the force of
g is in many words, so also, I must speak something concerning the force of c,
though it be not altogether so uncertain as the other: for, c is always known
to have the force of s, before e and i, and might well be so called, if it were
distinguished accordingly; but c before any other letters, must be pronounced
like k, and ought so to be called: for, what difference is there between the
force of c, in these Latin words, lac, nec, sic, hoc, huc, and the force of
ck, in these English words, lack, neck, sick, lock, buck? yet you are to know,
that our custom is always to write ck, in the end of a word, whenever it
comes after a short vowel; (as in the words before) except it be after the
vowel oo when it is short, as in cook, hook, book, and the like. And now
forasmuch as the force of c and k, is al-one, and yet our custom is to write
them both, as in lack, neck, etc. it may be demanded, which might best be
spared? To this I answer, that in regard of the force, which is proper to
either of them, the one might be as well spared as the other; for, we might
as well write lac as lak, and hac as hak; yet of the two it were better, to write
lak than lac, and hak than bac, because the force of k, is better known than c:
but forasmuch as custom will allow neither, we must (for the present) write
both, as in lack, deck, lick, lock, luck: and so al others of this kind.

And forasmuch as it is our custom, to expres the force of k, after a short
vowel by ck, I may fitly take occasion heerby, to show when que ought to be
written, to expres (express) the force of k, in the end of a word, and the
rather, because it is so frequently used; as in Logique, Rhetorique,
Arithmetique, public, Catholic, and the like: where there is no reason, why
it should be written in any of them, as also in many others: The best help to
know, how to write such words, is to know those words which are derived of
them, for if we write Logician, Rhetorician, Arithmetician, publication, etc.
by the same reason, we ought to write Logic, Rhetoric, Arithmetic, public;
and not Logique, Rhetorique, etc. But in some words we must write que for k, as
in relic, oblique, traffic.

You ought to observe also, that ch has two several forces belonging thereto,
the one properly belongs to English words, and the other to Hebrew and Greek:
or to such English words as are borrowed from thence. The force which ch has in
English words, is expressed in the beginning of these words, namely, in charge,
chest, chip, chop, chalk, choke, chose, choose, churn. But when the force which
ch has, in the words aforegoing, does come in the end of a word, after a
short vowel, it is expressed by tch: as in these examples, namely, in catch,
fetch, ditch, botch, hutch. These words only are excepted, namely, rich,
which, such, much: and also the word touch, which is to be pronounced short
like tuch.

The force which ch has in Hebrew and Greek words, or in such English words,
as are borrowed from thence, are expressed in these examples, namely, in Cha-os,
Che-dor-la-o-mer, Al-chy-mist, choler, choleric, school, scholars, character,
Christ, Christian, Chro-ni-cle, echo, Eunuch, (which is pronounced by many
like Evnuke:) Shadrach, Lamech, Enoch, Ach-sah, me-cha-ni-cal, Mo-narch,
Mo-nar-chie, se-pul-chre, or se-pul-cher, Archangel, Mel-chi-se-de^h: Yea,
wheresoever ch is written, in the names either of men, women, or places,
thorowout the Old or New Testament, it must always be pronounced like k: as
also, in all other words whatsoever, which are borrowed, either from the Hebrew
or Greek: a few only excepted, which custom has exempted; as namely, Ra-chel
in the Old Testament, where the last syllable thereof is pronounced like the
last syllable in sa-chel: but I rather think, if the pronunciation thereof must
not be according to the other words, it ought to be pronounced thus, Ra^hel.
The word Che-ru-bin is also excepted. And in the New Testament Ty-chi-cus: and
no more do I remember. Likewise ch in Architect, must not be pronounced like
k: nor in any word beginning with arch, as Archduke, arch-enemy, and the like:
Archangel (as I have showed before) is only excepted.

It is also needles, (needless) to put a double consonant in the middle of such
words as these, namely, in saddle, meddle, fiddle, cobble, bubble: but rather
write them thus, sadle, meddle, fidle, coble, buble: for what use is there of a
double b, in bubble, more than there is in double and trouble?

I give you farther to understand, that if the vowels were so distinguished one
from another, as that their sounds might be certainly known, when they are
long, and when they are short, there is no necessity that any word whatsoever,
should have a double consonant, either in the middle, or any part of it, unles
it be to show the Etymology thereof: and this may plainly appear, even by
our own practice, in the writing of many English words: as for example, what
use is there of a double: in dittie, more than there is in City; or of a
double d in ruddy, more than in study; or of a double d in sodden, more than
there is in trodden? But forasmuch as our vowels are not so distinguished, as to
know when they are long and when they are short, we are enforced to use a
double consonant, where a single might serve: as for example, these two words,
filled and filled, as they are expressed in filled up to the brim, and filled with
a file, they might either of them, be written with a single l, if their vowels
were so distinguished, that the long vowel in the one word, might be known from
the short vowel in the other: as also, these two words, pinned and pined, might
either of them be written with a single n, if there were the like distinction.
Multitudes of examples might be given in this kind, but these may suffice.

But although the sounds of our vowels, are not so distinguished one from
another, as they should be, yet I see no reason, why a double l, should be
written, in any derivative word, where the vowel in the simple word, is known by
custom, to be long of it self, as for example, in these three simple words,
namely, call, wall, fall, where the vowel a is well known to have the sound of au:
and therefore, why may not these three derivatives, ca-ling, wa-ling, and
fa-ling, be so written; forasmuch as their syllables are to be pronounced,
like cau-ling, wau-ling, and fau-ling? Again, forasmuch as the sound of o, is
well known to be long before I, in the end of many simple words, as in roll,
poll, toll, which may as well be written thus, roll, pol, tol, why may not their
derivatives be written thus, ro-ling, to-ling, po-ling? But heerin, (as in
other things before) I submit my self to the judgment of the Learned.

You are to know also, that whenever e comes in the end of any English word
whatsoever, except the article the, it has no use for sound of it self; and
therefore might be altogether left out, if we had long vowels to expres our
words withal: but forasmuch as this is wanting, we are enforced to make use of
e in the end of a word, to show thereby, the vowel going before to be long:
as in these words, vale, male, mane, mare; to distinguish them from val, mal,
man, mar: as also in these words, wine and wile, to distinguish them from win
and will; whose vowels are short. But it were to be wished, that the vowels
might be so distinguished, as that their sounds might be certainly known, to
be long of themselves, without any other help. And surely, in some cases,
there is an absolute necessity for the doing of it; if we desire that there
should be any certainty in the pronouncing of our words* an example thereof,
you may see in these two words, win-der, and wil-der, where the first syllable
in either of them must be pronounced long, as in wine, and wile: The neglect
of distinguishing the long vowels from the short, is the cause, why many words
are pronounced two several ways: for some men call the wind, the wind; and so
accordingly, they mispronounce the derivatives of the same word. Again, in the
word wil-der, the first syllable thereof, must be pronounced like the word
wile, but in the word wil-der-nes, it must be pronounced like will. What great
uncertaintie is this for the learner! And how great a benefit might the whole
Nation receive thereby, if these things were amended! I wish therefore, that al
such as love Learning, would take this into their serious consideration.

Thus much have I thought good to speak, by way of digression. And now I return
again to my former discourse, concerning the use of e in the end of a word,
which (as I said before) is only useful, to show the vowel to be long which
went before: and therefore, in all such words, where the vowel or the diphthong,
that went before, is well known to be long of it self, what need will there be
of an e, in the end thereof? As for example, in these words, lead, laud, seed,
fool, pail, void, cloud, and the like, the vowels and diphthongs, are so well
known to be long, of themselves, as that there needs no e in the end, to make
them known. Nevertheles, you are to observe, that there are many words, wherein
such vowels are, which are commonly known to be long in the most words, and
yet in some, they are to be pronounced short, as in these words, head, read,
stead, hea-dy, rea-dy, stea-dy, and such like: it is therefore (for the
present) very meet, to put an e in the end of some such words, as in read, the
present tense, to distinguish it from the short sound of read, the
preterimperfect tense. Also, there is no need of an e, in the end of such
words, as harm, learn, corn, burn, part, hurt, hand, bound hang, thing, sing,
song, hung, and such like: You are therefore to be careful, that you never put
an e, in the end of any such words as these aforegoing, but specially, in the
latter words, whereof the word sing, is one, for, if you should put an e, to
the end of it, it would alter the sense thereof, and make it in stead of sing,
to become singe. Also, it is to be observed, that where it is not needful to
use e, in the end of the singular number, it shall not be needful, to use e in
the plural, and therefore the plurals are to be written thus, seeds, fools,
pails, clouds, harms, parts, bands, bands, bounds, things, songs, rings,
strings, swings: but not thus, seeds, fools, pailes, clouds, harms, parts,
hands, bands, bounds, things, etc. In such words as these aforegoing,
custom has already given way, for the leaving out of e in the end, and
therefore we may boldly practice it. But there are diverse words, which as yet
would seem strange, and therefore, for customs sake we use it, although there
be no more necessity, for the using of it in these words, than was in the
former: as in fee-ble, stee-ple, nee-dle, tem-ple, peo-ple, and such like. And
here it may be observed, from such syllables as these aforegoing, that some
kind of syllables, may be expressed without a vowel: for, what use has e for
sound in the last syllable of the word fee-ble? And therefore, if custom would
give way thereto, such words, might rather be written thus, fee-ble, stee-pl,
nee-dl, tem-pl, peo-pl. And here by the way, we may take it into
consideration, whether o in peo-ple, were not better to be left out, and the
word to be written thus, pee-ple.

There be also, many other words, wherein e might very well be spared, as in
give, live, sive, and the like; for, the vowel which went before in either of
them is short, and therefore needs no e in the end, to show it to be long:
such words therefore might be written thus, giv, live, siv. As also, such words
as these, mouse, house, and the like, forasmuch as the diphthong going before,
in either of them, is well known to be long of it self, what need is there of
an e in the end, to make it known? The words therefore, they might be written
thus, mous, house, and so, al other words of this kind. But I leave these
things to the consideration of the Learned.

You ought also to observe, that it is not needful to write e after y, in the
end of any word: because y, will serve sufficiently of it self, to expres the
sound of ie in the end of a word, as y in cry, is well known to expres the like
sound as ie does in cry: and therefore we ought not to write cry, try, etc.

It is also very needful, for the help of True-writing, that you diligently
observe, when you are to write y, for i the vowel: understand therefore in the
first place, that it ought most naturally, and truly to be written, in all such
words as are borrowed of the Greek, as Synagogue, Physician, hypocrite, mystery,
and such like. But forasmuch as custom has received it, and withal the Learned
do so frequently practice it, I see no reason, why we may not use it for a
vowel, as formerly we have done: for, in many words (according to our custom in
writing) it is, as if it were naturalliz'd, as in my, by, thy, why: for these
words are always so written: but in many other words, they are differently
written: as for example, some write thus, die, tie, lie, stie, cry, spy: and
some write thus, die, ty, ly, sty, cry, spy: for mine own part, I think, that
both these ways of writing, may still be retained: yet so, as that the first
sort may be constantly used for nouns, and the last for verbs, for in so
doing, by adding s, to the first sort, they will become nouns of the plural
number: as die dies, tie ties, lie lies, stie sties, cry cries, spy spies:
and by adding ing, to the last sort, which are verbs, they will become
participles: as die dy-ing, ty ty-ing, ly ly-ing, sty sty-ing, cry cry-ing, spy
spy-ing. As for y, which is used for a vowel, in the diphthong ay, forasmuch as
it is so constantly used, in the end of a word, as in may, lay, say, day, way,
pay: it may therefore, be constantly used, both in nouns and verbs: and not
only, in the singular number of a noun, but also in the plural, as day days,
way ways, stay stays: and it is not only to be used before ing, as in
stay-ing, but also before eth as in stays, and before ed as in stayed: and so
in all other words, which have the like endings.

It is our custom in writing, to use y for i, in multitudes of words: yea I
think, that there is scarcely any word (not being a substantive) that, ends in
i, but may (according to our custom) be written with y: as tarry, carry, very,
weary, heady, ready, fully, happy, trusty, lusty: and what not?

It is very meet therefore, that any word, which is a substantive, should never
end in y, but always in ie, as City, dittie, treaty, belly: and so al
others, save only in some words, where l and n went before: as in alley,
valley, journey, Attorney, and the like. Any of these words aforegoing, by
putting s to the end, will make nouns of the plural number, as City Cities,
dittie ditties, treaty treaties, belly bellies, alley alleys, valley valleys,
journey journeys, Attorney Atturneys: and so in all others whatsoever, of either
kind.

Thus much may suffice to have spoken, concerning y, when it is to be used for
a vowel in the end of a word: and now it will be expected, that I should show
also when it ought to be written, both in the beginning and the middle of a
word: I desire therefore, that I may give satisfaction heerin: for I am not
ignorant, that some are very much affected, with the writing of y, for i, in
the beginning of some words, as in iron, ydel, ynow, enough, ynke, ynck,
ynckling, with diverse others: but the words aforegoing, ought to be written
thus, iron, idol, inow, enough, ink, inch, inkling: and here withal I give you
to understand, that it is not needful, to put y for i, in the beginning of any
English whatsoever; except it be in such a word, that is borrowed from the
Hebrew, or Greek, which for the present, I know none.

Some do also use y for i, in the middle of many words, as in giant, sithe,
tithe, hyde, tide: which ought to be written thus, giant, sith, tithe, hide,
tide: and here also, you are to take notice, that it is not needful to put y
for i, in the midst of any English word whatsoever: except it be in such a
word, that is borrowed from the Greek: as I have showed before, in the beginning
of this discourse, concerning y.

It is also very needful to know, how words are to be written, when they end
with the sound of a diphthong: you are to observe therefore, that al words
which end with the sound of eu, are written with ew: as few, hew, dew: and they
are expressed also in these three words, few-er, hew-er, dew-lap. Such words as
end with the sound of oi, are written with oy, as boy, joy, coy, toy, and such
like.

Such words as end with the sound of ou, are written with ow, as how, now, cow,
sow, bow, vow; and such like. The pronoun thou, is only excepted; and such
words as end in ough (where gh is not pronounced) as bough, slough, and such
like.

Two of the words aforegoing, namely, sow and bow, are differently pronounced,
as in these examples, A sow and her pigs. To sow the seed. To bow the knee. A
bow to shoot withal.

The sounds of al such words, as these aforegoing, which are so uncertain, they
might (for the present) be so distinguished, as to make them better known than
now they are: that is, by putting an e in the end of one of them: as in these
examples, The sow cannot sow. He cannot bow the bow.

But there are many words which (for the present) cannot be so distinguished,
as to make them known the one from the other, as in these examples, He did use
it for a good use. He did excuse himself with a bad excuse. He did offer me
a great abuse, to abuse me so.

Also, there are many words written alike, without any distinction, which differ
only in the accent, that is, in the lifting up of the voice in one syllable
higher than in another, as in these examples, A convert. To convert. A rebel.
To rebel. The incense. To incense. Wherein you may observe, that any word
written alike, consisting of two syllables, which may have a or the, put before
it, the first syllable thereof, is to be lifted up: and that which cannot, the
latter syllable thereof is to be lifted up. As also, the like may be observed,
for any other words of two syllables, which are not alike in writing.

Some words there be, which are alike, both in their writing and sound, and yet
differ in their signification: as in these examples, The water in the well, will
make him well. The bell- weather, was in the fields with the sheep, in foul
weather.

There be some words, diversely written and sounded, in the same sense, as in
these examples, namely, enquire and inquire, enform and inform, incline and
incline, endite and indite, etc. It were to be wished, that there were a greater
uniformitie, both in our speaking and writing, not only in words of this
kind, but also in many others. But it may be demanded of me, for such words
as these aforegoing. Which is the best way for the true pronouncing and writing
of them? To this I answer. That if any derivative words be commonly written and
pronounced with i in the beginning, we may conclude from thence, that their
primitives ought to be so pronounced and written also. But these two words,
inquisition and inclination, be always both written and pronounced with i, by
the same reason, we ought to pronounce and write, inquire and incline, and not
enquire and incline. The like may be said for all other words of this kind:
and therefore in stead of en, we ought always to write in.

You ought to observe also, that al words of more than one syllable, ending in
this sound us, (according to our custom) they are written with ous, but
pronounced like us, as in glo-ri-ous, ver-tu-ous, righ-te-ous, and the like.
But if ly or nes, be added to such words, the sound of us, is written with ous,
as in glori-ous-ly, ver-tu-ous-ly, righ-te-ous-nes. etc. But al words of one
syllable, that end in us, are written thus, us, thus, and trus. (or trusse)

In some words before some letters, you are to observe that a, is to be
pronounced like au, and to be written in stead thereof, as in these words,
namely, in bald, scald; as also, in mult, halt, salt, shall.

Also, you are to observe, that it is our custom, to pronounce al, like au, and
to write it in stead thereof: as in balk, walk, talk, stalk, chalk, malkin,
calkin, calkers, falcons; as also, in almond, alms, halm, balm, palm, calm,
shalm, psalm, malmsey: and in like manner, it is used in these words, namely, in
calf, half, salve, salves, calve, calves, halve, halves: as also in scalp,
scalps. And as al, is written for au in the roots, so it is to be in the
branches, and also, to be pronounced accordingly, as in halving, calving,
salving, balking, walking, etc.

You must observe also, that the sound of ee, before some letters, is expressed
by ie, as in field, wield, shield, siel'd, Priest, piece, grief, grieve, thief,
thieve, chief, atchieve, brief, relieve, relief, siege, liege, Pierce, fierce,
biere, Lieutenant, which is to be pronounced like Lief-tenant.

It is to be observed also, that when a word ends in ence, if it be a noun,
it is usually written with ce in the end, as a fence, and a recompense: but if
it be a verb, it is written with se in the end, as to fense, and to recompense:
and in words of other endings accordingly; as a practice, to practice, and the
like.

Take notice also, that al compound words, wherein sh, th, or ph, is written,
they ought to be divided thus, as hous-hold, fals-hood, gos-hawk, gras-hopper,
dis-honest, dis-honour, mis-hap: and not thus, household, falsehood, etc. So
likewise, Priesthood, Neat-herd, and not Priesthood, Neatherd: Also,
Shep-herd, up-hold, Vp-holster, and not Shepherd, uphold, Vpholster.

This one thing also, (both for the True-pronouncing, and Writing of English)
in a special manner ought to be observed, namely, that most of our English
words (as they are commonly pronounced) are monosyllables: for, howsoever we
use to Write thus, leads it, makes it, notes it, raketh it, per- fumeth it,
etc. Yet in our ordinary speech (which is best to be understood) we say,
leads it, makes it, notes it, rakes it, perfumes it. Yea, custom has so far
prevailed in this kind, not only, with the Learned in their Writings, but
also, with the Pres: (Press) as it may most plainly appear, by many
wel-Printed Books, now extant. Therefore, whenever eth, comes in the end of
any word, we may pronounce it sometimes as s, and sometimes like z, as in
these words, namely, in bolteth it, and holds it, which are commonly
pronounced, as if they were written thus, bolts it, and holds it: save only in
such words, where either c, s, sh, ch, g, or x went before it: as in graceth,
pleases, washes, matcheth, rages, taxes: for, these must still remain as
two syllables. Howbeit, if men did take notice, how they use to speak, in their
ordinary speech one to another, they might plainly perceive, that in stead of
graceth, they say graces, and so they pronounce al other words of this kind,
accordingly: But I leave this, as also, many other things to the consideration
of such, as are judicious: hoping that they will take in good part, whatsoever
has bin done, in the Work aforegoing: that so, I may be encouraged yer long,
to publish a far greater, wherein such things as have bin here omitted, shall
be spoken of at large. In the mean time (for a conclusion) I have thought it
good, to give a taste thereof, in the syllables and words following; wherein
are expressed the true sounds of all the vowels and diphthongs, which are proper
to the English-tongue.

The true sounds of all the short and long vowels, are expressed in these
examples. The true sounds of all the diphthongs, are expressed in these examples.
ad lad -- ade lade. ai day. ed led -- ead lead. eu dew. id rid -- eed reed. i would
ride. oi coy. od lod -- and laud. oad load. oi coi -- ners. ud good ude good. ou
cow. ood good -- ood food.

FINIS.
Errata.
THe first line in the fourth page, should have bin placed in the first page
with A. and therefore, the word eight, which is the third word therein, must
be pronounced like ait. In the seventh page, in the last line thereof, the
second word therein which is caught, it should have bin taught. In the second
line of the eightth page, the third word therein, which is rode, must be
pronounced like rod. In the first line in the thirteenth page, in some Copies,
in the seventh word therein, which should have bin jerkin, is jerking.


