The Holy Harmony: OR, A Plea for the abolishing of Organs and other Music out
of the Protestant Churches of Great Britain, and demolishing of superstitious
and idolatrous Monuments.

WITH A plenary Expression OF The Parliaments Piety, Cities Charity, Countries
Constancy.


ECCLES. 4.11, 12. Also if two sleep together, then shall they have heat: but
to one how should there be heat?

And if one overcome him, two shall stand against him: and a threefold cord is
not easily broken.

LONDON, Printed by R. Austin, and A. Coe. 1643.

The Holy Harmony.
SOlomon the wisest of Kings did so love the peace of the Church, that he
charged the daughters of Jerusalem not to awaken the Spouse of Christ until
she pleased, Cant. 8.4. and when he built the Temple of the Lord, you shall
observe greater noise at the dedication then erection, for there we heard
Solomon's prayer, the peoples submission and acclamation, 2 Chronicles. 7.3. but in
the building of this holy pile not the noise of a hammer: it is a Holy Harmony
when the King and people join in prayer and sacrifice, for I find it no
prejudice to holy David in descending to the poorest, though holy expressions
of his people; the Crown and Scepter is not prejudiced in the observation of
the meanest acts of devotion: the King of Niniveh prescribes not a fast to man,
and beast, but himself also. Monarchy were miserable if it had this exemption.

I find in this pious union between the King and people, a notable zeal,
wherein it had been no point of treason, for the subject to have been more
devout then his Sovereign; it is true, the Levites were there with their
instruments of music, which David made to praise the Lord, which I conceive he
was forced to do, to comply with the people, who were but newly exept from
under the Judges, in which time having no King, they did every man as he
listed, and therefore were not fully reduced to civility, so that David happily
suffered these plausible things, whereby to attract the peoples recourse to the
Temple, nature ever aiming at something that may please or profit, and a holy
policy is tolerated, for God grants that nation a Bill of divorce, because of
the hardness of their hearts: but we must know, that our hearty devotions are
the only music for the house of God, Psalms and Prayers are not the heavenlier
for Copes and Vestments, not the louder for wind-Instruments. Indeed I observe
at the dedication of Nebuchadnezzars image, the Cornet, Trumpet, Harp, Sackbut,
Psaltery, and all instruments of Music, Dan. 3.7. were alarums appointed as
Vshers to the adoration of those living statues to a dead image, as if the ear
must be rouzed before the heart, or as if men's devotions were like Bucks, Bores
or Hares, not to be rouzed without hollowings, horns, and hounds, or as if men
had slept all night in a strange lodging, and were to be awakened the next
morning by the Weights of the town, with good morrow to your Worship,
certainly that zeal is half dead the six days, that must have all that
stir to awaken his nap the seventh; certainly this is no holy Harmony.

Me thinks I affect that holy pastime, and devout derision of Eliahs used to
the Priests of Baal, when he was by the convincing, and converting of Isreal,
to confound them, 1. King. 18.27. Cry aloud (says he) for he is a God, either
he takes or pursues his enemies, or is in his journey, or it may be that he
sleeps, and must be awaked, but this would have been one of the devils
sheetings, a great cry and no wool.

Lazy and sluggish devotion is cold in operation, holy duties have their life,
and vigor without such secondary assistance as is borrowed from leatherne
bellies: what needs such horrid shouts unless it be to confound the sweetness
of a hymn? it is hard for the vulgar sort to know the Psalm which is clearly
lost by the Organs, and the Quire, well may they admire the art of the
Musician, but not edify themselves; yet many I suppose have gone to see the
prayers, but they could not distuiguish by the sound they were so, yet was this
applauded by the unholy, for the holiest harmony.

The soul should appear to God, as God to Moses, in a soft, and a still
wind, the holy and sweet sighs, or silent expressions of the soul are most
acceptable, Paul knew the sweetness of this still Music, these heavenly
breathings, and would have preferred one of them before a thousand crowds of
sackbutts, this is the holy harmony.

I find the ancient Romans had a kind of Vergers that went before their
solemn processions, to proclaim silence that so there might be no disturbance
to their devotions, for indeed me thinks it had been absurd for a people to
speak to their God who must of necessity hold his tongue, but the new Romans
being emptier of zeal, have their Organs to rouse theirs least like those in a
swoune they should die in a qualme of ardency; it is the organs of our selves we
should employ in that service. Poor Hanna obtained a son for never a word
speaking. 1 Samuel, 1.13. for Hanna spoke in heart, he lips did move only, but
her voice was not heard, but mark she that conceived a prayer in her heart,
forthwith conceives a son in her womb, such access to the heavenly throne
has the silentest prayer, they shall be fertile that are faithful, but as if
the loudest prayers were the highest, Eli tells her she is drunk, which she
devoutly disproves, nay my Lord, etc. even like him, more impotent, and holy
they are in their censures, for they think all congregations drunk whose
organs they hear not: but he that prays to be heard of men, men shall never
hear that that man's prayer is heard, but we hope to have our desires heard,
granted, and our sterile wombs opened by those sound, but not sounding
expressions of our fowls, which is the holy harmony.

Christ when he was to raise the daughter of Iairus Mat. 9. would not work his
miracle of mercy till he had excluded the minstrells (though a bedchamber be a
fitter place for such a pack then the house of God) our dumpish souls find
small solace in such society, nor can they be raised from their slumbers in
sin, nor receive the benefit of Christ's consolation, whilst they suffer
themselves to be transported with the raving raptures of their foolish
jollitie, it is thence happily we are deprived from the blessed operations of the
spirit of life, we approaching the tents of Jacob rather to hear the noise of
such instruments, then the devine voice of the charmer, who spoke as never man
spoke.

It Is worth the observation that Saul's evil spirit was driven away with David's
harp, which we know was the stillest instrument amongst the Jews, for I
conceive that not only much babbling but loud is discommended, though I know
that deep sorrows, or strong sense of sin does frequently make choice of
violent, zealous, importunate and loud expressions, in which case if I mistake
not, was the holy Paul, when he cried out, Oh wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death? this is a holy harmony.

Questonlesse the still devotions are deepest: which smoothly and strongly run
in an unfathomed channel, hasting with a strong current into the maine and
uncircumscribed Ocean of Gods mercies, then the whirling and shallow streams,
which publish their grumbling peace, and are dammed up by boys in sport. The
Pharisee procliams his Plaudite, when as the poor Publican dares hardly
whisper his devotions, yet makes up a more approved Harmony.

I dare avouch the Primitive times sent up speaking devotions with a little
noise or pomp, their holy melody did not swell their cheeks, but their hearts
with sighs, and eyes with tears, they sought not to give that a sound which
was dumb, for they knew they prayed to him that was not deaf; for men in
public to tie themselves to musical airs, is to publish himself a useless
fiddle that can make no music till he be put in tune. Such anthemes as those
our Savior used over Heirusalem, to which holy harmony had they given regard,
they had not felt the Roman fire.

Which divine harmony is the greatest matter that has kindled the holy Tapers
of these times, who had rather offer up the incense of sweet and heavenly
prayer to almighty God, knowing that the still, or sweetly smelling, though
silent, savor thereof, is more acceptable to him then all the bellowing of
beasts sacrificed.

These coares in our devotions does the Parliament strive by all meanss to cut
out, as careful confectioners from Apples, or Pears, or the stones from
fruit, that so they may preserve with the Sugar of reformation the fruit it
self, whith else would putrify, or like wise Chirurgions that embowell that
body, they intend to embalme, it is much better to part with what we can spare,
and will hurt being kept, then by keeping a snuff incense the owner to remove
his candlestick, this might justly be suffered by the Church, and the Church
not suffer by it. I hold it as great an error in us to affect the Pomp of the
Romish Church, as for them to contemn the homely, yet decent, and holy dress
of the Primitive, Christ chose a spouse that though she was black was comely,
the wife attires not her self but in a modest, and civil manner, when as the
whore uses garish flaunting, painting, crisping, to ensnare the silly
beholder: whom she blindfold leads into the Chambers of death: had not the
pomp and policy of Rome prevailed beyond her, she had had as few Proselites,
as Crowns, which whore, and bawd, our Parliament is wipping, and carting for
her many fornications, and adulteries committed with the Kings of the earth,
Rev. 17.2. this is the way to produce a Holy Harmony.

Those watchmen of Israel, or strongmenn about the bed of Solomon had rather
our Church should be found in the seamelesse coat of Christ, then arrayed in
the royal apparel of Herod, Act. 12. for they find Christ arising from the
hive of the worm in glory, and Herod made living food for the worms, so that
now though I conclude not the same on our Church and theirs, who in all their
blind (though garish devotions) look not on God, nor ascribe the excellency
thereof (if any) to him, but to the visibility, and glory of their Church, and
Pope, yet I say we may without sin expect a happy resurrection of ours from
the dead errors borrowed from them in which she yet sleeps, and also to see
her laid like Sodom, a mark of divine vengeance, to increase our Harmony, how
have they already given proofs of these pious purposes, having defaced those
offensive monuments stopped, and exiled by all possible means the course of her
menstruousnesse, and branded her with the marks of her prostitutions. This then
must needs be the basis of their endeavors, for without some spiritual end no
mortal men would ever involve themselves in such toyls, or strive with Atlas
to ease the groaning burden of a superior, an office not so painful as
unthankful. I find in that Apologue of Iotham, Judge. 9. that the Olive would
not leave his fatness, the Fig his sweetness, the Vine his cheeringnesse, to
be a King. Questionless in that honorable Assembly there are Olives, Figs,
Vines, which have declined the fat, sweet, and cheerings of their possessions
and retirements, to groan under constant encumbrances, hazards threatened,
censures proclaimed, and ruins (without Gods infinite protection) to be
expected, and all this for a Holy Harmony. I find in that place above cited a
bramble that accepts the government, which happily may be the reason that ever
since there has been such scratching about a Crown, for there be brambles
that endeavor, if not to be in the throne of Solomon, yet to be as the Lions
on either side, so that their Sovereign might neither ascend nor descend, but
the beams of Majesty must of necessity reflect upon them, whose luster is
peradventure not desired for its own splendour, but for that it affords them;
like the Salamander, who loves not the fire because it is hot, but in respect
of the antipathy between him and the cold: so I suppose such brambles regard
not the royal gems belonging to the Crown, because they are as fixed stars,
and cannot be disjoynted from the regal possessour, they dearly adore those
the Prince may spate to gild their blackberries, or if you will have it
plainer, they affect not the religious acts of a Prince (which are the true
imperial gems) but cherish any vice that may feed their luxury or avarice:
these be the kind Ravilliacs of a Prince, and brambles in a Throne. The pious
and insupportable care the Houses undergo to produce this Harmony is
inexpressible; what depths of unknown troubles wade they through? At Sea they
stand at the helm by turns, because the labor is great, and only thought to be
the business of one watch, but in this task of theirs every man is at the
helm, the whole voyage being sothered indissolubly, all men's labors are one,
and ones is every man's, every Member being both the alarm that strikes, and
the wheels also by which the alarm does strike. Argos is fained to have an
hundred eyes, and him Juno set to watch Io from Jupiters embraces, which he
did, giving his eyes rest by turns, but these cannot do so, for one motion
keeps them all waking, let who that likes unmantle this fiction by a farther
application.

Now all these bees do extremely labor to fetch in the honey on their laded
thighs from all parts of the kingdom, into the hive of the Church, and common
wealth, out of which to make one cake of pure wax of which may be made a
blessed, and divine light, to guide us to a holy and heavenly Harmony. In which
Act as good as great, this City has not spared any encouragements that would
possibly be given, whose helps to this Cause is not unworthy the name of
Charity, though it may properly be styled a magnificent supportment; yet where
the greatest works of God do require (though not want) the helps of men,
they are termed charitable works.

In the cause of a distressed Mother the aid of a son may come within the lists
of Charity, though it be a duty enjoined by Nature; thus then the sustaining of
our mother the Church in her infirmities, not only by seeking such remedies as
may recover her health, and also reward the Doctor for prescriptive receipts,
and the Apothecaries bills, I mean the chief reducers and their agents; this
you do, and this Harmony you have endeavored to advance, being as zealous, and
largely free, as the heavens in showers, the Sun order, the sea in floods;
where shall I begin my wonder, is it at your Hospitalls the stately nurseries
of infirm and diseased bodies, or those of crazed minds, or look upon the
education of your infantry to breed up the good, or house of correction to
castigate the ill, upon your free Alms to each Company belonging, your
encouragements to deserving female servants, your large allowances to heavenly
Dispensers, your daily nourishments or shall I now name a Charity out-stripping
the vaunts of Rome, such a one that the sun may stand amazed almost to behold,
Posterity would be startled to sum up the last great, spacious unpatternd, and
vast charity, to the Irish Pilgrims, these were your brethren in Christ: so
that now I am amazed at a greater disbursment; association, or what I may call
it, a filial, ersonall, general assistance of your languishing Mother whose
glorious rags you have striven to take off, whose holy homely ornaments you
have like Solomon's Temple endeavored to garnish not only with your gold, but
blood, which holy harmony, as Paul speaks of that he heard, no tongue can
express, nor few of your own hearts can conceive. This great unexampled act
makes you more famous then all your holy edifices, stately granaries, pompous
edifices, by which you shall live in a record beyond the applause of Speed, or
any mortal Chronologer or Historian. Rome quakes more now at the name of
London, then once at Carthage, in whose walls noble Essex shall be held as
terrible as their Hanniball, no Hannonian faction shall be able to put a jarre in
your Music, nor no Scipio survive to triumph in y^^^ spoils, whilst your
dagger (the Cities arms) wounds yours and Gods opposers, and you enjoy that
liberty which Paul made his dignity, being (...) from all the Maligners of your
prosperity: the twelve Companies, like the twelve Tribes, attending the Ark of
the Almighty shall rear up their Standards and lead you thorugh the wilderness,
by the conquest of the Canantish. Confederates, till you arrive in the land of
Promise where you shall find what I treat of, a Holy Harmony.

Now behold the strength of a zealous association, like that holy oil (...)
Aarons head, that came down to his garments; it is not the Heads of the kingdom
now assembled, that give care to this heavenly melody, nor the shoulders, which
is the Metropolis, but the skirts of the garments, the zealous countries,
though not so wealthy in abilities, yet have the same garlands to wreath about
their heads.

Harfordshire, Essex, and Cambridgeshire, have furnished up an Army able to
reduce Ireland, who have sent in 20000 able, wealthy, well armed, trained men,
all of the army of the Lord of Hosts to fight this (nay his battle) who met
at their randevous in Cambridge, and Bishop-Stratford, on Saturday last, where
observe how ready the people of God are to obey his summons for upon Thursday
the first of this June at the Fair at Bishop-Stratford: no sooner had some of
his Excellencies trump summoned their appearance, but suddenly every man was
in readnesse, forsaking their wives with as great joy as first they met them,
every man putting two months pay in his pocket, and have marched with a noble
resolution to procure to us a Harmony here which shall be a preparation to that
Harmony the Angels make at the throne of the Lamb, to whom be glory now, and
for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

