AN ANSWER TO A CERTAIN WRITING, Entitled, CERTAIN DOVBTS And QVAERE'S Upon
occasion of the late Oath and Covenant, With desire of satisfaction, for tender
Conscienced People, to whom it may be exhibited.

5. August. 1643.
Imprimatur

Joseph Caryl.

LONDON, Printed for Luke Fawn, and are to be sold at the sign of the Parrot
in Paul's Churchyard. 1643. Sept. 11.

TO THE Right Worshipful And much honored COLONELLS Ralph Asheton, Esquires.
Richard Holland, Esquires.
And the rest of the Colonells, Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers, in the
County Palatine of Lancaster.

AN ANSWER to a certain writing, Entitled, Certain Doubts and Quere's upon
occasion of the late OATH and COVENANT, with desire of satisfaction, for tender
conscienced People to whom it may be exhibited.
Question 1.
FIrst, I doubt how I can swear in truth, and judgment, or in truth and
knowledge, according to Jere. 4.2. For however, the Parliament may to it self,
have just grounds for what they say, yet to me, this is but T^s^imonium
humanum; and though a man think, or believe all true that is in this Oath, and
in its Preamble asserted, yet it is not therefore in an Oath to be avowed or
disavowed, I may in some cases swear upon my own knowledge, or ex testimonio
Di^^ino, but I may not swear upon other men's knowledge; As in Logic, Quod
nescit predicare de est in secundo adjecto, nescit predicare de est in t^^ti^
adjecto. So in Divinity, Quod nescit jurare de est in secundo adject^, nescit
jurare de ^st in tertio adjecto. He that cannot swear that this plot was,
cannot avow it to be wicked or treacherous.

Answ. It is written in the Law, The Testimony of two men is true, and by the
month of two or three Witnesses shall every word be established: But in this
Case of the Plot, we have the confession of Master Waller, and of others; two
whereof were executed for their guilt herein Chil^^^^^ I am k^^^
, and the Declaration not of one or two Members in Guild Hall, London, but of
both the Houses to be read in all parish Churches and Chapels, and a public
day of thanksgiving appointed for the deliverance from in which though it be
but Testimonium humanum is so convincing, that the disbelief or doubting of the
verity of the Plot, does lay an imputation either of very great weakness or
horrible wickedness on the Houses, of mocking God and man.

The Law of the Land gives so much credit to every Court of Record, That no
averrement must be taken against it, none be admitted to contradict it, or to
say it is not true, no not the King Himself Kingdoms Case p. 11.
; yet we are not required to swear that there was such a Plot, or that it was
wicked and treach^rous, but (upon supposall of the Parliaments assertion, and
our beli^^^ thereof) that we detest and abh^rre it. May not a man swear that he
detesteth the wicked and treacherous design: of the Gunpowder Treason Gun
Powd^r Treason is fathered on the ^uritans.
, or the Irish Rebell'on The Kings Commission is pretended for it; therefore
they say it is no Rebellion.
, Seeing there is but Testimonium humanum for either of them. The People made a
Covenant with King Joash upon (...) of ^^hojadah, that he was the Fings son,
(which was but T^^^^ (...) humanum,) 2 King. 11.4. and 17. though the Queen
cried Trea^^^, Treason, verse. 14. No man may hence forward swear, that he will
(...) true and faithf^ll to Charles the ^^^full King of England, or that he
rests ^ully assured of His Majesty's Princely truth in His Protest^tions:
Seeing there is but Testimonium humanum that there is a King, that His name is
Charles, that He is the lawful King; that those Protestations are His, that go
under His name, for none can swear these things ex Testimonio Divino, and few
(if any) can swear, all of them of their own knowledge.

How can I swear in righteousness as I am commanded, Hosea 4 2. Is it a
righteous thing to vow assistance to every man that takes this Oath, without
limitation of lawful taking, and lawful pursuance thereof; but may there not
be some that will pursue this Oath by lying, stealth, murder oppression, etc.

The word ((...)) was expressed in the Protestation, Matthew. 7.1. so to
understand it here, even as when the People answered Joshua, All that thous
command ^st as, wewi^^^, and whither soever, etc. Josh. 1.16. And Wives in the
form of marriage do vow to love, honor, and obey their Husbands. No man has
a vocation to any unlawful thing; he that does unlawfully, Eatenus does not
pursue this Oath, though he may think he does; but I am not bound to assist
every man in whatsoever he thinks he does in pursuance of the Oath, but in
whatsoever he indeed does in pursuance thereof. They that without warrant of
Law do take away Men's Goods, and Lives, and they that countenance and assist
them, are Thieves and Murderers, Nihil ^l^ud potest Rex quam quod de jure
potest. Bracton.
now Judicium Guriae est quasi Juris dictum, and in the Courts alone does the
King legally judge, But the Kings word is no warrant. His will no Law whereby
to take away the Lives and Goods of our Neighbors, nor will they free a man in
foro civili, much less in Divino, from being Murderers or Thieves.

I must not forswear, Psalm. 15.4.

The Oath of Alleagiance being intended for Papists, quatenus liable to that
infection, is in effect thus much, I swear I will do nothing against the King
by the Authority of the Pope and Sea of Rome See God and the King Printed by
special command, p. 21. to the 30.
See more Page 8, 9, 10.

The Oath of Supremacy was intended to thrust out the Pope, and to discover
Papists, and not to determine the present difference between the King and
Parliament, or the King and Kingdom, for Parliament is the Kingdom to all
intents and purposes of Law Sta^nta universi regni per regem, etc. Cowell.
, and it makes the King supreme over all persons, Rex non habet parem nee
superiorem, Bracton, But not over the Laws, or the Judgments of his Courts,
for so Rex habet superiorem, Deum scilicet and legem per quam fact us est Rex,
item Curiam Comitum Baronum, etc. Ibidem. The Supremacy therefore is not in his
personal, but in his legal commands, He Himself being under the Law, subject
to the Coercive power of the Law; notwithstanding any Commission or protection
from the King. The King is Supreme in Ecclesiasticis, yet He (notwithstanding
that Supremacy) is liable to Church Censures William the Conqueror was
excommunicated for breaking his Oath at his Coronation.
, at least His Friends, Favorites, and Agents are; and the King cannot annull
or make invalid those Censures. Neither can He (notwithstanding His supremacy)
in Temporalls, make void the sentence or judgment of any Court of Record.
Forces raised by the King may be dangerous and destructive to His Person.
Crown, and Kingdom, and so by Law be Rebels and Delinquents, as the forces now
raised by the King are actually adjudged to be (and the like forces have
formerly been so judged (...) 11 (...) 4.
by Parliament, from whence ly^s no Appeal, and therefore may and ought to be
res^sted; yet this in judgment of law is no resistance of the King, who is
never supposed to do against Law, (...) Rex, quod (...), quod (...): If the
King command. A. B. C. D. to take up Arms to kill (...) a Judge of Assise, or
^. G. Parliament men whil^st they are doing that Office, and they accordingly
kill them, this is high (...), notwithstanding the Kings command, and the
Indi^t is found (...). (...) King^ Ca^e, (...).
And it is not only lawful, but our duty to our King, (both by Law and our
late Protestation) to resist such forces so raised by the King, and to
endeavor to bring them to (...). And they that do so resist, do stand for the
King (...) at the Law and judgment given (...) Kings judgment, though gi^
(...) the (...) standing thereof, we (...) ^pacit^ This distinction is w^ted by
^t^siue, (...) Edward Cook, and many others
.

P^erall, in which (...) is subject to (...) infir^, (...) ^ain of the Law,
(...), the (...) and (...), C^ts of (...) ^lly in the Parliament.

C^ands and Commission (...) the King in His (...) ^mitis, (...) and. ^ay (...)
that proceed from Him in (...) Commands and Commission (...), are those, when
these disagree, for then (...) and they that are ^ly loyal, (that is) legal,
(...), th^n does a King hate His (...).

^ can make a Popish Army, then the opposite Army is a Popish Army. Had it been
for the Kings honor to have raised those forces, it had been no dishonor to
have them spoken off. The Oath and Preamble are (as much as may be in such a
Case) tender of the Kings honor, for though they say it is a Popish Army, and
that it is raised by the King, and that it is for the subversion of Religion,
Laws, and Liberties; yet they say not that the King does so intend it. His
Majesty and His forces may have several ends and ayms; It is no wisdom to
complement away our Religion and Liberties, for if Salus Reipublicae be
supremalex. If Rex be propter regnum, not regnum propeer regen^, (Fort^scue,
Aquinas,) then the honor of the King is no further to besought, then is
subservient to the good of the Kingdom.

God. Nature, and the Laws of the Land do allow defensive Arms to a subject
against illegal and injudiciall violence. The Parliament is not a subject, for
the King is a part, and in intent of Law present, Master Herles answer to
Doctor Fern. I have seen cited for proof hereof Ashes Tables, Error, 65 to
70.21 Iac. c 13 Ceom^tons Jurisdiction of Courts, f^^ to 20. Smiths
Commonwealth, l. 2. c 1, 2 15 Ed 3. c. 2, 3 of all these there are sund^y
Presidents. Answer to thenin^^en Propositions.
not only as a Court of Justice, but as the highest Court, in which there is a
Chair of State for His Person, and things agitated there, are said to be done
coram Reg^; Neither are the Lords and Commons in Parliament merely subjects,
but are Coordinate with His Majesty (this being a mixed Monarchy His Majesty's
Answer to the ninteen Propositions.
, not only of Supre ^e and subordinate Governors (for so the most absolute
Monarchies or Tyrannies in the world are mixed) but of three Coordinate States)
in the Legislative power, and trusted with the ultimate and indisputable power
(in Case of doubt) of declaring what is Law, of reversing erroneous Judgments
given in Inferior Courts, of damning illegal Pattents, Monopolies,
Impositions, Exactions, of removing public grievances, and particular wrongs
complained of, of censuring and judging Delinquents of all sorts, not only in
the Kings absence, but against His Personal Negative Vote or disassent in case
he be present. His Majesty says, That the power legally placed in both Houses
of Parliament is more then sufficient to prevent and restrain the power of
Tyranny: which it cannot be in some cases without resistance of the forces
raised by the King; without such power of resistance in the hands of the
Houses, all mixture of Government and Limitation of Regal power is vain, for
the Government at the will of the Prince, (raising a thousand, or but a
hundred, that may not be resisted) will resolve into absolute Arbitrary, and
Tyrannical Government.

Resistance of the forces raised by the King, may consist with loyalty to His
Person; for the forces are not the person of the King, neither is His person
ubiquitary with His forces; The Law supposes not that the King is at any time
amongst Traitors and Delinquents, but as a prisoner, especially in Parliament
time, when he is presumed to be in the House of Lords.

The safeguard of the Kings Person has been pretended when other things have
been intended, Lancashire men were by warrants called to Warrington, to guard
His Majesty's Person, which came not there, the intent was to gather forces to
assault Manchester: A guard for His Majesty's Person, was the foundation of the
war against the Parliament. If the Kings Person be engaged in any dangerous
expedition, more to blame are the Cavaliers, they should say, it were better
that all they were executed, then that one hair of His head should fall to the
ground, 2 Samuel 18.3. But if they will needs expose His sacred Person to hazard,
then we say, To kill or wound the King intentionally and purposely, is treason,
hateful to God and all good men, but to wound or kill Him casually, not only
praeter but contra intentionem; while we in our own intent and in intent of
Law, are (for His preservation) prosecuting Rebels and Delinquents, is indeed
a cross, and an occasion of sorrow, but not of sin to the soul of him that
does it The King being sick calls for his Physicians to give Him Physic, they
proceed according to the rules of Art, and sincetely endeavor His health, if
he being persuaded by some do neglect the prescribed rules of Diet, and so the
Physicked kills in stead of curing, the Physicians are not guilty.
. In Justs and Torneaments, Subjects standing only on point of honor, have
returned Lance for Lance, stroke for stroke, unhorsed, disarmed, and wounded
Hall. 16 H. 8.
, yea killed Anno 1559. p Anno 1266.
their Kings without suspicion of disloyalty. The casual killing of King
William Rufus by the glance of an Arrow, was no treason. The fighting against
the Earl of Leicesters forces (where King Henry the third was in person, and
carried about for the countenance of His Actions) and the rescuing of Him
(though He was wounded unawares in the rescue) was by Parliament judged, to be
loyal and faithful services. Finally, (to omit what Bishop Poinet says of
the power of the great Constable of England.)

If the King should come in the head of the Irish Rebels (many whereof are
already Him,) we may and must (with as much tenderness and care of His
Majesty's Person, as will stand with discharge of our duties) resist and help
to destroy those Robels that are about Him.

In reverence of Parliaments, and in regard of tender consciences, I desire
these things first to be cleared, least in taking this Oath we go on Popish
grounds, in these three principalls (viz.) Of implicit faith, of
infallibility of Council, and the Oath ex Officio. The Papists by an
implicit faith, And why, and how can our Country people believe, and swear,
but because the Parliament faith it. The Papists think the Popes council
cannot err, therefore engage their faith to believe, and their practices to do
what de future shall be determined: I desire therefore to know the extent of
the word (continued) will assist the forces raised and continued by both
Houses, it seems to be meant, do futuro, else (raised) would have served the
expression, thus it may be as large as etc. and ingageth our assistance to
them, without limitation of lawful continuance, as if this Army or
Parliament-Councell could not err in ordering the same. The Papists (as was
exclaimed in our Bishops Courts) have an Oath in their Inquisition to oblige
men, either to accuse, or forswear themselves; and does not this Oath oblige
men (if conscious of this that is meant by the Plot) either to accuse
themselves, which is unnatural, or forswear themselves, which is Diabolical.

The Parliament do publish in their Declarations the Reasons and Grounds of
their Votes and Actions, This comparison was made by Acneas Sylvius in the
Council of Basil.


To avoid processus in infinitum (which nature abhorres) there is a power
resting some where, which is the ultimate and indisputable power of expounding
the Laws; which power (resting in the Parliament) must be assisted by all
within the jurisdiction of the Court, and not be resisted or controuled by any,
upon pretense of possible or actual error in them. If any Court of Record do
err, I am excused, yea, justified by the Law, if I living within their
jurisdiction do submit to their sentence, yea, obey it till it be reversed; As
if A. (free from all Felony) be outlawed for felony (which is but a
Declaration by and before the Coroners) every subject in the County is bound
so far to credit the said Judgment, as not to receive, releeve and comfort,
A, upon pain of being accessory to felony The Kingdoms Case cites 12 Ed. 2.
Coron. 377. which is cited. 19 Eliz. die 355.
And in case of Attainder by Parliament, though supposed to be unjust; the King
Himself cannot discharge the persons so attainted, but by reversing it in
Parliament 1 Hen. 7.4.
There is no necessicie that (continued) should be meant de futuro, seeing but
a line or two before, both (raised) and (continued) are spoken de preterito.
But if it be (is I believe it is) spoken d^future, it cannot be so large and
boundless, as etc. seeing the ground of my promising assistance, is the
limitation of the Parliaments forces (in my belief) to be for their just
defense, and the just defense of the t^^e Protestant Religion, and Liberty of
the Subject. If, I say, whereas I believe, A. B. is a Protestant, I will assist
him in the maintenance of his Religion, I do not engage my self to maintain
Popery in case he should turn Papist. The King and His Council and his forces
may err; therefore the Inhabitants of Chester, Shrowsbury, or any other place
which have engaged themselves by Oath (upon their bele^f of His Majesty's
Protestations) to assist Him and His forces, against the forces of Robert Earl
of Essex, Sir William Br^reton, etc. especially de future, which is as large
as, etc. and without limitation of lawful, are in this respect as guilty as
they that take this Oath.

This Oath differs much from the Oath ex Officio, (which you say is Popish) for
it is tendered not only to suspected persons, nor principally intended for the
finding out of guilt, or the punishment of guilty persons, when found out
(though such like Oaths were in use, Number. 5.19. Exodus 21.11. And now in Courts
the person indicted, does plead guilty, or not guilty; and so either detects
himself, which is unnatural, or lies, which is Diabolica^l.) But to the whole
Kingdom to bind them to the detestation and non-execution of the said, or the
like plot, and to fidelity for after times, R. S. the Author of these Q^aere's
does (I suppose) refuse this Oath; yet (I hope) he does not hereby accuse
himself to be conscious or guilty of the said Plot.

I may not (especially by solemn Oath) take Gods name in vain,

You say, then the Protestation, and the Protestation was not sufficient to its
end, many (notwithstanding the same) revolting from, plotting, and practicing
against Religion, Parliament and Kingdom, under pretense of standing for the
King.

The Jews of old, and Christians of late did often renew their Covenants with
God to the same intent. David and Jonathan made a Covenant, and renewed it
once, and again to the same intent, 1 Samuel 18.3. and 20.16, 17.23.18. yet did
not take Gods name in vain. The Governor of Christer has imposed several
Oaths upon the Inhabitants of Chester to the same intent, (viz.) the security
of the City, the resistance of the Parliaments forces. It seems that they also
do take the name of God in vain.

An Oath ought not to be urged on them, Jerc. 4.2. Thou shall swear in truth.
Now it is more then probable that some of the multitude (seeing it is pressed
on all the Kingdom) shall lie. For when they have told God and the
Congregation, that they heartily sorrow for their sins, they will tell God a
solemn lie. Now though we may exhort all men to repent, yet it is
questionable, whether we may urge them to swear, that they repent who do not so.

By this Argument, Ministers may not in their own, We are heartily sorry for
these our misdoings; the remembrance, etc. Nor Godfathers, and Godmothers
(especially in the name of the Children,) say, I forsake the devil, etc. I
believe in God, etc. Nor Children be taught to say, Our Father. Nor the Oaths
of Supremacy, All agiance, and Protestation, nor any other Oath be tendered to
the whole Kingdom upon any occasion; seeing it is more then probable that some
of the Ministers, and people, are not heartily sorry, etc. Some of the Gossips
do not fotsake the Devil, etc. Some of the Children have not God to their
Father. Some Popish, treacherous, perjured persons, will in taking the Oaths of
Supremacy, etc. Tell God and the World a solemnelye.

On the solemnelyes assertorie or permissory, or both that were told by the
people, Josh. 24. 2 Chro. 15. 2 Chro. 23. Neh^. 9. etc. 10. That man is a son
of Belial, which (living in these sad times) is not in some measure sorrowful
for his own sins, and that intends not to endeavor the amendment of his own,
ways; surely, he is none of the tender conscienced men, for whose satisfaction
these were propounded. The Inhabitants of Chester have sworn, that they rest
fully assured of His Majesty's Princely truth and goodness, etc. It is well if
some of them to save their goods and liberties,

I desire to know the extent of those words, Will according to my power and
vocation, assist the forces of the Parliament against the forces, etc. For it
may be said, That he that warreth not in his own person; he that slyeth at any
exigent; he that leaves his Armor; he that takes or gives quarter; he that
gives not all his estate immediately to these wars, it may be said, That
these have not done according to their power, and so are forsworn; and there
is the more reason for this question, because some have taught, and others have
practiced this for a doctrine, that you may not take or give quarter in these
wars, An unnatural and bloody resolution.

When you know the extent of the words (To the uttermost of my power) in the
Oath of Alleagiance, Chester and Shrowsbury, and of the words (To my power) in
the Protestation, and Oath of Supremacy, (the Oaths which you have already
taken) Then you will guess at the meaning of the words (accerding to my power
and vocation) in the Oath now to be taken, where the word vocation limiteth the
word power, for no man has a vocation to any unlawful or irrational, any
unnatural or bloody resolution or action. If any man say, or teach, as you
intimate some do, They have as little ability, as they have authority to
expound the Oath. It may be some others do so explain it, that any Malignant in
the Kingdom may take it, without forsaking his own principles. But, Inter
utrumque via est.

An Oath is to be taken when we are thereunto called by lawful authority,
Number. 30.5. A woman has no power to vow that which her father disavowes, and
how then can a subject have power to vow that which the King disavoweth, is not
Rex pater patria?

An Oath may be taken lawfully by private persons to give satisfaction in some
weighty doubt, though they be not thereunto called by any authority at all.
1. Jonathan and David's Covenant stood firm, though condemned by Saul, 1 Samuel
22.7, 8. who was the father of one, the father in law of the other, and the
King of both. Yea, they afterward renewed that Covenant, 1 Samuel 23.17, 18. The
Kings lawful authority is in His Courts of Justice, and His Proclamation for
the reversing of the sentence and judgment of any Court of Record, especially
of the Court of Parliament, which is His highest and honourablest Judgment
King James. Basllicon Doron.
, is ipso facto null and void; especially when the King is amongst known and
judicially declared Rebels and Delinquents, for then His Proclamations may be
judged to be the acts of the said Delinquents, over-awing, mis-informing, or
otherwise abusing the King. A King of England was once articled against, as for
other things, as that Without consent he had carried away the Jewels and Plate
of the Crown, and did hold a fantastical opinion, That the Laws of the Realm
were in his head, and sometimes in his breast. So for that He craftily devised
certain privy Oaths, contrary to the Law, and caused His Subjects to be sworn
thereto. Though this be now ordinarily done, not so much by the King, as by the
Cavaliers within their Dominions of Northumberland, Cumberland, Yorkshire,
Chester, Shrowsbury, etc. But the authority of Parliament was never till of
late questioned for greater acts then these. The late Protestation, which (well
understood) contained that very thing which you dislike in this Covenant, viz.
of resisting the forces raised by the King in some cases, stands good by your
own rule, for the King did not publish any Proclamation against it, Numb.
30.4.7.

The vehement pressing of this Oath may prove prejudicial to the Cause, and to
the end,

These and the like quaere's in the hands of common people do not help the
matter: Joh. 6.1. We had rather have open foes then treacherous friends. I
believe those hearts are rotten quantum ad nos and causam nostram, that have no
juster scruples then these, and yet refuse this Oath. A man may truly fear an
Oath, yet take the Oath of Supremacy, Alleagiance, Protestation, and this also.

Other brief Quaere's, with their Answers.
IS there any president of such an Oath to resist forces raised by their

Yes, Orang is one. Briesly, Kingdoms in the like Case, do usually take the
like course to prevent treachery and division.

The King and Parliament are here divided,

This Covenant does not disannull any of our former Oaths and Covenants. contra.

The King has protested upon the Sacrament,

It is not certain that the King has so protested, Si dissimulandum, Regnandi
causa dissimulardun, qui n^s^it dissimulare, nescit regnare. Should Popery and
Tyranny be professedly maintained; sew Protestant Subjects would cleave to that
party. If His Majesty were from amongst Delinquents, Atheists, Papists,
Aliens, He would (I believe) keep His Protestations, Prove. 25 Remove the wicked
from about, etc. It is our duty therefore to rescue Him out of their h^nd^,
that He may keep His Protestations.

FINIS.

