Milled Lead Sheathing FOR SHIPS against the WORM, Plainly Proved to be BETTER
than the BEST, and above Cent. per Cent. CHEAPER than the Ordinariest
WOOD-SHEATHING can be; besides diverse other Advantages to the Public.
The Particulars are more at large contained in the BOOK under-mentioned,
referred to in the Margent.
IT lies upon the Vide p. 38. 41.
Plank so thin and smooth, that it can be no hindrance to the Ships sailing,
whereas the great thickness and roughness of a Wood sheathing must obstruct it.

It stiffens a Ship so that she will carry more Sail, which will also
accelerate her motion.

P. 78.
It preserves the Plank cool, smooth, and sound, and the Oakam longer in the
Seams: Whereas it is well known that when one Plank is doubled or clapped upon
another, the undermost, being kept close and hot, will become doted, which in a
Wood-sheathing must also rot the Oakam in the Seams, the sooner.

The great Nails in a Wood-sheathing must be very destructive to the Plank; for
when they strip that Sheathing, they are fain to spyle up the Nail-holes with
Pegs of Wood, whereas the small Nails of a Lead-sheathing does the Plank no
harm.

P. 38. 41. 76. 80.
It is owned not to foul so much as a Wood-sheathing; and when foul, easier
cleaned.

Lastly, The Lead-sheathing being Metal, which the Worm cannot enter, it must
be a certain security against it.

That it is above Cent. per Cent. Cheaper, plainly appears as follows.

SUppose that an ordinary Streights-sheathing will cost 10 d. a Foot square (a
good East India Sheathing near three times as much) and that such a Sheathing
lasts not above a Voyage or two; but, for more abundant proof, let it be
granted that one such Sheathing would last seven Years, and that the Charge of
Graving upon that Sheathing (suppose for a Ship of 600 Tun, which would measure
5400 Foot square) would cost but 45 l. a year, (which will probably be above 55
l.) this in seven Years, with the Sheathing at 10 d. a-foot, would cost 540 l.

Suppose also that a Milled Lead Sheathing should be stripped at seven years
end, P. 27.
which for any defect in the Sheathing it self (as Experience has shown) may
last twice as long, if the Ship's Caulking, driving of her Bolts, or other
Repairs, don't require it: And that such a Sheathing for the same Ship would
cost 15 d. a foot, let there be deducted but for the Old Sheathing when
stripped; which, being Metal, must yield more than that to melt down again,
this Lead-sheathing would stand the Owner but in 253 l. 2 s. 6 d. which is
Cent. per Cent. saved, and 33 l. 15 s. to spare, probably more than it will
require to repair accidental rubbs all the time; and when any such thing
happens, a small quantity of the Lead and Nails, being reserved on board, any
one may mend as Opportunity offers.

There is nothing more required, over or under this Sheathing, but to have the
Plank well brimm'd, P. 41. 76, 77.
and the Seams well caulked, at first bringing on, and some long handled
Bristle-brushes provided on board to clean it once in two or three Months, as
occasion offers. Tallowing, that has been sometimes used, was never proposed by
the Inventors, they conceiving the Lead-sheathing would keep longer clean
without it.

If it be objected that this Sheathing costs ^/3 more than the other at first
doing, Object. Answ.
though if it did, it is sufficiently repaid in the seven years time; but
deducting only 55 l. for the Old Sheathing, allowing seven Years rebate for its
present value, and it will appear not 4 per Cent. more than that at first
charge with once graving.

A short Account of the Beginning and Progress of the Mill'd-Lead Sheathing.

THis Invention was begun upon an Act of Parliament, by the countenance and
encouragement of King Charles II. who very well understood Shipping, and P. 22.
Of the Letter.
promised himself great Matters from it, and had not been deceived if it had
met with due encouragement for all the Services it was qualified; particularly
for Vide Pursers Certificates. P. 83.
lyning of Bread-rooms, where, after it had been some time used (instead of
Plates of Laten or Tin, which cost more, and, being made of Iron soon rusted
and decayed) it was laid aside again, upon pretense that there was a dampness
and moisture discovered in the Lead it self, which they found did corrupt and
spoil the Bisquet; although it is well known, especially to Merchants, that
nothing preserves any Provisions or Goods, they put therein for their long
Voyages, sweeter and better than Lead instead of. The Earl of Carlisle, when he
went Governor of Jamaica, carried over with him several Deal-boxes lyned with
Mill'd-Lead, wherein he put Corn, Meal, Gunpowder, etc. intending them for
Water-Cisterns afterward, from whom and Sir Henry Morgan Letters came to Sir
Philip Howard, that the Corn and Meal was preserved sweet in those Boxes, when
the rest of the same sort that was in Cask was musty, and the Gunpowder dry,
and a sixth part of more force upon Trial than the same sort in Barrels: And
also for Scuppers, wherein notwithstanding the P. 114.
Evidence upon the Trials made in 1678. by that Board's Order the same was
discontinued till the present Navy board being satisfied upon P, 116.
new Trials by them ordered in 1691. were pleased to restore it to use again,
at Rates above 90 per Cent. less charge to the King, than the former Scuppers
for the same Service had cost him, though they might reasonably have allowed
the Proposer something more for his Encouragement, and saved the King enough by
his Proposition.

The first Ship was sheathed by his Majesty's Direction, March 10 1670. and
soon after many more: But it quickly found great opposition, and continual
Complaints and Objections, raised by the Artifice of Persons interested to
oppose it; viz. that it would rub off by Cables, Hawsers, lying on ground, etc.
so that the Navy-Board deferred entering into any formal Contract for it, till
they had taken time enough to be fully satisfied therein; and after five Years
Trial upon ten Ships, which had been sheathed within that time, they then (as
in the Preamble of their Contract) upon P. 8. 73, 74, 75, 76.
sufficient Proof and Experience, entered into a Contract with the Parties
concerned for the whole time of their Act of Parliament.

Afterward about half a score Ships more were sheathed in two or three. Years
time, when a new Complaint was raised from abroad by Letters from P. 11, 12,
13, 14, 15.
some Captains and Commanders of Lead-sheathed Ships, that there was some
venomous Quality discovered in the Lead sheathing, that did in a very
extraordinary manner eat and corrode the Bolts and Rudder-Irons, which took
such impression in that Navy-Board, notwithstanding all Reasons offered to the
contrary, that they ( October. 28. 1682.
some time afterward) reported the thing to the then Lords of the Admiralty,
as true, and advised the stripping off the Lead-sheathing as soon as the Ships
came home, to which Report the Mill'd-Lead Company (when they heard of it,
having obtained a Copy) put in their Answer, both which were by my Lord
Nottingham, one of those Commissioners, and also a Privy-Counsellor, laid
before the King and Council, and by them upon Hearing (the Particulars being
many) referred back again to the Lords of the Admiralty to examine and report
their Opinions; but that Admiralty Commission being determined before any
Report could be obtained, this Sheathing has been discontinued in the Navy ever
since, P. 40. 41.
upon no other ground but barely upon its supposed extraordinary eating and
corroding the Rudder-Irons, all other Complaints being cleared as abovesaid,
and nothing more now objected in their said Report, which showed their full
satisfaction in all other Matters, but what related to the Bolts and
Rudder-Irons only.

Obs.
It may be observed upon this last Paragraph, without Reflection upon the
Commanders, that the Shipwrights here having furnished their Brethren the
Carpenters, on Board those Ships, with Instructions from the rusty discoloring
of the Lead, mixing with the Filth about the Braces of the Rudder and
Bolt-heads (by the Salt Waters gleeting from the Iron-work beneath P. 25. 26.
being not parcelled as it ought to have been) it may be thought no great
difficulty (especially if the Rudder-Irons happened to be much eaten) for these
Carpenters (whose proper Business this is) to impose upon the Captain by
positive Assertions, that they never knew Rudder-Irons so much eaten in so
short a time, and might name some upon other Ships that were much better; and
persuade him (from this unusual Color about the Iron work) that it must be
some poisonous or corroding Quality in the Lead-sheathing that has thus
extraordinarily eaten his Rudder-Irons; which seeming plausible to him, at
length he believes, and writes so to the Navy-Board, and afterward, perhaps,
thinks himself bound in Honor to maintain it, what Reasons soever are offered
to the contrary.

The whole Proceedings about this Lead-sheathing having been sometime since
printed, and the Books fold at certain Booksellers ( viz. Mr. Hensman's in
Westminster Hall, the Crown and Harrow in Fleetstreet, the Harp in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and at the Leg and Star in Cornhill) some eminent Merchants, Owners
of Ships, have taken the same into their Consideration; and being well
satisfied of the Excellency, and preference of this Lead-sheathing in respect
of the other, and of the weak and groundless Suggestions of its corroding and
eating the Rudder-Irons, both from Reason and Experience (it being evident that
the duration of Rudder-Irons have always been very different and unconstant
upon all Ships, whether sheathed with Lead, Wood, or not sheathed at all,
according to the Smith's better or worse mixing, welding, and working of his
Iron, Vide the Account of Rudder-Irons from Deptford, and p. 12. 14, 15, 30,
32. of this Book.
some of those other having lasted as short a time as any upon the
Lead-sheathed Ships, as well as some upon these, as long as any upon the other,
as can be proved, if necessary; which Effects must have been as constant and
uniform as their Causes, if the sheathing either way were any wise concerned
therein) have applied this Lead-sheathing to four Ships within this twelve
month; one of them a Ship of above 600 Tun, called the Vide the single Sheet at
the end of the Book.
Antel pe, employed the last Summer in his Majesty's Service, which being
returned with her Sheathing much to the Owners satisfaction, they have since
sent her a Voyage to the East Indies.

Notwithstanding all which, there are some Persons that are still prejudiced by
the old Complaints, and others who deal in the Materials of the VVood-sheathing
and Graving, especially the Shipwrights (whose Interest it is, and therefore
the less to be blamed) that decry this Lead-sheathing; but it is to be hoped
there are some Persons in Power (now that the Scene of the Royal Navy lies in
the way of the Worm, and is likely longer so to do) may be found of that
Public Spirit, that will give themselves the trouble to be duly informed in
this Matter; and if they find it deserves it, to promote its Restoration to
the Navy, that the Public may have the benefit thereof as well as private
Persons, which may accrue to them in many other respects, besides the direct
use it in sheathing Ships: For that the P. 37.
most essential part of what is employed in the Wood-sheathing is of foreign
growth, often in times of War (when most wanted) not to be had, or at very dear
rates, whereas the Lead being in our own Bowels can never be wanting: And also,
for that this Lead-sheathing will more exhaust our Lead-Mines, and increase the
Manufacture of Lead; upon which Considerations the Parliaments of England have
ever laid great weight, in all their deliberations about Trade; and
particularly in the Act relating to this very Invention.

All such as have occasion for this Lead-sheathing, or for any other sort of
Milled Lead, from one pound to the Foot-square to twenty or more of the usual
breadth of three Foot and an half, and twice as long as any Plumber pretends to
cast, if need requires, for Covering Houses, and all Works wherein Sheet-Lead
is used, better, and above 20 per Cent. Cheaper than theirs, as is proved in
the Book above mentioned, p. 114. and elsewhere, Mr. Hale who lives at the
Mill'd-Lead Sign in Aurange-street by Red Lion Square, is ready to undertake
the said Sheathing, or any other Work about Churches, Houses, etc. having able
Plumbers and sufficient Workmen to perform the same; and sells his Solder for
sixpence a-pound, which the Plumbers, by Combination, have hitherto kept up at
9 d.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed February, 1695/6.


