Job afflicted

Take my brethren, the Prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for
an example of suffering affliction and of patience.

Behold, we count them happy which endure. ye have heard of the patience of
Job, etc.

James. 5.10.11. THE HOLY LIVES OF GOD'S PROPHETS.

By J. H.

LONDON, Printed for Will: Hope at the blew Anchor on the North side of the
Royal Exchange. 1654.

To his worthily much Honored Kinsman, George Smith, Esquire
Most worthy SIR,
SVch and so extraordinary are your Favors, and so freely conferred upon me,
that I must needs acknowledge I am in a strict manner obliged to all
opportunities of humble Gratitude. Whereupon (not without some praemeditation)
I have thought sit to take this, and have adventured to publish to the world
the Lives of these HOLY MEN under your Patronage, who indeed for a kind of
sympathy between you and them, do the rather own you for their Patron: For if
you please but seriously to peruse them, you may in many things read your
self, and find wherein you have made them the pious Presidents of your own
good Works. Of those, as you well know, my self have had no little experience,
a Theme too on which I might well enlarge my self; but indeed such is my
unhappiness, I want those abilities, either by more excellent Art of Language
to express them, or any other way of service or respects to testify
sufficient thankfulness. What need I then add more, seeing this little
already said, though but mean, and according to my duty, is I am confident
above your expectation, so little do you delight in the resitall of your
kindnesses, or desire they should be thus brought to your Remembrance: your
expectations as in a sutablenesse to your Christian Virtues, await higher
Rewards with those Pious Men before mentioned, that as you have endeavored to
imitate their Lives so you may also partake with them in their Eternal
Happiness; for the fruition whereof, he shall daily pray, who in all duty
subscribes himself, Sir,

Yours most humbly observant, J. H.

Of the Lives and Noble Acts of Gods Prophets.
The Life of the Prophet JOB.
CHAPTER I.
Section 1.
THe Prophet Job, who was also called Jobad, as the seventy Interpreters relate
in the end of the Book of Job, or that book which is writ concerning Job, was
head of the fifth Family from Abraham, as the same Interpreters deliver in the
same place. For Abraham begat Isaac, Isaac Esau, Esau Zara of his wife Basemath
the daughter of Ishmael, Zara Jobad, who also is Job.

Sect. 2.
This man although he lived amongst wicked and lewd people, and dwelt in that
Country called A^sotis, or Hus, in the borders of Idumaea, yet was he not
infected with any vice or lewdness from them, but even from his childhood he
eschewed vice and followed virtue with that resolution of spirit, that he would
never do otherwise than he ought, even when he had lost all those things which
mon esteem most dear, his Fotranes, and Children, and his whole body was so
pestered with sores, that his very friends could not endure to look upon him:
which things because they be so excellent, and make for his greater
commendation than if he had moderately behaved himself only in prosperity; I
resolve to declare all severally, that all men in adversity and misery may have
a notable example set before them of this man.

Sect. 3.
And because it is no great matter of praise, nor any such rare virtue for a
man to lose but an indifferent Estate, and to bear out that misfortune
gallantly, we must understand this, that Job was no mean person, nor one that
had but a poor or slender Fortune, for he was the second King of the Land of
Edom, inasmuch as he succeeded in the room of Bela, or Balach the first King;
And he was very rich for those times, wherein men's wealth consisted much in
flocks and herds; it is therefore recorded in the Scriptures, which mention
that he was a wealthy person, how that he had seven thousand Sheep, three
thousand Camels, five hundred yoke of Oxen, and five hundred she Asses, and a
very great Family. Now before I tell by what means all these things were taken
from him, and with what mind he bare the loss of them, I will relate how he
demeaned himself in his prosperity.

Sect. 4.
Though he was a King and a Prince, as I have said, and one that had such a
great Estate, yet did he never misuse his Sovereignty or Authority to the
injury of his Friends or Strangers, like a proud man, nor his goods to the
satisfying of his lusts; for in judgment he decided matters with such equity,
that when he went to the Gate of the City, and had his seat prepared him in the
Court, The Courts were kept in the Gates of the Cities.
all that heard and saw him (forasmuch as the Aged stood up to him, and the
Princes and Nobles forbore, out of reverence, to speak in his presence)
thought him happy, and gave witness to him that he delivered the poor which
cried, and the fatherless which had none to help them; the Cause which he
understood not he searched out diligently, lest, if he should have passed
sentence whilst the cause was unknown, he might both have done wrong to another
man, and dishonor to himself.

Sect. 5.
And how he behaved himself toward his equals or betters, either in Suits and
Controversies which he had with them, or in other dealings, we may hence
conceive, in that he never refused a trial with his man or maid servant, if at
any time they would go to law with him; besides, in his whole life he was so
full of liberality and pity, which had grown up with him from his infancy,
that he never eat a piece of bread alone without the fatherless; he never
denied poor people what they requested; he never wearied out the people with
delays; he never saw men perish for lack of clothing, or any poor man to be
without a covering: Lastly, he never suffered a stranger to tarry without
doors, but was willing to have his house lie always open to the traveller, so
that he was an eye to the blind, a foot to to the lame and a father to the
poor; which though they be great matters, yet shall we cease to wonder at them,
if we do but consider that contempt of riches which was in him. For he neither
placed his strength, or confidence and hope in gold, nor did he rejoice in much
wealth when he had got it.

Sect. 6.
Let me now set forth his other virtues; He did not love his friends only, but
his foes also, and enemies so, as that he never rejoiced at their adversity, he
never spoke against them, he was so modest and chaste, that if ever woman had
deceived his heart, or if ever he had laid wait at his neighhours door, he
did not refuse that his wife should be false to his bed. chapter 31. And of such
integrity of heart, such innocence of life, and of such an even behavior was
he toward all men, that if ever he had stepped aside out of the way, or had ever
seen that which was another, so as to desire it, or had taken any thing from
any body, he did wish, that what he sowed might become other men's, and that
his family might come to ruin. And these things he wished; or, rather he
propounded this condition to them, that would tax him of any injustice, not in
his youth or middle age, or in his prosperity, but now that he was aged and in
his adversity, wherein men that are spiteful devise many things, because now
they need fear no power: Nor did he mean this touching his by past life, and
alter his purpose for the remainder, but even as he lay in misery, he professed
with a settled resolution, that he would never forgo his innocence of life,
that a lie should never enter into his thoughts, nor a wicked word-proceed out
of his mouth, whilst breath was in him, and thus did he carry himself toward
his neighbors. Now must we relate how he behaved himself toward God.

Sect. 7.
Amidst so much and so great prosperity, which is often wont to turn rich and
potent persons from Gods fear, worship and service, he never worshipped the
Sun, Moon and Stars, as they used to do, with whom, and amongst whom he
lived; but the only and true God, with so great devotion, that when he married
an Arabian Wife, by whom he had seven sons and three daughters, and his sons
having invited their sisters, did feast one another every one his day; he
fearing lest they might have sinned against God in any thing, or cursed him in
their heart, was wont when the days were gone about, to send for them, and
sanctify them, and early in the morning to offer burnt offerings according to
their number.

Sect. 8
It may now in order seem requisite that we speak concerning the miseries into
which God suffered him to fall (not for his wickedness, but to prove his
patience, and to manifest it to others, and set it abroad to be imitated) so
great miseries, as scarce any man is able to imagine them. Satan indeed bare
such hatred toward him, and was so blind with a desire to do him harm, that
he would not believe God, when he bare testimony to innocence, virtue and
religion, but having extenuated these his so great virtues, as though they were
not true, but practiced merely for the times sake; that is, because of
prosperity, he said, that God himself should at last prove it to be so; If the
wealth wherein Job abounded, might be violently taken from him, and he of a
happy man become miserable: God who had known and tried the manliness and
valor of his Champion, gave Satan power to take away his goods by force, and
kill his children. He having this leave given him, instantly stirred up the
Sabaeans; that when the eldest of Jobs children entertained the rest at a
dinner, having made an inrode, they took away the Oxen plowing, and all the
she Asses in the fields, and slew all the heardsmen, except one who came to
bring him news of that calamity; whom when he was hearing, another comes
suddenly in who told him that the sheep were burnt up with lightning, and the
servants consumed with the fire; who whilst he was yet speaking, there came in
another who brought news that the Camels were all taken away by the Chaldeans,
and the servants all slain but himself; and he had not made an end of
speaking when a fourth brought him heavier news then the former, touching the
death of all his children, who when they were eating and drinking in their
eldest brothers house, were slain with the fall of it; what do we think that
Job did or said among so many and so great and so crowding calamities, or, with
what mind he endured them? he underwent them with a constant spirit,
prostrating himself upon the ground, with his garments rent, and his head
shaven he worshipped God, and with great constancy said, Naked came I out of my
Mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither; the Lord, has given, the
Lord has taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord. This is a gallant
example, and remarkable to posterity, of a manly and patient Spirit: but that
which follows, is far more excellent and glorious.

Sect. 9.
Satan, who had done all these mischiefs to Job, was not content (for he
thought that he might been driven from his stability of Spirit, by some
miseries, and so might possibly be overcome) but procured far more grievous)
for when God had asked him (after his brags, that he had gone about the world)
whether he had considered his servant Job, an honest and religious man, and one
that retained his innocence; whom notwithstanding at his motion, he had made
very miserable without cause: He answered according to his malice, which cannot
be satisfied but in destruction, that a man is wont to part with another man's
skin for his own, and his own means to preserve his life, which seeing Job
had done in his goods and children, it was not to be accounted as any great
commendation for him, or wonder, if he had not denied God and cursed him. But
if he would but touch his body with a disease, then at last he should hear him
curse him to his face. God, who knew that his champion would not be overcome by
bodily harms, but that he would foil his adversary, yielded his body to the
Devils will, forbidding him to attempt any thing either against his mind,
which is at his own liberty, or against his life. He having received this
power, presently infected and vexed Jobs whole body with such boyles, that no
part of him remained sound. It is worth our labor to consider and take notice
of what he did or said in the calamity.

Sect. 10
As soon as he felt the evil, like a man repulsed from his City and home, he
sat him down upon a dunghill, and scraped off the filthy matter with a
potsheard: now his wife, which alone seemed to have been left him of so great a
family to comfort him, when she perceived him suffer this extreme calamity
with such steadfastness of mind, not imputing this to his valor, but a
stupidity, and senseless dullness, she chid him, because he yet retained his
integrity, and advised him to curse God and dye, or, as others interpret, to
desire humbly of God that he might dye, and not linger any longger. He, who had
litted himself to endure adversities with a manly courage, Did mildly, she
had spoken like one of the foolish women, for they had received good things
from God, why should they not endure evil: Which word if we should make use of
in the like case, we should not be so nice and effeminate, nor should we so cry
out against Gods providence; and indeed there is no question but that saying of
his wife did increase his sorrow. For when we are in grief and misery, if
they who should comfort us, I do not say forgo their duty by leaving it
undone, but do or say something not agreeable to what they ought, then truly,
then I say, by this very thing the former grief is increased.

Sect. 11.
But his three friends, Eliphaz the King of Theman, Baldad King of the Suhites,
and Sophar King of the Naamathites, did more mightily set it on; for when they
having received the news of that so great a calamity, had come very long
journeys together to comfort him at a day appointed, from the place which they
had agreed upon for their common setting forth, and having beheld him afar off,
so sore afflicted, did not at the first know him, afterward coming nearer,
had lift up their voices and wept, and having their garments rent, had
sprinkled dust upon their heads to express, their sorrow, and had sat with
him seven days and seven nights, and were not able to bring out a word, for
the grief which they saw him suffer. Yet when he had begun to speak, and they
answering by turns, or discoursing, had first objected that what he suffered,
he suffered for his wickedness; moreover they termed him audacious and ^ash
that would compare himself with God, and abide the trial with him: Lastly,
they said he was presumptuous, because he spoke of himself, and ascribed so
great virtues to himself, which they said might be found to be either none or
false, by the things which he did endure: He again for his part, did refute
their opinion with such weighty sentences, telling them that they which were
come to comfort him and case his sorrow, did seem heavier then s^nd unto him.
They having nothing to say, at last held their peace, and said not one word
more: But when they held their peace, Elihu partly excused Job, and took his
part, and partly he accused him.

Sect. 12.
Which judgment of theirs concerning Job, God two ways showed how much it
displeased him: first in that he said he did not punish him for his
wickedness, but that he might get glory by conquering Satan, and besides in
that he rebuked Eliphaz the King of Theman, because he had not spoken right, as
Job, and for that reason to make satisfaction for their wickedness, he and his
two companions should take seven bullocks and seven rams, and go to Job, whom
he would accept, praying to him for them, when they had offered sacrifice:
Which when they and Job had done, God being moved by Jobs prayers pardoned
them. In which thing, both the love and charity of Job appeared, who prayed for
them, that thought badly of him, and spoke against him: and his exceeding great
renown, who being contemned not only by strangers, but also by his friends,
was accounted worthy with whom God would enter into discourse.

Sect. 13.
Nor did such a sufferance and patience procure him this credit alone, but all
things which Satan (by Gods permission) had taken singly from him, were
restored double to him, Sheep, Camels, yokes of Oxen, and she Asses, he lived
also after these miseries, a hundred and fifty years, happy and prosperous,
and begat seven sons and three daughters. In which doubled plenty and
abundance of things, he was not proud or rigorous against them that had
neglected and scorned him in adversity, deeming them unworthy to come at him or
to speak with him, or to ask him how he did, or objecting their omission of
what they should have done, or threatening that he would be revenged of their
injuries, but retaining still his gentle behavior, he courteously entertained
his brothers and sisters, his kindred and all them that were known to him upon
any occasion as they came to him, (when they knew that al things were changed
to him sort be better) and received small presents from them, from every one a
Sheep, and one golden ear-ring, which then he might have been without; but he
received them lest he might seem to be pult up with prosperity and slight them.

Sect. 14.
The discourse which he had with his friends, because it is written in the book
entitled by his name; I need not set it down in this. It will be enough but
to conceive this, that he made it for the most part concerning the miseries of
man's life, concerning the providence and power of God, concerning his former
life, how excellently and devoutly he had spent it, concerning the punishments
of the wicked, concerning the rewards and glory of the Godly, he prophesied
many things touching the general resurrection of men's bodies: which part of
his discourse has especially moved me, that reckoning him amongst the number
of the Prophets, I should write his life, amongst the lives of the Prophets.
Which I have therefore placed the first, because he was many ages before the
rest.

The life of the Prophet Samuel.
CHAP. II.
Section I.
Samuel the Seer or Prophet, was the son of Elkanah and Hannah his Wife.
Elkanah having two Wives, a thing which was then lawful, Hannah and Peninnah:
Peninnah which had borne children, reproached Hannah because she was barren.
Hannah who was ignorant of Gods purpose, being much moved with the taunts and
bitter speechees of her adversary, burst out into tears, nor did she eat
year by year at those set times, wherein Elkanah with his Wives and children
went ordinarily from his house, from mount Ephraim, to Worship and Sacrifice in
Shil^, where the Ark of God was placed, Sam. 5. He having sound out the ground
of Hannah's grief and sadness, begun to comfort her saying, that he was
better to her then ten children; now though she felt so much oase of her grief
by this comfort her Husband gave her, that she fell to meat, yet, knowing it
was God alone that could fully release her of her sorrow, making a vow with
tears, she besought him within her self, that he would please to look upon
her and vouchsafe her a Son, whom she would devote his servant all the days
of his life. Haeli (who because he saw her moving the lips and did not hear
her voice, thought that she was drunk) partly rebuked her, and partly
admonished her to put away the wine wherewith sh^e was overtaken; whereas she
denied that she had drank any wine to that time of the day, for that, she poor
woman, made her prayer unto God with a sorrowful Spirit. Now when Haeli having
blessed her had so sent her away, as that she might obtain what she desired
and asked, they both, having worshipped God, returned home; and a little while
after, Hannah by Gods blessing conceived and brought forth this Samuel, whose
life we write.

Sect. 2.
Some three years after, when he was weaned, she both remembering the vow
wherewith she had engaged her self, and the benefit she had received from
God, presented him to God with solemn sacrifices, and told Haeli that she was
the Woman, which had lately besought God for that Son, and that therefore
she would lend him to God; nor did she only consecrate the child to God, but
also she gave him many thanks, and extold him exceedingly with true praise, and
having left the child to minister before the Lord, she returned home with her
Husband. There Samuels Ministry became so acceptable to God, that he called him
to the office of divining and foretelling things to come, which we call
Prophecy, even from the beginning of his childhood, after this manner.

Sect. 3.
Haeli the Priest, because he was old, had made his two sons, Ophni and
Phinees, Priests, which office then had the chief power and sovereignty
amongst the Jews by Gods appointment, 1 Samuel 2. They in that office took to
themselves, the things that were offered contrary to Gods Command, and besides,
they used to lie with the women; which when Haeli their Father came to know of,
he chid them, but did not correct them for it, ver. 24, 25. Therefore God so
disliked and detested his indulgency toward his children, that he let him know
by a Prophet, whose name is not written, that it should come to pass that his
two sons Ophni and Phinees should dye in one day, ver. 34. because he had
honored them more then him, and that he would raise up unto himself a
faithful Priest, that should be obedient unto him in every thing he did.
Samuels ordination shortly after ensued upon this praediction of the Prophet;
for when he being but a child, lay asleep in the Temple, somewhat nigh unto
Haeli the Priest, God called him thrice, and when being awakened, he thought
Haeli had come to call him, he made answer three times, that he was there at
hand. Haeli who understood not the matter, sent him three times back again to
sleep, but when he perceived the third time that God had called him, he bad
him say to God that he was ready to hear, and that he should therefore speak;
When Samuel had said so, God rehearsed all those things touching Haeli, which
he had foretold him; as I have said already, by a Prophet God gave him no
command that he should tell Haeli all those things; but being (as I may say)
adjured by him in certain words which had in them the power of an oath, he
told him.

Sect. 4.
Hereupon a report went far and wide that Samuel was Gods faithful Prophet,
and when Haeli dyed, a little while after, he became moreover Priest and Judge,
which was the supreme magistracy amongst the Hebrews. This he discharged with
exceeding great integrity by the confession and testimony of all the people.
For when, having made a King as they desired, he had given them leave to speak
freely, that, if any one would witness, he had taken away any man's Ox or
Asle, or had defrauded, or oppressed any one, or had received a bribe from any
man, he would make restitution; they all said no, and produced God as a
witness of that matter; which speech indeed as it is befitting all that
perform any public charge or business, so I would to God they could truly
use it with the Peoples testimony and confession joined thereunto. The same did
he show himself in managing and discharging the Priests Office; for, whereas
it belongs to the Priest to offer sacrifice, and to pray unto God for the
people: The people ever thought his prayers so acceptable to God, and
profitable for themselves, that at the last when he had told them how
grievously they had offended God, desiring a King should be given to them, then
the people carnestly besought him, that he would pray to God for them, that
they might not dye; and he having cheared them up with many words, spoke thus,
most becoming a Priest. God forbid that I should sin so fore against him, as
that I should cease to pray for you, or to teach you the good and right way.
But of these things we must say something severally.

Sect. 5.
God indeed, as often as he perceived his people Israel (having contemned him) to
be turned to the worship and service of false Gods, to recall and withdraw them
therefrom, was ever wont to provide them enemies that might oppress them, that
being constrained, as it were by the smart, and neglecting and despising the
service of false gods, they might crave his succor; a thing which I have often
evidenced in the Book which I have writ of the lives of the Patriarchs. And
even for this reason, while Haeli was Priest, God raised the Philistines
against them, because they worshipped and retained strange gods, and especially
that, that it is called Aslaroth: And they by Gods permission, for such a
fault, slew thirty thousand foot, and the two sons of Haeli, Ophni and
Phinees, the ark of God also being taken, which that it might protect them,
they had taken order to have fetched from Silo into the place where they were
to fight. But in the twentieth year after the Arc was taken, the Philistines
brought it back, by reason of the destruction that came upon them, when they
conveyed it into any place of theirs whatsoever. Samuel, who understood the
cause of the calamity which they received in the war, told all the people,
that if they would all truly and entirely return unto God, they should now take
away their strange gods, and Aslaroth from amongst them, and prepare their
hearts for God, and worship him alone. For so it should come to pass, that he
would deliver them from the malice and power of the Phlistines. Sam. 7. They
all yielded to Samuel, and when they had thrown down, and put away their
strange gods, in the number of which was Baalim and Aslaroth; they worshipped
God only. After this he commanded them all to meet together in Mizpeh, that he
might pray to God for them, when they were come thither, they drew water and
powered it down before God, and having fasted that day, they confessed openly to
God, that they had sinned; as soon as the Phyilistians had heard that the Jews
were there assembled, their Lords came against them with a cruel Army, and
such a trembling thereupon fell among the Jews, that they presently entreated
Samuel, that he would never cease praying for them, till they were saved from
the Philistines. He first offered a whole sucking Lamb for a burnt offering
unto God, and then he prayed unto him for Israel, and God heard him openly. For
when the Philistines whilst he sacrificed, fell violently upon the Jews, God
delivered them, being discomfited with a thunderclap into the power of the
Jews to be slain; they were so subdued and scattered with this overthrow, that
they durst never after break into the Coasts of Israel whilst Samuel lived.
After this, being enforced by misery, that they might make peace with the
Jews, they restored the Cities which they had taken.

Sect. 6.
These offices he himself executed as long as he could for age; Now when being
aged, he could not execute the office of a Judge; he made his sons Joel and
Abiah Judges, whereas they did not do as their father had done, but took money
and gifts for judging: the lilders of the Jews came to Samuel, and desired,
that forasmuch as he was grown ancient, and his sons did not walk in his
ways, he would grant and appoint them a King, whom they might make use on for
a Judge; that saying displeased Samuel, and therefore he thought it best to
advise with God. God bade him do as they had desirod, for that they had not
rejected and cast off Samuel, but himself, that he might not rule over them;
And he showed him Saul, the son of Kish, whom he should anoint and ordain
King, 1 Samuel 10. when he had found him, because he was taller then any man by
the shoulders, he bad all the people see, how that none was like him whom God
had chosen: and when they had cried God save their new King, verse 24. after he
had told them the Law of the Kingdom, and writ it, and laid it up in the
Tabernacle, he blessed the people. After this, by recital of Gods benefits
which they and their fathers had always neglected, he made known to them what
a grievous sin they had committed when they asked a King: Which, that they
might the better understand, there were thunderclaps heard, rain poured down
at his request, as he had told them aforehand it should come to pass; at which
so strange and usual a matter being much affrighted, they speak to him that
he would beseech God that they might not die, forasmuch as they confessed they
had grievously sinned in asking a King. Samuel exhorted them at large to be of
good courage and not to fear, 1 Samuel 12.3. for that they indeed had sinned
exceedingly, yet ought not to forsake God, but serve him with all care and
earnestnes of Spirit, scorning and neglecting the worship of strange Gods, who
seeing they were vain and unprofitable, could not be able to deliver from
evil. For thus it should come to pass, that God would not forsake them for
his great name, seeing especially he had made it good with an oath, that he
would make them his people; but it they should go on to sin, that both they
and their King should perish.

Sect. 7.
Saul being King, had offered Sacrifices shortly after, contrary to Gods
command, because Samuel came not within the 7 days, 1 Samuel 13. in which time
he had said that he would come, and the Jews slipped away for fear of the huge
company of Philistines that came to battle, when as Samuel coming in the mean
while rebuked him sharply, and foretold that the end of his Kingdom was at
hand, and that in his stead there should succeed a man that should be pleasing
to God, ver. 13. A second time as Gods Propher, he told Saul of the end, or
downfall of his Kingdom for the very same cause. 1 Samuel 13. The Amalekites had
made resistance to the Jews as they came out of Egypt, whose wrongs when God
had purposed to revenge by Saul, he sent Samuel to him to charge him, that he
should raise a mighty Army, and utterly destroy Amaleck, and all things that
belonged to them; But he spated King Agag when he was taken, and reserved the
Herds, and the Flocks, and all the things that were of any value; Hereupon God
told Samuel that he was displeased, and that he repented that he had made Saul
King, who set light by his Commandments, 1 Samuel 15. Upon these words of God,
and the thing which Saul had committed, Samuel took such grief that he spent
the rest of the night in crying, and praying, and carely in the morning he
hasted by long journeys to Saul, whom when he had soundly chid, having reckoned
up Gods benefits toward him, because he had not again observed God, and he on
the contrary maintained that he had obeyed him, and the people only had
reserved the richest of the spoil that they might offer it to God; he said,
that God did not desire sacrifices, but willed rather that men should obey and
keep his Commandments, for obedience is better than sacrifice. Therefore he
should know and persuade himself thus much, that he had rejected God, and that
he also was rejected by God from being King. When Saul confessed that he had
sinned against God and him for fear of the people, and entreated him that he
would also bear with his fault, and go back with him to worship God, and
Samuel said he would not do so, because God had despised him, that he should
not now be King over Israel, he caught hold on the skirts of his mantle, as he
was going away, with such a force as that it rent; by which passage, as by a
token aforehand, Samuel told him that God had rent away his Kingdom and given
it to one better than he; when again he confessed that he had sinned, and
entreated Samuel that he would do him honor in the sight of the Princes, and
of his people, and that he would return with him, that he might worship God,
he followed him and cut in pieces King Agag, who was a corpulent man, with
these words, As thy sword has made mothers childlesse, so shall thy mother be
childlesse amongst women.

Sect. 8.
After that Samuel went to his house in Ramath, neither did he from that day
forward see Saul, whose chance and misfortune nevertheless he was sorry for. 1 Samuel 16. God rebuked him when he sorrowed, and asked how long he would mourn
for him whom he had put from his Kingdom; And therefore he should fill a horn
with oil that he might send him to Jesse the Bethlehemite, whose Son he had
chosen King; when he asked how he could go but he should be quickly killed by
Saul when he knew it, he showed a way and a means how he might easily avoid
his fury. Thus at the last, being very consident, he went diligently and
dutifully to execute what God had commanded him, and he anointed David King,
whom God had manifested and showed to him.

Sect. 9.
Samuel after all these famous and holy performances, dyed in a good old age at
his own house in Ramath, 1 Samuel, 25. which when the Jews knew of, they all met
and mourned for him, and buried him there; if we follow the Scries of those
things which are written in the first book of the Kings, he will seem to have
dyed before Saul's death, and the beginning of David's Reign, or his taking upon
him the Government and Kingly Office; but if we respect those things which are
written in the first booko of the Chronicles, how that David and Samuel the
Seer, that is, the Prophet, chose two hundred and twelve Porters which are
there reckoned, a thing which does not seem to ha have been done whilst Saul
was living, he did not die till after Saul's death.

Nathan the Prophet.
CHAP. III.
Section. 1
NAthan was Prophet, when David was King, of the kindred of Thot, as Epiphanius
says, who who also writes that he was a man of Gabath, and that he knew
beforehand that grievous sin which David was to commit with Bersheba, and that
as he came a long journey to keep the King from such an evil act, he was
hindered by a villain, who had slain a man, whom when he found lying naked
upon the ground, he tarried there to bury him, lest he should be eaten up of
wild Beasts, and that he knew that very same night that David committed that
foul Act, and that therefore he went back with sorrow to Gabath, and that as
soon as ever David had killed Vriah the Husband of Bershebah, God sent him to
him to reprove him: And this is that which Epiphanius writes concerning
Nathan. Now will I tell what is writ of him in the Scriptures.

S. 2.
King David had taken order, that the ark of God should be brought with
exceeding Pomp and reverence; all sorts of Musical instruments being made use
of, and 3000 chosen men made to attend it first to the House of Obed-Edom,
because of the sudden death of Vzza who had touched it, 2 Samuel 6: and after to
his own house; when he perceived that al things went well with Obed-Edom for
the Arkes sake. A little while after he conceiving it unsit for him to dwell in
houses of Cedar, and the Arc in skins, viz. in the Tabernacle, he asked Nathan
his advise, and told him the thing; Nathan at the first, who yet knew not Gods
intent, thought that he might do what he was resolved, as touching that
matter. The night following, God commanded him to go to David and tell him that
he should not build the House which he had in his thoughts, but his son,
whose Throne he would establish, after his decease: which when Nathan had told
him, he sorbare the work which he had resolved to do, and gave God hoarty
thanks, as he was bound, for his especial favor toward him.

Sect. 3.
A second time God sent him to David, in a case altogether differing from this;
for when he, having committed adultery with Bersheba, had ordered that Vrias
her Husband should be slain in the battle, God did by Nathan tell him in this
Parable the heinousness of his crime so home, that he not understanding the
drift of it, condemned himself before he was aware. Nathan at Gods bidding
told him, that there were two men in one City, whereof he that was rich, and
had store of Sheep and Oxen, had taken from a poor man a Sheep, which was all
he had, and had set it before a stranger to eat, and that he was come to him,
to know what judgment he would have to be passed upon him. David being moved
with anger toward him, who as he thought had done this, said, he deserved to
die, and be made to restore fourfold: Nathan affirmed him to be the man,
because he had taken * Bersheba [* Bathshebah] whom he had defiled to Wife, and
had killed Vrias her Husband, and that therefore evil should never depart from
his House: And he foretold all those evils and adversities which befell him
shortly after. Then at the last, David confessed that he had grievously sinned
against the Lord; which Repentance of his, God knowing to be true, he bad
Nathan tell him, that for that reason his sin was put away, and that he should
not die; but the child which should be borne to him, because the enemies being
moved by this his wickedness, did speak evil of God and dishonor him: which
when Nathan had spoken, he went home, and all those things which he had
foretold, fell out accordingly.

Sect. 4.
David was very aged, insomuch, as when he was covered with clothes, he could
get no heat, 1 Kin. 1. Adonijah his son by Haggith, who by this concluded
that his Father could not live long, had, unknown to him, seized on the
Kingdom, nor did his Father blamed him when he knew it; yet Nathan would not
side with him, and therefore he persuaded Bathsheba, Solomon's Mother, that if
she would take order for her, or her Sons safety, she should go to the King,
and put him in mind, that it was Adonijah, who whilst he was alive, and
whether he would or no, had usurped the Kingdom; whereas he had sworn that
Solomon should succeed him, and he promised her that he would come in the
interim, and help her out with what she had begun to say, she being first let
in, acquainted the King with matters to that purpose; when withal news is
brought to the King, that Nathan is there, he coming in, does aggravate the
heinousness of the matter at large, and gives his judgment that Solomon
should rather be preferred as he had heard him say. Which when it liked the
King, again, he gave order to Nathan and Zadock the Priest, and other three,
that they should set Solomon upon his Mule and bring him to Gihon, and that
there Zadock should him with oil; which thing was done as fast as could be,
every man shouting, God save the King. And these things are all that I have
found concerning his life; now, he dyed very ancient, and was buried in Gabath,
his own Country, as Epiphanius writes.

Gad the Prophet.
CHAP. IIII.
Section 1.
THE Prophet Gad had bestowed upon him, and discharged the Office of a Prophet
at the same time almost that Nathan. Although I find that God sent him to
David once before Nathan; for when David slying from Saul's sight to avoid
present death, was come to Achish King of the Gothites, and he lied neglected
him, seeing he counterfeited himself mad, to preserve himself. And eseiping
thence into the Camp of Adullam, was chosen the Commander over five hundred
men, that were indebted, and going thence into Maspha, which was under the
Authority and power of the King of Moab, had entreated the King, that he would
suffer his Father and Mother to abide with him, till he knew what God would do
for him, which when he had obtained he might remain in the hold. This Prophet
God, his opinion was, that he ought to go thence, and come into that part of
Judea, which at the dividing fell to Judah and his posterity: whose advise and
command (or Gods rather) he obeyed, and betook himself into the Forest of
Haveth.

Sect. 2.
Another time God sent him to David; David had given order that Ioab the
Captain of the Host should number all his Subjects that could bear Arms, in
which when he found he had offended God by putting him upon this service, both
acknowledged that he had done amiss, and besought God that he would remove his
sin; when he was got up very timely God sent the Prophet Gad (who, as it is
written, did use to prophecy of all things to David) that he might offer the
choice of three things, either of seven years famine in his own Dominion, or
to fly before his enemies who should pursue him for three mo^ths together, or
at least the Pestilence for three days in his Kingdom; which when he had told
him, he desired him to make answer which of those three he would rather have,
that he might bear word back again to him that had sent him; when he had made
choice of the Pestilence, saying, that he had rather fall into the hands of God
than of men, because God was very merciful, threescore and ten thousand men
died within the time limited. God caused him to see the Angel destroying and
killing, at which time he spoke most like a King; for he said, it was he that
had sinned, but they that were sheep and were slain had committed no
wickedness, and therefore he besought him that he would turn his hand against
him, and against his Fathers house; with which words of his God being moved,
sent the Prophet Gad unto him to command him to build him an Altar in the
sloore of Areana the Jebusite; when, having made an Altar, he had sacrificed to
God, both the anger of God ceased and the Plague stayed.

Ahias, or Athias the Prophet.
CHAP. V.
Section 1.
AHias was a Shilonite, he, as Epiphanius says, foretold Solomon that it
should come to pass that he should sin against God, and that women should
withdraw him and turn him away from God. He also, as the same Author writes,
reproved Hieroboam, because he would serve God hypocritically and feignedly if
once he should come to the Sovereignty, and he foretold him that he should
oppose God with two Calves, and that his seed should be kept in servitude. But
we will relate those few things which are mentioned in the Scripture concerning
him.

Sect. 2.
King Solomon had set Hieroboam the Ephrathite, having observed him to be of a
good disposition, over the Tribute of all the Family of Joseph. This Ahias
being clad with a new garment met him on the way as he came out of Jerusalem,
and when he had taken his mantle and rent it in twelve parts, he advised
Hieroboam that he would take ten pieces to himself, for that God would divide
Solomon's Kingdom and give him ten Tribes, but one Tribe should be left him for
David's sake, and that these things should betide to Solomon, because he had
worshipped strange Gods, and had not obeyed Gods Commandments, doing like to
his Father David. If in his reign, after Solomon was dead, (for he should not
rule over the ten Tribes whilst Solomon lived) he would obey Gods
Commandments, as David had obeyed them, that he would not be wanting to him
upon any occasion.

Sect. 3.
Now after that Hieroboam was King, when his Son Abia was sick, he remembered
what Abias the Prophet had foretold him, and therefore he gave order to his
wife, that, having changed her apparel lest she should be known, she should go
to him in Shilo to enquire what should betide the Child; she having provided
her self of all things necessary took her journey. But God both made known to
Ahias, that could not see for age, that it was Hieroboams wife that came to
ask him about her Son, and told him what he should say, therefore ho called
her by her name as she came in, and chid her much because she came in a
disguise; he also foretold her the death of her Son, and the ruin of her
Family for the sins of Hieroboam her husband; the Child indeed died (as Ahias
had foretold) at her entrance in at the door; and when Asa was King of Judah,
Baasa having killed Nadab the Son of Hieroboam, ho destroyed his Family. Now
Ahias died in Shile, as Epiphanius says, and was buried near an Oak which
was there.

Semeias the Prophet.
CHAP. VI
When the ten Tribes did fall off from Roboam to Hieroboam, as Ahias the
Prophet had fore-prophesied, and Roboam was therefore gone to Jerusalem and
had raised a great Army that he might reduce them, God sent Semeias to tell
Roboam, and all the people that attended him, that they ought not to go to war
with their Israelitish brethren, and therefore they should go every man to his
house, because this thing was from the Lord, and they obeying Gods command went
back again without doing any thing at all:

Joam the Prophet.
CHAP. VII.
Section 1.
EPiphanius calls that Prophet Ioam, whom the Scriptures mention to have come
out of Judah to Bethel at Gods Command at such time as Hieroboam stood before
the Altar to burn Incense; he indeed at his first coming had begun to cry out
against the Altar, as God had commanded him, O Altar, Altar, thus says the
Lord, there shall arise up a son or David, Josias by name, and he shall
sacrifice in thee the Priests of the high places, who now burn incense on
thee, and the bones of men shall he burn on thee, and this should be known by
this, that the Altar should then cleave asunder, and the ashes that were upon
it, be powered out. Hieroboam could not abide those words of the Prophet, or of
God rather, but stretching out his hand from the Altar toward him, he
commanded those that were about him to lay hands on him, when on a sudden his
hand dried up, so that he could not pull it in to him, and finding that to be
the power of God, he entreats the Prophet to pray for him, that he would
restore unhim his hand safe and sound; which when he had done, and his hand was
restored, in thankfulness for the favor, he entreats him to go to his
house to dinner with him, where he should be requited for his charitable
kindness: He said he could not do so, although he should give him the one
half of his Kingdom, for God had charged him, that he should not return by
the way by which he came, and therefore he returned another way.

Sect. 2.
But when he had gone a part of his journey, a certain old Prophet, whose
sons had told him what he had done; riding upon his Ass found him sitting
under a turpentine tree, and when upon the same reason he had denied his
request, to go with him and cate bread, at the last, giving too much credit to
him, when he said he was a Prophet also, whom God had commanded to do this, he
assented to his own hurt; for as he sat with him at the table, the Prophet
that had brought him back foretold him, (as God had bid him) that because he
had not obeyed Gods word, his carcass should not be brought into the Sepulcher
of his Fathers; and therefore, shortly after a Lion slew him as he went away
thence; which, when the old Prophet had news of, he went presently, and laying
the whole carcass on his Ass, brought it to his house, and buried it with all
honor, speaking to his sounes that when he should dye they should bury him
hard by him.

Jehu the Prophet.
CHAP. VIII.
IEhu the son of Hanani was Prophet, when Asa was King of Judah. God sent him
to Baasa King of Israel to foretell him, that forasmuch as being exalted out of
the dust as it were, and made Prince over Israel, he followed the way of
Hieroboam, and made Israel to sin by his example and command, it should come to
pass that his estate and memory should be utterly taken away: Now, Baasa did
not only refuse to entertain these words as he ought, but also he killed Jehu
the Prophet and messenger of God he also greatly blamed Josaphat the King of
Juda, when he came back from the battle, wherein he had assisted Ahab, and
told him, that for so doing, he had deserved Gods wrath, but with all that
there were good things found in him.

Azarias the Prophet the son of Obed 2 Chro. 15 Oded.
CHAP. IX.
THis Prophet came by Gods appointment, to Asa King of Judah, in the fifteenth
year of his Reign (when having overthrown the Altars of strange gods, taken
away their worship, and taught his people to seek and serve the Lord, and with
prayer obtained Gods assistance, 2 Chro. 14.11. by an army of his own
subjects, he had overthrown a huge multitude of Arabians that had invaded him)
to tell him, that, because he and his people had been with God, God also had
been with them, and to foretell him, that for a long time together the people
of Israel This is spoken as a thing past in the 2 Chro. 15.35.
should be without the true God, without a teaching Priest, and without the
Law; but when in adversity they should seek the Lord and return to him, he
should be found of them, and that then there should be no peace to him that
went out or came in. But great fear and terror upon all the inhabitants of the
Land; Therefore that they should be strong, and not hang down their hands, for
their work should be rewarded. Upon these words of Azariah, Asa took courage
to go on in putting down the Worship of strange Gods every where, and
restoring the service of the Lord, and setting his people in the same.

Hanani the Prophet.
CHAP. X.
HAnani (Father of Jehu the Prophet) served in the Cajetan says it should be 26.
thirty sixth year of the Reign of Asa K. of Judah. Now this was the cause of
his sending. Baosha King of Israel, came with an hostile Army against Judah,
and fortified Ramah, that none might come in or go our of the Kingdom of
Judah. When this was told Asa, he took all the treasures out of the Lords
house, and out of his own house, and sent the silver and gold to Benhadad. 2
Chr. 19.
Benhadab King of Syria, who had seated his Palace-Royall at Damascus, desiring
aid of him. Hereupon the King of Syria sent his Princes with a great Host,
which destroyed many fenced Cities of Israel. When this was told Baasha, he
left work at Ramah; and so Asa called all his people together, and pulled
down what Baasha had set up. But God abhorring this deed of Asa's, sent Hanani
the Prophet unto him, to tell him, that because he had put his trust in the
King of Syria, and not in his God, who had delivered into his hand the Host of
the Aethiopians, which was greater then that of the Assyrians. Therefore was
the Army of the Syrians escaper out of his hands, and to foretell him, that
thence forward he should have wars. Asa who I said before did better and better
at the words of Azarias the son of Hanani, was so far from recovering his
former degree of goodness, by the words of Hanani his Father, that he cast the
Propher into prison.

The life of Michaiah Son of Imlah, (or Jimlah.) 1 Kings 22. 2 Chronicles. 18.
CHAP. XI.
MIchaiah, son of Imlah, was famous for his gift of Prophecy in the Reign of
Jehosaphat King of Judah. And this was the cause of one of his prophesies:
Jehosaphat being joined in Affinity with Ahab King of Israel, was also
persuaded by him to join with him in the war against Ramoth Gilead, and when
Jehosaphat and his forces were come up to him, he desired that the Lord might
be consulted whether it was meet for them to go thither or no; Ahab sent for
four hundred false Prophets to advise with about the seat of war, who when
they answered All, Go thither and prosper; Ichosaphat not trusting them asked
if there was not there a Prophet of the Lord of whom they might also ask
directions; Ahab told him, there was indeed one Michaiah the son of Imlah, but
he was alwais wont to prophecy some evil or other unto him. And when
Ichosaphat said, Let not Ahab say so, an Eunuch (or Officer) was sent to call
Michaiah, who having found him, said thus to him, Behold all the Prophets with
one assent declare good speed to the Kings design, I pray thee let thy words
be like unto theirs; But Michaiah swore sadly, that whatsoever God said, that
he would speak; And when he was come the King asked him whether they should go
to Ramoth Gilead to battle, or should they forbear? He answered, they should
go and prosper! Then said Ahab, How often shall I adjure thee in the name of
the Lord that thou say nothing but the truth to me? Then Michaiah answered, I
saw all Israel scatered upon the Hills as sheep that have no shepherd, and the
Lord said, Return every one to his own House, these have no Master, Then said
Ahab to Ichosaphat, Said I not true before, that this man would prophecy no
good to me, but only evil? But Michaiah not terrified with his words, seeing
also that Ahab believed him not, went on, and told Him, that he had seen the
Lord sitting on his Throne, and all the Host of Heaven on his right hand and
on his left, and when he asked who will go, and deceive, and make Ahab go to
Ramoth Gilead and fall there? And one spoke after this manner, and another
after that; then came there forth an evil Spirit and desired that that
business might be left to Him; and when God asked him how or wherewith he
would deceive him; He answered, I will go and sit a Lying Spirit in the mouth
of all his Prophets; Then Zedekiah (one of Ahabs talse Prophets) stroke him on
the Face, asking him, What way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to thee?
Michatab told him, he should know that to his cost when he run from chamber to
chamber to hide himself. Hereupon Ahab commanded him to be carried to Amon the
Governor of the City, and Ioas The Kings Son.
the son of Amelech, 2 Chronicles. 18. who should put him in prison, and feed him
with bread and water till the King came back safe, and had dispatched his
business according to his mind. But Michaiah knowing assuredly that God had
revealed this unto him, answered. If thou return in peace God has not spoken
by me, and bad all that heard hear witness what he had said. So went Ahab and
Ichosaphat with their Armies to Ramoth Gilead. In the way Ahab disguised
himself, but Ichoshaphat kept on his Robes. Now the King of Syria had charged
his Chiefetaines only to make at the King of Israel; They therefore guessing by
the Robes, fell all upon Ichashaphat with might and maine; He seeing himself
in such eminent peril of death, cried unto the Lord, who heard him; For the
Spians seeing their mistake, forbore and left him; yet one of the common
Soldiers shooting an Arrow [at Rovirs, or] at adventure wounded Ahab in the
shoulders so that he d^ed that Evening.

The life of Elijah the Prophet.
CHAP. XII.
Section 1.
IN the Reign of Ahab King of Israel (which began on the thirty eighth year
of Asa King of Judah, and Lasted twenty two years) was Elijah glorious both
for Prophecy and working of miracles. Him God sent to Ahab first with this
Prediction. There shall be no rain (for a Three years and 6 months.
space of time) but according to my word; during which time he betook himself
to the 1 Kings 17. brook Cherith which is before Jordan: out of which he
drunk, where God also had promised that the Ravens should feed him. And when he
was come thither the Ravens brought him bread and flesh, morning and evening
constantly, and water he drew, and drank out of the Brook; which when it was
dried up (by roason of the drought,) God sent him to Sarepta a City of Zidon,
to a widow whom he had commanded to feed him there. Elijah was no sooner come
to the gate of the City, but he light upon that very widow gathering sticks;
And calling her, he desired her to bring him a little vessel of water, and as
she was going to fetoh that, he called and entreated her to bring a crust of
bread with her also, she answered that she had no bread at all, only a handful
of meal she had, which she was about to bake for her self and her child,
which when they had eaten, they should go and die: He bad her not fear, but
go and do as she had said, yet first make a cake for him, and then for her
self and her son; for God had spoken it, the barrel of meal shall not waste,
nor the cruse of oil fail, till the day he sent rain upon the earch. The
woman believed him. So Elijah and the woman and her child, did feed upon that
bread; and from that day the barrel of meal wasted not, neither did the cruse
of oil fail.

Sect. 2.
The power and excellency of Elijah, was most apparent and conspicuous in this,
but it burst out more gloriously, in this that follows. It came to pass that
the son of that widow fell into so sore a sickness, that there was no
appearance of life in him; she came and complained to Elijah, that his coming
to her house had brought death along with it to her son: Then Elijah tock her
son out of her bosom, and carrying him up into the loft where himself kept,
laid him upon his bed, cried unto the Lord, and stretched himself upon the
child three times, and prayed that the childs soul might return to him
again. God heard his prayers, raised the child, and Elijah delivered him to
his mother, who consessed her faith, saying, by this I know thou art a man of
God, and that the word of the Lord is true in thy mouth.

S. 3.
In the third year of this drought, God bad Elijah show himself to Ahab, for
now he would send rain upon the earth. Now the Famine was so sore in Samaria,
that Ahab was feign to send Obadiah (governor of his house, and one that
feared God) into one quarter of the Land, and himselse to go into another, to
seek provision about the springs and brooks, to save the horses, mules and
carrell from starving; in the way, whom should Obadiah meet with all but
Elijah? whom he well knew, and falling upon his face to the very ground, said,
art thou my Lord Elijah? when he said I am he, and bad him go and tell Ahab
his master, that Elijah was here, Obadiah asked him, what sin it was, for the
punishment of which, lie would deliver him to Ahab to slay him, for there was
no Nation or Kingdom, whither he had not sent to seek him: And when they said,
he is not there, he took an oath of them that so it was; And yet thou biddest
me (said Obadiah) go tell thy Lord that Elijah is here. And whilst I am going,
the spirit of the Lord will carry thee to some other place, and when Ahab comes
and finds thee not, for certain he will slay me. Yet when Elijah swore he
would show himself to Ahab that day, then upon his word, Obadiah went to tell
Ahab that Elijah was there, and out came Ahab to meet him, and as soon as he
saw him, thus he entertained him; Art thou he that troublest Israel? Elijah
denied himself to be the troubler of Israel? telling Ahab that it was he and
his fathers house had done it, in that they had forsaken the commands of the
Lord, and served Baalim. And with like confidence he bad him send for the 450
Prophets of Baal, and the people to meet him at Mount Carmel, and when they
were all met together, he came and asked the People once, how long they would
halt betwixt two opinions? if the Lord was God, they should do well to follow
him; but if Baal, then let them go after him, when they all stood silent, he
spoke again after this manner: I am here left alone, the only Prophet of the
Lord, but lo, the Prophets of Baal are four hundred and fifty: yet am I content
to make this overture; let here be brought us now two Oxen, and let Baals
Prophets take their choice of one, cut him in pieces, and lay him on wood, but
pat no sire under, the other will I take and cut in pieces, but put no sire
under. When the people jointly applauded this proposition, he bad them do as
was agreed, and call upon their gods. When all was done according to agreement,
(and no fire put under) they called upon Baal from morning till noon, O Baal
hear us, but there was neither voice, nor any one that answered. At noon
Elijah mocking them, bad them strain their voices a little higher to rouse up
Baal, for sure and sooth he was a God, but perhaps was bufie talking, or was in
a journey, or at his Inn, or he might be asleep in bed. And for this purpose
they stretched their voices louder, and gasht themselves with knives and lances
till the blood gushed out; when noone was past, and still they continued
vaticinantibus,
Raving, till the solemn time of the evening Sacrifice approached, and yet no
voice was heard, nor any one that answered or regarded: Elijah called the
People to him; and when they were come, the first thing he did was to repair
the Altar of the Lord that was pulled down, which he built up with twelve
stones (according to the number of the sons of Jacob) and with such other
materials as he thought sit, then when he had the third time commanded them to
pour store of, water into the trench, and the time of the Sacrifice was come,
and the wood ordered, he came without fire, and addressed himself to God by
prayer, in these words: O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, manifest thy
self this day to be the God of Israel, and that I thy servant have done all
these things at thy command. Hear me O Lord, hear me, and let this people
learn that thou art the Lord God, and that thy self have converted their
hearts. These words were scarce out of his mouth, ere the sire sent from Heaven
burnt up the Sacrisice, and the wood, and the stones also, and the dust, and
the very water that was in the trench. After this, the people struck with
admiration, fell on their faces, crying out once and again, the Lord he is
God. Then commanded Elijah, that the Prophers of Baal should be laid hold on,
and carried to the brook Kishon, and there he slew them every one.

Sect. 4.
After this, Ahab bad Elijah come eat and drink, for there was a noise of much
raino, so Ahab came, and Elijah went up to the top of Carmell, and cast
himself upon the earth, and put his face between his knees, and bad his
servant go seven times, and look toward the sea, which when he had done, there
seemed a little cloud to rise out of the sea; when he beheld this, he warned
Ahab to prepare his Charior, and have down, lest the rain should stop him; and
immediately there sell rain in great abundance.

Sect. 5.
From thence went Ahab to Jesabell, and told her all Elijah had done, and how
he had slain the Prophets also; with which report she was sore troubled, and
so onraged against Elijah, that she sent one to him to let him know, that she
wished the gods might confound her, if she made not him like one of those
Prophets, by the morrow that time. Elijah afraid at the threats of Jesabell,
went for his life as he thought best to Beersheba of Judah, but himself went
went on a days journey into the wilderness, and sitting under a Juniper tree,
he even wished for death; at length falling asleep there, an Angel of the Lord
came to him and bade him rise and eat, so he did and lay to rest again, then
the Angel came again and bade him up and eat, for the journey he was to go
was very great. When he had eaten the cake which the Angel had set by him, and
drunk the water, he arose and travailed forty days and forty nights, in the
strength of the food, till he came to Horeb the mount of God; where, as he was
private in a Cave, the Lord appeared to him, asking what he did there in that
place. Elijah answered that he had been very earnest in Gods behalte (in such
things as he had done) for that the wicked had scorned Gods Laws, pulled down
his Altars, and slain his Prophets with the sword, so, that he alone was left,
and feign he was to fly for his life, for it they sought to take away also.
Hereupon, God commanded him to stand upon the mount, where he showed him some
signs of his approach, which so frighted the Prophet, that he covered his face
with his mantle, and so went out, and stood in the door of the Cave, where he
heard a voice, saying, what do thou here Elijah? To which he answered just as
before. Then God commanded him to go to Damaschus, and there to anoint Hazael
King of Syria, and Jehu (son of Ninshi) King of Israel, and Elisha (the son of
Shaphat) Prophet in his own room, for it should come to pass, that, him that
escaped the sword of Hazael, Jehu should slay, and him that escaped Jehu,
should Elijha slay, yet (said God,) I have left me seven thousand men in
Israel, that have not bowed the knee to Baal. Thence went Elijah after that,
and found Elisha at plough, upon whom he had no sooner cast his mantle, but he
under stood the business, and asked his leave but to go and take leave of his
parents, and he would return to him with speed; so Elijah bad him go, and come
to him again, and so he did, when he had dispatched what he went for, and from
that time forward he attended on Elijah.

Sect. 6.
Ahab had a great mind to buy a vineyard of Naboth the Jesrcelite, which he
refused to sell, as coming from his forefathers by inheritance: But Ahab
took this answer so ill, that for wrath and grief he cast himself upon his
bed and for sooke his meat. But Jesabell the Queen, as soon as she knew the
cause why he was vexed, bad him rise, eat, and cheer up, she would order the
matter so, that Naboth's Vineyard should soon be his. To this purpose she writ
letters in Ahab's name (sealed with his ring) to the Elders and Nobles of
Jezreel, exhorting them to suborne witnesses to accuse Naboth of high treason,
condemn him, and stone him; this they do punctually, and send word to Iesabell
of the same; she tells Ahab what is done, and he being rid of that which grieved
him, hastes to the vineyard, where by Gods appointment, he meets with Elijah,
who rebuked him very fore, for killing and taking possession, for which
abominable wickedness, he foretells him, that, in that very place where the
dogs lickt the blood of Naboth, they should lick his. Ahab thought that Elijah
spoke thus without cause, of his own head, and out of malice, and therefore
asked him, what, or wherein he had found him his enemy? Elijah answered, he
had found it by experience, in that he had so greedily sinned against God, who
therefore would destroy his house, as he had done the house of Jeroboam and
Baasha. Ahab wrought upon by these threats, rent his clothes, went in
sackcloth, observed a fast, and lay in sackcloth, and walked drooping, and
dejected, to appease the wrath of God. And this repentance moved God to tell
Elijah, that because Ahab had humbled himself in that manner, those evils
which he had foretold, should not come in his life time, but be deferred, till
his sons days.

Sect. 7.
When Ahab was dead, Ahazia his son who reigned in his stead, fell through
the lattesse of his upper chamber and got a hurt: He doubting whether it was
mortal, consulted (not the Lord but) Baalzebub, whether he should recover or
no. God offended with this deed, commanded Elijah to go meet these Ambassadors
of Ahazia, and to ask them first, whether there was not a God in Israel, that
they went to advise with Baalzebub, God of Eckron, and next to bid them tell
their master, that, for that very cause he should not come down from the bed
whereon he lay, but should surely die. When Ahaziah heard the answer which his
messengers brought him, and their answer (upon questioning what a man he was
that told them this) that is was an hai^ic man wearing a leatherne girdle, he
concluded by his habit and garb that it was Elijah: He sent therefore a
Captain and fifty men to fetch him. The messengers calling Elijah man of God,
tell him that Ahazia King of Israel, had sent them to him with a command to
come to the King. Elijah hearing their message, answered; If I be a man of God,
let sire come down from Heaven and consume you all; and so it did. The King
then sent as many the next time, who using the same words, were dispatched in
the same manner that the former were, Elijah calling fire down in the same
wo^ds he did before. Then the King sent a third company; but that Captain
kneeling down, besought Elijah that he would pirty him and his fifty, and not
suffer them to perish as the former did. Upon this the Angel of the Lord
encouraged Elijah, so that he went to Ahazia, who died soon after Elijah had
told the same words which he had before delivered to the Ambassadors.

Sect. 8.
Elijah having done al these glorious acts, was afterward taken up into Heaven
(yet dyed he not) that he might be a witness and Preacher (or proclaimer) of the
second coming of Christ: And when God revealed to him, that he should be taken
up, as they went together, he spoke to Elisha his servant to stay behind, for
God had sent him to Bethel, but he swearing he would not leave him, followed
him to Bethel; there, sons of the Prophets asked him, if he was aware that h^s
master should be taken up that day by a whirle wind into Heaven, he told them
he knew it well, they might hold their peace. Then again Elijah bad him tarry
there, but he refused as before. So they two went to Jordan, fury sons of the
Prophets following them at a distance; when Elijah came there, he took his
mantle and wrapped it together, and smote the waters therewith, which parted, so
that they two went over dry shod: When they were on the other side of the
River, Elijah bad El^sha ask something of him before he was taken from him;
whereupon he desired a double portion of his spirit to be given to him. Elijah
told him he had asked a hard and difficult thing, yet if he saw him when he was
taken from him, he should obtain his desire, but it not, it should not be so.
And it came to pass, as they walked on and talked, that a Chariot of sire and
horses of fire, carried Elijah into Heaven by a whirle-winde, and Elisha saw
it, and cried, my Father, my Father, the Chariot of Israel and the Auriga.
Horseman thereof. And when he saw him no more, he took up his mantle that fell
from him and sinote the waters and they divided.

Sect. 9.
Epiphanius writes, that Elijah was a Levite of the Tribe of Aaron, and that
when he was born, there appeared to Sobac his Father, men in white clothing,
that saluted him and wrapped him in the fire with swaddling bands, and put the
flame into his mouth: Which thing when he reported to the Oracle of God at
Jerusalem, it was answered, fear not, for fire shall be the habitation of the
child.

The life of Elisha (or Elissaeus the Prophet.
CHAP XIII.
Section 1.
Elisha the Prophet, was the Son of Shaphat, a man of the Tribe of Reuben, in
the Village of Abelmehola: He was eminently famous, both as a man and as a
Prophet, for his wonderful and strange works. Epiphanius writes of an
ominous accident that seemed to foretell his fortune, greatness, and excellency.
For when he was born in Gilgall, a Cow which was in Shilo lowed so loud, that
she was heard at Jerusalem, and hereupon the Priest said, that it was evident,
a Propet was born that day, who should both throw down the graven images of
the gods, and the moulten ones. Elias at Gods command called him from the
plough when he was but a boy, fust, to wait upon him, and afterward to take
part of his office; of which because I have spoken in the life of Elias how it
was done, I will begin to speak of him from that time when Elias was taken into
Heaven in his sight. Elias indeed had bidden him ask what he would, before he
was taken away from him; And Elisha had desired a double portion of his Spirit,
whereas Elias said he had asked a hard thing, nevertheless he should obtain
it upon this condition, if he saw him when he was taken away. Elisha made it
appear that he saw him, when he was carried into Heaven in a fiery Chariot and
fiery Horses, in that he cried, my Father, my Father, the Chariot of Israel,
and the Chariot man thereof. And therefore that he might receive what he had
requested, when he would pass over Jordan again, for trial sake, he smote
the waters, as his master had done with Elias cloak which was fallen from him
as he went up: which when they were not divided, he began to cry where was the
Lord God of Elias, but when he smote them the second time, they divided into
two parts, and afforded him ready passage: which when the children of the
Prophets which were at Jericho had taken notice of; from that time they said,
that the Spirit of Elias rested upon him. Therefore they went out to meet him,
and throwing themselves with their faces on the ground did him reverence. After
this, they tell him that there were fifty stout men with his servants, who
might do well to go and seek his Master, if perchance the spirit had carried
him into some mountain or valley; when he forbad, or entreated that they would
not send, they rested not, till they had wrested from him a consent. So these
fifty men went and returned the third day, having lost their labor: Elisha
when he understood so much, said, did not I forbid you to send?

Sect. 2.
His dwelling was at Jericho, in which City the water was so unwholesome, that
it was death to him that drunk it; and moreover the earth was very barren.
Which when the men of his City made known to him (or rather made complaint of)
he bad them bring him a new cruse and some salt, this he threw in, and said,
God has healed these waters, so that they shall neither cause death, nor
barrenness should be upon the earth: Which kindness of his the men of Jericho
were better for a long time after.

Sect. 3.
As he went thence unto Bethel, the children of the City came forth and mocked
him, saying, come up thou bald pate, come up thou bald pate, he taking notice
of them, cursed them from God, whereupon, two bears came out of the Forest,
and tore two and forty of them; so effectual was his curse. But how much his
prayers availed with God, may easily be known by that which follows: Joram
King of Israel the son of Ahazia had stirred Josaphat King of Judah, and the
King of Edom, to war against the Moabites, who denied tribute after Ahab was
dead, when they had marched seven days there wanted water for the Army and
Cattle; when Jehosaphat knew by Ioram, who murmured against God, that Elisha
the Prophet was near at hand, he thought it best to go to him. Elisha first
bad Ioram got and ask counsel of his Fathers Prophets. Yet after when he
demanded, why God had called three Kings together, to deliver them into the
hands of the Moabites, El^sha told him, that had it not been for the revereace
he bare Iehosaphat, he would not have come at him; lastly, he bad that a
minstrell should be sercht, upon whose playing, he being inspired, gave order
that gutters should be made in the valley before them, wherein, without wind and
rain, they found such an abundance of water, as sufficed them and their beasts
and families; nor was lie content with this good turn, but he foretold also
that they should obtain the victory.

Sect. 4.
Now how liberal, or merciful rather, he was to those in want, 2 Kings 4, the
following example will show, a woman, one of the wives of the Prophets, had
told him, that her husband who feared God was dead, whose creditor was come to
take her children from her, and make them slaves: He pitying her, asked her
what she had at home, when she answered, nothing but a little oil,
wherewithal she did anoint her self, he persuaded her to borrow of her
neighbors many vessels, into which she alone with her children, having shut
the doors, should pour in some oil, which when they were full, she should
take away. She being full of hope, got store of vessels together, pours some
oil into them all: it would seem incredible, what I shall tell, unless it were
recorded in Scripture, those drops of oil so increased by Gods power at
Elisha's prayers, that the woman saw the vessels presently full with a great
deal of joy, and no less admiration, when she had told Elisha of the thing so
wonderful, and never the like heard of, he bad her sell the oil, and when she
had got her self out of debt, to provide things necessary for the maintenance
of her self and children, out of that which was left. This so abundantly
multiplying of the oil, did not so much declare Elisha's kindness as his
power.

Sect. 5.
But that which follows will evidence both these his virtues more abundantly.
An occasion had happened, that as he hasted to another place he went by the
City Shuna: There a great woman entreated him, that he would lodge at her
house; from that time forward when he traveled that way, he used to go
thither to lodge. The woman who understood by his manners, deeds and speeches,
that he was a great Prophet, persuaded her husband that he would furnish an
upper Chamber with all necessaries for strangers and travelers. When she had
prevailed with her husband, and every thing was fi^ted, Elisha lodged there, as
he had occasion afterward to come that way; he considering the strange free
heartednes of the woman, that he might not seeming rateful, he thought good to
send for her by his servant, when she was come, he gave his servant in charge,
that he should ask her with what good turn he should requite her so
extraordinary bounty; whether she had any business and would have him to speak
for her to the King, or to the General; when she had returned answer, that she
dwelt amongst her own people and friends, that would look to her occasions, if
she had any with the King, or with the General: he enquired of his servant,
what then she expected from him; his servant answered she had no child, and
that her husband was old; then he had told her before the chamber door, that
at that very return of time, and at the same hour, if she lived, she should
bring forth a son. Which thing (although she thought that he mocked her)
fell out at the time appointed. The child was now grown up, when going to his
Father that was gone to see his reapers, he complained of the headache;
therefore his father took order to send him to his mother as soon as might be.
He dying within a little while after upon his mothers lap, was laid in Elisha's
chamber. Then the mother sends for her husband, tells him the death of the
child, and persuades him that some servant might go with her upon an Asso to
Elisha; the Ass is sad led, she goes her journey and comes to Elisha to
Mount Carmel; he, when espying her, sent his servant to meet her, and to ask
her whether she, her husband, and her child, were well or no; she answered it
is well, but after she was got up the hill, cast her self at his feet,
lamenting like a woman, and bewailing her son. Elisha gave his staff to his
servant, that he should lay it upon the face of the dead child, and charged him
to salute none that met him, nor answer any body that saluted him; so away went
he with his errand, but the woman said, she would not leave Elisha, he
therefore followed her, and met his servant coming back again, who said he had
been there, but had done no good at all. Elisha therefore went to the house,
and threw himself upon the child, yet so, as that he covered the childs
hands with his hands, the childs eyes with his eyes, and the childs mouth
with his mouth: And this he did once or twice, the first thing he perceived,
was the child's flesh to wax warm, and then after he had walked a little up and
down, and had lain upon the child, he sheesed seven times and opened his
eyes. Then at the last when he had sent for the mother, he restored her child
unto her sound and alive, she falling down at his feet, did him reverence, and
gave him thanks.

Sect. 6.
A sore Famine was upon the land, and the sons of the Prophets dwelt with
him, 2 Kin. 4 and 38. when as he gave charge to one of his servants, that he
should make a great pot full of pottage; one of them not knowing what was in it,
had put into the pot (amongst other herbs) some Colocyntidae which he had
gathered of a wild vine; when every one had his share poured him our of the
Pot, they all when they tasted the pottage felt it so bitter, that they cried
out death was in the pot; Elisha took and cast meal into the pot, and bad that
pottage should he set before them al, and after that, no bitterness at all was
to be tasted.

Sect. 7.
I have spoken already of his increasing of the oil; now will I speak of his
multiplying of the bread, which will appear to be no less a wonder. A man of
Baalshalisha had brought him twenty barley loaves of his first fruits, and new
corn in the husk; Elisha gave order that all this should be set before the
people, his servant would not, but said that it was too little or nothing for
the eaters, an hundred men; whereas he again commanded that they should be set
before the people, assuring them by the Spirit of God, that they would eat
enough, and leave to spare. And so it came to pass, for when they had eaten
sufficient there was somewhat left. Hitherto I have declared those works which
manifested his exceeding great power and his Prophetical Office: Ho divided
the waters of the river into two parts; he called water not from Heaven, but
out of the bowels of the earth, when an Army of an innumerable multitude of men
and their beasts were ready to dye for thirst; he so increased the oil, which
was but a very little, as it never failed afterward; he multiplied the loaves:
and lastly, he raised a child from the dead. Now will I mention his other
works, which joined with the former, will evidence, that the Spirit of Elias
was double upon him.

Sect. 8.
Naaman the General of the army of the King of Syria, was very well beloved of
his Master, both for his warlike valor, and because, that either by his
means, or for his sake God had given deliverance unto Syria. 2 Kings 5. But he
was sore afflicted with an Elephantiasis or leprosy. The King of Syria had
understood by Naaman (what he had learned from a wench brought captive out of
Israel into Syria, and then waited on the wise of Naaman) that there was a
Prophet in Samaria that could cure the leprosy, gave him a letter to the King
of Israel, wherein he wrote, that he had sent his servant Naaman unto him, and
entreated him to cure him of his disease. Naaman took his journey, and with him
ten talents of silver, and six thousand pieces of gold, and ten suirs or
appatell, which were got ready, and made for change, and comes to Samaria. When
he had delivered his letter to the King of Israel, and he had read it, being
fore displeased and angry, rent his clothes, crying that the King of Syria
mocked him, and sought occasion of a quarrel by this very thing, that he had
sent a leper to him to be cleansed, as though indeed he were a God: when the
report of that matter (through many folks talk as it falls out) was come to
Elisha, he sent on a sudden to the King of Israel, rebuking him, first, because
he had rent his clothes, and then advising him to send Naaman to him, for he
should know that there was a Prophet in Israel. Naaman came with horses and
Chariots, and Elisha presently sent his servant to him at the door, to bid him
go to Jordan, and wash himself seven times with the water thereof, and then
at last he should be made whole; he being angry because Elisha came not down to
him, (nor craving the help of God) had touched the place of the leprosy with
his hand, and healed him as he hoped, departed without any thing done,
alleging this also, that the waters of Abana and Phaphar, rivers of Damsacus,
were better and more wholesome; but his servants showed him, that the thing
which Elisha had prescribed was easy, and that if he had enjoined a thing
harder to be done, yet he ought to have done it, much more a thing so easy.
Naaman who had slighted the Prophets word, yielding to his servants advice,
washed himself seven times according to Elisha's appointment, and was perfectly
cured; and he who thought he was much holden to the Prophet (having received
such a curtesy) went back again him with all to his train, and first said that
he knew there was not any other God, except the God of Israel, and afterward
entreated him to receive his gifts; when he had denied to receive them, he
dismissed him. But Gehazi Elisha's servant, who had seen that his master
refused the presents, following his attendants privily, when he overtook them,
said he was sent by his master to desire of Naaman one talent and two suites of
apparel Naaman gave him two talents, because he thought he spoke the truth.
This villainy of Gehazi was not unknown to Elisha; for when he hoped that he
could have concea-from his master, and kept it to himself all that he had
taken, being called unawares, and asked whence he came, and denying that he had
gone any whither, Elisha told him that he was present with him in spirit, when
the man came to meet him out of his Chariot, and that he should know that the
leprosy of Naaman should never depart from him and his posterity, who had
received money and clothes to buy Vineyards and Oliveyards, and other things; he
had soarce made an end of speaking this, when a leprosy as white as snow
seized on him.

Sect. 9.
The sons of the Prophets complained to Elisha, that they were pent up from
room, 2 Kin. 6.1. and therefore thought it would be requisite for them to go
to Jordan to fell some timber, he liked the matter well, and at some of their
entreaties went thither himself, there it happened, that as one was cutting
down a tree, his axe head slipped off and fell into the water; when he had told
Elisha the matter with tears, and showed him the place, Elisha threw a piece
of wood (that himself cut down) in thither; whereupon the iron contrary to
its nature, did rise from the bottom and swam on the top; so he that lost it,
put out his hand, as Elisha bad him) and took it up again safe; this is a work
of wonder: But that which follows will appear far more wonderful.

Sect 10.
The King of Syria made war with the K. of Israel, 2 Kin. 6.8. he having called
his servants to a Council told them that he would set some of his men in
ambush in a certain place, that the Israelites might unawares fall into their
hands. Now before this was but in execution, Elisha knowing it by revelation,
told it aforehand to the K. of Israel, the K. of Israel presently sent his men
thither; when the King of Syria knew this, in great fury he demanded why no
body would tell him, who was that traitor, which revealed all his counsels to
the King of Israel? at last one made answer that it was Elisha the Prophet, who
told the K. of Israel all that he said, or resolved upon in his bedchamber or
cabinet. He being angry, or rather furious, charged his men, that they should
look diligently where he was and tell him, that he might go and take him; at
length some body found that he was in Dothan, and so he told the King, who
immedrately sent thither horses and Chariots, and the strength of his army:
they coming thither by night, presently begirt the City, Elisha's servant going
out as soon as it was light, espied, and ran trembling to tell this to his
master: He bad his servant nor fear, for more were with him, than with those
other, and prayed God that, he would open his servants eyes, that he might see
it, as be soon after saw the mountain full of horses and fiery Chariots about
his master. When the enemies were come up near to Elisha, he prayed God to
strike them with blindness; which when he had obtained of God, he told the
Syrians that that was not the way to the Town which they enquired for, and
that therefore they should follow him, he would bring them to the man they
sought for; so these blind ones followed him, and he brought them directly to
Samaria. In which place he showed extraordinary great pity and elemencie
toward them. For when the King of Israel asked him whether he should kill them
all or no, he did not only forbid that, because they were not taken in war,
but he commanded that all manner of necessaries should be given them and sent
them away satisfied.

Sect. 11.
After those things Benhadad King of Syria having got a great army, besieged
Samaria, and besieged it so long, that when all things necessary for food were
spent, there grew such a dearth of provision, that an Asses head was sold for
fourscore pieces of silver. 2 Kings 24. In this so great scarcity of provision,
two women constrained with hunger, had made a covenant betwixt themselves, to
eat their children by turns; now when one of them had given her child to be
eaten, and the other would not stand to agreement, but on the day after hid her
child; That woman pined with hunger, besought the King of Israel with cries and
tears; that he would help her, and take some order for her life, and told him
this story of the children, hereupon, he rent his garment in all their sight,
swore bitterly that Elisha should die that day. And for that end he dispatched
away an executioner, but before he came to the house of Elisha, Elisha told the
Elders that sat with him, that purpose of the King, and charged them that they
should not open the door to the messenger, because the sound of his masters
feet followed. He had not yet made an end of speaking those words, when as the
King prevented the messenger, and said; Behold this evil is of the Lord, what
should I wait on the Lord any longer? 2 Kin. 6.33. The Prophet at Gods
appointment, foretold that the next day about that very hour, a measure of fine
flower should be sold fora shekell, and two measures of Barlie for a shekel in
the gate of Samaria; 2 Kin. 7.1. the matter seemed so incredible to a certain
Lord, (upon whose hand the King leaned) that he said that could not be,
although God should open Heaven; whereas the Prophet assured him, that it
should come to pass, that he should see the thing, but should not eat thereof.
At that time, four Lepers constrained with hunger, going into the enemies
camp, in such apparent danger of death, when they were come to the entrance of
the Camp, they found no body, for God had caused the enemies to hear a
rushing and a noise of Chariots, and horses, and of a great army, which when
they heard, they left their luggage and ran away. Now when the Lepers had told
these things in the City, the King at the first interpreted it to be a
Stratagem, afterward having sent two horses (of the six that were only left)
when the scouts had found it to be so, all the people came thither for booty,
and when the tents were spoiled, that cheapnesse of provision followed which
Elisha had foretold, and then that Lord of whom I made mention before, to whom
the King had given charge of the Gate, was trod to death by the multitude.

Sect. 12.
The Prophet had persuaded that woman whose Son (as is showed before) 2 Kings
8.1. he raised from death when he foretold the seven years famine, that she
should go some whither else and sojourne with her Family to avoid it; She
followed his counsel, but at the seven years end, when she came back, she
found her house and land seized on, therefore she petitioned the King that she
might recover her own. King Ioram then opportunely at that nick of time
commanded Gehazi Elisha's servant to relate the great and strange works that
his Master had done; for besides other things which he told him, he affirmed
that this was the woman whose son (that was also present there) he had raised
from the dead. Thereupon when she, being asked, had affirmed that it was so,
the King commanded an Officer, or Eunuch, to restore her not only all her Land,
but all the profits of it also. And no doubt but the woman avoided the
inconveniences of the Famine, and recovered her own estate through Elisha's
goodness.

Sect. 13.
When Benhadad King of Syria was sick, Elisha was at Damascus, 2 Kings 8.7. of
whose coming when the King was certified he sent Hazael to him, who was one of
his chief servants, with presents, to ask of him whether he should recover
from his disease, he answered that he indeed should recover, but nevertheless
God had told him that he should die shortly, whereupon whilst Hazael stood in
his sight Elisha began to weep. And when Hazael asked him why he wept; He
answered, that when he should be King of Syria he would afflict the Israelites;
therefore the next day after he had brought his Master Benhadad news of
recovery, he smothered him and seized upon the Kingdom, and soon after he
oppressed the Israelites with many sad overthrowes; the same Elisha took order
to anoint John King of Israel, 2 Kings 9. (who should root out the Family of
Ahab with Iezabel his wife, as Elias had foretold) after this manner; he bad
one of the sons of the Prophets, which he had called, take a box full of oil
and go to Ramoth Gilead, and when he had found John there to consecrate him
with oil, according to Gods command, in an inner Chamber where no body was by,
that he might afterward utterly destroy the whole Family of King Ahab together
with Iezabel; when he had done as Elisha bad him, John being King, lid execute
all those things which Elisha had appointed him by Gods command. After these so
excellent uncouth and unheard of things were done, Elisha fell into the disease
of which he died, 2 Kings 13. when he was sick Ioas King of Israel came to
visit him, and perceiving the danger of his disease he wept before him with
these words, My Father, my Father, the Chariot of Israel and the Chariot man
thereof. He first commanded the King that he should bring his bow and arrows,
and afterward that, when they were brought, he should lay his hand upon the
bow being bent, and lastly, that when his hand was laid upon the Kings he
should shoot out of a window which he had toward the East, which when he had
done, he said, that was the Arrow of Gods deliverance, even the Arrow of
salvation against Syria, whom he should smite till he had destroyed them in
Aphet. Again, he commanded him that he should take an Arrow and strike the
ground; Now the King when he had struck the ground three times gave over,
whereupon he being angry foretold him, that if he had struck five, six, or
seven times, it should have come to pass that he should utterly destroy Syria:
But because he had only struck the ground three times, he should only smite it
three times: Epiphanius writes, that he was buried in Sebastopolis a City of
Samaria; Now he, that when he was alive had raised a dead man (as I have
showed) after he was dead also raised a man from the dead; for when some were
burying a dead man, and for fear of some free-booters Moabites, who that year
in which Elisha died had thrown the Corpse into Elisha's Sepulcher, as soon as
it touched his bones the man revived and stood upright. He died the fourteenth
day of June, as Oswald writes.

The Life of the Prophet Amos.
CHAP. XIV.
AMos the Prophet was, as he says himself, a Tek^aite, and the Father of
Esaias the Prophet in the Judgment of Epiphanius, although the Hebrews deny it
by reason of the difference in Amoz, Es 1
spelling the names, Amos, Am. 1
he of a Shepherd became a Prophet, and was called and chosen by God from
feeding Flocks of sheep to feed and teach the Flock of Israel; he executed the
Office of Prophet when Ozias (or Azarias) was King of Judah, and Jeroboam son
of Ioas was King of Israel, and that was when Sardanapalus ruled over the
Assyrians, and Procas Sylvius over the Latins. I cannot sind in what year of
Azarias, who ruled over Judah two and fifty years, he began to prophecy, or
to what year of Hieroboam, who Reigned two and twenty years, his ministry of
Prophecy lasted. But I am sure of what I say, seeing that Vzziah.
Ozias succeeded his Father Amazias in his Kingdom in the twenty seventh year
of Hieroboam King of Israel; and Amos himself says, that he prophesied when
Azias and Hieroboam were Kings, that he ended his prophecy within the
remaining two years of Jeroboam, when the son of Amazia the Priest slew him,
as I will show you by and by. And this I was willing to premise that all may
understand that I had a good cause why I writ the Life of Amos before the Lives
of Esaiah, Hosea, Zachary, and others who prophesied when Achas was King of
Judah, seeing I resolved to follow the order of the times in which every one
lived. Because then Amos fulfilled his Office of prophesying within the two
remaining years of Hieroboam King of Israel, that is, the twenty eighth, and
twenty ninth, when as in one of those years, by Gods Command, he fortold in
Samaria the destruction and captivity of Israel, and Amazias, Priest of the
Gods of Bethel, accused him to King Hieroboam; for he sent to tell him how that
Amoz endeavored to make a change and innovation in Government, and that he
opposed and openly rebelled against the King, and that he spoke such words as
no man was able to bear; for he said thus openly, that Hieroboam should dye by
the sword, and that Israel should be led Captive. It is not set down in the
Scripture, neither have I read in any Writer what answer Hieroboam made to
those things which are written in the book of Amos, or what affection he
carried toward Amos because of them. But this is written in the Book of Amos,
that Amazias the Priest, when he had sent those that should tell these things
to Hieroboam, went to Amos and charged him with threats that he should go out
of Samaria and fly into Judah, and there prophecy, and that he should not
foretell any thing as a Prophet in Bethel, because there the Golden Calfe was
worshipped after the manner of their Ancestors, and the Kings Court was settled
there; To these words Amos made answer, that, when he was not a Prophet, not
the son of a Prophet, but an heardsman who gathered Sycamore fruit, he was
called by God, who commanded him, that, as a Prophet, he should tell his people
Israel things to come. And that therefore he bad Amaziah hear the word of the
Lord, who told him, that because he had forbad him to tell Israel and the
Family that worshipped strange Gods things to come, his wife should be made an
Harlot in the City, and his Children dye by the sword, and that the Enemies
should divide amongst themselves the Land that he possessed, and that he should
dye in a polluted Land, and that Israel should be led Captive out of their own
Land; nor have I found this written what answer Amazias the Priest made to
these things; But this Epiphanius writes, that Amaziah's son slew him (knocking
Amos in the head with a club) because he had proved that he closely stole two
golden Heifers: and that Amos was carried into his own Country, being yet
alive, where he dyed, and was buried amongst his Ancestors. Oswald, who writ a
book, called, The story of Martyrs in the days of Clantes the Great, says,
that he was struck through the Temple, with a Leaver by Vzziah King of Israel
the last day of March, and that being half dead he was carried into his own
Country and there buried.

The Life of the Prophet Obadiah, or Abdias.
CHAP. XV.
OBadiah the Prophet was a Sichemite of Beththaca, near the sea, as Epiphanius
writes; he also has lest upon Record, that he was the third Captain of the
fifty men who were sent to Elias by Abazias King of Israel. For when Abazias
had fallen through a Latice, and by that fall had got a hurt, not knowing
whether he should recover from that disease or no, he sent messengers to
enquire of Baalzebub the god of Ekron concerning his disease; whereupon God
sent Elias to charge them before they came thither that they should return to
their Master and tell him, that because he had sent to enquire of that god, as
though there were not a God in Israel, he should never rise sound from his bed;
which when they had told him, and he understood by his habit and apparel that
it was Elias that had commanded these things, sent once or twice a Captain of
fifty with his men who should fetch Elias to him; who when they were destroyed
with lightning, he sent another Captain with his fifty, who when he had humbly
besought Elias that he would have mercy upon him and his men, he pardoned them.
And this third Captain, as Epiphanius maintains, was this Abdias, whose Life
we write; He also writes, that, having relinquished the Estate or Rank in
which the King had placed him, he followed Elias and became his Disciple, and
that having endured many things he was preserved by him. And Hierome writes,
that this was that Abdias (as the Hebrews think) who in the Reign of Ahab fed
an hundred Prophers in Caves; which story, that it may the berter be
understood, I mean to report more fully. Elias, by Gods Command, had told Ahab
that it should not rain upon the earth for three years and a half together;
A little while after, he first went to the brook Kerith, and afterward to
Sarepta a City of Sidon, lest he should be slain by Ahab. In the third year
God sent him to Ahab to give rain unto the Earth. Now upon the drought there
followed such a famine, that at the last Ahab, who thought Elias to be the
cause of that great mischief, was constrained, having divided the Land, and
appointed one way to Abdias steward of his house, himself took the other way,
to seek out water-springs, that the horses, and mules, and laboring Cattle
might not perish for thirst; so it fell out, by Gods providence, that Elias met
Abdias on the way, whom (looking well upon him) he knew: Then falling down upon
his feet, he asked him, whether he was not Elias? N^w when Elias had said that
he was, and charged him to go and tell his Master that he was there, he
demanded of him what great sin he had committed for which he meant to deliver
his servant to be certainly put to death by Ahab, seeing there was no Country,
or Nation, nor Kingdom whither he had not sent some to seek him, and when all
had made answer that he was not there, he took an Oath of them all.
Nevertheless he sent him to tell Ahab that he was there, whom the Spirit of
God would conveigh away where he should not be found, and so he should be put
to death; was it not told of Eliah how that when Jezabel would have slain the
Prophets of the Lord he hid an hundred of them by fifties in a Cave, and fed
them with bread and water? Yet when Elias for all that commanded him that he
should tell the King he was there, he obeyed; but Ahab went with not good mind
to meet Elias when he understood by Abdias that he was there; For at the first
meeting he asked him, whether he was not that Elias that troubled the STATE?
Which when he did not only deny, but on the contrary maintained that Ahab was
he, who neglecting Gods Commands did worship Baalim with his whole Family (as
his Ancesters had done) he bad him that he should call together all the
Israelites, and the Prophets of the god Baal to Mount Carmel, where when they
were met, all those things fell out which are well known, and set forth by us
at large in the Life of Elias. Therefore that we may return to the point,
Hierom according to the judgment of the Hebrews thinks this man both to be
that same Abdias, and the Captain of fifty also of whom we speak; and we may
also suppose him to be one and the same man, for the says in the beginning of
his Commentaries upon the Prophecy of this Abdias, that because he had fed an
hundred Prophets, Obadiah both received the gift of Prophecy, and of a Leader
of an Army was made a Guide of the Church. This Prophet, if we follow the
Letter, foretells the overthrow of Idumaea, and the restitution of Indaea: if
we consider the meaning, the overthrow of the Gentiles, and the building of
Christ's Church by the Apostles. He is short indeed for number of words, but
long for the weight of the Sentences. He dyed, and was buried in his own Land;
although St Hierome writes, that his Sepulcher, together with the monument of
Elissaeus the Prophet, and John the Baptist was had in honor and reverence in
the City Schasto, which was sometimes called Samaria.

The life of the Prophet Hosea or Osee.
CHAP. XVI.
SAint Hierome thinks that Osee was the first of all the Prophets. He was the
son of Beeri, and discharged his Office of Prophecy, when Hieroboam the
son of Joas was King of Israel, and Vzzia, Joatham, Ahaz and Hezekiah were
Kings of Judah, whereby it may be conceived, that he lived long. For whereas
Hieroboam reigned two and twenty years, Ozias fifty and two, Joatham sixteen,
Ahaz sixteen, and Hezekias twenty nine; although I can deliver nothing for
certain, in what year of Hieroboam he began, or in what year of Hezekias he
left off to Prophecy; yet I thing this may be conjectured, that he prophesied
fourscore and four years, and above; unto which, if we add the years of his
age when he began to prophecy, and those years he lived in the reign of
Hezekias, and till heo died, which we are ignorant of, we must confess that he
lived very long. This Hosee at Gods command, married Gomer an Harlot, by whom
he had three children, to which he gave names also at his command, to the
eldest son he gave the name of Jezreel, to his daughter Lo-Ruamah, to the
third a son Lo-ammi. Hos. 1.1. S^ Hierom (who thinks this was really done,)
says, this is not to be imputed as a fault to Hosea, but rather a
commendation, because of a bad woman he made her a good one, and did not marry
her for lust, but by the command of God. Now that which is done at Gods command
cannot be reputed a fault: nor indeed would God have this done without a cause,
but that he might typifie, or by fact also signify what he commanded, by words
to forerell, namely such a destruction of the Kingdom of Israel, that is, of
the ten tribes which had worshipped strange gods, by the means of Hieroboam,
and his posterity, that God should neither be moved with mercy toward them,
nor esteem, or call them his people, And these very things, which indeed came
to pass, signify the rejection or detestation of the Jews; as the other
woman whom the same Prophet at Gods commandment loved, does the calling of the
Gentiles. And in these two almost is the whole Prophecy of Hosea spent.

The life of the Prophet Jonah or Jonas.
CHAP. XVII.
Jonas the Prophet, was the son of Amittai a Sydonian of Sarepta. For
Epiphanius and St Hierome, and so also the Hebrews, as he says, will have him
to be the son of the Widow of Sarepta, whom Elias raised from the dead; which
how it happened (although we related it elsewhere) yet will it not be far amiss
to declare it in this as the proper place. When Elias had foretold the famine
(which lasted three years and a half) to Ahaz King of Israel, as God had bid
him, he fled from the face of Ahab, and first dwelt near Jordan, by the brook
Cherith, till the brook was dried up, and afterward he went to Sarepta a City
of Sidon; when he was come to the City gate, he found a widow as God had
foretold him, gathering sticks, when she at Elia's bidding, had brought a
cruse, wherein was a little oil, and a barrel wherein was a little meal;
though she told him, she had provided both these for her self and her son,
that when they had eaten they might die, yet that oil did so increase at his
prayers, that afterward it never failed; by this strange and unheard of work,
the widow was so affected, that when her son, who shortly after fell sick
and died, she came and complained to him of the death of her son, as though
his coming had been the cause of it. Elias that was both grieved for the death
of the child, and the mothers mourning and tears; when he had carried him into
a chamber, stretching himself three times upon him, he raised him from the
dead by his prayers, and restored him alive to his mother. Now when this child
that was raised up, was grown to man's estate, God commanded him to go to
Nineve, a very great City of the Assyrians, to declare and preach the truth,
and he not obeying Gods command, as soon as he came to Joppe, a Haven town of
Judaea, he there found a Ship setting out for Tharsis, and having paid the
fare, and got into the Ship, he failed with others toward Tharsis; but
presently by Gods permission, there arose a mighty wind, and so great a
tempest, that the Ship was in great danger; hereupon the rest being greatly
afraid, prayed every one to his God, and threw their goods into the Sea, that
the burden of the Ship might be lighter, but he was asleep in the side of the
Ship: Therefore the master of the Ship, who thought him extreme negligent and
retchlesse (that when others were afraid, and all at prayers, for all that was
asleep in so manifest a danger,) roused him up, and bad him get up and pray
unto his God, as others did: In the mean time they all agreed to try by lots
what might be the cause why that disaster happened, and the lot sell upon
Jonas: Whereupon, they entreat him that he would tell them, for what cause and
fault such a mischief had lighted on them all, and they asked him whence he
came, whither he went, what country man he was, and what trade he used. He
told them that he was a Hebrew, and that he feared and worshipped the God of
Heaven, who made the earth, and the sea, and that he fled from his presence.
Then they being mightily afraid, begun to ask him, why he had done this evil,
and what they should do to him, that they might be freed from that danger;
when he had told them that that evil had happened because of him, and through
his default; and that therefore, if they would throw him into the Sea, they
should have a prosperous wind and a calm sea; they cast him into the S^a,
beseeching God that he would not lay this sin to their charge. And so (which
was strange) a wonderful stillness of the Sea followed upon his casting in,
which when they had observed, having offered Sacrifices to God (whom they
greatly feared for this that was done) they made vows to him. But God
neglected not, nor forsook Jonah his servant, but provided a great fish, who
took him and swallowed him up, but yet did not consume or digest him, but kept
him whole in his belly till the third day, on which he vomited him out of his
belly safe and sound upon the Land. Now perceiving out of the fishes belly,
such a great favor of God toward him, he gave thanks to him, having recounted
the dangers from the which he had delivered him. When he was delivered from
that danger, God commanded him again, that he should go to Nineve the great
City, in which he should tell the Citizens what God had prescribed him. There,
when he had dispatched one days journey, he told this openly to all, that the
City should be destroyed within forty days. The Ninevites did not neglect or
contemn the speech of Jonah; that is, of one that was a stranger, and of low
degree, and one whom they had seen before, but believing it, they publicly
proclaimed a Fast, and repented them of the wickedness of their former life,
being clad in sacking and hairecloth. Nor indeed was this chang of life only
in private men, but of all the Magistrates and Princes. For when (as it uses to
be) by talk and report that praediction concerning the overthrow of the City
was brought to the King, he did not fall to delights and pleasures after the
manner, as others do usually, having prescribed a form of repentance to
others, hold themselves excused; but having abandoned his Throne, prostrated
himself, and cast off his Royal apparel; he was first clothed in sackcloth
and sat in ashes, and afterward gave charge by proclamation, that not only
men and women, but the children also, and not the children only, but also the
beasts, (which by their nature are void of reason) should abstain from food,
or fodder, or drink, but that all, being clad in sackcloth and hair cloth,
should entreat the Lord, and all should change the course of their wicked
lives, for that none knew whether God being pacified would pardon their sins,
In this place I could commend and set out the great wisdom of the Ninevites,
seen in the alteration of their lives, but that I write the life of Jonas, that
is, I set down the bare narration of the thing how it was done. Now the King
was not mistaken in that apprehension he had touching God, for when he saw them
all turned (at the Kings commandment), from their vile and wicked way of
living, he took pity on them, neither did he overthrow the City, as he had
determined; which mercy of Gods caused a deal of grief to Jonas, either lest
he should seem to have told a lie to the Ninevites, because he absolutely
said, that Nineve should be destroyed within forty days, or because he
understood that the people of Israel should be destroyed: and therefore he
besought God that he would take away his life, because he had rather dye than
that should come to pass, although he knew that he was exceeding merciful;
being asked by God whether he thought he did well to grieve, he went out of the
City, and having got him a shady place, which looked toward the East, from
whence he might safely see what befell the City, God had raised up an Ivy (or a
Gourd) which overshadowed him, in the beholding whereof he was extraordinarily
delighted. But when God had also the next day, by break of day, raised up a
worm, which stealing and creeping did so devour the Gourd, and Jonas feeling
the heat of the Sun wished for death, and God asked him whether he did well to
be angry for the Gourd that was eaten? And he had answered, that he was grieved
to the death; Then God spoke those words unto him which most plainly discovered
his exceeding great mercy to mankind: For he demanded of him whether it was fit
that he should be troubled at the fading of a Gourd which he had not set nor
made to grow, and that he should not himself pardon that City in which there
were above six score thousand persons who could not discern good from evil.
What answer Jonas made to these words, or what he did afterward is nor
recorded: Although Epiphanius writes, that he afterward returned into his
Country, wherein now he thought there was no dwelling for him, lest his own
fellow Citizens should object unto him, that his Prophecy concerning Nineve
was false, and that therefore he went with his mother to Sura, and dwelt in
Saar, and there died, and was buried in the Cave of Ceneseus the Judge.

Jehaziel the Prophet.
CHAP. XVII.
I find that Jehaziel did once only do the Office of Prophecy, 2 Chronicles. 20.14.
and that was unto Jehosaphat the King of Judah, after this manner, The
Ammonites and Moabites, having gathered a great Army, resolved to fight with
Jehosaphat the King of Judah; when this was told him, and that the enemies were
now already entered his Kingdom, he, not trusting himself and his own
strength, betook himself wholly unto God, and besought him, that he (who had
driven out all the Nations in former times out of their Countries, that he
might place his own people in them, as he had promised Abraham) would hear him
and his in this sad time of danger, that the Ammonites and Moabites came
against him with an hostile Army, being unthankful for, and unmindfull of,
their deliverance, when at his command their Elders coming out of Egypt (under
the Conduct of Moses) spared those two Nations when other people were
destroyed. He knew well that he was not able to stand against such a Multitude
unless God Almighty did help him; nor did the King alone pray to God, but also
all the Jews with their wives and children. There was amongst them this
Jehaziel the son of Zachary a Levite, who by a long descent was come from
Asaph, David's singer; He being moved by the Spirit of God came from amidst the
multitude and foretold to Jehosaphat and others, by Gods Command, that they
should not fear such a multitude, forasmuch as the battle was not theirs but
Gods, who, the next day, would overthrow their enemies. This very thing fell
out the next day, not in that manner as one would have expected, for Iosaphat
and his Army did not overcome their enemies by sight, but they overthrew
themselves by fighting, wounding, and killing one another; which when the Jews
had observed, they found so much booty that they could not carry it away in
three days; Triumphing hereupon they returned to Jerusalem, with Lutes and
Timbrels, praising God.

Eliezer the Prophet.
CHAP. XIX.
ELiezer the Prophet was the Son of Dodavah of Maresha. 2 Chronicles. 20.37. I find
that he also executed the office of a Prophet only once, and that unto the same
King Iehosaphat; for when the King had made friendship with Ahaziah, Iniisset
inimicitias.
that ungodly King of Israel, and been partaker with him in the design of
rigging a Navy which should go to Tharsis, but the hand of God was lost at Sea;
this Eliezer was sent by God to tell him, that because he had made a Covenant
with Ahazias, by Gods providence the Navy was cast away at Sea, and could not
reach Tharsis.

The life of the Prophet Esaias.
CHAP. XX.
ESaias the Prophet was the Son of Amoz the Prophet, whose Prophecy is extant,
as Epiphanius would have it; or another ( Am. 1. Amos Esa. 1. Amoz.
Amoz) because of the unlike spelling; in St Hieroms opinion he discharged the
duty of a Prophet in the Reign of Iotham, Ahaz and Hezekias Kings of Judah;
and his Prophecy does chiefly concern Judah and Jerusalem; what he foretold
in every Kings Reign is uncertain, except in Ahaz his, and Hezekias, unto
whom he was sent, as I shall tell you anon, Although we may conceive this, that
he prophesied those things which he treats of from the beginning of his book
From the first chap. to the seventh.
to that place where he mentions King Ahaz, when Vzziah and Iotham were
Kings. And those things that follow to that place Ezech. 3.6. wherein he
speaks of Hezekiah when Ahaz was King, and the rest to the end of his
Prophecy whilst Hezekiah reigned.

Sect. 1.
He was sent to Ahaz upon this occasion, Rezin King of Syria, and Pekah the son
of Remaliah, King of Israel, joined forces and besieged Jerusalem, yet could
they not take it; And God had Esaias tell this before their Army was on march
to Ahaz, (who was exceedingly afraid) that Pekah King of Israel had made a
confederacy with Rezin King of Syria, that they (seizing on the kingdom of
Judah) might drive Abaz thence, and make the son of Tabell King in his stead;
but that he should not sear, for it should not so come to pass as they had
devised. He bad him also, by Gods command, that he should ask a sign of God
either in heaven or earth, and when he said, he would not ask or tempt God,
not in that he behaved himself humbly, but in that he worshipping strange gods,
did not believe God, and yet dissembled it; Esaias chiding him, and them, that
obeyed him, because they had not only wearied men, but God also, Esa. 7.13.
foretold that such a sign as this should be given them: He said, a Virgin
should conceive and bring forth a Son, whose name they should call Emmanuel,
that is, God with us.

Sect. 2.
And when Hezechiah was King, Esaias was sometime consulted withal, and sent
unto by the King, who entreated his prayers for him, and other times sent by
God on messages to the King, which how, and wherefore, it was done, I will
declare in few words. Isa. 3.6. Senacherib King of Assyria, invading Judah, had
taken all the fenced Cities thereof, and had sent Rabshacheh General of his
Army to Jerusalem, that he might treat with Hezechiah concerning the
surrender of the City. Hezechiah being mightily afraid, sent Eliakim the son of
Helkiah the Steward of his house, Shebna the Scribe, and Ioah the son of Asaph
the Recorder, who when they had heard many words tending both to the disgrace
of the King, and the dishonor of God, (as though he was not able to help his
own people) and had told them to Hezechiah, he rent his clothes, and, being
clad with sackcloath, went into the Temple of God, and sent those three, in the
same habit, to Isaiah; First, to relate to him those things, and afterward to
increat him that he would pray to God for them that persevered trusting in him;
Esaias, at Gods Command, bad them toll Hezechiah that he should not fear, for
God would send a blast upon Senacherib, and he should hear a Rumor upon which
he should return into Assyria, and there dye by the sword. These things they
told to the King; but because in the mean time Senacherib sent messengers who
brought Letters to Hezechiab containing yet more grievous railings against God,
he first read them over as soon as he had taken them from the hands of the
Ambassadors, and afterward, going into the Temple, he humbly besought God,
and that at large, to revenge the wrongs and reproaches of Senacherib, and
deliver his own people. God being entreated with those prayers of the King,
declared at large by Esaias, that there should be a great deliverance, and
showed the tokens by which he should know the things for certain, which when
they had all come to pass accordingly, a hundred fourscore and five thousand of
the Assyrians were slain, and Senacherib himself also a while after in
Assyria, whereupon ensued a happy peace.

Sect. 3.
The occasion afterward why he was sent unto the King, was this: Hezechias was
sick, and that with danger of life; therefore God sent Esaias to him to put him
in mind of ordering himself and his affairs, because he was to dye. He, being
affrighted with this message, besought God presently that he would have mercy
on him; whereupon Esaias was again sent by God, having not yet gone out of the
Courtyard, to tell him, that his prayers were heard, and his tears seen, and
that therefore he should live fifteen years in that felicity, that both he and
the City should be free from the King of Assyria, and that he should hence know
this, for that the shadow of the sun in Ahaz his Dial should go back ten
degrees, and so the King recovered, having by Esaias direction laid to the
wound a plaster of dry figs.

Sect. 4.
Mcrodach, King of Babylon, had heard that Hezechiah was recovered from that
sickness, and he sent him Letters Congratulatory, and Presents by
Ambassadors, unto whom Hezechiah showed all things that were brave and costly
in his Treasuries. This deed of his, being full of arrogance and glory, was so
displeasing to God, that he sent his Prophet Isaiah to tell him, that because
he had done this very thing, it should come to pass that all those things
should be carried away, and his Posterity become Eunuchs in the Palace of the
King of Babylon, To these things Hezechiah made no answer, but that the word of
God was right and good, only might there be peace while he lived. And these
things have I found concerning Esaias in the Scriptures; But Epiphanius
writes, that he was cut in two pecces by Manasses, and buried under an Oak at
Rogel. He also spoke so plainly and openly concerning the mysteries of our
Religion; as of the Conception, Birth, Sermons or Preaching, wonderful works
in curing diseases, Death, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, that he
seems not to foretell them as things to come, but to relate them as things
present or done and past; Therefore St Hierom will have him reckoned not so
much a Prophet as an Evangelist.

The Life of the Prophet Joel.
CHAP. XXI.
JOel the Prophet, as Epiphanius says, was a Bethorian of the Tribe of Ruben,
and the son of Phatuel. It does not appear out of the Book of his Prophecy
under what King he prophesied or lived; But St Hierom writes, that he
prophesied under the same Kings that Hosea did, that is, Vzziah, Joatham, Ahaz,
and Hezekiah, and he will have all his Prophecy to belong to the Kingdom of
Judah only, and not also to Israel; Act. 2.16. Joel 2.28.
he spoke much concerning the coming of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles,
which St Peter the Apostle interpreted, and many, concerning that repentance
which God requires in his Children: Moreover, as Epiphanius says, he was
buried honorably in his own Country.

The Life of the Prophet Micha.
CHAP. XXII.
MIcha the Morastite (so called of Morasthi a little Town of Palestina) of the
Tribe of Ephraim, as Epiphanius writes; he ministered when Ioatham, Ahaz, and
Hezekiah were Kings of Judah; we find nothing written concerning the Life of
this Prophet, (nor concerning many others) only there is extant a little book
wherein his Prophecy is set down, and that indeed chiefly relates to Samaria,
and Jerusalem, and somewhat also to the Birth of Christ. St Matthew an Apostle
and Evangelist so interprets that place of Bethlehem the place where Christ was
borne; and forasmuch as he rebukes the wickedness both of Jews and Israelites,
first, against God, and then against their neighbors in his disallowing those
things, he shows and declares not only to them, but also to all men, what
they ought to do. For he says, this is good, and this God requires, do
judgment, that is, that we perform what we rightly determine, and that we
love mercy and bounty, and that we carefully and diligently walk with God.
Epiphanius writes that because he reprehended and blamed the wicked villainies
of Ioram King of Judah, he was thrown by him from a steep place, and was
afterward buried in his own Country with honor.

Joram was Father to Vzziah, is it not Jotham? and how could Jotham kill him?
he prophesied in Ahazia's and Hezekia's days. (...)

The life of Oded the Prophet.
CHAP. XXIII.
ODED the Prophet was found once discharging the duty of a Prophet, when Ahaz
was King of Judah. For when Zizchria mighty man of Ephraim, had killed Maaseiah
the Kings son, and Azrica the ruler of his house, and Elkana who was next to
the King, and the Isralitos besides, had taken captive two hundred thousand
women and children of Judah, and an infinite booty, and carried all to
Samaria; Then this Oded, who was there, going out to meet the victorious army,
coming in, told them that that deed was not acceptable to God, who had
suffered the Jews to be killed, for their wickedness, whose wives, children
and goods, they took away and spoiled, contrary to all right, and therefore
they should follow his advice, to carry their captives back again, for fear
the wrath of God grew hot upon them. These things he spoke to Azaria, Berechia,
Ichizkiah, and Amosa the commanders in chief, who presently told the same to
their companies, and caused them to bring back their prisoners, and restore all
the booty as sacred, lest the wrath of God should rage against them: which
thing they did with so great devotion and affection, that they sent back those
that were naked, clothed, and set them that were weak upon beasts, after that
they had well refreshed them.

Nahum the Prophet.
CHAP. XXIV.
Nahum the Elkeshite (so called of Elkesis a small Village in Galilee, which St
Hierome writes, was showed unto him) of the tribe of Simeon, as Epiphanius
writes, he foretold the destruction of Nineve and the Ninevites, who before (as
I have told you) persuaded by the Prophet Jonah, had obtained pardon from God
upon their repentance; he prophesied in the reign of Hezekiah the King, as St
Hierome will have it: at the last he died in his own country, and there was
buried.

The life of the Prophet Jeremiah.
CHAP. XXV.
Section. 1
JEremiah the Prophet, Ieremiah's Father was of the Priests that were in
Anathoth in Terra Benjamin.
was the son of Halchiah, of the Tribe of Benjamin, a Priest of Anathoth; he
prophesied as may be gathered from the beginning of his prophecy, from the
eleventh year of Josiah the son of Amon King of Judah, to the eleventh year
of Zedekiah, who then was led away to Babylon, after Jerusalem was taken with
the remnant of Judah, as Jeremiah had constantly foretold by Gods command,
which thing occasioned him great trouble; For he was both laid in Irons, and
cast into a prison, and a most nastie dungeon, and yet by all these duresses,
his undaunted spirit could not be brought, either to think or Prophecy
otherwise then God commanded, though the false Prophets told the contrary.
This, because it much commends him, I have resolved to set down in what manner
it was done; God had sent him to Topeth, to foretell those things which he had
given him in charge, and when he was come back from thence to Jerusalem, and
standing in the Court of the Temple, told all the people plainly, that all
those evils should befall both the City, and the Inhabitants thereof, which God
had spoken, because they obeyed not his Commandments. Phashur the Priest could
not endure such words with patience, but presently cast him, after he had
beaten him, into prison. The next day very early, when Phashur had brought him
out, whatever the cause was (for I do not find it written,) Jeremiah
constantly and freely maintained that he was not called Phashur, by God, but
Magor-Missabib, Ier. 20. fear on every side; forasmuch, as God would astonish
him with fear, and his friends, so, as that they should be run through with
the enemies whilst he looked on, and that God would deliver all Judah into the
hands of the King of Babylon to be slain, and their riches for a spoil, and
Phashur himself should be led captive thither with all his family, and die
there, and all his friends unto whom he prophesied lies. What answer Phashur
made to these words, or what he did being moved with them, is not foe down in
the Scriptures.

Sect. 2.
In the beginning of the reign of Ichoiakim son of Josiah, as he stood in the
court of the Temple, he denounced to all that were come out of the Cities of
Judah and Jerusalem to worship God, that unless they kept Gods Laws, both
that should befall the Temple, which besell Siloh, and that all Nations should
abhor that City, Ier. 26. The Priests, false Prophets, and people who had
heard him speak these words, apprehended him, and said first among themselves,
afterward to the Princes (who having heard this doom of his, went from the
Palace into the Temple) that for that matter he ought to be put to death; But
he, having leave given him to speak, told them that God had sent him to declare
every word that he had spoken; And therefore they should repent and observe
Gods Commandments, who thereupon also would repent and not bring the evil
upon them, that he had purposed. ver. 13. And as for him, that he was in their
hands, that they might resolve what they would against him; yet thus much they
should understand and know, it they put him to death, they should kill one that
was innocent toward them, and the City, because God had sent him to prophecy
all those things unto them. ver. 14. The great men and the Rulers being
persuaded by these speeches, persuaded the Priests and the false Prophets that
they should not kill him that was sent by God. And amongst these, some Elders
standing up, altered their minds, by minding them of Micah the Prophet, who
when Hezekiah was King, had foretold many things concerning the destruction of
the City, and for all that was not put to death, but the men which lived that
time, appeased God by their repentance, prayers, and fears: but herein the
pains and diligence of Ahicam the son of Shaphan most of all appeared, that he
might not be put to death.

Sect. 3.
In the same Kings Reign, God commanded Jeremiah to bring the posterity of
Richab (who were called Rechabites) into the Temple, and give them wine. Now
they had a command from Ionadah their father, to abstain from wine. Therefore
when Jeremiah had set wine before them at Gods command, they bringing this
command of their Fathers for anexcuse, refrained altogether from wine (which
had not been well done of them, if he had said that God had commanded them
this) But God by this example of the Rechabites intended to show and shame the
depraved and corrupted manners of the Jews. For he sent afterward to
Iieremias to tell them how grievously they offended, because the Rechabites at
their Fathers bidding abstained from wine all their whole life, whereas he had
endeavored to draw them from their wicked course of life by his Prophets (of
whom he had sent a great many) and could not because of their obstinate will;
hereupon also, he denounced that the Jews should be plagued with Famine,
Pestilence and captivity: But to the Rechabites he promised that their
posterity should never fail before him, because they had obeyed their Fathers
command, with such constancy of spirit.

Sect. 4.
And in the fourth year of the same King, God commanded him, that he should
write in a book all the miseries, with which he would punish the Kingdoms of
Israel and Judah; that when they should hear them read, they might by
repentance seek to appease Gods wrath against them, Ier. 36. He was then as I
said in prison, therefore he sent for Baruch the son of Neriah, a good man,
whom he bad first write in a book, what he dictated, and afterward to rehearse
it in the Temple, (whither he could not come) on the fast day to all the
people, and all that came out of Judah to worship, that if they would believe
those words which were rehearsed, and live according to them, they might find
God more favorable unto them. When he had done these things, and at a set fast
in the fifth year of the same King, and the ninth month, had rehearsed them
all; Michaiah the soune of Gemariah, told them all to the chief men of the
Court, and they sent Iehudi the son of Nethaniah, to command him, that he
should bring the role to them, When he was come, he read all out of the
writing, as they commanded, and that with such admiration, or aftonishment
rather, that they said, they would acquaint the King with all those words: yet
first they enquired of him, how he writ all those words. When he had told them
that he had taken all those words from the mouth of Jeremiah, who dictared
them, as if he had read them out of a book, and that he had written them all
with ink; then they advised him, that he and Jeremiah would hide themselves
some where, so as no body might know it, and they gave the book to Elishama the
scribe. Then Iehudi at the Kings command, began to read the book; but after
three or four pages only were read, the King cut it with a penknife, and
afterward threw it into the fire; nor could Elnathan, Delaiah and Gemariah,
dissuade him, but that he would needs do the thing, nor was Ichojakim content
with this so grievous a wicked act, but he also commanded Ierahmiel, Hammelech,
and Seraiah the son of Azriel, and Shelemiah the son of Abdul, to apprehend
Baruch the Scribe, and Jeremiah the Prophet; but God hid them from the Kings
wrath: But God was so offended with the burning of the book, that he bad
Ieremias to write the same role over again, and to add thereunto many other
things, and to tell the King front him, that there should remain none of his
posterity that should sit upon the throne, but withal, that his carcass
should be thrown out, and that he, his posterity, and servants should be
punished for their wickedness, and those evils should befall them, the City,
and people, which when they were foretold they had so neglected and slighted.
Jeremiah as he was commanded by God, delivered the other book to Baruch;
whether Baruch read to the King himself, or the people, or both, or what the
King did, or the rest, is not set down in the Scriptures. The same Jeremiah,
in the beginning of the Reign of Ichotakim the son of Josiah King of Judah,
at Gods command, had foretold that Jerusalem should be taken, and the Jews be
led away to Babylon by Nebuchadnezer the King. But the false Prophets stisly
maintained this should not be, and for this cause they brought him into the
disfavour and dislike of Iehoiakim the King, and (when he was taken and led
away) of Zedekiah.

Sect. 5.
Amongst these was Hananiah, the son of Azur, a Gebeonite, who in the fifth
year of the reign of Zedechias, maintained in the temple, in the sight of all
the Priests, and all the people, that God foretold this, that he had broken the
yoke of the King of Babylon, and would cause that within two years the vessels
of the Temple, which Nebuchadonozer the King had taken away, and carried to
Babylon, should be brought back again, and Iechoniah, the son of Iehotakim the
King of Judah, with the rest of the Captives, should be brought back, Jeremiah
the Prophet that was present then, could not endure this false prophecy of
Hananiah's, but when first he had said, that he wished such an event of things
as he had prophesied; afterward he said moreover, that it should then at the
last be known that God had sont a Prophet when that came to pass which he had
foretold. Hananiah on the contrary, persisting in his opinion, having pulled
off the yoke or chain from Ieremiah's neck, and broken it, affirmed openly,
that God said, so he would break the yoke of the King of Babylon after two
years. Jeremiah who could no longer endure his refractorinesse went his way,
but God bad him return and declare that, not only that was true which he had
foretold concerning seventie years Captivity, but also that Hananiah should die
that very same year, because he had lied against God; and so it came to pass
soon after, in the seventh month, whereas the former words were spoken in the
fifth.

Sect. 6.
This same Jeremiah also, a little before that time, that is, when Iechonias
was taken and led away to Babylon, in the third month of his Reign, by Gods
appointment, he sent a letter from Jerusalem to them that were carried away
thither with the King; wherein first he exhorted, or rather commanded them,
that there they should build houses, that they should plant gardens and vines,
that they should take and bestow wives, and do all things which the
Inhabitants of the places used to do, and withal did forewarne them, not to
believe those false Prophets which God had not sent: lastly he foretold them
when the number of seventie years was fulfilled, it should come to paste that
they should be brought back again; but they that had not removed thither out of
Judah, should die with the sword, the famine, and the Pestilence, and because
two false Prophets out of Judah. Ier. 29.21. Ahab the son of Kolaiah, and
Zedechiah, the son Maaseiah, prophesied lies to them, in the name of God, he
wrote how they should fall into the hand of Nebuchadonozer, and there should be
brought into such a hatred of all, as that he that would wish any thing to fall
amiss, or unhappily to any body, should desire the same to befall him which
befell them; he foretold how the same things almost should befall Shemaiah the
Nethelanite, who in Babylon prophesied lies also to them that were gone
thither, Elisha the son of Shaphan, and Gomariah the son of Helkiah,
carried this letter at the command of King Zedechiah, but in what year of his
reign it is uncertain.

Sect. 7.
Zedechiah the King, when Jerusalem was besieged, sent twice to Jeremiah, once
by Phashur the son of Malchiah, and Zephaniah the Priest, the son of
Maaseiah, to ask of God if he would please to deliliver him and his people.
Ier. 37.3. And the second time by Iehucall the son of Shelemiah and Zephaniah
son of Maastiah, to entreat him to pray for him and his people. He commanded
the first messengers, that they should tell the King, that God said this, that
he would turn back the weapons of war, wherewith they should fight against the
King of Babylon and gather them rogether into the City Jerusalem, and make war
with them with all his might, and with great fury, and destroy all the Citizens
with the Pestilence, and that all those whom the Pestilence, the Sword, and the
Famine had spared, to the will of K. Nebuchadnezzar, who should put them to
death without mercy: and the latter messengers he bad tell the King, because
upon report of Pharaohs Army' the Caldaeans who had besieged Jerusalem, had
raised the siege, yet the Army of Pharaoh, which was come to help him, should
return into Egypt, and then the Caldaeans should return, who should beser,
lack, and burn the City. Now when the army of the Caldaeans had received the
news of the coming of the Egyptian Army for Zedechiah's relief, and
thereupon departed, Jer. 37.13. Jeremiah was going from Jerusalem into the
Country, about some business, by the way he light into the hands of a certain
Captain, named Irijah, who (when he had upbraided him, that he fled to the
Caldaeans, and he on the other hand denied it, yet he believed him not,)
accused him to the Nobles; whereupon, they being very wreth, beat Jeremiah,
and cast him into Jonathans prison, where he remained a long time in a
loathsome condition, Zedechias the King, afterward sent for him, to come to
him into the Palace, and asked him privately, whither he had received from God,
any message concerning the captivity, and when he had told him, that what he
had spoken was the word of God, and that Zedechiah should fall into the hands
of the King of Babylon, he humbly besought him, that he would not send him back
into the Prison of Jonathan to die there, he having deserved no such matter;
the King moved with his supplication, put him in the court of the prison,
giving charge, that a little bread and pottage should be given him, as long as
the bread in the City lasted, yet were not his enemies content with this
punishment; for Shaphaiab the son of Mahan, and Gedaliah the son of Pashur,
and Jucal the son of Shelmeiah, and Pashur the son of Malchiah, the chief
men of the Court were moved against him, Jer. 33.1. (because they heard him
speak openly, that which I mentioned a little before, that he that tarried in
the City, should dye by the sword, the pestilence, and the famine: But he that
fled to the Caldaeans, should be safe and secure; and going to the King, they
besought him, that he might be put to death, as an enemy to the State,
especially since he discouraged the soldiers which remained in the City, from
defending it, by scattering such like speeches. The King, who in such confusion
and astonishment of things, and in such danger, desired to keep the affections
of his Subjects toward him, said, that he was in their power, and that it was
not for him to deny them any thing. They then took him, and let him down by
cords into the dungeon of Malchiah the son of Hamelech, which was in the
Court of the prison full of mire; there he continued not long, through the
providence of God, who moved a man that was a stranger to pity him. There was
in the Court an Eunuch, one Ebedmelech an Ethiopian, who because he conceived
the things were true which Jeremiah had foretold, as soon as he heard that
which had befallen him through the malice of his enemies, he told the King,
that, that was wrongfully done of them, to put him, where it was twenty to
one, but he died: The King, whether moved by his entreaty or persuasion, gave
him charge to get Jeremiah out, and put him in the Court of the prison.
Thereupon, not long after the King sent for Jeremiah to him, and bad him tell
him plainly, in good earnest, what should be the event of things. He first
said, he was afraid, lest if he should tell him truth, he would kill him, and
not follow his advise; and afterward having leave given him to speak freely
without fear of death (the King having passed an oath for his security) he
told the King, that if he would go out to the King of Babylons Captalnes, he
should be safe and all his whole family, and the City should not be burnt. But
if he would not go out, that then he should fall into the power of his
enemies, so, as that he should never escape, and not himself only, but also
his wife and children, and the City should be burnt. Therefore if he would do
the best for himself and his friends, he should give credit to those words
which were not his own but Gods When the King said he was afraid, (if he
should yield himself) he should be delivered over to the Jews, who already
run away to the Caldaeans, who would mock him: Although Hieremiah avouched, in
the word of a Prophet, that if should not be so, but as he had told him, yet
the King believed him nor, but only requested of him, or rather charged him
that no body should know This their conference.
those things; but if the Commanders or great men should ask what he had
spoken with them about, he should say, that he requested that he might not be
sent back again into Ionathans prison to dye there; the King sent him back
into the Court of the prison; the Princes asked him, as he went out, what
discourse (and what about) the King had with him; but when he had told them
what the King had bidden him, they were satisfied; Nevertheless he remained in
the Court of the Prison till the day that the City was taken, which however
when it came to pass (that the rest of Hieremiah's words and doings may be
better understood) we must now relate.

Sect. 8.
Jerusalem began to be besieged by Nebuchadnezzer, King of Babylon, and his
Army Ier. 39. in the ninth year of Zedechiah King of Judah, and the tenth
Month, and in the eleventh year, and fourth month, and the ninth day of the
month it was taken, and those things befell Zedechiah which Hieremiah the
Prophet of God had foretold: For when he understood that the City was taken he,
got out privily by night, with some armed men, through his garden by a Gate
which was betwixt the two walls; but the Army of the Cadaeans pursued him, and
took him in the fields of Hiericho, and brought him to Nebuchadnezzar to
Riblash in the Land of Hamath. There, when he had talked with him at large, he
put out his eyes, and put him in bonds, having slain his Children before his
face: But God had pity upon two especially, Hieremias, and Ebedmolach the
Ethiopian, who had besought Zedechiah that he would deliver Hieremiah out of
the Dungeon pit, as I have said: I will first speak concerning Edebmelech.

Sect. 9.
Before the City was taken, God bad Hieremiah, in the Court of the Prison, go
and tell Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, that every thing which he had prophesied
against the City should come certainly to pass, and yet he should not come
under the power of them whom he feared, but should be delivered, because he had
hoped in the Lord. And God took so great ear for the welfare of Hieremiah,
that by his goodness Nebuchadnezzar, the King of Babylon, gave charge to
Nebuzaradan the General of his Army, when Jerusalem was taken, that he should
suffer Hieremiah to have his liberty, and not trouble him at all, but deal
with him and use him as he desired. Therefore he fetched him out of prison, and
delivered him to Godolias the son of Ahikaiv, that he might go abroad at his
liberty. Afterward when Nebuzaradan was to return to Babylon, he (mentioning
the benefit of his freedom) gave him choice either to go with him to Babylon,
or tarry where he would in Judah. And when he had said, he had rather do the
latter; having afforded him necessaries for his maintenance, and bestowed gifts
upon him, he sent him away: And he going to Gedaliah (whom Nebuchadnezzar had
made Governor over the Cities of Judah) dwelt with him in Mispah till he was
slain by Ismael the Ammonite. And when Ismael had slain Gedaliah, and many
others, and Ismael himself was beaten by Iohanan the son of Careah, Ier.
41.13, 14, 15, 16. they that were left entreated Hieremy to enquire of God
whether they should go into Egypt, or tarry there, for they would do whatsoever
God saw good; on the tenth day after, having called all the men of Arms
together, and amongst them Iohanan the son of Careah, he told them, that it was
Gods will they should dwell there, where he would deliver them from the
servitude of Nebuchadnezzar, which they feared, but if they went into Egypt,
the Sword, Famine, and Pestilence should follow them thither. Therefore in a
long set Oration he exhorted them to look to themselves and perform all those
things which God approved and appointed. But they answered, that he was not
sent by God to forbid them to go into Egypt for safety; but there was one
Baruch the son of Neriah who set him against them, that they might fall into
the hands of the Caldaeans. Going on therefore in their resolution, and
neglecting the Command of God (who would have had them dwell in Judah, as I
have said) they came into Egypt, and forced Hieremiah and Baruch to go with
them; when they were come to Tahpanhes, by divine inspiration and appointment,
he foretold Nebuchadnezzer coming into Egypt to take and destroy it, and to
burn the Temples of their Gods, and those that came thither against the will
of God should dye by the sword or Famine. The people, being provoked by this
Prophecy, stoned him to death, as Epiphanius says, and he was buried in the
place where Pharaoh had dwelt, for the Egyptians honored him, because they had
received great favors from him; for at his prayers the Aspes and Crocodiles,
which before time killed the Inhabitants, forbore afterward to do any more
hurt. Moreover the Christians had him in such veneration, until Epiphanius his
time, that they prayed in that place, and with the dust which they took out of
the Sepulcher they both healed the bitings of Asps, and drove the Crocodiles
out of the River. Oswaldus has recorded, that he was at Tahpanhes the first
day of May.

The Life of the Prophet Baruch.
CHAP. XXVI.
BAruch the Prophet was the son of Neriah. He was servant and assistant to
Hieremiah the Prophet in taking the Book from him at Gods Command, wherein God
denounced the evils that should come upon them that went not out of the City
Jerusalem to Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and the good things that should
befall them that went; and in reading in the Temple on the Fast day to all the
people that were come to Jerusalem our of the Cities of Judah. There is extant
a Book which is not the very same he wrote then, as may be conceived by the
time and place, For the former book was taken in the fourth year of Ichoiakim
King of Judah, and in the fifth year, in the ninth month, when a Fast was
appointed at Jerusalem it was read in the Temple, and when it was cut in
pieces by King Ichoiakim and thrown into the fire, it was copied out again by
this same Baruch, in the same words, and more at Gods Command, whilst the same
Hieremias dictated, or certainly it was delivered him by Hieremiah. But this
that is extant is said to be written by this Baruch, and to be there read by
him to Ieconias the son of Ioackim King, of Judah, and to all the people that
were carried Captive into Babylon, so that this was writ later. Concerning that
former, we have spoken sufficiently in the Life of the Prophet Hieremiah. And
when this was read, they all wept, fasted, and prayed unto God. But when the
other was read, they sent money, that they gathered, as every man's Estate would
bear, to Jerusalem, to them that were there, to buy sacrifices, entreating
them that they would both offer for the sins of all the people, and beseech God
that he would grant a prosperous life to Nebuchadnezzer, and his son Balshazar,
and afford them favor in the sight of Nebuchadnezzer and his son, that they
might live and make their prayers before God, against whom they had offended,
and whose wrath was not yet pacified. They exhorted them also, that they would
take order that the book which they had sent should be rehearsed upon holy
days in the Temple; The rest of his words is spent in detestation of the sins
and wickedness which they had committed, and reckoning up the evils with which
they were rightly pressed. There is also in the latter end of Hieremias book a
Letter, wherein, as a Prophet of God, he does foretell the Captives of
Jerusalem that they should be brought to Babylon by Nebuchadaezzar the King of
Babylon, and exhorts them, that when they be there they should not worship the
gods which they should see, but the true God. Now Baruch was of such
familiarity and acquaintance with Hieremiah, that when the City of Jerusalem
was taken, and the people lead away to Babylon with Zedechias and the great
men; He tarried with those, which out of several Countries, returned to Judah,
and dwelt there at the command of Nebuchadnezzer the King, ( Gedaliah being
Governor) and after Gedaliah was slain, and the remnant had entreated
Hieremiah to enquire of God, whether they should go into Egypt or no, and he
had told them, by Gods command, that they ought not to go: They said, God did
not forbid this, but that Baruch was one who moved him against them, and
because they did not obey Gods Command, the Commanders brought Hieremias and
Baruch by force into Egypt with the rest, and there, as I suppose, he died and
was buried.

The Life of the Prophet Ezekiel.
CHAP. XXVII.
Section 1.
Ezekiel, a Prophet, and a Priest, was the son of Buzi. He prophesied at the
same time, that Hieremiah, but with this difference, that Hieremias began to
prophecy in the thirteenth year of Josiah King of Judah, but he in the fifth
year after Iechoniah was led away to Babylon; and Hieremias continued
prophesying till the eleventh year of Zedechiah, wherein he was taken, and
little more than so: But Ezekiel unto the fourteenth year after the City was
spoiled, which he calls the five and twentieth after he himself was led away;
which that it may more easily be understood, and the Life of Ezekiel better
known, I have a mind to fetch the order of times, and things a little more from
the bottom.

Sect. 2.
Ichoiakim, after his Father Josiah was slain, (who reigned thirty one years,
2 Chro. 36.) and after Ichoahaz his brother (who reigned only three months) was
led into Egypt) was made King of Judah, in his brothers stead, by Nechokin King
of Egypt; Iehoiakim, dying in the eleventh year of his reign, left Ichoiakim,
who is also called Iechoniah, the heir to his Kingdom; This Ichoiakim, in the
third month of his reign, when the City was vanquished, and the Temple spoiled,
was taken and led away to Babylon with his mother, wives, and Eunuchs, and a
great many more; and amongst these Ezekiel now began to prophecy in Babylon
(as himself says) in the fifth year after Ichoiakim was taken, that is, in
the fifth year of Zedechias, who was placed in his stead by Nebuchadnezzer the
King. And Zedechiah was taken in the eleventh year of his reign and cast into
bonds. To these eleven years of Zedechiah, wherein Ezekiel was now Captive, if
we add the other fourteen, after Jerusalem and Zedechiah were taken, we
shall find five and twenty years, and that five and twentieth is the year of
his Captivity, unto which he continues all his Prophesies. And therefore
Ezekiel did not prophecy in Judah, but in Babylon, and foretold, first, that
other Captivity (which befell when Zedechiah, as I have said, was King) of all
the people because of their wickedness both old and new, all which God showed
unto him, though done by them not in Babylon, he spoke of their deliverance
also. He began to prophecy in the sixth year after Iehoniah was taken and
carried to Babylon, and that in the fourth month, and the fifth day. A year
after, that is to say, in the sixth year, on the fifth day of the sixth month
God appeared to him, and bad him fasten his eyes upon the way which looks
toward the North; which when he had done he behold an Image; The Image of
Jealousy at the gate of the Altar, in the very entrance of the Temple of
Jerusalem, which the Inhabitants worshipped, that by this their villainy they
might even drive God away from them. This was a great wickedness, but he
showed them another greater than this: He brought him into the Court of the
Temple and bid him dig through the wall, when he had done this, there appeared
a door, by which when upon Gods commandment he had gone in, he saw upon the
wall the pictures of all sorts of beasts painted, and Jaazaniah the Priest, the
son of Sho^han, standing in the midst of seventie Elders, who hold Centers in
their hands, and the smoke of the Odours that was burnt just then appeared. He
also showed him more notorious wickedness then these. He brought him into the
Temple by the door of the gate, which looked toward the North, and there he
espied women which lamented Adonis. Afterward he showed things more worse then
these. He brought him into the inner court of the Temple, from thence in the
door of the Temple, betwixt the porch and the Altar, he saw about some twenty
five men, who with their backs to the Temple, looking toward the East, did
reverence toward the Suns rising, and as our men say, did worship. Ezekiel. 8.16.
All which things, when God had showed him, he discovered to him their future
destruction; for he said, because they had done all these things to provoke
him, it should come to pass, that he in his fury and anger, would not spare
nor pity, and when they prayed unto him with a very loud voice he would not
hear them.

Sect. 3.
In the same year a little while after, the spirit of God took him up and
brought him into the East gate of the Temple, where in the entrance of the gate
were twenty five men, and in the midst of them, Iaazaniah the son of Azur,
and Pelotiah the son of Benaiah, Princes of the People; and there the Spirit
told him, that those were the men that in the City devised mischief in their
minds, and took wicked Counsel, in that they said the Temple was built long
ago, that this City was the Cauldron, and they the flesh. And therefore he
commanded him to prophecy concerning them; and he was bidden to foretell these
things unto them, because they had slain a many in that City, and strowed the
streets with carcasses, that the carcasses of them that they had killed were
the flesh, and the City was the Cauldron. But it should come to pass, that
they should be brought out of the City, and the sword which they feared should
come upon them, and they should be thrown out of the City, and fall into the
hands of their enemies, and all these things should befall them, because they
had not obeyed Gods commands, but had imitated the manners and lives of the
Heathen. Which things when Ezekiel prophesied, Pelatiah, the son of Benaiah
(whom I mentioned a little before) died; with those death he was so astonished,
that he thought that the death of the rest also would shortly follow. But God
comforted him in his wailing and mourning, by promising the restorement of them
whom he had scattered afar off, in that he would cause them to keep his
Commandment, and they should be his people, and he would be their God. When
God had given him these things to prophecy, he was carried back by the same
Spirit into Caldaea, and told all things to his fellow captives, which God had
showed him. Ezekiel. 11.

Sect. 4.
Now in the seventh year, in the fifth month, on the tenth day, certain men
of the Elders came to enquire of God, and sat them down before Ezekiel,
whereupon God bad him say thus unto them, that God (who knew very well with
what mind they were come to enquire of him) would not answer them. But if
Ezekiel would judge them, he should first tell them the ungodly doings of their
ancestors, beginning from their deliverance out of Egypt, and then their own
after sins in order. In the year before, certain men of the Elders, came to
ask counsel of God, as they sat before Ezekiel; God bad him tell them, that
(as he had discovered to him) they thought upon their Idols; and that he, as
often as they, or such as they, came to ask counsel of him by a Prophet,
their hearts running after Idols, he would answer them not by a prophet, but
according to the multitude of their sins, and for that reason, he bad him to
declare this to Israel, that whereas he had now warned them to become new men,
and to keep themselves from the worship of strange gods, and all manner of
wickedness, if any Israelite, Citizen or stranger, being estranged from God,
should worship strange gods, and come to enquire of God by a Prophet, God would
give him an answer by himself, and make that man an example to the rest, so
that at last he should be destroyed. And these things Ezekiel was bidden to
speak privately to some, which indeed belonged to all. He foretold also many
other things that concerned the Jews publicly at Gods command, both good and
evil, and likewise he prophesied of Egypt and other Kingdoms, though he went
not solemnly in Embassage. And he was so constant and stout in his office, that
at last, one of the hands of the People, because he was reprooved by him for
worshipping of Images, slew him in Babylon, as Epiphanius writes, and he was
buried in the country of Saur, in the Sepulcher of Shem, and Arphaxad his
ancestors, whither as the same Epiphanius writes, a very great concur of
people came, and prayed, and did their offices at that place. He was slain the
tenth of April, as Oswald writes.

The life of the Prophet Daniel.
CHAP. XXVIII.
DAniel of the Tribe of Judah, was born in Betheban the upper, nor far from
Jerusalem, as Ephiphanius faith. He, when he was but a child, in the third
year of the reign of Jehoakim, was led away Captive with others to Babylon,
but he got into great estemation with the favorite of Nebuchadnezzar, and his
successors, both for the repute of his continency and beauty, and also for his
skill in divination, and interpretation of dreams. For Nebuchadnezzar had
given command to Aspenaz, Governor of the Eunuchs, when many beautiful and
well countenanced youths were brought away to Babylon, that he should choose out
Israelitish children, descended of the Kings and Princes (well favored and
instructed in all learning, and in all Arts and discipline) into his Palace,
that there they might be brought up three years in the language and learning of
the Caldaeans, at the end of which time, they might be sit to stand in his
presence. Daniel was one amongst these, to whom the governor gave the name of
Belteshazzer; now the King had appointed provision for him and his company,
such as was for himself, but Daniel resolved, not to defile himself with
abominable meat; and therefore he entreated the Governor of the Eunuchs, that
by his favor he might enjoy this courcesie, at first he did not grant him
this, because he said he feared the King his master, who, when he had appointed
the same meat and drink to him and his fellows, which he used, if he should
observe them not so faire-liking as their fellows, would have good cause to
punish him. Afterward Daniel remaining in his purpose and resolution that he
had taken, easily persuaded Malasar, whom the governor of the Eunuchs had set
over him and three others, that for ten days together, in which they would
only eat pulse and drink water, he would look upon his face whether he
should grow leaner then others, that made use of their allowance appointed
accordingly. Upon the tenth day, at the last, when the thing was taken notice
of and tried, the face of Daniel and his three companions, appeared much fuller
then the faces of others, to the great admiration of Malasar, whereas he had
given them only pulse and water. And God gave unto Daniel, besides the
knowledge and skill of all books and wisdom, which was common to him and his
three fellows, Ananias, Azarias and Misael, skill of interpreting all dreams;
by help whereof, as I said, he came into great favor with Nebuchadonozer and
his heirs: For when he was brought into the Palace, and the King had seen a
dream, in the second year of his reign, which no diviner or interpreter of
dreams being made use of could interpret, but Daniel alone, he begun to be in
very great request. And what alike dream this was, and upon what occasion
Daniel was consulted, it will not be far amiss to declare. In the second
year, as I said, of his reign, the King saw a dream, wherewith he was
exceedingly affrighted, but being slipped out, it could never afterward come
into his mind again. Therefore having called together all the Magitians and
diviners of his Kingdom, he bad them first tell the dream which was quite
gone, and afterward interpret it. They be sought the King, that he himself
would relate the dream, which they would interpret. When the King began to
press them, propounding a condition, that unless they could tell the dream
and interpret it, it should come to pass, that both they should be destroyed,
and their houses should be sequestered; but if they could tell and interpret it,
they should receive rewards and gifts, and great honors. Again, either they
had advised or entreated the King, that he would tell his own dream, and then
afterward they would interpret it, for no body could do what he demanded, but
only the gods, who converse not among men. Whereupon the King being angry and
furious, gave sentence, and commanded Arioch the chief Marshall, that the
diviners and south sayers should be put to death. And now they were slain, and
Daniel and his fellows sought for to be killed; when as he having understood
that cruel bussnesse, went to the King, and besought him that he would give
him time for the matter that he enquired after. A time being allotted he went
to his house, and acquainting his three fellows with the matter, he besought
God, in common with them, that he would declare to him and them the mystery,
that they might not perish with the Caldaeans. God heard them, and discovered
the thing to Daniel by night, who, not forgetful of his benefit, gave him
thanks in these words. Praised be the name of God for ever, for wisdom and
strength are his; he changes times and seasons, and removes Kingdoms, and
sets them up; he gives wisdom to the wise, and knowledge unto them that
understand discipline; he reveals mysteries and hidden things, and knows
those things which are in darkness, and the light remains with him. I praise
thee and thank thee, O God of my fathers, because thou have given me wisdom
and strength, and have showed me those things, which we begged of thee; in as
much, as thou have revealed unto us the Kings dream: when he had given thanks
to God, he went to Arioch, whom the King had commanded to kill the wise men, he
entreats him that he would not destroy the wise men, but bring him in unto
the King, to whom he would both tell his dream, and interpret it. He brings
him in to the K, and tells him that he was there that would declare his dream
to him. And when the King demanded of him, whether, he could interpret the
dream unto him: then Daniel said, the Magicians and South-sayers could not
declare the mystery which he enquired after; and he professed there was a God
in Heaven, which revealed secrets, and discovered unto him, things that should
come to pass in the last times. Now the dream which he had seen, was thus: he
seemed to see a great statue, which stood with a terrible look before him; his
head was of gold, his Breast and arms of silver, his body and thighs of
brass, his legs of Iron, and his feet partly Iron, partly clay He looked at
it, till a stone was cut out of a mountain without any hands or labor, which
brake the feet of the Image; which when they were broken, the roast of the body,
was likewise thrown down and broken into pieces; but the stone which had
broken the Image, was turned into a very great mountain. And this was the
interpretation of the dream propounded and told, that he who excelled other
Kings, and to whose dominion the God of Heaven had subjected all things, was
that head of gold; that another King who being a little inferior to him,
should afterward arise, was the breast and arms of silver, that the belly
and thighs were a third King, that should rule over all the world, and the
Iron legs a fourth King, which like Iron, should bring under and subdue all
things; that the difference of the feet in respect of the matter, did signify
an Empire which should afterward be divided, and that withal, the mixture of
the matter did signify, that it should come to pass that they should be
mingled amongst themselves, but not agree, that that stone which seemed to
break all in pieces, was a King which the God of Heaven would raise up in those
times, who should neither be disturbed nor driven out of his Kingdom, that it
might be given to another, but that that King should have an eternal and
perpetual Kingdom, and should overcome all. The King, who understood and knew
that his dream was to told as he had seen, and rightly interpreted, when he
had cast himself down at Daniels feer, and worshipped him, and commanded that
sacrifices with frankincense should be offered to him, professed that the God
of Daniel was the God of gods, and the Lord of Kings, who revealed secrets.
Hereupon, he set him, being rewarded with many great gilts and presents, over
all the Provinces of Babylon, and over all the Divines and South-sayers, And at
his entreaty, he gave Babylon to be governed by his three comparions. The same
King afterward saw a dream, with which, though he was as much affrighted as
with the former, yet he retained the form and the manner of it in his memory
And therefore having called unto him the Magicians and South-sayers out of
Babylon, he did not, as before, demand of them the manner of it, but only the
interpretation of it, when he had told it them. Now the dream was thus: He
thought he saw a very tall tree, whose top touched Heaven, and whose leaves
were very fair, and fruit very much, on which all things lived; the beasts
dwelt under it, and birds sat in the boughs of it; he seemed also to see a
watchman, and a holy one, who coming down from Heaven, commanded with a loud
voice, that the tree with its branches should be hewne down, and the leaves
shaken off, and the fruit scattered; the birds being made to fly away out of
its branches, and the beasts that dwelt under it; yet so, as that the stump of
the roots of the tree should remain in the earth, which should be bound with
an Iron and brass band in the grass, and should be wet with the heavenly
dew, and that he should eat the grass like the beasts, and his man's habit and
sense, should be turned into a beasts for seven years. He said the watchmen had
decreed thus, and the holy one had designed thus, that men might understand
that God was high, who commanded men in Kingdom, and disposed them to
whomsoever he would. When the rest could not interpret this dream, upon the
hearing of it; at last they came to Daniel, whom as I said a little before, he
had set over the Magicians and South-sayers. He being asked his opinion, at the
first he begun silently with himself, more heedfully to consider the
interpretation of the thing, and that with great perturbation of mind, because
of the event of the thing which was signified. At the last when the King had
taken notice of that, (for there appeared in him, manifest tokens of
astonishment) and had bidden him utter the interpretation of the dream freely,
then he wishing with a loud voice that the interpretation of that dream might
befall his enemies, so interpreted that dream, as he said, that tall tree was
the King himself, who was so great and powerful, that his greatness reached
to Heaven, and his power to the ends of the world; but he that was so great,
should in the time which God had appointed, be driven out of his Kingdom, and
from the society of men, and dwell amongst the wild beasts, and eat hay like an
Ox, and be wet with dew in the fields for seven years, till he should
understand that God is high, who rules the Kingdom of men, and gives it to
whomsoever he will. But yet that his Kingdom should not be altogether taken
from him, but restored, when he should have acknowledged the power of God.
After this he gave wife and profitable Counsel to the King, which if he would
follow, he might avoid those evils which he conceived by these things were like
to befall him; for he persuaded him that by relieving the poor he would make
amends for his sins; for perhaps God would be merciful to his sins. Now all
those things befell Nebuchadonosor in the twelfth month after, when he bragged
that Babylon was built by him only, and when the seven years were fulfilled,
both his senses were restored to him, and his Kingdom, and his glory and
dignity was greater than it had been formerly. And then he was not unthankful,
but with many excellent words he thanked God, and professed himself to
acknowledge his power; nor was he ashamed to write a Letter to all people,
wherein he both told his dream, and how Daniel only gave the interpretation of
it, and the event of his dream so declared, as I have said, and the
restitution of his Kingdom at the last. All which things ought to be before
every bodies eyes, but especially Kings and great men, and those that are
eminent in power, left they should attribute to themselves those things which
they ought to ascribe to God. When Nebuchadonosor was dead, Balthazar his son
succeeded him in the Kingdom. He made a stately banquet to a thousand chief
men of his Kingdom, in which as every one was before another in years, so he
drank; and being overcome with wine, and drunk, he gave order, that the
golden and silver Cups, which Nebuchadonosor his Father had caused to be
carried out of the Temple of Jerusalem, should be brought, that all his Guests
might drink in them. And now did he drink, and amongst his Cups, as he
drank, he praised his gods made of gold silver, brass, and other matter, when
behold on a sudden he beheld fingers, like a man's, which writ upon the wall
over against the Candlestick in the very Palace of the King. The King being
afrighted at the sight of a thing so unusual and strange, gives order, with a
loud cry, that the magicians and south-sayers, should be brought in as soon as
might be: They being consulted could neither read nor interpret that which was
written, whereas the King promised such a reward as this, that he that should
read and interpret it should be clad in purple, should wear a gold chain
about his neck, and have the third place in his Kingdom. Hereupon, not only
the King conceived much grief, but also the Princes; nor had that grief and
sorrow been mitigated or laid aside, unless the Queen had advised the King
that he should be cheerful, saying, that he had Daniel, whom his Father
Nebuchadonosor had set over all the Magicians, because he was very famous for
Divining, having found him still to be excellent in a matter of greater weight;
when he, at the Kings commandment, was brought in, first, the King told him,
that the Magicians could neither read nor explain that which he saw written;
and then mentioned what he had heard touching the commendation of his skill,
and his fame for such like things; which if they were true, and that he could
read those things which he saw, and could interpret them, he should have the
same reward, which, as I have said, was offered to the Magicians. Daniel
answered, that the King might take his gifts to himself, or give them to
another, for that he, without inviting by any reward, would interpret that
which the writing had obscurely signified, and therefore repeating the thing a
little higher, as far as from Nebuchadonosor the King his Father, he told, how
he had received Kingdom, glory, and such great Power from God, that because of
it all men stood in awe of him, and that he himself advanced, and afflicted
whom he listed: but that he, because he ascribed all these things to himself,
and not to God, by Gods will was driven from his Kingdom, and cast out of the
society of men, and was in the shape of a beast amongst beasts, until he had
acknowledged the power and majesty of God. And that because he his son who
knew all these things, had not humbled his heart, but had lift up his mind
against God, the Ruler and Lord of heaven, drinking in his cups of gold and
silver, and praying the gods of gold and silver, who do not see, nor hear,
nor perceive, slighting and despising God, in whose power, all that he had,
estate, life and Kingdom were: God himself had sent one to write those
things. And that this was the meaning of those three words which were written,
God had numbered the years of his Kingdom, and he was weighed in a balance,
and his Kingdom divided, and given to the Medes and Persians. And though this
true interpretation of Daniel's was destructive to the King, yet the King gave
him his reward at the same moment of time. And he was slain that very night,
and Darius the Mede enjoyed the Kingdom. This Darius had set over his
Kingdom, an hundred and twenty governors, and over them three, and amongst
these Daniel, to whom, they were to give an account of what they did, that he
might the more freely take his ease; and the King had so great an opinion of
Daniels wisdom, that he was resolved to set him only over the whole Realm,
rather then the other governors, which they did apprehend, being angry and
vexed, that they were put from their places, they began to take more strict
notice of him. When they could object nothing, as I have said, touching his
trust, in discharging his office, and yet for all that, their envy would not
be quiet, laying their plot together, they resolved to bring him out of favor
with the King, because of his Religion, wherewith he worshipped his God.
Therefore going to the King, they persuade him that he would make a decree
unalterable, that if any one, should ask any thing of God or man for thirty
days together, except of him, he should be thrown into the Lions den; Darius
made, confirmed, and writ the decree at their entreaty, yet for all that,
Daniel ceased not to pray and worship God humbly three times every day, and
that he did too with his windows open; which when they by their diligent
watching had found out, thinking they had got an opportunity to satisfy their
envy, they return to the King, they put him in mind of his decree, whereof
when they observed that he was mindful, as also of the punishment which he had
resolved against him, that should violate it; then at last they made it appear
that Daniel had violated it by worshipping of his God. The King, who as I have
said, made very great account of Daniel, at the first conceived much sorrow in
his mind at that report, afterward he strove by all means till the sunset,
that he might deliver him from the punishment decreed; but when they alleged
the custom of the Medes and Persians, that no decree of the King could be
altered, he prevailed nothing. And therefore at his bidding, they brought him,
and cast him into the den of Lions Now the King commended him to his God, by
whom he hoped he should be freed, and that no wrong might be done him, he laid
a great stone upon the dens mouth, which he sealed with his own ring, and with
the rings of his Lords. And took on so heavily for the fall of such a faithful
servant, that returning into his Palace, and for grief going to bed
supperlesse, he could not rest; but getting up very early in the morning, he
ran hastily to the place, and calling Daniel by his name, began to ask him,
whether his God was able to deliver him or no? Daniel being safe and sound,
made answer out of the dungeon, that his God had sent his Angel, who had so
stopped the mouths of the Lions, that they had done him no harm, because he had
found his actions honest, and moreover he said, he had never done any hurt
against him. Darius being very glad at Daniels welfare, commanded him to be
brought forth, upon whom no hurt nor wound was found, to the great admiration
of the King, and all men. But when his accusers, and their children, and wives
were at the Kings bidding cast into the den to be punished, they were in a
moment of time devoured and eaten up by the Lions. Darius the King, being moved
with so admirable an accident, writ a letter to all Nations, which signified,
that he had made a decree, that all his subjects should fear and reverence the
God of Daniel, because he was the one, and the eternal God, whose Kingdom
should never be removed, and whose power was everlasting, who gave salvation,
and did wonderful works, both in Heaven and in earth, and had freed Daniel
from the Lions den. I will relate also, another accident of the like kind, and
no less wonderful. When P A R.
Astyages the King was dead, Cyrus the Persian had got his Kingdom, with whom
there was none more familiar, none more dear, and none in greater honor and
esteem then Daniel. He every day did worship to the image of the Babylonians,
Bell by name, to which every day twelve great measures of fine flower, in
seventie and two sextaries forty Sheep, and six vessels of wine were given as
though it had taken and devoured them all; but Daniel worshipped God; which
when the King had observed, he began to ask him, why he did not worship Bell,
he made answer, that Images made by the hand and work of men, were not to be
worshipped, but the living God, who had made Heaven and earth; when the King
again began to ask him, whether he did not think Bell was alive, whom he saw
to eat and drink so much. Daniel smiling at this, advised the King that he
would not continue longer in an error as to think that that did live, and eat,
which within was made of clay, and without of brass. Whereupon Cyrus being
moved with anger, sent for the seventy Priests of Bell, whom he threatened to
slay, unless they did show who did eat and drink those things which were every
day set before Bell, but if they could make it appear that it was Bell, Daniel
should die, for he had spoken against Bell: Daniel likes the motion, he comes
into the Temple with the King; the Priests likewise embracing the motion,
advise the King, (that the thing might be more openly manifest) that he would
set on meat and drink, shut the door, and scale it with his ring, and go in
the next day, and try the matter: that when he had observed and found out the
truth, either they or Daniel might be put to death. Now there was a table in
the Temple, upon which all those things were set, and under it the Priests had
made certain passages under the ground, by which they entering by night with
their wives and children, devouted all as they used to do: which when Daniel
knew, before the doors were shut, he scattered ashes which his servants
brought him, in the Kings presence, that their knavery might be found out. And
in the morning very early, he followed the King into the Temple, to find out
the truth; The King who was ignorant of the Priests cousenage, after the door
was opened, when he saw the table empty before him, c^yed out, that Bell was a
great god, and that he had no deceit or guile in him, Daniel, who as I said,
knew their knaverie, smiled, and held back the King as he was going in, and
willed him to mind whose foot stops those were, which he saw set in the ashes,
Cyrus made answer, that they were the prints of men, women and childrens feet.
The Priests with their wives and children, were sent for by the Kings order,
who for anger could scarce hold his hands; they discover the passages by which
coming in the night time they used to take away the meats and drinks, and
then at last, according to the Kings motion, which as I said they had accepted,
they were put to death. Daniel destroyed Bell, being given into his power, and
his Temple. There was in that place also a dragon, of a wonderful bigness,
which the Babylonians worshipped. Now Cyrus, because he was alive, and was
worshipped as a God, thought he had found a reason why Daniel most needs
worship him, as though he had said he would not worship Bell, only for this
reason, because he was not alive. Therefore meeting with him, he objected that
he had no reason now, why he should not worship the Dragon which was alive: he
made answer that he worshipped his own God which was alive, but that the
Dragon was not a god, whom he that was a man, if he might have leave given him,
could kill without a sword. After the King had given him leave, he boiled
pitch, and fat, and hair together, and cramb'd into the mouth of the Dragon,
with which he was presently burst in sunder, and then he smilingly said to the
Babylonians, that that was the god which they worshipped. The Babylonians being
almost madded with this matter, all cried out that the King was become a Jew,
because he had destroyed Bell, and killed the Dragon, and put the Priests to
death. With these words, they one stir up another, and go to the King, whom,
having declared the heinousness of the matter, they threaten with the
destruction of himself and family, unless he delivered Daniel unto them. The
King being enforced with their threatenings, gave Daniel to their will, whom
they throw into the Lions den. He was there five days, in which they gave
nothing to the seven Lions, to the intent, he might be the more greedily
devoured by them, whereas aforetime, two carcasses and two sheep, were given
them daily. There was then, one Habakkuk a Prophet in Judaen, who carried
pottage that he had made, with bread sopt in them, into the country to the
reapers, and an Angel of God discovering himself unto him, bad him to carry
the dinner which he had to Babylon, to Daniel, who was in the Lions den, he
answered that he never saw Babylon, nor knew the Lions den. But the Angel
taking hold of the hair of his head, carried him to Babylon, and set him down
by the den, Habakkuk called Daniel thence by name, and willed him to take the
dinner which God had sent him; Daniel when he had given thanks for Gods so
great favor toward him, eat; on the seventh day, the King came to the den, to
lament Daniel, whom, when he saw sitting there without the least hurt, amongst
the Lions, he cried our with a loud voice, great art thou, O Lord God of
Daniel. And when he was drawn forth, he threw all them together into the den,
who had sought his destruction, and they were suddenly devoured by the Lions.
By these two gallant acts, he preserved himself, and his own life,
maintaining the worship and service of the true and living God. But in that
which follows, he defended his Neighbor from an unjust death. There dwelt a
certain man at Babylon, one Joacim by name, and he had taken a wife, whose name
was Susanna, the daughter of Helcias, a handsome woman, and that which is more
to be valued, a woman that feared and served God. For her Parents being just
and good persons, had brought her up in the Law of Moses. Amongst her virtues,
her chastity was especially eminent, which is seldom found joined with bodily
beauty, nor could she ever be brought by any disgrace offered her, or by death
ordained according to a Law, to suffer her self to be defiled; for whereas her
husband was a rich man, and had an Orchard next his house, into which she used
often to go privately, without any body by, to wash her self, and two elders
who were made judges, that came often to Joacims house, had observed her in the
garden, and at last, having got an opportunity to satisfy their lust, as they
thought, were gotten alone to her by her self, and first, with many
allurements had attempted her chastity, and afterward thought that they would
bring her to it, when she utterly denied that she had ever been defiled, it
they should threaten her, that they would object against her, how she had used
to lie with young men; which by the Law was a fault that deserved death; she
remained constant in her purpose and resolution, once undertaken to maintain
her chastity. For being brought to that strait, that she should either offend
God by losing her honesty, it she should yield her self to be defiled, or be
put to death according to the Law, by the witness of them two, if she should
withstand their lust, and keep her honesty; she chose rather to fall into
their hands, that is, to hazard the loss of this life, retaining and keeping
her honesty, then having lost it, und saving her life, to offend the will of
God. Thereupon she began to cry out with aloud voice, and so did the Elders.
The servants hearing their mistresses speech, ran to her by the back door, and
when they heard the Elders affirm that they had taken her in Adultery, because
they had never heard any such thing concerning her; they did not only wonder,
but also blush at it: That I may not be long upon the matter; the next day,
Susanna is accused, and upon their testimony is condemned. She who now
conceived, there was no help for her in man, besought God, in these words,
that he would take some course for her: O eternal God, who know the devices
of the heart, and know all things before they come to pass; thou know
that their witness is false against me, and yet am I violently corried to be
put to death, unless thou be a defender of mine innocence. God heard her,
having raised up his spirit in Daniel, who was but then a child, who when she
was brought to be put to death, cried out, first, in the multitude, that he had
no hand in that fault, by which the blood of innocent Susanna was to be shed;
and after, when the people asked what he said, he answered, that their
testimony against her was false, and therefore, the Judges should go again to
judgment; when the Judges giving credit to him, were about to take better
cognizance again of the matter, and had willed him, that he would come and sit
with them, he judged it fitting that those two witnesses should be parted. He
asked them severally after they were parted, under what tree they saw the young
man commit whoredom with Susanna. And when they both had not named the same,
but a several tree, the thing being found out, all that were there shouted and
praised God, who saved them that hoped in him. Hereupon according to the Law,
those two I Iders were punished with death. By which Judgment, Daniel
afterward obtained great renown and authority amongst the people. God told
him many things, by Gabriel the Angel, concerning the Kings of Persia-Greece
and Egypt; also concerning the Kingdom of Christ, the restitution of
Jerusalem, and the bringing back of the Jews, which are set down in the
book, which by his name is reckoned amongst those of the Bible. He died at
Babylon, and was buried in the Kings Cave, as Epiphanius writes, who says
also, that his sepulcher in his time, was very well known to all.

Habbakkuk the Prophet.
CHAP. XXIX.
HAbbakkuk the Prophet was of the Country of Bezzocherene, of the Tribe of
Simeon, as Epiphanius says, and he fled, having left his Country, into
Ostracina, a country of the Ismaelites, when he heard that Nebuchadonosor came
with a mighty Army to destroy the City Jerusalem. There he dwelt until he was
certified that the Chaldees, having taken and demolished the City, were
returned with spoils and poisoners into their Country, and the rest of the
Jews, amongst whom was Hieremias and Baruch, were gone to dwell in Egypt, as I
have expressed in their life; for than he returned into his Country. After his
return, in what year it is uncertain, he had sown some Barley, and when the
harvest came had let it out to reapers to be cut down and bound up in sheaves:
And when he carried them their Dinner, an Angel of God appearing unto him, bad
him carry it to Daniel, who was in the Lions Den in Babylon: He made answer to
the Angel, that he had never seen Babylon, and that he did not know the Den;
whereupon he carried him by the hair of his head and set him by the mouth of
the Den, calling Daniel by name from the mouth of the Den, he told him of the
Dinner that God sent him; whereupon Daniel blessing God, who was not unmindfull
of them that trusted in him, and having given him thanks for that benefit, had
taken the pottage and the bread sopt in it out of Habbakkuks hand; the Angel of
God in a moment of time set him again in the same place. There be some that
affirm, Epiphanius for one, that he, who knew that thing would be so, before
he was carried thither, did tell his servants aforehand, that he should go a
great way off, and come again presently; but if he should be too long away
they should get the reapers some meat, and that he came again that very day,
and came in amongst the Reapers just as they were at their supper. In the holy
Bible there is reckoned a very little book entitled by his name. In the
beginning of the book he expostulates with God more earnestly why the wicked
should overcome and afflict the Godly, but after God had foretold of the
coming of Christ, who should free and preserve the good, he became more
patient, and concludes with prayers, which do show the virtue and power of
Christ; He died in Judaea two years before the Jews were brought back from
Caldaea the fifteenth of January, as Epiphanius says, and his body by Gods
discovery was found when Arcadius was Emperor.

Sophonias the Prophet.
CHAP. XXX.
SOphonias the Prophet, was the son of Cushi, of the Tribe of Simeon. He
prophesied what is written in the book of holy Scripture, which is called by
his name, when Josias the son of Amon was King of Judah. First, he terrifieth,
and afterward comforreth; he foretells the Captivity of the Jews for the
wickednesses which he reckons up, first of all, and then of the Princes and
Judges, and for terrors sake, he calls the day by such names, as use to strike
terror into men. He foretells also, the destruction of many Nations; as of the
Ethiopians, Assyrians, Moabites, and Philistines. In the latter end of his
book, he treats of the coming and resurrection of Christ, and the conversion
of the Centiles unto him. He dyed, and was buried alone in his own country, as
Epiphanius says.

Aggaeus the Prophet.
CHAP. XXXI.
AGgaeus at Gods Commandment, underwent he duty of a Prophet, when he was but
a very young man, in the second year of Darius Hystaspes, first unto
Zorobabell, the son of Salathiel, and Jesus the son Josedec the Priest, and
afterward unto the Priests. The occasion of his prophecy, was this; When in
the first year of King Cyrus, the people of the Jews who were at his Command,
brought back again to Jerusalem, to build the Temple of God, said, that the
time of building was not yet come, God sent Aggaeus to tell Zorobabell the
governor, and Jesus the son of Jozedec, that the people spoke falsely, that
the time of building Gods house was not yet come, seeing it was come, and that
for that reason, because the building was omitted; what they had sown in great
abundance; had afforded slender profit, the rain being withheld from it. And
that therefore, they should diligently begin and dispatch the work. These two
men liked well of this word of Aggaeus, or rather of God, and by their means
all the people. And when the work was begun, in the twenty fourth day of the
sixth month, of that same year, he was again sent to these two, whom I spoke
of, and to the rest of the people. First to exhort these two to go on, because
God would help them, and then to tell them all, that that new Temple should
exceed the old one in glory, because of Gods coming, which was at hand. In the
twenty fourth day of the ninth month, he was sent again to tell them, having
wrested a confession from the Priests, by a simile and an induction, that those
gifts were not very welcome and acceptable, which they brought to God in the
Temple, and that the work of laying the foundation of the Temple, was so
pleasing to him, that for the future, he would increase their come. Being sent
again the same day, under the name of Zorobabell, he foretold the coming and
glory of Christ. This Aggaeus, at Gods bidding, did not only tell Zorobabel
and Jesus the Priest, that the time of building the Temple was come, but also
when they believed him, he helped them in finishing the work, not only as a
workman, but also by a new kind of singing, for there he and Zacharias the
Prophet are said to have first sung an Hallelujah, which being an Hebrew word
signifies the same that praise ye the Lord. Therefore the hymn and praise of
Aggaeus and Zacharias is called Hallelujah, he died at that same place, and was
buried with honor by the Sepulchers of the Priests.

Zacharias the Prophet.
CHAP. XXXII.
ZAcharias the Prophet, was the son of Barachias, who was the son of Addon.
He began to prophecy the same year that Aggaeus, that is, in the second year
of Darius the King, but in the eighth month, whereas he began the first day
of the sixth month; But he prophesied longer then he, and to more. For he
performed the Office of a Prophet, in the fourth year of Darius, and the book
that is entitled by his name and reckoned amongst Scripture, contains many
more verses. In the beginning of the book, at Gods bidding, he charge the
Jews, who were newly returned out of Babylon, that they would return to him,
and so at last he would return to them, and that they would not live as their
forefathers had done, who had contemned the Command of the former Prophets, who
persuaded them from their wickedness to an holy course of life; that they
would not lie, but speak the truth to their neighbors; that they would judge
truly, and friendly; that they would not devise evil in their mind, against
their neighbor; that they would not love a false oath, forasmuch as these were
the things which God hated. These things if they would do, that they should
receive all things that they had sown with increase and abundance. He
foretold the coming of Christ to Jerusalem upon a she Ass, and the price of
his betraying. God showed him Jesus the son of Josedec the high Priest,
standing before his Angel, and Satan standing at his right hand to withstand
him: whom when God had rebuked, he signified by the Angel, that his sins were
pardoned by the change of his apparel, and that he should become a judge if he
would observe his Commandments. In the fourth year of Darius, in the fourth
day of the month, that is of November, some, amongst whom were Sarasar and
Regemmelech, had sent to Jerusalem to ask the Priests and Prophets, whether
they should weep and fast in the fifth month for the time to come, as they had
done already in former times, and for many years. Now God bad Zacharias, being
inspired and moved with a prophetic spirit, to ask of the people of the
Country, and of the Priests, whether they had fasted to God, these seventy
years, in which they had been out of their land, when they kept a fast the
fifth and ninth month, or when they eat and drank to him, God declaring by
these words, that their fastings, dinners, and suppers, were not acceptable to
him, because they were not joined with works of bounty and mercy, as he had
wished them by former Prophets, and therefore it was come to pass, that he
being moved against them, had scattered them abroad into all countries. He
prophesies also many other things, which are besides my present purpose. he
foretold also to Josedec, as Epiphanius says, that he should have a son that
should serve as a Priest in the Temple of God, and to Salathiell, how he should
have Zorobabel. There are some, as Hierome says, that would have this to be
the Zacharias, whom Christ affirms in Matthew, to have been slain betwixt the
Temple and the Altar. But Epiphanius refers this to Zacharias, the father of
John the Baptist in his life, and writes how that this man being very aged,
died in Judaea, and was buried near Aggaeus the Prophet.

The Life of the Prophet Esdras.
CHAP. XXXIII.
ESdras the Prophet, and scribe of the Tribe of Levi, was the son of Saraias.
He, as himself says, was a Captive, when Artaxerxes was King of Babylon, and
he began to prophecy, in the thirtieth year, almost after Jerusalem was
destroyed. He makes mention in his book, of the prophesying of Malachias the
Prophet, who nevertheless is said to be born after the people were brought
back again from captivity; And therefore he must be conceived to have foretold
this, as being moved with a prophetic spirit. But because we write the life
and acts of Esdras, we must keep the order of the times, as long as we can, in
setting them down. In the first year of Cyrus King of the Persians, in which
the seventy years of the captivity foretold by Hieremiah were fulfilled, by
his grant this Esdras went to Jerusalem to build the Temple with Zorobabel the
governor, and Jesus the son of Josedeck, and others, that had a mind to go
after them; but how long he was there, it is uncertain. For he came afterward
again to Babylon, and in the seventh year of Artaxerxes, he returned thence
to Jerusalem by his grant, with many others, and so, as that when they set out
from Babylon, the first day of the first month, they came to Jerusalem, the
first day of the fifth month. Which journey and return of his, why, and how it
befell, or was procured, because it pertaines to his exceeding commendation, I
have thought meet to be related. The work of the Temple of Iierusalem, which
was begun by the edict of Cyrus had been intermitted by the hatred and envy of
the enemies of Jerusalem, and completed in the sixth year of Darius, and the
third day of the twelfth month. And in the seventh year of Artaxerxes the
son of Darius, seeing he by Gods blessings, was in great favor with the
King, both because of his great virtues, with which he was endowed, and also
because he knew him to be a scribe very skillful in the Law of God; he not
only willingly granted his petition, that he might go to Jerusalem with his
country men, that had a mind to explain the law, but also he gave him a Patent,
whereby it may easily be conceived how gracious he was with him: Now the Copy
of the Patent is thus; Artaxerxees King of Kings, to Esdras the Priest, ascribe
exceeding skillful of the law of the God of Heaven, greeting. I have made a
decree, that he that will of the people of Israel, the Priests and Levites may
go with thee to Jerusalem out of my Kingdom, for thou art sent by me,
according to the advice and judgment of my seven Counselors, that thou may
teach and explain in Judaea and Jerusalem, the law of thy God which thou
understandest, and propound it to all, and may carry the Gold and silver
which I and my Councellers have of our selves, and of our own accord, offered
unto the God of Israel, whose Temple is at Jerusalem. And if the people which
is in the country, will give gold and silver, I give thee leave to receive it
all, and buy with it Calves, ramms, lambs, and other necessary sacrifices which
thou may offer in the Temple of thy God; and if there be any silver or gold
left, that ye may dispose of it as it likes thee or thy people, according to
the will of God. The vessels also which are delivered thee to do sacrifice in
the Temple of thy God, do thou there look to, that they may be ready at hand.
But if thou want any thing besides, I would that thou require of my Rulers,
whom I have set over my Treasury beyond the river; for this I have given them
charge of in thy decree, lest perhaps thy God should be angry at me and my
children, and also that they that attend Gods service, may be altogether free.
Let it be also lawful for thee to appoint some punishment, either of
banishment, or death, or prison, or fine. Esdras having received this Patent,
after he had thanked the King in presence, gave thanks also to God by himself,
because he had inclined the Kings mind, to honor and beautify his Temple, and
had caused according to his goodness toward him, that he should get favor with
the King and his Counselors and Princes for the matter. According to this
decree, in the first day of the first month, in the seventh year, when
Artaxerxes was King, Esdras going from Babylon, called together a great
multitude of his countrymen, near a river which falls into the river Ahava.
Having tarried with them there three days, when he found no Levites whom he
sought for amongst the People and Priests, he sent eleven Princes and discreet
men to Eddo, and his brethren, who having received their errand came thither.
And when he had appointed a fast unto all at Ahava, that they might pray to
God, that he would grant them a prosperous journey (for he durst not desire of
the King a foot-company, or horse, that might give safe conduct to them all,
but he had said Gods protection would not fail him and his people) he set out
thence on the twelfth day. That which he and the rest had desired of God, that
they might have a prosperous journey, so fell out accordingly, as that when on
the first day of the fifth month, they came at length to Jerusalem, they felt
no harm at all, nor were they troubled with the treacheries or mischievous
attempts of their enemies. When he was come to Jerusalem, on the fourth day he
took order that every thing should be done according to the Kings decree. He
also a while after, performed the duty of a good and wise leader; many had
contracted Wedlock with strangers, contrary to Gods command and law. Which when
the Princes had told Esdras, he sat sorrowful before the Temple with his
garment and coat rent, and the hair of his head and beard pulled off, and
remained in that look and habit, till the sacrifice which was offered at even,
when all were come unto him that feared and worshipped God, because of the
transgression and wickedness of the rest. After he stood up in that holy
assembly, and then afterward again, kneeling upon his knees, hanging down
his countenance, and spreading his hands abroad, he professed unto God that he
was ashamed to lift up his face toward him, because the wickedness of his
forefathers, and the people that then were, was infinite in number and weight,
and that for their sakes they were rightly given up to the will of the Nations:
Whilst Esdras confessed these, and many other things to God in prayer, there
came together a great company of men women and children weeping, amongst these
S^chenias, one for all spoke unto Esdras, that he and all the rest had broken
the Law of God, and had taken strange wives; but if their repentance might be
accepted, that he and they would make a covenant with God, wherein they would
promise, that they would put away those wives and the children that were born
of them, according as God should advise, and they that devoutly worshipped him,
that they might all obey the Law; and that therefore he should stand up, whose
part it was to determine about the business. As soon as he stood up, he made
the Priests and chief Levites, and all Israel, swear and bind themselves by
an oath, that they would do according to Zecheniah's words. When they had
sworn, he neither eat nor drank, before he had given command by all their
consents, than within three days, all of the Tribe of Judah and Benjamin
should meet together at Jerusalem, as the Princes and Elders had determined,
and the losing their estates, and the casting of them out from the congregation
of the people of God, should be the penalty to them that did not come at the
day. The third day fell upon the twentieth of the ninth month of that same
year, the day on which as it was ordered under a penalty, they met at
Jerusalem. When they were all set in the court of the Temple, Esdras stood up
and told them, as they trembled for their wickedness, what a great sin they
had committed, in that they had taken strange wives, yet nevertheless they
should receive pardon from God, if they would put away those wives, and
separate and part themselves from those Nations. They all said with a loud
voice that they would do so; but because they knew that the multitude was very
great, and that it was not a business of one day, especially seeing the rain
hastened them away, they entreated him that the chief men might be pricked out,
who with the Elders, on set days, might determine concerning them that were
called. When this liked them, after he had sent them away, he began to sit in a
place appointed with the Judges that were chosen on the first day of the tenth
month, that they might enquire after the matter, and they used such diligence
therein, that upon the first day of the first month, the business was done and
ended. Thus when all were purified, he betook himself afterward at the
desire of them all, to rehearse the Law of God. That was done in the seventh
month, that is, in September, which amongst the Jews was almost all dedicated
to Gods worship and service, by reason of so many holy days. And therefore, on
the first day of that month, when an infinite number of men and women were come
together out of the Cities and villages of both Tribes, that is, Judah and
Benjamin, to the open place which joined to the watergate: Esdras at the
entreaty of them all, standing from morning till no one upon a Pulpit which was
made to that end, after silence was made, recited unto them the Law of Moses
out of a writing. When he read the Law with a loud voice, so as all might
hear, they all wept. Which Esdras perceiving, he bad them not to weep, because
that day was consecrated to God, and therefore they should go and take their
meat with gladness. On the next day, the chief men of the families of all the
people, the Priests and Levites coming to him, entreated him, that he would
interpret the words of the Law to them and others, and because they had read it
written, how that God commanded Moses that the People of Israel on the feast of
Tabernacles, which lasted seven days, should make them booths of twigs and
boughs of trees, in which they dwelt, they were made at his bidding, and then
afterward, every day for 7 days together, he read and expounded unto them the
words of the Law. At which time he made the titles to the Psalms of David,
which were read, and which they were without till then. Now the feast of
Tabernacles, was kept from the fifteenth day of September, to the two and
twentieth, and the eight day was holy, which being spent in reading and
interpreting the Law, as I have said, they met altogether on the four and
twentieth, keeping a fast, and covered with sackcloth and ashes, and hanging
down their heads, they confessed their sins with tears, and put away their
strange wives. Esdras gave praise and thanks to God at large, and declared his
benefits toward his people, and rehearsed the wickedness of their
forefathers, and of them that then were, for whose sake, God always had
punished his people, though not so much as he might. Lastly, at his
exhortation, they made a covenant with God, wherein they promised, that they
would keep his Law, and the most of them sealed it. He prophesied, as I said,
at Babylon, in the thirtieth year after Jerusalem was destroyed, and he saw
many dreams, and had obscure visions presented to him, which Uriel the Angel
of God explained, when he wished for and desired their interpretation. Now when
these so many and excellent things were done and past, he died at Jerusalem.

Malachias the Prophet.
CHAP. XXXIV.
MAlachias the Prophet, was of the Tribe of Zabulon, he was borne after the
Peoples return from Babylon, and was the last that prophesied. Epiphanius
writes that he lived well and honestly from a child, and because the people
respected him for his piety and clemency, that therefore they called him
Malachias, that is, the Angel. He foretold many things touching the expiation
of Christ. He smartly rebuked the Jewish Priests, because they did honor God,
and because they offered him base Sacrifices, which being rejected, he
foretells, how the sacrifices of the Gentiles should be accepted by God. The
same Epiphanius has written, that he died when he was but very young. He died
on the fifteenth of May.

FINIS.
Books printed or sold by William Hope, at the Sign of the Blew Anchor on the
North side of the Royal Exchange.

These following in Folio.
Dubartas Divine POEMS. Military Instructions for Cavalry by Mr Cruse.
Insectorum.
These following in Quarte.
Prestons New Covenant. Primrose on the Sabbath. Usquarts Doctrine of
Triangles. Bramble-berry. Merchants Remonstrance. Scriptures Harmony. Muzled
Ox. Protestants Accounts. Confession of Faith. Reconciler, a Sermon.
Reformation of Religion. Gerardo, The Unfortunate Spaniard. Beaumonts POEMS.
French Tutor. Callender of Man's Life. History of Susanna. Free Trade, Or a
means to make Trade flourish.
These Books following in Duodecimo.
Run from Rome, by Mr Wootton. Colloquia Plautina, by Mr Rosse. De Usu
Authoris. Secretary of Ladies. Dr Sutton on the Sacrament. Howels Visions.
History of AMBOYNA. Greek and Latin Catechism. Stea Triumphans. Bedford on
the Sacrament. Raleighs Skeptic.

