Ad illum

Per Hanc

Ab Istac

man lying on bed

AN ELOGIE, AND EPITAPH, Consecrated to the ever Sacred Memory of that most
ILLUSTRIOUS, and Incomparable MONARCH, CHARLES, By the Grace of God, of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, late King, etc.

Together with an Elogy and Epitaph upon the truly lamented death of that
Excellent pattern of perfect Magnanimity, Virtue, Valor, and Loyalty, Arthur
Lord Capell.

With some streams of remembrance issued from the bloods of his Noble
Fellow Sufferers, Duke Hamilton, and Henry Earl of Holland.

By F. H. Philomusus.

Printed in the Year, 1649.

An Elogie and Epitaph, etc.
1
Howl, howl, distracted Kingdom, let thy cries
Like Dragons roarings, terrify the earth,
Amaze the Heavens, fright Hell, and dark the skies;
For now thy throws have issued a cursed birth:
Let the Sun blush, and all the trembling stars
Refrain bespangling of their moving Spheres,
Until they see the termine of our jarres;
Let this, of all, be deleated from years,
Lest in it the guilt of King-shed sacred blood.
Increase to a torrent, period in a flood.
2
O could we see the depth of our distress
With Linxceys eyes! it would torment our souls:
All Rhetorique's dumb, our anguish to express,
Horror our mourning, fear our tears controules;
Th'imminent judgments and impetuous storms
Hovering in vengeance ore our hardened Nation,
Makes zeal for woe, rave in preposterous forms,
And stretch our heart strings on the Rack of passion,
Whilst bleeding souls, in stead of dropping eyes
Bedewes the footsteps to our miseries.
3
Rent, rent your hearts, your garments are defiled
Ye traiterous Nation, with your dear Kings blood;
Whilst th'hopefull branches of his root exiled,
Adds a full sea to our afflictions flood:
Ye have betrayed a gracious King to death
Ye murtherous varlets, by your base revolt
From the Diadem to the dunghill, could the breath,
That nine years since his glory did exalt
Unto the Heavens, with cursed yealps now cry,
Give us these Barrabbesses? let our Sovereign die.
4
Busiris like, ye murderers did ye dream,
Heaven would rain peace f^^ this strange Sacrifice?
Ye should have let your own ours'd bloods to stream,
And quenched the flame of all our miseries:
But he in Lamb-like sufferings has wrought
More then Herculian conquest over your rage,
Though with the dear price of his blood y' have bought
England the Aceldama; your dreadful stage,
Whereon you have acted such a Tragedy,
Nero had wept, had he but lived to see:
5
Had he by Schythians, or a ruder hand,
Been ravished from us to his Crown of glory,
Reason might over our passions claim command,
Because their natures yielde their acts a story:
But for a Tribe of Hypocrites to lurk
Under the wings of Zeal and Reformation,
Till they had finished Satan's master-worke,
And ruined all the Bulworks of our Nation:
Thus making God, whose Soul abhorres all evils,
Seem to command those acts proclaim them Devils.
6
Trembled ye not, ye Furies, for to see
When ye convened, such reverence in his face?
Such high deportment, sacred Majesty,
Such radiant Luster, and such awefull Grace?
No, no, thriving Rebellion's moved no more
With such transfixions, then a flint with tears;
But their desire to wallow in his goare
Have proved them such, nor God nor Devil fears;
But in contempt of both, have challenged all
The powers of VENGEANCE on their heads to fall.
7
Ye viperous brood, who with your subtle teeth,
Unseene, have gnawne through th'bowels of our State:
Think ye REVENGE with REGICIDE agrees?
Or Kingdom ruins can shake hands with hate?
Think ye the extirpation of a Race
Divinely Royal, can establish Peace?
Or seat rude Traitors in our Princes place?
Or blood can fill our garners with increase?
No, no, VENGEANCE but writes in these red letters
How much to Hell, and torment ye are debtors.
8
But Reader, lest our sorrows and exclaims
Should seem for one whose graces are forgot,
Because Rebellion took such tedious pains
His spotless soul, with hellish guilt to blot:
Though language faulter, and our Contemplation
Reach but the Idea of his blessed perfection;
Yet let our groans disburthen's of some passion;
Communicating Mourners (Sans exception)
May clap a plaudit, to the eternal Fame
Of him, whose exit sealed our lasting shame.
9
Would ye have Heaven in a choice Cabinet
Treasure her richest graces up in store*
For a selected people to be set
In the Arc of their affections? he was more,
For the continued fire of Divine ZEAL,
For his Redeemers glory did inflame
The darkest angles of our Commonweal;
He was a burning Light, whose shining Fame
Made ENGLAND seem, once, as she had conspired
With radiant truth* the world to have wholly fired.
10
RELIGION was enhaunc'd to such a price
In his esteem, 't seemed as Devotion had
Been only molded by his exercise,
(To make the ZEALOUS-HEARTED truly glad:)
Nor only in a Cell his piety,
Gave life to the hou^es of his well spent days;
But in the Temple of the Diety,
He often proclaimed his Creatours praise:
So fervent in, of prayer, so rich a prizer,
As earth had had no other Sacrificer.
11
Have ye observed the curling Maine to treasure
Each Rivers Offspring in her spacious womb,
Rendering to every Fountain her just measure,
Making her self again their tributes tomb;
So did this Sea of wisdom still receive
Th'issuing Rivolets of ingenious store,
Nor did he by retention thus bereave
Them of their wealth, but rendered four fold more,
To each small Spring that streamed pure waters forth,
Yet still reserv'd's own inexhaustine worth.
12
The Arts in him conspired to erect
A lasting fabric to eternity,
Whose concave did contain the true effect
Of the most absolute ACADEMIE:
Had ye observed, this Mirour did present
The Sciences in an EPITOMIE;
Or rather't seemed they had been only sent
From him to borrow light and dignity;
Each Science serving but to attend and do
Those Acts that his perfection prompt them to.
13
So highly Gods pure worship did he tender,
That in his latest exigent of breath
He proved himself our saving faiths Defender,
By signing with his blood 'ts reprieve from death;
Still David-like in valor he appeared,
And in his troubles Job and David too,
For Patient Magnanimity, y' have heard,
Were perfect patterns of his tedious woe,
Who SAMPSON like, drowned in his last spilt goare
Thousands of souls, that laughed at's grief before.
14
Now snarle accursed ENVY, let thy gall
Burst with thy Venom, for this object will
Rebound thy blunt aspertions, like a wall
Of Adamant, (thy meager soul to kill:)
And when the Armies of our Nation shall
Disclaim to treasure, with his glory, our shame,
His glories triumph in our fatal fall,
TO eternity shall still preserve his Fame:
For death has murdered in this cruel stroke
Three Kingdoms Honors, and their Basis broke.
15
Rest sacred Mattyr, whose blessed Temples are
Crowned with the glory of thy SAVIORS merit,
And let these Traitors for thy Scepter jarre,
Whilst thou a heavenly Kingdom do inherit;
And though we languish in a dying life.
Yet may thy Royal Offspring be preserved
From being butchered on our stage of strife,
(More swift to urge our vengeance, just deserved,)
And whilst the woes of REGICIDES increase,
May thy blood be our Sacrifice of peace.
EPITAPH.
Reader, here lies three Kingdoms Peace,
Their Honors, plenty, and increase*
Religion, Learning, Faith, Law, Grace,
Are all inshrin'd in this small place;
One accursed Instrument of wrath and woe,
Made three brave Kingdoms headless with a blow.
FINIS.
An ELOGIE, and EPITAPH upon ARTHUR Lord CAPELL.
WRetched'st of Kingdoms, late the world admired
Thy glorious Luster, State, magnificence,
Until prepostrous ZEAL thy brambles fired.
Whose rage has ruined all thy excellence;
Thus Heaven we see when Kingdoms but augment,
Their sins appear, or plenties do increase,
(And with choice mercies their base lusts foment)
Can change the abused benefits of peace
Into continued judgments, as Heaven wooed
Drownd's in a deluge of our noblest blood.
2
Sufficed it not your thirst (ye hell-fir'd souls)
TO have drunk the dregs of wrath in your Kings gore?
But must ye quaffe damnations healths in bowls
Of our Peers blood, t'intoxicate ye more?
Feed ye upon our poor like bread, and will
Naught surfeit ye? nor Prince, nor peoples means?
Must Lords estates your Idol panches fill?
Can Heaven designe's no plagues but these extremes?
No, no, it is just that Tyranny and Hate
Should feed on people ripened in debate.
3
Me thinks it seems a wonder ye should thirst
After ye have drunk the Royal fountain dry:
But oh! that blood exasperates your curs't
Insatiate drought; whose rage will never die
Whilst streams of noble tincture flow in veins
Of crystal, t'out shine yours of Stygian hue;
Your souls though di'd with Regicidiall stains,
Must be redrench'd in blood of Worthies too,
And lest swift vengeance seize ye on life's shore,
Yee'l swim to hell ore seas of noble goare.
4
But say, (ye ENGINEERS of TORMENT, why
Devise ye plagues to languish us to death?
Could ye not (as Cali gula.
ROMES TYRANT wished) once tie
Our vassal^d necks to one fierce stroke of death?
Though ye becharm'd us to believe our woe
For chiefest good, yet when we see ye tear
The Limbs from the fallen Cedar, we must show
The world your falsehoods in our trembling fear;
But vengeance will not spare that blaspemie
Which makes Heaven seem to approve cursed cruelty.
5
Can neither cries of Widows, nor the tears
Of tender Orphans, not the dreadful groans
Of three sad Kingdoms pierce your deafned ears?
Will ye not hear the Prisoners ruefull moanes?
The cries of blood have peirc't the Firmament,
And vengeance slumbereth not, ye brands of ire,
TOPHET'S prepared of old, not as ye meant
For glorious CHARLES, nor CAPELL, but with fire
Eternally to torture those that sell
Kings and Peers bloods to purchase Thrones in Hell.
6
Readers, perchance now ye expect to know
Why we amaze the world with our exclaimes;
And whence those torrents of dire passions flow,
That these sad dirge-strains powerfully proclaims?
Did not the flames of Zeal for our late loss
Extract the quint'sence of all anxious tears?
That ruin quite transformed our joys to dross,
And this our hopes to agravated fears;
Ruin said I? no, CHARLES and CAPELLS name
Rests crowned with glory, but their Foes with shame.
7
He whom we now lament earth equals not, in him
Valor, and Fortitude, feem'd both to place
Their choice demensions in his every Limb,
Which his Zeal managed with HEROIC grace;
Prudence but ushered his accomplishments,
And though blind fortune, him betrayed to th'hate
Of a perfidious enemy, 's in tents
Proclaimed him Victor in his captive state;
Who in his latest exigent of breath,
Conquered his murdters in outbraving death.
8
Nor here expect our griefs should entertain
Their Worths, Hamilton and Holland.
as the honored loss we chiefly wail,
Though with their bloods the have purified the stain
Of their disloyalty; true, flesh is frail,
Nor therefore shall black obloquy cloud over
Their redeemed Honors; but joint suffering shall
Write their eternal glory with the goare
That streamed from CAPELL in's HEROIC fall;
Religion, King, Laws.
For one true Martyr in that * three fold cause
May render three brave exits their applause.
9
You whose afflicted souls do merit here
True Crowns of Patience, O remember how
This constant president did still appear
Glorious in Trials, crowned with glory now;
Let not base fear of Tyranny and Rage
Betray your Honors to a lasting shame,
Their Tragic Tryumphs but their woes presage,
Which will increase, as your eternal Fame:
Your blood's so spilt most potently invoke
Your Mercies, whilst REVENGE prepares their stroke.
10
Cease, cease your mournings, ye indulgent souls;
Give not occasion to those insolent
To triumph whilst your passions hope controules,
Tears now seem streamed from inward discontent
At his eternal happiness (the Sun
Appears most radiant still before a shower)
But if your sorrows in a full stream run,
'T may cloud his luster, and augment the power
Of petulency, deluge like to overflow
His honors Pillar in their flood of woe.
11
Rest, rest, Renowned Martyr, whilst we praise
Gods power that in thy constancy appeared;
Thy virtues thee a Pyramid shall raise,
Whilst Tyrants of their shadows are affeard,
Thou who have sacrificed thy well-spent life,
For God and King, with them art crowned in glory,
May thy blessed Offspring and thy fruitful Wife,
Joy to contemplate on thy honored story;
And may thy blood, or prove a drench to purge
Thy Murderers malice, or their ruins urge.
EPITAPH.
Grace, Valor, Magnanimity,
Zeal, Fortitude, Faith, Loyalty.
Chose this true HERO here inshrin'd,
To be their Champion, he whose mind
Vanquished the power of Tyranny and rage,
Defying death upon's own tragic Stage,
And though his Murderers on his sufferings fed,
They drunk their bane when is innocence bled.
FINIS.

