THE SMOKE OF THE Bottomless Pit. OR, A More true and fuller Discovery of the
Doctrine of those men which call themselves RANTERS: OR, The Mad Crew.

By John Holland Porter, an eye and ear witness.

2 Timothy 3.1. This know also that in the last days perilous times shall come.

2 Pet. 2.1. But there were false Prophets also amongst the people, even as
there shall be false teachers amongst you, who privily shall bring in damnable
heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction.

Phil. 3.2. Beware of Dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision.

Licensed and entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright, at the Kings Head in the Old-Baylie. 1651.

The Doctrine of the RANTERS, viz.
FIrst concerning God. Secondly concerning Christ. Thirdly concerning the
Spirit. Fourthly concerning the Scriptures, Fifthly concerning the Creation.
Sixthly concerning Marriage. Seventhly concerning the Commandments of God.
Eighthly concerning Ordinances. Ninthly concerning Sin. Tenthly concerning Man.
Eleventh concerning the Devil. Twelfth concerning Heaven and Hell. Thirteenth
concerning Death and Resurrection. Fourteenth concerning the last Judgment.
A word to the Christian READER.
AT the earnest request of diverse of my friends, to whom I am much engaged, I
was unwillingly willing to publish to the world, the more and worse then
Atheistical blasphemies of these men, not with any intent (the Lord knows) to
make their persons odious unto any, much less to stir up any to persecute them
barely for their judgments; for when I consider what the Scripture says, I
find it is not Gods method to deal with Spiritual enemies with carnal weapons;
the way that God took to overpower those men that were against the
re-building of the Temple, you may read Zach. 4.6. not by might, nor by power,
but by my spirit says the Lord; and this was Paul's practice, for says he, the
weapons of our warfare are not carnal but mighty through God for the pulling
down of strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. and this Paul gave for a rule to the
Saints, that if a brother be overtaken in a fault, you that are spiritual,
restore such a one with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self lest thou
also be tempted, Gal. 6.1. Paul does not say if a man hold an error, imprison
or banish him, or take away his life: again Paul Prophesies that the greatest
enemies that ever Christ had in the world, should be destroyed, namely by the
spirit of Christ's mouth, and the brightness of his coming, 2 These. 2.8. and
this truth was revealed to John in the Revelation, who tells us that the weapon
that Christ fights with against his enemies, is the sword that goes out of his
mouth, Rev. 19.15. and we may see what this sword is, if we read, Ephesians. 6.17.
but I shall say no more on this subject, lest I make my porch too big for this
house: Only I wish that thou and I may imitate our heavenly Father, who always
has and still does bring light out of darkness, and good out of evil; and not
forget the poor Be, who can suck honey out of the most stinking weed, so do
thou when thou read this Pamphlet, farewell.

J. HOLLAND.

The doctrine of the RANTERS.
First concerning GOD.
THey maintain that God is essentially in every creature, and that there is as
much of God in one creature, as in another, though he does not manifest himself
so much in one as in another: I saw this expression in a Book of theirs, that
the essence of God was as much in the Ivy leaf, as in the most glorious Angel;
I heard another say, that the essence of God was in that board, as much as it
was in heaven; he then laying his hand on a Deal board. They all say there is
no other God but what is in them, and also in the whole Creation, and that men
ought to pray and seek to no other God but what was in them.

The titles they give God are these: They call him the Being, the Fullness, the
Great motion, Reason, the Immensity: I heard a man swear that if there was any
God at all he was one, I said to him that God knew all things, and was able to
do whatsoever he pleased, but you cannot, therefore you are not God, but a
blasphemer: Another made answer, he was not The GOD, but he was God, because
God was in him and in every creature in the world: I replied, If God were in
every creature, how then came it to pass, there was such a difference amongst
the creatures, as there are some good and some bad, and some Godly men, and
some wicked, and all such good and bad are divided one against another, but God
is undivided and at unity with himself, therefore God essentially is not in
every creature.

Secondly concerning Christ.
THey say that Christ was only a form, or a shadow, or a fleshly apparition of
God and no more, and that what he did in way of suffering, was for himself, for
none had, or ever should have any benefit by his suffering but himself. That
the Ministry of Christ either by himself, or by his Apostles as it is held
forth in the Scriptures is ceased, as well as the Ministry of Aaron; others of
them say, that what Christ did in the flesh, is now made over to us in the
spirit, and that we are no more to eye or mind Christ that died at Jerusalem,
but we are to mind Christ in our selves; others of them say, that what Christ
did in his own person, was only a figure or a type of what should be done and
acted in every man, and that every man must do and suffer as much as Christ
did; this is the best they say of Christ: I have heard some say, that if Christ
were on earth now, he would be ashamed of what he did before; I heard one of
them say, it was a question whether Christ was born of a Virgin, nay, says
another, he was a bastard sure enough, for the letter, says he, (meaning the
Scripture) says that Mary was betrothed to Joseph before Jesus was conceived
in the womb. At which words I was much enraged, and began to speak, intending
to reprove them, but was interrupted by one of them that sat by, who swore
abloudy oath, and told me I doted on a silly boy which was at Jerusalem, and he
also swore he knew the Lad very well, for, said he, I was his Godfather; one of
them met me, and said he was told that I had as much wisdom as Christ, I
answered, that none but blasphemers would say so; then he answered, if I had
not so much wisdom, he had. There was one of them did affirm to Doctor
Chamberlain, in my hearing, that every man was God as much as Christ, for,
says he, there is as much of the Godhead in every man, as was in Christ.

Thirdly, concerning the Spirit.
THey all affirm that there is but one spirit in the world, and those names of
good spirit, and bad spirit, are mere imaginations and scarcrowes to fear men
withal, that they are taught and are only under teaching of this spirit, and
that all other teachings either by Scripture or otherwise are of no use to
them. There was one of them said in my hearing that he need not read the
Scripture, nor hear Sermons, for the Father, the Son, and the Spirit were all
three in him; and this he said he could prove, but his best arguments were of
no force in my opinion.

Fourthly, concerning the Scriptures.
THe best they say of the Scripture is; That it is a Tale, a History, a Letter,
and a dead Letter, and more, the fleshly History; they call it a bundle of
contradictions. I heard one swear it was the archest piece of Witchcraft that
ever was (...). Another said it was the greatest curse that ever came (...)ld,
for sai^ he, the Scripture has been the cause of all our misery, and divisions
both in Religion and civil affairs, and has been the cause of all the blood,
that has been shed in the world; and that there would never be peace in the
world, till all the Bibles in the world were burned. I heard one reason thus,
Paul had the spirit of God, by which spirit he wrote the Scriptures; and says
he, I have the spirit, why may not I write the Scripture as well as Paul? and
what I write be as binding and as infallible as that which Paul writ: Again
says he, all the books of the Old and New Testament were directed to some
particular Nation, or Church, or Persons; but says he, none of the Scriptures
are directed, either to the Nation, or to any Church in England, or any man in
England; therefore the Scriptures belong not to us, neither are they any rule
for us to walk by, or to live after.

Fifthly, concerning the Creation.
THey say that the world was created long before the time the Scripture speaks
of; for say they when Cain fled from the presence of the Lord, he went into the
Land of Nod, and there he built a City, he could not build a City himself, and
it was needless for him to build a City for his own household, one house or
tent would have served him; therefore they argue that there were at that time
more people in the world then Adam and Cain, though we read of no more.

Sixthly, concerning marriage.
THey say that for one man to be tied to one woman, or one woman to be tied to
one man, is a fruit of the curse; but they say, we are freed from the curse;
therefore it is our liberty to make use of whom we please: I did intend to ask
them how we came be freed from the curse, but I was prevented; this opinion
they infer from those words of the Lord to Eve, Thy desire shall be to thy
husband.

Seventhly, concerning the Commandments of God.
THey say that all the Commandments of God, both in the Old and New
Testaments, are fruits of the curse, and that all men being freed from the
curse, are also free from the Commandments. Others say, that all the
Commandments are to bring men up to live in God, and God in them; and they say
that we living in God, and God in us, therefore we are above all Commands
whatso^ and forth(...) say Gods will is our will, and our will is Gods will;
and they say Gods will is his law, for sometimes he commands men to kill, to
steal, and to lie; and at other times he commands the contrary, hereon they
infer that we living in God, and God in us, why may not we do the like? and if
it be a sin to kill, to steal, or lie, God is the Author; for say they, it is
his will these things should be done, and it is by his power they are done.

Eighthly, concerning Ordinances.
THat Ordinances are ceased to them, and that they are above all such weak and
beggarly things as they are; that Ordinances are made for weak Christians,
such as are under the teaching of the letter, meaning the Scripture.

Ninthly, concerning sin.
THat there is no such thing as that which men call sin, that sin and holiness
are all one to God, and that God delights as much in the one as in the other;
and this they say they can prove by the Scripture, as from these words in the
Prophet Esaias 42.16. I will make darkness light before them, and Esaias 45.7. I
form the light, and creat darkness, I make peace, and create evil; and in
another place, he made darkness his secret place, yea his pavilion round about
him.

Tenthly, concerning man.
THat man cannot either know God, or believe in God, or pray to God, but it is
God in man that knows himself, believes in himself, and prays to himself;
and this they infer from Gal. 2.20. Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ
lives in me, etc. hence they allege, that man differs in nothing from the
bruit beast, but only that God does manifest himself more in man, then he does
in the beast; that man lives and feeds on nothing but his own excrements, for
thus they reason, that man's excrements dung the ground, which causes the
ground to bring forth Corn and Grass, and the beasts eat the grass, and we
eat the Corn and the Beast.

Eleventh, concerning the Devil.
THey say that the Devil is the left hand of God, or the back part of God, or
the dark part of God; that the Devil could do no evil at all, if God did not
give him a power to do it, and therefore the Devil is not so much in the fault,
as men think he is. Nay says one of them, God seems to complain much of the
Devil and wicked men, then why does not God take away that power he has given
them, and then there will be no body to trouble him; these words made me
tremble, one of them said he hoped to see the poor Devil cleared of a great
many slanders that had been cast on him.

Twelfth, concerning heaven and earth.
THey teach that there is neither heaven nor hell but what is in man, and that
those men that do see God to be in all things, and his will to be done by all
men, though they do never so wickedly, and not apprehend any wrath to be in
God, and can quietly without any check of Conscience commit any sin as we call
it, and can see themselves to be above all Ordinances, and all Commands, and
that these men are in heaven, and heaven is in them; but those men that cannot
see and believe these things are in hell, and hell in them. I saw a Letter that
one of them writ to a friend of his, but it never came to his hand, and at the
bottom of the Letter he writ thus, From Heaven and Hell, or from Detford in the
first year of my reconciliation to my self, at the beginning of the Letter,
he saluteth his friend thus, (which I am sorry my pen should write, or my
tongue speak) but that I saw it, the words were, My pretty God, and Devil, by
Gods heart and wounds I love thee and if thou will not believe me, the Devil
confound thee; this Letter was written by a Frenchman then living at Detford,
to one esteemed in former times a Saint, though now one of them; when I heard
the Letter, I was much troubled and spoke in dislike of it, but was told that
there were spiritual truths couched in those lines which I discerned not.

Thirteenth, concerning death and resurrection.
THat when men dye their spirits go into God, as the small Rivers go into the
Sea, and as the Sea sends back the same water again, sometimes into one
spring, and sometime into another; so does the spirits of men after they are
gone into God, they return and appear sometimes in one form or shape, and
sometimes in another, one wished that his spirit might never be in the shape of
a horse, for says he, a horse has the most toylesome life of any Creature
that is. One told me that I had been in a hundred shapes or forms for ought he
knew, and that I should be so again, though I was such a fool I would not
believe it.

Fourteenth, concerning the last Judgment.
THat there is no such thing as a day of judgment, but that it is only an
invented thing, to serve for a bugbeare to keep men in awe, yet I hear one of
them say, the day of Judgment was begun already, and that the world had been
made many thousand millions of years before we read of its creation, and that
it shall continue many millions longer then we expect, but I say the Lord
knows his appointed time and none else, to him be all glory.

Postscript.
REader, I have not followed that orderly method I might have done, but have
written the judgments of these men, in a confused manner, but I do profess in
the presence of the Lord, who is the searcher of all hearts, I have done them
no wrong in the matter of their judgment, except it be in forbearing to repeat
their bloody swearing and cursing, and for this offense I hope those that truly
fear God will excuse me. Farewell.

FINIS.

