GOD, A rich supply OF ALL GOOD. SETTING FORTH,

I. The Believers interest in it. II. The riches of it in quantity. III. The
gloriousness of it in quality. IV. The means sealing up all: Namely,
CHRIST. All illustrated, with many wonderful and remarkable spiritual
experiences, not only of former, but of later Christians.

By Doctor NATHANAEL HOMES.

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Roycroft, in Goldsmiths Alley near Creple Gate, 1650.

PHILIP. 4.19. But my GOD shall supply all your need, according to his riches
in glory, by Christ Jesus.


HERE is a rich and glorious Text; for it contains riches and glory. A
comprehensive Text, for it holds forth a supply of all need. The Fountain is
infinite, Viz. God. God shall thus supply. The conveyance and insurance
infallible, Christ Jesus. And the impression that all these make upon the heart
of a Believer first or last, is very great. For this Text is spoken out of much
confidence, and experience: My God shall supply. My God that has supplied me,
Verse. 12, 13. shall supply you.

So that the But in our English translation, may be better turned into And (as
the Greek well bears it) thus: God has heretofore supplied me, Verse. 13. now
you have supplied me, Verse. 14, 16. AND God shall supply you.

Qu. Why did not Paul refuse the Philippians benevolence, and turn YOUR into
MY, and his words to others, into Faith for himself, saying, My God shall
supply all my need.

Ans. Paul could, and has, and would again have done this, if God had denied
all means, but for him to refuse means, when means are offered, had been to
tempt God, not to trust in him. The Philippians had well to spare, and
(contrary to the gripple Corinthians) were willing to spare; and Paul's hands
could not make up his need; he must fulfill his Ministry, what ever was laid
by, and he had been rich in Doctrines to the Philippians, therefore the
Philippians did well to give, and he did well to receive. Besides Paul's Faith
here ingageth for more to the Philippians, then his sense had received. He,
one, had received from them a great many, some small contribution of some
temporal things; but he promises them that his God should supply all the
need of them all, spiritually and temporally. My God shall supply all your
NEED, according to his riches by Christ Jesus.

Shall supply, Greek (...), shall fill, or will fill. He shall, because he
will. His good will puts a necessity on his great power to do great things for
his people. See the great things, the fundamentals of salvation, of grace and
glory that God does for his in and by Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 1. first ten Verses.
And Why? Because he had taken counsel with his will so to do, Verse. 13. So in
all Providence, yea in all things, Romans 8.28, 29. Mark well the FOR that knits
the two Verses together. And as his will is a good will, so a rich good will.
According to his riches (says the Text.) He is rich for our need; and has
riches for every need. And richly shall he proportion the allowance viz.
According to his riches in glory.

The adjoining glory to riches signifies (as some, namely Beza, will) that God
will supply according to his riches gloriously; or rather it signifies more, to
wit, that he will supply according to his glorious riches.

For all the supplies that come from God through Christ to one in Christ, come
tipped, guilt, with a glory upon them; a centro ad caelum. Providence below,
graces within, Heaven above, as they have a lovely scarlet blush of Christ's
blood upon them, so they are rayed upon with a beam of divine love to them
that are in Christ.

And whether we render the text in Christ, or by Christ, or with Christ, it
makes no great matter, see the Scripturs. For according to Scripture all are
true, and apt, yea all will well concur to make forth the all of the way, how
all things are ours through Christ. In regard of Christ's Passion, we have all
by Christ; namely by purchase. Ephesians. 1.11.12. In regard of Christ's
incarnation, we have all in Christ, namely in our union with him, 1 Cor. 1.5.
Ioh. 15.5. Colos. 2.10. In regard of donation, we have all with Christ. That is
God giving us Christ in spiritual marriage, with him he gives all he is worth,
all his estate with him. Transit res cum persona. Romans 8.32.

D. Beleivers have assurance and experience that their God will fully supply
all their need according to his glorious riches through Christ Jesus.

There are 4 things to be explained in order as they lie in the doctrine for
the manifestation, and so confirmation thereof. 1 The beleivers interest in the
Supplyer, that makes him so bold and confident as to say, My God shall do so
and so. 2 The extension in quantity of the supply: to supply all need. 3 The
intension in quallity, According to his glorious riches. 4 The medium or means,
Christ Jesus.

1. The interest. The beleiver has a God, the only true God, truly; who is
the original of all. All goodnesses but coppies taken out of, and according to
that original. All streams of goodness are from that Ocean of Nectar. All my
springs (says the Psalmist Psalm. 87. ult.) are in thee. i.e. From God giving
forth himself in the Church. All things are in God, either formally or
causally, or eminently. Wisdom, power, etc. are so formally in God, that they
are essentially God. All the creatures are causally in God. That is, they have
moving and being from an efficacy proceeding from him. And all the rest are
eminently in God; whatsoever is excellent below; is in God in a more excellent
manner. As light is more excellent in the Sun, then in the fire or candle. God
is the divine Artist to know all. He is the divine Artificer, facere to make,
all. Heb. 11. And he is the divine virtuous one, Agere, to do all. As it is
said of Christ, he did all things well. Acti agimus we act well, being well
acted of him. His omnipotent power upholds all. His all-loving heart gives all.
And his allwise-hand dispenceth all. His power is above all difficulties. And
his good will above all our unworthiness. You see the world below is vertually
in the Sun; and the Sun a more excellent thing then al on which it has an
influence: So all things are much more eminently in God, but God himself is
more excellent then all. Psalm. 84.11. His nature is unaccessable. He dwells in
light that none can approach unto. His love incomprehensible. Ephesians. 3. And his
ways of works and providence past finding out, Romans 11. He supplyeth the
Angels with power that fell not, that they might never fall. He supplied
Christ; filling him with the Spirit above measure, and raising him from the
dead. Therefore much more can he supply us that Believe.

In this God, has the beleiver his interest, he can confidently call him my
God; mine by creation. And not only of being, as the lapsed Angels, but of his
well being, of a gracious heart, and gracious qualities in that heart, Psalm.
51.10. Ephesians. 4.24. Ephesians. 2.10. Mine by preservation, and not only in common
providence, as he is the Savior of all men; but in preservation of the soul
from sin, of the affections from prevayling temptations, and graces from
deadness. Mine by redemption. Sutably to that specially here meant, is here
mention of Christ Jesus. According to that, Christ is made of God to us
redemption; 1 Cor. 1. He has paid a price to justice to redeem us from
vengeance; and has gained the actual love of mercy to bestow all good upon us.
* The same Fine and Recovery cuts of the entayle of evil, and conveighes the
good estate to us. Upon these grounds, and in this manner does the beleiver
challenge God to be his God. If you will have the measure and graduall; then
thus. The beleiver says, God is my God, fundamentally by the promise. As that,
I will be your God, and you shall be my people. Formally and properly by faith,
my beloved is mine, and I am his. Cant. 2. And Thomas, my Lord and my God.
Effectually, and feelingly, by the operations of love, joy, etc. As Mary-sayd,
my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. And as the beleiving Jews did. 1
Pet. 1.8. Completely, (in parts) when we own God, and own our selves to be none
but his. Faith drawing down Christ to us. And that faith working by love,
carries us up to Christ. Cant. 2, My BELOVED is mine, and I am HIS, he feeds
among the Lillies, until the day break, and the shadows flee away, turn my
beloved, etc.

2 Extension in quantity. God shall supply, even to a fulsilling all needs. The
word (...), here rendered need: 1. Signifies want, necessity. So that
whatsoever is necessary to supply, God will supply. A sinlesse wanting, viz. of
such things without which we cannot answer to Gods ends, God will be sure to
supply. But a sinful wanting, a moral aguish dropsy thirst of such things, and
so much, as will rather hurt then help; a wantonness rather then a want, God
does best supply rather by keeping us in that want then supplying; rather by
withholding then by giving. Psalm. 119. It is good for me that I was afflicted.
For in this case we more want soul health then bodily supplies; therefore God
withholding the drink of creature comforts, is best to cure our spiritual ague
or dropsy appetite. So then our desires must be natural, not unnatural, either
after things in kind, not good for us, or in degrees unsuitable for our
condition. As on the otherside our wanting must be real, not imaginary as the
dream of thirst in the Prophet. Such an imaginary want was in Rachel when she
phantisied that her life depended upon having children. Give me children (said
she) or I dye.

2. The Greek word signifies use, that which is useful, and instrumental to
act and do. Now that is for our true use, that more fits us for Gods use. For
(as the Philosopher called Servants) we are Gods, instrumenta rationalia; his
reasonable tools or household goods. Revel. 4. All is made for Gods end and use;
Therefore without all fail God will so supply and serve our need, as may fit
us best to serve him. And in relation to both significations of the Word,
remember that I told you that the word supply in the original, signifies to
fill; God will at least fill the true useful need. He may and does often make our
cup to overflow, gives a measure running over; but that is of superabundant
kindness. But this he will do, and is, tied under hand and seal, in Word and
Sacraments; viz. to fill such wants. He will fill every size of vessel,
replenish every capacity to its proportion. He will ballast and tackle every
ship, as it may safelyest swim and ride out every storm. He clothes lambs and
sheep with a fleece they may best bear, and get away from the thorns.

3. Intention in qualities, one way or other, first or last he will supply
according to his glorious riches. God is glorious, and so will dole out your
share according to your proportion, you shall confess it when the total is
cast up. In comparison of others nothing, or your own former small thing, you
shall have great things. God has chosen the poor in regard of the world,
(says James) rich in faith. And (says Paul) Godliness is great gain with
contentment. For it brings contentment, hearts ease; more satisfied then
Alexander with a world. The Godly man has two worlds entayled upon him.
Godliness has the promise of this world, and that to come. So that the Godly
man can say, I have enough; He is rich that thinks he wants nothing; that has
as much as he can ask, or tell what well to do with; give us, (...), bread
sufficient for our substance. A man's estate is to be valued according to the
use, not the bulk, according to the efficacy not the quantity. What are tools
of which one has no use or benefit? Green herbs if they give content (says
Solomon) exceed a stalled Ox. If a man's estate serve his use, is effectual to
a quietation of spirit, he has the greatest ENOUGH that can be desired.

The whole of a beleivers estate is very rich, thus: 1. The least mercy is
greater then he (as Jacob confessed) for a man is all misery in himself. 2.
The least that he has, as to him, that it might be a mercy (not a snare) cost
the value of Christ's blood. A little Diamond costs more then a load of quarry
stones. 3. If the stream of mercies be small, yet great is the continuance,
from the fountain. A little freehold is better then more by short lease. 4.
Besides all, he has the fountain it self; God himself. The heavenly man,
has not only the light, but the Sun it self fixed in him as in its Orb. The
Christian and God are one, as Christ and God are one. Ioh. 14.20. Ioh. 17.21.
All that God gives to beleivers, intends, and ends in this, to lead them to
God. (Judge your condition by this) God is a wooer, that gives tokens to his
love with an intent to give himself.


You see then God does many ways supply richly.

That richness according to which God will supply is a glorious richness. The
glory is threefold; as the riches are threefold.

1. There is a glory upon the temporalls of a beleiver. They come from Gods
right hand. See the difference, Pro. 3. and in the Patriarks blessing. The
right hand blessings perfected the left. They come from Gods good will, not from
mere common providence. They all taste lovish; they are varnished with love;
polished with a beauty as given to Christ for us, as the world was made
exceeding good; that is, beautiful, useful, etc. for the first Adam in
innocence. Again, there is a glory in the seasonable giving of temporals to
beleivers, So like apples of gold with picturs of silver. Striped with the
blood of Christ, inlayed with the operation of spirit sanctifying them unto us.
Yea, there is somewhat of God himself stamped upon every creature, which only
the believing eye can see. On vegetables, life, on Animals, understanding and
wisdom. And so much of God as is in a creature is most glorious. And God that
is in them has laid his Command upon them, to do us good (if we believe) and
goodness is glorious.

If there were but the divine order in Gods dispensations of outward things,
first this, then that as is best for our welfare; this were glorious. He first
provides for us the breast, then bread. He dispenses as the parent does
clothes, suites fit for our age, and so they sit handsomely. Look how grimme
disorder is, so comely and glorious is order. He gives not all at once to
over-whelm us; nor the last thing first, or the first last.

2. There is a glory in spirituals. In gifts some as in knowledge, elocution,
etc. but in grace and graces more. For the grace of favor; It clothes us with
Christ's righteousness: This must needs be glorious. (2 Cor. 5. la) it being
the righteousness of God. You may perceive it, by considering how grimme the
sight of sin was to you, before you saw that glorious clothing upon you. Whiles
ye see not your selves in Christ, mantled in, and clothed with his
righteousness, you are an abhorring to your selves. But when you behold your
selves (yea and as beheld of God in Christ's righteousness) you see your glory,
so that you can glory. 1 Cor. 1. two la. Christ is made to us righteousness,
etc. that he that glories may glory in the Lord. The Apostle adds, 1 Cor. 3.
that the very ministry that holds forth this righteousness to us is far more
glorious then the glorious giving of that glorious fiery Law, as it is set
forth and called, Deuteronomy. 33.2. The Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir,
and shone forth from mount Paran, and he came with ten thousand of his Saints,
from his right hand went a FIERY Law for them. And then too, the graces of the
Saints are glorious. They are the spiritual creation of God. Ephesians. 2.10. The
purchase of Christ's blood, Ephesians. 1.7, 8. The breathings of the Spirit, Ioh.
20.22. The Image of God in us. Ephesians. 4.24. They make the soul of man (in the
bent of it) like Adams soul; yea it is another divine soul, in our natural
soul.

So that by all glories aforesaid, a Saint is made most glorious within his own
court or habitation. He dwells in Christ, glorious in his garments, glorious in
his complexion; he is full of righteousness and holiness. Solomon was
glorious; the Lillies (says Christ) are more glorious then he, but Christ most
glorious; and spiritually and imputatively, as he was, so are we in this world.
1 John 4.17.

3. There is the glory of heaven; which is the plat-forme of all our
happiness. I need not argue this glory, but rather declare it, if I (or any
else) could. Here below we have a glory, but it is like the glory of a
glow-worme, brightened at the night-shining of the stars, in comparison of
heaven, which is as the glaring of Diamonds, or sparkling of Crystal
looking-glasses, the gloss of cloth of gold, and Tissu, at the sight of the
noon-sun. In heaven every glory is lightened and hightened to a transcendency
of translucidation and luster. Our natural bodies shall glitter above the face
of Moses, Stephen, or innocent Adam; namely, like the body of Christ, 1 Cor.
15. which was most glorious on Tabor. Our reason shall be equalized too, if not
made superlative above the highest intellectuals of Angels (forasmuch as we are
nearer in union with God through Christ they.) And as for our graces, every
grace shall be raised to the highest perfection, and actings that graces can be
extended, or exalted. There in glory, we have the sight of God; either by some
extraordinary Species representing the divine essence, a light of glory the
mean while elevating the understanding with a supernatural strength, to behold
the representation; or by the light of glory, elevating and strengthening the
understanding to the highest, pitch of apprehension, to behold the divine
essence immediately presented without any Species, or by any immediate clear
vision of God without. Species or elevation by any light, more then is innate
in the glorified intellectuals. Doubtless by unspeakable union with Christ, in
him we shall apprehend God, as he (so far forth as he is man) does apprehend
him, to our utmost proportion.

In heaven the fountain of our happiness is substantial glory. Namely, God
himself, perfecting our substances to the highest of our kind; our company
the Angels, full of superlative glorious qualities, the place filled with rays
of both, and we perfected and polished in all things to a glorious hue and
luster. The flower colored shining spring, the Golden sea (as Homer calls it)
with morning beams, or the spangsed starry heavens, in a serene evening, are
but shaddows to this glory in Heaven. Our communion there is like the most
ravishing music, our sights all of admiration, and our thoughts seraphical
raptures.

The fourth thing to be explained is, the means, viz. Christ Jesus. God
considered in himself, is able to supply, being infinite rich and glorious. And
naturally he is willing as the chief good to communicate his goodness to his
creatures, considered in their mere and pure naturals; but there is not in him
a moral willingness (as we may say) a willingness of free choice to be
communicative of himself to fallen man, but through Jesus Christ. God
foreseeing what was wisdom and justice to himself, chose us in Christ. And
now in time communicates himself no other way, but through Jesus Christ. He is
fixed in, and shines through the Orb of Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 4. Shines to us in
the face of Christ Jesus; even as after the Sun was made upon the fourth day,
(though there was some general light before, as innocent Adam had a legal light)
there was no light to be communicated to the world but through the Sun. The sum
of all we will say of this is briefly this. 1. That Christ's incarnation is the
fundamental insurance of our assurance of our neerernesse to God then Angels,
Heb. 2. That he will be our Immanuel. Matthew. 1. Applied, Romans 8. to our
justification and salvation. And so will do by us as he did by Christ, in all
excellencies whereof we may be capable. 2. The perfecting and formal act of the
virtue of this incarnation to communicate himself to us, is our actual union
with Christ by the Spirit. 3. That Christ is the pattern to which we must in
all things, according to our proportion be conformed to; and is the beginning
of the reassimilating and making us like to Gods image in the first Innocent
Adam, Christ therefore is called, the first borne of every creature, etc.


Useful is this Doctrine, 1. For invitation of all that stand off at a
difference with Christ, totally holding off, or stand off at a distance from
Christ, as in a degree strange, fearing to come near and close to Christ; in
doubt whether to throw themselves into Christ's arms, fully to trust themselves
with him. Come says this Doctrine, come in, come near, own God in Christ, and
rejoice in him as thine own, that thou may come up to this privilege, viz.
with assurance of faith to say, My God shall supply all wants. Mine and thine
in temporals, set all the world together by the ears; Kings say, that is mine,
nay say Parliaments, that is mine; nay say the people, that is mine. But in
spirituals they set all in tune. Therefore of all things learn to MINE the
Lord, to cry by faith, thou art mine, as Thomas, My Lord and my God; and as
Mary, My God and my Savior. You may as they (but more spiritually) rely on
him, for you have him held forth to you not only as borne, but as crucified
for you before your eyes. Gal. 3.1. That is, in the preaching of the Gospel;
which continually beseeches us to receive Christ. 2 Cor. 5. Why therefore do
not men come in and come up closer to Christ Jesus, through whom God will be
such a rich supply? And therefore if ye be poor like Laodicea, it is because
ye do not com on through profession of Christ close to Christ himself. If ye
be rich, yet ye are not rich indeed, if ye close not with Christ. If ye be
honorable; yet ye are not right honorable, unless ye put on Christ. Come
therefore, come, come to God in Christ. Hear those glorious invitations, Isa.
55.1. to the end of the Chapter. And Revel. 22.17. turn to them, read them,
weigh them; they woo thee imphatically and pathetically; and answer all
scruples. Come therefore to Christ. The promise is to you, for it is to all the
Lord shall call; that is to all that obey his Call, Act. 2.39. He dyed for the
ungodly, Romans 5. And he came with an intent not to condemn the world, but that
the world might be saved, Joh. 3.

Oh therefore close with Christ, throw your selves into his arms. Let thine
heart say, he is mine by faith, mine in hope; I love him, I give up my self to
him, I will lie in his arms, lean on his bosom, live in and upon his heart of
love, there I will expect all incomes from God. Close with God in Christ, for
here in the Text and Doctrine he does as it were call to you in the marker
place of wisdom, come see what ye lack, see what ye want, do ye want riches,
honor, comfort, any thing, all things, See what ye want, come buy, and buy
without money or moneys worth. Isa. 55.1. Revel. 22.27. And in the Text. He
will supply all your wants. Do ye want a comfortable habitation? Ps. 90.1. Lord
thou have been our dwelling place in all generations. Do ye want riches?
Solomon tells you The blessing of the Lord makes rich. And Paul tells you that
Godliness is great gain. And so we might run over all things, His power shall
be your chambers to hide in, Isa. 26.20. His love and union shall be your
chamber (your Bride chamber) to rejoice in. Cant. 1.4. Do ye want peace. The
Apostle calls God, the God of peace. And he promises, Isa. 26.3. He will keep
them in perfect peace, whose minds are stayed on him. Do ye want friends? By
Faith Abraham was called the friend of God; that is, passively God was a friend
to him; for God justified him by faith, Jam. 2.25. And by obedience (flowing
from faith) we manifest we are Christ's friends, Joh. 15.24. Do ye want
wisdom? And what to do? To bear afflictions (that perhapps arise from wants)?
If any man lack wisdom, (and for such a purpose) let him ask it of God who
gives it liberally. Jam. 1.

If any man out of a willingness to follow Christ loses all, he shall find
all, with addition above that he lost. Matthew. 19.28, 29.

Object. For spirituals, God does easily supply them, by immediate infusion.
But how can he supply temporal, when they are not in being?

Answ. This is our fault. God provided Manna; But say they, can he provide
flesh in the Wilderness? Sure says that great man, 2 Kin. 7.2. he cannot send
plenty into besieged Samaria, by to morrow, if the windows of heaven should
rain down bread. This or the like, is the language of our unbeleeving hearts,
and the censures we pass upon divine providence, as if we would provoke God to
do nothing for us. Why, God has, and can do strange things, so that they seem
to be done by creation. How wonderfully did he lead his people from Egypt into
Canaan. And he will create Jerusalem (a sad City) into joy. He will create
peace.

Come therefore ye disputers, attend upon the words of his mouth, rely on him
by faith, he will be true, he must be true to you, according to this Text, To
supply all your wants according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus. Can ye
find a want, a need of spirituals? Do ye feel your need? Seek first the
Kingdom of God, and the righteousness of him, and all other things shall be
added unto you. Go close with Christ, and then go to God and ask and have any
thing that you truly need that may do you good. By this you shall know whether
your outward wants be a true and right need, by what and how ye dare ask them
of God in prayer. That is not a true need which you dare not ask boldly of God
in prayer. And so much is not needful which you dare not confidently beg of
God in prayer. And that way or manner, or means of attaining any thing is not
needful, for which you dare not with a free heart petition to God for his
blessing on the same. When God has a mind to bend his ear, he will prepare
the heart to pray. Psalm. 10.17. Therefore go to God by faith, make your
addresses to him by prayer in faith for a supply of whatsoever ye need. Say
here it is, here it is to be had, I will go no further then this door, here I
will stay, and beg till I receive.

The Devil, and sin will tell us they will supply our need, so they told the
Angels (that fell) and Adam, Beelzebub seduced the rest, and one of them seduced
Adam. The politic world will bear us in hand, that they will supply all our
need. Do but come (say they) over to us, go our way, come plot in our Plot,
cooperate, and comply in our design and ye are made, we will make you men for
ever. And the creatures with their beautiful looks will smilingly seem to
promise much: And our own corrupt hearts, and carnal reasons will tell us many
fair tales. But whom and with what will these supply? only our senses with
sensible things, and leave our inward man to faint and fail; or they will
supply our lusts, with impure objects, which are worse then nothing, to poison
and pain us to all degrees of misery. They will supply (they say) but according
to what? even quite contrary to the text. viz. they will supply according to the
abundance and baseness of evil, that is in sin, and the Devil. But the voice
of the text is life, the voice of God indeed. He will supply all your need
according to the riches of his glory by Christ Jesus.

Second Use is, for improvement of God in Christ Jesus unto all consolation, to
them that can closely close with, and own God in Christ: to say, My God by the
blood of Christ, My God by the spirit of faith. These men shall be able to say,
My God shall supply all my wants; yea mine and others that are beleivers, as
Paul speaks in the text, for himself and other Saints. God shall supply all,
Widows, Orphans, Prisoners; and with all; of which we have absolute need,
without all fail; of what is also convenient for us, when it is convenient.

First, We have absolute need of grace, without faith it is impossible to
please God, Heb. 11. And God tells us we have need of patience, Heb. 10.36.
Therefore that God must needs supply: according to his promise; he will pour
out his Spirit, Act. 2. And according to his insurance, having filled Christ,
that of his fullness we might receive. Ioh. 1.

Secondly, There is an absolute necessity of what is altogether necessary to
gracious actings in all conditions. Heb. 4.16. Let us come boldly unto the
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace in the time of NEED.
And my grace shall be sufficient for thee, even in thy wraftling with Satan, 2
Cor. 12. Compare diligently, 1 Cor. 10.13. Therefore this also God must needs
supply.

Thirdly, That is of absolute necessity that concurrs to our natural being and
life, whiles God will have us to be on earth for his service. In this respect
Christ says of outward things, Your heavenly Father knows you have NEED of
these things. Therefore so much of food, of clothes, of liberty, of peace, etc.
as whereby we may be able to be, and act according to Gods mind, God must
needs supply.

Fourthly, There is an absolute need that God should be glorified by us. He
must attain his end. All things was made for his glory, Revel. 4. Therefore
whatsoever is needful for us to further Gods glory, that God must needs supply.

All these are but absolute necessary supplies. But God supplies sometimes, ex
superabundanti, good measure pressed down, and running over: not only for
necessity, but for delight. And he will so supply us at present need in some
things, that we shall be able out of experience to speak with confidence, of
futures, My God shall supply all needs. As Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 1.10. Who
delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver; in whom we trust he will
yet deliver. And Romans 5. Tribulation works patience, patience experience,
experience hope. Past mercyes are the first fruits of future. As the Apostle
argues, Romans 11. That God has more mercy for the Jews whom he calls the lump,
because the first fruits of the fathers before the flood, and the Patriarks
after the flood were holy by mercy received from God.

And as God supplies all, with all (as we have said) so also sutably to the
Saints condition in this world will he supply. For Hell, and the world endeavor
to put the Saints into need, and all manner of wants. But, says the text, God
will supply all your need. Hell and the world labor to make them poor, and
scanty, and miserable; but says the text, God will supply all your need
according to his riches. Hell and the world, do nothing but render them
contemptible, and ignominious. (But says the text) God will supply according to
his riches in glory. Hell and the world labor if it were possible to divide
them from Christ. But (says the text) God will supply them by Christ Jesus.

Object. But how will God supply us?

Answ. Either ordinarily, or extraordinarily, God is pleased (when he sees
good) to use means, but he is not tied to means, method, or manner of acting.
When Moses was much with God on the mount he could fast forty days, when Peter
had a vision ( Act. 10.) he forgate his hunger. When Paul was in a rapture, he
knew not whether he was in the body or no, and therefore minded not bodily
wants. When we consider our clothing with Christ's righteousness, and eternal
glory, we shall more mind our clothing upon with them, then moth-eatable
garments. 2 Cor. 5. Whiles Adam enjoyed God, he minded not his nakedness.
There are no perplexities can enwrap and hamper and seize upon Paul's spirit,
whiles he considers Christ's fullness; through whom he can do all things. Phil.
4. A word from Christ's mouth stils him in a great fight of temptations. 2 Cor.
12. Distractions there may be in States, and upon Churches, and every one
enquires what will things come to? But the consideration of these, Christ must
reign, Psalm. 2. Heb. 2. The four mettalled Image of all humane power opposing
him, must be broken before him, Dan. 2. And Antichrist must down, as sure as if
down already, Revel. 18. Christ's Church must be set up in glory, Revel. 21. The
Saints must rule, chap. 20: these I say will quiet our minds.

Object. But my heart has many doubtings in it.

Answ. Do thou call him my God? and have had some former experiences what he
has done for thee? then may thou boldly, as Paul, say in the text; My God
shall supply all my wants: Yea the same God that makes any promise will give to
thee lying under the serious consideration of that promise, assurance through
that promise, that he will perform it; and make thee wait till thine eyes see
it done. In waiting with hope upon God, a soul often times has much communion
with God. And in this communion, God does make admirable impressions on Saints
spirits, touching assurance, Psalm. 130.5, 6, 7. So that if all the world should
persuade them it were in vain to wait, they could not be taken off. Yea some
Saints waiting upon God unto, and in great sufferings, have little less then
an impression of Prophecy made upon their spirits. Hus a Bohemian, signifying
a Goose in his language, said, that if they costed him in the fire, within an
hundred years should rise a Swan that should carry the cause on for which he
suffered. And accordingly, Luther, (signifying a Swan) rose up, and did so most
successefully. The Martyr that last was burnt in Smithfield, told the people
they should be of a good comfort, for he was persuaded he was the last that
should suffer under Queen Mary; And so he was. The world does not consider this
of secret impressions. And therefore they plot sometimes great plots, thinking
to have the people to side with them: But God makes contrary impressions, and
so all falls to nothing.

Quest. When will God supply?

Answ. When his time is come; As he will not stay a minuit longer then the
fittest time; so nor will he act a minuit before the time. But just at his time
to a minuit he will do it; Ioh. 2. There wanted wine; His mother tells him of
it. He answers, his hour was not yet come. And there were but a very few sands
to run. Those being out, he turns water into wine; which was presently after
his mother spoke to him. See Christ will be punctual at the instant of the
fittest season to do us good.

Object. There are many great men and means to hinder those supplies we want.

Answ. What are mountains before Zerubbabel (says Zechary) what can let God
to make his way plain, yea who can resist God when he will make impressions on
great men's hearts, that they shall not hurt, nor hinder? Both Laban and Esau
came out in fury against Jacob, but God made impressions on their hearts that
they should not hurt him, and they became as tame and gentle as lambs. Plots
have been against us, as we said before, by great ones, but God made impressions
on the Commonalty, that they could not act, nor execute any thing.

Object. But I am full of unworthiness.

Answ. So thou art in thy self, but seeing it, and acknowledging it, is the
way to remove that, that it be not an impediment. Especially if thou look
from thy self to Gods free mercy through Christ, Psalm. 130.4. And the text
gives thee a full answer. God will supply all thy need according to his riches
in glory BY CHRIST JESUS.

Though thou art unworthy, believe in, and hope on Christ, who is worthy. He
accepts of us in him the BELOVED, Ephesians. 1. O therefore that men would not take
up Religion in the outside, or in the Gallantry of wit, parts, repute, and
favor of great men, but in the kernel, faith, hope, communion with God. By
these to lie in Gods bosom will quiet, when all helps are suspended.

Object. I am in such a state, and condition, as of afflictions, imprisonments,
etc. as are quite contrary, to any probability of supplys of my wants.

Answ. God to show his wisdom, and power, and to exercise our faith, does often
times take contrary courses to supply us. As in the Creation, being about to
make a beautiful lightsome world, he first created a Chaos lying in darkness;
so in his providence, he works often by contraryes. Israel must go out of Canaan
into Egypt to be preserved for Canaan. And when at first he sent Moses and
Aaron to treat with Pharaoh to let them go, things went worse with them. God
does of purpose sometimes cast us into afflictions, and seem to hide himself,
that we might pray, and believe, and hope, till he return and help, Hos. 5.
la. And for the particular of being in prison: As touching thy inward
condition, The Heathen could say, Solus sapiens est liber. That is, A wise man
is the only freeman; freer in prison, then a fool at large, most gloriously
true spiritually. If Christ has made us free, we are free indeed. Its a brave
freedom to go to prison to be free in conscience. As touching thy outward
condition of imprisonment, Joseph must through a prison be advanced. The Lord
will carry down Jeremiah to the Potters house, and there teach him the lesson he
is to learn of free grace, that God will have mercy, because he will. Once a
prisoner in this place spoke a glorious sentence, when condemned to have his
head taken off. He spoke it on the scaffold. If there had been (says he) an
easier way for me to heaven then this, I should have found it: But God would
lead me this way rather then no way, thither.

Object. You have given many fair words, but they seem to be but notions.

Answ. Thus our megrom giddy heads think substances to be but shadows. I say
to you, as Paul once to the Corinthians, God or his Gospel Ministers are not
streitned, but ye are streitned in your own bowels. Else we might come to that
as other Saints attain to: as a woman of late of mean estate said, I want
nothing, I have all things in Christ. Are these only notions, which hold forth
to us, that which is the result of all. viz. contentment, For God in Christ is
the only contentment, which evidently appears by comparing a poor believer
and a rich unbeleever together: The one has much contentment, the other has
none. Is this a mere notion? If he spared not his own Son, how shall he not
WITH him freely give us all things, Romans 8. And Psalm. 37. I have been young and
now am old, yet I never saw the righteous forsaken, etc. Is Gods taking care of
crows, sparrowes and ravens, notions? From thence our Savior argues, how much
more will God take care of men that trust in him? Are those notions, that prove
most real in event? A woman in these hard times having lost her estate and
yearning over her children, wanting clothes, fell down before the Lord in
prayer, mourning thus, Lord such a child wants a coat, and such a child wants
such a garment, what shall I do, my eyes and hopes are upon, and to thee to
help. And suddenly the Lord strangely provided for them. Two other being in
distress, the one in torment of pain, the other greatly afflicted with
compassion. Come said the husband to the wife, if it be the will of God, that
thus this extremity must lie upon us, we will even hire more help to attend, and
settle to the affliction. And behold presently the Lord took away the
affliction. I have known a stock of prayer driven for diverse years for a
mercy; and often the deliverance came to the birth, and was not brought forth. At
last it was given in as in a dream. The thing done, when scarce any means used.

Therefore I conclude, Believe, pray, hope, and wait on God, and he shall
(according to the infallible truth of this text) supply all your need according
to his riches in glory, by Christ Jesus. Amen.

FINIS.

