THE GRAND PREROGATIVE OF HUMANE NATURE Namely, The Souls natural or native
immortality, and freedom from corruption, showed by many arguments, and also
defended against the rash and rude conceptions of a late presumptuous Author,
who has adventured to impugn it.

By G. H. Gent.

Now first published according to the perfect Copy, and the Authors mind.

Math. 22.32. I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob:
God is not the God of the dead, but of the living.

LONDON; Printed by ROGER DANIEL, and are to be sold by Antony Williamson, at
the Queens Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. An. 1653.

THE PREFACE.
SO great and sovereigne to Man has been the benignity of indulgent Nature, as
that she has not only bestowed upon his soul, above those of other creatures,
the high and singular Prerogative of immortality; but has moreover imparted to
him light whereby he might come unto the knowledge of it, and by that same
knowledge be excited to make a diligent inquiry after the obligations that
follow on it, and how also in this life he may make his best advantages and
preparations for the next. Neither is this same Truth of immortality any new
discovery, but acknowledge of old by the Heathenish and Pagan Nations; of which
thing we in the Work ensuing are to give in a large evidence, by our producing
the many testimonies of a full and frequent Senate of ancient Sages, who, being
destitute of revelation, had nothing but nature to instruct them in this same
verity.

Against these powerful impulsives and clearer notions of truth the adverse
party has nothing to oppose but mere surmises or suspicions, such, namely, as
the Author of the Book of Wisdom out of their own mouths records, saying,
There has not any one been known to have returned from below: Or else such as
Pliny does imagine, who grafteth the opinion of immortality, not upon an
innate, or natural longing and appetite, as he should have done; but,
contrariwise, upon a false ambition and greediness in man of never ceasing to
be.: Or again, as Lucian, who brings nothing to make good what he conceives,
besides downright impiety, dressed up and set forth with facetious scoffs and
derisory jestings, wherewith nevertheless sundry ill-affected spirits and
feebler understandings are easier persuaded, then with solid arguments.

The Chorus of Seneca afterward alleged, moved, as it may seem, with no
better or stronger arguments then these, is driven, as by a storm, into dark
and doubtful cogitations touching the souls mortality; and so also is another
Chorus consisting of Mahumetan Alfaquies in the English Tragedy of Mustapha. By
such shadows also as these a late Philosopher was affrighted and before him
some of the ancients so far forth as to be made imagine, that even granting
the soul should survive the body, yet that it would not thence follow it were
perpetual, but that, contrariwise, in tract of time it might decay, and vapor
it self at length to nothing, burning or wasting out it is own substance like a
torch or candle; or, at least, have a period of duration set it, connaturally
to the principles of constitution, beyond which it was not to pass, but at
that term or point presently and naturally to extinguish or return to nothing:
of which vain phantasy we are to consider more hereafter.

But, if suspicions may come to be examined, we shall find that there be other
sort of them persuading the souls mortality, that seem more hollow and
deceitful then the former are; as namely, a depraved appetite, or an unbridled
and untamed sensuality, that sollicites perpetually to be satisfied, and is
desirous, without fear of future reckonings in the other world, to wallow for
the present and tumble, like a swine, in the mire of dirty pleasures, and to
conceive some shadow of security for it, that so, with the old Epicureans, it
might merrily say, Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas.
Eat, and drink, and play thy fill,
There Is after death nor good nor ill.


Doubtless these later perswaders seem to be more ruinous and corrupt then the
former, and of more dangerous consequence. And thus we see that on either side
there want not suspicions, namely, as well for concluding of mortality as of
immortality, if we will be guided by them. But into this high Court of
judicature, wherein causes so weighty and so grave as this are to be decided,
suspicions and dark imaginations will not be allowed for evidence, or be able
to cast the business either way.

To these other proofs which after I allege, I add this one, which I have
placed in the frontispiece of this Treatise, namely, these words of Christ,
Matthew. 22. partly recited by him out of Exodus: I am the God of Abraham, and
the God of Isaak, and the God of Jacob. God is not the God of the dead, but of
the living. By force of which Text the Sadduces, who denied there surrection,
were convinced, and not only they, but this Author also against whom we
deal; for the place proves the soul's immortality, as well as the bodies
resurrection, Because if God be the God of Abraham after death, then must his
body one day rise again, to the end that being reunited with the soul there
might result an Abraham; again, if he be the God also of the living, then must
his soul continue living without any intermission from death; for, as without a
body there is no Abraham, so without a soul there is no vivens, or thing endued
with life. If you object, that it is sufficient if it live then when the body
is to rise, though not before: I answer, that this intermitted living neither
is nor can be sufficient, because then according to this same supposition the
soul must have a revivall and refuscitation, for the which we have no warrant
any where, and feign it we must not; or if we do, it will want weight and be
rejected. It follows then, that the soul of man after the departure of it from
the body must either always live, or never; and so, by consequence, seeing the
soul must live once more, it must live always, that is to say, not only at
the resurrection, as this Author feigneth, but continually from the time of
the separation to the time of the reunion, and so after everlastingly. And this
is the conclusion was intended. And thus much touching the argument of the
Treatise following.

Now touching the Adversary. I am to let you know, that if the Readers had not
deserved much more regard then he, and besides, if the matter had not required
some elucidation, more then his objections did an answer, I had been wholly
silent and spared all this labor I have taken.

Peradventure it may seem to some that over and above an answer given to this
erroneous Author, the pains bestowed in opening the cause of the soul's
indeficiency, and also the tracing out the several paths which lead unto the
places from whence arguments are to be raised for the proving of it, was
therefore super fluous, because we all shall quickly try whether it be so or
no, forasmuch as our Pilgrimage in this life cannot be of any large extent,
either in old or young. To these men I return no other answer but this one,
that if the soul be immort all, that then, indeed, we shall experience whether
it be so or no; but if it be not, we, in that case, shall experience nothing:
for though a man broad awake does feel himself to live, yet one either dead or
in a dead-sleep, feels nothing at all, and knows not what he is. But betting
that pass, it cannot be denied but that the knowledge of a soul's being
incorruptible must needs be in this life a great consolation to any man, and
especially to such as be in great adversity; for by that Truth he learns he may
outlive his sorrows, and attein at length unto a wished rest. Besides, by this
doctrine he has a caveat given for his good behavior here, and that, for the
satisfaction of any unreasonable and inordinate desire, he venture not on any
thing in this life that may be a hinderance of his felicity in the next.

It was not the Authors intention to enter here in the following Work into any
disputes that were not for every English reader's understanding; but, contrary
to his mind, he was forced to stray from that purpose ever now and then, for
the satisfying of sundry flying objections; to which condescension he was
induced the easier, because such disputes could not be a prejudice to any
Reader, in regard that those harder pieces might be passed over by him very
easily, and that, besides all those, there was enough wherewith to entertain
him: whereas on the other side, all such digressions could not come unwelcome
to others whose understandings had been acquainted and exercised with
speculations of greater difficulty, and so both sorts of Readers receive
contentment, one sort by the easy, the other both by the easy and the hard.

The Grand Prerogative of humane Nature.
CHAP. I. The Authors Design, and the occasion of it.
AS bodies that are foul and do abound with peccant humors be subject to
contagion, and apt to be infected by each weak venom, from the danger whereof
cleaner and better tempered bodies live secure: so in like manner, minds that
be corrupted, and all such understandings as have lost the stays and
principles of truth, are easily entrapped by every poor and childish
sophistication; and having once left their anchour-hold, float afterward up
and down upon the waves of humane opinations, are dashed against every rock of
error, be it never so low, or contemptible, and, like unto small weak flies,
are caught and entangled, not always by the strongest and most artificially
woven cobweb, but by the very next, though never so rude and slender. This poor
and sorrowful manner of defaillance must needs be, of all other, the most
hateful, not so much for the deadliness and venom, as for the reproach which
follows it; for by it a man loses not truth alone, but withal his reputation
and esteem; it being a judgment very slenderly armed that with a wooden dart
can be pierced through. Experience verifies what I affirm; for of late a sorry
Animal, better then so I cannot call him, whose soul he himself thinks to be
mortal, and whose learning and capacity is so small, as if indeed it were so
mean as he imagines it to be; This sorry Animal, having stepped into the crowd
of Scriblers in the defense of an old rotten heresy, condemned and suffocated
by consent of the wise, almost at the hour of its birth, has met with some
other dull souls so unhappy as to be persuaded by him, and to think as meanly
of themselves as the wisest of all ages have done of beasts, to the dishonor
and debasing of their own kind; not elevating beasts to the degree of reason,
as sometimes Plutarch, Sextus Empiricus, and some others have sought to do,
though vainly, and peradventure more for ostentation and argumentation sake,
then in any earnest; but contrariwise, reproachfully depressing man, even as
low as brute beasts, by ascribing to them both a mortality alike.

The old and despicable heresy which this obscure author now labors to
resuscitate and to conjure up, was raised in Arabia about the time of Origin,
and extinguished by his dispute, immediately after its birth, as Eusebius
witnesses l. 6. Hist. c. 30. and according to the division of Rufinus, 27.
such as were infected with this error were termed by Saint Augustine de
Haeres. c. 83. Arabici, [Of these Arabici and their doctrines concerning the
soul, see Abraham Ecchellensis in supplem. Chronici Orientalis, where an
account is given of them.] by reason of the Province from whence the error
first arose: so that such as now submit unto it may well be termed wild
Arabians, which kind of people by reason of their rude condition and volatile
natures, were ever as ready to be cosened, first by this heresy, and after by
the grand Impostour Mahomet; as the Romans prepared to betray their own
liberty, then when Tiberius cried shame upon them for it, saying, O homines ad
servitutem paratos! O men prepared for servitude! Tacit. l. 3. Annal. who if he
had lived in this age, and noted the pronity of men now adays, to embrace
every groundless fancy, and to forgo any ancient and well-grounded truth, would
have changed a word or two and said, O mentes ad errorem paratas! O minds
prepared for error! O minds corrupt enough for the receiving and applause of
any folly, of any error, be it never so absurd, disadvantageous unto them, or
derogating from the dignity of humane nature! O curvae in terris animae! About
the time of these Arabici, Tatianus in an Oration of his yet extant seems to
have held with them, and afterward some later Sectaries termed by reason of
this their foolish error Thnetopsychitae, as Damascene relates l. de Haeres.

Lastly, one called Volkelius, has in our times blindly stumbled upon this
same error, teaching it expressly, and also laboring to prove it, l. 5. c. 25.
out of which puddle it is not unlikely this Adversary of ours did draw his
unwholesome waters of pestiferous doctrine, and went no further for them.

Upon the consideration of those errors that have of late infected us and
betrayed humane nature, I cannot think it a thing improbable, but that the
infernal spirit which has suggested them, and governed the hearts of men as a
predominant planet, in these Northern Provinces of Europe, is that martial
Devil called, Apocal. 9.11. Abaddon, or Apollyon, that is to say, a Destroyer;
for as much as the designs of all such as have disturbed our peace of late
days, are generally for ruin and destruction.

For first, what is the wealth and treasure of man, but the dignity and value
of his actions? of this he has long since been plundered. His eyesight whereby
his steps were to be guided, was his knowledge; but this diverse have labored
to extinguish by denying, with the old Academicks and late Socinians, that
there is any certainty in it, and by becoming so witty as to know nothing. His
regal sceptte, I mean his natural liberty, by the command of which the Empire
of his little world was swaied, is wrested out of his hands, and voiced to be
wholly forfeited and not any longer to appertain unto him. His crown and life
was the immortality of his better part, as therein chiefly being superior to
beasts and all other things irrational; but behold here also a privy but a
dangerous traitor endeavors to despoil him of it; so that in fine, if all
these treacherous assailants might have their wills, he shall be wholly
mortal, poor, feeble, blind, and miserable, dethroned from his wonted dignity,
and cast down unto the lower class of Beasts. Profecto plurima homini ex
homine mala, as Pliny justly complains, even though he himself be one of the
Authors of those evils which come from man against himself. Was it not enough
that all inferior creatures do rebel against us, but we must basely and
treacherously conspire against our selves? The man that going from Jerusalem to
Jericho fell amongst thieves, had hard measure offered him, for he was
despoiled and wounded by them, and left only half alive; but those thieves
amongst whom we are now fallen be far more cruel, for they would kill us
outright, that is to say, both in soul and body, and with less then this will
not be contented. But now it is time we begin to examine what urgent reasons,
what killing arguments there were that moved this new Author unto so
extravagant a course of rigor against all mankind; for if these be not very
urgent and invincible, we must conclude this man guilty not only of much
folly, but also of heinous malice and temerity against the rights and
prerogatives of man, in defense of which we now come into the field against him.

CHAP. II. His first Class of arguments examined and refuted.
HIs first arguments be drawn from man's creation, fall, restitution and
resurrection: the principal is this,

That what of Adam was immortal through Innocence, was to be mortalized by
transgression.

But whole Adam (quatenus animal rationale) was in Innocence immortal.

Ergo all and every part, even whole man liable to death by sin.

Upon this bungling argument or syllogism the weight of all his cause must
lean, which, as I perceive by the posture, should have been a syllogism, if
the Author could have cast it into that form; but since that might not be, we
will be contented to take it in gross as it lies, rather then pass it over
without an answer. We grant then that indeed all Adam for example by sinning
became mortal, and all and every part of him; that is to say, he was after so
much of his age exspired, to yield up to death and be totally corrupted; or,
which is all one, he was to have his two essential parts disunited, and after
that, until the resurrection, neither he, nor any of his parts thus dissevered
and disunited, to be Adam, or a man any longer, All which might be without that
either the matter of his body, or substance of his soul should perish or be
destroyed, as Thomas de Argentina expressly teaches in 2. did. 17. ar. 1. ad
1. arg. And forasmuch as concerns the matter of his body, it is an evident
case, because matter is a thing both ingenerable and incorruptible, and so
neither produced by his generation, nor destroyed by his corruption; and as by
generation only fashioned and united, so again by corruption or death, only
defaced and disunited or dissolved. And as for the soul the other part, there
is no more necessity death should destroy it, then there was it should destroy
the matter, there being no more reason for the one then for the other.
Wherefore Saint Paul wishing death that so he might be with Christ, did not
desire to be destroyed, as this silly Authors doctrine would infer, but to be
dissolved; for surely if his soul was to have been destroyed, by any natural
deficiency, or otherwise, he could not think to be with Christ, during the time
of that destruction, or dissolution which he wished, and so his words and
wishing would have been very vain, seeing, according to this Author, he should
by his being dissolved come never the sooner to be with Christ; because
according to him, neither alive nor dead he was to come unto Christ before the
general resurrection: nay further, his wish would have made against himself
and his own ends, because he knowing Christ a little in this life, might in
some small measure enjoy him in it; but if by death his soul be killed as well
as his body, he should have no knowledge at all nor comfort of Christ, but be
cast further off from him then he was before.

Now as all agree that matter throughout all mutations remains incorrupted;
so also, according to the judgment of sundry knowing men, and diligent
inquirers into the works of nature and transmutation of natural compounds,
natural and material forms themselves also do not perish at their parting
from their matters, but only are dissolved and dissipated, lying after that
separation in their scattered atoms within the bosom of nature, from whence
they had been before extracted by force of the seed, the result of whose union
was the form. So that the entity of the form remains still unperished after
corruption, though not in the essence and formality of a form, or totally and
completely. Thus teaches the learned Author of Religio Medici, and exactly
declares himself: of the same mind is the famous late Physician Daniel
Sennertus in his Hypomnemata, though sometimes not so fully; as for example,
when he ascribes to forms precedent the full production of the subsequent;
assigning a genitall power, or vis prolifica in every form for multiplying of
it self: by which doctrine he seems to recede from his former principles of
Atoms, and not to stick constantly to them, yea, and besides to deliver a
conceit which is hardly understood, and which moreover seems to be improbable;
for who can explicate what one form does when it multiplies another, or what
kind of causality it does then exercise, or by what strange influence that
effect is wrought and the form made up of nothing? This same doctrine of
Religio Medici, and that also which we deliver here touching the origination of
forms, was the doctrine of old Democritus, expressed by him in his constitution
of Atoms, or minima naturalia, as we find it largely expressed and illustrated
by Joan. Magnenus l. de Philosophia Democriti 'Disp. 2. c. 2. and seqq. as also
by Petrus Gassendus in his voluminous work de Philosophia Epicuri tomo 1. with
whom in substance agreed Leucippus, as we may find by that which Laertius and
others do deliver of him. Not that every Atome did contain a form, as Sennertus
seems to think, but rather several pieces for the composition of it; according
as every simple or ingredient of Diacatholicon, for example, is not
Diacatholicon, but contains something in it of which it is to be made up, and
from which as from differing heterogeneall parcels, collected and united by an
artificial mixtion, it results; and for want of putting this difference or
restraint, Sennertus his own doctrine and explication of Democritus may seem
defective. But though we may approve of Physical Atoms for the composition of
natural bodies, yet we do not thereby allow of Atoms Mathematical or
indivisibles with Zeno; of which point see Arriaga, and our learned countreyman
and Philosopher Compton otherwise called Carleton. Neither again do we with
Epicurus and some other old Philosophers, maintain any casual meeting or
accidental confluence of them; but contrariwise, an assembling of them in
generation by the force of seminall or spermatick virtue, descending from the
forms into the sperme or seeds, and by the Creator infused at the first
creation into the forms. As for the composition it self abstracting from these
particulars, it was also taught by Anaxagoras, when he affirmed all to be in
all, or every thing, and to have a preexistence in the bosom of nature, even
before such time as, by the operation of seminall causes, forms be accomplished
and made to appear in their own likeness upon this theater. This is also the
judgment of Athanas. Kircherius a late learned writer l. 3. de magnete, part.
3. c. 1. where he shows how rich compounds earth and water be, as Chymick
industries for separation have discovered, insomuch as he notes, there is
contained in them a (...), or general magazine; the common matter being from
the first creation not lean and hungry, but foeta and praeseminata with forms
partial and incomplete. This also is the inchoations of forms and the rations
seminales preexistent, which many learned men have often favored, expressly
taught by the great Albertus 1. Phys. tract. 3. c. 15. and 16. and. 1. part.
summae tract. 3. q. 14. ar. 2. memb. 2. and tract. 6. q. 26. ar. 2. memb. 1.
and part. 2. tract. 1. q. 4. ar. 1. memb. 2. Which doctrine of his being
explained in this sense declared, lies no way within the danger of the
objections of Gandavensis, Durandus, Dominicus de Flandria, or Thomas de
Argentina, who all proceed against it according to a way of understanding,
though true in it self, yet quite different from this, and also, as we may
justly think, from the true meaning of Albertus, or of Jacobus de Viterbo,
related by the afore-nominated Argentina l. 2. sent. did. 18. ar. 2. and there
impugned by him. The same doctrine for inchoations of forms in the matter
before generation, I mean not in materia prima, but in secunda and
praeseminata, is largely declared, proved, and defended by our learned
countreyman Jo. Bacon a Carmelite, l. 1. Quodlibet q. 6. and also in 2.
sentent. did. 18. q. unica, in which latter place he shows that this doctrine
is according to the meaning of S. Augustine: These same inchoations are the
rations primordiales concreated with the matter, in whose bosom they lie as
it were a sleep, until such time as by the genitall power and agency of forms,
which are in perfection and displaid, they be called out and united, not
accidentally, but substantially, into one Compositum, which Compositum when it
is to be dissolved, all those unfolded seminall reasons do shrink up again, and
withdraw themselves into the self same beds from which they came. And this is
the doctrine of Albertus and Bacon, although they do not descend to such
particulars as be expressed here, but hold themselves aloof, according to the
custom of the Schools, in more general principles and expressions.

This, lastly, is nothing else but, in a good sense, an eduction of forms ex
potentia materiae, which is Aristotle's and his Disciples Doctrine; for it
cannot be thought that Aristotle ever intended to press or squeez any forms
out of the dry skeleton of matersa prima, which matter is a principle only
receptive, and no promptuary out of which to educe a form by virtue of any
natural agent whatsoever; for in such a spare entity as that what fecundity is
imaginable?

And so much touching the original of forms, which is one of the abstrusest and
nicest points in all philosophy, and that which by vulgar Authors is meanliest
handled, and by the wisest is known but by conjecture.

Thus his main argument is answered, after which all the rest will fall down
headlong with any light touch, though but of a finger.

Immediately after this he argues out of Genesis 3.19. where Adam is told, that
for his disobedience he must turn into that dust of which he was made; out of
which he concludes, that all and every part of Adam must be converted into
dust: which if it be so as he says, then not only his earthly particles, but
his aerie, watery, and fiery parts must to dust also, and not only his body,
but his soul, if he have any, must be turned into the same matter. See what
fine conclusions follow out of this mortal souls philosophy. It sufficed then,
that so much of his body, or of the whole man, was to return to dust as had
been made up of it. And by this alone the commination of God is fulfilled
without any more ado.

After this he comes upon us with his false Latin, saying as follows. Death
reduces this productio entis ex nonente ad Non-entens, returns man to what he
was before he was: that is, not to be, etc. and by and by, citing impertinently
two or three places of Scripture, falls to another argument drawn from the
resurrection.

As for the Latin word Non-entem, whether it be right or no, we will not
examine, but apply our selves to the consideration of the sense, which is as
faulty as the Latin can be: know therefore in brief, that death did not reduce
Adam to non ens, but to non Adam; it did not cause him absolutely not to be,
but only not to be man or Adam any longer. And forasmuch as concerns his body,
it is confessed and certain, that it was not turned by death or mortality into
nothing, or non ens, but into dust, which is an ens, or something; that is to
say, his body was not annihilated, but corrupted; and to die, is not wholly to
be destroyed but partially only, which act is all one with dissolution. Now if
to the total mortalizing of man it be not necessary that his body be
destroyed, then can it not be needful that his soul should be so: and thus our
adversaries stout argument is more then mortalized, for it comes to nothing,
which man by dying does not.

We will not deny him but that the soul of man did die and die again, as much
as it was capable of death; for first it died by the being separated from the
body, although indeed, according to a philosophical propriety of speaking, this
same separation of it be no death, or true manner of dying: secondly, by being
subjected unto damnation, which, as we know, is called in Scripture a second
death. But as for the annihilation of it or of the body, that is it which we
deny; and so to do we have just reason. In fine, as Generation is nothing but
the union of the parts, and not the creation or absolute production of them; so
again, Death and Corruption is nothing but the disunion, or dissolution of
them, and in no wise the annihilation, according as this wise Author would
persuade us,

As for the article of the Resurrection, it proves nothing against the
perpetuity of the soul; for we never read of any resurrection besides that of
the body: wherefore to aver a resurrection of souls were a grand foolery, and
a doctrine never debateable or heard of amongst Christians, till this silly
Author came to teach it. And so much for his first chapter.

CHAP. III. Scripture no way a favourer of the souls mortality.
HIs places cited out of Scripture in favor of his error are so impertinent,
as that it were no small piece of folly to examine them one by one; They all of
them signify that man shall die, or sometimes, that for example Joseph or
Simeon is not, as Genesis 42.36. all which how they are to be expounded and
understood may sufficiently appear by that which has been said in the
precedent chapter, and how again they make nothing at all against the souls
immortality.

Touching the words of Ecclesiastes c. 3. the answer is, that they were no
determinations, or resolves, but a history, or an account given of what
sometimes came into his thoughts, and what obscurities and desolations of soul
he had, and what lastly was one of the first difficulties that troubled him,
and stirred him up unto a sollicitous enquiry; for certainly this one verity of
the immortality of man's soul, is that which is to order man's designs, to
regulate his actions, and to put life and vigor into them, this being a truth
most fundamental. We see this one was it which moved Clemens Romans l. 1.
recogn. (if he be the true Author of that which passes under his name) to a
serious inquiry and care for the finding out what he was to do, whom to
consult, what to esteem most, and in fine what to fear or hope most, and how to
order all the passages of his life. This is the question that usually troubles
men first of all, and till a resolution be had, suffers their hearts not to
be at quiet, every man at first suspiciously, as Solomon did, asking of
himself, as Seneca (in Troade) gallantly expresses, saying, Verum est? an
timidos fabula decipit?
Vmbras corporibus vivere conditis,
Cum conjux oculis imposuit manum,
Supremusque dies Solibus obstitit,
Et tristes cineres Vrna coercuit?
Non prodest animam tradere funeri,
Sed restat miseris vivere longius?
An toti morimur? nullaque pars manet,
Nostri cum profugo spiritus halitu
Immistus nebulis cessit in era,
Et nudum tetigit subdita fax latus?
Is it a truth? or is it our fears
Have buzzed a fable in our ears?
That man's hovering spirits do live,
And their interred corpse survive,
When grieved consorts hands do close
Their eyes, and their last days oppose
Our bright Hyperions beamy light,
And drowns the slender shades in night,
Then when our bones to ashes burn,
To be confined within an urn?
Be not the funerals our fate,
But there must be a longer date
For wretched man? Or does he die
Entirely, and intombed lie?
Or may he not forthwith consume
And vanish all in slender fume
Then when his wandering spirit flies
And mingles with the aerie skies,
And when the dismal funeral torch
His side insensible does scorch?


After this sort do anxious and afflicted spirits oftentimes argue and dispute
within themselves, laying before their eyes all the doubts and difficulties
imaginable, before they descend to the making of any conclusion at all, or to
the determining of any settled doctrine. Thus and no otherwise did Solomon, when
first revolving in his thoughts the matter of the souls condition, and touching
upon the various suspicions of men concerning it, with no small sense and
anguish of mind, at length Eccles. c. 12. drawing to a conclusion, he
determines, saying, Let the dust return unto the earth from whence it came, and
the spirit unto God who gave it. And this text alone is sufficient to confound
the Adversary, and to confute whatsoever he has endeavored to draw out of
Scripture for man's total corruption and mortality.

I add, according to good Expositours, that Solomon in this place represents
not what he himself did judge, nor what a rational man ought to judge, but
rather what Epicureans and voluptuous persons did, or were wont to judge,
according either to the desires, or at least to the apparences of sense; for
according to them, man and beast do breathe out their lasts alike; but this
judgment of theirs Solomon absolutely condemns, as appears plainly by that
which before has been alleged out of him.

CHAP. IV. His argument out of reason viewed and examined.
WHat the several fancies were of heathen Philosophers touching the nature and
definition of the soul, is not much regardable, sundry of them being so
monstrous and absurd. But it is a thing very considerable, that amongst so many
straggling and wild conceits, all, or most of all at least of the noblest and
the best Philosophers, have taught the immortality of the soul it self:
howsoever, in other businesses concerning it they might sometimes disagree.
Permanere animos arbitramur, says Cicero Tuscul. l. 1. consensu nationum
omnium: qua in sede maneant, qualesque sint ratione discendum est: and again in
his Hortensius, as witnesses Saint Augustine l. 14. c. 19. de Trinitate.
Antiquis Philosophis, hisque maximis longeque clarissimis, placuit, quod
aeternos ammos divinosque habeamus. We are persuaded by the consent of all
nations that souls remain, but must learn of reason of what quality they are,
and in what places they remain. Again, in Somnio Scipionis he determines,
saying, Infra Lunam nihil est nisi mortale and caducum, praeter animos generi
hominum Deorum munere datos. Beneath the Moon there is nothing which is not
corruptible, excepting souls alone bestowed upon mankind by the munificence of
the Gods. Thus Cicero, who in his book de senectute delivers himself more at
large, as also in the first book of his Tusculan questions, and also brings
reasons for what he says. This assertion of Cicero, for consent of Nations and
Philosophers in this truth, has been showed to the eye by the great diligence
and learning of Augustinus Steuchus, commonly called Eugubinus, in the 9 book
of his excellent work de perenni Philosophia, in which he voucheth to this
purpose the authorities of Phere^ides Syrus, who as Cicero witnesses, was the
first that delivered this verity in writing, also of Trismegistus, and the
Chaldean monuments of Plato, likewise Pythagoras, Aratus, Philo, Cicero,
Plotinus, Jamblichus, Hierocles, and sundry others, as also of Aristotle the
Prince of the Peripateticks, who is judged by the greatest searchers into his
doctrine to have directly taught the immortality, although he had not declared
himself in that point, as in many others, nor as others have done, peradventure
concealing himself on set purpose, because he for want of light from divine
revelation, was not able to tell what to do with them after death, nor was he
willing to make up his matter with fictions poetical, as his master Plato had
done before him; and this very reason of Aristotle's reservednesse in this point
is rendered by Tostatus, Paradox. 5. c. 54. and 55. For this cause peradventure,
he held it more expedient to leave his judgment of the souls immortality to be
gathered out of the consequence of his doctrine and words, let fall here and
there, as it were by chance, rather then to deliver it in express terms, or to
handle the question on set purpose. It was enough for him, 1. Ethic. c. 11. to
have said, that the fortunes of posterity good or bad were a concernment of the
dead; because, out of this one assertion his mind might come to be known: for
of a certain, that which is not can have no concernment, wherefore the souls of
the deceased were supposed by Aristotle to have a being, and consequently to be
still alive, and also to live intellectually; because first of all, as the
Philosopher teaches, Viventibus esse est vivere, To be and to live, is with
creatures endued with life all one thing, so that with them to kill is as much
as to annihilate; secondly, by the same reason Intellectualibus esse est
intelligere, With creatures intellectual, their being is to be intellectual,
or to live intellectually; so that if the intellectual part of them be
extinguished, they perish wholly, and have neither life nor being left them. In
consideration of this we may say, that it is no matter at all to Bucephalus,
for example, whether those of his race proved jades or metall'd horses: and why
is this? because Bucephalus is extinguished and has no life nor being: but
contrariwise, according to Aristotle, it is a matter to the predecessors,
whether their posterity prove good or bad, happy or miserable; and why then
must this be, but because these have life, though Bucephalus had none, these
have a being intellectual, Bucephalus has none at all? Other places also of
Aristotle are consonant to this, as we may find in Javellus l. 3. de Animae q.
3. and again tract. 1. de Indeficientia Anima: in the Conimbricenses tract. de
Animasepar. disp. 1. art. 2. and lastly in Albertinus tom. 1. Corollariorum.
Moreover, Plutarch. in l. de Consol. ad Apollonium, out of Aristotle's book de
Anim. ad Eudemum, recites this passage following, as the words of Silenus unto
Midas. Wherefore, says Silenus, O most noble and happy, seeing we esteem those
who are departed this life to be happy and blessed, we hold it a thing very
wicked to speak of them any thing that is false or contumelious, by that they
now are made partakers of a better and more noble nature: and this opinion of
ours is so ancient, that the Author and the beginning thereof be wholly
unknown, but by an infinite descent of ages has been devolved upon us. Thus
reports Plutarch, and it is not unlike but Aristotle who alleged it was of
the same mind; and this is probable so much the more, because his chief scholar
Theophrastus, a man almost equal to himself, is confessed to have been very
positive in this doctrine of immortality. The same Philosophers also are
diligently alleged by Monsieur Plessy, in his book de veritate Relig.
Christianae c. 15. which is every where extant. Besides, the same doctrine of
immortality has been constantly taught by the learned Aben Sina, or Avicen in
the last book of his Metaphysics, and also in his Almahad, in which treatise
he maintains constantly the immortality of the soul, but earnestly impugneth
the bodies resurrection, and withal, which is most false and improbable,
defends that Mahomet in his law never taught it, but only parabolically and
for fashion sake, complying with the peoples rudeness, whereby they were not
sensible of any doctrine teaching a felicity that was spiritual. Another
Arabic Author, who goes under the name of Aristotle, is of the same mind
with Avicen: Seeing, says he, it is manifest out of the books of the ancient,
and already proved, that the soul or mind is not a body, nor does perish, but
remain, etc. Thus he l. 1. de divin. sap. secundum Aegyptios, c. 2. p. 1. and
12. consonantly to other Philosophers, though afterward, in the very next
chapter, most absurdly he affirms as much of the souls of Beasts. But his
reason was, because he thought the souls of men did, after their separation,
pass into the bodies of brute beasts by a transmigration Pythagoricall.
Afterward c. 4. he adds, saying: If our fore elders had been doubtful of
the souls immortality, they had never, for the confirmation thereof by natures
dictamen, made a law against which no man is, but he who is entangled in vice.
And a little after: The soul therefore passing out of this life, and gotten
into the other world, does not at all perish. Lastly, l. 3. c. 1. and again, l.
12. a. c. 10. ad 17. he by many arguments assayeth to prove that the soul is
void of corporeity. Thus he, of whose credit and excellency see the judicious
censure of Doctor Guiliel. Dunal in Synopsi doctrina Peripatetic^^. ultimo..

Amongst the Poets let us heart ancient Epicharmus, who, as Plutarch relates
out of him, pronounced sentence as follows touching one departed this life. A
collection was first, now a dissolution follows, and he is returned from whence
he came, the earth downward, the spirit upward. So he, in Plutarch l. de
Consol. ad Apollonium, Conform to whom is Euripides in Supplic.

Res unde quaeque sumserat exordium,
Eo recipitur, spiritus c^^le redit,
Corpusque terra.
Each part returns from whence 'twas given;
Man's corpse to earth, his soul to heaven.
Next unto these I produce Manilius, yet not as a light Poet, but as a sage
Philosopher; he flourished in the time of Caesar Julius. This same Author l.
1. Astronomicoon, speaking of the Galaxia, and endeavoring to give a reason of
it, writes on the manner following.

Nec mihi celanda est famae vulgata vetustas
Mollior, ex niveo lactis fluxisse liquorem
Pectore reginae divum, coelumque color
Infecisse suo, quapropter lacteus orbis
Dicitur, and nomen causa descendit ab^ista.
An major densa stellarum turba Corona
Contexit flammas, and crasso lumine candet,
Et fulgore nitet collato clarior orbis.
An fortes animae dignataque nomina coelo,
Corporibus resoluta suis, terraque remissa,
Hue migrant ex orb, suumque habitantia coelum
Aethereos vivunt annos mundoque fruuntur.
Nor will we hide what ancient fame professed,
How milk that gusht from Juno's snowy breast,
In heaven that splendent path and circle drew;
From whence the name, as erst the color grew.
Or troops of unseen stars there join their light,
And with their mingled splendours shine more bright.
Or souls Heroic from their bodies freed
And earthly parts, attain their virtues meed,
This shining Orb, and from their lowly hearse
Ascending high, enjoy the Universe,
And live Ethereall lives.
And again,
Jam capto potimur mundo nostrumque parentem
Pars sua conspicimus, genitique accedimus astris.
Nec dubium est habitare Deum sub pectore nostro,
In coelumque redire animas, coeloque venire.
Of all the world we 're now possessed,
And clear behold our Parent blessed,
A part of him, and from these wars
Make our approches to the stars.
No doubt but under humane breast
A sacred Deity does rest;
And that our souls from heaven came,
And thither must return again.
Lo here how he does signify, not only the souls of men be divine and
immortal, but besides, that they had not their original from the earth, or
from any earthly agent: with whom consents a Greek Philosopher Sallustius
Emescenus, in his book de Diis and mundo lately published and vindicated from
the moathes by Leo Allatius; This Philosopher c. 8. teaches on this sort.
First says he let us know what the soul is. The soul is that which makes
things living, or animate, differ from the livelesse, or inanimate. Their
difference consists in motion, sense, fantasy, and intelligence. The soul
devoid of reason is a life that serves apparences and the senses, but the
rational, using reason, bears rule over the sense and fantasy. Indeed, a
soul destitute of reason follows the affections of the body, for it desires and
is angry without reason; but a rational, according to the rule of reason,
contemnes the body, and entering into combat with the soul irrational, if it
get the better does follow virtue, if vanquished declines to vice. This of
necessity must be immortal, because it knows the Gods, and no mortal thing
can know that which is immortal; besides, it contemnes humane things, as if
they were belonging to some other person, and being it self incorporeall, is
averse from things corporeal, which bodies, if they be fair and fresh, it
languisheth, if old, it begins to flourish. Also every diligent soul makes use
of the mind. (...); the soul is not generated by the body, for how should any
thing that wants reason generate that which has it? Thus Sallustius, out of
whose words we have, first, That the soul differs from the body. 2. That the
rational from the irrational, or the sense. 3. That the rational is
immortal, and the reason why. 4. That it is ingenerable, and for what cause.
With this Greek Sallustius agrees the Roman, who l. de bello Jugurth. says,
Ingenii egregia facinora, sicut anima immortalia sunt: The egregious
achievements of the wit are like the soul immortal: and, by and by, Omnia
orta occidunt, aucta senescunt, animus incorruptus, aeternus, rector humani
generis: All things which rise do fall, and being increased do wax old, the
mind is incorrupt and eternal, etc.

From these Philosophers we descend to inquire after the disciples of
Hippocrates, being desirous to learn what their opinion was, of which we are to
make no small account, they being the chief Mystae, or Hierophantae of nature,
and men most knowing, especially in the transmutation of bodies; and not only
in the Anatomizing by dissection of such bodies as be organicall, but also of
others by the Art of Chemistry, which teaches how to dissolve natural
compounds, though not so far as into their first elements, yet into their
secondary parts of composition. True it is, that diverse of this excellent
profession have been suspected of some sinister cogitations touching the
immortal soul, as namely, that it was like that of beasts, that is to say,
only a thin and fading exhalation raised out of the pure substance of the
blood, etc. But I must do them right; such of them as have been guilty of these
thoughts, or rather mean conceptions, were not any of their Grandees, no
Apollines, nor Aesculapii, but, contrariwise, men of a far meaner condition,
and only of a midling size at the most, such, I say, as, by reason of their
weaker understandings, have lost themselves amongst the rubbish of material
and grosser objects and there perished. Whereas the diviner understandings have
sped better, as being able, from material things, to take a higher flight, and
by a curious inspection into the effects, to find out the first cause and
mover, and by the diviner operations of the soul, to conclude the immortality
thereof. And of this eminent sort, in our days Italy has afforded us an
Argenterius and a Jul. Scal. Spain a Vallesius and a Mercatus: France a
Fernelius and a Laurentius: Portugal a Zacutus: Germany a Sennertus: to say
nothing of the great Aldrovandus, Dodonaeus and others. As then, as Cicero
observes they were Minutuli, little petty Philosophers, who denied the souls
immortality, so also may we say that those Physicians who did the same, were
but an inferior sort of men, and half-witted, in comparison of those other who
did maintain it. And as for Galen, a most principal master in that profession,
he inclines to the asserting of immortality; for though sometimes he seem much
perplexed, not knowing what to determine, then, namely, when he only
considered how the habilities of the mind held a constant proportion with the
several structures and temperatures of the body, rising and falling with them;
yet at other times, when he beheld the sublimer operations of the ^de, he durst
not affirm them to be the effects of temperature, nor of any corporeal
principle: and so being reduced into great straits, confesses finally his own
ignorance, and that he knows not whence they do proceed; as namely, l. Quod
anima sequatur temperaturam corporis. and again, l. De usu spirat. l. De causis
pulsuum. and l. 2. De causis symptom. After all which, l. 7. De Placitis
Hippocratis, he grows more resolute, declaring plainly, That the mind, or
original of those operations, is either some body Etherall, or else a
substance wholly incorporeall: and finally, l. de Conceptu, his conclusion is
delivered by him in these following words; The soul, says he, is a particle of
that great soul of the Universe, descending from the region celestial, is
capable of science, aspiring evermore, by a way sorting to it self, unto such a
substance as has affinity therewith, and relinquishing things that are
earthly, soaring toward the highest, partaking of divinity celestial, and
often contemplating the heavenly mansion it gives an attendance to the
Moderatour of the Universe. Thus Galen, as cited by Fernelius l. 2. de abditis
rerum causis e. 4. and the self same he defines l. de Demonstratione, alleged
by the ancient and learned Nemesius, l. de Anima c. 1. Also, before Galen,
Hippocrates resolved the very same, whose words, l. de Carne, are these: Of
things, says he, celestial and sublime, I am, as it to me seems, to say
nothing, save only that men and other creatures which live upon the earth and
are bred there, have their Original from thence, and that the soul is from
heaven. Now will I declare my opinion. Verily, it seems to me that the thing
which we term hot and heat, is something which is not mortal. So he,
according as we find him cited by Fernelius in the place before quoted; and so
much for the honor of Physicians in order to this truth.

Our next authority is that of Apollonius Tyaneus that famous Pythagorean
Philosopher, whose life Philostratus Lemnius has writ at large, and amongst
other accidents, l. 8. relates of him how, after his decease, he appeared to a
young man a student in philosophy, resolving him as follows. The soul is
immortal, and no humane thing, but proceeds from the providence divine. This
therefore, after the body is corrupted, as a swift courser released from his
bonds and delivered from a troublesome servitude, removes up and down, and
intermingles with the gentle ^ire. Thus he: to whom consents most expressly
Hierocles in his commentary upon the golden verses of Pythagoras in sundry
places, telling us that the the soul is not only incorruptible, but also made
immediately, not by procreation, but the hand of God. See him of the Greek and
Latin edition of Paris page 101. 103, 132.

Seneca the famous Stoics mind may be learned easily out of his three
several consolatory Tractates; namely, to Polybius, Helvia and Martia, and
Epist. 121. as also out of other places wheresoever occasion was given. His
words to Martia be these. Mobilis and inquieta men's homini data est, etc. A
mind, says he, restless and unquiet is given unto man, and no wonder, if we
look up unto the first Original; it is no concretion of any dull or earthly
body, but descends from a spirit celestial, is to be in motion incessantly:
it flies and is carried on with a swift course, etc. Thus he, out of whose
words we may gather three things; first, that the soul is from above, and not
by any natural generation. Secondly, that it is immortal. Thirdly, that after
once it is released from corporeal Organs, it acts continually, and never
sleeps.

I will add to these the words of the Emperor Marcus Antoninus, commonly
called Aurel. de vita sua l. 4. n. 13. according to Merick Casaubon's division.
If souls, says he, remain, how from all eternity could the air hold them, or
how the earth retain their bodies? As here the bodies after they have line a
while within the earth are changed, and being dissipated, leave space for other
carcasses; so souls carried up into the air, after they have been there some
time, whether kindled or liquefied, are conjoined to the common (...), that is,
unto the original mind, or great soul of the world. Thus he, as if he had
said with Solomon, the spirit returns to God that made it; for the great soul
of the Universe, or the original mind of all, is nothing else. Horace
consents, saying, Melior pars nostri vitabit libitinam. and Tacitus in vit.
Jul. Agric. Siquis piorum manibus locus, sive, ut sapientibus placet, non cum
corpore extinguuntur magnae animae, placide quiescas. If to the spirits of the
pious there be any place remaining, if, as wise men do conceive, great souls be
not together with their bodies extinguished, may thou rest in peace. To
these Ovid subscribeth Metamor. l. 15. Morte carent animae, etc. Souls be
exempt from death, and l. ult.

Cum volet ille dies, quae nil nisi corporis hujus
Jus habet, incert^ spatium mihi finiat aevi:
Part tamen meliore mei super alta perennis
Astra ferar nomenque erit indelebile nostrum,
Come when it will my Deaths uncertain hour,
Which of this body only has a power;
Yet shall my better part transcend the sky,
And my immortal name shall never die.
Some may here imagine that this same immortality of the better part mentioned
by Horace and Ovid, is, according to them, nothing else but a never-dying fame:
yet this cannot be, because fame, though never so lasting, is no part at all of
us, neither better nor worse.

The same doctrine is constantly taught by Pythagoras, as appears by his
doctrine of Metempsychosis and Palingenesia, as also both Jamblichus and
Porphyry in their several histories of his life do witness of him, as also
Diogenes Lacrtius. Porphyr. l. de Abstinentia is also of the same opinion.

I conclude this Jury with the judgment of Macrobius, who c. 14. in somnium
Scipionis, after he had recited sundry and differing fancies of several
Philosophers touching the nature of the soul, concludes as follows. Obtinuit
tamen, non minus de incorporalitate ejus, quam de immortalitate sententia.
Nevertheless, the opinion touching the incorporeity of the soul, as well as
touching the immortality of it has been prevalent. Against all these therefore
it imports little that Dicaearchus Messenius a Peripatetick Philosopher and
Scholar to Aristotle, or that Aristoxenus should, as Cicero relates in the
first of his Tusculanes and in the second of his Academicks, hold and defend it
to be mortal, or that both he, and, as Cicero reports out of him, another
more ancient Philosopher, by name Pherecrates, one of the lineage of Deucalion,
did think there was no soul at all, neither in man nor beast. And forasmuch as
concerns the same Dicaearchus, we read in Sextus Empiricus and Tertullian,
l. 2. Hypot. c. 5; as also in Job. Fr. Picus of Mirandula, l. de Doctrine,
vanit. Genti^^^, c. 14. he was of the same opinion: for there is nothing so
absurd which some one Philosopher or other has not maintained. Sextus
Empiricus was of the same mind also, as he l. adv. Mathematices acknowledges.

As for Epicurus and his associates, they cannot be admitted to give sentence
here, and therefore their adverse judgment is not prejudicial to our cause.
First, because the common Epicureans were slaves to voluptuousness and vice,
using Philosophy only as a cloak wherewith to palliate their enormities.
Secondly, because they themselves are guilty persons, and that in a high manner
also; for although, as Tostatus in Genes. determines, the right Epicureans
were men of great gravity, yet they offended grossly against the light of
nature in sundry passages of Philosophy concerning the highest verities.
Moreover, though Petrus Gassendus in his late voluminous tractates De vita and
Philosophia Epicuri, has freed Epicurus from many foul objections and
imputations, and with much labor has washed him, and wrung him, and perfumed
him; yet many stains do rest behind, which with all his art he was not able to
fetch out; neither could he sweeten him so fully, but that he smells still of
the hogge-sty, and that also so strongly, as he is not fit to enter into the
Senate House of Philosophy, or to have a voice therein allowed him. What was
the occasion of his error is needless to examine, but the error it self, and
the reasons brought for it by Lucretius, are exactly refuted by the same
Gassendus, as also his other impious doctrines.

Neither, again, can the words of Pomponatius and Cromoninus be of any weight,
although they be men much adored by some superstitious followers of Aristotle;
for if we consider these two men attentively, we shall find them to be wooden
Idols, because their chief talent lay only in canvasing several texts of
Aristotle, and, foot by foot, tracing out his senses and ways of discoursing:
so that, in fine, they are rather Commentatous then Philosophers a Philosophers
office being to prove his doctrines by reason and strength of argument, which
way these two never take; but yet doubtless would have done, if their
habilities had served them for it. Wherefore these men are of too low a class
to be made Judges here, and have not law enough in them for the deciding of the
controversy in hand.

After these Philosophers of name, which I have alleged as favorers and
asserters of immortality, I produce the whole companies of the Esseni, the
Druides, the Magi, the Gymnosophists, the Brachmans, all which were tribes and
Schools of selected spirits, that in several ages and regions did profess
Philosophy, and all subscribed to this one truth, as we may find in Pliny,
Caesar, Josephus, Solinus, Mela, Philostratus, Diodorus, Porphyrius, and
others. Neither can it be any prejudice to the authority of all these, that
during the night of Gentilisme, an Epicurus, or a Dicaearchus, though men of
note, should stumble and fall into an error: but now after the sun is up, it
were a great shame for a Pomponatius, or a Cremoninus to fall into a ditch, and
teach such doctrine as the wisest of the most early ages judged to be erroneus
and absurd.

But now, by the way, I note how sublimely most of these heathen wise men did
Philosophize, when as they conclude the souls original to be from heaven, and
how much above the low pitch of certain depressed spirits of this age, who
after their continual poring into objects material, and raking in the mudde
of corruptible things, will needs draw out of that dirt the nobler substances
of our souls and natures intellectual, by assigning for them no more perfect
principle then generation; of which number this sorry Author, against whom we
now deal, is one, yea and one also of the grossest that ever meddled about this
business, as by his demeanor in it does appear. Hierocles in express terms
determines saying, It seems, says he, that God himself produced the several
souls of every particular man, and left the souls of Beasts to be produced by
the hand of nature, according to the judgments of Plato and of Timaeus the
Pythagorean. So he com. in caerm. aurea Pythagorae page: 133. of the Greek and
Latin Edition of Paris Anni 1583.

I know well, that amongst these ancients the word Anima, or (...), is
equivocall, because sometimes it is taken only for an exhalation of purer
blood, sometimes again for (...), Men's, or Animus, (...), by which words the
ruling, the spiritual, and intellective, and lastly, the immortal part of man
is signified; and not any material, or fading exhalation, which here by the
way I note, for the avoiding of exceptions and mistakings.

Let us come now unto our Author, who would gladly father upon Aristotle,
Nemesius, and Ambrosius Paraeus, that the soul is all the external and
internal faculties of man jointly considered. Which charge is strange seeing
it is well known that Aristotle defines the soul after no such way, but says
it is Actus corporis Organici, and a substance by which we live, have sense,
and do understand; and if a substance, then can it not receive intension and
remission, as every young Logician has learned.

The ancient and learned writer Nemesius, whom the adversary alleges, does no
way favor him. First, because, at that time both he and sundry others did hold
that rational souls were created before their bodies; but the faculties
organicall and external, could not be then created. Secondly, because l. de
natura hom. c. 1. he delivers doctrine diametrically opposite to that for which
this Author does allege him. Moreover, says Nemesius, the soul is a
substance, because susceptible of contrarieties; it is a subject, but harmony a
quality. Now substance and quality be things distinct, and therefore the soul
from harmony: and though it may have harmony in it, yet is it not therefore any
harmony, no more then it is a virtue therefore because it is partaker of
virtue. Galen determines nothing of this point, witnessing in his book de
Demonst. that he has affirmed nothing of the soul: yet that he does say
shows him inclinable to judge it to be a temperature therefore, because the
difference in manners does follow it, and this he labors to confirm out of
Hippocrates. If this be so, then doubtless he holds it to be mortal, though
not all, but so much only of it as is devoid of reason, for of that portion of
it he in these words makes a question...... But, that the soul cannot be a
complexion, or temperature of the body, it appears hence, namely, because
every body, etc. Hitherto Nemesius, whose doctrine as we may see is flatly
opposite to the Adversaries.

His pretension to Ambrose Paraeus, a late writer of Chiturgery, is as wide
from the mark as this other before of Nemesius was, as may appear plainly by
the perusal of c. 5. l. 1. and c. 11. l. 23. wherein his doctrine is very
good, and also consonant to that which is delivered commonly, and we here
defend. Wherefore let us now hear further.

All the faculties of man are mortal, as well those peculiar to man, as those
other which are common to him with beasts: and if all those with his corpulent
matter completing man be proved mortal, then the invention of the soul upon
that ground vanishes, which thus I prove.

All elementary compositions or temperatures are mortal. But man's faculties, a
minore ad majus, are temperatures. Ergo mortal.

The minor is denied, namely that all man's faculties be temperatures; for, to
instance, neither the understanding nor the will be temperatures, and yet are
principal faculties of man.

He proves the minor. That which is subject to intension and remission is a
temperature.

But such are all man's faculties, yea those of reason, consideration, science
etc. All that distinguishes man from beast is augmented by learning,
education, etc. lessened by negligence, idleness; and quite nullified by
madness. Ergo.

Of this killing argument there be but two propositions fall, that is to say,
both the major and the minor of it, and then what kind of conclusion it has we
may easily judge. For first, it is false that every thing is a temperature,
universally speaking, which is subject to intension and remission, excepting
such things only as be subject unto them per se and by their own nature, and
not by accident only: and this appears in the very business now in agitation
between us; for a greater clerk then this man is, will hardly ever prove that
the augment or diminution, which is found in the acts of knowledge, do arise
from any internal alteration in the intellective faculty, and not contrariwise
from the difference, advantage, and alteration in the organ, or the species and
forms intentionall: for this reason therefore, a man may understand better then
a child, namely, not because his faculty intellective is better then a child's,
but only for betternesse in the organ; also a learned man better then an
illiterate, and a diligent then a negligent, because those may have acquired
more species, or forms intentionall, or else have kept them better then these
other that be illiterate and negligent, and not for any intension or remission
in the faculty. This I say may be the reason of the difference, and is likely
so to be, and not any variation in the faculty it self, notwithstanding any
thing which this Author has said; and therefore this proof of his is
defective and of no validity.

In the same sense we deny the minor also: for it does not follow that the
faculties rational be more or less, because the acts of it be more or less,
in regard that there may be more causes then one of this intension or
remission, as namely, the different perfection of the organ, as well as the
several measure of the faculty it self. Wherefore it belongs to this Author
to prove that this ebbing or flowing of acts of knowledge, is to be referred to
the soul's or understanding's wanings and increases, and not to the differences
of the organs; which thing since he fails to do, his argument can by no means
conclude, or be admitted as good.

He argues again. Temperature is a quality. A quality may be absent without
the destruction of the subject. Reason and understanding may be so: therefore
they are temperatures, or qualities, and not substances immortal. The minor is
proved by example of madness, falling sickness, etc.

In answer, First, I deny it to follow, that because Reason is a quality,
therefore it is a temperature, for there be many qualities which neither are
temperatures nor belong unto them, because no other qualities belong to
temperature, but only such as be elementary.

Secondly, I deny absolutely that reason or understanding can be absent without
the destruction of the soul, or of man. I know the act of reason may be absent,
and the effluence of it hindered, more or less, as in infants, mad men, a
poplectick persons, and such like, but still the root remains, and without
death cannot be removed. Hence I infer against this Author, that although
sundry actual intellections may be improved, or impaired by sense, yet the
radical cannot, but is wholly independent. Nay further, even some acts of the
soul are in the manner of working independent of the body, and wholly
inorganicall, as diverse learned Authors have showed.

Some old authors have ascribed to the soul a body Aethereall; but that it
self was a body Aercall or Elementary, I conceive none of them ever yet
affirmed. What that obscure writer says whom he calls Woolnor, I neither
know nor regard, for he is no classical Author, nor has any voice allowed
him in the Philosophers Parliament.

The several absurdities: which afterward this Author labors to infer, do
not follow out of the doctrine of immortality, but only out of his own
mistakes, erroneous and ignorant conceptions, and therefore he may take them
all home to himself, which to do, I know it must be to his great loss; for
throughout his whole book he swarms so much with this kind of vermin, as they
eat up all the substance of his undertakings and discourse.

He adds. Every form depends of the matter, and by separation perishes. But
we must tell him that this is false doctrine and can never be proved. If it
were not so, says he, then one might be generated without the other, a soul
without a body, and a woman be brought to bed of a spirit.

I answer, That an immortal soul cannot at all be generated; as first, being
by it self and its own nature ingenerable; and secondly, having no principle
here on earth, either material or efficient, that is able to beget it, all
agents created in this kind being impotent, as afterward we intend to show
against this Author, as also against Sennertus, Religio Medici, and some
others.

What reason is there, says he, man's and beasts Anatomy being both considered
and compared together, that man's faculties in a higher degree should be an
immortal spirit, more then beasts in a lower degree, but both elementary and
finite?

For the finitenesse we grant you that both are finite, but not both
elementary, or mortal: and this we collect not from the Anatomy, but from the
operations, by which we do collect not a graduall difference betwixt the two
souls bestiall and humane, but an essential. See Aquinas l. 2. contr. Gent. c.
66. and Ferrariensis, ibid.
So that call it reason which is in beasts, or call it what you will that
reason which is in man is essentially superior unto it: and if that of beasts
be reason, then does man's reason deserve another better term whereby to
signify the essential pre-eminence of it, as Campanellae himself acknowledges
in diverse works of his, and proves in his Metaphysics at large. We know that
bordering nations do a little symbolize in their natures, but yet are not
therefore the same: so then, albeit the highest of vegetables, as the herba
viva, or the Agnus Tartaricus (if there be such a plant) and the Zoophyta, have
some resemblance to creatures of sense, yet nevertheless are they different
from them, and the Zoophyta themselves belong only to one class or other, and
not to both. So, in like sort, although the most perfect of animals have acts
of sensation that something resemble the apprehensive, discursive, and judging
faculties of man, yet are they wholly and essentially distinct. Wherefore, as
some erroneously may imagine, the sense in beasts is not a weak or imperfect
reason; nor again, in man is reason a strong and perfect sense, for these two
faculties be wholly different even in one and the same man, as manifestly
appears, First, by the several degrees of subordinate perfections found in
creatures, which perfections, whenever extant in several sorts of creatures,
be specifically, or essentially distinct; as namely, the degree of vegetation
is distinguished from that other next inferior to it in all things that be
destitute of life; and so again, is the degree superior of sensation from the
inferior of vegetation: wherefore in like sort, and in proportion to these, we
are to think that the degree of reason, though never so imperfect, is
essentially distinct from that of sense, though never so perfect, and is
superior unto it. As then it would be no small absurdity for us to confound
the confining degrees of life and no life, sense and vegetation; so also would
it be to confound sense and reason, and to allow between them a difference no
greater then accidental secundum magis and minus. Secondly, the same appears
by the different objects of either faculty; Reason, for example, is sensible of
religion, of spirits, of future times, of shame, of compassion; but Brutes have
no sense at all of these, no feeling of them, neither more nor less, neither
perfect nor imperfect. But if the degrees of sense and reason differed only
accidentally, that is to say, according to greater or less graduall
perfection, and no more; then would it follow that whatsoever reason apprehends
perfectly, sense also would apprehend, at least imperfectly, in one degree or
other; which seeing sense does not, we may safely infer from thence, that
reason is essentially different from sense, and again, that sense is not an
imperfect reason, but contrariwise no reason at all, perfect nor imperfect.

Again, we see that Reason bridles Sense, and, like a shore, confines it, and
therefore Reason and Sense are no more one thing, then the Bridle and the Horse
or then the Shore and the Ocean. Of which point more may be seen in Aquinas and
his Commentatour Ferrariensis l. 2. cont. Gentes c. 66.

Thirdly, the same also does appear out of the contrariety and disagreement
which we daily do experience betwixt the two judgments of reason and sense, as
also between the two appetites sensual and rational, and the great repugnancy
we find between them throughout our whole life, and by the great business and
sharp conflicts which are caused thereby, much to our cost and labor.

The opposition betwixt the indication of sense and the judgment of reason is
evident: because the sense, for example, judges the suns diameter to be but
a span; reason here opposes, and concludes it to be much greater then the
diameter of the whole earth. Infinite other examples might be given, but this
one may suffice for all.

The disagreement of the two appetites, and how they draw several ways, and
torture the heart of man, is evident, First, by every man's experience;
Secondly, by the suffrages of the Genes. Ovid brings in Medaea complaining
tragically in these words, Metamorph. l. 17. -- Aliudque cupido,
Men's aliud suadet. Video melioraproboque,
Deteriora sequor,
A new-felt force my striving powers invades,
Affection this, discretion that persuades.
I see the better and approve it too,
The worse I follow.
Seneca in Hippolyto accords, Quae memoras scio
Vera esse, Nutrix, sed furor cogit sequi, etc.
Good Nurse, thy counsel I confess is true,
But forced by fury, I the worst pursue.


The writings of Plato, Cicero, Seneca, Hierocles, and other Philosophers,
abound with the doctrine of making resistance against passions and the unruly
appetitions of the body.

Aristotle l. 1. Ethic. c. ult. and l. 7. c. 23. The pleasures, says he, of
the mind be repugnant to those of the body, and those actions which delight
the mind are praeternaturall to the body. So he. The same lesson is taught us
by the Author of Pythagoras his life extant in the Bibliotheca of Photius.
Wherefore, says the Author, we being made up of various faculties, do lead a
toilsome life and incommodious, forasmuch as every other creature is governed
by one simple nature, but we by several, which natures do draw ways contrary
to one another; as namely, we are sometimes moved to the better by that within
us which is divine; but at other fits, the portion irrational being
predominant, we are overwrought unto the worse.

But admit, say you, all this is so, yet it proves no peculiar perfection in
man above that of other creatures of sense, because this same contrariety of
appetites is common to him with brute beasts, for example, it is found in a
dog, which, having an appetite to a piece of meat, dares not touch it for
fear of blows; lo then, here is one appetite of eating and another contrary
unto it, which is, of keeping his bones whole, which later being the greater,
crosses the former, and makes him to refrain.

I answer, by denying that here is any contrariety between those two appetites,
but only an accidental inconsistency between the objects of them, which
hinders him at that time from satisfying of them both: no contrariety, I say,
because one of them does not oppose directly, or condemn the other, for he
both likes the meat, and likes also the saving of his skin harmless, just as
a man thievishly disposed likes to steal a horse, and likes also the keeping of
his person safe from the severity of the laws; in which case the dog and the
thief are much at one, both of them being disposed like beasts: but now with an
honest and rational man it is far otherwise, for, as with one appetite he is
incited to the stealing of the horse, so with another he disapproves it, and
condemns it as an act unjust and irrational; and herein consists the
difference of these appetites from the former. So, in fine, although the
objects of the appetites, such as beasts and bestiall men do covet, might be
consistent, as many times they may, as for example, that a man may both steal a
horse which he likes, and also escape the law, which to do he likes as well;
yet, nevertheless, the rational appetite would contradict and countermand the
theft, as an act irrational and unjust.

Lastly, the Holy Scripture is plentiful in this argument. The Spirit, says
our Blessed Savior, is willing, but the Flesh is weak. And his Disciples
advise, Walk ye in the Spirit, and the desires of the flesh you shall not
fulfill. The spirit coveteth against the flesh, and the flesh against the
spirit. I find in my members a law leading me captive unto sin. I do not that
which I will, etc. Mark 14.38. Gal. 5.17. Romans 7.22.23. Also Romans 7.21. I am
delighted with the law of God according to the interior man, but in my loins I
see another law repugnant to the law of God, and captivating me in the law of
sin. Yea, so apparent was this disagreement, as that Galen. l. 5. de dogmat.
Hippoc. thought they could not subsist in one and the same soul, and therefore
concludes, that in man there must be two different souls: and into this same
error afterward fell the Manichees, as S. Augustine testifyeth. l. de duab.
Animab. and l. 1. Retractat. c. 9. Which erroneous believers deduced also
falsely, that there were two first principles, or Gods, one of them good, the
other bad; that from the good the rational soul proceeded, and from the bad
the sensual; from one the appetites of good, from the other the desires of
evil. Pythagoras, Aristotle, Julianus, Augustus, etc. do all note this
contrariety of desires in man, but none do note the same to be in beasts; for
even Plutarch in his Gryllus does observe the contrary.

Thus we see what opposition reason finds in man from sense: but reason cannot
be contrary unto it self, nor does it struggle and strive with its own powers
and dictamens: and therefore it is a different power from sense. And so much in
answer to this chapter, omitting the particular examination of his other
inferences of absurdities, as he calls them, against the doctrine of
immortality, because either they are answered beforehand in that which has
been said already, or else are such wretched fluffe as they can afford no
matter for any sensible answer, or serious undertaking.

CHAP. V. Arefutation of certain shifting Answers given unto sundry Texts of
holy Scripture.
THe first place 2 Cor. 5.6.8. where Saint Paul declares, that while we are
present, or at home (...), in the body, we are absent from our Lord; but he
desires rather to be absent from the body, and to be present with our Lord.

Out of this it may be inferred, not that immediately after death we all shall
be present with God, and attain to glory, as this Author idly objecteth; but
that during the time of our absence from the body, we may be present with
Christ and enjoy God, whether this be immediately after death, or no, about
which point we do not now contend.

His answer is, that the Apostle speaks not of the interim betwixt Death and
the last Judgment, but of the state of the Resurrection.

This Gloss of his corrupts the Text, for the state of the Resurrection is not
the state of separation, or separated souls; but the Apostle speaks plainly and
expressly of absence or peregrination from the body, which is the state of
separation, during which state, he might (as he says) be present with Christ.
I do not deny, but that in the precedent and subsequent Texts he may speak also
of the Resurrection; but it does not therefore follow, that he speaks of that
state only: and as for his words, they clearly bear witness to the contrary;
therefore after death, and before any reunion with the body the soul remains.
And by this clear sense his second shift is taken away, whereby he seeks to
elude a like place of the same Apostle, Phil. 1.23, 24.

Genesis 35.18. It is said of a woman, that her soul was departing: therefore
there was such a thing as a soul that continued after death.

He answers, that the meaning was, she died. Be it so, yet the words do not
import that only; but besides, that this dying of hers was by the departing of
her soul from her body, and not by the perishing or destruction of the soul
departing. For example, when we say, The enemy is departed from such or such a
place, we do not mean, he is slain, but only gone, and do intimate that he is
still alive. She could not die, says he, if her soul were living. This is both
false and also absurd, for it was not the living of her soul which made her
live, but the being of it living within her body, and the informing of it with
the same: as then this presence and union of a living soul made her live, so on
the contrary side, the taking away of this presence and dissolving this union
must make her die; to which effect the living of her soul afterward, or the
dying of it, was a business impertinent; for whether it after lived or died,
it being once separated, she was dead and remained no woman any longer; for the
soul of a man or woman, is not a man or woman, though indeed the Platonicks,
together with Cicero, Macrobius, and Hierocles, not knowing any thing of the
Resurrection and of glorified bodies, yet being sure that man was to remain and
be rewarded after death, they knew not how to defend this truth without their
holding an error, viz. that the soul only was the man, and the body but as a
prison of it: but Aristotle he was wiser than to think so, for he defined man,
not Anima rationalis, but Animal rationale; and this Doctrine is truly
Christian and Philosophical, taught expressly by Marcus Varro apud Augustinum
lib. 19. de Civit. dei cap. 3. His choice of the three opinions is, says S.
Augustine of Varro, that man is neither soul alone, nor body alone, but body
and soul together; and therefore that the supreme good of man, which is to make
him happy, consists in the goods of both, that is to say of soul and body; and
by Saint Athanasius in his Creed, Anima rationalis and caro unus est homo,
Aquinas 1. p.q. 75. c. 4.
A reasonable soul and flesh is one man; and by Saint Methodius Bishop of
Olympus in Lycia, and afterward of Tyrus, in excerptis apud Photium Cod. 224.
(...). A man according to nature is most truly said to be, neither a soul
without a body, nor yet a body without a soul, but a compound of them both
joined together in one form and beauty. Thus he; with whom consents the
Prince of Roman Historians Crispus Salustius l. de Bello Jugurth. Nam uti genus
hominum compositum ex corpore et anima est, etc. For as the race of man is
compounded of body and soul, etc. All these according with Aristotle, who would
not feign false principles for the avoiding of true difficulties, which he
could not solve, though now they dissolve of themselves, the Article of the
Resurrection and of glorified bodies having been revealed to us, which before
was Mysterium a seculis absconditum, A mystery hidden from the beginning of the
world.

But after all this light, some men's eyes, it seems, were dazzeled with it, and
by name John Wicliffes, who, as we may see in Waldensis tom. 1. l. 1. ar. 2. c.
33. and 34. adhered still to the false opinion of Plato concerning the souls
being the whole man, and also stood stiffly in the defense thereof; his reasons
for it are examined, and effectually impugned by the same Waldensis in the
places cited. Dicaearchus, an ancient Peripatetick, ran into another extreme,
holding that man was nothing else but body, and that he had no soul at all,
neither mortal nor immortal; which gross error of his needed no
confutation, but was hissed out of the schools as an open and manifest
falsehood. Besides, if it had not been manifestly false, yet needed it no other
confutation then those arguments by which the immortality thereof is proved to
be a truth, because according to the received old Maxim, Rectum est index sui
et obliqui.

The rest of the Authors evasions of this nature are forestalled and prevented
by this that has been answered already, and so without any more ado about
them, may be dismissed.

Fear not them, says Christ, who kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul. Therefore when the body is killed, the soul is not, neither can man kill
it; and why, I pray you, but because it is immortal? This objection can never
be solved, neither will all his trifling about the signification of the word
Hell, serve his turn; for let Hell be what it will, and where it will, yet
still it runs, that the soul cannot be killed. But, what the true and formal
signification of the word (...) is, we way find expressly declared by Eustathius
in 1. Iliad. and Anastasius Sinaita, quaest. 90. contrary to the dreams of this
man: and in particular, that formally it does not signify the Grave; and if it
did, yet it could be no place for souls that remained unkilled and quick, for
it were a very cruel course to bury souls alive, or to cast them quick into
the grave. Moreover, that there is no Hell before the Resurrection, is more
than he has proved, or any other for him or else that none shall see God till
then, even in the mean time; abstracting from the controversy that is agitated
betwixt the Schismatic Greeks on the one side, and the Orthodox Greeks and
Latins on the other; for the most schismatic Greeks did not deny Hell or
Heaven before the day of judgment, but only that till then neither all men nor
devils were made happy in the one, or tormented in the other: for the
Schismatics themselves acknowledge that the Martyrs have the prerogative of
the first Resurrection, that is to say, that they are happy before the
Resurrection of their bodies, and before the rest of the just; or, which in
substance is all one, they are admitted into Heaven, and to the clear vision of
God; or again, whether or no they will allow the vision of God to be the
happiness of the blessed, yet felicity is Heaven wheresoever it is, or in
whatsoever good thing it consists; and again, eternal torments appointed for
the reprobate be truly a Hell, whether it be in the center of the earth, or
else in some other region.

This day says Christ unto the Thief, thou shall be with me in Paradise; but
not in body, therefore in soul alone, and therefore also his soul still lived
after his bodies dying. He answers, that Christ himself was not in Paradise
that day. But this is a foppery, for though Christ's humanity was three nights
and days in the lower parts of the earth, yet his Divinity was that day every
where; and besides his soul was happy still, and carried its Paradise along
with it; so that the good Thief might be with Christ that day, and be in
Paradise also, as the sacred text does assure us he was.

Christ said, Luke 22. Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. And Steven
Acts 7. said, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. But if the spirit died, there was
nothing to be received.

He answers, that his spirit was his life. This shift was frivolous, for his
life was to be lost and destroyed, and so was not commended into the hands of
any.

Apoc. 6.10, 11. I saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for
the word of God, etc. and they cried with a loud voice, etc. Therefore they
were then extant and alive, or else they could not have been seen, nor cry. But
it is certain that one impiety cannot be defended without more, and therefore
as formerly, he depraves the Scripture, saying, not with the Scripture, (...),
The souls of the slain, or of the men slain: but with such miscreants as
himself, The slain souls; and that they cried, but like the blood of Abel. But
if it were meant no otherwise then thus, the bodies might then have cried also
as well as the souls. The Text says, it was the souls of the slain, and if the
souls also had been slain, the Text would not have uttered it in that manner as
now it does; for it were an impertinent manner of speaking to talk of the
souls of the slain, if the souls had been slain and dead, as well as the bodies.

The other places, as that of Ecclesiastes, I have urged, as also the other of
the Apostle, who desired to be dissolved that he might be with Christ: and this
later I have enforced so far, as I suppose it convinces and is unanswerable,
as the rest also are. Behold here by example of this poor silly man, how bold
and saucy ignorance is grown since the time that darkness fell upon the face
of the earth; for, is not this, with Simon Magus, Acts 13.10. of set purpose to
pervert the right ways of our Lord, and to thrust men headlong into perdition?
But setting complaints aside, which even when they are necessary be not
grateful, let us examine the later remnants of this Authors follies, and so
leave him, if it may be, to repentance for them, yet first take into
consideration some other verityes which concern this argument.

CHAP. VI. The rational Soul of man ingenerable and incorruptible.
WE have seen already that, by the consent of the wisest of all times and
nations, the rational soul is not subject to corruption, and that it has not
a period of time assigned it beyond which it must not pass; nor that it may
simply leave to be, and be annihilated as it were by the principles of nature
it self, they not requiring any longer conservation from the beneficence of the
first cause; but contrariwise to be deserted by it, as a late Author vainly,
and without any probability at all, imagined; much according to the old
fantasy of the Stoics, who, as Cicero l. 1. Tusc. not without indignation
and signs of derision, rehearses, Vsuram nobis largiuntur, tanquam
cornicibus; diu mansuros aiunt animos, semper negant: They allow us a date, as
they do to Crows; they grant our souls shall continue long, but that for ever
they deny it: dealing in like manner with Souls, as some did with Oracles,
whose silence they ascribe to no other cause than impotency of speaking any
longer, the spirit that fed them exspiring of it self, as being wasted and
consumed with age. One would judge, says Cicero, these men spoke not of
Oracles, but of falsedges, which by long keeping would grow unsavory and
stale. Certainly, these that judge thus of Souls and spiritual substances make
an estimate of them, as they would do of trees, whose timber is of several
solidity and duration: as if some of them were like Cedar wood, or Oak, which
would last long; others as Chestnut, or Elm, which be not of so long
continuance; others again like Ash, or Maple, which rotte within a while. This
is light Philosophy, worthy of derision more than confutation, and is a device
not acknowledged by our Authors before alleged, who give no limitation to
the life of souls, but determine absolutely a perpetuity. For my part, before
such time as I can assent to their Philosophy in this point, I desire to be
satisfied by them what reason they can show, why the first cause should at a
certain date of years withdraw his preservative, or conservative influence,
and why the same influence is not still as formerly to be continued, or what
exigence of nature there is, or may be, which shall make the difference. I
grant them that in compounded bodies a Philosophical reason may be given of
such an alteration, because it may fall out that the natural impugnation of
them by the a gency of second causes for their corruption, or dissolution, may
require such a revolution of influxe. Also the same may be allowed for the set
time of desition of accidents permanent, then whenever they come to be
deserted by the subjects which gave them their support; which thing may happen
to them, either by the dissipation of those substances, or else by the violence
of some external agent that shall dislodge them. In accidents that be fluent,
and by nature successive, a reason also may be rendered why they should
continually cease to be, and besides, at a certain term or period, exspire for
altogether. But yet, why substances incompounded and by nature permanent, such
as naturally cannot be corrupted, nor perish by dissolution, of which sort all
Intelligences be and all other substances intellectual, as, namely, the
rational souls, why they, I say, should have a fatal hour assigned them, and
then require to be annihilated and forsaken by the sovereigne first cause,
these new Philosophers have not yet told us, much less, why it should be so
without any requiring on their part, or any natural exigence for it.
Wherefore, leaving these light phansies to the Authors of them, we say with
the Poet, His ego nec metas rerum, nec temporapono:
Imperium sine fine dedi, etc.
To these no limits I intend,
But grant an Empire without end.
Of which point see more in our learned Carleton, alias, Compton.

Without doubt that soul which has withstood and survived the violent assaults
of Death then when it was rent from the body and forced to surrender that
beloved Fort, there can be no suspicion that it should fail afterward, grow
old with time, decay and come to nothing, and all this without any other force.
Besides, if the soul be of a simple uncompounded nature, as intellectual
substances be, then can it not dissolve, or, which is all one, perish by
corruption. Wherefore if the principles of nature, whereby the soul is
constituted, admit of no desition nor ending by corruption, there can be no
reason given why these by exigence of nature should not require to be
continually sustained in their being by conservation from the first cause, and
much less, why at such or such a point of time or age, they should require to
be forsaken, and by the withdrawing of the first causes benevolence, to return
unto their first nothing. Wherefore I account these conceits of mortality and
aerie possibilities of desition, to be unworthy of any further examination, but
rather to be rejected, as inventions of contentious and sophistick brains,
that love to entangle all right threads of discourse, and to obscure those
lights which lead men unto truth.

Having seen all this in favor of an immortality of the soul, let us now
behold as uniforme and favorable a consent of the ancient Sages for the divine
original of the same, and not humane by procreation, as our impious Author
labors to maintain. Salluste, the Greek Philosoper, in the place before
alleged out of him, speaks plainly, and tells us it cannot be produced by
generation. Manilius derives its pedigree from heaven, as we have heard out of
him already, which he elsewhere confirms, saying, Stetit unus in arcem
Erectus capitis, victorque ad sidera mitt it
Sidereos oculos, propiusque adspect at Olympum,
Inquiritque Jovem; nec sola front Deorum
Contentus manet, and coelum scrutatur in alto,
Cognatumque sequens corpus se quaerit in astris.


Cicero in Some. Scip. determines, saying, His animus datus est ex sempiternis
illis ignibus quae sydera and stellas vocatis quae rotundae and globosae
divinis animatae mentibus etc. Marcus Antoninus seems to draw men's particular
souls from the great and common soul of the world; and the Gentiles in general
do acknowledge them to have a celestial original by the received fable of
Prometheus. who composing the bodies of men of clay or earthly substance, is
feigned to have stolen fire from heaven wherewith to animate and inform those
bodies; signifying thereby that the fires of earthly furnaces were not
sufficient for so excellent a work.

The Philosophers of later times are for the major part of them against the
production of souls by procreation; amongst the rest, Laevinus Lemnius. l. 1.
de Occultis nature Miraculis, c. 11. speaks much after the manner of some
Heathens before alleged, calling the soul scintillam divinae mentis; which is
a high expression, yet not meaning (as literally it seems) that it is any
particle of the Deity, or any substance increated, but denoting only the
sublimity of it, and that the original is not from the earth. With him agrees
the great speculatour, Jeannes Argenterius med. ad. 1. Aphor. Hippoc. The
famous Fernelius l. 1. de Abditis rerum causis, c. 5, and 7. declaring that the
cause of all forms in general is from heaven. Andrew Laurentius, l. 1. Anat.
c. 1. teaches in express terms that the reasonable soul is not generated, but
created. The same doctrine is confirmed by Zacutus Lusitanus, one of the most
famous and able Physicians of this time, who tom. 1. oper. l. 5. Medic. Princ.
Histor. hist. 3. q. 3. does in this behalf open himself very fully, and gives
reasons also why the soul can be no other but a substance indeficient, or
immortal. I omit the rehearsal of more votes, and come to enquire after the
cause why it cannot be generated like other forms.

In the head of this search I propound the doctrine of Cicero, who l. 1.
Tuscul. has laid the foundation of the truth; Animorum, inquit, in terris
nulla origio inveniri potest, etc. No origin, says he, of souls can be found
on earth; for in the mind there is nothing that is mixed, nothing concreate or
bred from out the earth, nothing which is humid, or aeriall, or fiery: for in
these natures there is nothing which has the power of memory, of mind, or
cogitation, which may retain things past, or provide for the future, and
comprehend the present, which alone be things divine, neither is it ever to be
found out how they might betide to man but from God only; Wherefore the nature
and power of the mind is singular and different from these usual and known
natures. For which cause whatsoever that is which apprehends, which is wise
and wills, and is vigorous, that same is heavenly and divine, and is of
necessity eternal. So discoursed Cicero, and rightly also, if I be not
mistaken.

The pressing home of this argument will consist of three points or heads;
First, from the nature of the soul it self, which seems to be an Entity not
capable of being produced by generation; Secondly, from the nature of the
things out of which it is to be educed; Thirdly, by the inhability of those
actions which are exercised in generation for the production of any spiritual
substance, or intellective faculty, although the soul in it self were a thing
producible, and that the elements might afford sufficient materials for the
composing of it.

For the first I argue thus; No entity which is simple and unmixt can be
produced by generation: but such is the intellective part of man: therefore
that part is not to be produced by generation; and if ingenerable, then is it
incorruptible also. That it is simple and unmixt, needs no probation, because
it is a thing wholly improbable that an intellective power or substance should
be a temperature or mixture, as our Adversary conceived it to be; for though a
temperature and mixture may remotely, or a far off, concern understanding,
in as much as they belong unto the Organs, yet is not an intellective Entity
therefore a compound or a bodily temperature, as by and by we are futher to
declare.

That no simple Entity is producible by generation is evident, because the
effect or terminus of that action is the composition or compound, which thing
it performs not by producing the Entity of the parts, but by making a
substantial union between them, and by the making those several entities to
be parts, which although they were before, yet were they not parts of that
compounded body which by this newer generation did accrue. Besides, this is the
clear and express doctrine of Aristotle in sundry places of his works.

For the second head of probation, I affirm that no lumpish matter, or earthly
concretion, can yield materials for the building up of an understanding or
mind. Chemists by their curious arts of dissolving bodies, have found out
salts, sulphures, oils, spirits, quintessences, elixirs; they again can draw
tinctures and magisteries, and out of metalls, a vitriol which shall contain in
it the essence of them, and have the virtue of transmutation of other metalls
into their own nature: but yet never any knew how to extract out of them any
one dram of understanding, or to fill the least phiall with it; nor could
they ever find metal or oar which contained wit and understanding in it.
Arnoldus de villa nova, as Mariana recounteth in his Spanish story of Spain,
attempted by mixtures and furnaces, to make a man; but his art failed him, and
he was confounded; all his ingredients could not afford him an intellective
spirit wherewith he might be animated and informed. You will say, Sense cannot
be extracted any more than reason. True, but sense arising from things
divisible may come by a resultancy from things united, as being material,
which our reason, being immateriall, cannot, especially in the principal acts
thereof, which be wholly inorganicall, as by name the acts of judgment be
touching objects immateriall, and a fortiori, all such of them as transcend the
sphere of Nature. Cicero touches chiefly upon this point, and his
argumentation seems to be very solid and irresistible, if pressed to the
uttermost.

The third head of argumentation is from the improportion and imbecility of
the actions of humane generation. For first, the actions of vegetation and
sense are of an inferior nature, and so unable to produce any thing higher and
perfecter then themselves; and for this cause each entity is to be produced by
actions that be of its own class and order; namely, per actiones congeneres
and cognatas: therefore the soul if it were to be generated, could not be so
otherwise than by actions of understanding, or of the intellective; but it is
certain, that generation is not performed by acts of wit, or understanding, but
contrariwise by acts of vegetation and sense, which actions be of an inferior
degree; and a man generates with his body, and not with his mind; so that the
generation of man is no more any act elicite of reason, than his eating or
walking is, which actions be no acts of the understanding, though prescribed
and directed by it. Now though the act of the divine understanding be
subsistent, yet the acts of created understandings be only accidents; for such
and no better is the verbum mentis in all created understandings, humane or
Angelical, and therefore humane understandings beget no understandings, nor
any children like themselves. It follows then, that the soul neither
generates a soul, nor again is generated by any, and for this cause must be
incorruptible, and, by the principles of nature, immortal. By this it
appears that the non-generation or traduction of the soul is a verity so
evident, that by it the immortality may be proved, and it stands not in need to
be it self proved by immortality. Besides all this, it is plain that every
substance incorporall, being void of composition physical, has no passive
principles of corruption in it, and therefore is not susceptible of any
physical generation, or corruption, nor is resolvable into parts: and this
argument is urged by Scaliger excercit. 307. n. 20. Again, the soul has no
contrariety of qualities within it, nor is there any thing abroad which is
contrary thereunto. I know well that many things may cease to be, and yet not
by corruption, as for example, sundry sorts of accidents, and the souls of
Beasts: but yet these are consequents of corruption; for therefore the soul,
for example, of a Beast perishes, because the organicall body which it
inhabited was destroyed or corrupted; and again, therefore an accident ceased
to be, because, by a corruptive action of a contrary agent, it was thrust out
of doors, and had nothing left it whereupon to rest, no basis to sustein it any
longer. And by this the argument of Petrus Molinaeus l. 9. Phys. c. 12. is
answered, by which he labored to infringe the ancient doctrine, namely, That
every immateriall substance and incorporeall was incorruptible and immortal,
and that, consequently, the soul of man being such a substance, could not be
corrupted, or otherwise naturally cease to be: of which point see Merat. tom.
1. tract. de Ang. disp. 9. sect. 2. and Bagotius tom. 2. Instit. l. 1. disp. 4.
c. 8. To tell us here, as some new masters do, that a spirit may be compounded
of a certain spiritual matter and of a form thereunto correspondent, and that
therefore every spiritual substance may not be simple, but, contrariwise,
resolvable into parts essential, according as corporeal substances be, is to
tell dreams and fancies of the night, instead of probabilities: and therefore,
desiring them to dream again, and to enjoy their own imaginations, I leave them
to their rest. But howsoever this new device of theirs might have some truth in
Angels, which are complete substances, and abstracted from corporeal
materiality, yet in the soul of man it could not, because the soul it self is a
form and a substance incomplete, and therefore a prodigious thing it must needs
be to make this form to consist of both form and matter, and so to compound
man of one form and two matters, one spiritual and the other corporeal; yea
and indeed, by admitting materiality in Angels, to make them less pure and
simple then the souls of mortal men, which to do might seem to be a device,
in reality, very simple. True it is that matter taken in a large sense, that is
to say, for potentiality, and as contradistinguished to a pure actuality, may
be admitted in spiritual substances; but yet this makes nothing for the
dissolution of them into parts, or for corruptibility: of which kind of
materiality or composition the learned school-Doctour Thomas de Argentina has
said enough to satisfy, 2. sent. d. 3. q. 1. Moreover, admit that, properly
speaking, a spiritual matter were possible, because some few Doctors be of
that opinion, and amongst the rest our countrieman Mr. Thomas Carleton, alias
Compton, in his Philosophy lately published, disp. 9. this opinion of theirs
does not take away the force of the argument; first, because we are not to
consider what opinion this or that man does hold, but, contrariwise, what he
has reason to hold; secondly, because if I hold this spiritual matter to be a
thing implicatory and a fiction, or that my reader do also think the same,
then, according to our judgments at the least, the argument is good and
efficacious. Neither is it requisite that no argument should be produced, or be
thought efficacious, save only such as in every Doctors judgment should be
accounted such, and to be concluding; because then, perhaps, we should bring
none, neither for this same verity of immortality, nor yet for any other:
wherefore, although peradventure Scotus and his sub-Philosopher Pontius, or
Arriaga or Carleton should not like of this or that argument, we are not
therefore to reject it as not concluding, or as a proof that is not probable,
or conducing to the decision of the point in hand. But of the impossibility and
improbability of this composition of matter and form in spiritual substances,
see more in Lud. Moeratius tom. 1. tract. de Angelis, disp. 3. For the
neglecting therefore of shifting answers to the arguments usually brought in
the behalf of immortality, the advice of Mr. Carleton is very prudent, who
disp. 10. de Anima admonishes, saying, In my judgment they do not
discreetly, who go about to weaken arguments used to be brought by Philosophers
and Divines for the soul's immortality; and might more fruitfully for the
Christian Commonwealth have employed themselves in seeking to establish this
doctrine, which is the foundation of virtue, then in picking quarrels at the
arguments; for no reason is so strong, which by some shiftings may not be
obscured.

For, indeed, out of that which has been delivered touching the non-traduction
of the soul by any seminall way or principles of propagation, the deduction of
the soul's incorruptibility will be a business very plain and easy, and this
by virtue of a twofold consequence; the former of which is drawn from the
soul's not generating, or active generation; the later from the not being
generated, or passive generation.

Touching the former it is clear, that whatsoever substance does not generate,
that same is immortal, even by Natures universal provision and ordination;
for as much as in all her works she affects one kind of perennity or other,
that is to say, either a perpetuity of the individual, by an indeficient
stability of the natural principles, or else at least in the species, by the
intervention of generation and corruption: so that wheresoever there is no
propagation or acts of generation assigned for the maintaining a secondary
immortality in the species, there must of necessity be granted a primary and
better immortality in the individuum. Hence it follows, that because a man
does not generate with his mind, but with his body, therefore his body is
corruptible in it self, and perpetual only in the species; and again, that
his mind or soul is immortal in it self and subjected no way to corruption,
not standing in need of any help or supplies from generation.

Touching the later, it is manifest that every entity which is not produced by
generation is not generable, and therefore not corruptible. That it is not
generable we gather hence, because whatsoever entity is by nature generable,
every such entity requires, as by a connaturall way, to be produced by
generation; as in like manner, every entity that is simple requires,
whenever it is produced, to be produced by no other way but creation. By this
it follows, that whatsoever is produced, and not by generation, is by Natures
laws ingenerable, and so by consequence incorruptible and immortal: But the
mind or soul of man is produced, and not by generation: therefore it is an
entity incorruptible. That it is not generated, has been proved before, as
also that it does not generate: for a mind or rational Soul cannot generate
nor be generated by any other agent then a rational Soul, nor by any other
actions then acts of reason and understanding; by which acts since it procreates
nothing which is like it self, nor intends to do it, the soul is neither
generated, nor does it generate, and therefore, according to the principles of
being, and the laws of Nature, must be immortal and unsubject to death or
desition, and not be in any possibility to be corrupted by the virtue of agents
natural.

The learned Sennertus, being moved by certain difficulties which he could not
overcome, was very inclinable to think the Soul is generated, and that the seed
it self from the beginning is animated with a humane Soul: Sennertus in Hypom.
4. c. 10.
but he together with Justus Lipsius reflecting upon the consent of Divines
unto the contrary, does with him religiously submit, and subscribe Pareamus,
Let us obey. As for the said difficulties, I do not find them very urgent, but
that they may conveniently be avoided, as we intend to show in the next Chapter.

As for the reasons themselves which prove the immortality immediately without
any dependency upon traduction from parents, or not traduction, they are often
and plentifully exhibited, both by Philosophers and Divines; as namely, by
Javel. l. de indificentia An. written by him at the earnest request of
Pomponat. who was sorry for his former error and retracted it; by Scaliger
Exer. 307. n. 20. by the Conimbricenses, Tract. de Anima separata; also briefly
and pithily by Eustachius, Assellius a S. Paulo in summa Philosophiae. Renatus
de Carts in his Metaph. and his Principia Philosophica, and sundry others; and
amongst Divines, by Albert. magnus 2. sent. d. 19. Antoninus in sum. by
Aquinas in both his Sums, Raymund Sebunde in his Naturalis Theoloria.
Barthol. Sibylla in Quaest. Peregg. Dec. 1. Lud. Vives l. de veritate fidei,
Christ. Postellus in Concordia Orbis, Savonarola in Triumpho Crucis.
Vellosillus Advertentiis in S. Aug. Greg. de Val. Tom. 1. Lessius l. de immort.
Jo. Mariana, l. de morte and immort. Ferrariens. Philippus Faber, Collegium
Complut. and others, especially Albertinus Tom. 1. Corol. and Alexander
Valignanus apud Possevinum Tom. 1. Biblioth. Select. Thomas Carmelita l. 11. c.
12. de conversione Gentium, Bagotius tom. 2. Instit. d. 4. Menasseh Ben Israel,
de Resurr. Mortuorum a c. 8. Zanchy de oper. Creat. l. 2. c. 8. Fromundus l. 4.
de Anima, Carleton in Philosophia tract. de Anima, q. 10. Morisanus in
Philosophia tract. de Anima Quaest. 5. Petrus Gassendus tom. 1. de Philosophia
Epicuri, where he musters up all the objections made by Lucretius, and confutes
them: all which men of Learning did not only hold the reasonable Soul to be an
immortal substance, but also that thus much might be proved of it by natural
reason, Thom. Campanella in his Metaph. very copiously.

This high preeminence in the Soul, of immortality, we trace out chiefly by the
operations of it* as by so many steps which lead unto the knowledge thereof,
because, according to the rule in Philosophy, sicut se habet res ad esse, sic
ad operari, and sicut ad operari, sic ad esse. By the nature of any thing we
may search out the operations, and again, by the operations, the nature. One of
the chief operations of the soul is the act of understanding, by the indication
of which we learn it to be immateriall, and again by the being so, not to be
corruptible or dissolvable by any natural agent, or, which is all one, to be
immortal. These acts or operations intellectual do by three ways prove the
immortality. First, because they simply are intellectual. Secondly, because
they terminate upon objects spiritual, and are apprehensive of them. Thirdly,
because they fall even upon material objects after a manner immateriall.

First, according to Aquin. 1. p. q. 14. a. 1. Valentia, ibid. Raynaud. Not.
Theol. d. 2. q. 2. a. 3. and Aquin. l. 10. con. Gent. c. 44. and others, no
power or substance that is not devoid of matter can be intellectual, nor
again, any object directly and immediately intelligible, which is not also
immateriall; the reason is, because corporeity or matter darkens the power, and
confines it to singularities. The words of Petrus de Aquila, called Scotellus
1. Sent. did. 35. q. 1. are very pertinent and these; By how much, says he,
any thing is freed from matter, by so much is it both objectively and also
actively intelligible, because, according to Avicenna and Aristotle,
Immateriality is the cause of Intellection. But God is the most remote from
matter and therefore is the most of all intellective. Wherefore, since matter
and corporeity are over-grosse to admit of intellection, and that the soul of
man is intellective, it can be neither material, nor corporeal, but,
contrariwise, of nature elevated above matter, that is to say, spiritual and
incorruptible.

Secondly, The soul does not only understand mean objects, but the highest and
the purest of all, that is to say, all objects spiritual, and God himself. I
grant to Aureolus that the object and the power need not be alike in nature,
and therefore it is no formal consequence, that because the object is
spiritual, therefore the power must be so: but yet nevertheless, the
material consequence is very good, because it is wholly necessary that the
power intellective should be free from all those impediments of understanding,
whether like or unlike, which are situate within the sphere of the object, or
without it; and that moreover, as Pet. Aureolus 2. Sent. did. 19. himself
confesses, there ought to be some resemblance or proportion between the object
and the power, at least, quoad rationem cognoscentis and cognoscibilis: but
between a material power and a spiritual object there is none; First, because
the power is too low and gross: Secondly, because a spiritual entity is
situate without the sphere or compass of the object; as for example, an Angel
is quite without the compass of any eye corporeal, because he is such an
object as is not visible, but intelligible only, that is to say, perceptible
only by a power that is higher then any sense, and properly intellective,
which the eye is not because material; and a spirit is therefore imperceptible
to our sight, and beyond the lines of the object, because the object of the
sight is color, figure, magnitude, etc. none of which are in a spirit. And
though, as Arriaga teaches, in some kind a corporeal agent may act upon a
spirit; for a body united to a soul, as it is in man, according as it is
severally disposed, may transmit something upon the soul, cause alterations in
it, contristate, or rejoice it; yet nevertheless can it not do any thing by
way of vision, because the soul has nothing in it wherewith to terminate the
sight, in which case it must be wholly invisible, even although it were no
spirit, but some other kind of entity, as namely a sound is, which though it
partake of materiality, yet is it invisible, and therefore imperceptible by the
eye, though not by another sense. For this cause it seems improbable that any
corporeal eye can be enabled to see the Deity by means of any elevation or
sublevation whatsoever, contrary to the opinion of a late learned Grecian, Leo
Allatius l. de consen, Eccl. Occid. and Orient. As then one reason why an eye
corporeal cannot see a spirit is because the organ of vision is corporeal, so
on the other side, one reason why a soul may be sensible of a spirit is because
the soul is spiritual, and thereby prepared to receive an impression from it,
and also is, conformably to the object, a power intellective, as the same
object is intelligible. I said before, that a sound cannot be seen; but I add
now, that it may be seen easier then any spirit can, because a sound is
material, and therefore one degree nearer to visibility then a spirit, and for
this cause needing no intellective faculty to apprehend it, as every spirit
does: so that against the eyes seeing of a spirit there be two impediments,
whereas against the seeing of a sound there is but one. Out of all this I
deduce, that if the Object be spiritual, the Faculty perceiving must be no
less.

Thirdly, the soul does not entertain material objects after a material
manner, but contrariwise, after a manner immateriall, for it abstracts them
from the dross of matter and the grossnesse of singularity. Now it is a
certainty that Vnumquodque recipitur secundu^ modum recipientis, Every thing is
received according to the form of the recipient, and not according to the own;
wherefore, seeing the manner of being is correspondent to the manner of
operation, and seeing again that the manner of the souls operation, even upon
things material, is immateriall, therefore the manner of being of it must be
also immateriall. The impression declares the figure of the seal. If then the
souls impression upon material objects be spiritual, the soul it self is also
spiritual. The understanding of a spirit spiritually might peradventure be
ascribed to the virtue or aptitude of the object, but the understanding after a
spiritual and refined manner those objects that be gross and material, cannot
be referred to any other thing then to the virtue of the faculty it self.

By this then it appears, that in an eye corporeal there is a twofold
repugnancy against the seeing of a spirit, viz. one, because the power is
material, and therefore not intellective of any object at all, spiritual, or
corporeal: the other, because every spiritual Entity is without the precincts
of the visive faculty. Wherefore on the contrary side, the eye of the mind, by
the being in a state able to receive some notions of a spirit, and to judge it
to be an Entity devoid of matter, may, upon a twofold evidence, be determined
to be spiritual.

Thus, by these several ways, the action of understanding in the Soul proves
the incorruptibility thereof. The first is, by the being precisely
intellective. The second, because intellective of spiritual entities. The
third, because it understands material objects immaterially, which act is done
by abstracting; of which act, whether it be confused or distinct, we are
forthwith to consider more at large.

The second operation of the understanding is the knowing of spiritual things
by abstraction from singularities, and material objects after a manner
immateriall, and by penetrating into the quiddities or essences of things; for
of these concealed and hidden entities, unto which our senses can have no
access, the soul of man gets some intelligence, and attaineth of them notices,
though not perfect, intuitive or comprehensive, yet not contemptible or untrue:
neither are these essences temperatures, as Basson and some others fondly and
without probability do imagine, as is elsewhere to be showed.

A third is a reflection upon it self, which acts are above the nature of
matter, as Albertinus, Campanella in Phys. and others do suppose for certain.

Against abstraction some object, that it is no perfection, but rather an
imperfection, that manner of knowledge being confused. But this objection is
inefficacious; for, supposing the infirmity of humane understanding, the force
of our understanding things abstractedly is most perfect and distinct, and of
all other has the least confusion in it; though in such understandings as be
above humane, and are able with one view to comprehend, abstraction is
needless and no perfection. As for humane understandings, we find by
experience that the meaner and grosser they are the less they can abstract:
and indeed abstraction in the understanding is a subtle act, and like to
extraction in Chemistry, which takes the purer parts from the faeculent, and
resolves bodies into their several native parts, which before did lie confused
in one heap and mingled together.

For the preventing of objections, we add, that there is a great and manifest
difference betwixt a knowledge confused and an abstracted, because the former
of these two is done by making a commixture of the superior differences with
the inferior, that is to say, of the genericall perfections with the
specificall and individual; but the later is done by an intentionall, or
intellectual separation of one from the other, namely, by the considering but
one, yet knowing more then one, that is to say, both the superior and
inferior: for we do notabstract from what we know not, but from what we know;
so that, according to the humane way of understanding, this abstraction is not
a confused way of knowledge, but a distinct, not an imperfect, but an
exquisite; because by this the understanding does, as it were, anatomize the
object, either pitching upon several formalityes, as they use to call them, or
else upon several connotations to different effects, as the Nominalls speak,
according to the different virtues contained in the same object. An abstractive
knowledge makes Genus and Species, by the drawing off from matter and
singularity; a confused does not so, but fastens upon the inferior degrees
indistinctly and in gross. As for example, a confused view, if it perceive a
figure, or a tree, does not distinguish the particulars, as not whether it be
round, or triangular, an Elm, or an Oak; but an abstractive knowledge
supposes a particular sense of all, for otherwise there could be no abstraction
of one from the other. Campanella in his Metaphysics, and some other also
related by Carleton, alias Compton, disp. 25. would have it that the eye
abstracts, though but a power material, then, namely, when it sees confusedly,
as when it perceives, for example, a man, but discernes not whether he be
Socrates or Plato. This objection is prevented already, because the sense
cannot abstract from what it sees not in particular, nor yet draw off from
individualls, complete or incomplete. Again, the not-knowing of a perfection
is not an abstraction from it, and therefore the eye seeing color and not
sweetness, does not abstract from that sweetness, as Campanella did imagine
it to do.

A fourth is the eminency of the acts of understanding, which argue a principle
nobler and higher than any mortal entity. This argument is largely prosecuted
by Lessius, Mariana, and Campanella, and before these by Cicero.

A confirmation hereof is, that some acts of humane understanding be
inorganicall. But Molinaeus, in his Sum of Philosophy lately published, will
not agree to this, objecting, that it is contrary unto experience, because,
says he, even at that time when the understanding does abstract most, and
contemplates objects that be spiritual, it makes them, as it were, material,
ascribing extension both to God and Angels, circumscribing them in places, and
assigning lines and limits to them. Again, there is nothing, says he, in the
understanding which has not been formerly in the sense. Thus objecteth he.

Our answer is to this Maxim of Philosophy, that, according to the learned
Thom. de Argentina q. 3. Prologi ar. 4. it is to be understood with limitation,
namely, that whatsoever is in the understanding has been formerly in the sense
some way, at least, or other, that is to say, either immediately, or mediatly,
in it self, or in the cause, effect or sign. It Is true, accidents may enter by
themselves into the sense, and so forward into the understanding; but
substances, whether material or immateriall do not so, nor yet things absent
in time or place, whether they be substances or not. Actions and events of ages
past, also of people absent, of verityes supernatural, we know by testimonies,
as by signs, and not by our senses immediately: we know a future Eclipse by the
cause, the soul of man by the effects; and so also do we know God, namely, by
his word and by his works, one, as by a sign, the other, as by an effect;
neither has God ever been known unto our senses.

Secondly, we answer, that the soul, being in the middle region betwixt pure
bodies without spirit, and pure spirits without body, as on the one side it
clothes pure spirits with some corporeal vestures, so on the other it does
divest material objects of their materiality, namely, by conceiving them
conformably unto it self, that is to say, after a manner abstracted and
immateriall, declaring thereby the spirituality of it is being; for it is as
great a sign of a spiritual. Being to understand a matter immaterially, as it
is to understand a spirit that has no matter.

Thirdly, I answer, that although our power apprehensive does attire spiritual
substances in forms corporeal by reason of the imaginative faculty upon which
it borders, yet the judging and discursive faculties do not so, for these two
cast of all figures and resemblances corporeal, determining Angels, for
example, to be spirits purely, and devoid of all figure and corporeity; as
also, in like sort, that privations, though apprehended as positive entities,
yet are not so: in so much as the soul, by means of judgment and discourse,
goes further then the phantasy, and finds out truths which the phantasy could
not tell it, and by thus surmounting forms corporeal, shows her independency
upon the body, and that some of her acts be inorganicall. By this, then, it
appears that the apprehension of spiritual objects under lineaments
corporeal is but the first enterteinment of them, which though it do argue
some imperfection in the soul concerning her manner of being, yet not in the
being it self. Wherefore, as on the one side this imperfect way of apprehension
argues the soul to be in a degree inferior unto Angels, or pure Intelligences;
so on the other side the acts of judgment and of discourse, which it does
exercise afterward, do sufficiently evict that it is in a degree superior to
corporeal entities. I exemplify, for declaration sake. God, when he first
arrives in our understanding by the out-portalls of simple apprehensions,
appears unto us in the habit of a body, an Angel in the likeness of a man,
Time dressed up in wings, and in his hands a sith and houre-glasse, Death like a
raw-bon'd sire armed with a dart, etc. but forthwith Judgment and Discourse do
wait upon them, dismissing Apprehension, and being thus stepped in, divest
this Time, for example, pull of his strange disguize, bid him lay down his
sith, clippe his wings and break his houre-glasse, and to appear in no other
likeness but his own, that is to say, without colors, or lineaments
corporeal; and thus having disrobed him of his borrowed attire, the soul
judges of him as he is, and gathers new verities of him by discurring. And as
the understanding proceeds in this one example, so it does in others of the
same nature: and thus the difficulty which Melinaeus made has found out a
solution.

A fifth head of probation is from the appetite of man that can be satiated
with nothing but eternity, the desire of which is universal and infinite. This
desire being general must needs be from Nature, and therefore right, and not a
vicious rapacity or greediness, as Pliny seems to make it, and so being right
cannot be frustrate.

This argument is urged earnestly by Alex. Valignanus l. contra Japonios apud
Possevinum, part 1. Biblioth. l. 10. c. 4. Thomas Carmelita l. 11. de salute
omnium Gentium procur. c. 12. and by sundry other learned men: and it seems to
be very efficacious, because this same appetite of perpetuity is very vehement,
restless and incessant, and besides, universal, yea, Pliny himself
acknowledges as much. Wherefore, as from the general and pressing appetite of
meat, we do infer rightly a convenient provision of sustenance ordered by
nature; so in like sort, from this ingrafted longing after a perpetuity, we may
infer no less rightly a provision of immortality ordained for us. One
Pontius, a late Scotist, in his Philosophia universa secundum mentem Scoti,
excepteth against this argument and diverse others also, with whom not being
willing to wrangle, we return him no other answer but this, viz. that he who
is more in love with the determinations of any one Master, be he never so
eminent, then he is with truth, especially in doctrines of concernment, is not
an Eagle of the right breed, nor deserves the name of a Philosopher. It may be
here objected, that if an appetite were a good argument to prove a
satisfaction, it would prove we should never dye, because against death man
has a great and natural aversion. I grant it proves that either we shall not
dye, or else, at least, should not have died, if we had remained in that state
of innocence in which Adam was created, for death entered into the world only
by sin; but this punishment of death is not of the soul, but of man, and
again, the death of man is no more but a separation of soul and body, out of
which the death of the soul does not follow, but that of the body only; for
although a body cannot live without a soul, yet no reason can be given why a
soul cannot live without a body: nay, on the contrary side, though we may
easily understand how a soul may be annihilated, yet it is a thing hardly
intelligible how it should die. The soul is a form assistent as well as an
informant, and therefore may well subsist without an actual informing.

It appears that this appetite is natural, First, because it is universal,
and follows the whole species; Secondly, because it cannot be suppressed from
breaking out into actual and vehement longings after immortality; out of which
it follows, first, that immortality is a thing possible, because nature does
not incline us to impossibilities; secondly, that the appetite is right and
rational, and cannot be erroneous, as Scotus did object it might, for, at
least in the generalities, the works of nature be the works of a high
intelligence; thirdly, that this immortality is not only possible to be
obtained, but also shall be atteined. Neither if this argument from natural
appetite be a good one, would it follow thence, as Abulensis in c. 22. Matthew.
q. 224. conceives it would, namely, that the Resurrection would be a natural
effect, and might be proved by reason; this, I say, does not follow, because,
as Aquinas teaches, 4. d. 43. q. 1. a. 1. and lib. de veritate q. 24. a. 10.
ad. 1. and in supplement. q. 75. a. 3. and Ferrariensis l. 4. con. Genesis c. 79.
the inclination of nature and her power be both of one latitude, and therefore,
because no natural efficient is able to reunite a body once separated, nature
does not incline unto it, and so not unto the resurrection. Wherefore that unto
which nature does incline us is only to a continuance of the soul with the
body, and not to a restitution of it after it is once separated from it, in so
much that, if any longing do remain still in man to have a body by way of
resurrection, it is but as hot embers, the remnants of an ancient fire. It is
then in this case, as it is in the desiring of having all our limbs perpetually
entire; for, if by chance any be cut off, as it is not then in the power of
nature to restore it, so is it not in the appetite of nature to have a
restitution of it; so that, whatsoever appetite for it there is left behind,
is a false and erroneous appetite, and not truly natural: and of such an
appetite as this we may truly say with Scotus, Aquilanus and others of that
side, that it can be no argument to prove a satisfaction for it. But, since the
appetite which we allege is none of that sort, but, contrariwise, truly
natural, this grant takes off nothing from the force of our argument drawn
from that true appetite. In fine, although wheresoever there appears a
natural impossibility for the performance of any thing, we may rightly from
thence infer that the appetite to it is not natural; yet it is not
necessary, as Tostatus would have it, that before such time as we can allow any
appetite to be natural, we ought to know the object of that appetite to be
possible, for it suffices if we do not know it to be impossible, because this
obstacle being removed, or else not put, the appetite may be discerned to be
natural by other ways, viz. by the greatness and universality of it; and
again, by this same naturality of it we may discover it to be also rational,
and consequently the object of it not to be impossible: of which points see
Valentia tom. 1.

As for creatures irrational, I mean brute beasts, and other of that degree of
life, they do not aim properly at any perpetuity, neither do they love or hate
death, or have any apprehension of it. It Is true, they love not to be killed,
but why is this? not because they shun death, but because they hate and fly
pain which is a companion of death, then when it comes by killing and
violence: but we do abhor death under the proper likeness, and do aim
directly at a formal perpetuity, and that perpetuity, not of any dull or
senseless being, but of a vigorous life and intellectual. I say distinctly,
of such a life, for, which of us would not be as willing to be quite
annihilated, as to be turned into a brute, or into a stone, and again, no less
unwilling to be a stone, then to be totally destroyed and blotted out of the
book of Nature? in regard that creatures which are not intellectual do not
possess or enjoy themselves, and so receive no benefit by their being made,
nor by their being destroyed any loss: for those that had nothing given them,
can have nothing taken away. In consideration of this, it is not the book of
Nature in which we desire to be registered, but in the Book of such a Life,
perpetuity without it being not esteemed by us, nor yet such a life without
perpetuity.

Besides, it is no question but that Nature by her giving life and
understanding to man intended it for his benefit. Now a knowing or intelligent
life that must have an end by a perpetual death, is no benefit at all, but
rather an infelicity; and therefore man by dying pays a large tribute, for the
life was lent him, and returns to Nature more than he received from her, and
the interest he pays amounts in that case to more than the principal; because
in one death (come when it will) there is more acerbity included and greater
bitterness, than there could be jucundity or content betwixt the largest
terms of living, or in the most fortunate successes that ever were; so we may
indeed justly and properly be said when we die to pay, and to pay also with
advantage our debt to Nature: wherefore when man dies, if he then be
extinguished, he should not dye in Natures debt, but contrariwise Nature should
remain in his, yea and owe him also a vaste sum to recompense him for being
put to live upon those hard conditions of being afterward to dye, that is, to
be thrown down and destroyed by her that built him: for what could this be
else, but to be lifted up on high that his fall might be the greater and more
afflictive? Better, surely, to lie still, though never so low, then to rise up
to fall.

For what thing more discontenting than fuisse aliquande and non esse, vixisse
and non vivere, to have been sometimes and not to be any longer, to have had a
life or living spirit and now not to have any, but to be thrown for ever
amongst the dead, and to be cast down as low as lumpes of earth or heaps of
stones? It is commonly received as a truth, that there is nothing so
afflictive, as once to have been happy and not to be so any longer. And indeed
if the case were so with man, that death should devour him wholly and put an
end to all, extinguishing both him and his desires together, the complaint of
Pliny against Natures harshnesse might seem not to have been made without just
cause, namely, that she is illiberall to man, Cujus causa videtur cuncta alia
genuisse, magna and saeva mercede, contra tanta sua munera; ut non satis sit
aestimare parens melior homini an tristior noverca fuerit, that is, upon such
hard conditions, that it were not easy to determine whether she had showed her
self toward him like an indulgent mother, or a cruel stepdame. So he, l. 7.
in Proem. and rightly, supposing, as he falsely did, the soul of man to be
mortal, forasmuch as out of that erroneous conceit this absurdity or rather
impiety must follow, Turpius ejicitur quam non admittitur hospes.

For what is the benefit of an ending life? Is it not to taste of light and
living that you might feel the grief of loosing it, which otherwise you would
not have done; and to be showed and made infinitely enamoured of a felicity
which you are never to enjoy, but to be barred of for ever?

Again, if man by death should be utterly destroyed, what did it avail him to
have lived? were his eyes, think we, given him, that with them he might have a
sight of death, how ill he likes him, or how grimly and unpleasantly he looks?
shall all his education and labors taken in the world serve for nothing but,
at the end, to marry him to rottenness, and for worms to be his sisters
everlastingly? A fair preferment at the close of all, and a worshipful
kindred! We cannot dive into the counsels of the Almighty, but yet, by his
other mercies and perfections, we may gather that he is too good, too
bountiful to set down so hard an order for us, or to have been so sparing of
his gifts. What? shall any man think that we all were sent into the world upon
a frivolous errand, that is to say, to come in hither only to go out again,
and so to be as very nothings at the last end as we were at the first entrance?

That death should make us neither less nor more,
But merely nothing, as we were before?
Or were we sent hither by a power superior, only to make sport for the
lookers on, such bitter sport as the Cat makes with the Mouse, much to her
sorrow while it lasts, and when it ends, then to no less then her destruction?
Such bits as these, unworthy of God, unworthy of man, must they swallow down
who will maintain the soul's mortality. The whole desire of man's heart, as it
is either to be happy, or else not to be at all, so is it either to have this
happiness perpeually, or else to have it never given him. Tully in the end of
his Dialogue entitled Hortensius, although he takes exceeding great comfort
from the consideration of the soul's immortality, yet nevertheless, to the end
he might make all sure in case it should not be so, he adds, saying, But if
that wherewith we are sensible and do understand, be mortal and ruinous, this
extinguishment and setting of it cannot but be pleasant to him who has
discharged aright the offices of humane life; and may, without being molestfull
at all, be embraced by him as a repose or quiet of his life. Thus pleads
Cicero, with whose resolution S. Augustine remains much unsatisfied, wondering
justly how a man of so great with as he, and who places humane felicity in the
contemplation of the truth, could promise a pleasant goodnight or set of that
intellectual substance, whereupon all this felicity of his is founded; as if,
says S. Augustine, that thing did die which we did not love, or rather, which
we so deadly hated, as in the destruction of it we should rejoice. Thus
strongly argues S. Augustine l. 14. de Trinit. c. 19. Surely, if we love our
own soul and our felicity, we cannot rejoice or take any contentment in the
extinction and destruction of either, but rather on the contrary side be
incredibly afflicted with it, and the sole remembrance of it cannot but be
unpleasant, and cause a most vehement contristation in the heart of man, and
finally, let Epicurus say what he will, strike such a damp into his pleasures,
as would be of power sufficient to extinguish them.

I know well that God may do with his creatures what he pleases; his
jurisdiction over them is illimited by any other thing then by his own justice
and mercy. Job in his affliction confessed this, when he taught us, c. 9. v.
12. Who is it can say, why do thou so? and by and by after, v. 17. In a
whirlewinde he will crush me, and multiply my wounds, even without a cause.
What he can do we do not enquire, but what he will do, or has done, we may
give a guess by his other mercies toward us. If things should thus go with
man, we might resemble his state to a Guest that should be entertained for one
night with all the dainties, the welcome and delight that might be, and the
very next morrow be sent to the gallows, there to make a conclusion of his
joys and welcome. In fine, whatsoever is not perpetual is nothing, and man's
heart cannot receive true content from any thing which he is to loose, and
whose possession is without date immortal. Non est mortale quod opto, Our
hearts aspire not after any thing which is mortal; neither when we have
considered well do we say within our selves, Aut Caesar, aut nihil; but, Aut
aeternum, aut nihil: Not to be Caesar, or nothing; but to be eternal, or not at
all. For as Marcus Antoninus in l. de vita sua rightly ponders, and like a man
of wisdom after death is once come quid habet ille qui vixit tribus seculis
plus illo qui vixit triduo? what has that man who lived three ages left him
more than any other that lived but three single days.

This argument though it prove another life after this, yet does it not
directly evict there shall be no interruption of living in the soul until the
resurrection; nevertheless it persuades it strongly, because the fairest way of
perpetuity is by continuing it in the soul, and by the leaving there a pledge
for a total accomplishment to follow after, and the more, because this dying
of the soul is an improbable invention, and such as in Philosophy or Divinity
has no foundation, but rather indeed is a great step to infidelity; for if men
have much ado to persuade themselves that after the body is dead and rotten it
shall have the ashes gathered together and rise again, they would find much
more difficulty if they should think that the soul it self was mortal and to
be extinguished, and so in the whole man nothing left of life.

A sixth probation is from the absoluteness and independency of humane will,
which matter is well followed by Aureolus in 2. sent. did. 19.

A seventh is drawn from the benignity and justice of God in favoring the
good, and giving recompense for all their labors and sorrows in this life;
which recompense since it is not given in this life, it must be in another, and
so there must be another life. I confess also that this argument, though it
prove a second life, yet does it not exclude an interruption of living in the
soul more then it does in the body; for at the resurrection a complete
recompense may be made both to soul and body, notwithstanding they both had
been extinguished for a time: but yet because this fancy of the souls being
extinguished is not proved by any one argument which is considerable, therefore
that same medium which proves a second life after the departure from the body,
proves also a continuance of the second with the first; for no Philosopher or
Divine of note has hitherto been found so devord of sense, as to dream of any
interruption of living in the soul, but that if it was to live after death, it
was to do it continually, or if it died, then it was to live no more for all
eternity. So that this man's reviving of souls is an error as absurd and
improbable, as his resurrection of beasts, which is the express doctrine not
of Christ the great and true Prophet, but of the grand Impostour and false
Prophet Mahomet, both in his Alcoran and the books of Sonna, as Guadionolus
recites out of him in his Book against Achmet Ben Zin a Persian Mahumetan.

Some labor to evade this argument by saying that no such recompense is
necessary in another life, because a full amends is made in this. If you ask
them how, they tell you that Virtus divitiis animosa suis, nec indiga laudis
est praemium sibi; Virtue is rich, and is a reward unto her self.

This saying is nothing but a Stoicall tumor or swelling which has no
solidity in it; for first, say it were a reward, yet not rightly distributed or
dilated; for how small a portion of mortal men are sensible of this aerie
reward? Secondly, man's reward is his felicity, and therefore must be both great
and perpetual: but this same reward is a very slender one and besides the
slenderness it is of small duration; out of which it follows that this
contentment received from virtue is no sufficient recompense, nor reduces
things unto equality, nor lastly, commends or justifies the providence of God.
Thirdly, this contentment received in the soul from virtue cannot keep the
virtuous from being miserable, because this solace is received only in the
mind or soul, notwithstanding which content, he may be in poverty, captivity,
sickness, in Perillus his Bull, or upon the rack; in which cases, as the body
suffering for a good cause receives contentment from the soul, so in like sort
the sorrows be reciprocal, for the soul is made partaker of the miseries of
the body, and is afflicted by means of it; so that in fine here is no full and
clear contentment, but a mixture of joy and sorrow, and consequently here is no
desired reward or felicity, neither of soul nor body, and much less of the
whole man, who consists essentially of both, and is totally to be rewarded, and
not the one half of him alone, whether soul or body. Number, says Anastasius
Sinaita, quaest. 73. quando oportebat certare, corpus plus sudoris expressit,
quando autem est tempus coronarum, sola coronatur anima? Shall the body endure
the greatest trouble in the conflict, and the soul alone receive the crown or
comfort? this were no justice or equity. Certainly a man in this state would
stand in need of patience, which virtue I think was never necessary for the
happy man, but for the afflicted, nor for the enjoying of felicity, but the
enduring of misery. In sum, it were a fury to think that while these two
parts of man, body and soul, are linked together, that one half of him can be
happy while the other is miserable, or that the reward of the soul alone is the
reward of the whole man, and able to give him satisfaction: But that,
contrariwise, as the soul of man is but one half of him, though indeed much the
better half, so likewise the felicity of the soul alone is but one half of man's
felicity; and so again, the affliction of his body one half of his infelicity,
though by much the lesser. See of this point Abulensis in c. 4. Deuteronomy. q. 7.
Thomas de Argentina in 4 did. 49. art. 4. Vincentius Beluacensis l. de
Consolat. ad Regem Ludov. c. 11. also our countryman Jo. Bacon the famous
Carmelite, in 4. did. 50. q. ult. and principally Marsilius in 4. d. ult. The
Stoics invented for man this harsh and miserable felicity, for supplying the
defect of their doctrine touching providence and humane felicity, which they
could not patch up otherwise then with such rotten stuff as this, which will
not hold the examination, nor indeed can be without the Christian doctrine of
the resurrection. So that albeit reason alone without revelation cannot prove
the resurrection to be, because this effect exceeds the virtue of natural
causes, there being allowed in nature no regress a privatione ad habitu^; yet
reason proves that article to be very convenient and credible for an
accomplishment of all, and without which there is no way remaining, either for
the justifying of providence, or the rewarding and beautifying of man, or
lastly, for the giving any life and encouragement to virtue.

Now if a reward over and above the inward contentment of the mind be due to
virtue, and this reward is to be of the whole man, and also to be paid him
after this life, then must this reward be such as will fully satisfy and
content him, for satisfied he is to be, and also satisfied by that which is a
reward consequent to his actions, wherefore his contentment must be eternal;
for nothing else can please him, as elsewhere we have endeavored to evict, and
as, I suppose, every man's own heart will tell him without book: wherefore the
soul, which is to enjoy this, must also be eternal, or, which in our sense is
all one, immortal. Pontius the Scotist struggles against this argument also
for the defense of his Master Scotus, but the zeal of defending truth and of
delivering healthful doctrine, I value above that other of defending the
sayings of any one particular Master whatsoever, if he be but a man, as Scotus
was no more.

Eighthly, the doctrine of the soul's immortality is the foundation of virtue,
without which she must needs fall unto the ground: this is clearly showed by
Lessius, and long before him by the Platonic and Heathen Philosopher
Hierocles; Unless, says he, something should subsist in us after death fit to
be adorned with verity and virtue, which subsistent thing without doubt is no
other than the reasonable soul, we should have no pure desire of honesty or
virtue. For the suspicion of an abolishment would choke the desites of these,
and divert us to corporeal pleasures, of what sort soever, or whenever they
might be gotten by us. And according to that doctrine, how could it seem the
part of a prudent or moderate man not to be so indulgent to his body as to
grant it all things, seeing the soul in that case was preserved for the bodies
sake, and of it self had no existence, but accrued unto man from the
conformation of his body? Or why under the name of virtue should we molest our
body, if the soul so perish with it, as virtue her self can have no subsistence
left, for whose sake we endure death? Thus far Hierocles, and that very
cordially and truly.

If then the doctrine of the soul's immortality be the foundation of virtue,
doubtless it is a truth assured, because virtue and a rational manner of
conversation, taken in the generality, cannot be founded upon any falsehood or
uncertainty, as Ludovicus Vives has notably declared.

I might add here the arguments of Scaliger, Exercit. 308. n. 20. of Aureolus
Renatus des Carts, and diverse others, but these alone well explicated and
considered are sufficient.

These are the chief seats of arguments, from whence Authors do usually fetch
them, which how much more or less valid or perspicuous they may seem, yet have
they been held for good by the wisest Philosophers both Heathen and Christian,
and to be concluding. But howsoever that be, the verity it self has been
counted certain and evident, insomuch as Aureolus himself, although he found
difficulty in sundry of the arguments, yet did he not doubt to say, speaking of
the soul's immortality, in 2 Sent. did. 19. This doctrine of faith is to be
held undoubtedly, and it is the common conception of the mind, and a verity
evident of it self, though to give a reason for it, it is not so casie. So
Aureolus, with whom consents Cicero, when as he said, as has been before
alleged out of him, that it is the consent of all nations. Now, says he, if
the consent of all be the voice and verdict of Nature, then are we to think the
same. Besides, how could so many Heathen Philosophers have acknowledged
unanimously this doctrine of immortality, otherwise then by the light of nature
and common reason? out of which it is plain, that natural reason does teach us
this verity. It follows then, that by Ciceroes judgment, whatsoever the
arguments be, the doctrine it self is not only true, but also certain and
evident; which thing may very well be, for there be many truths which are not
proved easily or evidently, and yet nevertheless be very certain, yea
peradventure are not to be proved at all, but be things most evident and
indemonstrable; nature and the understanding acknowledging and embracing them
as legitimate, without any further argument than her own light: and again, many
things be knownly false which nature rejects as spurious and false, although
she be not able to demonstrate that they involve any repugnancy or
contradiction; so that indivers verities we are to rely lastly upon
Tertullian's Testimonium animae, without exacting from them any clearer
evidence.

CHAP. VII. A List of some other Topics, or heads of probation.
A Ninth head of argumentation is taken from the general sense of Religion
which is in the soul of man, and in no other of creatures inferior, by reason
of which sense he is easily induced to make an humble acknowledgement of an
invisible and supreme Power, unto which all things are subjected, and all
intelligent natures do owe a duty: upon which affection Seneca making a
reflection pronounces, saying, Hoc habuit argumentum divinitatis suae, quod
illum divina delectant; This argument has he of his own divinenesse, that he
is delighted with things divine. Thus he, and not without good reason for it,
in regard that creatures endued with sense have their delights suitable unto
their beings, or natures: wherefore as the natures be, so are the delights; if
terrestrial and fading, such are the natures; if contrariwise celestial and
sempiternall, the natures are thereafter.

From this feeling of Religion came it to pass that, throughout the whole
civilized world, so many Temples were erected, so many Altars, religious
houses, solemnities and festivalls, whether in particular holy or
superstitious, sacred or profane, right or wrong, according to the different
passions and apprehensions of men, yet all of them conspiring in this one, that
the Deity was with all humble recognizance and submission to be worshipped.

A tenth Topic may be the eminent desire of chastity and single life, a
quality transcending the condition of any nature wholly subject to corruption.
For the better conceiving of which verity, we are to note that Nature in all
her completed works aspires unto a perpetuity, and therefore does not only
furnish them with means for the effecting of it, but also imposes a necessity
upon them for the performance, such as they are not able to resist. I say, a
perpetuity, either in the Individuum, or else in the Species at the least.
Incorruptible things are neither produced by generation, nor yet do generate,
neither have they any appetite thereunto. As for example, Angels and the Orbs
celestial. Those other who are allowed no better an immortality then
specificall, or by succession from one of the same kind unto another, Nature
has not only made apt to generation and able, but also so prone unto it as it
cannot be resisted by them. The condition of man is neither exempted from
generation, as Angels be, and from the appetite thereof, nor yet subjected to
it by any natural enforcement, as brute beasts, but is of a middle temper,
partaking of both extremes: he can generate, and has an appetite to it,
neither of which two qualities belong to Angels; again, he has an appetite
also to live chaste, and can refrain, neither of which two properties belong to
Beasts. So that, as with the creatures below him he has an inclination to
propagate; so also with incorporeall substances which are above him, he can
control and bridle that same appetite, and also make it wholly subject to the
other, he aspiring unto a fairer and better way of continuance and perpetuity
then specificall. By this, then, it appears that in man there is something
which is mortal, and again, that there is also something which is immortal,
and stands in no need to be repaired by generation; and what can this be but
his soul? The practice of the world confirms that which we have said, because
the virtue of chastity has still been held in no small reputation and esteem,
as for example, amongst the Jews, in the Esseni, of whose institute of life,
large and honorable memories are exstant in Josephus, Pliny, and Solinus;
amongst the Romans, in the Vestall Virgins; amongst the Indians, in the
Gymnosophists; amongst the Greeks, in the great Apollonius Tyaneus, of whose
acts Philostratus and others do make ample mention.

An eleventh argument may be drawn from our solicitous inquiries touching our
soul's perpetuity, as of a matter of high concernment and by no means to be
neglected, Nature her self thereby teaching us that we had claim unto it. This
argument is in the first place produced by a late Rabbine of Amsterdam,
Menasseh Ben Israel, de Resurrect. c. 9.

A twelfth way of probation is from the consent of Nations, who all of them
do, either expressly a vow this opinion of immortality, or else teach it
implicitly in some practice or other in which it is involved, and to be
supposed as a truth. Of the Nations in particular I need not render an account,
both because the matter is well known, and also because the same Rabbine Ben
Israel l. de Resurr. c. 9. Eugubinus l. de Perenni Philosophia, Gassendus tom.
1. de Philosophia Epicuri, have done it exactly.

This consent being general, and no erratick or straggling imagination, cannot
but have a foundation that is solid. That act, says Thom. de Argentina l. 1.
d. 1. q. 2. con. 1. which does follow the whole species is simply and
absolutely natural; and again, that is necessary which amongst all is one and
the same.

Our thirteenth and last way of probation is from the many and undeniable
apparitions of souls departed; the truth of which we have attested and
delivered unto us by depositions, as creditable and authentical as we are wont
to require for the confirmation and assurance of other things which are to come
unto our knowledge by relation; wherefore the argument drawn from hence cannot
but be solid and good, and therefore if we give credit unto those other
relations, we cannot in any reason deny it unto these. To tell us here of
Legends were a vanity, for all Legends are not lying, though some be, no more
then all other Histories are lying, though diverse of them be. It were a bold
act to give thely to the Annalls of Baronius and of his learned continuatour
Odoricus Raynaldus, to the Annalis of the Minorites composed exactly by Lucas
Wadding, or to the noble History of Ferdinandus a Castello, to the Florilegium
of Ribadeneyra, to Matthew Paris, Guilelmus Nubrigensis, Bartholomaeus Sibylla,
Alph. Tostatus, Eustratius apud Photiums, Beda, Nauclerus, Caesarius,
Cantipratensis, Guil. Tyrius, and infinite others, who all agree in this point,
and whose authority is so great, as it will retort the ly upon the reprehender
with greater force then it can be cast upon them by him or any man

Now although it be a thing not evident, that the spirits seeming to appear are
really the souls of such or such deceased persons, yet have we no reason to
think otherwise: but if that they are their good or evil Angels, which, by
divine appointment, do act in their behalf and likeness, yet even by that it
will appear that those souls are still alive; for God himself did often appear
by such deputies, and manifest himself to Moses and Abraham by the apparition
of his Angels. But yet it is a thing no less reasonable to judge that they are
humane spirits that make an apparition in themselves, or at the least in their
deputies, then to judge that they are spirits. Wherefore whosoever questions
whether these appearing spirits be souls or no, but rather deluding Devils
putting on their likeness, may as well doubt whether, on the contrary side,
those same Devils be really Devils, and not the souls of men; or again, whether
those living men whom our eyes daily do behold, be really men, or rather, not
some delusive apparitions. I would fain learn why men, contrary to the doctrine
of Aristotle and Epicurus, should distrust their senses in judging every thing
to be the same it seems, unless they see some urgent reason to the contrary.
Surely, in behalf of such apparitions there may be just reasons given; because
it is not unlikely that souls which had so much dealing in the world during the
time of their habitation in the body, and contracted so many obligations of
justice, might after death have something remaining here for them to rectify,
and to give notice of unto the living whom it does concern. Besides, say that
they who appeared were Devils, and not souls, yet this alone would argue
immortality, for, to Dogs and Horses or such like, who have no relation to a
future life, neither Devils nor souls do appear, neither were it to any
purpose that they should.

I add, that if no returns of souls were to be admitted, but that being once
gone from hence, they were never to be heard of more, many men would be afraid
that indeed our souls were nothing but a breath, or a slender exhalation,
which after it was once dissipated was never again to be drawn together, and
consequently that all the reasons brought for immortality were but
sophistical, and found out to flatter us in that opinion; for so indeed it
fell out with Epicurean and wicked men, who pleased themselves with No^ est
agnitus qui sit reversus ab inferis, There was never any known to have returned
from the Dead; which is as much as to say, There were never any Ghosts, or
souls of men, that did appear unto the living after death.

In the first Edition of this small Tract, this argument of Apparitions brought
up the rear; but it pleased the Censurer of it in Oxford to dash it quite out,
though for what reason I do not know. If it were because he counted all the
narrations of apparitions to be fabulous, he must give us leave to prefer
before him so many faithful witnesses who have avowed them. Again, although he
esteemed them fabulous, yet, seeing all men of judgment did not so, he might
have left the argument to go as far as it might, and every reader to censure
of it as he should see cause, and not thus to impose laws upon other men's
understandings, and presume to put down his judgment as a rule to others. But
contrariwise, if he scraped out this argument for fear such stories of
apparitions might lead the way to some doctrines which he himself was not
willing to admit, this his way of proceeding (I must tell him) seems to me to
relish more of craft then ingenuity, and also to be so far from reasonable,
as he who uses it may justly be compared to him who, after a preposterous
manner, would deny the Premises, therefore only because he did not like the
Conclusion; or to an evil Astronomer, who will not frame his Hypotheses
according to his (...) or celestial apparences, but contrariwise, correct his
apparences according to his Hypotheses. Wherefore our Censurer, by this course
of his, seemed desirous to maintain what he did hold already to be true or
false, rather then to correct his errors, and to take right information for
beating out the truth. We do acknowledge that the Law, the Prophets, and the
Gospel well understood are sufficient to instruct us; and again, that for our
ordinary intelligence and concernments, we are not to expect messengers from
the dead: yet this will not enforce us to discredit all the testimonies of
apparitions which time has left us, or to say that in all occasions they are
fruitless; for, as Tostatus reasons, although they would do no good upon the
kindred of Dives, which, as it seems, was hard-hearted, yet they might upon
others; and again, although they did not confer to any living man's conversion
and salvation, yet they might rectify some injustices and errors committed by
the dead; and this, for the most part, is the errand for which they pretend to
come, as Tyraeus and other writers teach us: and of this Tostatus q. 89. in c.
16. Matthew. and q. 54. in c. 17. recites an example happening in his own time,
and also teaches, that at the transfiguration the soul of Moses appeared upon
mount Tabor.

CHAP. VIII. The Catabaptists error about the sleeping of Souls related and
refuted.
HAving examined our Adversaries chief arguments brought by him for proving the
soul's dying and mortality, it remains that we take into consideration another
error, one of no small affinity with this, yea, and in effect all one with it,
namely, the sleeping of souls, and their being in a state insensible, from the
first instant of their separation from their bodies, until the general
resurrection. Such as maintain this error, not daring, as Zanchius l. 2. de
oper. creat. c. 8. notech, openly to deny the immortality of men's souls,
because it seemed over plainly contradictory to the holy Scripture, and to the
judgments also of the gravest and wifest Philosophers and Divines, do
therefore deprive them of all sense, knowledge, or any other vital operation,
and lay them to sleep until the judgment day in which they are to be reunited
to their bodies, which time is to be the first of their awaking. But, indeed,
if this tenet of theirs be viewed diligently, we shall find that this
pretended sleep is nothing else but a direct death, and only different in the
name: and the reason is, because for a spirit to be destitute of all vital and
intellectual operation, is nothing else but to be dead, seeing that life is
nothing else in the soul besides the perpetual motion or action of it.
Wherefore in consideration and acknowledgement of this incessant activity,
Cicero and others delivered that the souls of men were made of fire celestial
and unextinguible, borrowed from the stars, and the Poets, in relation also
to this, did feign that Prometheus stole fire from heaven, wherewith he gave
life to his men of clay, which he had made. Now fire, as we know, is an element
always in action, yea, even then when it is raked up in ashes, for even then
it works both upon the food that maintains it, and also on the adjoining
bodies. Wherefore no charm, no medicine soporiferous can cast the spirit of man
into such a dull and deadly heaviness, as it shall not so much as have a
feeling of it self, nor be awaked by any other voice then that of the last
trumpet, which shall with a dreadful found call all to judgment, and which
noise shall be heard even by bodies, then which there is nothing more dead, or
more corrupted, nothing farther off from life, as having the atoms of which
they were composed, now all disordered and scattered with the wind; and
therefore that soul which can be rouzed up by a voice no lower, must needs be
more then a sleep, or laid down to rest.

Sleep is a thing different from Death, though nearly allied unto it, as Seneca
does signify in the Prosopopeia following; Et tu somne, domitor laborum,
Pars humanae melier vitae, etc.
Sharp sorrows tamer, steep, that art
Of life humane the choicer part,
Astrea's offspring here beneath.
Faint brother unto pallid Death.
Consanguineus Lethi Sopor, says another, Sleep is Death's kinsman, but how
near, we will not examine, and yet so near we are sure, as to a spiritual or
intellectual substance they are both one, and one of them as destructive of
life in it as the other: because, though they in themselves be things distinct,
yet sleep is as deadly to the soul as death it self is to the body, and can
agree as little with it; because, though sense can rest from action, yet reason
cannot, in regard there is a greater and a more eminent kind of vivacity in
the one then in the other.

If the Authors of this fantasy would be understood, let them declare,
first, what kind of Entity they take a spirit to be; secondly, seeing a spirit
has no body to rest, nor senses to shut up, nor vital or animal spirits to
repair, what this sleep of a spirit is, I mean, how they will define it. If
they cannot do this, then are they bunglers, and speak they know not what, and
therefore not regardable. If they say, it is a cessation from action, and from
possibility immediate of action, then has a spirit no life left in it more
then a stone or a dead body, and so in this case to sleep and to die signify the
same thing, though in terms that are different.

Yet say that they indeed could tell us what kind of thing this sleep should
be, that same is not enough, unless besides they do prove it strongly, for
such extravagancies as this is, are not to be admitted without convincing
arguments to make them good. Let us hear then what their arguments be, and let
us consider also of what weight.

CHAP. IX. Volkelius his Arguments for this Error examined and refuted.
VOlkelius, a known man, and a most principal Socinian, is the stoutest
Champion in this attempt; therefore let us hear him what he says.

Holy men, says he, after their change of this present life with death are
said in the Scripture not to be any longer, Psalm. 39.14.37.10. Jerem. 21.15.
Matthew. 2.18. Thren. 5.6.
and being dead, do neither live actually, nor understand, etc. And though the
spirits of men return to him that gave them, as shall be demonstrated
elsewhere; yet that those same spirits be persons which do any thing, or be
sensible, or do now enjoy pleasures everlasting, is a thing so far off from
being taught us by the holy Scripture, as on the contrary side, it is easily
showed to be repugnant to them, and that also by reasons very evident. For Paul
affirms that if the resurrection of the dead were not to be hoped for, a vain
thing it were to think of piety, or for the Truth's sake to undergo so manifold
calamities, and that of all men the Christians would be the most miserable.
Which assertion of his could not be true, of the souls of men without the
resurrection were settled in such pleasures and authority, as that they did not
only enjoy a good eternal, but were also in a state to give assistance unto
others: because that same felicity of theirs would be so great, as scarcely no
accession might be made unto it by the resurrection. Thus reasons Volkelius.

My answer to the first part is, by denying it to be said in Scripture simply
and absolutely, that souls departed, or men departed have no Being at all, but
only, that they have no being upon the earth; in regard that by dying they
cease, not only to be men any longer of this world, but even to be men, as
before death they had been: and this must needs be the true meaning of the
places quoted by the Adversary, in the Margin, and not that other which he
pretends; because it is a thing most evident, both in reason and in holy
Scripture also, that the parts of which men are composed be not annihilated by
death, without any remnant of Being left them but, that they cease only to be
united, or to be men; in respect of which deficiency alone it might be truly
affirmed of men, as it is in Scripture, that after death they are not in being.

To the second part I say, that although the soul after separation from the
body, be not a person humane, or an entity complete, yet still has it a stable
subsistence, and leaves not to be a substance intellectual or a spirit.
Wherefore it does not follow, that because the soul is not a person, or a
complete entity, after separation, that therefore it can have no action, but
must either sleep or die. The soul, be it separated or united, is a spirit, a
spirit is intellective, an intellective substance can neither die, nor wholly
cease from action, as before has been proved, and therefore is not capable
either of sleep or slumber, or in any danger of being benumbed, and, much
less, of death.

To the third I answer, that the Apostle speaks there, not of Christian souls
being miserable, but of Christian men's being so; and therefore let the souls be
never so happy after death, yet, if there should be no resurrection, the men
could be never otherwise then miserable, yea far more miserable then any
other men; because in this life they should be afflicted in a higher degree
then others, and in the next they should not be at all. You will say, What
matter is it if the men be miserable in this world, and never happy in any
world, so the souls in the next world be made happy? In opposition to this, I
say, Yes, it is a matter, and a very great matter also, if we will weigh things
rightly; for to be miserable in the whole, and afterward to be happy only by
the halfes, is a great and capital inconvenience. Let the soul be where it
will, and as happy as can be, yet if the body do not rise again, but ly
trampled under foot, and be triumphed over by death everlastingly, the
condition of man, as man, would be very miserable, and that of a Christian more
then of an ordinary man. Besides, as the soul finds pain and contentment by
the body in this life, so ought it afterward, or else it would want somewhat
of the former perfection.

To the fourth part I answer, that notwithstanding the soul be happy before the
resurrection, yet great will the advantage be that both the soul and also the
whole man shall get at that great day. For then at that time man recovers
himself, and is put into a new possession of what he lost by death: now what, I
beseech you, can be dearer and more welcome unto man then he himself is?
neither can his victory over death be completed till then; neither again is
his crown of glory finished before that recovery be made. Besides this, the
soul also gains not a little portion of felicity by this recovery, for so think
many grave Doctors, both ancient and modern; but what is the certainty or the
particulars, that is a mystery which we know not, yet some may guess that, as
at the resurrection there is an accession of one essential half of man added
to the soul which is the other half essential, so also there is one half,
greater or less, of felicity that does then accrue; and is not one half of
felicity a notable accession and a great advantage? It may well be, for ought
Volkelius knows to the contrary, that the soul, during the state of
separation, shall have allotted to it, by the verdict of the first Judgment,
which is a judgment of souls, such a portion only or proportion of felicity
as belongs unto it under the title of being a form assistent, in which
capacity it might act diverse things by it self, without assistance or
cooperation of the body; but at the resurrection the same soul shall have, by a
verdict of the second Judgment, which is a judgment of men, another portion
of felicity allotted to it, so much, namely, as might correspond unto the soul
as it is a form informing, and makes up together with the body organicall one
complete agent, which complete agent is the Author and Actour of the greater
part of all the actions of this life. See Estius in a. sent. did. 45. 7. ad. 4.
So that the former portion of felicity has a correspondence to the soul
alone; the later portion, both to soul and body, not as they are several, but
as united and knit up into one. All this, whether it be true or no I know not,
but yet thus much I know, that it may be true for ought that Volkelius has
said, and therefore is it sufficient to break the force of his argument, and
wholly to evacuate it, till he have proved the contrary.

My conclusion is, that as in death there is a sorrowful departing, and the
farewell between soul and body is a very sad one: so in like sort, at the
resurrection, when they meet never after to be divorced, there needs must be a
joyful interview between them, and those second nuptials be a most solemn
festival, a day of light and exultation, in which the mutual congratulations
will be unexpressible. And therefore, let Volkelius imagine what he pleases,
the soul by the last day, and by the resurrection, will be a mighty gainer, and
receive new joys, new treasures of felicity.

To the alleged place of the Apostle to the Corinthians, I answer, that it
makes nothing at all for Volkelius his purpose, because it is not said there,
that without the resurrection there is no felicity, but only, that our faith
was void unless Christ had risen; and if our faith were void, then would all
promises of comfort and felicity be void also, and so, by consequence, neither
our souls nor our bodies should attain to happiness. Out of which defect it
would also follow, that Christians of all other men should be the most
miserable, because they in this life should have more afflictions and fewer
comforts then other men, and in the next life have none at all, nor any thing
wherewith to recompense them for their labors, abstinences and sufferings
here. But say that the souls might be completely happy, although there should
be no resurrection; yet, nevertheless, even in this case the condition of a
Christian would be more sad and more unhappy then that of other men, so far
forth as concerns his body, at the least, which is one half of man, and one
essential part, and also is that of which the Apostle does in this place
principally entreat: and so the Adversaries argument can conclude no way.

You may further object, that in sundry places of holy Scripture dying men are
said to sleep, for example, with their fathers: and this manner of speaking is
very frequent. But the answer is manifest, because this word sleep is meant of
the body only, which being dead, lies in the sepulcher quietly as in a bed,
and is at the great day to be called up again, as one that wakened out of a
sleep, a very dead one. Besides, this word sleep, when meant of the soul, is
only a symbolicall expression.

My Conclusion is with S. Hierome ad Pammach. Incorporalem and aternam animam
in modum glirium, immobilem torpentemque sentire non possumus. We cannot be
persuaded that the incorporeall and everlasting soul is, like to a Dormouse,
immovable and benumbed; or to Swallows that sleep all winter. So thought this
ancient Doctor: and for our own part, we can be as soon persuaded that the
soul may dream, as that it should sleep: and, if we will believe Albertus
magnus in 4. did. 44. ar. 41. to hold that separated souls should dream, were
a thing ridiculous, and therefore no less to think that they can sleep or
slumber.

Again, as Carolus Bovillus notes, it is a thing contrary to nature, reason
and Philosophy, to put any substance destitute of connaturall operation:
wherefore either grant the operation, or else take away the substance; and so
let the souls of men either be active and awake, or else let them not be at
all; for to say they are, and yet are not operative, is a gross non sequitur,
and not to be admitted by men of reason. Wherefore, if we grant the soul to be
a substance intellectual, then to go consequently to this, we must also grant
it to be immortal; and again, if both intellectual and immortal, that then
also it can never cease from the exercise of connaturall operations, and so,
lastly, can never be a sleep. I end this chapter with the magistrall doctrine
of the learned B. Tostatus l. de statu Animae Concl. pr. 1.
of Avila: The souls, says he, if they remain immortal after death, it is
necessary that properly they always understand. Forasmuch as the understanding
is not a power that is subject to weariness then when it is separated from the
body, therefore it shall never be tired, as having no coherence with the
conditions of an organe corporeal. Thus defines he.

CHAP. X. An estimate of the reasons for the souls immortality.
THere have not wanted, both in this time, and also in former ages, some
Icarian wits, who, I know not why, have labored to extenuate and to diminish
the force of the arguments usually brought in favor of the souls indeficiency,
not doubting to give it out, that they be not demonstrative. But this exception
of theirs fails more of being demonstrative, then the reasons do against which
they except: for, admit they be not properly demonstrative, yet nevertheless
may they be proofs very sufficient, and able to persuade any man that is
unpartiall, and governed by reason, and also much stronger than any which
hitherto have been brought against it, and so are to carry the cause on their
side.

I will not deny but that those same reasons may not be so clear and
perspicuous, as some are which we have for sundry other verities, the cause
whereof may seem to be the souls immuring within corporeal organs, as in a
dark house or prison, in which it being shut up, although it may behold out at
the windows of the body objects abroad illustrated with light, yet at home, by
reason of the domestic obscurity, it cannot do the like. This same difficulty,
moreover, is increased, because the soul of man is an entity placed in the
confines betwixt the two regions of substances spiritual and corporeal, and so
of nature more ambiguous and hard to be discerned, by reason that in this
posture, it may sometimes seem to be belonging to one side, and sometimes again
unto the others and so much also the easier, because the soul, while it is in
the body, discharges a two-sold duty, viz. one of a form informing, as
Philosophers use to call it, such, namely, as is performed by the souls
inferior, conformably to the doctrine of Aristotle; the other of a form
assistent, agreeable to the School of Plato, unto which Campanella does
subscribe. Such a form as this is God unto the world, and is therefore styled
Anima mundi by very many, the Soul of the Universe; of which sort Intelligences
be, according to the Peripateticks, in respect of their several Orbs, and a
Pilote in a ship, as also other movers and directers of that nature. And this
double office the soul performs, because even as it is rational it does not
only animate the body, and is it self also a formal ingredient, and
constitutes man in his specificall degree of being, and thereby distinguishes
him essentially from all other creatures, which functions belong unto the soul
as it is a form informing: but besides all this, acts the part of a form
assistent, residing in the body as a high Dictatour, controlling it, commanding
and countermanding, prescribing laws, inflicting punishments, exercising acts
of jurisdiction and absolute sovereignty, thereby resembling a Judge upon the
bench, or Prince upon his throne, more then a form merely informing: whereas,
contrariwise, the soul of a Beast lives in subjection to the body, being
therein compelled to follow the prescription of every sensual appetite after a
servile or slavish manner, without any power to make resistance. Wherefore not
without good cause did Fl. Josephus style the power of reason a Sovereignty, or
Empire. In consideration also of this two-old office of the soul, seemed it to
have two names given it, one relating to it as it is a form informing, namely,
(...), or Anima, the other to it as a form assistent, viz. (...) Animus, or
Men's. In the former sense it is a Soul, in the later a Mind: which preeminence
of being a Mind, over and above that other of a Soul, Juvenal expresses
saying, Sat. 15.

venerabile soli
Sortiti ingenium, divinorumque capaces,
Atque exercendis capiendisque artibus apti,
Sensum e coelesti demissum traximus arce;
Cujus egent prona and terram spectantia, mundi
Principio indulsit Communis conditor illis
Tantum animas, nobis animum quoque, etc.
For arts, a wit to man was lent,
Afar from heavenly towers sent:
Which shining light prone creatures want;
Nature, it seems, to them was scant,
A soul on each, to us more kind,
Besides a soul bestowed a mind.
How inconsiderate an act it is in men of learning to seek evasions from the
usual arguments brought in favor of immortality, we have noted before out of
our learned countriman Mr. Carleton; and again, with what ill success men do
impugn both those arguments and other received doctrines in Philosophy, the
experience of this last age has taught us, in which we have seen the fall of
many soaring spirits that have adventured upon them. Telesius, Patritius.
Ramus, Basson, Gassendus, though, in a manner, but newly sprung, yet are grown
already into neglect: and the like destiny may Des Carts, Henricus Regius, and
Campanella expect; the last of which three, though he have many strange
conceptions and novelties, as for example, touching the sense of things
insensible, and also his three Primalities, as he calls them, which he will
hardly persuade unto the world, and again, many trifling objections against
Aristotle, yet, by his largeness of contemplating, starts many notable Truths
which other great Wits, who have gone on in a straight line, have not espied;
in regard of which verities, his labors may continue longer them other of that
sort are like to do. We see Aristotle yet lives, and lives also in esteem, and
his adversaries lie buried in contempt. It is an old saying, Qui vult infestare
fortem,
Perit atque quaerit mortem.
Those who with the strong contend,
Must expect untimely end.


Those who will be ever quarrelling with Aristotle and his School about those
doctrines which have passed the Test, after so many examinations by the most
able Wits for no small number of ages, may, peradventure, be overmatched, and
return out of the fray with broken heads. To impugn this or that single
doctrine, this or that one argument, may pass for current, and peradventure
also prove successful: but he that will undertake to raise a whole new frame
of Philosophy, and encounter with Aristotle at every turn, stands in need to
have the wit of Aristotle, which, as it appears, few of these new undertakers
have had, yea, such bold attempts do show the adventurers capacities not to
have been very great.

Let the quarrellers go on and try their fortune, and by experience they may
find that the arguments for immortality had deeper roots then they imagined.
Surely, that doctrine to which the most intelligent persons of the very
Heathens gave their assent, either wanted not good arguments to prove it, or
else bad arguments had very strange and incredible success. It could not be
but those proofs were very forcible, which were able to enforce an opinion of
life, even after the ruins made upon man by death, at which time no power in
nature was able to make a restoration; and then also when few or no messengers
came to them from the dead; but, contrariwise, man after his departure was
heard of no more, nor any news was sent them from the other life. It is true
that Epicurus stood astonished at the sight of death, and of the many disorders
and disturbances in this world, and therefore wickedly denied both providence
divine, and also immortality, which was a consequent thereof. But other
Philosophers were wiser and more considerate then so, and would not forsake the
Truths of providence and of immortality, because of an encountering difficulty
which they could not overcome: and therefore, touching the other world,
Aristotle held it the wisest way to be silent, Plato had recourse to fictions
of his own, touching circulations and Palingenesiae after every of his great
years to be accomplished, Pythagoras fled for succor to his transmigrations
or Metempsychoses, the Stoics to open falsehoods and improbabilities, telling
us, contrary to the express determinations of Aristotle and Theophrastus, that
men might be happy by virtue alone, and that no corporeal miseries were
evils. In fine, here Ethnic Philosophy was deficient, not being able to
satisfy, or come home unto us, nor to resolve us in our greatest doubts: but
these great vacancies of Philosophy were to be supplied by Christian religion
alone, just as the doubts about the Antipodes were to be cleared by the
discoveries of adventurous navigatours; for it is Christian religion alone
which does solve this Gordian knot, Et caeteri tanquam umbrae vagantur, and all
the rest, like shadows, do wander up and down. It was Christ, the Lamb of God,
who opened the books of providence, which formerly had been sealed up, and the
contents hidden from the eyes of any mortal man. Against the Antipodes: and
the habitation of the burning Zone great difficulties were urged, yet,
notwithstanding them, the reasons on the contrary side were so considerable, as
they carried many of the wisest with them, as, by name, Polybius the historian,
Clemens Romanus, as we may see in his Epistle to the Corinthians, and Virgilius
B. of Saltzburg; which Virgil. being miss-understood by his unskilful
auditors that made a false report of what he taught, he had like to have
incurred a heavy censure for it: Aventin. l. 3. hist. The two cases, viz. of
the torrid zone and of immortality, be not much unlike; for, as the Antipodes
were denied by many, because they were beyond the torrid zone, which for the
extremity of heat, was esteemed unpassable; so the beatitude of man, unto which
immortality is addressed, was held in doubt by many, by reason of the frozen
zone of death, which lies between our present life and that; which icye
climate, by reason of the extremity of cold, could not, as it was thought, be
passed over by any mortal man. All which difficulty was increased by the
seeming deficiency of providence over the affairs of man; the consideration of
which did move even the ablest and the best men, as namely, Job, David,
Solomon, Jeremy, and amongst later men, Seneca and Boethius; although it
prevailed not with them, as it had done with Epicurus, who, if he had pleased,
might have perceived easily that the want of some order and equalities in this
life did plainly argue another to come after it; and again, the admirable
contrivement of the world for the natural part, does evict as careful a
provision also for the moral. What, shall we think that the great Author of
things was a better natural Philosopher then a moral, or that he was more
powerful then he was good? no greater an absurdity then this could be
swallowed down by any: and so Epicurus, while he sought to fly a seeming
inconvenience, sell into a real; and for the avoiding of a lesser dissiculty,
fell into a greater. This world is the Stage, men the Actours, our life the
Play. An action must not be judged by one Scene, but by all together, and
chiefly by the last, and before that be showed no condemnation can pass, nor
Plaudue be given. God then being so great an Artist in composing, and also in
continual ordering of this Theater and of the various lights that hang about
it, may be presumed not to have been less provident in the Action which is to
be represented on it, then he was about the Theater it self; unless we would
admit that the Stage should be more artificial then the Play, and that the
Architect was better and more skillful then the Poet. By the actions, then, of
God in his works of Nature, he has given us a most sufficient security for his
works of Morality, and neither Epicurus nor any other had cause sufficient to
call it into question. Wherefore the other lise must be the last scene, and
that one must bring all to order, and make amends for all the defects and
disturbances in the former; and so, consequently, for the finishing of all, a
succeeding life and a continuated immortality must be allowed us. This
inference seems so clear and evident, that, if no ship of nature could pass
the line of death, but after a tempestuous voyage and a perilous poor
laboursome mortality it must be thrown over board into the deeps, and there
perish everlastingly, then, if humane understanding might presume to give a
judgment, the spectatours of this tragedy would not doubt to say, this play
was neither worth the acting, nor the making, yea and besides, that so curious
and well built a stage was ill-bestowed upon so mean a history. If all that is
of man must end in death and come unto a total dissolution, we can scarce
withhold from setting upon it this censure, namely, That in the Architecture
there wanted much symmetry or proportion, because the gate was made bigger then
the city, and besides, that mighty were the preparations, but the feast was
hungry and penurious.

It was not, then, the false and flattering desire in man of living ever, and
of surviving his short and transitory pleasures of this world, which did
persuade him immortality, according as Pliny vainly did surmise; but Nature her
self it was which did rise up in us for vindicating of her own right, of which
the unadvised school of Epicurus did labor to dispossess her. And doubtless
those arguments in favor of immortality could not be otherwise then very
powerful and weighty, that, in the midst of Ethnicisme, were of ability to
prevail, and by their force to stem the violent tides of so many advancing
difficulties as daily did arise, and also to charm the Furies, which, out of
the dark retreats of humane ignorance and imbecility, did incessantly molest
them. For, in very deed, it was the unknown and then undiscovered hemisphere of
the other life which caused many, but the Epicurcans especially, utterly to
despair, and to conclude our little light and joys within the circles of
humane mortality; just as the ignorant vulgar did conceive that the Sun, when
it goes down to us, did lie concealed and bathed it self in Tethis salt waves,
until the following morn began to call upon it. Can, I say, these reasons of
persuasion be counted weak, that were able, from age to age, to carry on the
doctrine of immortality against the violent streams of death and dissolution?
which seemed to be diseases irrecoverable, and by them a man brought into a
state that is desperate and never to be altered; and therefore it was an usual
saying, Mors ultima linea rerum, Death is the utmost line of things, beyond
which there is no going, and as it were the pillars of Hercules with the Nil
ultra graven on them. Neither were those same reasons able, after corruption
and ashes, to rear up a single frame of life for perpetuity only in the soul
of man, but also to attempt it for the body, yea and to come very near the
absolute proving of it, and the evicting of a Resurrection, as a thing due unto
the principles of nature, and as a sequel also of the attribute of Justice
divine: in consideration of which two reasons, it appears, that albeit the
Resurrection cannot be natural, yet it is a very near borderer upon nature,
and, that we may so speak, not distant from it three fingers breadths, the
intervall or distance between them being no more then the want of a natural
agent that might be able to reunite the soul and body after separation.
Whereupon I conclude, that the Resurrection of the body is none of the hardest
articles of our faith, but contrariwise such a one as may be persuaded easily.

In confirmation of this truth, I cannot pass over in silence a memorable
conference between Almaricus king of Jerusalem and William B. of Tyrus,
recorded by Tyrius himself libro 19. capite 3. de bello sacre. The question
propounded to by the king was this, viz. Whether, setting aside the doctrine of
our Savior and of the Saints that followed him, the Resurrection could be
proved by any evident and convincing arguments? To which, being moved with the
newness of the word, I answered, That the doctrine of our Savior and Redeemer
was sufficient, who, in many places of the Gospel, does teach us most
manifestly that the Resurrection is to be, and that he is to come as Judge, to
judge both the living and the dead, and the world by fire; as also, that he
will give unto the elect a kingdom prepared for them from the constitution of
the world, and to the wicked fire everlasting, prepared for the Devil and his
angels: Besides, the pious assertion of the Apostles and Fathers of the old
Testament may be sufficient. To which he made answer, All this I firmly hold,
but yet do desire a reason wherewith I might prove it to one who should deny
this, and did not receive the doctrine of Christ, namely, that the Resurrection
is to come, and after death another life. To whom my answer was, Take upon you
then, said I, the person of one so affected, and let us try whether or no we
can find out any thing. Content, said he. Then I, You do confess that God is
just? Then he, I hold nothing to be more true. Then I replied, Is it justice to
return to the just good things for their good deeds, and to the wicked evil
things for their wickedness? Then he, It is very right. Then I, But in our
present life this is not done: because in this world, good men find nothing
but afflictions and adversities, but the wicked enjoy a continued prosperity,
as daily examples do teach us. Then he, It is a certainty. Then I proceeded;
Therefore this is to be done in another life, because God cannot be otherwise
then a just rewarder: therefore there is to be another life, and a resurrection
of this body of ours in which we deserved good or evil, and therefore ought to
receive a reward accordingly. Then he, This pleases me exceedingly, and by it
all my doubting is taken off. Thus far are the words of the grave and
faithful historian Guil. Tyrius.

Besides this, the soul being a form of a body organicall, is not in a full
perfect state, nor in a full contentment without the body, as Argentina in 4.
d. 49. Tostat. c. 4. Deuteronomy. q. 7. etc. 25. Matthew. q. 63. Aquin. in supplem. q.
75. ad. 4. and 1, 2. q. 4. a. 5. and 4. con. Gentes c. 79. and Ferrarien. ibid.
Albertus, l. 7. Comp. c. 16. do evict: for indeed all forms informing do
receive perfection from the matter informed by them, as well as communicate
perfection to it: and again, in things created every total entity is more
perfect then a part, as S. Bonaventure clearly shows in 4. d. 43. q. 1.

CHAP. XI. Man's being by Procreation no argument of his Soul's mortality.
THat man's soul must have the being by generation because the man himself has
his being by it, is no good consequence; and the reason why some have been
deceived in judging it a good one, or that of due his soul ought to be
generated as well as the souls of Beasts, has been partly a false apprehension
what the true nature and essence of generation was, and partly also what was
the perfection and essence of man.

As for the first misprision, it was, that generation was not only to make the
compositu^ or whole to be, but also the parts, by the conferring unto them not
only the being parts, but also the simple Being, or the being ^^^ties, that is
to say, not only the formality of them, but even the naturality; which conceit
of theirs is a false conception, and against all reason and principles of
Philosophy: for by them we are clearly taught that it is Man which is
procreated, or made by generation, and not his soul, his body is made or framed
by it, and not the matter of which it is composed. For it is a received maxim
and most true, touching the power of natural causes at least, though no
farther, Quod ex nihilo nihil fit; Of nothing there is nothing to be made: out
of which it follows, that before generation, both matter and forms of all
corporeal things must have beforehand a being in rerum natura, at least an
incomplete one, and cannot possibly have it from generation. Wherefore by the
work of generation they are not made, or receive any new absolute entity, but
only are collected, ordered, and at last substantially linked and united one
with another; which union is not by a sole approximation, contiguity, or
juxta-position, that I may so speak, of one of them with another, as it falls
out in artificial compounds, where colors, for example, though they be not
pictures, yet being thus or thus chosen, formed and united, make up such or
such a picture; but it is by a continuity, or an inward and substantial knot,
which is in our power better to conceive then explicate, and yet not to
conceive fully neither, for these principles of generation are Natures arcana,
her darkest and most secret mysteries, which, like the springs of Nilus, she
has hidden from our eyes, as if our seeing of them were a profanation, thereby
to let us know that she is our mother, and we but ignorant children, and such
who must not be made much acquainted with our original.

Again, if the parts also must be generated, I ask, whether these parts be
simple or compound entities. If simple, they cannot be generated, but must have
their being by creation; if compound, then if they must be generated, the parts
also of which those parts are made must in like sort be generated; and so
either in infinitum, or else at least, till we come to some parts which a
simple and ingenerable: by which discourse it follows that no parts at all,
neither corporeal nor spiritual, neither in man nor beasts, do receive their
being by generation.

As for Accidents, they cannot be properly said either to be generated or
corrupted, but do follow the fortunes of the substances in which they are to
inhere; and besides, are the formal effects of Alteration, and not of
Generation.

Touching the second misprision, or original of error and mistaking, note,
that although it belong to the perfection of an Animal to generate another like
it self, yet is it a perfection only to Animals and Vegetables; and to them
also not simply, but only quatenus corruptibilia, so far forth as they are
corruptible, generation being instituted only for reparation of decays, and
to re-edify the ruins of corruption; so that wheresoever there be more ruins,
in that place more reedification is needful. In creatures therefore
irrational, where there is a corruption more large then in the rational, a
fuller manner of generation is necessary, because there is a greater decay in
the form in the one then in the other; forasmuch as the forms of irrational
creatures be by corruption disformalized and dissipated into their atoms,
which dissipation, if the forms were spiritual, needed not; and again, if
indivisible, were a thing impossible. Therefore generation is to perform more
in one then the other, and yet sufficiently in both, according to their
several exigences. Seeing then generation is nothing but Productio viventis a
vivente in similitudinem naturae, A production of one living thing by another
in a similitude of nature; according to the definition thereof, whatsoever
agent shall do this, that same is truly and univocally said to generate, how
much more or less soever it do besides this. A man therefore producing another
man by the only composing and uniting his two essential parts, body and soul,
makes that to be a man which before was none, and does truly generate a man,
although he no more produce his soul, then he does the matter of which his body
is formed and made; for there can be no more necessity for the production of
the one then of the other. And this one instance of matter will evidently
destroy our Adversaries argument taken from procreation.

Neither is it, as Argenterius well declares, any imperfection in man not to
generate so fully as other Animals do, but rather a great perfection in him:
for as it is a perfection in beasts to generate totally as much as generation
can do, because they are totally corruptible as much as in nature it is
possible; and as in Angels it were an imperfection to genelate, because they by
their nature are totally incorruptible; so in man it is a perfection to
generate as Angels do not do, and also not to generate so totally and fully
as brute beasts do generate, because he is, as the Philosophers rightly and
aptly term him, Horizon mundi, and nexus naturae utriusque; as it were, the
Horizon of the world, and that which knits corporeal and spiritual natures
together, by his participating with them both, and not fully agreeing with
either; not being so corruptible as beasts, nor so incorruptible as Angels or
pure Intelligences. By which it follows, that his manner of generation is in
something to agree with the non-generation of Angels; and again, in something
with the total generation of creatures irrational: that same generation of
his being truly and univocally a generation, because he is univocally and
truly an Animal, and yet not totally so, because in his immortal soul he
resembles the incorruptibility of Angels or Intelligences. For Modus generandi
sequitur modum essendi: and ideo quod partim est immortale and partim non,
partim etiam generare debet and partim non. That which is not wholly mortal
does not wholly generate: and therefore neither man nor beast does generate
wholly, yet a beast more wholly then a man; and the reason is, because a beast
is a creature which is more imperfect. Where note by the way, that the more
imperfect any entity is, the more imperfect is the manner of production; and
contrariwise, that which is most perfect has no production or original at
all. Therefore God, who is the most perfect entity, is not caused any way, nor
producible, either by generation or creation. Angels or Intelligences, who are
next in perfection of being to him, come to be by the work of a Creator, and
not of a Parent or Generatour, as being entities, according to the principles
of their nature, immateriall, simple and ingenerable. Man, who is next in
degree to Angels, and of a twofold nature, was therefore partly to be produced
by creation, so far as he communicates with Angels, or abstracted forms; and
partly again by generation, so far forth as he communicates with inferior
entities, which are concretee substances and wholly immerst in matter:
wherefore to be generated totally, as Beasts are for as much as concerns their
forms, is no perfection, but an imperfection, nor agreeable to man's nature
and perfection, but adverse and derogating from it. And consequently hereunto,
who so thinks that Man, a rational creature, should either generate totally
another like himself, or else totally be generated, thinks grossly and
unworthily of him, and not as his principles of nature do require. Wherefore
Tostatus, c. 1. Genesis q. 27. said very rightly and Philosophically; An Ass does
generate an Ass more properly, then a Man does generate a Man. For whatsoever
is wholly generated, is also wholly corruptible; and so also on the contrary
side; for as Boethius tells us, Constat aterna positumque lege est,
Vt constet genitum nihil.
Eternal laws do so ordain,
That nothing gotten shall remain.


Wherefore if some of him after corruption do remain there can be no necessity
that all of man should be made by generation; nay, seeing something more of
him, namely the form after corruption does remain incorrupted, more, I say
then there does of beasts, for of beasts the matter only remains, therefore
something less of him is to be produced by generation then there is of them,
though all of neither. Whosoever therefore shall affirm that a creature
intelligent like man should generate another of his own kind as totally and
adequately as one beast does generate another, does not speak like a
Philosopher, and besides does unjustly disparage and disgrace his own lineage,
and violates the rights of (...) creation.

CHAP. XII. A solution of the Adversaries objections, together with some others
of Doctor Daniel Sennertus.
THese former notandums having been premised, we need not dwell long upon
answering of objections, for by them the way is opened already, and that which
before has been delivered will not need any more then application.

Object. 1. Whole man is generated by man, therefore all his parts, both soul
and body: and if both be generated, then both are mortal.

Answ. Whole man is generated by man, I grant it. Therefore both soul and body
are generated: I distinguish; That both soul and body are made parts of man by
generation, and a creature produced like in nature to him that generates; I
also grant and do affirm, that by doing of this only the complete act of
generation or procreation is performed, according to the received definition of
generation before exhibited in the Chapter precedent. But that both soul and
body must be therefore made, and have their entities or beings given them by
procreation; that consequence I deny as false and absurd, yea so absurd as it
suffers a thousand instances to the contrary. For example, a whole horse is
generated both matter and form, and yet his matter did not receive any being by
generation; and so it falls out in other creatures. If then it be not necessary
that the matter receive the being by procreation, though the whole Animal
consisting of matter and form be truly generated, what reason can there be
why to the generation of the whole Animal, a new being of the form, by virtue
of procreation should be necessary? or why can one be necessary to generation,
when as we see evidently the other is not? or why again should we exact the new
production of either of them by generation, See Argenter. com. in Aphor. 1.
Hippocr. and Zacutus Lusitanus tom. 2. l. 3. Hist. ad praxin, c. 7. sed alia.
when without any such act the definition of generation is fulfilled, and
agrees both unto the generation of beasts, whose matter is not generated, and
to the generation of man, whose form is not generated any more then his matter
is? By force of this solution all his imaginary absurdities, which he labors
to fasten upon the non-procreation of the soul, do of themselves dissolve.

If the soul, says he, be infused, then Christ did not take whole Humanity
from the seed of the woman.

Answ. He received from the seed of the woman as much of the Humanity as was to
be received thence, and that which he took did not come unto him by
procreation, nor was it so to do. As for the fourteenth to the Hebrews which he
cites for his purpose, our answer to it is, That it is not found in our books,
neither Greek nor Latin, neither do the Editions of Raphelengius or Elzevir
contain any more Chapters than thirteen.

If, says he, we consist of soul and body, and are not men without both, and
receive not our souls from him, (he means the Generatour, as I suppose) then
Adam is the father of no man, nor Christ the son of man, because his manhood's
constitutive part, even that which should make him a man, could not be by the
seed of the woman, and a man is as much a father of fleas and lice, which
receive their matter from him, as of his children.

Answ. Surely fleas and lice, whence soever they receive their matter, do not
proceed from him in likeness of nature; as by the definition, they, if they
were generated by man, ought to do. Moreover, they are not generated by man,
but of him, neither is he the agent, but the patient, and so is of these vermin
no generatour at all, proper or improper. Secondly, men do receive their souls
by force of generation, although they be not generated; and so, notwithstanding
this non-generation of the soul, Adam might truly and univocally be the father
of all men; and also the soul of Christ might come by the seed of the woman,
although it were not made or procreated by it.

If the soul (adds he) be infused after the conception, then there is growth
before there is life, which is impossible, for the soul is made the vegetative
as well as the motive, sensitive, or rational part.

Answ. I grant that before the infusion of the soul there may be vegetation,
and this by the sole virtue of the sperme; but I deny that therefore there be
in man more souls than one, that is, than the rational: for this same force of
vegetation which is in the seed, holds it self upon the part of the matter
only, and does not perform the office of a soul or form, the substance and
operation thereof being no more then to fashion an organicall body, and to make
it fit for the reception of the soul and the union with it, after whose
infusion, both the vital and animal spirits do but serve as instruments to
it, and to accomplish the body in making it to be so perfectly organicall as
the eminency of a rational spirit above other forms does require to have it.

If the soul be not generated, but infused into a dead body, then, says he, it
is lawful to be Nigromancer; for Nigromancy is nothing but putting a spirit
into a dead body, and so it is imitation of God, and God the only Nigromancer,
and all the men in the world but Nigromantick apparitions, whose spirits, when
they have done the work for which they were put into the bodies, desert them as
other conjured Ghosts do.

Answ. See the shallowness of this man, who can neither speak right, nor
reason with common sense and probability. He calls Necromancy constantly
Nigromancy, and he supposes that a soul in a dead body makes a living man, and
can exercise vital actions in it, or actions of life, and so, according to his
gross capacity, if the soul be infused God must be a Necromancer, and men but
Necromantick apparitions: for this Ignoramus, it seems, knows no difference
between a soul and body that are united, and those that are not united, but
together only, nor between a body living by the virtue of the spirit, and by
virtue thereof doing vital actions, and another which is only moved and
inhabited by a spirit, without any union with it or participation of life. But
supposing all were one, yet were it not lawful to be a Necromancer, because
nothing at all, be it never so good, is to be done by superstitious actions, or
by making any recourse unto the Devil, and acknowledgement of his power by any
dependency on him whatsoever, more or less.

It is granted, says he, that the body considered merely sensitive cannot sin,
and is but an instrument, or as the pen in the hand of the writer. Therefore if
the soul be infused, then of necessity the immortal thing, and not our mortal
flesh is the author of all sin, and so God's immediate hand the cause of all
sin.

That the body is only an instrument of the soul is false, See Soto of this in
4. d. 43. q. 1. a. 2. Rat. 3.
for it is a living co-agent with it, and a partaker both in the good and evil
actions, and is both rewardable and punishable with it; whether in the mean
time it be created or generated, for this variation makes no difference in this
matter of merit or demerit. Neither does the creation of the soul make God the
author of sin more than the generation of it, that is to say, not at all, for
still the soul and body are authors of their own actions, and the deformity
arises from their misdemeanour, and not from God's creation or concurrence.

Doctor Sennertus, although he admit not of any mortality in the soul, yet he
holds it probable that it comes by procreation, and that from the first
instance of conception, the seed is ammated with the rational soul: which
Doctrine of his, by his leave, inferrs mortality: for whatsoever is generated,
is corruptible, and is to go out, according to the ordinary laws of Nature, at
the same gate of corruption at which it entered in. Neither is it true, or
likely, or lastly, any way Philosophical, to say as he does Hypom. 4. c. 10.
as also in his Paralipomena c. 7. n. 3. ad Hypomn. 5. that nothing created is
immortal by the principle of Nature, but only by the free will or gift of
God; because as it is amongst bodies, some are very durable, as Marble and
Cedar, some by and by corrupted, as Flowers and Fruits, even out of the several
natures of their composition which God has appointed for them, and not our of
the free will of God immediately, without any farther relation; so in like
sort, some substances are perpetual out of the nature of their being, as
spiritual substances, and bodies that are simple and unmixt, other some out of
their own natures corruptible, as those that are mixed and made up of Elements,
which as by some natural agents they were knit up together, so by the
operation of other some they are dissolvable. Souls then if generated are
compounds, and if so, may be uncompounded by the agency and operation of causes
natural: wherefore to seek an immortality only from a decree extrinsecall,
without any foundation in their natural beings, seems neither to be
Philosophical, nor true: wherefore the immortality of Souls and Angels is not
to be reared upon this weak foundation, according to which a Fly may be as much
immortal as an Angel, one by nature, according to Sennertus, having no
preeminence over the other, the free determination of God for their perpetual
conservation being equally applicable to either of them.

Conformably to this position of his, Sennertus Hypomn. 4. ca. 10. and lib. de
consens. Chymic. cum Arist. and Galeno c. 9.
he will needs have the sperme always animated with a reasonable soul; but
then consider how many more souls are cast away without any bodies organicall
and humane, then are actuated and preserved by bodies. I ask what must become
of these innumerable souls? must they perish, or have bodies made them at the
Resurrection? neither of these two can be admitted without great temerity and
absurdities.

Besides this, we know God did not inspire Adam with a living spirit while he
was a lump of clay, but when he had a face and a body that was organicall, and
not before. Again, why does the soul depart from the body, but only because it
leaves to be organicall? why then, or with what probability can we imagine the
soul is in the inorganicall sperme? certainly, with none at all.

The wind that did drive Sennertus upon this inhospitall shore, was the
necessity of assigning a vis formatrix, or a (...), that is to say, an able
architect or former of humane body, which though most acknowledge to be the
seed, yet Sennertus sees not how this can be, unless it should be animated
with the soul; his reason is, because the soul only is to build an house fit
for it self to inhabit. But this reason of his is not urgent; nay more, it is
not likely; for eggs and young birds do not build their own nests, but the old
ones for them; so that it must, by this account, be the parents office to erect
this new building, and not the childs. But how, says he, can the father do
this? Easily and well, by sending his sperme as his deputy and officer to
perform that duty, Argent. com. in 1. Aphoris. Hippocr.
as Argenterius also teaches; which entity has derived to it from the
generatour so much natural strength and cunning, as to make a sufficient
architect for the effecting of this work, and all this may be done with the
only form of seed, without any animation of it with a soul. Thus it is likely
that the Acorn for example, without any more form than of an Acorn, collects
sit particles out of the elements and materials about it, and by a virtue
derived from the tree on which it grew, forms out and fashions the body of an
Oak: and for the effecting of this work the seed participates much of the
nature of the tree or plant, and has ordinarily much of the same virtue.
Wherefore in this abstruse question or quaere that we may say something which
is likely, and has for the truth thereof probable examples and instances in
nature, we do conceive that (...), or forming virtue, is the seed's own form
excited and assisted by the breeding, cherishing, and connaturall warmth of the
maternall body, which does environ it; as in the procreation of birds it seems
to be, where the semen of the Cock being cherished and stirred up by the
ambient and incumbent warmth of the Hen, is that which changes the egg, and
forms it into the shape of the bird from whence it came: neither is it
probable, that in so small a coagulum or seed which came from the Cock the soul
or essence of a Cock is resident.

Now whereas he tells us, that by the blessing granted to all Creatures by the
Creator of them in these words, Increase and multiply, force was given to
every soul to multiply another: we confess it to be true; yet this not to be
done by creating of the younger by the elder souls, or by the giving of them
new entities; but rather by doing some other act out of which these forms
should connaturally follow, as material forms they do by a resultancy, and
immateriall by creation from a higher cause, which creation is to follow, and
is due by a regular ordination and exigence of Nature; and so they may truly be
said to be given and communicated, though not made, by the force of generation.
And this is the true vis prolifica, and not that other which Sennertus feignes
unto himself, by which he will have one humane soul to beget another, and on
the instant to become with child of it, no body knows how; neither by what
particular operation, nor from what Mine it should be dug. For this manner
of speaking makes show rather of some empty Magic, than of sound Philosophy,
and seems altogether as hard and impossible as the eduction of them out of the
potentiality of the materia prima, when understood in that sense in which he
himself impugns it.

If the Parents (objecteth Sennertus) do not give the soul, which is the form
of man, they do not generate the man: but for certain they do generate the man:
therefore they give the soul also: unless they communicate the soul, like
should not generate his like. So he Hypomn. 4. cap. 11. In brief, I answer,
that the Parents do give and communicate both form and matter, but that work
they may well do without the making or the producing either of them. It is
certain they give the matter, and it is as certain they do not produce it;
wherefore the same may be said of the form, without prejudice to the essence of
generation, or which is all one, of one like or simile producing of another.
And that there is true generation without producing either part, appears
plainly; for Death, which is the opposite to generation, and destroys what the
other made, will show us what generation is: but Death is only a dissolution
of parts united, and not a destruction of them; it is destructive, not of the
matter or form, but of the man: for do but divide a man's soul and body, and he
is destroyed, and remains not a man any longer, but loses what he had got by
generation, that is to say, by generation he got to be a man, and by dying he
loses it. In fine, as Argenterius rightly answers, Generation is not of the
parts, but of the compositum: and so also answers Zacutus in the place before
cited.

He adds, See him in 1. Aph. Hip.
If the sperme from the first instant be not animated, and the generatour dye
in the interim before the animation, it might be said that a dead man did
generate. I deny the consequence, because that Parent while he was living did
that act, by virtue of which all the rest (as their turns came) did follow, and
that one and first act was generation, and not the subsequent. As for example,
he is said to make a fire who first puts the fire to these well and kindles it,
though all do not burn till a great while after, because all the rest did
follow in virtue of the first act.

Thus we see that the arguments of Sennertus were not so urgent and weighty, as
to be able to hinder such a wise Christian Philosopher as he was, from
relinquishing this tenet of his, and from piously subscribing his Pareamus: by
which act he left behind him an example worthy of great praise, and of all
true students to be imitated, I have added to the Author's objections, whom I
undertook to impugn, these out of Sennertus, who is a Writer of great worth
and substance, to the end that by occasion of his difficulties, the matter in
hand might be explicated with more satisfaction, and for mine own satisfaction
also, who was weary with fighting with a shadow.

But, say you, if that the soul be not produced by virtue of the sperme, how
then can Original Sin be transmitted from the loins of Adam down to his
posterity? I answer, that it may very well, because that sin of Adam is not
transfused into his descendents by any physical influence or deduction, but
contrariwise by a legal devolution, or by a way juridicall, which way of
conveiancy is founded upon an ordination or covenant, annexed to the act of
generation; as also the rights of inheritances use to be that are so devolved
from father to son and so downward throughout all the line or pedigree: and to
me there seem no more difficulty in one descent then in the other, both of
them being moral, and both also supposing some natural action for the
foundation of them. But I leave this question to Divines.

CHAP. XIII. The Adversaries resurrection of Beasts exploded, together with a
Conclusion of the Work.
IT is usually said, that one folly brings on another, and ordinarily one worse
than it self: and so it falls out with this wretched man against whom we deal
at this present, who after his gross error of man's total mortality, falls
into one which is much grosser, yea, so absurd, as it is to be numbered amongst
the most ridiculous that ever were maintained even by Mahomet the father of
absurdities, and who was better at that work than any man that went before him.
But at the length what may this error be? I will give it in his own words, and
it is this:

All other Creatures (says he) shall be raised and delivered from Death at the
Resurrection, my reasons and ground for it, be these. First, that otherwise the
curse in Adam would-extend further than the blessing in Christ, contrary to the
Scriptures, For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive,
1 Cor. 15.22. Thus he, abusing Scripture, as we see, for the upholding of this
his prodigious folly. Surely the man when he resolved upon these things was
given over into reprobate sense, and permitted (for his greater confusion) in
sight both of God and the world, to fall into such an Abyssus of absurdity, as
that no man might take harm or be seduced by him, but such only who had a mind
to be deceived.

It seems then by this bestiall Doctrine, that at the Resurrection all the
Gnats and Fleas that ever were shall be revived, all the Toads and Frogs and
poisonous Serpents and other vermin. Certainly those who are to live amongst
all these are likely to have gallant time of it. His places of Scripture which
he profanes in alleging to prove this, need no expositour nor answer to them,
for I think no Reader is so simple as cannot do it by himself. Doubtless both
according to the common principles of Christianity, and also those particulars
of this Author, Christ is the cause of our Resurrection; and none are to rise
but those only for whom he died, and therefore since he died not for beasts,
they are not to have any Resurrection.

As for the Assertion, it is grosser and more inexcusable in this Author, than
it was in Mahomet, because this Mahomet made a Paradise and felicity agreeing
most of all to beasts and men of beshall dispositions; for as it is well known
out of the Alfurcan or Alchoran, and as Theophanes an ancient and faithful
Historian relates, His Paradise was place of corporal eating and drinking,
Theophan. apud Porphyr. c. 17. and Jacob. de Vitriaco l. Hist. Orient. c. 6.
of wantonness with women, where there was a River flowing with wine and honey
and milk, together with an incomparable beholding of women, not these we have
now, but of others: also long lasting pleasures of obscenity, and other such
things full of luxury and folly. So writes Theophanes. But this man, who will
seem a Christian, might have learned out of the Gospel a felicity of an higher
strain, one purely refined from all dregs of baseness and carnality, and that
the blessed shall neither marry nor be married, but live like the Angels in
Heaven, not enjoying the felicity of a swine, but a celestial. Wherefore
leaving Mahomet and other beasts with him to enjoy such a felicity as they
deserve and feign unto themselves; I pass unto our Author's last folly,
which is his calling it a Riddle, that the soul immortal is all of it in all,
and again, all in every part, wondering how this should be, and holding it a
mere fiction and thing impossible. But I for my part do not wonder that a man
of so gross a wit and narrow a capacity, as he in this book has showed
himself, should not understand this Doctrine or saying, especially if he will
judge of the nature of indivisible presences by those that are divisible, as it
seems he does. Yet I have cause to wonder why so stupid and so sorry a fellow
as this is, should dare to hold it to be a Riddle, or impossible, only because
he with his small with is not able to understand it; as if, forsooth, nothing
were possible to Nature, or to God the Author of Nature, saving that alone
which he understands how it can be done. I am now quite weary of this man, and
sick with raking so long in such a heap of dirt, and therefore at this instant
I leave him to bethink himself about making a timely recantation.

Now, turning with delight unto my Reader, to solace and refresh my self after
all this travail, I desire him to look into Hierocles Commentary upon the
Golden Verses ascribed to Pythagoras, in which he seems to have discovered
the original of this pernicious error, touching the souls mortality. What
availes it, says he, with perjuries and murders and other wicked ways to
gather wealth and to seem rich unto the world, and to want those good things
which are conducible unto the mind? But besides, to be stupid and insensible of
them, and thereby to augment the evil, or if they have any remorse of
conscience for their offenses, to be tormented in their souls, and afraid of
the punishments of Hell, comforting themselves with this alone, that there is
no way of escaping them, and from hence are ready to cure one evil with
another, and by a persuasion that the soul is mortal, to sooth up themselves
in wickedness, judging they are not worthy to have any thing of theirs
remaining after death, that so they might avoid those punishments, which by
judgment should be inflicted on them? for a wicked man is loath to think his
soul to be immortal, for fear of the revenges that are to follow his
misdeeds. Wherefore preventing the Judge who is below, he pronounces the
sentence of death against himself, as holding it fit that such a wicked soul
should have no longer a being nor subsistence. Behold here the fountainhead of
this error opened and purged by Hierocles.

In fine, from whatsoever puddle this error sprung, let us remember what
Socrates (being to die) delivered touching the various condition of souls after
this life. He said, as Cicero relates, l. 1. Tuscul. there were two different
paths or voyages of souls at their departure from the bodies: for all such as
with humano vices had contaminated themselves, and were delivered wholly up to
lust, with which as with domestic vices being blinded, they had by lewd
actions defiled themselves, or had attempted against the Commonwealth any
crime, or fraud inexpiable, that these had a wandering way assigned for them,
sequestered from the assemblies of the Gods; but such again as had preserved
themselves entire and chaste, contracting little or no contagion from the body,
having always retired and withdrawn themselves from it, and had in humane
bodies imitated the conversation of the Gods, these found opened for them an
easy way of return to them from whom they proceeded at the first.

This is the Doctrine both of Cicero and of Socrates. What then remains to do,
but to hearken attentively to the wise counsel of the Prince of Philosophers,
Aristotle, and to suffer it to have a powerful influence into all the passages
of our life? His words l. 10. Ethic. c. 9. according to the division of
Andronicus Rhodius, be as follow. If then, says he, our understanding, in
respect of man, be a thing divine, so that life which is led according unto the
understanding, if compared with life humane, is divine also: neither, as some
persuade, is it lawful for a man to relish and follow only that which is
humane, and being mortal, those things only which are mortal; but as much as
in him lies, he ought to vindicate himself from all mortality, and to take
special care that he live according to that part which is most excellent
within him. Now that which is best within us is our mind, which though it be
small in bulk and weight, yet in power and excellency does furpasse the rest.
And with this wise counsel of the Philosopher I conclude this whole Question,
which though the day of every man's departure will decide, and give a sinall
resolution to it, yet in the mean season are not disputes of this nature
fruitless or superfluous, because if they be well performed, they are like
burning torches, which in the dark gallery of this life teach us how to direct
our steps, and before that black day come, to help us for the making our
preparations beforehand, that so with better hopes of safety we may meet out
deadly enemies in the gate. Without all doubting, for the repressing of
brutish, bestiall and unworthy affections, and again, for our encouragement to
noble and generous designements, the best preparatives against death, there is
no no consideration so powerful and efficacious as that one of the high
perfection of man's soul, and the immortal nature and condition of it: for, as
Cicero observes l. 1. de legibus, Qui seipsum norit primum aliquid sentiet se
habere divinum, ingeninmque in se suum sicut simulacrum aliquod dedicatum
putabit, tantoque munere Deorum semper aliquid dignum faciet and sentiet. He
that does know himself, will forthwith find within him something that is
divine, and will hold his understanding as a statue dedicated, and be always
thinking or doing something answerable to so great munificence of the Gods.
That is to say, he will be mindful that as in upright shape of body and the
perfection of his spirit he excels beasts and all creatures irrational; so
he will endeavor to do in the condition of his living, by disdaining to stoop
to any thing which is base, or to defile the house in which his foul inhabits
with any unworthy or ignoble actions.

Without all doubting there is no man who, as a Poet speaks, has any thing
within him that leaps under his left breast, but that if he be well persuaded
of his souls immortality, and so, by a plain sequel thereupon, sees that he
has a longer part to act after his Exit from off this earthly Theater, then he
has here, he will never live unmindfull of that second state, and therefore
will be sure to stop his ears against the Sirens bewitching songs, and not
drink of the enchanting cups of Circe, whose fordid pleasures are feigned to
have turned Ulysses his unwary companions into swine; nor lastly, Esau-like,
for a small pittance of temporal contentments, or for a few voluptuous hours
consumed in vice or vanity, neglect the safety of his immortal spirit, and
sell his birthright of Eternity.

I will seal and sign this whole dispute with the determination and censure of
the book of Wisdom: which book whether it be received into the Canon or no,
yet is it confessedly very ancient, and therefore by consent of all may claim a
just precedence of authority before any Heathen Philosopher whatsoever: the
words are these, Justorum animae in manu Deisunt, and non tanget illas
tormentum mortis: visi sunt oculis insipientium mori, illi autem sunt in pace.
The souls of the just be in the hands of God, and the torment of death shall
not touch them: to the eyes of the foolish they seemed to die but they remain in
peace, Chap. 3. Behold here in the judgment of this venerable Author, what
kind of people they are who hold the souls mortality, namely, (...), such as be
destitute of true judgment and understanding. This is not my censure, neither
is this character of my making; for who am I that I should presume so far? but
it is the judgment of the ancient Author of the book of Wisdom, whose years
and credit may deserve regard, even amongst those spirits that be most
confident of their own conceptions, and be the greatest admirers and idolaters
of themselves. In fine, this ancient Sage brands all deniers of our souls
immortality with the self-same note of ignominy, that David the kingly prophet
did mark that wretched mortal who closely and in his heart had said, There is
no God. Psa. 13. Yet there is this odds between them two, and worthy to be
observed, for though both of them be impious and absurd, yet one of them had
some shame in him, and said it only in his heart; but this Adversary of ours
goes further, and had the face to publish his impiety in Print, or at least the
heart to do it so as he himself might ly concealed, and his name unknown. Which
covert way of his, though it appear not altogether so bold and bad, as if he
had put his name unto his work, yet was it an act too bold for any Christian
man or true Philosopher to exercise, or to be an Author of in Print: for alas
after so many great Divines and deep Philosophers, whose uniforme suffrages we
have for the dignity of man, that is to say, for the soul's immortal nature and
incorruptibility how could the cogitations unto the contrary of this poor worm
be a matter any way considerable with men of understanding and ability?

A Peripatetick Disquisition touching the Rational Soul's Immortality, whether
it be Natuturall to it, or no.
THis intellectual substance, the Soul, which is our Intelligencer for all
things abroad, being shut up here in an obscure prison of a corruptible body,
does not without great difficulty know it self, and learn out what kind of
entity it is, corporeal or spiritual, corruptible or free from corruption.
Hence arose so many varieties of opinions, and even amongst those who asserted
immortality, so many degrees thereof. Dicaearchus, a Peripatetick Philosopher
of Sicily, was of opinion that men had no souls at all; but notwithstanding
this, the soul being ashamed to be so grossly ignorant, as to deny it self,
this man was left alone and had no followers. Epicurus, Lucretius, and Pliny
granted man a soul but denied the immortality of it, condemning it to a death
perpetual: which impious assertion has been refuted by all the best
Philosophers, of Plato's, Pythagora's, Zeno's, and Aristotle's School also,
excepting Alexander, and some very few of no note. Amongst those that admitted
a perpetuity to the soul, some did it with an intermission, as namely, the
Heretics called Arabici, who, as Georgius Syncellus in his Chronicle now newly
published, Parisii^ 1652. ex typographia Regia.
anno Christi 237, testifies, did, impiously hold the soul in the hour of
death to perish with the body, and again, both of them to be revived at the
resurrection; concerning which point a famous Synod was assembled. The same
error is largely showed of them by Abraham Ecchellensis in his Historiae
Orientalis supplemento, where he describes the customs and doctrines of the
Arabians. Now it is manifest that during the interim between death and the
resurrection, the soul is in being, is alive and also awake, by those reasons
that do prove the immortality, simplicity and immateriality of it; as also by
apparitions of them, of which the Christian Histories are full; and it is
justified by Eustratius, a Priest of S. Sophia, in his Tract remembered by
Photius in his Bibliothecae, wherein he affirms that souls do appear really,
and not good or evil Angels in their places; and lastly, the same is confirmed
even by Ethnic Histories, as for example, by that which Phlegon Trallianus, in
his Book de mirabilibus and longaevis, relates, first, of Polycrates, and after
of Philinion; by the appearing of Apollonius Tyanaeus after his death to his
scholars, assuring them of the souls incorruptibility, about which they had
been doubtful and disputing, if we may believe Philostratus, who writ his
life; by the apparition of a Ghost to Athenodorus, recorded by Pliny in his
Epistles; and last of all, by Plutarch, out of whom Georgius Monachus Syncellus
relates this notable following History, Chronogr. anno Christi 37. and
Caligulae 3. Caius Caligula, says he, also slew Julius Canus the Stoic
Philosopher, of whom the Greeks relate a fiction beyond all credit, namely,
that he being led to die, is reported to have foretold to one Antiochus, a
Seleucian who followed him, with a mind undisturbed, that the night following
he would be with him, and deal about a question worth the discussing, and
moreover that Rectus, another of his fellows, should be slain by Caius within
three days, all which the event proved to be true, he being slain within that
space; Antiochus relating what he had seen by night, and that he had beheld
Canus, who had disputed with him concerning the immortality of the soul, and
the passage of it after death unto a purer light. Thus Syncellus: which
relation I see no reason why he should hold to be a fiction. Averroes (as we
use to call him) grants a soul that is spiritual and immortal, yet grants but
one, and that one to be common unto all mankind. This fantasy of his is
generally exploded as absurd, and convinced for such by Albertus Magnus in his
Sum, and S. Thomas in his other Sum contra Gent. as also by diverse others,
and therefore needs not to be considered anew. The general Tenet of all
classical Philosophers and the better sort of Christians is, that the soul is
spiritual, immortal, and incorruptible, and that there be as many
individualls thereof as there be men, yea and besides, that this
incorruptibility thereof is not of mere grace, and bestowed on it after the
creation, but contrariwise of nature, and involved within the principles of
constitution. Sennertus in his Paralip. holds it to be a perfection added to
the nature merely out of favor, and in favor of his opinion cites Damascen.
l. 2. c. 3. but cites the greek text lamely; and Stapulensis is mistaken wholly
in his translation; for Damascen does not say there, as they impose upon him,
that Angels be incorruptible, not by nature but by grace, but rather the quite
contrary, namely, That they by grace or favor have a nature that is immortal,
for so the Greek Text has it. By which words he teaches us, that they have
their nature, not by right, or of themselves, but by grace, as all other
creatures have, and their immortality from nature, as all other creatures have
not: according to which account Angels are immortal by nature, that is to say,
by a favor antecedent to their natural being, and not subsequent unto it. For
the better clearing of which verity, let us consider what is properly meant or
signified by this term incorruptible, or immortal.

I note then that of this term there are three different acceptions; one
proper, but not ordinary; a second both proper and ordinary; a third neither
proper nor ordinary. Immortality in the first sense is supereminent, that is to
say, such a one as has so firm principles of constitution as be superior to
any agency, and therefore whatsoever is thus immortal can neither be
dissolved, nor annihilated. And this kind of superexcellent immortality is
proper unto God alone, and no created entity can lay any claim unto it; and
therefore 1 Timothy 6. he is called Solus immortalis etc. and of this we are not
in this place to entreat. In the second sense an entity is called immortal,
when as the principles, though they be not proof against the power that can
annihilate, yet are not subject to dissolution or corruption, and therefore
being once produced are to remain ever, there being no reason why the cause
that preserves them should at any time withdraw his sovereign influence, nor
any second can do them harm, and so they are safe on both sides, whatsoever
Arriaga imagines to the contrary. Immortality taken in this sense is properly
so, and this is the usual signification of the word, and again in this sense
it is to be understood, except some other term or some circumstance do show
the contrary. The third and last acception is when it is ascribed to such
things which, although according to the natural principles they ly exposed to
destruction, either by annihilation or corruption, yet are continued by the
favor of some external preservatour. This improper kind of immortality our
bodies should have enjoyed before the fall of Adam, and shall after the
resurrection; and it is rather a contingent perpetuity than any natural
immunity from mortality and corruption, so that a body in that state is still
corruptible, though not corrumpendum. This difference of acception of the term
being noted, I observe that our business here is not to inquire in the first,
or third sense about the souls incorruptibility, but in the second only, as
namely, whether it be incorruptible according to the exigence and virtue of the
natural principles of constitution, without recourse to external courtesy or
favor. The question being stated on this sort, it appears thereby that we are
not to dispute point-black the souls immortality, but, presupposing it to be
immortal some way or other, whether that same immortality be an endowment that
is natural.

Pomponatius and Sennertus will not grant it to be natural; and now lately one
Mr. Hobbes, in a prodigious volume of his, called by him as prodigiously
Leviathan, is of opinion that no other immortality of the soul can be proved
out of Scripture, if any at all can, besides that one of the lowest class,
which is of grace and favor merely.

For eviction of the contrary both out of reason and Scripture, I note first,
that the soul of man is an entity or substance intellectual; and secondly,
that every such entity is capable of a true felicity, and is unquiet until it
do attain thereunto; and thirdly, that every such sublimer entity is made in a
manner for it self, that is to say, as Adam Godham judges, 1. Sent. q. 2. some
way or other to enjoy its own being, and to be settled in a full possession of
it self, reserving always the subordination to the supremest entity, and a
continual dependence thereupon. This appears plainly, because the whole
species of man, that is to say, all mankind, does earnestly desire felicity
and the fruition of a good so great as may give it a full content and
satisfaction, after a subordinate way, for the pleasing and rejoicing of it
self. In this limited sense the doctrine of Eudoxus Gnidius and of Epicurus,
subscribed lately and explained by Gassendus, seems to draw very near the
truth, namely, that man's felicity did consist in some high and refined
pleasure, not corporeal, but such as is intellectual and pure: from which
opinion Aristotle and Albertus in their Ethics seem not to dissent, and
Aureolus is of the same mind with them. In relation to this same contenting of
our selves, Aristotle describes humane felicity in general terms, without
including God in any other terms then those of the sublimest entitie. And
though in reality it be God that is our Summum bonum, and is that goodness
only which can make us happy, and moreover, that we stand bound to love him
above our selves, to observe and please him, yea, even although we were to reap
no benefit thereby; yet nevertheless, such a transcendent relation we have
unto felicity and content, under that very title, as that abstracting from
whether there were a God or no, we should as earnestly defire to be happy and
to enjoy our selves as we now do: and again, as we desire to please God in all
we do and suffer and are, so also we do desire felicity for the pleasing of our
selves, yea even independently upon any other consideration, and so, although
we were principally made for God, yet secondatily and subordinately we were
made for our selves, and therefore for our selves, because we were made
intellectual.

I argue then from hence as follows. Every entity framed for the enjoying of
it self, and so for it self, is to be perpetual, according to the exigence of
nature. But such is the reasonable soul, and every nature intellectual. Ergo,
the rational soul and every nature intellectual are to be perpetual
according to the exigence of nature. I say, according to the exigence of
nature, and not according to any act of grace, because if we were not so, then
had not the efficient wrought consequently to himself and to his own ends.
Wherefore seeing the skilful architect of Nature knows how to work conformably
to the rules of reason, and to proportion his work unto the end for which he
made it, it follows hence, that every rational soul, or substance
intellectual, is by the order of nature made up immortal and incorruptible.

And this consequence is therefore good, because it is essential to felicity
to be perpetual, and to be an endless state of everlasting joy, and therefore
the subject in which this joy is to reside cannot be otherwise then naturally
perpetual. Morcover, seeing it is our soul which is directly and per sc
proportioned to felicity, and capable thereof, and our bodies only indirectly
and as it were by accident, therefore immortality belongs primarily to the
soul, and to the body only by a sequel. And so we argue here in conformity to
that we should in other cases not unlike to this; as for example, upon a
supposall made that the sun was created to enlighten the earth perpetually, we
should conclude from thence that is was framed of a nature and body
incorruptible.

Now further, that perpetuity is of the very essence of felicity, or, at the
least, an inseparable companion thereof, Reason it self does teach us, and our
Divines do show it plainly, as by name, Aquinas, 1. p.q. 44. a. 3. and 1.2. q.
5. a. 4. and l. 3. cont. Gent. c. 62. Albertus, seu Aegidius, in compend. l. 2.
Valentia tom. 2. d. 1. q. 5. p. 6. Lessins l. 3. de sum. bono c. ult. Estius
4. d. 49. and, as I persuade my self, Paravicinus l. de Bono, and all the rest:
forasmuch as, of a certain, true felicity ought to be devoid of care and
sorrow, and then, seeing that which we possess with delight, we cannot
relinquish without sorrow, and again, what we love we cannot enjoy contentedly
without our being assured not to lose it, forasmuch as the only dread or
suspicion of being deprived thereof causes sorrow, and is afflictive to the
heart, even as well, though not as much, as the loss it self. And for this
there is great reason, because we do not desire alone that good which is
felicity, but besides to have it always, and to be assured of it, and
therefore we are unsatisfied and in pain unless we be really happy, and
withal assured so to continue. Of so large a capacity is the spirit of man, as
that it rests not in that alone which is present to it, but besides, with
swift-wing'd thoughts and flying affections overtakes the future, and
thereafter as that same is apprehended to be, good or bad, pleasing or
unpleasant, draws from it either comfort or affliction.

But why is it that a man cannot be happy for a season, as well as miserable
for a season? Jo. Pontius, a late Philosopher and follower of Scotus, is of
opinion that he may; for so he determines q. 6. Ethic. con. 3. n. 28. to whom
I can by no means assent, because as Cicero and Boethius do define, Felicity is
such a state and such a good as fully satiates, and i^ replenished with all
that is justly desirable. It is, says Cicero, l. 3. Tuscul. Secretis malis
omnibus cumulata bonorum complexio: And Boethius, l. 3. consol. pros. 2. Status
omnium bonorum aggregatione perfectus. Wherefore it must consist either in all
several goods together, or else in some one that conteins and countervails
them all. Wherefore though a man who is miserable now may be happy afterward,
yet he who is happy now can never be miserable afterward, because happiness
that is in being now excludes misery both present and future; but,
contrariwise, misery that is now in being, although it excludes a present
happiness, yet not a happiness to come. The reason of which disparity is,
because a true and perfect happiness includes essentially, as we showed
before, all good things, of which number a secured perpetuity is one, as on the
contrary side every state of misery does not of necessity include all evil
things, or all the causes of infelicity, and therefore not any perpetuity of
them; and for this reason it is that there is no repugnance why it may not have
an end, forasmuch as S. Dionysius defines, Bonum est ex integra causa, malum
ex quocunque defectu; seeing that more is required to the constitution of
felicity then to the destruction or abolition of it, more to an efficiency then
to a deficiency: and so consequently, although felicity cannot subsist without
a perpetuity, yet infelicity may, contrarily to that which Pontius imagined.
And although felicity be the same for a day that it is for a year, or for
ever, considering only the Physical entity thereof; yet considering the whole
value and moral estimation thereof, it is not so, because an endless duration
accruing to the possession of any good thing does raise the value of it and the
just esteem; as contrariwise, the same duration accruing to an evil does make
it infinitely worse and more afflictive: for which cause a good which is
perpetual and known for such, may satiate, when being but for a time it cannot.

As for brute beasts, whatsoever Mr. Hobbes conceives unto the contrary, they
have neither sense nor capacity of a present happiness, nor knowledge of a
future. And no other in former ages, that I have heard of, besides the false
Prophet Mahomet, ever asserted any happiness to beasts; whereas, on the
contrary part, according to good Philosophy, beasts neither have any
happiness, nor do desire it. Ignoti nulla cupido. No Animal, says Aristotle
l. 10. Eth. c. 8. and apnd Andronicum, 10. devoid of reason can be partaker of
felicity, because wholly destitute of the faculty contemplative. The life of
God is happy altogether, and of man also, so far forth as he resembles him
and participates of his vigorousnesse. No other Animal is happy, because not
communicating of the hability to contemplate. Such as be able to contemplate be
capable of selicity, and the more able to contemplate, the more happy they may
be; and felicity extends it self as far as that and this, not by accident,
but per se. Thus he. The true reason then why beasts can have no happiness is,
because they cannot possess nor enjoy themselves, for want of an understanding
spirit within them; and so properly speaking, though they can be or not be, yet
can they not have any thing at all, nor, contrariwise, lose any thing, and so
neither be rich nor poor, happy nor miserable.

I argue again to the same intent. Such as the operations of the soul be, such
is the nature of it; and therefore all the proofs for immortality drawn from
the natural operations do prove the soul to be immortal naturally, if they
prove any thing at all, as most wise Philosophers do conceive they do.

I prove the same out of holy Scripture against the assertion of Leviathan. It
is confessed the Scripture says the soul of man is immortal and does live after
death, not adding any where that this same immortality is out of grace of
favor; therefore, in effect, it says every where, when it speaks of that
point, that it is immortal naturally. The Antecedent is certain by the survey
of those several places cited by Valentia, the Conimbricenses and Nic. Baius.
The consequence I prove to be a good one therefore, because words are ever to
be understood in their usual and proper signification, except some adjoining
words or circumstances of the speaker do imply the contrary. But in the
Scripture, wheresoever it teaches the immortality of the soul, there is no such
word or circumstance. Ergo, they are to be understood of such an
incorruptibility as is natural, because that only is the usual meaning of
such words as signify an immortality: as the term man uttered without
limitation simply, is to be understood for a real and natural man, and not
for a painted one or metaphorical.

To this I add, that the verity of the soul's immortal nature is not attested
singly and simply, but besides as a certainty and a verity not to be called
into question, even abstracting from those Philosophical arguments commonly
brought to prove it be demonstrative or no; certainly their form, at least, is
demonstrative, because drawn ab effectis. Thus much is in substance asserted by
Aureolus, 2. did. 19. That the soul, says he, is immortal, is a doctrine of
says to be held most firmly, and is also the common conception of our
understanding, and a verity that is evident, although it be not so easy to
find out a reason for it: diverse of those which are brought be not concluding.
Thus pronounces he concerning the certainty of this doctrine, even in case the
arguments for it should not be thought convincing. And that it may be so,
stands with great reason, because we are very sure of many natural verities,
for which, nevertheless, we are not able to render any such reason as is
compelling or demonstrative; for we do not learn all we know by the force of
formal arguments or syllogismes, but rather by virtual proofs, and a secret
intelligence settled by nature betwixt our minds and truth. Yet this I do not
say as if I did not judge the reasons for immortality to be efficacious, but
only to prevent evasions, and in particular that one of Pontius, who in the
place before cited ventures to affirm that the immortality of the soul is not
known for a certainty by the force of natural reason, therefore because he
holds that the arguments brought in favor of it do not convince: which
assertion of his is not only a disparagement of so noble and fundamental a
truth, but besides seems very false, and gives no small offense: because,
admitting the arguments for it were as notconvincing as he himself pretends,
yet nevertheless the truth it self may be very certain, even by natural
reason, as Aureolus, a very great Master, before has signified; and if it had
not been so, how could all nations have conspired about it? And that they have
done so, we may find both by the perusal of the Ethnic writers, as also by
the collections of Eugubinus l. 9. de Perenni Philosophia, and Menasse Ben
Israel l. de Resurrectione c. 8. Moreover, as infirm as Pontius judges the
Arguments to be, yet was not he able to give them any good Solutions, although
he endeavored to do it, and besides, did not put them home, as may be
perceived by any indifferent survey. The reasons however disparaged will be
able to justify themselves, and the easier, because such as do undervalue and
impugn them are driven into such streits, as they are enforced to call in
question sundry fundamental Truths which are acknowledged generally for certain
and evident; as for example, That there is one Rectour of mankind, who,
according to justice, will reward and punish; secondly, That the general
conceptions of humane understanding are true; thirdly, That the universal
appetite of humane nature is rational, and also possible to be satisfied. These
and such like, although they do not deny them to be true, yet they will not
grant them to be evident. Against such dangerous rocks as these are they driven
who will not yield that the reasons brought to prove the immortality be
concluding; from which inconvenience the other side of classical Doctors are
very safe and free. As for Holkot in Say. cap. 2. lect. 14. although he does
not magnify those reasons which are usually urged for this immortality,
affirming of them that they do not press more then those other do which are
commonly produced against the possible eternity of the world; yet he himself
confesses them to be good, though not demonstrative, adding three arguments of
his own, and also acknowledging that this same immortality is a doctrine
delivered by the chiefest of the Philosophets, maintained by the Catholic
writers, and proved for a truth by miracles innumerable. Now, admitting these
arguments to be no less efficacious then those other against the eternity,
this cannot prejudice them much, because many men of great learning and
judgment are of opinion that these against the eternity be not only good, but
also demonstrations. Moreover, allowing these for immortality be not, in
rigor, demonstrations, yet all particulars being cast up, we shall find that
men generally do give a constant assent to sundry natural verities upon less
evidence then these.

Concerning Pomponatius, we are to understand that he was troubled in
conscience for what he formerly had written in prejudice of immortality, and
therefore, like a good Christian, did not only relinquish that error of his,
but besides made suit by a letter to Javellus, a person of eminent learning,
that he would be pleased to give the world which he had abused a satisfaction
for him, which at his request was done accordingly, as appears by the said
Javellus his learned work now exant, De indeficientia animae, in which tract
remains inserted a copy of the letter which Pomponatius wrote unto him for
that end.

For the completing of this business in hand, I note, that the Philosophers
who lived before Christ had much greater difficulty for their embracing this
capital Truth of immortality, then those other who flourished after, by reason
that they were destitute of all other light then what blind Gentilisme had left
them, and therefore might not easily perceive but that, as it was ordinarily
voiced, Mors ultima linea rerum; which saying was erected like the pillars of
Hercules, with this solemn inscription engraven upon them, Nil ultra, as if
beyond those there was no region habitable: and besides, it was hard to
believe, as Pliny speaks l. 7. c. 55. Iterari vitam a morte, insomuch as they
ought to have been arguments well steeled that should be of power sufficient to
force theirway through the brazen wall of death, and to rear up a huge pile or
fabric of another life after corruption and rottenness, of which life they
could perceive few or no signs appearing in the world. Wherefore, although the
arguments for immortality were very weighty, yet they having such a strong
bar laid to cross their way, no marvel if sundry of those Ancients should
be brought unto a stand, and the arguments, as forcible as they were, benumbed,
and though not killed, yet cast into a slumber. For, indeed, because men then
knew not how to dispose of souls after their separation from the body,
therefore they might have license granted them to speak doubtfully, not knowing
what to determine, or to say nothing at all, either pro or contra. Some few we
find did contradict, as by name Epicurus and Lucretius: yet notwithstanding
this maine obstacle, the general sense of the world was for the immortality,
and much more then when the other hemisphere of life came creditably to be
discovered by the Messiah, for at that time those old reasons for immortality
awaked, and recovered their natural vigor and vivacity; and no wonder,
because this truth of immortality and that other of a life to come are mutual
inductives one unto the other, and conspire so friendly, as whosoever denies
either of them, does disparage and weaken the other; and again, they give so
great aides to each other, as that the notice of another life made ready way
for the entertainment of immortality, and contrariwise, the doctrine of
immortality added reputation to the doctrine of the other life. Moreover, The
incorruptible nature of the reasonable soul; The state of felicity or
infelicity in a life to come; That God is the high Rectour of the Universe,
extends his providence over all, and is a just and bountiful rewarder; be all
of them symbolizing verities and of a strict confederacy both offensive and
defensive, and so can hardly be overthrown.

I conclude this small labor as Pythagoras and Philolaus concluded their
golden verses, wherein the ancient doctrine is declared plainly, (...),
(...).
Sic ubi, deposito jam corpore, libera coeli
Templa penetraris, Deus immortalis, and omni
Spretus ab illuvie terrarum, eris integer avi.
And having once laid down our dust,
Through spacious aerie Lawnes we must,
And free in those large circles move,
Immortal, like the Gods above.


(...), says Hierocles the Commentatour, limiting and qualifying the higher
expression of the verse, by admonishing his reader, that albeit Gods we must
be, yet not simply and absolutely, as the words do sound, but only so far
forth as it is possible for a separated soul to be.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
OVer and above those reasons brought by the Author of the precedent work, all
which do prove an immortality naturally belonging to the soul, there want not
diverse others that do the same, as amongst the rest, for example, this one,
viz. Such as the physic and food of the soul is for curing of the maladies
thereof, and for the strengthening and cherishing of it, such is the nature of
the soul it self: But the physic and food of the soul is wholly immateriall
and intellectual; that is to say, Reasons and Truths eternal and
incorruptible: Therefore the nature of the soul is such. I prove the minor
proposition by experience: for when the mind is troubled and out of peace and
order, by reason of some loss or misfortune, then all the Materia medica of
Dioscorides, or of Horstius will not make a cure: if so the body be not
diseased, or out of tune, no physicians skill will be able to prevail, we must
not seek in such cases as these to Galen, or Celsus, or Paracelsus, or
Avicenna, no druggists shop, no physick-garden can furnish us with remedies
against the raging sorrows or bewitching pleasures of the mind. Non est
medicamen in hortis. Tollere nodosum nescit medicina dolorem. A sick body
physicians can sometimes cure, but a sick mind never. If so the body be then in
health, and that the infirmity do not proceed from thence, Philosophy in that
case must do the deed, and not Medicina. Philosophy, says Hierocles in Proem.
ad aureos versus Pythagora, is the purger of humane life, and the perfection:
the purger it is, because it delivers it from all corruption contrary to
reason, and from the mortal body; the perfecter, because by the recovery of
the true natural constitution, it reduces it to a similitude with the divine:
which two things being to be done by virtue and verity, by one of them it takes
away the distempers of perturbations, and by the other induces a God-like form
into it. Thus he: conformably to whom determines the wise Emperor Marcus
Aurelius Antoninus l. 2. de vita sua. 15. when having numbered up a world of
miseries and perplexities which haunt this life, he adds, saying, What is it
then that must conduct us through all these? Philosophia. Also the great
Egyptian King Osmanduas, as we find it recorded by Diodorus Siculus l. 1. p.
2. raised a goodly structure which had graven on it this inscription,
Medicatorium Animi (...), that is to say, a storehouse for curing of the
mind; and this same was not an Apothecaries-shop, but a Library well furnished
with books wherewith to charm men's cares, and cure both the vain delights and
bitter anguishes of the mind, whose tranquillity is not procurable by medicines
or receipts, but, contrariwise, by the good documents, for example, of
Epictetus, of Seneca, or Marcus Antoninus; and where all Pagan doctrines and
consolations be deficient, by the instructions and good counsels to be found
for us in the Holy Bible, in Thomas de Kempis, Peraldus, Petrarch de remediis
utrinsque fortunae, and other such like. The Recipes taken from hence will
work, when all the material compounds, quintessences, extractions and Elixirs
can do nothing, as not having virtue in them, nor yet subtility to penetrate.

Now albeit the Ethnic Moralists can do much for pacifying our disordered
affections and introducing a content, yet do they not come home; for though
they be able to persuade a generous contempt of all transitory delights and
fading glories, and also how to draw on a kind of sad or disconsolate way of
resolution for a constant suffering of all adversities, telling us that

Quidquid erit, superanda omnis fortuna ferendo est; and read us many such
melancholy lectures: yet do not they assign us any solid reasons whereupon to
build content, or whereby we might receive true satisfaction; but,
contrariwise, endeavor to feed us with shadows, as namely, by their telling us
that virtue is an ample reward unto it self, and again, that the miseries and
affliction of this present life are not evils really, though we do think them
so, and with such empty fantasies as these would make us give our own
experience the lie. Moreover they sometimes speak faintly and fearfully of the
life to come, and the rewards thereof, by means of which alone the inequalities
and the great disorders of this can be made up and reconciled with providence.
On this sort spoke Tacitus concerning the soul of his Father in law Julius
Agricola then late deceased: Si quis piorum manibus locus sit, si, ut
Sapientibus placet, non cum corporibus extinguuntur magnae animae, placide
quiescas, If, says he, to the spirits of the pious there be any place
remaining; if, as wise men are persuaded, great souls be not extinguished with
their bodies, may thou sweetly rest. To strong and pressing sorrows such
feeble remedies did many of the Ethnicks bring; but this sovereign medicine was
left for Christianity to compose and show unto the world, by the belief of
which those cold sweats with which many before had been sore afflicted, were
prevented wholly.

Another natural track whereby to trace out immortality, is the universal
shamefastness of mankind of the own nakedness; which passion is not found to
be in brute beasts; and the reason of the difference between them seems to be,
because beasts are corruptible, and are so to be, but men, though now they also
be corruptible, yet it seems they were not so to be, but only by a
misadventure or mischance: for man's body, because composed of several
disagreeing parcells, is dissolvable, and may be taken in sunder by the very
same way that it was put together, and therefore by the own right cannot lay
any just claim to a perpetuity more then other composed bodies can, yet it
seems that by right of the being matched with a substance intellectual it
might pretend unto it, and therefore holds it a disparagement and disgrace to
be reputed mortal, which without such a title it could not do: and seeing
nakedness betrays it to be a piece of corruption, a condition so abject and
inferior, it is ashamed to be seen, forasmuch as sexes be the evident marks
and tokens of mortality; for why are sexes, but to propagate? and what need of
propagation, but only to provide a substitute? and none provides a successor
or a substitute, who is not himself to be turned out and to be gone: of which
mean and inferior condition, as not befitting, men are ashamed, and in
relation to this grand imperfection, we find that men labor to conceal, even
as much and as long as possible, their amorous affections, as springing out of
a root of corruption. Thus we see that men once in high fortunes, and cast down
and grown into necessity, are abashed at their poor and present state, whenas
others that were poor and low always be not so. And this I conceive to be the
principal reason why men do blush at businesses of corporeal love, and are
ashamed of their nakedness, although hitherto I do not know any that in
particular have taken notice of it.

Now finally, how immortality is consistent with the principles of Aristotle,
and also how it does follow upon them, is not my intention to examine, as being
a long and intricate piece of work, and performed by others, as namely by
Javellus l. de indeficientia anima, and of late by Card. Augustinus Oregius in
a work peculiarly intended for that purpose.


