THE COPY OF A LETTER Sent from the Earl of HOLLAND, to an Honorable Lord, at
the Parliament.

Anno Domini. 1641.

The Copy of a Letter sent from the Earl of Holland, to an honorable Lord,
at the Parliament.
MY LORD,
IN the discharge of my care and duty to the Parliament, I can only say this,
That having received their Orders for present disbanding of the Army, beginning
with the Horse, I have given order, that the Regiments of my Lord of Carnarvan,
Master Wilmot, and Sir Tho. Lucas, together with Master Percies Troop shall as
far as for the present I can do, be prepared to be forthwith disbanded; and
so the rest to follow. Having given directions, that the accounts of these
Regiments may be in readiness for those Gentlemen that are appointed to take
care of the Counties satisfaction, both in the debts of the Officers, and
likewise for the billiting of the common Soldiers; which I have howsoever put
in a way by the casual meeting of Sir Tho. Hansby at Doncaster, where some of
our Horse-troopes are quartered, which I drew together to attend his Majesty
into the Town; which occasioned some discourse betwixt us, That as yet I had
not received the names of those Gentlemen, neither had any of them bin with me,
that are appointed to assist in these accounts between the Army and the County:
whereupon he showed me a Letter written unto him and some others, for the West
riding of the Knights of the Shire to that purpose; but told me as yet they had
not met to agree of any thing about it, but that within one day or two they
should do it. My advice unto him then was, out of my desire to obey (as
speedily as possibly I might) the orders of the Parliament, that they would
loose no time in it; and by a joint letter informed me, of their orders for
this service; that so I might for that Division (a place being named) appoint
the Officers to ajust their accounts with them: and likewise that those
Gentlemen for the other Divisions may do the like. Who I suppose (the Assizes
and coming of the Judges to this Town being upon Monday next) may have
deferred the giving me the Account of this their employment until this time, I
pray God, by the private intelligence that comes amongst us, there be not a
general Assizes and judgment appointed for this Kingdom in these great
troubles, which are such as cannot be prevented or averted, but by the advised
counsels that are expected from our great and highest Council the Parliament;
who may be both assured, and secured of all readiness in our obedience to
those orders I have received from them, being full of that respect and duty that
becomes me toward their Lordships; My Lord J am most faithful.

We hear that the General of the Scotch Army, will show unto his Majesty
their Army as he passes by Newcastle; the which some say has been recrewted
of late. If it has been so, I conceive it only to make it appear in a
better posture before his Majesty; since now there can be no other end for it,
this Parliament being assured of their sudden marching away out of this
Kingdom. And likewise I conceive of their speedy disbanding in Scotland, which
will both ease their Charge and the hearts of many in these parts, that
otherwise will continue in their fears; How reasonable I know not.

York 13. Aug. 1641. Your Lordships most humble and faithful servant, Holland.


