THE FALLACY OF INFANTS BAPTISM DISCOVERED. OR, Five ARGUMENTS, to prove that
INFANTS ought not to be baptized.

Delivered in private by Captain HOBSON, who should that day (with Master
Knowls, and some others;) have discussed the thing in public with Master
Callamy, and Master Cranford, etc.

And now published for the benefit of those that seek the truth in love.

Col. 2.23. Which things have indeed a show of wisdom in will worship.

Isai. 1.12. Who has required this at your hands?

LONDON, Printed in the year of Discoveries. 1645.

To the courteous Reader.
READER,
I Who am one that waits upon Truth, desiring to know Truth, but am not to be
considered under any of those names of distinction, as a member of any
Independent Congregation, or one that they call an Anabaptist, but a friend to
them and others, so far as they are one with the Truth: I having by a
providence, had an opportunity to hear one Captain Hobson (with two Ministers
more) in private, who should have disputed in public with Master Callamy and
some others, about the point of Baptism, having taken the heads of what
Captain Hobson delivered, and conceiving that the good which I received by it,
should engage me to communicate it to others, I was therefore willing to put it
forth in print. But I desire you (Christian Reader) that you would consider
that it is but the heads of what he delivered, as I took it from him in
shorthand, and therefore if there be any broken expressions in it, attribute it
not to him, but to me, who am not so well skild (as in understanding, so) in
writing Syllogismes, which (I understand) he was enjoined so to speak, had he
spoke in public, and he seemed to be willing to speak in private, as he
should have done there. There was two Ministers more who exercised also, whose
arguments were worthy the printing, could I have taken them so as to bring them
out but not taking of them so perfectly, I was loath to dishonor that truth
that I believe was in them.

My desire is, that neither I nor you, may so look upon this, under the
consideration of that division that seems to be amongst men of Presbyterians
and Anabaptists, and Separatists, but that these names of distinction may be
laid down, and that we may all as sons of Truth, try every thing by the rules
of Truth, and love each other in truth, which I know is that which would put an
end to that great confusion and trouble that I see abroad. And I hope when you
have read this, you will see (as well as I) that we have for a long time been
led in blindness, taking that upon trust, which now I see is contrary to
Scripture, even Infants Baptism.

So desiring you to pass by infirmities in it, and make a good construction of
it, I leave you to Truth, desiring you not to have any prejudicial thoughts
against him that spoke it, notwithstanding any infirmities you may see in him
that writes it.

Yours in the Lord Jesus, S.S.

THE FALLACY OF INFANTS Baptism discovered.
Dearest Friends:
SEeing a providence has brought us together at this time, I shall therefore
endeavor, according to the intent of our meeting to declare my self, and so
declare my self, that I may not only answer your expectations, but directly
our intentions, in speaking to the point in hand, which this day should have
been discussed in public: But seeing a providence has prevented us; and we
who thought to have been in public, are now prevented by the Civil
Magistrate, whom we much honor; and with all willing Subjection, are willing
to Obey in all things that cross not the LORD JESUS CHRIST: And truly here is
that which stays our spirits, though we were willing to declare our Judgments
in public, to the view of Many; Yet if GOD will have it other ways, herein is
our joy That the Truth knows how best to make out it self; And it God by our
Silence, will cause Truth to speak, We rejoice: Or if the time is not yet
come to have things brought to a public View, We desire to wait upon God,
knowing that his time is best to make out Truth to the Sons of men.

But before I address my self to what I intend to speak, I desire that you
would give me leave to speak to two or three things: First, To desire you not
to think it strange that not only one, but two, or three should speak to one,
and the same thing. Secondly, That you would not think it strange for us to
trade so much in the shadow, in breaking up the shell, and not a little to
trade in the kernel; My meaning is, that we should speak so much of the
outward Ordinance; and not enter into the unfolding of the sweet, and glorious
mystery of God in Christ, wrapped up in the Ordinance, which is the Life as of
the Ordinance, so of Saints while they are observing it. Thirdly, I desire that
you would not think it strange for me to speak to you, contrary to my wonted
practice, which I shall at this time do, only speaking in a Syllogisticall
way; for the truth is, I shall here endeavor to declare my self in private,
as I did intend, to declare my self in public; and the same grounds I
intended to lay down in public, I shall lay down here Against the Baptizing
of Infants.


And the reason of my speaking Syllogistically, is because it was an Injunction
laid upon us so, to speak, had we met in public.

But before I come to lay down my Reasons, I shall take a portion of
Scripture, and draw a Conclusion, which Conclusion shall be as a Ground, from
whence I purpose to build all my following Discourse, the Scripture is.

MATTHEW. 28.20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you.


IN the words there are these two things considerable: An Exhortation, And a
sweet Direction.


The Exhortation does arise from the words considered in reference to the words
before, (Verse 19.) Go^e therefore and teach all Nations.

The Direction in these words, Teaching them to observe Whatsoever I have
commanded you.

In the Exhortation (if we had time) we might observe:

First, The Party exhorting; that is Christ.

Secondly, The Parties exhorted; That was the Disciples, or Apostles, who were
taught of Christ.

Thirdly, The matter exhorted to, Go teach.

From all which you may observe this Conclusion.

That it is the duty of all those who are taught of Christ, Doct.
to declare to other what they enjoy from Christ.

But this is not that which I intend to build my following discourse upon.
Therefore I pass it over.

And I come to the Direction, in which we may observe.

First, The Party directing.

Secondly, The Parties directed.

And Thirdly, The Direction it self.

Firt, The Party directing; That Is Christ.

Secondly, The Parties directed, That is the Aposles, on the Disciples in this
word Ye.

And Thirdly, The Direction it self, in these words, Go and teach them to
observe whatsoever I have commanded you.

That which I shall at this time speak of, is in the Direction it self; And
from thence briefly observe with me these things.

Christ, are the command of Christ: In these words, Teach them to observe
whatsoever I command you. So that their teaching duty to Christ, was the
command of Christ.

The second conclusion is from these words, Teach them to observe whatsoever I
command.

Christ ought to be observed.

I might be large in speaking of this;

First, Because I see men are apt rather to observe the commands of men then
the commands of Christ; and so do exceedingly slight and undervalue the
commands of Christ.

Secondly, Because I apprehend that men are apt to mistake in the commands of
Christ, and to take that for a command that is not; and to make that no command
that is. But I shall not at this time speak of that.

The Third conclusion does arise from something Included in these words, Teach
them to observe what I command. Implying not only that we should observe
Christ's commands; But in observing any thing as a duty to Christ, it must be in
reference to a command of Christ, from thence observe this conclusion.

Christ, must not arise from Supposition, but it must answer a command given
out from Christ.

And at this time this is the conclusion I shall speak to; Explaining the
terms, and confirming the Proposition; being that which I intend to build my
following discourse upon.

And in opening the terms, I shall be very brief: First, To show you what is
meant by the Law of Christ, or the commands of Christ. Secondly, What I mean by
Observation. Thirdly, What I mean by Supposition. Fourthly, The Reasons why we
are to observe nothing as a duty to Christ, but that which answers a Law given
forth by Christ.


What the Law of Christ or the Commands of Christ is.
First, By the commands of Christ, my meaning is, Not the Ceremonial Law, which
was a Type of Christ, and did in a dark way hold forth Christ. Nay, by the Laws
of Christ, or the commands of Christ, I do not intend the Moral Law considered
in the hand of Moses: Though I must tell you, first, I own the Authority of
that Law: Secondly, I own the Materials of that Law: But the obligement of that
Law, Do and live; (for so it was considered in the hand of Moses) So it is not
to be considered in the hand of Christ to us; for now we are not to do for
life; but because we live: But consider the Authority of God, and the Materials
of the Law handed to us in Christ, so I own it, and desire all Saints may do
so. But by the commands of Christ, my meaning is, All those commands that
Christ gave as he was a Prophet, Priest, and King of his Church; either
concerning our believing in God, or of our worshipping or walking with God. And
so much of that thing.

What is meant by Observation.
Secondly, My meaning by observation, in a word is, Actually, and Truly, and
Really to do and conform to what Christ commands.

What is meant by Supposition.
And what I mean (in the Third place) by Supposition: By that I mean a doubtful
apprehension that men gather up consequentially, by the strength of Reason and
Art, and have no plain word for it. Now in such a case, Supposition of one
side, is as strong as of the other: And if it be a duty to observe a thing
under such a supposed consequence, then if there be a supposed consequence for
the contrary, it is also a duty to observe a thing contrary to that.

The Reasons why we are to observe nothing as a duty, but that which answers a
Law, or Command of Christ.
But a duty does not consist in answering a Supposition, but a command; And
that it does, I will prove from these Reasons.

First, Because nothing is a duty, but as it answers a command, Luke 17.10.

Zach. 7.5, 6. where he says, When ye fasted, did ye as all fast unto me, even
to me? So then if a man observes a thing only from Supposition, and not a
command, at the best, it is but a supposed duty.

Believe in light, so they should do in light, or obey in light, Ephesians. 5.8.
But if we observe any thing barely from Supposition, and not from a command, it
is observed in darkness, and not in light: Therefore not as a duty to be
observed.

Isal. 1.12.
Who has required this as your hands? The Gospel forbids Will Worship. Now,
Will Worship is not only to do a thing contrary to a command; but to do a
thing that is thought right or good by the wisdom of man; as Worship without a
command, which the Apostle condemns, Col. 2.

Matthew. 5.16. But to observe any thing as a duty, and not from a command of
Christ, but from Supposition; that is not sufficient to stop the mouths of them
that oppose duty: Therefore ought not to be done; for you must know
Suppositions (as I said before) are as strong of one side as of the other.

Romans 15.4. where he says, What is written, is written for our learning: I
shall form my reason thus, That which is written the Saints should learn; But
it is no where written That we should observe any thing as a duty, in reference
to Supposition, but to answer a command Therefore to observe any thing as a
duty to Christ, without a command, is not a Doctrine for Saints to learn.

John 14.23. and 15.14.

These Reasons (dearest Friends) I have given to you to confirm what before I
spoke, which was, That we are to observe nothing as a duty to Christ, but that
which answers a Law given forth by Christ.

I might here draw diverse Uses, Use.
which might be useful for us; But at this time I shall only speak of a Use of
Reproof; To reprove those that will observe things, and in their observing,
plead for it as a duty to Christ, and yet have no command for it from Christ:
Amongst the rest, this is that which I shall here reprove, The Baprizing of
Infants; which is the very point in controversy: And because I desire to speak
directly to the Question as it was stated; I shall here rehearse to you what
the Question was, and what they were to prove and what we were to prove. The
Question was Whether Infants of believing parents were to be Baptized, ye^, or
no? They were to prove That it was their duty, and they ought to do it. We were
to prove That they ought not to do it.

I shall not at all go about to meddle with the justifying of our practice
concerning the Baptizing of Believers; for that is not the point in hand.
Though I must tell you, It had been but a reasonable thing for them by
Scripture to endeavor to justify their practice; and we by Scripture to
justify ours; and then neither of us would have been put upon the proof of a
Negative, which every rational man knows is the worst and of the staff. But
seeing it was so, I shall therefore direct my speech to give forth my judgment
concerning that thing.

The Reasons that I shall at this time lay down (according to time and
strength) Why children ought not to be Baptized, are these:



But the Baptizing of Infants does directly deny Christ to be come in the flesh;

Therefore ought it not to be done.

I know that no man can deny the Major, which is so clearly confirmed, 1 John
4.3. with diverse other places.

But at this time I will prove the Minor, That Baptizing of Infants does
directly deny Christ to be come in the flesh; And that I prove thus:

That which does keep on foot that which was before Christ, and ended by
Christ, considered come in the flesh; that denies Christ to be come in the
flesh:

But the Baptizing of Infants does keep on foot that which was before Christ,
and ended by Christ, as come in the flesh;

And therefore it denies Christ to be come in the flesh.

For the proof of this,

First, I shall unfold to you what I mean by that which was before Christ, and
ended by Christ come in the flesh. That which was before Christ, was, That God
made a Covenant with Abraham, which Covenant ran in the flesh, and was entailed
to generation; and not upon condition of Regeneration. And this you may see,
Genesis 17.7, 12. And this was that Covenant that Circumcision of Children had a
reference to; And whosoever was a child of Abraham, considered as a son of the
flesh, had a right to it, and might, and did plead for privileges by it. But
when Christ came, the natural Branches were cut off Romans 11.20, 21. and no man
is now considered a son of Abraham, or the Seed of Abraham, but as he
believes, Gal. 3.7, 9, 14, 22, 28, 29. And now there is no promise that runs
forth to any considered in referened to a carnal generation; but a spiritual
Regeneration, John 3, 5. Therefore when they came to John ( Matthew. 3.7, 8, 9.)
to be Baptized. He takes them off from pleading their privilege considered in
the flesh, and tells them, Say not in your heart, You have Abraham to your
Father, and so plead for Baptism. But he exhorts them to Believe and Repent.

And by this you see what I mean by that which was before Christ, which was,
The Promises and Covenant running in a natural line; but it is now ended, and
runs in a spiritual But now to Baptize Children because their Parents Believe,
and upon this ground, Because it was the same (as they say) with Circumcision;
in so doing they go about to make the promises to run in a natural line, which
was ended by Christ; And therefore in the observing of it, deny Christ to be
come in the flesh.

Secondly,

That which does directly take from Christ that which the Holy Ghost gives to
Christ, considered come in the flesh; That denies Christ come in the flesh.

But the Baptizing of Infants does directly take from Christ that which the
Holy Ghost gives to Christ considered come in the flesh.

Therefore it denies Christ come in the flesh.

And for the proof of this, I shall declare to you what I mean by that which
the Holy Ghost gives to Christ considered come in the flesh.

The Holy Ghost gives to Christ a pre-eminence above all others that were
before him in his Prophetical and Kingly Office. Col. 1.18. Phil. 2.9.


In his Prophetical Office, Joh. 6.68. Matthew. 11.9. Luke 24.19.
that neither Moses nor the Prophets were to be compared with him, but far
inferior to to him, and his Office; So inferior, that he was not to be
expounded by them; but in giving out his mind considered come in the flesh, he
was to expound and unfold them. But now men in their going about to plead for
the Baptizing of Infants, do exceedingly undervalue Christ's Prophetical Office
in this, that they make the old Testament expound the new; Matthew. 5.21, 22, 27,
28.
whereas the new should expound the old; Christ should, and does expound Moses;
But there is no warrant for us to bring Christ under the Exposition of Moses;
And men do undervalue the Lord Christ, in making Moses speak that which Christ
speaks not, or bringing Moses to Christ, as a greater light to unfold the
lesser; They do (I say) exceedingly undervalue Christ, and that thus.

The Light unfolding or the Wisdom unfolding, must be greater then the matter
unfolded: And therefore he that goes about to make Moses mouth to speak out
Christ's mind, in things that concern Christ as come in the flesh, sets up
Moses above Christ; and denies Christ to be come in the flesh.

Secondly, Isai. 9.6, 7. Revel. 15.3.
They exceedingly take from Christ's Kingly Office; whereas the Holy Ghost sets
up Christ a King in his Church, and a Lawgiver, as equal to, so transcending
all others that were before him: But that men in the Baptizing of Infants do
undervalue the Kingly Office of Christ, in giving Laws to his people. That Is
clear in these two things.

First in this, That they say it is a duty to Baptize Infants, and Answers the
mind of Christ, and yet cannot show a command from Christ; whereas the Apostle
says, Heb. 3.2, 3.
Christ was as faithful in his house, as Moses. And you know the faithfulness
of Moses did consist in this, That he gave Laws and Commands to the Israelites,
to declare their duty: and lays nothing upon them as a duty, but what they had
a command for. And it he gave them Laws for every thing they were to observe,
and Christ was as faithful in his house as he; I will leave this to the
judgment of you, whether or no that this does not undervalue the Kingly Office
of Christ, to say, that Baptizing of Infants is a duty that they owe to Christ;
and yet can show no command for it from Christ. Secondly, They undervalue the
Kingly Office of Christ, in giving Laws to his Church in this; That they go
about to perform (as they say) a duty to Christ, but can show no command for it
from Christ; but must use there own Art and Reason to make Christ's Law strong
enough to hold it out to be a duty. And whether the joining of man's Art,
Policy, and Reason to the Laws of Christ, does not exceedingly undervalue
Christ, as though his Laws were not perfect enough for his people, I leave you
to judge. And in so doing they do exceedingly take (as before I said from the
Prophetical, so here in the Kingly Office of Christ) that Honor and
Pre-eminence from him, which the Holy Ghost gives to him, considered as come in
the flesh: And therefore so to do, denies Christ as come in the flesh.
Secondly,

That which is no part of Righteousness, that as a duty to Christ, ought not
to be observed.

But, the Baptizing of Infants is no part of Righteousness;

And therefore it ought not to be observed.

The Major Proposition none can deny, I will prove the Minor, and that thus.

Whatsoever is considered as a part of Righteousness, was seen either in the
Person or Practice of Jesus Christ.

But neither in the Person nor Practice of Jesus Christ, is the Baptizing of
Infants seen or held forth.

Therefore it is not part of Righteousness.

And that whatsoever is a part of Righteousness, was seen in the Person or
Practice of Jesus Christ, is clear from this Scripture, Matthew. 3.15. And Jesus
said, Suffer it to be so: For thus is becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness.
If all Righteousness, then there was no Righteousness but was confidered
either in the Person or Practice of Christ. And that the Baptizing of Infants
is not-held out in the Person or Practice of Christ, I leave to you to judge.
He himself was not Baptized when he was an Infant, though he might plead the
same privilege as they do who say they are Children of Believers: Had it been
a part of Righteousness, Christ would; nay, Christ should have done it.



fulfill all Righteousness. And for his Practice ( though he Baptized not, but
his Disciples, John 4.2.) yet, in all their Baptizing where Christ was, you
never hear that ever they Baptized any Infant, or gave any command for it; And
therefore it is no part of Righteousness, and ought not to be done.

Thirdly, Die. 3.


That which is not the Baptism of Christ, That ought not to be done.

But the Baptizing of Infants is not the Baptism of Christ;

And therefore ought not to be done (We are now speaking of the Baptism of
Christ, considered in an external way.)

And that the Baptism of Infants, is not the Baptism of Christ so considered; I
prove thus.

First, That which does not Answer the Commission of Christ, That is not the
Baptism of Christ.

But, the Baptism of Infants does not answer the Commission of Christ;

Therefore it is not the Baptism of Christ.

That it does not answer the Commission of Christ, it is clear from the
Commission it self, Matthew. 28.19, 20. Mark 16.15, 16. Where you shall see these
things in the Commission, Go teach, Discipling, and Baptizing. And they that
were to be Baptized, were such as must first be Taught, and Discipled, and
being Believers, must be Baptized, Mark 16.16.

And that an Infant in the first place, is capable to be Taught the mystery of
the Gospel, and so to be taught as to be made a Disciple of Christ, and a
Believer in Christ. It is clear that it cannot be; and therefore the Baptizing
of them, does not answer the Commission of Christ.

Every man that professes to act by a Commission, most not only do things
because there is not an express command against it: But if they observe any
thing as a duty; they must have a command for it, in, and by it; or else it
will come under the reproof of him that gives the Commission; as those come
under the reproof of Christ ( Collos ^i^) who by the wisdom of men, went to
present a Will Worship to God. And so you see the Baptizing of Infants does not
answer the Commission of Christ; And therefore it is none of Christ's Baptism,
and ought not to be done.

Secondly, Christ's Baptism is a Baptism of Faith, Acts 8.37. Mark 16.16. Acts
8.12. Acts 2.38. Acts 28.8.
and a Baptism of Repentance.

But, the Baptism of Infants cannot be a Baptism of Faith and a Baptism of
Repentance.

Therefore it is not the Baptism of Christ; and ought not to be done.



That which causes inconveniences in the Church, That ought not to be done.

But, the Baptizing of Infants does cause inconveniences in the Church;

Therefore it ought not to be done.

I must tell you (dear Friends) for this Argument, I borrowed it from them that
oppose the thing, who laid down this as an Argument for Baptizing of Infants;
and that thus:

That which causes inconveniences in the Church, That ought not to be done:

But, (say they) the denying of Childrens Baptism, causes inconveniences in
the Church; And therefore it ought not to be (...).

And to prove this, they go to prove a Supposition by a Supposition; and that
thus:

It will make the Children of Believers (say they) to be no other ways then
the Children of Heathens; and so they go about to prove a Consequence by a
Consequence; which is but (...) upon.

But that the Baptizing of Infants does cause inconvenience in the Church, I
will prove from Scripture: and that thus;

That which does not only, present one, but make one a Member of a Church;
before being called of God, That is inconvenient:

But, the Baptizing of Infants makes them Members of their Church, before they
are called of God; And therefore it is inconvenient, and contrary to these
Scriptures, 1 Cor. 1.1. and 2 Cor. 1.1.

Secondly,

That which intails mercies and privileges to generation, which alone is to be
entailed upon men in reference to regeneration, That is inconvenient.

But the Baptizing of Infants, does intail mercies and privileges to them in
reference to generation, and not regeneration; And therefore it is
inconvenient, and contrary to this Scripture, John 3.5. Gal. 3.9. with many
other places, as 2 Cor. 1.1. where he does declare that all those that were in
the Church of Christ, and impriviledged with the Ordinances of Christ, they
were fanctified by Christ.

Thirdly, That which causes a Separation, and distraction in Christ's
conjunction; That's inconvenient.

But, the Baptizing of Infants, does make a Separation, and distraction in
Christ's conjunction; And therefore it is inconvenient.

By Christ's conjunction, I mean the oneness that is between the ground that
Christ lays down for men to be Baptized, and the ground he lays down for men
to break Bread; which is one and the same thing: He that Believes, and knows,
and discerns Christ, he is to be Baptized, Acts 8.37. And he that does so, is
to break Bread, in remembrance of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.

Now, those that plead so much for the Baptizing of Infants, by the same ground
they would Baptize Infants upon, they will not admit them nor others to break
Bread; And therefore as Christ's ground is one, theirs is two: And under that
consideration, they make a Separation in that which Christ makes a oneness;
and that is inconvenient in the Church of Christ, and ought not to be done.



But, the Baptizing of Infants, does directly cross the proceedings in the
time of the Law, and in the time of the Gospel; And therefore it ought not to
be done.

By that, I mean, That no man in the time of the Law, and in the time of the
Gospel was to do any thing by the virtue of a Right, Isai. 8.20.
without a Rule; But whatsoever they did as a Duty, it was to answer a Rule.
Had Abraham been circumcised by the virtue of a Right, as he was a Believer,
and not by the virtue of a Rule; then Lot might have pleaded for the same
privilege, for he was a Believer as well as Abraham; yet God did not make
choice of Lot, but of Abraham. And then, Ishmael should not have been
circumcised, but only Isaa^; But though Ishmael was a son of the flesh, and
cast out by God, and not a Believer in God; yet he must be circumcised: And
therefore this was not by the virtue of a Right, but by the virtue of a Rule.

The same thing also was in the time of the Gospel, where it is clearly
discovered that Christ owns nothing as a Duty, but as it answers a Law; and
they were to do nothing pleading a Right, without a Rule; but to do all things
by the virtue of a Rule: Therefore under that consideration, Will Worship was
condemned.

Now if there be any rule, or any command in the Scripture for Infants to be
Baptized, I desire they would show it: Here is the Word of Truth, which
justifies all things suitable to it self; and owns nothing else to be a Truth.
And I do exceedingly wonder that any men should go about to plead for a thing
by the virtue of a Right, without a Rule.

I have much more to say to you in this thing, had I time and strength: But, I
hope these five grounds that I have here laid down, will clearly discover to
you, That Infants ought not to be Baptized.

I am not here now to prove to you the Baptizing of Believers; That Is not the
controversy in hand, though a thing clear by Scripture; and that which I
should be glad if I had an occasion to speak of. Not only to speak of Baptism
in the Letter, but Baptism in the Spirit, which was the mystry of the Gospel,
and the glorious excellency of Christ in the Spirit, held out in the
Administrations of Christ considered in the flesh; which Administrations in the
flesh, are as so many signs to declare the Mystery of the Spirit; though I
know none can understand it, but they that do enjoy it; for none can unletter
the Letter, but the Spirit: But I cease from that, and cease giving you any
further Reasons (at this time) to prove that which we were to have proved in
Public, had we had liberty; which was, That Infants ought not to be Baptized.

But I leave them and you so to the Truth; desiring that we may all be taught
by the Truth; and sweetly made one in the Truth; and carried out from thence,
to walk up in an acknowledgement of the Truth, suitable to the Rules of it Self.

FINIS.

