AN ANTIDOTE Against HEN. HAGGAR'S Poisonous PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, The
Foundation of the FONT DISCOVERED: OR, A REPLY Wherein his Audaciousness in
perverting holy Scriptures and humane writings is discovered, his Sophistry in
Arguing against Infant Baptism, Discipleship, Church membership etc. is
detected, his Contradictions demonstrated, his Cavils against M. Cook, M.
Baxter, and M. Hall Answered, his Raylings Rebuked, and his Folly Manifested.

By Aylmar Houghton Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and Teacher to the
Congregation of Prees, in the County of Salop.

2 Timothy 3.6, 7, 8, 9. Of this sort are they which creep into houses and lead
captive silly women laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts, ever
learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the TRVTH. Now as Jannes
and Jambres withstood Moses, so do THESE also resist the TRVTH, men of corrupt
minds, reprobate concerning the Faith. But THEY shall proceed no further, for
their FOLLY shall be manifest to all men, as THEIRS also was.

Merito debet esse nobis suspectum, uicquid ab ANABAPTISTARUM officina
prodi^rit, quae tot portenta, and Fabricata est, and quotidie Fabricatur,

Calv. Psychopannychia, p. 476. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhust, and are to
be sold at his shop over against the great Conduit, at the lower end of
Cheapside, 1653.

To the truly honored, and his indeared friend the worshipful THOMAS HUNT Esquire
Major of the Corporation of Salop. A praiseworthy Patriot, and professed
Patron of piety, without respect of persons even of all that love the truth in
Sincerity.
Whorthy SIR!
YOu may censure me for overmuch boldness to set to you, or use your name in
this ensuing Treatise for Patronage without your leave or license, but that is
Plea sufficient, that you did not know it, if any danger, or disgrace should
befall it, or it miscarry.

But the truth of Christ needs no defense, for Christ himself will grace his
own truth in, and for his Saints that love it, if they should hold their peace.

Sir, I desire io know no man after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, and am
determined not to know any thing here below, but Jesus Christ, and him
crucified, and with that spiritual eye do I desire to look upon you, and love
you, and is the only motive moving me to make thus bold with you.

Sir, It is the Politic practice of impostors (like cunning crafty masking
mummers) to hide their faces, and rattle a boxful of Counters instead of good
Gold and Silver: So these men wind in their erroneous doctrines, and
counterfeit opinions, and then persuade poor silly people, it is the pure truth
of Jesus Christ: And thus have they done with some of my people, and by this
means brought me upon this unpleasing work, constraining me to shape an Answer
to a wrangler, and that only for the satisfaction of some of my people, and
reducing (if possible) some who are seduced, and to confirm the rest in the
truth of Christ, they have been taught; and the rather also, because M.
Haggar's Book was brought me by one of my own peopl, but now a seduced
Backslider, who left it with me for this very purpose. In which Book I find
many absurdities, falsities, impertinencies, and Scu^^ilities of and against
men better then himself, but the Lord rebuke him.

It may be (Sir) you have heard of that Noble Moralizers Fable of Amphialus,
who was challenged to combat with Argalus a Knight of the Sun, who when he was
prepared with all his Military accoutrements to meet his enemy; The wife of
Argalus dressed her self in her Husbands Armor, and gave the onset to
Amphialus, and gave the first charge; whom he encounters valiantly, and
overthrows with a mortal wound in the body: But when he opened the Armor,
viewed his conquest, and saw it was the wife of his enemy, he could have no
comfort of the day, because it became not a man so to ruin a woman: Such is my
case in this work in hand; The love of peace is glorious in the Church, even
among those that differ in opinion. But if they will p^^ on the arms of an
enemy, (because they wilfully will be enemies) with whom I am challenged to
combat for the truth of Christ; I cannot help it, if they meet with a blow,
though I glory not in it. But I am truly sorry that there should be any such
cause. It is not for any evil to their persons, but to give a mortal wound to
their damnable errors.

Plutarch tells of Archidamus, who being once chosen Arbitrator in a difference
betwixt two persons, brought them to the Temple of Minerva, and there decreed,
that they should not depart thence till they were agreed. I could desire that,
M. Haggar, and his party would agree to come into the Temple of God, and be
tried by the holy Scriptures faithfully explicated, and applied.

In the mean time, I leave it to your charitable censure, and pray the
favorable acceptance of this testimony of love and thankfulness, that I owe,
and am not able to pay, but in prayers for you, and all yours, who am

Your humble servant in the Faith once given to the Saints, AYLMAR HOUGHTON.
Prees, From my Study July 12, 1658.
To the READER.
I Thought it meet (if not my duty) to give some account of these ensuing
particulars: 1. Why M. Cook's, and M. Baxter's Treatises have not been
Vindicated before this time, since M. Haggar's Answer (such as it is) has been
extant, and they therein challenged some years since? These following
considerations might sufficiently justify their silence.

1. The impotency, and scurrility of that Answer (as is manifest to all
i^telligent Readers) might be a sufficient confutation of it, and render it
unworthy of any Reply but silence. When Rabshakeh rayled, blasphemed,
threatened, and boasted; The people held their peace, and answered them not a
word, for the King's Commandment was saying: Answer him not, Isa. 36.21. 2ly.
The littleness, and almost nothingness of that Answer to those Treatises, (as
will easily appear to the peruser) though his work did lie here, viz. fully to
answer these Treatises, which specially M. Cook's) by his Goliah-like
challenges, he had provoked to come forth to Vindicate the truth against him;
yet he vainly braggs in his Epistle, and in the end of his Book, that he has
answered both (the one consisting of seven sheets, and the other of sixty) in
eighteen sheets: When yet I believe it will appear, that not so much as is
written in half a sheet (of M. Cook's Book) has been taken notice off, much
less answered to, who could judge such a vapor as this a sufficient call to
undertake a reply. 3ly. M. Cook, and M. Baxter, did not apprehend any of their
respective Flock in danger to receive any hurt by M. Haggar's Answer (which
might be a call to appear against it) nor indeed of any other till of late.
4ly. Their employment (through God's mercy) has been so full in the work of
the Lord (although the Answerer charges all Ministers with idleness) that they
had no spare time to bestow on so needless a business, there appearing neither
cause nor call.

2. But why then does any reply come out at last? should not these reasons (if
valid) impose a perpetual silence on all? It is known by some what proud
challenges have been made by the Answerer (and to me in particular by one of M.
Haggar's Proselytes, heretofore a seeming friend, and sheep of my flock) which
may (and it is to be feared, do) work much upon some weak persons (who may be
under a temptation, by reason of those big swelling words) whom we are bound to
pity. 2. Yea, it is known, that some credulous persons (that more regard the
confidence of men's speeches, then the truth or ground thereof) are in actual
danger, as thinking thus, whosoever has the last word, goes away with the
victory; for whose sake something should be done, to undeceive them, if it may
be. 3. It is as well known, that this crazy body of mine is on the declining
hand, (and I am bound to patch up this old cottage, till my Landlord calls for
the Tenant) which has kept this reply on my hand longer then I intended. And I
thought I was bound to do him this service before I put off this my Tabernacle,
which (in all probability) will not be long.

3. For the manner of replying. 1. I shall not render (at least in design, and
desire) Reproach, for reproach, nor reviling for reviling If any think they
have the best cause and conscience, that can scold, and rail most, for me let
the Answerer have the honor with them, I shall not envy it; I desire to follow
the example of Christ, who when he was reviled, reviled not again, etc. 1 Pet.
2.23. Yet I acknowledge it is good to take notice of those Reproaches, which in
M. Haggar's Answer are belched forth, against Ministry, Ministers, Ordinances,
and Churches of Christ, knowing that God has a special hand of providence
therein, calling to self-examination; humiliation, supplication, and
reformation. Shimei cannot curse, unless God bid him, 2 Samuel 16.10, 11, 12. Nor
can Rabshekah rail, or Sennacherib blaspheme, but some good use is to be made
thereof, specially for quickening to prayer, Isa. 34. ver. 3, 4, 14, 15, 16. Nor
can the Devil vex Job, but he can acknowledge God's hand in it, Job 1.21. and
if by occasion of his suffering and smart, he spoke unadvisedly, he will
acknowledge himself vile, lay hands on his mouth, and abhor himself in dust and
ashes, Job. 40.4. and 42.6. 2. Yet if any thing be material in his Answer, I
shall fully Reply to it, not willingly passing by any thing that may seem to
make against those Treatises, or for the Answerer. 3. Yet I shall avoid
tediousness, being as brief as I may, without prejudice to the truth, and doing
that for M. Haggar, which he promised to do in his Epistle, but performs not in
his book, viz. to lay aside SVPERFLVOVS, and NEEDLESS WORDS. And I assure the
Reader, I am not conscious to my self of wronging M. Haggar purposely, when I
am constrained to abbreviate his WORDY Answer.

4. To whom, and for whose use is this Reply made? Even to M. Haggar and his
followers, if they be not such as God and Christ has warned us not to be
meddled with, Prove. 9.8. Mat. 7.6. which I fear, as to most of them, though
some perhaps may be engaged that way through ignorance, and so capable of
mercy. But however, it is in the behalf of those weak ones, who in sincerity,
and love to the truth, desire to know God's will and follow it, who being
staggered with the confidence of the Answerer, and unsettled with the long
silence, as to matter of reply, are to be pitied, and relieved in this case;
knowing that Satan the Prince of darkness, and their own natural darkness, and
corruption, may take occasion, by such persons, Pamphlets, and practices as are
abroad, to disquiet their Spirits, and to draw them into crooked paths;
specially those within my own special charge, of whom I travel in birth, till
Christ be formed in them; and for whose Souls I am bound to watch, as one that
shortly must give account. Thus have I given you the reasons of the publication
of this Treatise. If thou shall find any help for thy confirmation in the faith
of Christ, give God the praise, and forget not to put up one prayer for

The meanest of the Servants of the Lord Jesus Christ, A. H.

We Ministers of the Gospel, whose names are subscribed, do certify, that we
have perused the Reply of our Reverend Brother, M. Aylmar Houghton, Entitled,
an ANTIDOTE, etc. and do judge it in the main to be solid, and very useful
(for which end the blessing of heaven go along with it); to prevent the
spreading of the Gangrene in this County of Salop, and the Counties Adjacent.

Tho. Porter. Andrew Parsons. Rob. Bermey. Rich. Steel.

Imprimatur

EDMUND CALAMY.

CHAP. I. Concerning the Saints Foundation.
SECT. 1.
H. H. Page 1. THe Foundation which the Saints ought to build upon is Christ, 1
Cor. 3.11. for (...) foundation no man lays -- with Eph^^. 2.20. 1 Pet. 2.3,
4, 5.

Reply 1.

If Christ be the Saints foundation, then either you and your disciples are not
Saints; or else you and they build (in matters both of Doctrine and of
practice) beside the foundation, as in the points of original sin, free will,
falling away from grace, dipping, etc. (of which last there is no express
command or example in the New Testament) as shall be evidenced (God willing) in
their proper places.

2. It Is not said in 1 Cor. 3.11. No man lays, but no man can lay; (...).
you break your own rule so often inculcated by you, (^pecially p. g. 40.) with
direful threatenings. It Is ominous to stumble in the threshold.

3. I fear it was your design to make some believe, that the Apostle did, and
does contradict hims^l^; for if there be no other foundation but Christ, 1 Cor.
3.11. how comes it to pass that the same Apostle speaks of the foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. 2.20. Yea, good works are called a
foundation, 1 Timothy 6.19.
Nayin this same place he does distinguish Christ from the foun, dation of the
Apostles and Prophets: Indeed Distinguo fundamentum in propr. dictum and
ministe iale. Cham. lib. 3. c. 3. n. 46
Christ is the personal foundation, and the Apostles and Prophets are the
doctrinal foundation; which (though upon the matter) they are all one, yet you
might have done well to have let fall such a distinction, unless you had a
mind to make your Reader believe the Apostle did clash against himself.

SECT. 2.
H. H. Again, It Is also plain in the words of Christ to Peter -- Thou art
Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church -- Observe upon what rock; not
Peter, as the Papists say; for Peter is called a stone, but Christ is called a
rock, 1 Cor. 10.

Reply, 1. In saying Christ is called a rock, and Peter a stone; Do you not
more then insinuate, that Christ is not a stone; which is contrary to your own
quotation, Ephesians. 2.20. -- Christ himself being the chief cornerstone, (though
I confess it is not the same word in the original (...).
) nay contrary to diverse other Scriptures, where Christ is expressly called a
stone. e. gr. Isa. 28.16. Behold I lay in Zion for a foundation, a STONE. Act.
4.11. This is the STONE which was set at naught by you builders -- Yea in the
very place even now by you cited, Psalm. 118.22. with Mat. 21.42.
1 Pet. 2.4. To whom coming as unto a living STONE --

2. Though I am far from believing that the Church is built on Peter in the
Popish sense, yet I may truly and safely hold, that in some sense the Church is
built on Peter, for it is plain that Peter was an Apostle; and it is as plain
Ephesians. 2 20. -- We are built upon the foundation of the Apostles. This is no
whit helpful to the Papists, nor hurtful to us.

3. Admit the Church is not built upon Peter; yet your reason is very weak,
because, forsooth Peter (is, or) is called a Stone. Sure you had a mind to
gratify your dear mother the Church of Rome, notwithstanding your loud cry, as
the Papists say. The Learned give us better reasons. To instance only in one
Chemn. Har. mon cap. 24.
Peter has his name [ab illa petra] from that rock for two causes: 1. Because
notwithstanding Sathan's subtilty, and his own infirmity, Luke 22.31, 32 he
should adhere to that rock, and be as a living stone built on him. 2. Because
by his Ministry and confession, Mat. 16.18. Christ would build his Church on
himself the true rock.

4. If it be plain in Christ's words Mat. 16.18.
that the Saints ought to build on Christ the foundation, then something may be
plain by consequence, which is not expressed in the text: You are for
consequences betimes.

SECT. 3.
H. H. page 2. And who that is a Christian knows not; that the Church of
Christ is built on the rock Christ: Therefore David says, 2 Samuel 22.2. The
Lord is my rock -- And Verse 47. Blessed be the God of the rock of my
salvation, etc. all which I suppose, will not be denied by any that own Christ.

Reply 1. You may do well to examine thoroughly, whether your Church be built on
the rock Christ.

2. To say nothing that you do not cite the words of David as they are in our
Bible, specially verse 47. If every Christian knows that the Church of Christ
is built on the rock Christ, and none that own Christ will deny it; then I
suppose you will own me, and the rest of my persuasion for Christians and
owners of Christ, who are neither ignorant of the one, nor deniers of the
other. This is the best, if not the only piece of charity that is to be found
in the Book.

SECT. 4.
H. H. But the main question is, How the Saints may and ought to build on this
rock Christ? which is clearly answered by these following Scriptures, Mat.
7.24. Whosoever hears these sayings of mine and does them, I will liken him
to a wise man that built his house upon a rock, etc. Therefore to build on the
rock Christ, is to hear the sayings, and do them, and the contrary likened to a
foolish man, etc. liable to danger and destruction, Act. 3.22, 23. with 2 These.
1.8, 9. 1 John 2.4. Rev. 21.8.

Reply 1. Let the Reader consider, whether those words in Mat. admit not
clearly a limitation to that Sermon preached by Christ in the Mount; for it is
said ver. 24. Whosoever hears THESE sayings of mine, and does them not, etc.
Ver. 26. Every one that hears These sayings of mine, etc. In which Sermon
Christ spoke not one word of the nature or subject of Baptism; and so the
design you drive at (in alleging these words) is quite spoiled.

2. Admit the words be of a larger extent, because it is said, Luke 6 47.
Whosoever comes to me, and hears my sayings (indefinitely) and does them --
and Verse 49 He that hears and does not, etc. Yet this Scripture shows not
how the Saints build on this rock (as you pretend) but who they are that build
on him, or build not on him.

3. You write very rawly, and indistinctly. For certainly there are some
temporary commands or sayings of Christ, e. g. Mat, 10.8. Hoc symbolum pro
illotempore praeceptum quo certior ipsis esset divinae providentiae experientia
ut re^ti Chrysostom. notavit, Grot.
Heal the sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils, freely ye
have received, freely give. Verse 9. Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor
brass in your purses. 10. Nor scrip for your journey, neither two coats, nor
shoos, nor yet staves, etc. Are they all fit to wear a fools coat, who do not
these commands in these times: or do you take your self now obliged to that
command, Mat. 19.21. Go and sell that thou have, and give to the poor -- I have
been always of this mind; that THAT was a command of Trial, and not of
Obedience, unless it be when God requires it, as in times of public
persecution. Or are you bound to wash one another feet, as Joh. 13.14. or
salute one another with an holy kiss, as Romans 16.16. or anoint the sick with
oil? Jam. 5.14. and many more which I could mention, which neither you nor I
do: must therefore you and I be likened to foolish men? nay, be counted liars,
and be in danger of damnation? By this time you may perceive what it is to
write at random, to shoot at rovers, and talk so wildly. For

4. What a bloody sentence is this, to send to hell all Christians for more
then a thousand years, who have not been baptized after your mode. For we read
not of Anabaptists, till within this three or four hundred years, or
thereabouts at most, to my best observation.

CHAP. II. Concerning Christ's Precept.
SECT. 1.
H. H. page 3. Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. with Mark. 16.15, 16. whence observe: First,
that Christ commanded the Gospel to be preached to every creature, or all
nations, which words we ought to hear and obey, etc.

Reply 1. Are you bound indeed to obey this command? Then you have obeyed it,
or not: If not, are not you found in the number of those, whom Christ sharply
reproves (as you mention p. 2.) who call him Lord, Lord, and yet do not the
things he says, Luke 6.46. If you say, yea, I cannot believe you; for since
Judas Act. 1.25.
by transgression fell from his Apostleship, I cannot find you among the
eleven. Acts 1.13.


Secondly, but if this command is to be obeyed in the successors of the
Apostles, as Gospel Ministers (for the Apostles as such have no successors, as
is clear by the promise annexed Mat. 28 20.
I am with you always even to the end of the world) I pray you what is it to
preach the Gospel, but to open and hold forth the Covenant; the Covenant, I
say, made with Abraham, whereof this was one branch; I am thy God, and of thy
seed. Compare Genesis 12.3. and 17.17. with Gal. 3.8, 13, 14. Now that the Infants
of Covenanters are within the Covenant, as well as grown persons, is clear to
him that will not shut his eyes. If not, It shall be made clear (by the
assistance of the Lord) in this ensuing reply to avoid Tautologies. 3. Consider
also, as what they were to do, so to whom, every creature, all nations, now
that Infants should be none of the creatures, or nations is unsuitable to
reason, and religion, specially considering that they were included as special
subjects, when the Church was in so small a plot of ground, and Christ does not
exclude them by any restriction, or exception, which had been needful, and
seasonable, if they were to be excluded.

SECT. 2.
2. Observe. H. H. The end was that they might believe it.

Reply. 1. These words are not expressly set down in the places cited. viz.
Matt. and Mark. They are drawn but by consequence. 2. Neither do they hold
forth the end of preaching so much as the event. But thirdly whether end, or
event, if your meaning be that they might believe it for their seed and
household. As Acts 16.31. Believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved,
and thine house. You and I are agreed in this,


SECT. 3.
3. Observe. H. H. That those which did believe the Gospel, should be baptized
into his name.

Reply 1. If you understand it of Infidells converted to the faith, (not
excluding their children) we believe it, and accordingly practice, as well as
you; for the Scriptures alleged by you; prove that where the Gospel is first
preached, whether to Jews o^ Gentiles, Turks, or Pagans (who perhaps never
heard of Christ before) they must first be instructed, and embrace the Gospel,
before they be baptized, (as Abraham was, before he was circumcised) but this
hinders not their children from baptism: no more then Abraham's children from
circumcision, nor infants not believing from salvation; for you say, Foundat*
p. 61
infants are saved -- without actual faith, though the Text alleged by you
says Mark 16.16.
he that believes not shall be damned.

2. If you mean, as your practice speaks, that such who have been baptized once
(for so you grant p. 24. -- Be baptized again as we are,) and have received the
Lords Supper often, and therefore owned as Church members, should be baptized
by you, I say this doctrine and practice has no sooting on the Texts alleged
by you, either by clear consequence from, or expresseness of those Scriptures;
as hereafter shall be more fully evinced.

SECTION 4.
Fourth Observe. H. H. That those baptized believers were after to be taught to
observe all other things whatsoever Christ had commanded his Apostles to teach
them.

Reply. 1. After to be taught --? If you mean a good while after. Its our
practice to teach infants after baptism, as soon as they are capable. Genesis 18 19.
As Abraham taught his children a good while after circumcision; but if you
mean it presently after Baptism, and so continually to their lives end, I
grant it of grown persons, such baptized believers in the same, or like
juncture of Circumstances.

Secondly yet I do not find express mention made, that the Eunuch was
instructed by Philip, after he was baptized by Philip, but rather the contrary;
for its said: Act 8 39.
And when they were come up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught
away Philip, that the Eunuch saw him no more. Or that Ananias instructed Saul
after Baptism: though its said Act. 9.18, 19.
Then was Saul certain days with the disciples at Damas^us, or that Saul (now
Paul) instructed the Jailour Act. 16.33, 34.
after Baptism. You may by this time perceive, that your observation stood in
need of being bounded with some caution.

3. You do not tell us by whom they are to be taught afterward, surely you left
the door open for a private gifted brother,

SECTION 5.
H. H. Observe. Fifth. To this practice (viz.) to a people thus walk ing
according to this rule, hearing his sayings, and doing them. The Lord Christ
has promised his presence, saying, Lo, I am with you always to the end of the
world; but the end of the world is not yet. Therefore Christ is still with
those baptized believers which do thus walk.

Reply 1. In the Texts of Matt. and Mark cited by you, there is no express
mention made of these words, viz. To this practice, or to a people thus walking
according to this rule, etc. They are your dictates, and fancies.

2. If by the worlds end is meant the particular age wherein the Apostles lived
(as some of late hold) then it will not follow, that Christ is still with those
baptized believers, which do thus walk. Now though I profess ingeniously that
I disclaim that sense as false and impertinent (not only because of the terms
in this promise used, always (...).
or rather all days (and succession of times) but also because your phraise
(...)
the end of the world, is understood by the same Evangelist, of Christ's second
coming, and that three several times: Mat. 13.39, 40, 49.
yet you might have foreseen and prevented such an exception which quite takes
away the edg of the argument, and have answered the seekers, (as they are
called) whose gloss this is, and who are (for the most part) branches that
came out of your Church.

3. Though I deny not the spiritual presence of Christ among all true
believers (as is clear by other Scriptures,) yet these words in Matthew. 28.19. I
am with you etc. appertain principally (if not only) to the Apostles and their
successors; Vobiscum evo nec vobiscum tantum, s^d et (vobis mortu is cum
vestris succ^ssor bus. Par. in Loc.
for to them our Savior spoke, ver. 18. with 16. They are bidden to go, ver.
19. Go ye, and are commanded to disciple all Nations, in the same verse teach
ye (...).
or disciple ye all Nations, and ver. 19. Whatsoever I have commanded you, and
then presently, And lo I am with you -- So that this promise of Christ's special
spiritual presence is made to Ministers, rather then to the people, to
Teachers, rather then to them who are taught; to Baptizers, rather then to the
Baptized.

4. You do not distinguish between the corporal and spiritual presence of
Christ; (as has been hinted by me) but say largely, and generally, Christ has
promised his presence, etc. Hence the Argument for Christ's corporal presence,
seems to be as strong for the Ubiquitaries, as yours is for the Anabaptists;
and may speak in the same language as you do.

5. We have here your gross monoply of Christ's spiritual presence, as if it
belonged only to you; and to such as are baptized after your mode. No marvail,
for one of your silly Proselytes N. G.
preached, (or rather prated) lately in private, saying, Christ is with us
here, and not yonder (pointing to a Chapel near adjoining) but this is a
trick of the old Donatists (your predecessors) who confined (as is commonly
known) the Church of Christ within a corner of Africa, abusing that Scripture,
(as you do many) Where thou make thy stock to rest at noon Cant. 1.7.
the Latin has it, in^meridie, therefore forsooth, they couching in the
south, it must be with them*

6. I wonder you pass by some observations, as wise as some of the 5. viz. 1.
It Is the duty of every Minister to preach to every man in the world. 2. No
unbeliever whether baptized or unbaptized can be saved. 3. it follows hereupon,
that Infants who cannot actually believe shall be damned. For (in Mark chapter
16.15, 16.
believing, and being baptized are as nearly connexed to salvation, as (in
Matt. chapter 28 19, 20.
) baptizing is to teaching, and in order of phrase, Faith and Baptism are as
closely joined together, and it is as absolutely expressed: He that believes
not shall be damned. If I should say from all which I collect these three
observations -- I think I should gather that which the Holy Ghost never
scattered.

SECT. 6.
H. H. Thus have I showed the order of the words, as they were spoken by the
Lord himself.

Reply. Sir, by your showing the order of Christ's words and your shaping some
observations from them, you do more then intimate, that Teaching must go before
baptizing, for (if we may believe you) the Gospel must be first preached,
then believed, and then, and not till then Baptism administered; I confess
Christ mentions teaching (as our English Bibles have it) in the first place,
and baptizing after, J. G. Catabaptism, p. 167.
but this is not to instruct them, to teach in the first place, and then to
baptize them after, but only in the first place to instruct them, to teach, and
in the second to baptize.

2. Order of things i^not always or commonly so exactly expressed in Scripture,
by the position of the words. Therefore from Christ's mentioning teaching in the
first place, and baptizing in the second; it cannot be proved that persons must
always be first taught before they be baptized, no more then Christ Mar. 115.
putting repenting before believing, proves that Repentance precedes faith, or
Romans 10.9.
naming confession with the mouth, before belief of the heart, proves that
confession must go before faith as to salvation, beside the second person is
mentioned 2 Cor. 13.14.
before the first, and the third person Rev. 1.4, 5,
before the second, and I find Daniel Ezech. 14.14.
named before Job, who was notwithstanding, a long time after him; with many
more instances which might be given; but perhaps we shall more fully speak to
this in it is proper place.

3. Though I am of his mind Nec admodum refert, utrum discipulatus baptismum,
vel baptismus discipulatum antecedat, ne quis hic more Anabaptistarum vane sit
scrupulosus Muscul. in Jo. 4.19.
that it is not greatly material, whether discipling go before baptizing, or
baptizing before discipling, yet let it be granted, that this Scripture
compared with others, hold out, that some are to be taught before they are
baptized, (as before p. 4.) yet it will not help your cause one jot, unless
there be a concurrence of the like or the same circumstances. For a difference
is to be made between the constituting of a Church and a Church constituted.
Some things may be done in in the former, which are not requisite to be done in
the latter.

CHAP. III. Concerning Examples.
SECT. I.
H. H. same page. If it can be proved by ANY word of God, that any baptized
little babes, that cannot speak or understand; then I confess, they that
practice it may be born with, and they which cry it down as Antichristian
superstition, and man's Tradition may be too blame.

Reply 1. Practice it --? Cry it down --? I pray you whither is that Relative
IT (twice for failing repeated) to be referred? to the Word of God? I think you
meant not that; yet they that practice it, are not only to be born with, but
to be commended also: Or to little Babes --? That Is both incongruous, and
non-sensical. If to Infants baptism, or the practice of baptizing little
babes, why did you not say so? for there is no such substantive (in your
expression) to which this word It is to be referred. You that take upon you to
be the great Censurer of other men's writings, should have been more exact in
your own.

2. Infant Baptism (ever since it has been opposed) has been sufficiently
proved by the Word of God, many writings of the Paedobaptists remaining yet
unanswered, as Mr. Baxters, Mr. Cooks, etc. the tithe of whose arguments you
have not so much as lightly touched, though you make a flourish of an answer to
them.

3. Have patience a while, and it will be proved, that those little children
mentioned in the Gospel * were baptized (I hope that is the word) If so, Mat.
19.13. Mark 10.33.
you are too blame, and we to be born with.

SECT. 2.
H. H. page 4. Mat. 3.5, 6. with Mar. 1.3, 4, 5. Of John Baptist.
Where we read first of the voice of one crying in the wilderness, To prepare
the way of the Lord, and to make his paths straight. 2. That John baptized in
that wilderness, and whom he baptized is evident in the following words: And he
preached the Baptism of repentance for the remission of sins, and there went
out to him all the land of Judea, and they of Jerusalem, and were all baptized
of him in ^ordan, confessing their sins, etc.

Reply. You mis-cite the words of Mark, by adding to them, and diminishing from
them Contrary to Deuteronomy. 4.2.
1. By adding to them, in saying, To prepare -- and to make -- Whereas the text
has it -- Mar. 1.2. (...).
Prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make ye his paths straight. Which words
tell us what the people were to do, not what John Baptist did. 2. By diminishing
from them in some respect: For the text runs clearly thus Ver. 4.
John did baptize in the (not that) wilderness, and preach -- before which you
have cast a mist, least your Reader should discern, that sometimes Baptism
precedes Preaching; and indeed if there be any strength in arguing from order
it will follow, viz. That Baptism goes before preaching; for it is said
expressly, John did baptize and preach -- Take heed lest those Page 40.
dreadful thunderbolts you shoot against others, light on your own pate.

SECT. 3.
H. H. Thus we see that all that were baptized of John -- were such as could
and did confess their sins; but Infants cannot confess their sins, Therefore
none such were baptized by John.

Reply 1. In saying Infants cannot confess their sins, do not you imply that
Infants have their sins? (What other construction can any rational man make of
your words?) If so, how can you call them innocent so often? Page 60.


2. It Is neither here, nor any where else expressed in Scripture, that none were
baptized of John, but such as could, and did confess their sins.

3. What if it were granted (which I do not), it remains on you to be proved,
that this example is binding to us, which I shall believe, when I hear or see
you clothed with Camels hair, and with a girdle of a skin about your loins,
and eating locusts and wild honey: For the 5. and 6. verses are connected
together with the Conjunction And.

4. But to drive out one wedge with another, and to show the weakness of your
Argument, I thus argue Exodus 12.35.
The children of Israel borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver and of gold,
and raiment; but the Jewish Infants did not borrow, etc. Therefore none of the
Jewish Infants were children of Israel. The conclusions of both Arguments are
equally false, though I dare not be absurd, as you are Nar. of a Dispute, p 6.
in denying the conclusion.

SECT. 4.
H. H. Thus it is clear by the Scriptures, that John baptized men and women that
could believe and confess their sins, 2. Of the Apostles.
and not a word spoken of sucking children. Now I proceed to the practice of
the Apostles commissionated by Christ.

Reply 1. It is not yet clear by those Scriptures alleged by you. that John
baptized men and women that could believe and confess -- For in those
Scriptures there is no express mention made of any one woman baptized by John;
(For though it be said Mat. 3.5, 6.
all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan were baptized, and Mar. 1.5.
all the land of Judea, and they of Jerusalem were all baptized of him -- Yet
the word [all] cannot be taken universally; for who I pray you, were they, whom
Joh. 3.22.
Christ baptized, or rather whom his Disciples Joh. 4.2.
baptized?) no express mention made of any ones believing, whether man or
woman: you have foisted the word believing into the text. Contrary to the
former injunction, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ye shall not add unto the Word: Is not now that
doom due to you, which you thunder out against others? page 40.

2. A little before you tell us of such who could and did confess their sins;
now you mince the matter, and tell us of those that could believe and confess;
you durst not say they did believe; for how is it probable that they did
believe, whom John calls Mat. 3.7.
a generation of Vipers; or that they could believe, when Christ says, Joh.
5.4^.
How can ye believe which receiv^ honor one from another --? And Joh. 12.39,
43.
therefore they could not believe -- Why? For they loved the praise of men more
then the praise of God.

3. But to shoot in your own bow, what a wise argument is this? John baptized
men and women that could believe, etc. Therefore no Infants. Just like this,
Abraham was circumcised when he was adult, therefore no Infant was circumcised:
Or, Abraham who could (and did) believe was Circumcised; therefore no child of
eight days old was ^crcamcised.

4. If you say (as you do) Not a word spoken of sucking children being baptized
by John, as there is of their being circumcised; I answer, As the Argument
remains in its full strength for all that; so it is a known rule that A non
dicti ad non factum non valet conequentia.
no good consequence can be drawn, that such a thing was not done, because it is
not recorded. There is not one word spoken of the twelve Apostles being
baptized, nor of the Church of Antioch, Acts 11 -- Nor of the seven Churches of
Asia. Therefore by Mr. Haggars Logic we must conclude and believe, they were
not baptized. You see by this time you had sorry success with the practice of
John Baptist: now proceed to the practice of the Apostles.

SECT. 5.
H. H. Same page, 1. Instance.
Acts 2.40, 41. Then they that gladly received his word were baptized, and
added to the Church, etc. But little babes of eight days, weeks, or months old
cannot gladly receive the Word of God, because they understand it not; Ergo,
none such were baptized there.

Reply 1. The word Church is not in the fourth verse; that is of your own
adding: Will you yet be guilty of that crime and doom which you charge upon
others? though to give you your due, you have rightly cited the Scripture in
your page 24.

2. Your Argument is vicious, or faulty: For being in the first figure, the
Assumption, or Minor Proposition, should not be negative, as yours is, as
Scholars know. By the way, no marvel you have such an aching tooth against
Logic and learning, for by these means, your Sophistry, and fallacy comes to
be detected, and rejected, which by your illiterate proselytes are swallowed
down, and digested as gallant arguments, and solid reasons. Blow out the light,
or bring your disciples into a dark shop, and you may quickly vend your false
or gross wares.

SECT. 6.
H. H. But some will object from verse. 39. That the promise was to them and
their children, and therefore children may be baptized. Answ. I grant the
promise was to them, verse. 38. that if they did repent, and be baptized in the
name of Christ for the remission of sins, they should receive the gift of the
holy Ghost; and this is true also to their children if they did repent and obey
the Gospel as aforesaid; and so it is to us and our children, though never so
far off, upon the same condition of faith, repentance, and baptism; for it is
to all that the Lord our God shall call, but they must be CALLED first; observe
that ver. 39. And thus is the Objection fully answered.

Reply 1. In the verse. 39. There is no express mention made of these words,
viz. faith obeying the Gospel, and condition, they are in the number of your
own additions, though I deny not but they may be employed.

2. By being CALLED, do you mean obeying the Gospel? that is true of an
effectual call, in such as are adult, but not of an effectual call; for so
many are called, who do not obey e. g. Prove. 1.24. I have called, and ye
refused -- Mat. 22.3. He sent forth his servants to CALL them that were bidden
to the Wedding, and they would not come.

3. Is it all one with you, to obey the Gospel, and to be baptized? surely
then you trusse up Gospel obedience in a narrow compass.

4. In granting the promise was to them etc. You give up the cause, and grant
that children may be baptized; for what is the promise but the Covenant, for
they are interchangeably set down one for the other Gal. c. 3.
and the Covenant runs upon promises Ephesians 2.21.
specially consists of that grand promise. Genesis 3.15. -- The seed of the Woman
shall bruise the serpents head --) Now if the Covenant is theirs, who can deny
the initiall sign and seal of the Covenant, which is baptism? Let it be
observed, that this Text is the first Argument used after Christ's ascension to
provoke the Jews to repent etc. as discovering the new Testament-application of
the Covenant, and it is continuation to believers and their seed, as to Abraham
and his in the old Testament. Now that children of believing parents are within
the Covenant of grace shall be made evident hereafter.

5. In saying the promise does belong to their and our children, but they must
be called first, I answer. 1. Why may not children be said to be called in
their parents, as well as Levi is said H^b. 7.9.10.
to pay either in the loins of Abraham? And that God is said Hos. 12, 4.
to speak with the Israelites, when he spoke with Jacob in Bethel? 2. If you
will needs understand it of a direct immediate, and personal call, and so
exclude children from the promise, till they believe, repent, etc.
This gloss does rather darken then enlighten the Text, and cannot pass
current for these ensuing reason^. For if children should be excluded out of
the promise. 1. What privilege above others, have the children of repenting
parents? Now it is clear, the Apostle adds children in the Text, to show that
they had some special priledge above those that were uncalled.

2. What poor encouragement is this to such parents to submit to Christ under
this Administration? nay would it not have discouraged them, that their
children should be excluded out of the promise, who stood in it for 2000 years
before, under the other Administration.

3. what cold comfort would this be to your wounded hearts for crucifying Jesus
Christ. That they indeed on their repentance should be saved; but their
children should be the same with Heathens? Now here the scope of the Text is
urged by the Apostle for consolation, as well as encouragement.

4. What hope could they have of your childrens salvation? For hope without
promise is presumption, though you say infants are saved by Christ without
actual faith ( p. 61.); That shall be examined in its proper place.

5. What a loss would the believing Jews be at; for their children had once
a right to the Covenant, and to the seal of it, but now neither to covenant nor
to Baptism, till they believe.

6. What unlikelyhood is there? that the Apostle would use the same Dialect of
the Covenant, that was formerly used: (I am thy God, and the God of thy seed,
the promise is to you, and to your children) if it had been his mind, that
children should be excluded.

7. Then the word Children would be superfluous in this Text, and so the Spirit
of God would be charged with Tautologies, which would be blasphemy to affirm.

8. The Tense is changed, the promise IS to you, and your children, in the
present tense, but when he speaks of the Call; he speaks in the future tense:
As many as God SHALL call.

These are some of those Reasons (which I thought good here to give an account
of, with some alteration of the phrase and method) which (through the Lords
blessing) became happily instrumental to reduce an Anabaptist See the Leper
cleansed, page 7, 8, 9.
and (through the Lords blessing) may prevail with some that follow you, as
they did Absolon 2 Samuel 15.11.
in the simplicity of their heart, knowing nothing of the depth of your design,
no more then they did of Absolons. Neither do I altogether despair of your
conversion; for Mart. Cellar J.G. Catabapt. page 145. Et Melob. Adam. de vita
Borrhaui, p. 400.
who after he had stood by his sect several years, went and settled at Basil,
where he taught divinity, and being ashamed to be known, or called by that name
under which he had professed Anabaptisme, changed his name from Cellarius into
Borrhaus, under which name he wrote very learned commentaries upon the 5 books
of Moses etc. To say nothing of those converted by Musculus. Melch. Adam de
vita Musculi p. 377.


And now I hope you will have little cause to brag as you do in the close of
this Section. Thus the objection is fully answered; whereas indeed it remains
unanswered.

SECT. 7.
H. H. page 5. Again, If ever the Apostle baptized children, it must needs be
now, according to their argument, who say, the promise is to children, ergo,
but that they baptized no such children, is evident; because they that were
baptized were such as could and did GLADLY receive the word, v. 42.
and continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and felloship, etc. All
which little babes, that cannot speak words, nor understand reason, cannot
possibly do, Therefore none such baptized.

Reply 1. This is the same Argument with the former: Therefore let it receive
the same Answer, which may suffice. But because it is dressed up in another form,
and put into a seemingly better Garb: Therefore secondly the weakness of it,
is made evident by this Argument: they are rational creatures, who can
understand reason and speak, but Infants cannot possibly do all, or any of
these. Therefore they are not rational creatures. 3. In saying, if ever the
Apostles baptized children, it must needs be now, you art too peremptory in
divining and determining. It Is a received maxim, that Argumentum ad
Authoritate duum negative non valet.
a negative Argument from authority proves nothing.

SECT. 8.
H. H. Act. 8.12. Where we read, 2. Instance
that when they believed Philip preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of
God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both men and wowen, in
express terms, but we never read a word of little children.

Reply 1. We never read a word of little children? What, not in all the Bible?
where were your eyes? Mat. 19.13.
Then were brought to him LITTLE CHILDREN, 6.14.
but Jesus said, Suffer LITTLE CHILDREN. Surely the Gospel of Matthew is part
of the Word of God. Your wide and wild expression is liable, you see, to just
exception.

2. If you mean (as I suppose) we never read a word of the baptizing of little
children, Why did you not speak out? It Is said of Barnabas that Acts 11.24
he was a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost, and of Faith; but we read never
a word of his being baptized; must we therefore conclude and believe, that he
was not baptized? What Sophistry is this?

3. Sometimes in Scripture where men are only named, Women and children are
understood: Ex. gr Mat. 6.44.
. They that did eat of the Loaves were about 5000 men. Mat. 14.21.
And they that had eaten were about 5000 men, beside Women and Children; surely
there is no contradiction between Mark and Matthew. Again under the expression
of men and women, children are understood; as Josh. 8.25.
12000 men and women of Ai fell, where children must be understood; for it is
said Ver. 264.
Joshua utterly destroyed all the inhabitants of Ai, and no exception is made
but Ver. 27.
only of the cattle and spoil, and it is utterly improbable, that in that City,
and among so many thousands, no children should be found.

SECT. 9.
Hen. Hag. Acts 8.36, 37. The Eunuch said to Philip; See, 3. Instance.
here is water, what hinders me to be baptized? And Philip said, If thou
believe with all thy heart thou may; but little Babes cannot believe with
all their hearts, therefore they may not be baptized.

Reply 1. Beza, Jun. etc Trem. Grotius, (...) etc.
Diverse learned men assert, that the whole 37 verse is not to be found in many
Greek copies, and sundry ancient Translations, as the Syriack, etc. What then
will become of your Argument? No building can stand long without a foundation.

2. Admit that verse to be in the Original; the Major, whether you take it as
an hypothetical Proposition (if people believe with all their hearts, they may
be baptized) or as an universal Categorical proposition equivalent thereto
(whosoever believes with all his heart, may be baptized) is granted to be a
solid truth, if it be understood of those that are not yet baptized: For those
that are already baptized, must not be baptized again every day, or every hour,
because they believe with all their hearts, one Baptism is sufficient and
agreeable to the rule.

3. As to your Minor, though you prove not that Infants cannot believe with all
their hearts, (neither may you, nor any man else put bounds to Gods
omnipotency, who is able to regenerate and sanctify Infants, Luke 1.41.
* as John Baptist in his mothers womb) yet it is granted that such a formal,
rational, and professed faith, as is required in grown persons, they have not,
and in that sense, let your Assumption pass for current. But now this is the
misery, that (when it might be expected that both propositions being yielded,
the conclusion should be unquestionably assent^^^ to, which yet I deny not) the
syllogism you make is stark naught, and a palpable Paralogism: as having a
negative assumption in the first Figure, wherein the Assumption must always be
affirmative, else the reasoning is fallacious and unsound, which is evident to
the meanest capacity: e. g. The Sun, Moon, and Stars shine and give light: but
fire on the hearth, and candles on the table are neither Sun, Moon, nor Stars,
Therefore fire and candles do not shine or give light. Or thus: All four-footed
beasts are living creatures, but Anabaptists are not four-footed beasts,
Therefore Anabaptists are not living creatures. Or thus: All that are endued
with humane learning, in some eminency are reasonable creatures: But
Anabaptists for the most part are not endued with humane learning in eminency,
Therefore Anabaptists for the most part are not reasonable creatures. Thus your
sophistry and folly is discovered.

4. If you say your meaning was to prove from that Scripture, that they only
are to be baptized that believe with all their hearts; then the Argument is to
be formed thus: All those that are rightly baptized, or to be baptized, believe
with all their hearts; But Infants believe not with all their hearts; Ergo, not
rightly baptized, or to be baptized. Here it is granted the form is good, but
the matter of the first Proposition (to say no more to the second, then what
has been said) is naught. For John the Baptist rightly baptized many without
enquiry, (much less certainty) that their hearts were right in believing.
S^mon Magus (in this very Chap. Acts 8.13.
was baptized, and that rightly, for Philip is not in the least blamed, but
approved in that act, yet Acts 8.21.
his heart was not right before God. And multitudes we read of, that were daily
baptized; of whose believing With all their hearts we read nothing; and if you
must forbear baptizing until you know that people believe with all their
hearts, v) 1 Cor. 2.11.
you must never baptize (u) For what man knows the things of man, save the
spirit of man which is in him? Nay, neither that, nor any other Scripture holds
forth in express terms, that none but such as believe are to be baptized.

SECT. 10.
H. H. the same page, Acts 10.46, 47, 48. Can any man forbid water, that these
should not be baptized, 4. Instance.
that have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? And he commanded them to be
baptized, etc. By which we see, that no such babes were here baptized; for all
that were in this place baptized were such as had received the Holy Ghost as
well as the Apostles, and they heard them speak with tongues, and magnify God,
which children that cannot speak at all, cannot possibly do, all rational men
will grant.

Reply 1. Your Argument from hence is sick of the same disease with the former,
viz. All that were baptized here, were such as received the Holy Ghost, etc.
But children cannot receive the Holy Ghost, etc. Therefore -- Just like this
they that understand the Languages, wherein the Scriptures were originally
written, are guilty of humane learing (for in your judgment humane learning is
matter of guilt): But you do not understand the Languages wherein the
Scriptures were originally written (as you would bear us in hand by your
inveyghing against humane learning) Therefore you are not guilty of humane
learning. This is enough to show the unreasonablenesse of your reasonings.

2. Here is a clear Argument for baptizing Infants: they that receive the Holy
Ghost are to be baptized; but some Infants receive the Holy Ghost, Therefore
the Major shines clear by its own light; They who partake of the inward grace,
may partake of the outward sign; or they who have the thing signified in
Baptism, ought to have the sign, which is Baptism. The Apostle Peter justifies
this principle, and by the authority and strength of it proves the lawfulness
of baptizing those on whom the Holy Ghost fell -- Now that some infants receive
the Holy Ghost as well as grown men, it is plain; for Rom 8 9. (...).
if any man, (or any one) have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, and
if an Infant be none of Christ's, you must eat your words, and deny that any
Infants dying in their infancy are saved by Christ p. 61.
.

If you say, by receiving the Holy Ghost is meant, the extraordinary gift of
the Spirit, as ver. 44, 45, 46. Be it so; this makes the Argument stronger: for
if that gift which is common to elect and reprobate, does in title to Baptism,
much more that gift of Union, Adoption, Regeneration, (proper to the elect)
puts the party into a capacity of receiving Baptism.

If you say, such received the Holy Ghost as well as the Apostles, and
therefore the text to be understood of the same kind and degree; Then by this
text you have no more ground to baptize grown men (for which of them I pray you
spoke with tongues Ver. 46.
in the Apostles sense)? then (you say) we have for baptizing Infants, that
cannot speak at all. But the Apostle explains himself in the following Chapter
(z) For as much then, Acts. 1^.17. (...).
as God gave them the like gift as he did to us -- Like for quality, though not
for quantity. Yea it is said Heb 4.2.
unto us was the Gospel preached as well as unto them -- I think no man dare
say, that the Gospel was as fully, and as clearly preached to the Israelites in
the wilderness (for to them the Apostle speaks) as to us, since the coming of
Christ in the flesh.

SECT. 11.
H. H. same page, The next is Lidia and her household, 5. Instance.
Act. 16.14, 15.

Reply 1. I do Mr, Hagger no wrong: his fifth Instance (as I set it down to
help him) is thus nakedly proposed. I wonder we had not a taste of his Logic
here, as in the preceding instances. It may be the man was not in a good mood,
and therefore could not set it in a good Figure (having so often failed before).

2. But I suppose you meant this Enthymem: Lidia and her household were
baptized: Therefore no Infants. Or thus: If Lidia and her household were
baptized, then no Infant was baptized: But Lidia and her household were
baptized; Therefore -- To this I answer, I deny your consequence, and will give
you time till Doomsday to prove it: In the mean season this place is more for
the baptizing of Infants, then any thing that can be (at least hitherto is)
said against.

SECT. 12.
H. H. Some may say thus: Who knows but she might have little children? To
which I answer: If none knows, then all ought to be silent; and not to believe
and affirm things they know not, for that is wickedness and folly: But thus
much we know: 1. That Christ commanded them to baptize them which believed. 2.
Hitherto we have found them baptizing of none else. 3. The Scripture speaks of
no children she had, nor yet of any husband, and therefore silence gives no
commands to obey, nor no promises to believe, nor no example to follow.

Reply 1. Here you set up a man of straw, and then fight with him; you frame an
objection out of your own head, and then answer it, bravely done.

2. Is it not wickedness and folly in you to believe and affirm things you
know not? The necessity of dipping in the Administration of Baptism, the
salvation of Infan^s without actual faith, by virtue of Christ's death, (when no
such things are expressed in so many words and syllables in Scripture) and many
other bold assertions in your book, which shall be examined as they are met
with.

3. For the two first particulars which you profess you know, they have been
already spoken to; and for the third, the Scripture (you say) speaks of no
children she ( i. e. Lidia I suppose you mean) had, nor yet of any husband;
neither does the Scripture speak, I say, of any servants she had; I pray you
then, who were they that were of her household, which were baptized? for it is
said distinctly Acts 15.16.
she was baptized and her household.

4. As for the silence you speak of, it is as good as silence, or the speaking
of nothing. Instances are obvious and frequent. E. gr. There is no express
mention made in the N. T. of any command for Women's receiving the Lord's
Supper, nor of any promise of comfort in or upon receiving; nor any example of
any one woman that did receive. Nor is there any express mention made in the
Old or New Testament of any command for men's or women's relying on the merits
and satisfaction of Christ; nor of any promise of peace and pardon on such
relying: nor of any example of any one man or woman that did rely on the merits
and satisfaction of Christ; yet there is sufficient warrant in Scripture by
clear consequence for both these, etc. which is satisfactory to us; but what is
this to you, who must have expressness of Scripture?

By this taste you may perceive, what an unsound and erroneous maxim you have
vented; viz. That silence gives no commands to obey, nor no promise to believe,
nor no examples to follow.

SECT. 13.
H. H. page 6. Again, if she had an husband, he was baptized; for she and her
household were baptized: Now if he had been baptized, he would surely have born
the name in the history, rather then she, being the bead of the house.

Reply 1. Now fair fall your heart; if she had an husband, he was baptized, for
she and her household were baptized; you say well: might you not as well say (as
we do) If she had children they were also baptized, for she and her household
were baptized: and so if she had servants they were baptized; for it is said,
She and her household were baptized: If you include husband and servants in her
household, how can you for shame exclude Infants; or if you conclude the
baptizing of her husband and servants on this account, because she and her
household were baptized; why may you not as well conclude, that her Infants or
children were baptized on the same account; were you not wilful and partial in
your self.

2. To say nothing that you should have said but (not, now) if he had been
baptized, he would surely have born the name, etc. Your confidence is as high,
as your ignorance is great. Surely Zerviah was a woman; for she is expressly
called 2 Samuel 17.25.
Joabs mother, and 1 Chr. 2.15 16.
David's sister; Now you might have said as well, It Joab had a father, and
Zerviah an husband, he would ^urely have born the name in the history, rather
then she, being the head of the house; whereas the name of Zerviah is only
mentioned in the history to my best observation and remembrance in those and
other 1 Samuel 26.6 and 2 2.13, 18. and 3.39. and 8.16. and 14.1 and 16.9, 10.
and 18 2. and 19.21, 22, and 21.17 and 23 18 1 King. 1.7. and 2.5, 22. and 1 Chronicles. 11.6.34. and 18.12.15. and 26.13. and 27.24.
places.

SECT. 14.
H. H. Lastly, we read verse 40. That when Paul and Sil^s came out of prison,
they entered into the house of Lidia; and comforted the brethren -- but little
babes are not capable of such comforts. Therefore no such such brethren in
Lydea's house; nor any ground at all to believe it from Scripture or reason.

Reply 1. The word HOUSE is not in the original; Beza says, (...).
in very many copies, it is read unto Lydia, and so do others As the Sir. and
old Latin.
translate it, and for ought appears, Lydia at that time might be in another
house, as well as her own.

2. What a silly Argument is this? H. H. went into a Cheese-Factours house, to
ordain a Cheese-Factour to the office of a preaching Elder. Therefore there
were no Infants in his house. So Paul and Silas might enter in Lydia's house
(admitting the translation) to comfort the brethren, and yet there might be
Infants in her house, and baptized too, for it is said, she and her household
were baptized.

3. If you mean that in Lydia's house, there were no little babes that were
capable of comfort, its granted; but this hinders not, but little babes are, or
may be capable of Baptism, though not of comfort; as the Jewish Infants were
capable of circumcision, though not of consolation; but if you mean, no little
babes (supposing there were such) can be called brethren, I do not marvail at
it; since you deny them to be Disciples, Church Members, Covenanters, Saints,
and make no difference between the Infants of Pagans, and of Christians; I pray
you Sir why may you not call them brethren and sisters (if God be your Father)
whom the Lord says Eaech. 16.20
are born to him, and whom he himself calls his ver. 21.
children, not only by creation, but by Covenant, which had been made with your
Ancestors, as appears out of that whole Chapter, specially verse. 60.62.

4. You conclude there is no ground to believe from Scripture or reason that
there were Infants in Lydia's house, shall be answered by and by.

SECT. 15.
H. H. same p. The Jaylour was baptized with his household; from whence some
would draw the same Argument as from Lydia's; 6 Instance.
and persuade us that there were children in his house, but the Text is plain
against it. Acts 16.32, 33, 34. They spoke the word of the Lord to him, and to
all in his house, and he took them the same hour of the night, and washed their
stripes, and was baptized he and all his straight ways; and when he had brought
them into his house, he set meat before them, and rejoiced, believing in God
with all his house. (Thus the Scripture in plain words, as it says the one,
that he and all his were baptized; so also it says, he with all his house
believed in God.)

Reply 1. In the beginning of the sect. you say the Jaylour was baptized with
his household: Look the Text Acts 16.13.
It does not say so, here we have another addition of yours to advantage your
cause; no marvail that you add to men's writings; when you are so bold to add to
the Lords holy Scripture; I grant it says, He and all His were baptized, but
not, he was baptized with his household.

2. It Is very observable the Text says (...)
He was baptized and all his. i. e. he and all that were OF him: A most
emphaticall phrase to denote his Children, who are properly a man's own, his
natural Offspring; when the Evangelist speaks of the Apostles preaching, he
names the Jaylours house in the largest acceptance. They spoke the word to
him, and to all that were (...) --
in his house: but when he speaks of baptizing, he changes the term, and
says, He, and ALL HIS were baptized (that you may be sure his children were
baptized) without doubt M. Haggars children, and his horse, cannot be said to
be his on the same account. This phrase therefore in the Text, must primarily
be referred to his children.

3 I expected here also an Argument in form, to prove there were no children in
the Jaylours house; or, if so, that they were not baptized, but in vain. If yet
you would prove your former thus. Paul and Silas spoke the word to all in his
house, but P. and S. did not speak the word to infants, therefore no infants in
his house. The answer is in brief, it is a Sophistical Argument, the conclusion
should be, therefore Infants were not at all in his house; or all in his house
were not infants, which is granted, but what is this to your purpose? If you
can cast it into a better mould, it shall receive another answer. Now to prove,
that no infants were baptized here (though you say not so, as in the place
foregoing) thus perhaps you may be thought to reason. The Jalour with all his
house that was baptized believed in God, but infants believed not, Therefore --
The weakness of this Argument appears thus; The children of Israel went up
harnessed Exodus 13.14.
out of the land of Egypt: but the Jewish infants went not up harnessed, Ergo
--

4. Before I leav you here, one thing is to be observed. For if it be plain,
that children were not in the Jaylours house -- (As you would bear your reader
in hand out of this Text) Then something may be and is plain by consequence,
which is not expressly written in so many words in Scripture.

SECT. 16.
H. H. Thus the Scripture in plain words, as it says the one, that he and all
his were baptized, so also it says, he with all his house believed in God; and
therefore if M. Cook will evade the one by his learned Exposition, in his 17.
p. We may as well evade the other; and so conclude, that none but he was
baptized. But consider the result of his labors, when he has labored by all
his wit and skill to pervert the Text, yet he confesses that the Syriack
translation reads it thus: and he exulted, and all the children of his house,
even all of them in the faith of God. I pray you let all rational men
consider, what difference is between their all-rejoycing and believing God, and
exulting even all of them in the faith of God?

Reply 1. Let it be observed, that to the foregoing Scriptures (as holding
forth commands or examples of baptizing Jews or Heathens newly converted to the
faith Font uncovered, from p. 7. to p. 23.
there are given full and large answers both in general and particular (sh^wing
that they make nothing for M. Haggars purpose) and also to those Arguments
which he after frames from the precept and practice of Christ and the
incapacity of the subject (as he would gather from these Scriptures, yet he is
pleased to take notice of two very short sentences, passing by all the rest,
which (I believe) amount to an hundred times more, then what he seems to answer
to, what other construction can be made thereof, but that he finding himself
unable to answer the rest, thought good to pick out two or three lines, which
(being singled from the rest) he (as he imagined) might have more advantage
against? If this be sufficient, it is an easy matter to answer any books.

2, For opening the sense of this Scripture, Act. 16.32, 33.
I referr the reader to that book Font uncovered, page 17.18, 19 ver 32.
to which you answer nothing but this -- M. Cook may conclude that none but the
Jaylour was baptized, etc. Now whether more then the Jaylour believed, is not
declared, though its said, that they spoke the word to him, and to all that
were in his house, which must needs be understood of those that were capable,
yet the word in the (...) he having believed ver. 34.
original is only of the singular number, referring to the Jaylour alone; and
the Apostles required faith of the Jaylour alone, (...) believe thou ver. 31.
as necessary and sufficient to bring him and his family in^o a state of
salvation: So that as Abraham and his family was circumcised, even Ishmael and
his bond-servants, with their children (though we read not of the faith of any
of them, but of Abraham and Sarah the governors thereof; yea, Lydia and her
household were baptized, though nothing be said of the faith of any of them, but
of the governesse. For it was sufficient for the admission of this family to
baptism, and a state of salvation, that the Governor did believ, and his belief
is only expressly required in the co^ma^d, and mentioned in the story. But when
baptism is, mentioned it is said, --
he and all his -- As before, where there are two particulars that of necessity
must be understood of persons (being of the plural number) but the word that
is translated -- All his house, is an Adverb, (...).
noting neither person, not number in ^^s proper signification, but may
properly be referred to the Jailors rejoicing, See Mr. Cooks Font uncovered, p.
forenamed.
or exulting; q. d. After he had believed God, he leapt for joy in and through
the whole house; but of this more largely in the said book. *

3. As for your appeal, rational men may discern a difference enough to
frustrate your hopes of relief from that Translation; For as salvation might be
brought to Zacheus his family, Luke 19.9.
and yet not every one in possession of it, or actually saved that was in the
family; so they might all in the Jailors family be said to rejoice in or for
the faith of God, though they were not all actual believers; I say, for, or in
regard of the faith of God; whether be understood, the object of faith, Christ
Jesus; or the doctrine of faith, the Gospel preached; or the gift and act of
faith, in the Governor: or of the effects of faith, viz. the tranquillity, joy
and festivity, they being (e. g.) to the Jailor in over-blowing the desperate
fears that had seized on him and all his family, when they imagined the
prisoners had escaped. For where the Gospel (and the fruits thereof) comes,
Luke 8.13. Joh. 5.35. Acts 8.8.
it yields matter of joy (u) to many more then those who actually and sincerely
believe -- More particularly the Jailors happy and sudden exchange from sudden
fear to faith, the preaching of the glad tidings of the Gospel to those in his
family that were capable, might well put the whole family into a posture of joy
and festivity; Infants themselves not being incapable of joy and mirth; as it
appears at Feasts, wherein the spirits of those little ones are exhilarated:
Yea Infants are not incapable of spiritual joy and exaltation at the presence
of spiritual objects, though we cannot tell how it is wrought in them: E. g.
John Baptist, while an Infant in his mothers womb, leaping for joy at the
presence of Christ: for it is said, Luke 1.44. Grot.
The Babe leaped in my womb for joy. Where note by the way, that was no
natural, but supernatural motion: (as Genesis 25.22.
was the struggling of those Twins in Rebeccah's womb): and beside the Noun
here rendered (...).
for Joy, is of the same derivation rivation and signification, as the word
(...).
that is used to set forth the joy which the Jailor had in his family. So then
Christ the object of faith, the Gospel the doctrine of Faith, with a great
deliverance from a desperate danger being brought to this family, and saving
faith being wrought in the heart of the Jailor (at least) and Baptism the seal
of the righteousness of Faith being administered to them all, the whole family
might well be put into a rejoicing frame, by reason of the faith God brought
amongst them, though they did not actually believe for the present.

4. Whereas you call somewhat that was said by Mr. C. for the clearing of that
place, Act. 16. A learned exposition, by way of contempt and scorn of humane
Learning, as appears by your frequent invectives against humane learning; which
in the close of Page 123.
your Book you make one main matter of your accusation of our Church, and a
ground of separation from us; it shall be modestly discussed (if the Lord will)
when we come to it.

SECT. 17.
H. H. page 6, and 7. One thing more I had like to have forgotten, viz. This
seeming sophistical answer to Acts 8. ver. 12. where the text says plainly,
That when they believed, they were baptized both men and women. To this he
answers in his 16 p. That these words men and women are appliable to sexes
rather then to ages, and instanceth in Evah, who when Cain was born, she said,
I have gotten a man from the Lord. But what is this to our purpose? For she
does not say, that this man believed the things concerning the kingdom of Jesus
Christ, but those women Acts 8.12. were such as believed all these things:
Therefore your Argument is false, and you are self-deceiful, and wise to do
evil; as appears by this your cunning craftiness, where with you lay in wait
to deceive, Ephesians. 4. ver. 14.

Reply 1. Had you like to have forgotten? You then show a great defect in
memory: For whereas there are very many pages spent in answering (to your
urging of what Scriptures you could think of) both in general and in
particular, and many particular answers given to each Scripture, you resolved
to reply but to two short sentences of two answers, and you had almost
forgotten one. Had it not been more ease, and little less prudence, after you
had promised an Answer to the Book in the Title Page, to have passed by the
whole book (as you do all but a few lines) and to have told us, you had forgot
to answer it.

2. You bewray defect in method as well as in memory; for you bring in this
Scripture by Hysteron Proteron, to which I shall give such a Reply as I think
it deserves. You tell us of a SEEMING Sophistical answer; then out of your own
mouth I may condemn you: It is, I hope, but seemingly, not truly sophistical.
Considerate people will not judge the worse, because it seems sophistical; who
judge of things rather as they are, then as they seem. And it is to be hoped,
the rest of your answers to this and all the other Scriptures (which you pass
by as unable to charge them with seeming sophisticalness) are solid and
satisfactory, neither really nor seemingly sophistical: Your silence is just
ground for such an interpretation.

3. In saying, to this he answers; These words Men and Women are appliable to
sexes rather then to ages; you do not truly set down the words of that book,
Font uncovered, p. 16.
which says; Men and Women are names rather noting the sexes then ages, and
are appliable to Infants as well as to grown persons; and some instances are
there given. Here you discover your falsehood and fraud.

4. Concerning Eve, I pray you look back; Page 5.
where this Scripture being urged by you, Acts 8.12.
you should have brought your answer, (if you had not like to have forgotten
it, as you say, or rather (as others may judge) if you had intended plain
dealing) where this evasion of yours would have appeared vain; For you put the
Emphasis of your proof on Men and Women, in saying -- both men and women in
express terms, but we read never a word of little Babes. Thus you set men and
women in opposition to little babes, and therefore that answer which shows that
little babes may be called men and women (according to Scripture) is directly
to the purpose.

5. As for the falseness of Mr. C. Argument, etc. he that has but half an eye
may see how groundlesly and impertinently you bring it in; only when you have
nothing else to say, you have the knack to fill up paper with railings and
false accusations, without either occasion, or sense, though not without
abusing Scripture, and profaning God's holy Word.

SECT. 18.
H. H p. 7. The last text is, (in Acts 18.8.) that Crispus the chief ruler
believed in the Lord, with all his house; and many of the Corinths hearing,
believed and were baptized.

Reply 1. I expected that in the Rear you would have brought up your strongest
forces, utterly to have routed your adversaries, but you do not draw out one
Argument that dare look the Enemy in the face: Sure you made more haste then
good speed.

2. To this, and the rest of the Scriptures hitherto alleged by you, I do
roundly answer; That they prove only thus much: -- 1. That such believers, who
had not been baptized in their Infancy, were baptized at more maturity of
years. 2. That ordinarily Scripture-baptists did admonish and exhort those (who
came to them to be baptized) to repent and believe: neither of these are
denied by your Adversaries, nor have either of them the least shadow or color
of inconsistency with the lawfulness of Infant Baptism. 3. I wonder, why in
citing this text, and saying the chief Ruler believed, you left out the word
Synagogue.


SECT. 19.
H. H. Thus we have seen the command of Christ, and the practice of the
Apostles agreeing together, by which the foundation of the Saints is
discovered, upon which they ought to build; which is the words and sayings of
Christ, and the practice and examples of his holy Apostles.

Reply 1. To the first three or four lines, I have (I hope) sufficiently
answered in the beginning of this Reply; and I would not be guilty (as you are)
of vain repetition.

2. Yet I shall take the boldness to add a word or two. If you understand the
command of Christ, and practice of the Apostles, in reference to the present
controversy; I tell you again, the command is to be obeyed, and the example
may be followed in the like case and condition: But what is this to your
purpose and practice? I dare say, the command of Christ, and examples of the
Apostles will not bear you out in the baptizing those who have received the
Lord's Supper among us, etc. which kind of Baptism was neither commanded by
Christ, nor practiced by the Apostles.

3. If you understand Christ's command, and the Apostles practice largely, Then
in the fear of God, and in your cold blood, consider whether the lying,
corning, railing, perverting of Scripture, etc. (that makes up a great part of
your book, and I shall present to you view the particulars as I go along) be
agreeable to the words and sayings of Christ, and to the practice and examples
of his holy Apostles; And then your self shall be judge, what foundation it is
you build upon.

4. Because you said in page 6. There Is no ground from Scripture or reason to
believe there were children in Lydia's house -- and here in this 7. p. nor can
you find one word in all the holy Scriptures about baptizing little Infants. I
answer, the very notion of baptizing whole households, is enough to make out an
example of Infant Baptism: For 1. Sidenham of Infant-bapt. p. 107.
It is confidence beyond example to hold, that in all those houses (said to be
baptized) there were no Infants. 2. There is stronger ground to believe the
Affirmative then the Negative. 3. Especially when the word House, or Household
is put for little ones, and includes them, Genesis 45.18.
Take your households -- Now that children were understood, it is plain ver. 19.
Take Wagons for your little ones --

4. Whenever the household is spoken of in the Old Testament, see also Number.
3.15.1 Tim. 5.8.
it always includes children: If so, it would be strange, that the Apostle
should borrow that term from the Old Test, and use it in the New Test. to
exclude children.

5. In the close of this Section, if I knew whither the Particle It relates,
saying, It is none of the counsel of God -- It is no where declared (for you
mention Font, as well as Infant Baptism in the Antecedent) I could say
something that perhaps would displease you, but till I know, I shall be silent.

CHAP. IV. Of the Font.
SECT. 1.
H. H. page 7. Not a word that I can find in all the Holy Scriptures, or
sayings of Christ, the Prophets, or Apostles, about baptizing in a Font; nay,
not so much as the name of that abomenable Idol, the Font, is once mentioned
in all the Holy Scriptures; much less that the people of God should sacrifice
their children to it, as the children of Israel once sacrificed their babes to
Moloch, see Jer. 32.35.

Reply 1. I did intend to reply to all this in the 9. Sect. of the foregoing
Chapter; but I have here singled it out, (Mr. Haggar had so jumbled together
the Font and Infant baptism) that the Reader might distinctly observe it.

1. Mr. Cook says, The Printer put that title and term on his book; he nor we
will stand to justify it, though it might be against your cavile.

2. It Is strange you could not find the name Font in all the Scriptures, and
yet in the next page Page 8.
you can find it in Jerem. 2.12, 13. I pray you is Jeremy no part of the holy
Scriptures? What horrible confusion and contradiction is this in you? If the
name of the Font be not once mentioned in all the Scriptures, how is that
Scripture fulfilled? But of that a little more ano^.

3. How dare you call the Font an abominable Idol? Where does the Scripture so
brand it; if the nam^ be not once mentioned in Scripture.

4. What a loud and lewd slander is this? to say our children are sac^ificed to
the Font, as Isreal's babes were to Moloch? Assur^dly, Sir, we no more
sacrifice our babes to the Font or Basin, then you do your Proselites to a
Marle-pit, or Horse-pool, wherein some of them have been dipped.

5. I cannot imagine what should be the ground of such an absurd comparison;
unless it be to render us odious, which I hope will never be to any sober,
judicious, and unprejudiced Christian, or to pave the way, (he being a Factor
for Rome) for some bloody, or at least unbloody sacrifice.

SECT. 2.
H. H. Now seeing there is no Foundation for the Font in all the word of God,
we must (if we will discover it) seek for it somewhere else, the which (I
confess) is not worth the doing, were it not to discover and make manifest the
folly of them, that uncover it, and guard it, for Infants baptism, and to that
end I shall do it.

Reply. 1. What? no Foundation for the Font in all the word of God? then you
are much mistaken in saying Page 8, 9.
Here is the words of the Prophet Jeremy fulfilled.

2. Since you confess, the discovering of the Foundation of it, or seeking for
it else where, is not worth the doing, your allegation (I believe) will not be
worth the answering: why then will you spend your time and labor about that
which is like Jeremiahs Girdle, nothing worth Jer. 13.7.
.

3. Your secret gird at M. Cook and M. Hall is born with patience; but this I
must tell you, your discovering of that Foundation, will be but a discovering
of your own folly.

4. What need all this stir? to what purpose is this waste? Though my Reverend
and Godly brethrens books have Font in the Title, ye the main drift is not for
the continuance of Fonts, but of infant baptism.

SECT. 3.
H. H. Look into a book entitled, A view of the Civil, and Ecclesi^sticall
law, written by Sr. Thomas Ridley Knight, and Doctor of the civil law, etc.
Who though an enemy to us, yet confesses, p. 176. The Rites of baptism in the
primitive times were performed in rivers and fountains.

Reply. Here I earnestly desire the Reader, to peruse M. Haggars quotation, p.
8, 9, 10. or the Author from whence he brings his quotation, for either of
them are too long to transcribe, yet I shall not pass this tedious testimony
without some brief Animadversions

1. Whether the Knight was an enemy to you, its more then I know; or whether he
was a friend to us, is more then I am assured of: only it is well known, men of
that profession have been friends more to the Prelates, then to the
Presbyterians.

2. You say -- where the persons baptized received that Sacrament; but the
Knight says, where the persons to be baptized stood up and received that
Sacrament, and proved it out of the Syriack, Arabic, and Hebrew languages --
which you very cunningly left out, because your manner of Baptizing is
apparently different from thei^e.

3. You say, and that truly, Christ was baptized of John in the river of
Jordan; but the Knight says, our Sabaptized John in Jordan. A foul mistake, I
conceived it was the Printers fault, and I looked into the Errata's, but it is
not to be found there. Now if the Knight did so grossly mistake here, why not in
the rest, or most?

4. You say -- nascentes ibi ecclesiae -- but the Knight says -- Nascentis --
I looked among your Errata's, but find none printed; it may be, because all or
most of your books is a bundle of Errata's.

5. You say, this custom of baptizing in Rivers etc. being discontinued, or
left off, Fonts were erected in private houses. But the Knight says,
discontinued, those words, or left off, are of your own foisting in. Therefore
a man may say of H. H. Psalm. 36.3.
he has left off to be wise -- to be sure, to be honest, in setting down those
words in the same character, with the Authors, as if they were the Knights. And
notwithstanding there is no great difference between discontinued, and left
off; (though circumcision was discontinued forty years in the wilderness, yet
not properly left off; and an University man may discontinue there, yet not
leave it off, and a man's ministry may be discontinued, through sickness, etc.
and yet not properly left off) yet had you meant honestly, you might have
faithfully transcribed the Knights words without chopping, and changing. But
perhaps you intended to set a fair gloss on your following observations.

SECT. 4.
H. H. page 8. Hence let the Reader observe. 1. He says the primitive practice
was to baptize in rivers and fountains, which the Ancient Churches received
from the example of our Savior, Mat. 3.13, 14, 15, 16.2. He says, that was
left off: observe, they left off the example of Christ. 3. They erected Fonts
in their own private houses.

Reply 1. The Knight does not say, the ancient Churches, but Church; let the
Reader observe your own transcript a little before in the same page.

2. How Christ is said to be baptized in Jordan shall be scanned hereafter.

3. The Knight, I tell you, does not say, That was left off. So that in stead
of your observation the Reader may observe, that you have not left off to
mis-recite, and pervert the writings not only of men, but of God himself, as
follows.

SECT. 5.
H. H. Observe, Here is the words of the Prophet Jeremiah fulfilled, Jer. 2.12,
13. Be astonished, O heavens, at this, etc. for my people have committed two
evils: They have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and they have hewn
them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns, that can hold no water. Even so these
people did forsake baptizing men and women that did believe in rivers and
fountains, according to the example of Christ and Christians in the primitive
times, and builded them Cisterns, which they call Fonts, in their private
houses to baptize babes, etc.

Reply 1. You have professed your self to be ignorant of Greek, and all (that
have any schollarship) may discern your little skill in Latin, Nascentes p. 8.
and we look for exactness in the English; but observe here Is (not are) the
words of the Prophet; Learn to write and speak better English.

2. How miserably do you contradict your self? you said but a little before,
Page 7.
not a word found in all the holy Scriptures about baptizing in a Font; nay,
not so much as the name of a Font once mentioned in all the holy Scriptures:
but it seems the name and thing is found and mentioned here; how else can you
say, Here is fulfilled -- Clap your hands, and leap for joy, and say with the
Philosopher in another case, (...).
I have found, I have found: viz. the Font in Jeremy, though I cannot find it
in all the holy Scriptures.

3. Can you say without blushing, Here the words of the Prophet are fulfilled?
Did the Spirit of God ever intend here Baptismal Fonts? and if not intended,
how is this text now fulfilled? In what words are Fonts implied? in the word
Fountain (the Knight indeed says, Fonts or Fountains Page 8.
out the term is appropriated by the Lord to himself: They have forsaken me the
Fountain, etc. No man (that I know of) holds our Fonts to be Fountains of
living waters, and your self declines at, when you make the forsaking of
baptizing men and women, etc. Parallel with the peoples forsaking God the
fountain, etc. Or in the word C^stern? in which (it seems) you have found
Fonts; but the text says, Those Cisterns are broken Cisterns, that can hold no
water (which you have cunningly left out, lest your disciples should epsy your
foul mistake) but our Fonts could and did hold water. Sir, I must tell you, had
not your brain been cracked, you had never imagined our Fonts to be broken
Cisterns. Therefore let the Reader observe how grossly you abuse this Scripture,
and consider seriously whether that Scripture be not fulfilled in you, being
one of those that are unlearned and unstable, who 2 Pet. 3.16 (...), As
torturers Put a man on the rack, and make him speak that he never thought; so
these set the Scripture on a rack, and draw ou^ a sense which was never
intended. Leigh Crit. Sacr.
wrest the Scriptures (I pray God it be not) to your own destruction.

4. For the rest cited in your p. 9. and part of the 10. I say no more but
this; Is the Knights testimony so valid, that it must be largely transcribed,
when it seems to make against us: And must it be so slighted when it seems to
make against you? as about the Terms, Tithe, and Church. To the first, answer
shall be returned toward the end of the book: And to the second, Why may not
the public place of worship be called a Church, because the Church meets
there; as well as it is called the Synagogue, because the Congregation of the
Jews met there to perform public worship?

CHAP. V. Of the Rise of Infant Baptism.
SECT. 1.
H. H. p. 10. We must have the Rise of Infant Baptism from those Rabbis that
did practice it, or else not at all: because the Scripture is silent in it, as
they themselves confess. So Mr. Hall Font gua^ded, p. 30.
literally, syllabically, terminis terminantibus, in express terms
Infant Baptism is not commanded, nor a thousand things more. A wretched lie;
for it is an hard thing for Mr. Hall to prove, that God requires of the sons of
men a thousand, or half a thousand things no where commanded.

Reply 1. To pass by your scornful terms, Rabbis, etc. you are guilty of
falsehood, in saying, We confess the Scripture is silent in it. I know not any
one that makes such a Confession; if you do, you might have named him or them:
But this you pass by in silence, in hope your falsehood should not be
discovered, but in vain; a general accusation is as good as silence.

2. Admit the Scripture were silent herein, it makes nothing against us; For it
is a common and true rule, as before, a Negative Argument from Authority proves
nothing: Nay I confess, the Scripture is silent in Mr. Hall's sense; i. e. It
speaks nothing of Infant Baptism in express terms, by way of command, but it
is not silent in another sense, for it speaks implicitly of it. E. gr.
Ministers maintenance is not expressly mentioned in those words Deuteronomy. 25.4.
, Thou shall not muzzle the Ox when he treads out the corn, yet it is
implied in those words if you will believe the Apostle 1 Timothy 5.17.18.
, for the Scripture says, Thou shall not muzzle, etc. And again, 1 Cor. 9.9.
For it is written in the Law of Moses, Thou shall not muzzle, etc. Now Sir,
Riddle me, riddle me, what is this? The Scripture is silent, and yet Says, It
is Written in the Law of Moses -- And yet not one word (concerning Ministers
maintenance) written expressly in Deuteronomy. quoted. p 12.
Yea, to take your own instance; A man may pray in his Family, because he may
pray every where, according to 1 Timothy 2.8. Where Family-praier is implied, and
so the Scripture is not silent in it, but not expressed, and so it is silent.
Many more instances may be given, but these may suffice, without the imputation
of a wretched lie.

3. Suppose the Scriptures were altogether silent about Infant Baptism, it
rather proves that Infants were baptized, to any unbyassed judgment; because we
read not of any Controversy about a complaint against Infant Baptism; as we do
concerning the Widows that were neglected Acts 6.1.
(a business of an inferior alloy, in comparison of this in hand).

4. What a wretched man are you, in saying a wretched lie on the account
mentioned by Mr. Hall? you show your self as rude in Ethics, as unskilful in
Rhetoric, Hyperbole.
so much used in Scripture, specially in this case: e. gr. Cities walled up to
heaven Deuteronomy. 1.28.
i. e. very high; now because this was spoken by the Spies, who might tell a
lie, therefore compare this text with another, viz. Deuteronomy. 9.1. Cities great,
and fenced up to heaven -- which certainly were the words of Moses. So Mat.
23.24. Ye blind guides, who strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel: i. e.
strain at things of small moment; and swallow things of greater concernment. So
Joh. 21.25. And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which if
they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world it self could
not contain the books that should be written. Abundance of more instances,
which (if you can read with Latin eyes) you may find in Alsted Praecognita
Theologiae, page 157, 158. l. 2.
; But if you can look only with English eyes, see Diodat on John forenamed. I
hope you will not give the Wretched Lie to Moses, Christ, John, etc. as you do
to Mr. Hall, who by those thousand things, means (according to your usual
expression) a certain number for uncertain: i. e very many, or a great number,
as 1 Cor. 4.15. Ten thousand Instructers in Christ.

5. It Is well you say, It Is an Hard thing for Mr. Hall to prove, that God
requires a thousand things of us not commanded; It seems you dare not say it is
impossible, only it is Hard. And what if he prove an hundred, or half an
hundred (which is easy to do) they are too many for you to answer.

SECT. 2.
H. H. There is no express command (says Mr. Hall) in the New Testament for
observing a Sabbath, giving thanks at Meals, praying with our families,
baptizing of women, giving them the Supper, baptizing several sorts or degrees
of men; as Kings, Queens, Lords, Citizens, Husbandmen, etc. Will the
Anabaptists therefore do none of them? To this purpose says Mr. Cook Font
uncovered, p. 28.
and Mr. Baxter Plain Scripture proof for Infant Baptism, p. 3, 4, 8.
; but I answer, This reasoning is the life of all your Religion; for without it
they have nothing to say, as they themselves confess; neither do they know how
to delude poor souls, which desire to make the Scriptures their rule, and to
walk according to what is written, but by these sleights, etc.

Reply 1. If your conscience were not feared with an hot iron, you durst not
have said, This reasoning is the life of all our Religion. I would have you
know, the greatest part of our Religion is grounded on express Scripture.

2. If you would be understood concerning the point under debate, I do say, and
that truly, you have nothing to prove your own way of baptizing, but what is by
consequence from Scripture. For you have no express command in so many words,
Go and baptize visible Saints, or actual Believers: Dip or plunge such in
Rivers and Fountains etc. which you endeavor to prove by consequences, (wherein
also you are miserably mistaken, as I shall hereafter show). What now? Is not
this reasoning the very life of all your Religion? I say the very life of all
your Religion wherein you differ from us.

3. You your self do as good as confess, (and you must too, whether you will or
no) that without this reasoning ( viz. by Consequence) you have nothing to say
for giving thanks at Meals, praying with or in our families, giving the Lords
Supper to Women, baptizing Citizens, etc. As appears in your pages, 12, 13, 14.
For where are these in so many words written in the holy Scriptures? Are not
you one of those who delude poor souls by these sleights and cunning craftiness
of men, whereby you lie in wait to deceive? See Ephesians. 4.14. But let us hear your
answers in particular.

SECT. 3.
H. H. Page 11. 1. You abuse us much, to say, that this is our reasoning, that
we should do nothing but what we have a command for: but we say, command, or
example, which last you left out.

Reply 1. If Mr. Hall abuse you much, you may thank some of your own party; for
the objection is so laid by them; which was faithfully laid down by him, and
fully answered also by him sundry ways: But as your manner is with Mr. C. and
Mr. B. you catch at a piece of his first Answer, and pass by the other two
(wherein two leaves are spent) in silence.

2. Let the word Example be put in, yet it nothing helps you: For 1. Your
Argument is false in Form, consisting of mere Negatives, and so nothing is
concluded. 2. If you mean expressness of command, or example, then the major
Proposition is false, you your self being judge in your own Instances.
If you mean a command or example, by consequence, the Minor is false also,
even in your own judgment and practice.

SECT. 4.
H. H. page ibid. 2. We do not deny you All consequences, although you are
pleased to say we do, and accuse us falsely in that; But we deny your
consequences which you bring to make void written commands and examples. That
dealing we will by no means allow of, to you, nor to our selves; for in so
doing, we might soon make all the commands of Christ, and examples of the
Apostles of none effect by our traditions, brought in by such consequences, and
become such as the Lord speaks of, Mar. 7.7. to the 14 Verse.

Reply 1. Indeed all consequences that make for you, you allow and grant, but
ALL consequences that make against you, you disallow and deny (is this fair
dealing.) Let the consequence be never so clear from Scripture for
Infant Baptism; you are sure to deny the consequence, and it may be the
conclusion too. You are not fasly accused here.

2. It Is a false accusation, and a mere calumny, that any of our consequences
from Scripture for Infant Baptism make void any written command, or example.
The same commands and examples are binding to us in the same condition, we
baptize Jews and infidells converted to the faith: so that in allusion to that
Scripture, Romans 3.31.
(Do we then make void the law through faith, God forbid, yea we establish the
law) I may say, Do we by Infant Baptism make void the commands of Christ, and
examples of his holy Apostles? God forbid, yea we establish them.

SECT. 5.
H. H. same page It is to be observed, that these men are so taken up with your
1000 unwritten things, that they seldom read the holy Scriptures; if they did,
they could not be so ignorant of what is written in them. For 1. What if a
Sabbath be not spoken of in the N. T. yet it is spoken of in the old? But
Insants baptism in neither. 2. For giving of thanks at meals, does not the
Scripture plainly speak? Jo. 6.11. Acts 27.35.1 These. 5.18.3. For family prayer
1 These. 5.17.1 Tim. 2.8. Now let Infant Baptism be as plainly proved, and we
will freely grant it, and confess our sin in disowning it, which must be done
thus.

Reply 1. The men vou scoff at, and charge so uncharitably, read the holy
Scriptures, oftener then you do, I am sure to better purpose then you read and
pervert -- Jer. 2.12, 13. p. 8.

2. You falsely accuse us, in saying, we confess that Infant Baptism is no
where spoken of in the old or N. T. it is spoken of as plainly as giving of
thanks at meals, praying in our families, etc. according to the texts alleged
by you. Enough is spoken in the Old Testament Dent. 29.10, 11, 12, 13.
of Infants being in covenant, and of your Church Membership, which is not
repealed in the New. A plain ground for Infant Baptism, else the Gentiles
should be in a worse condition since Christ's coming then before, and the
Church of Christ not in a better condition then before.

3. M. Hall said, There is no express command in the N. T. of such particulars
mentioned, and you your self grant it for the Sabbath, and you cannot deny it
for the other; for though the Scriptures speak PLAINLY of such things, yet not
EXPRESSLY, but you cannot distinguish between these.

4. Let all rational men judge, whether the consequence be not as clear for
baptizing Infants from Mat. 28.19. because they are a considerable part of any
Nation, as for Family prayer from 1 Timothy 2.8. -- For you say, If Paul wills us
to pray every where, then in his Family: so say I, If Christ bids us to baptize
All Nations, then Infants.

5. Its too much boldness in you to prescribe, how, or with what weapon we must
fight. There are more ways to the wood then one, yet you say, It must be done
thus. Lets see how, I pray.

SECT. 6.
H. H page 12. 1. I prove by what is written Jo. 6.11. Christ took loavs, and
gave thanks: Now let them prove by what is written Christ took little children
and baptized them. If any object Christ took little children, and blessed them:
I answer, So he took the loavs and fishes and blessed them: does it therefore
follow that he baptized the loavs and fishes? I hope not.

Reply 1. You should prove that here is an express command for giving thanks
at meals, or else you prove nothing; Now such an express command is neither
here, nor any where else in Scripture i. e. Terminis terminantibus as M. Hall
says.

2. I grant by what is written here, giving thanks at meals is proved, or may
be proved (so do we by what is written prove sc. by consequence Infant
baptism:) but what is this to your purpose.? I commend you for saying, you
prove by what is written, not that it is written in so many words there.

3. What an unreasonable task do you put upon us, that we must prove by what
is written, that Christ took little children and baptized them; when it is
written Jo. 4.2.
Jesus himself baptized not, but his disciples. You would hit us home indeed,
if you could tell us that it is written in the holy Scripture that neither
Christ nor John, nor the Apostles baptized any little children.

4. It Is your mistake in saying, So he took the loavs and fishes; for when
Matthew Mat. 14.1^. (...)
speaks of the loavs and fishes, he uses one word; but when Mark speaks of
Little children, he uses another word, Mar. 10.16. (...).
-- viz. And having taken them up in his arms, which is proper to babes and
Infants, but not to loavs and fishes.

5. Indeed it does not follow that Christ baptized the loavs and fishes, or
that he baptized little children; For I (nay the Evangelist does) tell you Joh.
4.2.
that he baptized not, but it follows, that these little children were baptized
already, for imposition of hands was never practiced upon any persons (that we
read of in the sea Acts. 6.6. and 8.17. and 13.3. and 19.6.1 Tim. 4.14. with 2 Timothy 1.6.
N.T.) but only on such as were baptized, except in order to the working of
some miraculous cure: now the Evangelists neither mention any malady that these
infants had, nor any cure that Christ wrought on them. Is not the Scripture
here as plain for Infant Baptism? As yours is for giving thanks at meals, etc?
Nay,

6. It follows, that little children may be baptized now by u^ For shall we
refuse to pour water on them, on whom Christ did put his hands? shall not we
baptize such persons, whom Christ himself blessed? Shall not we receive into
the bosom of the Church such whom Christ The old Latin has it Amplixans eos.
embraced in his arms? What though these words do not hold out directly an
institution? yet they do hold forth plain principles and grounds for
administration of Baptism. For first it is Christ's express scope to show, that
infants under the Gospel belong to him, or to the Kingdom of Heaven. 2. They
are capable of a spiritual blessing to be conveyed by an external sign,
which they understand not, else Christ might only have prayed for them, but he
took them up into his arms, laid his hands on them, etc. 3. Its Christ's will
that Infants should be brought to him for a spiritual blessing. It could not
be by believing (for children you say, while such, are without actual faith;
and besides, the disciples could not hinder that coming) therefore it must be
some outward and visible coming, viz. by their parents tender and offer,
therefore by an Ordinance, and what Ordinance?
If not baptism. But Mr. Cook Font uncovered p. 31. etc.
has fully spoke to this Argument, which together with the rest you have
cunningly waved, as being unable to answer.

SECT. 7.
H. H. 2. I prove, that Paul Acts 27.35
took bread, and gave thanks in the midst of them all. Let them prove that P.
or any other Disciple of Christ, 1 These. 5. ver. 18.
took little children and baptized them in the midst of so many; or one witness
if they can, and we will grant all. 3. I prove by what is written, that it is
the will of God, that the Saints should give thanks for all things. They must
prove by what is written, that the Saints should baptize all children, before
they can speak or understand: and I will grant all.

Reply 1. Sir, you must not impose upon your adversaries; you are no Lawgiver:
yet the Text in the Acts does not say, In the midst, but presence of them all:
It becomes not you to chop and change the Scripture at your pleasure.

2. Admit there be no great difference, you may as well believe and conclude,
the Apostles were not baptized, because there is no one witness to prove it.

3. Giving thanks at Meals is also proved by these Scriptures, and that by
consequence only; and so have our worthies proved Infant Baptism.

4. Which of us do hold the Baptism of All Children? You fight against the man
in the Moon. We are as much against the baptizing of the children of Turks,
etc. while they remain in Paganism, as you are against the baptizing of the
children of Christians; though according to the Scripture we can put a
difference between them, but you cannot.

5. Why may not children be baptized before they can speak or understand, as
well as circumcised before -- Your Argument, or rather Answer, fights against
Circumcsion, as well as again Baptism of Infants Mat. 19.13, 14.15. Mat. 10.13,
14 15, 16. Luk 18.15, 16.
.

6. I have proved that those Infants (mentioned by three Evangelists) on whom
Christ laid his hands, were baptized; I hope you will now be as good as your
word, grant all.

SECT. 8.
H. H. page 13. 4. I have proved by what is written, that men ought to pray
every where. They must prove that men ought to baptize every where, or any
where, if they can. 5. I prove by Scriptures, that the seventh day was the
Sabbath of the Lord in the Old Testament; and likewise in the New Testament
that the Saints met together on the first day of the week to break bread. Exodus
20.10. with Acts 20.7. Now let them prove by Old or New Testament, if ever any
children were baptized; or that the Saints did baptize Infants, if they can.

Reply 1. As to that of praying every where, I have answered already; and I
love not Tautologie, as you do.

2. In speaking of Saints baptizing Infants, you smell too strong of the
Arminian and Popish cask Quid obstat, our in casu necessit at is non potest a
fideli Aliquo Infans Aquam tingi? Armin. Apol. c. 25. p. 246.
; as if any disciple of Christ, any Saint might baptize in some cases: for in
Acts 20.7. you distinguish between the saints or disciples that met together,
and Paul that preached to them.

3. The Jews were to keep the seventh day of the week as the Lord's Sabbath;
therefore we Christians are bound by virtue of that command, to keep the first
day of the week as God's Sabbath. This consequence you seem to grant to be
good, though in the New Testament there be no express command or example for
it. I now appeal to all Divinity and Logic, whether this consequence from the
command of Circumcision to Baptism, be not every way as strong and good: viz.
Infants were circumcised in the Old Testament; Ergo Children are to be baptized
in the New. For as the first day of the week comes in room of the seventh day
of the week, so Baptism in the room of Circumcision, as the Apostle plainly
Col. 2.10, 11 12.
holds forth Spanhem. part. 3 Dub. Evang. 27. p. 94
: else the Apostle should not prove what he intended, viz. Circumcision is not
to be retained.

4. That Children were baptized, I find in some of Paul's writings, 1 Cor. 10.2.
And were all baptized -- All the Jews that passed through the sea, are here
expressly said to be baptized; now that there were among them children, and
little ones, it is as clear in Pharaohs speech to Moses, Exodus 10 24 Let your
little ones also go with you: And in the Narrative of Moses, Exodus 12.37. Six
hundred thousand men, beside CHILDREN.

SECT. 9.
H. H. 6. I prove by the Scriptures, that Christians were Magistrates, or men
in Authority (which Mr. Bax^^ desires to see in bis first position, p. 3.) for
the Eunuch that was baptized, Acts 8.38. was a man of great Authority under
Candace Queen of the Ethiopians, who had the charge of all her treasure, ver.
27: which title in our days is no less then Lord Treasurer. And Sergius
Paulus -- was the Deputy of the Country; which men we commonly call, Lord
Deputies, Acts 13.7, to 13. Now let them prove as plainly, that any children
were baptized, etc.

Reply 1. How you bring in these instances, I know not, unless by head and
shoulders (as they say): Mr. Hall does not question a Christian Magistracy; so
far I can see in what you have transcribed from him, unless perhaps it be
comprehended in, and concluded from you, etc. p. 11.

2. You endeavor to prove that which Mr. Baxter denies not, neither desires to
see. He says, How sparing is the New Testament? and instanceth in four cases,
all which you have here cunningly concealed, save one: I desire you to see your
mistake in the position and p. cited by you.

3. You disprove the Anabaptists (your fellows) who cried, Where find you a
Christian in the New Testament that exercised the place of a King, or
Parlament-man, or Justice of the Peace, and the like: You can find a Lord
Treasurer, and a Lord Deputy, it seems, but none of the other can you find: but
of this in your 31 p.

4. If the Eunuch was a Lord Treasurer, and Serg^us Paulus a Lord Deputy (which
is but your conjecture) yet they were not Christian Magistrates in Mr. Baxters
sense.

5. But come, I desire to see how you prove by the Scripture that Christians
were Magistrates. Was the Eunuch a Christian Magistrate because he believed
with all his heart? So (you say) your disciples believe, and yet none of them
Lord Treasurers, or Christian Magistrates that I know of; or because he was
baptized, then Sergius Paulus was no Lord Deputy, for we read nothing of his
being baptized: And the Eunuch had these Titles before he was baptized.
or because he was a man of great Authority (under the Queen of the
Ethiopians), so is every Bassa under the great Turk. Beside the word signifies
one that is eminent for birth or wealth B^zi in Luke 1.52. (...)
. And were they Christian Magistrates of whom the Virgin Mary makes mention?
He has put down the mighty -- where the same word isused; Or because he had
the charge of all her treasure? Then the Treasurer of the great Cham of
Tartaria is a Christian Magistrate (u). A quatenus ad omne valet consequentia.
I deny not, but the Eunuch was a great Officer, while he was a Jewish
Proselite, for it is so in the same verse: He came to Jerusalem to worship, but
whether he continued in his office after he was baptized, it is more then I
know, or you dare affirm.

6. Let it be observed (supposing the Eunuch was a Christian Magistrate) you
make use of a mere consequence to prove it by: for neither the word Christian,
nor Magistrate is in that history. Acts 8.27.

SECT. 10.
H. H. Lastly, as for their saying we cannot prove, that men of all ranks and
qualities were baptized. I answer, It Is a mere Fable, a cunning devised Fable,
which they have invented, with many more like it, to turn aside men's ears from
the truth, 2 Pet. 1.16.2 Tim. 4.3, 4. For we can easily prove, that God calls
or commands all men every where to repent. Acts 27. ver. 30. And those that
did repent were baptized, Acts 8.12. as many of the Corinthians, Acts 18.8. And
the Corinthians were citizens of Corinth a City. Therefore Citizens were
baptized, and that Cavil answered. Now let them prove by the Scripiures, that
children of any degree or quality, were baptized before they could speak or
understand, and we grant all; if they cannot, let them for shame be silent.

Reply 1. I am ashamed of your railing, and therefore am silent to that; only
I say, The Lord rebuke you.

2. There Is no command to repent, in Acts 27.30. but in Acts 17.30. I might
deal with you, as you do with Mr. Baxter; but I spare you, and blame the Printer

3. Our Worthies have as easily proved Infant Baptism, Foundation, p. 79, 80.
as you do, that men of all ranks and qualities were baptized; which is by
consequence, and not in expressed terms: e. g. If all that did repent, and
believe the Gospel were baptized, then men of all ranks and qualities; but the
former is true, therefore the latter. And the Corinthians were baptized; the
Corinthians were Citizens, therefore some Citizens were baptized: Very good,
but where is it written, That men of all ranks and qualities were baptized?
(Though Mr. Hall spoke only of several sorts, or degrees of men) or is the
word Citizens in Acts 18.8. Wipe your eyes, and look a little better; you may
as well prove Kings, Queens, Lords, Husbandmen, etc. as Citizens baptized: that
is to say, by Consequence. How partial are you in your self? not allowing the
same way to us for proof of Infant Baptism, for which there is as plain and
clear Scripture, as for any of your forementioned instances.

SECT. 11.
H. H. page 14. One thing more I had like to have forgotten, viz. They say,
that we cannot prove that women received the Sacrament. I answer, neither do we
read the word Sacrament in all the holy Scriptures; therefore how should we
prove that women did receive it? But we read that the Disciples met together to
break bread, Acts 20.7. And that women were disciples is evident, Acts 9.36.
There was a certain disciple named Tabitha, etc. Now let Mr. Baxter, or any,
bring one Scripture that says, There was a disciple in any place, or of any
name, that was a little Babe, and they say well. Again, we have plain words for
it, That all the body do partake of that one bread, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. Now that
women are of the body of Christ, I think none dare deny, Gal. 3.27, 28, 29.

Reply 1. It seems you have a treacherous memory: but a Liar (as the proverb
is) had need of a good memory. You speak here the same language to Mr. Hall, as
you did to Mr. Cook, Page 6.
and it may receive the same answer.

2. Further, you lisp in the language of Ashdod. The Socinians say as you do;
viz. The word Sacrament is a barbarous word, and no where to be found in holy
Scripture, What then? It Is a true and common saying of our Divines; The thing
(though not the name) is in Scripture, as the word Trinity, etc.

3. But what vain jangling is this? Mr. Hall did not speak of women's receiving
the Sacrament, but of our giving them the Supper, as it is recited by your self,
p. 10.

4. It is not evident by expressness of Scripture, but by Consequence only,
that women were disciples, or that women received the Lord's Supper. It is said
indeed expressly that Tabitha was a Disciple, and that Tabitha was a woman, and
therefore it follows, that a woman was a disciple, or (if you will) women were
disciples; neither of these consequences or conclusions are expressly in
Scripture. Nay, you do not prove, that women received the Lord's Supper but by
consequences -- because the disciples came together to break bread, and by
consequent to receive the Lord's Supper; which none of us deny. And is it not
as evident, that Infants ought to be baptized, because they are disciples.

5. In the language of Christ, who was best able to express his own sense: to
belong to Christ, is to be a disciple of Christ: compare Mat. 10.42, with Mar.
9.41. and Mat. 18.5. And were not some of them Infants on whom the false
teachers would have laid the yoke of Circumcision, who are expressly called
disciples, Acts 15.10. And is it not said expressly, that the Disciples, Acts 21
4, 5.
with the wives and children, brought Paul on his way? -- Now as the affections
and lusts are flesh, Gal. 5.24. because it is said, the flesh, with its
affections and lusts: So here, wives and children are disciples, because it is
said; The disciples, with their wives and children -- Do we now say something?

6. Answer shall be returned to 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. when I come to the page
66.67. in the mean time I say, that some Infants are of the body of Christ, and
I think you dare not deny it: For Christ is the Savior of the body, Page 6.
Ephesians. 5.23. And you say that Infants dying in their infancy, are saved by
virtue of Christ's death. --

SECT. 12.
Hen. Hag. same page. Thus having discovered the vanity of all their
unreasonable reasonings; I commit it even to our enemies to judge between us in
these things, who has the Scripture most on their side, they or we. And thus
notwithstanding all their cunning craftiness, it is evident, they have not one
Scripture for Infant Baptism, and therefore not of God, etc.

Reply 1. What a pitiful contradiction is here? viz. That we have not one
Scripture for Infant Baptism; and yet you would have us judge, who has most
Scripture on their side: For suppose you have the most, does not that imply
that we have some Scriptures on our side? Sure none and some are contradictions?

2. If you mean we have no Scripture by consequence, that is palpably false;
unless all this while you have answered not one Scripture for Infant Baptism.
If you mean express Scripture, then you have not one Scripture for Anabaptism.
Now let all rational men judge, whether you have not discovered the vanity of
your unreasonable reasoning.

SECT. 13.
Hen. Hag. p. 15, 16, 17. We cannot find Infant Baptism in all the holy
Scriptures; Therefore to the fountain, whence it flows that all men may see,
that it comes not from the fountain of living waters, which is the holy
Scriptures.

Reply. I wonder you can find a Font for Infant Baptism in Jer. 2.12, 13. page
8. and yet cannot find Infant Baptism in all the holy Scriptures. Who so blind
as he that will not see?

2. You told us even now, p. 9. That the baptizing of Believers in Rivers and
Fountains, etc. was the fountain of living waters (or else your comparison is
lame): Now, that the holy Scripture is the fountain of living waters. Either
there are two fountains of living waters, or else you miserably contradict and
confound your self.

SECT. 14.
H. H. ibid. Now that Christ never commanded, nor his Apostles never practiced
the baptizing of Infants, even your own Poets confess; as Paul says in another
case, Acts 17. ver. 28.

Reply 1. I desire the Reader to peruse the Authors with their testimonies, as
they are cited by Mr. Haggar, because they are too many to transcribe. Mr.
Hagg. has empanell'd a July of 22, but I hope he will do me that favor, nay
that justice, to challenge some of them, and to consider (if not to demur) on
the Verdict of the rest.

1. Erasmus is one of yours, as well as ours: If an Anabaptist be a Papist, or
a Protestant, or a Neuter, or both. For in point of an Oath, and Lawsuits S^e
B^z^ in Mat. 5.34.
he seems not Id in Romans 5 14.
to dissent from the opinion of the Anabaptists, and in point of sin he is a
Pelagian, or Papist, * thinking it proceeds rather from example, then from
nature, yet he seems to be a Protestant. For he said that was heresy in Luther
which was good divinity in Austin; and being promised a fat Bishopric if he
would write against Luther, he answered (t) Luther was too great for him to
write against; Melch Adam. de vita Lutheri p. 115.
nay so great, that he professed, he learned more out of one little leaf of
Luther, then out of Aquina's his volumes. But how slight and unsound he was
about the deity of Christ Jesus, specially in Phil. 2.6. Tit. 2.13. They that
read him cannot but stand and wonder. I speak not this to smut his reputation,
but to show your vanity, scornfully calling him one of our own Poets.

2. Bishop Rossensis, and Doctor Eck, Ludovicus vives etc. are (or were)
notorious Papist^. In calling these our own Poets, I may better say to you,
then you do to Foundat. p. 10.
M. Hall p. 10. A WRETCHED LIE, but I love not bitterly to retort.

3. The rest (who are Orthodox) say no more then what (you say that (that your
Adversaries generally confess, viz. There is no command, nor Example,
literally, Syllabically in express terms for Infant Baptism, which is no
advantage to your cause, nor disadvantage to ours; no more then there is for
women's receiving the Lords Supper, Family prayer, etc. before spoken to.

4. You have dealt with some of their writings, as Satan did with the
Scripture, leaving out Mal. 4.6. with Psalm 91.11.
that which makes against you, as he did, what might make against him; e. gr.
Calvin bringing in that objection, that its no where found, that any one Infant
was baptized by the hand of the Apostles, answers Calv. Inst. l 4. c. 16. sect.
8.
That though the Evangelists do not expressly mention it, yet infants are not
excluded, where mention is made of baptizing whole Families, Acts 16.15.32, 33.
-- Ergo. Who but a mad man would conclude, that they were not baptized? If such
Arguments were valid, women in like manner should be debarred from the Lords
Supper, to which we do not READ, that they were admitted in the time of the
Apostles; yet considering the scope and nature of those Ordinances, it is
evident, that as women are to receive the Lords Supper: So Infants as well as
grown persons are to be baptized. Eo itaque privari nequeant quin Dei Authoris
voluntati fraus manifesta fiat. i. e. They therefore cannot be deprived of it,
but MANIFEST FRAVD; (or affront) is made to the will of God, the Author. Now
M. Haggar do you and your party make a wise use of this Testimony: you cannot
but know, that Calvin in the chap. forecited, and elsewhere Inst. Advers.
Anabap. Articl. 1.
proves Infant Baptism from many Scripture grounds.

Again though Beza says, as you cite him, yet a little after Beza in Mat. 3.11.
he gives the reason, why he translates (not in water bu^) with water (as we
do, and Luke 3.16. with out the Preposition In) least any should think there is
some force in thi^ particle, as they do, who are persuaded, children are not
rightly baptized, except they be altogether dipped in the w^ter.

Where the Reader may observe, that though John did baptize such as did
confess their sins, etc. Yet that makes nothing against Infant Baptism: And
again more plainly Beza in mar. ^.4.
in Mark. (though the place be not named by you) where he says, seeing the
Sacraments are seals; Doctrine or instruction is to go before sealing; He ads
(which you have left out) There is no reason that the Anabaptists should catch
at this against Infant Baptism, for John had to do with grown persons, and even
then, when Infants are baptized, the word is not severed from the sign in the
Church of God. The Reader by this taste may guess how M. Haggar has dealt
with the rest, whom for brevity sake I pass by, ex ungua Leonem.

So that now setting aside those that were challenged of Mr. Haggars Grand Jury
of 22, there are not left so many as will make a petty Jury of 12. unless you
allow some of them to have three votes a piece; as Luther, and Bucer, and some
four, as Zuinglius, which is not reasonable.

SECT. 15.
H. H. page 17. Thus much out of those teachers own writings, which observe and
use childrens baptism; from whence the Reader may take notice of the
unsoundnesse of your principles, and what little ground. 1. There is for it in
the word of God, as they thems^lvs confess. 2. Therefore what great cause have
we to search the Scriptures for better information, let the sober minded judge.


Reply 1. I verily believe you never read the writings of those Teachers.

2. I observe you mince the matter here, and dare not call them as p. 15.
our Poets, but those Teachers, etc.

3. The Judicious Reader cannot infer from thence the unsoundnesse of your
principles, by any reasonable reasoning.

4. A little before (yea often you said) we have no ground in the word of God
for infant baptism; you now grant we have a little, you begin to yield a little
ground; well done M. Haggar.

SECT. 16.
H. H. page 18. Moreover I shall further prove out of their own writings, that
infant baptism is a ceremony, and Ordinance of man brought into the Church by
Teachers after the Apostles times, and instituted and commanded by Councills,
Popes, and Emperors.

Reply 1. Calvin in the place alleged by you Calv. inst. l. 4. c. 16. sect. 8.
says, that whereas the Anabaptists spread it among the simple vulgar, that
Infant Baptism was not known (or practiced) till very many years after Christ's
Resurrection; in that Foedissime^ mentiuntur.
they lie most filthily, for there is not one ancient writer, that does not for
CERTAIN refer the original of it to the Apostles times. Sure your evidence
must be clear, to overthrow the confident Testimony of this pious, and learned
man, and to prove, it was brought into the Church after the Apostles times.

2. You empanell here another Jury of 21. I desire again (for brevity sake)
that the Reader would peruse them in your book, I shall take (if you will not
allow) the liberty in challenging, as before.

First. Erasmus is again challenged on the former account. Though his words
are, They are not to be condemned that doubt, whether the baptism of Infants
were ordained by the Apostles; which words evidently imply, that it was their
weakness to doubt, and that (it seems) he had other thoughts of those, who
did not only doubt of it but did refuse and oppose it.

2. Are you not ashamed to call Pope Gregory the fourth Ecchius, Cassander,
etc. Our own Poets (as p. 20?) (If this be not Poetical licentiousness I know
not what is.) Nay from that Pope etc. to conclude, it is a Tradition of the
Fathers according to our own confession?

3. You begin with Origin Hom 8. in Levit.
who calls baptism of children a ceremony and tradition of the Church. It Is
your unhappiness to stumble in the threshold: you had perhaps a mind to favor
your dear Mother the Church of Rome. For you might as well prove out of her 1.
The obscurity of the Scriptures. 2. The Canonicalness of the History of
Susanna. 3. Auricular confession. 4. Purgatory, etc. Certainly vide censuram
quorundam Scriptorum veterum, a Rob. Coco. p. 71. m P^oinde Homilias illas non
esse magnae Authoritatis. Bellarm. de verb. Dei. l. 4. c. 11.
those Homilies are bastard writings.
And undoubtedly there is more ingenuity in your dear brother Bellarmine (then
in you) who denies them to be Cyrills (as some were of opinion) and dares not
affirm them to be Origens, but leaves it with a Nescio cujus (m) who every where
destroys the letter, and frames out of his head mystical senses, and so
concludes, wherefore those Homilies are of no great Authority.

Now that Origin calls the Baptism of Infants a Tradition of the Church in
Epist. ad Romans l. 5.
so he may call it, in the sense of the Apostle: 2 These. 2.15. -- Hold the
Traditions which ye have been taught, etc -- with 1 Cor. 15.3. I delivered to
you that which I received, etc. where we see, that Tradition signifies a
doctrine delivered -- And it is well known that the greatest points of faith
are called by the name of traditions in the language of the ancients.

4. Augustine De Genesi adliteram. l. 1^ c. 23.
you say, calls it a common custom of the Church; true, but he says in the
very same place, that it ( viz. Infant Baptism) is in no sort to be contemned,
or accounted superfluous (as it is by you) which words you have cunningly left
out. 2. What hurt is there in so calling it? So is the observation of the first
day of the week, and imposition of hands on Church officers called a custom of
the Church, and yet you cannot deny, but that they are grounded on Scripture.
3. To kill two birds (as they say) with one stone, Austin was not only present
at that counsel, called Milevitanum, but (as it is said) President also; who
returning answer to those that desired divine authority for infant baptism,
first produces that rule Quod universa tonet Ecclesia, nec consiliis
institutum sed semper retentum est non nisi autbo i^ate Apostolicum traditum,
vertissime creditur, Aug de bapt. contra donat. l. 4. c. 23.
viz. That which the whole Church holds, and was not ordained by any
Counsels, but has ever been held, that is rightly believed to be an
Apostolical Authority. This, that great and famous light of the Christian
world in his days, took to be sufficient; yet for fuller satisfaction, he
proceeds to dispute for it from the holy Scriptures; where we see, what he
means by the custom of the Church, and by what Authority, that Council did
appoint the baptism of Infants

5. Luther you bring in, asserting that Infant baptism was established by Pope
Innocent. Indeed you speak somewhat warily, for some of your party would bear
us in hand, that Pope Innocent was the first that brought in Infant Baptism,
which is contrary to the stream of Ancient Ecclesiastical History See Doctor
Holmes Animad. on M. Tombs exercit. p. 191. etc.
and neither you, nor they tell us which Pope Innocent it was. But whoever he
was, it is well known that Infant baptism was practiced many hundred years before
this Pope was born. Nor is the practice of it to be counted, or called
Antichristian superstition, man's tradition (as you do, p. 3) because a Pope
decreed the establishment, or confirmation of it, more then this doctrine. Acts
16.16, 17, 18.
These men are the servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of
salvation, because it was preached and avouched by the Devil.

6. For Cyprian you are very confident, that Infant Baptism began in the year
248, and that by Fidus a Priest, opposed by Cyprian and his Council, who
ordained that young Children should be timely brought thereto. But 1. who this
Fidus was, is not apparent out of Cyprian Epist. lib. 3. Ep. 8.
, who (I am sure) does not call him by the scornful name of Priest, but, most
dear brother, and that three times in that Epistle. 2. The question by Fidus
was not, Whether Infants should be baptized at all, but whether before the
eighth day, (as appears by your own expressions, p. 19.) Now this clearly holds
forth, that Infant Baptism was used and practiced long before. 3. Neither did
Cyprian decree simply the practice of it, but only by his decree confirmed the
practice of it. 4. What a gross mistake is this about the time When, it began?
For how could it begin in Cyprians time? when the F^^^man of your Jury tells
us it was used in Origens t^^e, which must needs be 20 years at least before.
You deserve the Whetstone for abusing Cyprian and your Reader so grossly. For
what a bundle of lies have we here together? 1. Infant Baptism began in the
year of our Lord 248. 2. Brought in by Fidus a Priest. 3. That Cyprian and 66
Bishops and Elders ordained it;
And 4. by our own confessions, it is an ordinance and tradition of man, nay
Will Worship and Idolatry? All palpably false.

7. Let it be observed, that your Jurymen are not agreeed on the Verdict
concerning the time that Infant Baptism was brought into the Church. Origin
speaks in effect, It must be within 200 years after Christ, (for he died in the
year of Christ 220) you speak for Cyprian Anno 248. Cassander says 300 years
after the Apostles. Luther, in Pope Innocents time -- as you allege him, when
yet he says it was Established (not begun) in that Popes time, page 19.

8. The Carthaginian Council is brought in p. 19. We will that Children be
baptized: Thus (say you) we see it is, We WILL, therefore Will Worship. But 1.
mark the ground of Baptism there, because Children are within the Covenant,
which you cannot endure to hear of. 2. What a ridiculous Inference do you make?
me thinks you shame your self and all your friends. You tell us, that (on a
supposal) you Found p. 29.
Will confess your error, or justify your practice: If I should infer -- Thus
we see it is, I will -- therefore Will Worship in Mr. Haggar, Risum tenea^^s
amiei!
I should be justly laughed at. So Josh. 24.15. We will serve the Lord,
therefore Will Worship, etc.

9. I am loath to spend any more time in answering the particulars here
alleged; what has been replied to, may be satisfactory to any judicious
Reader: I shall conclude with this, That you who are an enemy to Humane
Learning, are not guilty of much learning, or else guilty of much dissembling:
I am persuaded of the former, for these quotations are but as stolen waters;
you never read these Authors, whose testimonies are alleged by you: For what
Scholar would have written Bullinger: As p. 19. numb. 14.
in ex Augustino? unless you had a mind to make more sport, and to play in and
out? Or that Anselm, Legate of the Church of Rome Ibid. number. 17
was present with Austin at the Miletan Council? I have read of Milevitan, but
never of the Miletan Council till now. And how could Austin and Anselm be
present at that Council? when Austin flourished in the year of our Lord 430,
and Anselm in the year 1080, as he that can but read English may see Clarks
marrow of Ecclesiastical History, p 162. and 188.
. Or what learned man can tell what Tuicensi (page 20. numb. 19) should be,
except perhaps Tuitiensis? or Bilander ( n. 21) for Bibliander, etc. If these
and the like were the Printers faults, why have we them not (with most of your
book) among the Errata's.

2. You do not set down these Authors (whom you bring) in the right order,
according to the Centuries wherein they lived.

3. You repeat one and the self same Author twice, and make a needless
distinction to increase the number of your Jurers; as Cassander, p. 18. numb.
7, and 10. 4. You set them together by the ears, and make them contradict one
another, as is obvious to any judicious eye, that will compare Page 18, 19.
your Origin, Cassander, and Cyprian together. Thus with a flourish of humane
learning, you would blear the eyes of the world: but especially your silly
Proselites. If you are guilty of dissembling your learning, it may be well
suspected that you are a Wolf in a Sheeps skin, and the rather because you say,
p. 39. We know you are Scholars.

SECT. 17.
Hen. Hag. p. 20. Thus out of the mouths of your own Poets you have it, and by
them confessed, That baptizing of babes is will worship, etc.

Reply 1. I will forbear to say to you, (as you to Mr. Hall, p. 10.) A wretched
lie: But I dare say, that not any one of the aforesaid Authors, do so much as
mention will worship. This is your own absurd, and ridiculous inference, Page
19.
you rack the holy Scriptures; as Jer. 2.12, 13. p. 8. no marvel therefore men's
writings.

2. You said, p. 19. That it is Will Worship and Idolatry, appears by their
own confessions, as follows. But as no mention is made of will worship, much
less of Idolatry, least of all, that we confess it. For shame give over
lying; and if you love your soul, think seriously of that Scripture which is
brought by you, p. 2. All liars shall have their part in that Lake which burns
with fire and brimstone, which is the second death, Rev. 21.8.

3. Lay aside those that are challenged, neither have you here a sufficient
number to make a Jury, unless on the former account; if there be, yet they are
not agreed upon the Verdict.

SECT. 18.
H. H. Thus having discovered the foundation of the Font; and having shown
whence, and when, and by whom Infant Baptism came; I leave it to the view of
all: Only for better satisfaction, the book is suddenly to be reprinted -- and
is entitled as follows: A very plain and well-grounded Treatise concerning
Baptism, etc. --

Reply 1. How many untruths are here tackt together? You have neither showed
whence, nor when, nor by whom Infant Baptism came in.

2. You have discovered your own vanity, folly, want of ingenuity, peity, and
learning, to the view of all.

3. Were we with Child, you would make us long after your Treatise; else you
would not give such timely advertisement of it, unless it were to spare the
labor in a Diurnal. But either it is stifled in the womb; or will come forth
with sharp teeth (as Speeds History of Great Brit. p. 882.
Richard the third was born) for it is now four years since you hinted the
sudden reprinting of it, by whom to be sold, where, and what title: But for my
part I have neither seen nor heard the printing of it, much less the
Reprinting.

CHAP. VI. Of Constituting Churches, and Church Members.
SECT. 1.
H. H. p. 23. In this our stating the Question, you say diverse things must be
animadverted, that we deceive not our selves and others, through darkning the
truth by words without knowledge: For we deny that Churches are constituted by
baptizing, or sprinkling of Infants.

I Answer; It Is to be observed, that Mr. Cook can say nothing, nor give any
answer in the least to our Writing, as we wrote them; and therefore he
cunningly says, That in stating the Question, many things must be
animadverted, or changed in the mind; and then he states the Question according
to his own mind, etc.

Reply 1. I desire the Reader to peruse the Narrative of Mr. Hag. p. 21, 22.
concerning an offer of reasoning with some Ministers at Stafford about
Baptizing -- which Narrative is too long to transcribe. But this I say, it may
be justly suspected to be untrue, because of Mr. Haggar's misrepresenting Mr.
Baxter and Mr. Cook in other particulars, as hereafter shall be made evident.
And whereas he says (not without abuse of Scripture) Psalm 53.5.
They were in great fear, where no fear was, as appears by Mr. Cooks Epistle.
Truly no such thing pppeareth to my best observation, but rather the contrary,
as appears by his eighth Reason See Mr. Cooks Epistle before his Font
Uncovered.
which together with the other seven, you might have done well to have
answered, if you could.

2 Do not abuse Mr. Cook, and triumph before the victory; It Is rather to be
observed, that you can say nothing to Mr. Cooks Answer in three particulars (at
the least) there mentioned, or else you would not have passed them by in
silence.

3. All orderly reasoning requires the right stating of the Question at first;
yet our Writings are fully answered, though as you wrote them, they needed
clearing. For I am persuaded you know not what is meant by Constituting
Churches, which you stick to, as if it were done by Baptism. And if you were
put to define, or describe [Constitution] perhaps you would give us as wise an
account thereof, as you do of the word [Animadverted], which you interpret,
changed in mind,: whereas the word signifies, considered, by serious turning
the mind to a thing: e. gr. Haggai 1.5. (...)
Consider your ways: i. e. Set your hearts on, or turn your minds to -- You
may then be as grossly mistaken in the word Constituted, as you are in the word
Animadverted; and argue for a word, the meaning whereof you know not. It had
been well therefore, if you had cleared your own meaning, (if you could) seeing
you are so offended with that book, which endeavors to clear the state of the
question.

SECT. 2.
H. H. same page First, if you deny the Churches are constituted by baptizing,
you differ from the rest of your brethren and forefathers; who generally with
one consent (till within these ten or twelve years) did conclude, that children
were made members of Christ, etc. in Baptism, (witness the old Catechism) then
they were not so before.

Reply 1. Since you have not proved, that our brethren and forefathers said,
That Baptism did Constitute a Church, or give it its being and form (which is
the usual and proper signification of the word) you have not showed any
difference between Mr. Cook and them.

2. Though we are not bound to own every expression in those Writings (which
for the main are sound) yet that phrase, of being made a member of Christ, may
admit a good Construction, according to that good rule Bains help to true
happiness.
; Things are said to be, or made; when they are declared, manifested, and
acknowledged so to be: e. gr. Joh. 1.12. with 1 John 3.1
To be the sons of God, is expounded, to be called the sons of God. And the
Jews charged Christ Joh. 19.7.
that he made himself the Son of God: i. e. he affirmed, and declared himself.
And look as Baptism is said to save, 1 Pet. 3.21. not that it constitutes our
salvation, but signifies, and seal^ it; so in Baptism we may be said to be made
members of Christ: i. e. our membership is signified, etc. thereby, and not
constituted.

3. It does not follow, that if Children are made members of Christ, etc. then
they were not before, no more then this: Acts 2.36.
God made Christ Lord after his Resurrection -- therefore he was not so before:
or that a man is in marriage made such a woman's husband; therefore he was not
so before, though precontracted.

SECT. 3.
H. H. Now if you disown the Common-praier-book, and that Catechism, you may
disown your Baptism which you had by it, and be baptized again as we are.

Reply 1. I thank you for this. Let the Reader, or any rational man judge,
whether you do not here grant, that we were once baptized. Now it is a received
truth, that Baptism is but once to be administered to one and the same person,
as the Jews were but once Circumcised, and we are born but once. Now baptism is
a sign of our new birth Tit. 3, 5.
. That place Acts 19.5.
which only seems to favor you, does not befriend you; for it is not said,
They were Rebaptized, or baptized Again. Nay it is clear those words are the
words of Paul, not of Luke penning that story, as appears by the (...) and
(...). see B^za in loc. and so excellently Cham. t. 4. l. 5. c. 13. n. 44.
particles in the 4. and 5. verses; showing plainly, that they who were
baptized of John, were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, or else John's
Baptism and Christ's differ; which is Popery.

2. I appeal to any man, whether you may not, (nay must) own the name
Anabaptist (which so often in your book you seem to disown); For you ingeniously
acknowledge that you are baptized again: And so much does the word Anabaptist
signify. Thus out of your own mouth you are condemned; Do not then condemn
them for nick naming you, who call you, and the men of your persuasion
ANABAPTISTS.

3. We have no reason to disown our Baptism, because of some imaginary, nay
real corruptions in the Administration, no more then the Jews were to renounce
their Circumcision, because of such corruptions, which indeed do not nullify
the Ordinance. Shall a Decree in Chancery be rejected, because the present
Officer is rotten and corrupt? Is a Writ or Patent naught and void, because
signed and sealed by naughty men? Was Circumcision ever the worse because
Jacobs sons had abused it, to overreach Genesis 34.
the Shechemites? No more is our Baptism on the former supposal.

SECT. 4.
H. H. page 24. 2. I suppose you will not be so absurd, as to own any
unbaptized person for a Churchmember, (that has an opportunity to be
baptized) neither do I think any of you will have communion with any such in
the Lord's Supper, or other Ordinances.

Reply 1. That we will not hold communion with such persons in the Lord's
Supper, you think right; but in that you add, or in other Ordinances, you think
amiss. For may we not hold communion with such in hearing the Word preached? I
trow, yes 1 Cor. 14.24, 25.
; the Apostle seems to hold it out: and I do not find that the Corinthians gave
over hearing or preaching, because of the presence of an Infidel. Now hearing
the Word is an Ordinance without doubt, and an act of communion also in some
sense. Rh^t^^f. of Presbyr. c. 9. p. 269, etc.


2. You sufficiently answer your self: For if those that cannot be baptized
through want of opportunity, though they earnestly desire it, and have right
(as your Answer implies) ought to be taken for Church Members; notwithstanding
the want of Baptism (as in the case of the penitent Thief) then surely Baptism
does not constitute Churches and Church Members: The effect cannot be, where
the cause is wanting.

3. It Is very true, profane sleighters, and proud rejecters of Baptism, are
justly reputed no Church Members; not because Baptism constitutes
Church Members, but because obstinate sleighting and rejecting the Sign and
Seal of Church Membership, is a sleighting and rejecting the thing signified,
and sealed: e. g. The rejecting of Circumcision when it might be had, Gen 17.14.
was a breaking of the Covenant; though Circumcision did not constitute the
Covenant.

SECT. 5.
H. H. 3. No people in Scripture since the Resurrection, and Ascension of
Christ, were ever called a Church of Christ, without Baptism: Prove it if you
can, etc.

Reply 1. What say you to Acts 7.38. -- A Church in the Wilderness? where
Stephen calls the Israelites in the Wilderness a Church, which was after
Christ's Resurrection and Ascension; though I confess, the people themselves
were long before Christ's Incarnation. But to put it out of doubt, were not
those people the Church of Christ with whom Barnabas and Saul assembled
themselves Acts 11.26
in Antioch? Yes sure; for the Church (you say) consists of Disciples; and it is
said, the Disciples were called Christians first in Antioch. There is a Church
of Christ without Baptism; for there is no express mention made of Baptism
there, as was noted before: Nay, are not the seven Candlesticks called by
Christ, the seven Rev. 1 20. etc. 2. etc. 3.
Churches, and by your self acknowledged to be Churches, page 28. and yet there
is not one word of their Baptism in those two Chapters mentioned.

2. What though we read not in Scripture of a people called a Church after
Christ's Ascension without working of miracles? Will it follow therefore that
Churches are constituted by working of miracles? And that it is no true Church
that wants miracles?

Many things may be in a Church (and that according to the will of Christ) that
yet do not constitute a Church: We read not of any Churches in Scripture
without afflictions, persecutions, and temptations (in some kind or other) yet
afflictions, persecutions, and temptations do not constitute Churches, and
Church Members. Armies appear not in the field without their Colors; yet
Colors do not constitute an Army. Markets and Fairs are not kept by a people
(except perhaps some Quakers) without their clothes on them; yet clothes (or
putting them on) do not constitute Markets and Fairs.

3. That place cited by you Act. 2.41* 47.
does not expressly speak of Addition by Baptism, it only shows the number, not
your manner of your being added (to the Church)

SECT. 6.
H. H. 4. Your self says, that faith, and interest in Christ, constitute a
Christian; very well then: But why do you baptize such as cannot believe in
Christ, nor yet make out their interest in the Covenant of grace? -- They then
that do not, cannot do so (as Infants) are not constituted Christians. What
they are to God is nothing to you or me, secret things belong to the Lord.
Deuteronomy. 29.

Reply 1. You mis-cite Mr. Cook, who says Font uncovered p. 1^.
Faith, OR interest in Christ, or the Covenant of grace constitutes etc. Not,
faith and interest in Christ. There is a broad difference between a
disjunctive, and copulative proposition. If one should say you are an
Anabaptist, or a Romish Priest, or a Jesuit, you would acknowledge this
proposition true: but if one should say you are an Anabaptist, and a Romish
Priest, and a Jesuit, it may be you would say it is false, though others think
it true. Beside you leave out those words, viz. or Covenant of grace. Its
plain, you had a design here to deceive. For in your p. 22, 23. you truly set
down the words, when you had no purpose to answer them, but here you chop and
change them all, least the words should speak for themselves, as they do
apparently. You confound those things Mr. Cook does distinguish, who holds;
that either professed faith, or interest in Christ and the Covenant, makes one
a Christian; which last is the case of Infants, according to Gods gracious Genesis
17.7. Luke 18.16. Acts 2.39. 1 Cor. 7.14.
grant and declaration.

In a word. They who have true faith, have interest in Christ and in the
Covenant of grace; yet all who have interest in Christ, and the Covenant of
grace, have not actual faith.

2 Now all may see the lameness of your Argument, viz. Infants have no interest
in Christ, because they cannot make it out, which makes as much against
Circumcision as against Infant Baptism, at least is as absurd, as if an Infant
had no interest in that which is conveyed to him by a deed of gift, because
(forsooth) he cannot make it out; and in brief, it is as false as that you
boldly affirm without any proof. viz. All our Infants are baptized into the
Church of England, (unless it be taken with a grain of salt.)

3. By your saying Very well -- (if any sense can be made of your words) you
grant that faith, and interest in Christ, constitutes a Christian. Hold you to
this, and there is an end of this controversy. viz. That Baptism does not
constitute a Christian. For Baptism is neither faith nor interest in Christ;
both which may be without Baptism, (as you confess in the penitent Thief) and
Baptism may be without either; as in Simon Magus, and all hypocrites.

4. For your Query. If by making out, etc. you mean an infallible discovery of
saving Faith, and real interest in Christ (from communion with him) we who are
ignorant of men's hearts, expect no such making out. But if you mean such a
discovery of your interest in the Covenant of grace, as has been always
accounted sufficient for external Church Membership, it is sufficiently made
out in your Book, yea, and in that very Chapter Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12.
you cite, and elsewhere. In a word, God's promise, and the parents Faith are
not such secret things, as not belonging to you and me: but things clearly
revealed in God's Word, as the forementioned Scriptures show.

SECT. 7.
H. H. Again you say, that joint and orderly profession of Faith, and interest
in the Covenant, does constitute a Church. Very well, and is not Repentance and
Baptism an orderly profession of the Faith. Does not the Apostle s^^, Acts
2.38.
Repent and be baptized? And is not putting on Christ, profession? etc. Gal.
3.27.

Reply 1. Here again is another instance in wronging Mr. Cook; for you have
lest out these words, Font uncovered, p. 1.
viz. (s) or God's owning a people to be his in Covenant. Now though adult Jews
and Gentiles might and ought to make profession of their Faith and Interest in
the Covenant for themselves, and theirs also (according to the Tenor of the
Covenant) yet Infants (it is granted) could not make such a profession for
themselves -- But God's owning them for his people is an Authentical declaration
of their interest in the Covenant, according to the forenamed, and other
places of Scripture.

2. If Repentance and Baptism be an orderly profession of Faith, then not
Baptism alone; and if so, Then Baptism does not constitute a Christian. For
the cause must not be partial, but total, which compleats the effect.

3. Repentance and Baptism are not of the like necessity, though you conjoin
them: Without Repentance adult people cannot be saved; no such thing can be
truly said of Baptism. If you take them severally, that Repentance is a
sufficient profession in some, and Baptism in others, then Infants that cannot
repent may make a sufficicient profession of Christ.

4. Though the use of and submission to Baptism is a part of Christian
profession, yet not exclusively to other duties; as the use of the Word,
Prayer, Lord's Supper, etc. which yet do not constitute a Churchmember; but
presuppose Church Membership, only let it be remembered, That as the professed
Repentance of the wicked Jews and Gentiles is a profession of their interest in
the Covenant, and a declaration of their right to Baptism (which is a sign of
Church Membership) So God's owning Believers Infants, is no less a declaration
of their right to Baptism (wherein Church Membership is sealed).

5. You need not prove that Baptism is a part of our profession of Christ, we
grant it is an Ordinance of Christ; in the observation of which (among others)
Christ is professed; but that it is the whole, or only, or first profession of
Christ, whereby a Christian is constituted, is not yet proved by you.

6. The Apostle does not say, Gal. 3.27. -- have put on Christ in or by
Baptism; that is your Gloss put on the Apostles text. The Galathians might and
did put on Christ other ways; Though your Baptism might be a sign of it, and
that in part only. And indeed the Apostles meaning is not, that baptism is
properly and adequately, but Sacramentally and significatively a putting on of
Christ. Because 1. else, all that are truly baptized; should in that very act
truly put on Christ; but that did not Simon Magus, nor any Hypocrite now. 2.
The Apostle in exhorting baptized Saints to put Romans 13.14.
on Christ, (which is to be done daily) should exhort them to be baptized
daily (which is absurd). 3. We should (with the Papists) hold, that the
Sacraments of the N. T. do (by the work done) confer grace.

SECT. 8.
H. H. Consider it again; Does not a man that puts on a garment profess to wear
it to all spectators, whilst it is upon him? So they that put on Christ,
profess to own him before all men. And Mr. Baxter himself calls it, A listing
engaging Ordinance; I hope you will not deny his Doctrine to be Orthodox,
though you cavil with the Scriptures. Now seeing by Baptism we put on and
profess Christ; it is evident out of your own mouth, that it constitutes a
Church; or else you must say, They are constituted before they put on Christ.

Reply 1. If putting on Christ be a profession -- Then some Infants may
profess Christ and so be baptized: For if they be saved by Christ (as you
say), surely they put on Christ as a garment; i e. passively; and so Beza
renders it Christo induti fuis^is, Bein Gal. 3.27.
have been clothed with Christ, Now by your comparison, little children may
profess by wearing those garments (to all spectators) wherewith they are
dressed by their mothers, or nurses; unless a little child is not a man,
contrary to Genesis 4.1. as before.

2. What an evil surmise is this? That we will own Mr. Baxters Doctrine, though
we cavil with the Scriptures. For cavilling with, and wresting the Scripture, I
leave them to you, who are old-excellent that way. Mr. Baxter I acknowledge to
be a pious and learned Minister, yet I own his Doctrine here and elsewhere no
further then it is agreeable to Scripture, and I believe Mr. Baxter would not
have it otherwise.

3. It Is not evident either out of Mr. Cook's mouth or yours, that baptism does
constitute a Church, or Churchmember. The eleven Apostles did put on Christ,
and yet we read not one word of their being baptized.

SECT. 9.
H. H. p. 25. You say, that Baptism is a sign or pledge of peoples admission
into the Church. Well: Then it follows, that they are not in before to any
man's sight; and if not in the Church, much less constituted and established
Church Members.

Reply. 1. That follows not: e. g. The Sheep which a man has bought may be
known to be his, before he set on them his mark, which may further signify
their relation to him, and his owning of them, but that does not constitute his
right to them. A Servant may be truly hired, before he receive an earnest;
which yet does not constitute him such a man's servant. Abraham was in Covenant
with God, and known to be so before he was circumcised. The Lord's Supper is a
sign and pledge of peoples admission into the Church, and yet were in it
before; which sufficiently declares the vanity of your Argument.

2. In that you take Constituted for Established, it appears pears you neither
know what is meant by Constitution, (in its proper signification) nor indeed
what you your self means. I thought at first you meant by constituting a
Church, the giving of its first being: but here you take it for Establishing.
Surely you might with better reason say, That Chu^ches are constituted by the
Lord's Supper; for this more properly is a sign and seal of Establishment in
the Church, then Baptism is.

SECT. 10.
H. H. You say, The Thief on the Cross was saved without Baptism. I Answer, We
deny it not: For he declared openly his Faith in Christ, and owned him, when he
was disowned almost of all; which shows he would have been baptized, had he
been at liberty. Therefore the Lord accepting the will for the deed, 2 Cor.
8.12.
says to him, This day thou shall be with me, etc. But what makes this for the
baptizing of Infants, etc. It proves that little babes might be saved, though
unbaptized; for they can profess no Faitg, nor confess no sin, neither has
Christ required them to obey any command, before they understand and believe
the Gospel: Romans 14.23.
For whatsoever is not of Faith is sin; But you say, we do not rightly apply
that Scripture, and why? Because it spoils your practice. But does not the word
Whatsoever include all matters and duties we owe to God. Cannot the Scriptures
be in quiet for you? But because this offends you, we will give you another,
Heb. 11.6.
Without Faith it is impossible to please God.

Reply 1. In that you grant the penitent Thief was a Churchmember (and that
visibly, though unbaptized) you clearly yield the cause, viz. That Baptism does
not constitute a Churchmember. For what does constitute a Churchmember, is
necessary to the being of a Churchmember. But Baptism is not necessary to the
being of a Churchmember; Therefore it does not constitute -- The Major is
clear by the nature and Definition of that which constitutes any thing: the
Minor you grant in the instance of the Thief; and I hope you will not deny the
Conclusion any more.

2. You show what a miserable Disputant you are; in saying, What makes this for
the baptizing of Infants? The question is not here about Infant Baptism, but
about constitution of Churches; which you assert to be done by Baptism, and
that Font uncovered p. 1.
book denies, and brings this very instance; which you deny not: and therefore
was very pertinent to the by question of constituting Church Members.

3. M. Cook has dealt more honestly with this Text, then you have done with
Jerem. 2.12, 13. p. 8. and many more. For hence we prove against Papists and
others, who hold an absolute necessity of Baptism to Church Membership and
salvation, that even Infants may be saved, and must be owned members of the
Church (being born of Church Members) though they die in their Infancy without
baptism. Thus you and they being of the same judgment, are confuted together by
this instance of the Thief.

4. Seeing you grant, that Infants (by this example) may be saved without
Baptism; I pray you consider, whether it will not follow unanswerably? To whom
salvation belongs now, to them the sign and seal of salvation belongs: But to
Infants (you grant) salvation belongs, now therefore baptism also, the sign and
seal of salvation. For it is said 1 Pet. 3.21
Baptism saves.

Again, as the Thief on the Cross (being in a state of salvation) had a right
to baptism; so Infants of believing parents, being in a state of salvation (as
you grant) have right to baptism.

5. Those Scriptures alleged by you are impertinent; you do but still more
pitifully entangle your self, and abuse the Scriptures, but not at all spoil
our practice or judgment. For though the word whatsoever As the word All is to
be restrained to the matter treated of, 1 Cor. 6.12. so is the word Whatsoever,
Mat. 7.12. and here also.
may be taken so as to include all sinful matters (which cannot be done in
Faith, and so are sins) and all external duties, (which though conjoined for
the matter, yet not done in Faith, become sins in the doer) yet the Apostle in
Romans 14.23. speaks most properly of things (in their own nature) indifferent,
which God has neither commanded nor forbidden; and expressly of meats, yea such
kind of meats as God has left free, to be eaten or forborne. Now mark the
vanity of your own reasoning: Infants must not be baptized, because they want
Faith; for whatsoever is not of Faith is sin, and without Faith it is impossible
to please God. Like this: Infants must not be fed, because they want Faith; for
whatsoever is not of Faith is sin; and without Faith it is impossible to please
God. 2, The latter sentence in Heb. 11.6. is spoken of Enoch, who lived long
before Abraham, and makes as much against Circumcision in Abraham's time and
after, as it is now against the baptizing of Infants i. e. nothing at all. Thus
whatsoever is not of faith is sin, and without faith it is impossible to please
God; but the Infants among the Jews had no faith, (though faith is the
condition of the Covenant of Grace, ever since it was set on foot) For alas
(they are your own words) b they can profess no Faith, etc. Therefore the
Circumcision of Infants among the Jews was sin. If this Conclusion be absurd
and blasphemous, confess the other, not a jot the better. For (to use your own
words again) does not the word Whatsoever include all matters etc? Then
Circumcision sure as much as Baptism.

SECT. 11.
H. H. This your president of the Thief on the Cross will not at all help you,
except in the like condition -- Then I confess a multitude of such penitent
ones might be reckoned to be in a saving condition, though not baptized. But
neither you nor I are in that straight as yet. Therefore it will be no plea for
us; but if either of us be unbaptized, we have time and liberty enough to
consider and turn, Psalm. 119.59, 60.

Reply 1. Here you again yield the cause: viz. Baptism does not constitute a
Churchmember, etc. for out of the Church there is no salvation. 1 Pet. 3.20.
with Ephesians. ^.23*26.
Otherwise to use your own expression page 29. Secret things belong to God. I
hope now you will not flinch.

2. Your supposal that neither you nor Mr. Cook are in the straight the poor
Thief was in is nothing to the purpose: Though you intimate that Mr. Cook and
his brethren may be; and I believe it, if you had your will, as those Joh.
16.2. for you that unchurch us, would make no bones to kill us.

3. You say, If either of us be unbaptized -- A needless If. For you granted p.
24. That we were once baptized, and you make no question but you have been
baptized (twice for failing) at least you do not think your self unbaptized.

4. It Is a miserable begging of the question, that baptizing after your mode is
the testimony and commandment of the Lord, unless (as has been said) in the
like case.

5. There is not one word of Baptism in Psalm. 119. ver. 59, 60. How pitifully
do you pervert and misapply this Scripture also? And I may say, They who have
made haste to be Rebaptized, have made more haste then good speed.

SECT. 12.
H. H. page 26. You tell us, that the Church of England was constituted in or
anon after the Apostles days, and by the Ministry of the Word were converted
from Heathenism to Christianity; and then persons of years were baptized upon
profession of Faith and Repentance. I Answer, What then? what is your Church
now the better for that which was done 1600 years ago, if you walk not in the
same footsteps which they did then? I can prove as well the Church of Rome Romans
1.7.
was then a constituted Church, according to the order of the Gospel. But does
that make the Pope and his Crew now to be a true Church: If they be, why do you
separate from them; but they are not, neither are you, etc.

Reply 1. I accept of your grant, That the Church of England was constituted in
or near the Apostles dates; and acknowledge we are not now the better for it,
if we had razed the Foundation, relapsed to Heathenism, and had been called
Hos. 1.6, 7.
Loruhamah, and Lo ammi. But seeing God (since the plantation of the Gospel in
this Nation) has raised up some faithful witnesses, and reserved some sincere
Professors of his truth, and still the Fundamentals of Christian Religion have
been owned, and Antichrists yoke cast off. It cannot (without great injury) but
be acknowledged, that the first constitution of the Church in this Land is much
to us; who desire and endeavor to be built, and to build on that Foundation,
Ephesians. 2.20. The Church of the Jews was the better for God's constituting their
Church in Abraham's family (if we may believe their 2 Chronicles. 20, 7. Neh. 9.
verse. 7, 8.
plea) and though they did degenerate, yet the Foundation was never razed, nor
the first constitution abolished.

2. On the former account, we are better (without question) for outward
privileges, and possibility of salvation, as the Jews were, Romans 3.1.2. with
Chap. 9, 4.5. or as the poor cripple John. 5.5.
that did lie at the Pool o^ Bethesda for cure.

3. If by our not walking in the footsteps of those who were first constituted
a Church in this Nation; you mean that we do not first repent, and then be
Baptized. You might as well charge the Jews, who circumcised their children on
the eighth day, for not walking in Abraham's steps, and therefore not a jot the
better that their Church was first constituted in him, for he was circumcised
at Genesis 17.26.
99 years old. Nay it seems you charge us for not taking care that all the
children in this Nation may live in ignorance, and Idolatry; that so being by
the Gospel converted, they may be baptized after their example. For they cannot
be converted from Heathenism as they were, and so be baptized after their
example exactly, unless they live in Heathenisme, as they did. If this be your
meaning and charge, I pray, Lord lay not this sin to your charge.

4. That Scripture does not prove what you assert, unless by a far-fetcht and
strained consequence. And as the word Constituted is not there; so neither
those words ACCORDING to the ORDER of the GOSPEL there or elsewhere in any one
place of Scripture. You are wise above what is written, though I deny not but
the Church of Rome, was once a rightly constituted Church.

5. Seeing you declare your self so great a friend to the Church of Rome, as
equalling us with them; and also pronounce us no Church (and so excommunicate
us with your brute Thunderbolt, as if you were another Pope) and dis-regard the
counsel and admonition of the Church (so censured, and nullified by you) I
leave you to the judgment of him who is Lord and King, Husband and Patron of
his Church, wishing you (if you be not past hope of profiting by Scripture) to
weigh what is written Jude 8. to the 17 verse.

SECT. 13.
H. H. You say that they and their children were then admitted into the
Covenant and Church, as Abraham and his family were by circumcision. I answer,
that it still remains for you to prove that they and their children were
admitted into Church Fellowship. I deny it, prove it if you can, or else you
have done nothing, etc.

Reply 1. As you say of the Sacrament, page 14. So we do not read (in your
sense) of the word Church Fellowship in all the holy Scriptures. Therefore how
should we prove that children were admitted into Church Fellowship? But

2 That all the Faithful are the children or seed of Abraham Gal. 3.7, 9, 14,
29.
and that they are blessed with faithful Abraham, and that the blessing of
Abraham is come upon the Gentiles, and consequently that the covenant (whereof
Mr. C. spoke, and not Church Fellowship) made with Abraham and the Faithful
under the Gospel, is the same for substance, being an everlasting covenant,
Genesis 17.19. Though differing in manner of dispensation by circumcision in the
room whereof Bap^isme succeeds, Col. 2.11.12. It is evident, that the same
covenant made with Abraham continues to us Christians; as is plain also, in
that we Gentiles are planted into the true Olive Romans 11.17.
from whence the Jews were broken off; which is more largely proved in that
Book you pretend to answer,

3. For proving that they and their children were admitted into
Church Fellowship. Do you not know that there are 13 Arguments in that Book,
which you have not answered, only you speak a little to one, which how
miserably it is done, will appear (I hope) in its proper place. In the mean
time, the truth is M. C. has done something to which you answer nothing upon
the matter.

CHAP. VII Of National Churches.
SECT. 1.
H. H. You (Mr. C.) seem to prove Font uncovered p. 2.
a National Church in that the Lord said to Abraham, Genesis 22.18. In his seed
all Nations should be blessed. I answer, He does not say that all of all
Nations shall be blessed; nor that all of any Nation shall be blessed. I am
persuaded you think in your conscience, some in this Nation are not blessed.

Reply 1. That Book (wherein Mr. C. declares his judgment briefly, and you
answer largely) says. Though we boast not of National Churches, nor is there
any necessity that the mention of National Churches should come into this
dispute, yet we are not ashamed of the name of a National Church. But seeing
you urge it on us, as odious, we desire to consider -- So that Mr. Hag. you
might have kept you to the main business, and spared your pains about this
by-businesse also, but that you had a mind to digress and quarrel.

2. You have no cause to think, nor does the holy Scripture say, that ALL of
ALL Churches, or ALL of ANY one particular Church on earth are blessed. For
cursed hypocrites are (ordinarily) in the most refined Churches, yet that
hinders not, but all particular Churches may be called Churches, and blessed --
For

3. The Nation of the Jews was (confessedly) a National Church and that whole
Nation, (as being in covenant with God) was a blessed Nation, Deuteronomy. 23.29.
Psalm. 33.12. and 89.15. And yet every particular person in that Nation was not
blessed, Deuteronomy. 27.15. to the end, and 28.15. to the end, and chap. 29.19.20.
These and other Scriptures show plainly, that as the Jewish National Church
was a blessed Nation, so every blessed Nation is a National Church, at least
in so considerable a part as may give it such a denomination, and though many
particular persons therein may be far from blessedness; yet this hinders not
such from the name of a blessed Nation, and of a people in covenant; and that
at the Nation of the Jews was blessed first in Abraham's seed. So all the
Nations of the earth should (in some sense) be blessed, by being at last
brought into the Covenant and Church State, through the same seed of Abraham.
You need not therefore make your appeal to Master C. conscience.

4. I wonder at your opinion (in the close of this Section) which you apply:
viz. A penitent Thief etc. and Murderer, etc. may not justly be put to death,
because he is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, etc

The penitent Thief was blessed, (you acknowledge him in a saving condition,
page 25.) as he acknowledges, In 22.4.
he suffers justly, and as I think you dare not deny, that he was the Temple of
the Holy Ghost; yea, I wonder more, that you dare call the execution of such an
offender, a destruction of the Temple of God, not without horrible abuse of
Scripture. But you began to lispe in the language of Tho. Muntzer Sleid. com.
l. 10.
your predecessor, against the Christian Magistracy; whatsoever you said
seemingly to the contrary, p. 31.32.

SECT. 2.
H. H. page 27. You bring this Scripture, Psalm. 22.27.28. I answer, when that
day shall come, and that Prophecy be fulfilled; we will grant it is fulfilled;
but for the present All Nations do not serve him -- neither do all in this
Nation worship him. Peter's words are true Acts 10 34.
But there are many in this Nation, that do not fear God, nor work
righteousness. Therefore no National Church.

Reply 1. Though I question the fulfilling of your promise, (for many
Prophecies may be fulfilled, which you either do not, or will not acknowledge,
and you may take some fulfilled, which are not) yet your concession is enough,
that a National Church in the time of the Gospel, is no such absurd, or strange
thing as you, and some would make it.

2. Albeit, this Prophecy is not fulfilled, yet it may be in the fulfilling.
For though all Nations are not brought to a Church State, yet some may be for
present, and others by degrees successively in Gods due time.

3. It is neither proved by you, nor indeed can be easily, that ALL ( i. e. the
generality) in this Nation, do not worship God, (for worship may be taken here
in a large sense) yet if granted, it will not thence follow, that this is no
National Church, since even when the Israelites were a National Church, they
might and did doubtless fall short of the true worship of God, as much and
more then the people of England.

4. Your ground whence you infer, that we are no National Church is very
unsound, viz because ALL do not fear God etc. Hereby you must not only deny the
Jewish Church to have been a National Church, but also the primitive Churches,
and all other particular Churches (whether Congregationall, or otherwise
called) to be Churches. For in all visible Churches a great part are
Hypocrites, without the fear of God, etc.

SECT. 3.
H. H. You say, Isa. 49.23. Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, etc. I answer;
That it shall be so I deny not, but prove you that it is so. As for Englands
Kings and Queens, it is well known how they would have nursed the Church, if
they had but had their minds, etc.

Reply 1. It cannot be denied without ingratitude, that England has been
blessed with pious Princes, who have nursed the Church in this Nation. Was not
King Edward the sixth a nursing Father, and Queen Elisabeth a nursing Mother?
(for instance) deny it if you can?

2. Your inference is as weak as the former. It Is well known how Saul, Ahaziah,
Athaliah, Mannasses, etc. would have nursed the Church, if they had but had
their minds (as you phrase it); Therefore the Jews could have no National
Church.

3. For our siding with Cavaleers, and c. I will say but this, It is you and
your party that strengthens the hands, and revives the hopes of the Cavaleers.
And if by their opposites, you mean the Round heads (as they are called)
difference in opinion (beside the foundation) does not take away the name and
nature of a National Church, no more then among the Jews.

SECT. 4.
H. H. You say Isa. 52 15. Christ shall sprinkle many Nations. Answ. It Is
granted; but it does not follow, that he does sprinkle whole Nations. For
believers have their hearts sprinkled Heb. 10.22.
etc. Therefore no National Church And I much wonder that you Ministers of the
Church of England, who for the generality hold, that Christ did not dye for all
men, but only for some few elect persons, should yet preach up National
Churches, etc.

Reply 1 Mr. C. did not say that Christ sprinkles Whole, (but MANY) Nations;
which phrase imolies that so many as are sprinkled by Christ in thos^ Nations,
may give them the Denomination of sprinkled Nations; if so, why not of
National Churches?

2. That all the Elect (which have been, are and shall be) in this world)
should be called (simply) some few persons Ames. Anti. Synod. de morte Christi.
c. 2. p. 176.
is a malignant restriction borrowed from your friends the Arminians.

3. Your wonder may be stayed, if you please to consider, that they who hold
that Christ dyed not for the salvation of ALL, but only of the Elect ( Mat
17.13.14 and 20.16.
who comparatively are but a few indeed) do not make election, or Christ's
intention, or interest in Christ's death, (which in themselves are invisible
things) The adequate ground or rule of Church Membership: but acceptance of,
and incerest in the Covenant as it is externally, and conditionally
administered. So that the visible Church is far more numerous then the elect, or
those for whose salvation Christ dyed. Judas was a member of the visible
Church; yet Christ dyed not for his salvation. (Though Christ's death was in it
self sufficient) For then he had been saved; it being impossible that the
intention of the Father in giving Christ, and of Christ in giving himself,
should be frustrated. So then to preach that Christ did not dye for ALL men (in
our and the Scripture sense) and yet to preach up National Churches, are not
things inconsistent.

4. For your scoff of being seven years at the University, I heed not, but had
you been two years there; you might have learned to distinguish between inward
and outward Covenant, (as to the Administration) and to draw better
conclusions, or (at least) not to deny the conclusion in a public dispute.

SECT. 5.
H. H. page 28. You say from Mat. 28.19. did not Christ command his Apostles to
go into all Nations and preach and baptize? I answer; Do you not know that they
never baptized whole Nations, nor yet whole Cities? but most hated and abused
them etc. We grant, if a whole Nation can be converted by the preaching of the
Word, they ought to be baptized, etc.

Reply 1. You chop and change Mr. C. words. He said (not whole, but) ALL
Nations, but do you not know that Infants are a considerable part of any
Nation; and does not the whole include the parts?

2. It Is granted; we do not read of whole nations converted or baptized by the
Apostles. For God in his providence so ordered, that the Gospel (at the first
preaching) should not overspread whole nations at once, but that it should be
Mat. 13.31, 32, 33.
as a grain of mustard seed, etc. As Abraham's family in process of time grew up
to a Nation, i. e. one family of believers became a Nation of believers; else
how can it be said Mar. 22.43.
that the Kingdom of God, (or privilege of being God's people in Covenant)
should be taken from them, etc. If they to whom the Gospel was brought, and by
whom it was received, were not to be a nation in Covenant as the Jews had been?

3. Are not all nations, or any sort of nations (to whom providence should
bring the Apostles) set in opposition to that only Nation of the Jews, which
had hitherto been a people in Covenant. But now to be cast out, and the Gentile
world to be taken in? And who can deny (without great ingratitude that some
nations (since Christ's time) have made as full and universal profession of the
true God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and of owning the Fundamental points of
Christian Religion, as the Jews (when a National Church) made, of the Lord
Jehovah, and of the Jewish Religion?

4. For our baptizing Infants contrary to Acts 8.12. (as you say) answer has
been made before, and for the Apostles baptizing some whole households, you seem
to grant Infant Baptism (contrary to what you say p. 5.6.) If Infants be a part
of any whole household baptized.

5. I cannot but pity your ignorance and impudence in saying we read but of 7
Churches in all Asia* which is one quarter of the world. For these seven
Churches were in Asiaminor Asiam intelligit minorem, scu eam Asiam partem, etc.
Pareus in Rev. 1.4. and Heylins Microcosm p. 520.
called now Anatolia) being but one of the 15 principal Regions of all Asia.
Besides these seven Churches mentioned in the Revelation, there was a Church in
Antioch Acts 11.26. with c 13.14.
which Antioch was in Pisidia, and Churches of Galatia; 1 Cor. 16.1. with Gal.
1.2.
now Pisidia and Galatia were Provinces in Asia the less, and Churches in
Judea, 1 These. 2.14.
now Judea was certainly one of the principal regions of Asia the greater
Heylin. page 520. and 521. see also 1 Pet. 5.13. The Church at Babylon, that is
in Assyria or Chaldea. Beza and Diodat.
. Many more instances might be given, but these (I hope) are sufficient to
convince, that you may read (if you look better) more then seven Churches In
ALL Asia.

SECT. 6.
H. H. You bring Rev. 11.15. The Kingdoms of this world are become our Lords,
etc. I answer. I told you already, that such times shall be, but they are not
yet, if they were, we should no longer pray, Thy Kingdom come. And in that day
Satan shall deceive the Nations, etc. Rev. 20.3.

Reply 1. Your reason to prove that these times are not yet, is very weak. For
though when the number of the Elect shall be made up, and be fully glorified,
there will be no need of praying Thy Kingdom come; yet while the Kingdom is a
coming, and in perfecting; It needs to pray so: And doubtless the nearer it
coms to perfection, the more fervently it shall pray for perfection, as
Natural bodies in their motion, move swifter, the nearer they come to the
Center. Now that the Kingdom will not be absolutely perfected at that time (you
hint) See the place you cite. Rev. 20.3, 7, etc.
Surely the loosing of Satan, and his deceiving the Nations, and in compassing
the Camp of the Saints, will not be after the full glorifying of the Saints in
the highest heavens.

2. If these things are too hard for Mr. C. to understand (though a Scholar)
are they easy to you? why then do you hold the Light under a Bushel? But he
that has but half an eye may see the impertinency of the Scriptures Luke
20.21. with 1 Cor. 2.8, 9, 10.
alleged by you.

SECT. 7.
H. H. You say from Rev. 21.24. that the Nations of them that are saved, That
walk in the light of the New Jerusalem. I answer; That Is granted, but that New
Jerusalem is not yet here below, for drunkards and wicked persons to walk by,
but Paul says, Gal. 4.26.
that it is above, and is free, and is the Mother of all the Saints.

Reply. 1. To what purpose do you mention drunkards etc. when Mr. C. according
to the text, Rev. 21.24. expressly mentions them that are saved.

2. Paul does not say expressly, neither do you undertake to prove that this New
Jerusalem (in the Revelation) is the Mother of all the Saints. That Is your
gloss, and not the Apostles words. But whether by this New Jerusalem is meant
the Church Triumphant in heaven (which is improbable, because it is said Rev.
21.2.
to descend from heaven, and expressly: The Kings of the earth do bring their
glory and honor into it, (which you cunningly left out) or 2. The Church of
truly sanctified ones on earth; which are hid in the visible Church, (as the
Wheat in the chafe) or 3. of a Future glorious Church on earth, at the Jews
conversion; I^ holds forth that National Churches are not to be accounted
absurd, to those who are acquainted with the Scriptures. For they that are
saved are Churches, or members of Churches; but Nations are saved. Therefore,
Churches, or members of Churches.

3. The Apostle says not, the Mother of all the Saints, (as you cite him) but
of us all, as you truly cite it, p 56. I believe you have a mind to canonize
all the Anabaptists for Saints, and I doubt not but there are some real Saints
among them, but if there be not drunkards and wicked persons, members of your
Church, you are foully belied. Such surely are of Agar.

SECT. 8.
H. H* p. 29. Lastly you say; If a company of believers in one house have been
called a Church Domestical, then a multitude of believers in a Nation man be
called a National Church. I answer, That Is granted, if they be all believers,
as you said at first, but little babes are not believers, etc.

R^ply 1. Sir, review your Answers from p. 27. to this 29. and you grant seven
times at ^east what Mr. C. proves, viz. a National Church in a Gospel-time,
which was the end of citeing the forenamed Scriptures See Font uncovered p. 2
to show that there is no cause of being ashamed of the Title of a National
Church; nor of your accounting it odious and absurd. Now blessing on you, I
hope you and Mr. C. will shake hands and be friends. But yet

2. You curtell Mr. C. Arguments and Scriptures. That immediately precedent,
and this present citation (of the words of that Book) witness, specially this
last, where you have not only left out ten parts for one (very material to
clear the consequence, but so cited here and there a word, as to make it speak
little better then nonsense,) which I refer to the judgment of those that will
read the Book, and mark how you have abused both it and him.

3. If there were some babes in those households, which could not actually
believe, and some adult too; who did not professedly (much less sincerely)
believe, the like must be granted concerning National Churches, viz. Though
every particular person therein does not actually believe, or profess Faith,
yet the major, or better part may give the Denomination, e. g. The Infancy of
some, the wickedness of others hindered not but the Jews might be warrantably
called a National Church.

4. Though you quite and clean mistake Mr. C. who by the by proves a National
Church, and here meddles not with Infants; yet if little babes be no believers,
(not so much as virtually, etc. as Mr. C. says) how Mar. 16.16.
shall ye escape damnation?

CHAP. VIII. Of Affirming a Negative, and teaching the Law.
SECT. 1.
H. H. You say in your 6 p. we affirm a Negative, viz. that the Baptism, or
sprinkling of Infants is not the Baptism of Christ, etc. And here you follow us
on to purpose, and tell us we are such as the Apostle speaks of 1 Timothy 1.5.6.7.
understanding not what they say, nor whereof they affirm. Here you think you
hit us home; I must confess now you have catched us out of our own element,
and in your own; for we know you are Scholars, and have learned to contend
about words to no profit, etc.

Reply 1. There is no cause of making this din (of being pursued to purpose,
etc.) For in that Book there are very few lines sp^n^ about this your
absurdity; But you have bestowed almost two pages in pleading for it, with more
absurdities. Nay this is not the only ground (as you untruly relate) of your
charge there but one among those verall gross mistakes, which may give just
cause to judge, that you are such as the Apostle says -- know not what they
say, nor whereof they affirm.

2. What vanity and audaciousness did you then discover in urging for disputes,
when you confess the terms of Art, (which are needful to be known in all
regular dispu^ings) are things out of your element: To dispute without Legick,
and to reason (in points of learning) without Scholarship, is as wise as to
undertake to judge of colors without sight and light; or to challenge to run a
race without legs.

SECT. 2.
H. H. Seeing we erred in saying we affirm a Negative; we will either confess
our error, or show you a president, which may justify our practice. Paul
says Kom. 3.12.
There is none that does good, no not one: Here Paul affirms a Negative, for
there is an Affirmative, etc.

Reply 1. It had been far better for you ingeniously to have confessed your
error, or to have passed it by in silence (as you have done many more material
things in Mr. Br. and Mr. C. Books) for you are like to a beast in a Quagmire,
the more you stir, the deeper you sink: What intolerable impudency is this?
instead or confessing your error, and resolving to keep within your own
element, to go about to justify your self of fathering your folly on the
Scripture?

2. In that proposition of the Apostle, the negative particle is (in the (...).
original) set before the Verb, so that (according to your interpretation) it
would be rather a denying of an Affirmative, then affirming a Negative. They
that understand know that where the predicate is affirmed of the subject; its
called an affirmative proposition, and where the predicate is denied of the
subject, it is called a negative proposition, but never an affirming of a
Negative (by them that know what they say); Nay, there is (as you lay it down)
not so much as a proposition. If you will not now confess your ignorance and
error, or go to the University to learn better Logic, you may erect (if you
please) a new College in the Country, and teach your deluded Proselytes some
new principles of a new-invented Logic.

SECT. 3.
H. H. Again, Isa. 45.5. I am the Lord, and beside me there is no God. Now Sir,
if you dare presume to be a teacher here, it should have been thus, I deny that
any God is but my self; and I pray show us the word Negative in the Scripture,
if you can.

Reply 1. Here is less color of affirming a Negative: For whereas in the
former, you would make the Verb to be the Affirmative (how absurdly I have
showed) here is no Verb at all exprested in the Original, (...).
as you might have seen by the different Characters, wherein the Verb's
supplied, are set down. It Is in the Hebrew thus (i) I the Lord, and none else,
besides me no God.

In the first proposition there is a pure Affirmative; viz. God is the Lord,
without denying the Affirmative. In the latter a pure Negative, without
affirming a Negative.

2. By this unwarrantable, and uncouth way of yours, Atheism and blasphemy may
be quickly taught and learned, in presuming to put a comma or full point at
part of a proposition; as in the very place you cite: There is no God; Oh
admirable! yet you can pave the way thereto. How ground lesly therefore and
dangerously you apply this to your present case, I leave others to judge,
considering how unreverently you deal with Scripture, comparing your
expressions with its, as if it were as safe to teach the Spirit of God how to
speak, as it is to teach you how to speak properly, when you acknowledge your
self out of your element.

3. For showing the word Negative in Scripture, I might say no more but this,
that we are not bound to Scripture expression in discourse or disputation, yet
you your self use many words that are not in Scripture, e. g. imminent p. 2.
Antichristian, p. 3. Objection, p. 4. History, p. 6. Primitive, p. 8.
Consequence p. 10. Paper-conference, p. 22. Absurd, p. 24. And a president in
the very p. 29. and an hundred more of this nature in your Book (without a
wretched lie.) Now when you have showed, when any of those words of yours are
in Scripture, I shall show you where the word Negative is in Scripture. In the
mean time know that Affirmative, and Negative are words of Latin Derivation,
in which language the holy Scriptures were not originally written: but the
things signified thereby, are often found in them, both in the originalls and
translations.

SECT. 4.
H. H. Lastly, to conclude, Joh. 1.20. -- He denied not. If John denied not,
Then he affirmed: and what did he affirm? He said, I am not the Christ. Here
Joh. affirmed a Negative, etc.

Reply 1. Here in the original the Negative particle is set before the verb; as
in the foregoing instance. But suppose the verb were an Affirmative (which
cannot be. For there cannot be an Affirmative proposition, but where the
subject and predicate are knit together by a verb affirmatively (as has been
showed), yet here is nothing like an affirming a Negative, but rat her it is
like a denying an Affirmative, as was said before.

2. It follows not, that he affirmed, if he denied not you never denied. (It
may be) that you are a Turk or Pap^^^, do you therefore affirm it? A man when
he is silent denies not an accusation, Mar. 14.60* 61.
as Christ was, Isa. 36.3.21.22.
Eliakin and Shebna held their peace at Rabshakeh's blasphemies. If they were
silent, they did not deny, if they denied not (by your goodly consequence) hey
affirmed and so owned his blasphemies, but this could not be, because of the
rending their choa^hs, etc. Thus we confess our wants and omissions, and yet we
cannot be said in any propriety of speech to affirm Negatives. So that hitherto
you have not proved that John affirms a Negative. For that in the 20 verse is a
Negative proposition, as that in the 23 is an Affirmative, the one distinct
from the other. But we will not strive about words, if you will be quiet, and
give glory to the Lord by confessing your error? Nay, but you will explain your
self? How I pray?

SECT. 5.
H. H. p. 30. To affirm, is but to say a thing is so; and to deny, is to say a
thing is not so: e. g when the Sun shines, I affirm it is day; and when it is
set, I affirm it is night. If I will prove a man is not a live, and show others
that he is dead, do not I prove he is not alive? If I say and prove a man is
not in his house, do not I prove a Negative?

Reply 1. If to affirm, is to say a thing is so, etc. It will unavoydably
follow, that to affirm a Negative, is to say a thing is so, which indeed is not
so (or which you said, is not so) and consequently your doctrine is yea and
nay, so was not the Apostles 2 Cor. 1.19
preaching.

2. It Is worse and worse with you in your instances. That of the Sun does not
prove the affirming of a Negative; for both are Affirmative Propositions: And
to prove a man is not alive, or not in the house, is one thing; to affirm a
Negative is another. For to affirm (you say) is but to say a thing is so, and
here you prove a thing is not so.

SECT. 6.
H. H. Seeing you make us offenders for a word; may we not justly say, that
you are one of those the Apostle speaks of 1 Timothy 6.3.4
; for you do not dote about words, viz. the Affirmative and Negative, etc. Do
not you count gain godliness? viz. (...) 100, or 200 per Annum, for preaching
and baptizing Infants* and rather then you will part with it, you dispute
perversely, like a man of a corrupt mind. I beseech you in the fear of God
consider it.

Reply 1. Who is guilty of doting? -- Mr. Cook, who wrote (as was said) a few
lines about your offending against the laws of Disputing? (which if it were
your greatest fault, might be winked at) or YOU, that write almost two pages
about them; and challenge too, any that will or can, to answer your Ten
Questions, Foundar. p. 53.54.
I leave. to the judgment of the impartial.

2. I do not know one penny allowed or required for baptizing any Infant. Is not
this therefore one of those evil surmizings mentioned by the Apostle?

3. As for your blind charge of an 100 l. etc. per An. for preaching -- I leave
you to him for an answer; who says, Exodus 20.7.
He will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain, whereof you are in
an high degree guilty; who (to vent your own rage and malice) blindly and
boldly misapply the Scripture to others, and neglect to examine your self by
it, though not a little concerned therein. I cannot but think that word sounds
in your ears; Is thine eye evil, because I am good? Here is your envy
mentioned by the Apostle.

4. For charging Mr. Cook with perverse Disputing, etc. Do you think that your
railing (mentioned also by the Apostle) will prevail, when your reasoning
fails? I beseech you (not complementally, but cordially) in the fear of God
confider it. I did not think nor dream that I should have found Mr. Haggar in
the Quakers Camp, whither many of his Church are gone in Staffordshire.

SECT. 7.
H. H. Though we have affirmed a Negative: yet you cannot justly apply to us
that Scripture, 1 Timothy 1.5, 6, 7. For we desire not to be teachers of the Law;
therefore Mr. Baxter says, We are Antinomians, and deny the Law. But I answer,
both you and he desires ^o be teachers of the Law: Witness your running to
Moses to prove Infant Baptism, and Church Membership; from Circumcision, and
the old Covenant, etc.

Reply 1. It Is plain, that the Law (in the place mentioned) is taken for the
Moral Law. Now I know no reason why any should be ashamed of being teachers of
that Law, or of being desirous to be such, if their ends in desiring be
sincere, their call be regular, and their gifts for that work be suitable 1 Timothy 1.3.
. The Apostle does not blame any absolutely for teaching the Law; (for he
says, We know the Law is good, if a man use it lawfully) but for undertaking a
work beyond your call and abilities, as those vain janglers did, v. 5, 6, 7.
Otherwise this desire is condemnable, as 1 Timothy 3 1. A worthy work, and the
more desirous of, and industrious in this work, the more they are approved of
God and good men. And I pray you remember our Lord Jesus Christ Mat 15.17. to
the end, with c 7 12.
was a diligent teacher of this Law: So was Paul Romans 3.31. and 13.8, 9, 10. 1
Cor. 9.8. Ephesians. 6.2. etc.
so was James. Jam. 2.8, 9, 10, 11.14.
Now you cannot vilify us for teaching the Law (absolutely) but you must
vilify these; and if we be desirous to be teachers of the Law, we have a good
copy to write after, good examples to follow.

2. If your words bear any common sense, you plainly disclaim teaching the Law,
and assent to Mr. Baxters charge, calling you Antinomians; I accept of your
acknowledgment: Let that brand stick on you, wipe it off, if you can. For Mr.
Cook says modestly, that you who would be counted great Disputers and
discussers of the Truth, in so saying -- give just cause to judge, that you are
such men, who are there described in Timothy, and you here speak plainly, that
you desire not to be teachers of the Law.

3. Here therefore was sufficient reason to apply that Scripture to you; not
only in regard of your not understanding what you say, and whereof you affirm
(which was the principal thing intended) but also in regard of your professed
desire to be a teacher of the Law; though here you disclaim it. Did you never
teach against Drunkenness, Whoredom, Idolatry, Covetousness, Profaneness, etc.
and are not these things forbidden and condemned in the Law? Did you not, do
you not teach the people, that they must love God and their Neighbor, worship
God rightly, sanctify his Sabbath, etc. And are not these things commended,
and commanded in the Law?

4. Though (you say) you desire not to teach the Law, do you not urge the Law
when you think it may serve your turn. E. g. p. 13. you prove from Exodus 20.19.
the seventh day was the Sabbath of the Lord. Without doubt the fourth
Commandment is part of the Moral Law. And page 52. you urge the fear of God,
and the keeping his Commandments, Eccl. 12.13
which is the doctrine of the Law. Now these and the like things you teach
either with your will, or not. If not, who forces you to teach against your
will? If with your will; how can you truly say, you desire not to be teachers
of the Law?

5. Though you desire not to be teachers of the Law: yet you desire to be
Teachers; (for you take upon you to be Teachers, witness your vocal and
printed doctrine) it must needs follow, that you desire and practice the
teaching of that which is against or besides the Law, (I mean God's Law, for of
that the Apostle speaks) and consequently against or besides the Gospel. For
though the Law, as it was mis-understood, and misapplied by the blind and
unbelieving Jews, was contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel, and Law too; yet
the true doctrine of the Law is ag^^eable to the doctrine of the Gospel, as
appears clearly by many Scriptures, Matis. 17, 18, 19, 20 etc. Luk 14.44. From
3.31. and 10.4.
specially by the words of the Apostle immediately following that Scripture, 1 Timothy E. ver. 7.8, 9, 10, 11.
which has occasioned this discussion. Whence observe, 1. All these (with the
like) sins and sinners are contrary to sound Doctrine. 2. This sound Doctrine
is the doctrine of the Law, (for it's-said ver. 9. The Law is made, or rather
lies (...).
heavily with its curses --). 3. This sound Doctrine of the Law is according to
the Gospel. Now seeing you will be a Teacher, and yet disclaim teaching God's
Law, which so harmoniously agrees with the Gospel, that whosoever teaches the
one rightly, must teach the other also; and whosoever rejects the one, must
reject the other: I appeal to your consciences (if not seared) whether your
Doctrine be not unsound, illegal, un-evangelical Doctrine; And seeing the Law
is just, holy, good, spiritual, whether your Doctrine be not unholy, unjust,
evil, and carnal? And if Christ tell us, Mat. 5.19.
That whosoever breaks one of these least Commandments, and shall teach men
so, shall be least in the kingdom of heaven; what think you will become of
those, who teach men to reject all the Commandments and wole Law, and would be
accounted Teachers, but desire not to be Teachers of the Law?


6. For your crimination of running to Moses, we do as Christ Mark. 12.26 with
Luke 10. ver. 37.
did, who did run to Moses to prove the Resurrection against the Sadduces; and
1 Cor. 9.9. with 1 Timothy 5. ver. 18.
as Paul did, to prove the main en^nce for Gospel Ministers; and as your self
does, who run to Moses to prove a Sabbath, page 13. forenamed.

SECT. 8.
H. H. page 31. And thus (Mr. Cook) I shall at present take leave of you, etc.

Reply. Indeed you do, for the present take leave of Mr. Cook, and may for the
future also; for you leave the substance of his book unanswered.

CHAP. IX. Of Mr BAXTER'S Ten Positions.
SECT. 1.
H. H. page 31. You say page 3. It has pleased the Holy Ghost to speak of some
things in the Scripture more fully, and of others more sparingly; and where God
spoke more sparingly, the thing must needs be more difficult, and yet truth
still. Answ. But he never speaks of Infant baptism in all the Scripture,
neither fully, nor sparingly. Then none of his truth, nor ever was.

Reply 1. If you could or would speak properly, you would or should have said,
Either fully or sparingly; but as you express your self, you grant, that
Infant Baptism is spoken of in Scripture one way or other. For two Negatives
(in our language) make an Affirmative: but I will not insist on this.

2. Whether the Scripture speaks of Infant Baptism, I hope it appears already
in part to the impartial Reader, and afterward will be further cleared.

3. The Scripture speaks neither fully nor sparingly of baptismal boots,
baptismal breeches, and other shifting garments used by your party; therefore
(by your arguing) your Mode of Baptizing is none of God's truth, nor ever was.

SECT. 2.
H. H. You instance in 4 particulars, but that which is pertinent to the matter
in hand is your fourth, viz. The New Testament speaks more sparingly of that
which is more fully discovered in the Old. What need the same thing be done
twice, except men should question the authority of the Old -- How silent is the
New Testament, concerning a Christian Magistracy? which made the Anabaptists of
old deny it, where find you in the New Testament a Christian that exercised the
place of a King, or Parliament man, or Justice of the Peace, or the like. And so
of an oath before a Magistrate, of War, and of the Sabbath, how sparing is the
New Testament, and why? because enough is said of them in the Old. To all which
I answer, you have spoken many words to no purpose, etc.

Reply 1. How pitifully you contradict your self? the meanest may see, by
comparing together the beginning, and close of this Section. For you said, Mr.
Bazters fourth Instance is pertinent to the matter in hand, and here in the
end, you say, he has spoken -- to no purpose -- How can it be pertinent? and
yet to no PURPOSE.

2. Why are not the other pertinent and to purpose? because you could not
answer pertinently, and to purpose. For in Mr. Baxters 1 Case he says Plain
Scripture proof for Infant Baptism, p. 3.
the word is not spoken to Infants, therefore it speaks more sparingly of them,
yet for the comfort of godly Parents, God has much more fully revealed his
mind concerning their children, then of wicked and open enemies. In the first,
that Infant Baptism is not so great a point as many make it, (except by the
dangerous consequences ensuing) therefore more sparingly mentioned. In the
second Infant Baptism was not controverted then, as some other points, yet
Scripture is sufficient to direct us for the determination of this too, if we
have wisdom to apply general rules to particular cases, and have senses
exercised to discern the Scope of the Spirit. Your silence to all which we
will take for consent.

SECT. 3.
H. H. Where as you say, That which is spoken on in the Old Testament, need not
to be spoken of again: I Ans^er; Infant Baptism is no where spoken of, neither
in the Old nor New Testament; therefore you ought not for shame to speak of it.

Reply 1. This Answer of yours might have been spared, if you had read Mr.
Baxter a little further Page 4.
The main question is, At what age members are to be admitted into the Church?
Now this is as fully determined in the Old Testament as most things in the
Bible, and therefore what need any more.

2. It Is horrible audaciousnesse for you to say, Infant Baptism is no where
spoken of in the Old or New Testament. If you mean in so many syllables, it is
granted already: If you mean not so much as by good consequence, we say, so
it is spoken of, as women's receiving the Lord's Supper, giving thanks at meals,
prayer in and with our Family, etc. and therefore you ought not for shame speak
against i^.

SECT. 4.
H. H. p. Ibid. As for your saying, Where find we a Christian Magistrate in the
New Testament? I Answer, Surely you have forgotten the Deputy, Acts 13.12. and
the Eunuch, Acts 8.27, 37, 38. and what say you to Erastus the Chamberlain of
the City, Romans 16.2, 3. and likewise those Saints of Cesar's household, Phil.
4.22.

Reply 1. Answer has been made to your two former instances, see chap. 5.
sect. 9.
which may satisfy any judicious Reader. I wonder at this vain repetition of
yours, unless it should be to make up the number of your sheets, I know not
the cause.

2. In your p. 13. You think you have found a Lord Deputy, and a Lord
Treasurer, and you would fain find here a Lord Chamberlain too. Would you set
up these Officers again, if you were to model and mould the State a new? But to
give you your due, you do not, dare not affirm Erastus to be a Lord
Chamberlain, or a Christian Magistrate, only you speak very gingerly: What say
you to Erastus, etc. Therefore I say --

3. I find mention made of Erastus -- in Romans 16 23. (not 2.3) where in the
Greek (...).
he is called a Steward. Now that a Steward of any Town or City is, or has
been called usually and properly, a Magistrate, is more then I know, or perhaps
you can tell. Only this I must tell you, you might as well call Gaius a
Christian Magistrate, of whom (in the same verse) honorable mention is made:
viz. that he was Paul's Host, and of the Church; and then he that lately, or
heretofore in these parts have entertained Mr. Haggar and his Church, must be a
Christian Magistrate too.

4. I dare not say that the Christians in Rome, specially they that belong to
the Emperors family (called Saints of Cesars household, Phil. 4.22) were
Christian Magistrates. If so, speak out, and prove it if you can.

5. You wrong Mr. Baxter, in charging him to say, Where find we a Christian
Magistrate in the N^w Testament? Indeed he says, How silent is the New
Testament concerning a Christian Magistracy? but presently after (within three
lines) explains himself -- How sparing is the New Test. etc. And you that take
upon you to find so many Christian Magistrates in the New Testament, cannot
find one Christian there, that exercised the place of a King, or Parliament man,
or Justice of the Peace, etc. and so his Quest. (for all your fair flourish) is
quite left unanswered by you.

SECT. 5.
H. H. p. 32. For an Oath, did you never read in the New Testam. Heb 6.16. And
for War, did you never read Luke 3.15. Act. 10.1.? For subjection to
Magistrates, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15. Tit. 3.1. and 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. and Romans 13.? Is
not the Scripture full of these things? and yet you do call for Scriptures.
Surely you read so many other books, that you forget to read the Scriptures,
etc.

Reply 1. Mr. Baxter said, The new Testament speaks sparingly of an Oath
(before a Magistrate) War, Sabbath, etc. not as if he held it made no mention
at all of them, as you would make others believe. For if it speak sparingly,
it is not a total silence.

2. It seems you are not gotten yet into the highest Form of the old
Anabaptists, Sleid. Comment. lib. 10. Docent non licere Christianis fo^o
contendere, non gere^e Magistratum, nonjus^urandum dicere, non habe c quod
proprium, sed omnia debere esse omnibus communia.
who denied a Christian Magistracy ((...) Mr. Baxter says, and you make no
Apology for them) and an Oath before a Magistrate (concerning which that place
in the Hebrews speaks nothing) and the lawfulness of War too. I am glad you are
not so high flown; but how soon you may be, the Lord knows 2 Timothy 3.13.
, for evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse.

3. I appeal to your own conscience, whether Peter or Paul (when they wrote)
sp^ke of Christian Magistrates in the places cited by you -- though we are
bound to those rules, since the Lord has blessed us with Christian Magigrates.

4. You bring us no Scripture in the New Testament for the Sabbath, as you did
for the other particulars mentioned by Mr. Baxter; I might therefore draw ^s
^igid a conclusion against you, as you do (in other things) against Mr. Cook,
Mr. Baxter, etc. but I had rather be a pattern of Christian charity, then of
groundless jealousy. In this then, either you subscribe to the main of Mr.
Baxter's position, or else you have said enough, as to the Sabbath, in your p.
13. as peradventure you imagine.

4. As for the charge upon Mr. B. that he forgets to read the Scripture, (in
reading so many other books) and your counsel to lay them aside, etc. they are
both unworthy of any answer: The one savoring of Pride and uncharitableness,
the other of ingratitude (at least) for the labors of the Learned. Only Sir,
before I part, I pray tell me, if you had never read any book but the English
Bible, how could you have empanell'd two Grand Juries, Chap. 5. sect. 14. and
16.
consisting the one of 22, and the other of 21, (as has been said) to serve
your ends? or have confuted (as you think) Mr. C. Mr. B. and M. Hall, etc. And
to what purpose was your book written, if we must give our selves wholly to read
and ^^^dy the Scripture^.

SECT. 6.
H. H. In your Second Position you say, That the great difficulties of a point,
is no proof that it is not truth; and a thing is not therefore to be rejected
as not of God, because it is not easy to understand. You affirm also, that
multitudes of silly Ignorants do the same. In all which I shall not oppose you.

Reply 1. I am glad that Mr. Baxter and you can hi^ (...) in any thing. Here it
seems you can shake hands and (...) friends. It Is well, if it be not like
Joah's ^iss.

2. Will not any sober judicious Christian conclude from hence (without breach
of charity) that you are one of th^se ^^^y ign^rants whom Mr. Baxter (...) or
four lines following? For because (...) no^ spoken plainly (in your sense) of
Infant Baptism, therefore you neither believe it, nor practice it.

SECT. 7.
H. H. You say, If a subtle Pagan should come amongst the people and dispute
that your Scriptu^e is not the Word of God, and that Christ Jesus is not the
Son of God, he would silence them more ^hen the Anabaptists can do. Answer.
Here Mr. Baxter rather si^^th with Pagans and Atheists, that deny both God and
Christ, and the Holy Scriptures, then with those which are fa^sly called
Anabaptists. Though we honestly ow^ God and Christ, and the Scriptures, and
desire to plead nothing else for our practice* for which cause he cries out
against us in his ^enth Position, calling us bruit beasts; and nothing (...)
because we call to him for Scripture to prove his practice; yet now he makes,
as if Atheists and Pagans had more to say for themselves then we: All which I
leave to God, and the impartial Reader to judge.

Reply 1. How dare you say without blushing, that you are f^^sly called
Anabaptists, if you truly say, that you are baptized again, p. 24.? If you
speak truly in one place, you speak falsely in the other Chap. 6. sect. 3.
but this has been hinted before.

2. If you did honestly own the Scriptures, you would not so dishonestly wrest
them: as Jer. 2.12, 13. p. 8. nor so dishonestly play with them; as Romans 3.12.
Isa. 45.5. Joh. 1.20. p. 29. to say nothing of the Scriptures abused by you in
this very 32 p. and many other in your book.

3. It Is an unchristian charge, that Mr. B. rather sides with Atheists then
Anabaptists (now truly so called) When he pities, or reproves with pity a
multitude of silly ignorant Christians, who are less able to answer a subtle
Pagan about the authority of the Scripture, and Deity of Christ, then an
Anabaptist about rebaptizing. Are not those more difficult points, then these
present under debate? What siding is imaginable in this? Must Christ be said to
side Mat. 11.10, 21, 22, 23, 24.
with Tire, and Sidon, and Sodom, rather then with Corazin, Bethsaida, and
Capernaum; because he tells them it shall be more tolerable for the former,
then for the latter in the day of judgment; what blasphemy would this be?

4. It Is a notorious untruth, that Mr. B. calls you bruit beasts, only because
you call for Scripture to prove his practice; No, but for renouncing reason, or
evident consequences drawn from Scripture, which you do in the present case.
All which I also leave to God, and the impartial Reader to judge.

SECT. 8.
H. H. page 33. Mr. B. speaks great swelling words of vanity; viz. He will
hazard all the reputation of his understanding on it, that there is ten times
more to be said for Free Will, then can be said against Infant baptism; yea, it
is twenty times more difficult (and yet you offer to dispute it with any man)
and must it therefore be true? Answ. 1. As for the reputation of your
understanding, I will not say what I judge what it is worth. 2. If you had said,
There is ten times more to be said for Free will, then for Infant baptism, you
had hit it right. Lastly, whereas you say, Free Will is such a difficult point,
I am not of your judgment in that: For I believ it is easy to them that will
understand, to know, that no man in, or of himself (without God) has any free
will or power to think or do that which is good. For Acts 17.28. In him we
live, etc -- in and through God that gives to all men life, etc. v. 25. to the
end that they might seek him, v. 27. Even the wickedest and hypocrites (the
worst of men) have a will and power to do more good then they do, and that is
one cause of their just condemnation. Moreover it is evident, that wicked Balaam
had a will and desire Number. 23.10.
to die the death of the righteous, etc. And Paul says plainly Romans 7.18.
To will is present with me, etc. By all which it is evident, that Free Will is
not such a difficult point as you would make it: but it is an easy matter with
you to call light darkness, and darkness light, Isa. 5.20.

Reply 1. For the worth of Mr. Baxter's Reputation in your judgment, it is very
like to the judgment of the Cock, who preterred a Barley-corn before a Pearl.
I believe M. B. is of the Apostles mind, 1 Cor. 4.3. But because you will not
speak it out, but it sticks in your teeth, I shall without flattery or fear
tell you my judgment; That as Austin was called Malleus Pelagianorum.
the Mall of the Pelagians; so may Mr. Baxter be truly called, the Mall of the
Anabaptists: Malleus Anabaptistarum.
His memory shall be blessed, when your name shall rot.

2. M Baxt. has hit it right, but you have mist it (for all your great
swelling words of vanity) if the question about Free Will were truly stated.

3. If you dissent from Mr. Baxter about the difficulty of the point of
Free Will, why will not such a brave Champion as you are, give or accept the
challenge to dispute it with him? you must have better weapons then here you
fight with, or I assure you he will quickly foil you.

4. I believe Infant Baptism is easy to him that will understand. The
spiritual plague is in your head; you hear, and will not understand; see, and
will not perceive.

5. The Papists and Arminians will say as much as you do, and yet they are
stiff Patrons of Free Will; who prank up nature in a proud dress: and derogate
from the honor of God, and Free grace.

6. I wonder you couple together Balaam and Paul: for Paul was a Regenerate
man, and Balaam (you confess) a wicked man; and is there no difference between
the will of the one, and of the other? It savors of the Arminian Cask. That as
man's will lost nothing by Adam's fall, to it gets nothing by the second Adam's
grace. But because this is beside the point, I shall (...) no deeper into this
Controversy; but leave you to Mr Baxter, who can handle you without Mittins,
your calumnis ^es^^ us no answer.

SECT. 9
H. H. I proceed to your fourth Position, (...) rein you say; that if never so
clear evidence of truth be produced, yet it will he dark to them that are
incapable of discerning it; For it is Gods work to make people understand --
Heb. 5.11, 12, 13, 14 I answer; We grant you all this. The clearest truth will
be dark to some. But let us show some clear evidence of truth first, and show
us where it is written, that Babes must be baptized, and then if we do not, our
blood be upon us, etc.

Reply 1. To pass by another mistake of yours ( viz. the fourth Position,
which indeed is the Third). It seems the doctrine of Infant Baptism, though
never so clear a truth, is hid from your eyes.

2. Mr. Baxter, and many other of our Worthies have showed, where
Infant Baptism is written as clearly and plainly, as Women's receiving the
Lord's Supper, praying in the Family, etc beforementioned, and many more,
without a wretched lie. Yea, as clearly and plainly as you proved page 6.
Lidra's husband was baptized, because the Scripture says, She and her household
were baptized, and yet you are so blind, that you cannot sea or held
Infant Baptism.

3. I fear your blood (according to your wish) will be upon you (as Christ's
blood was and is on the Jews, according to their imprecation) for your p^^de
and prejudice, ignorance and infidelity, which (Hear) as wilful and affected,
for in this 34 p. (...) profess you will not believe the clear evidence that
Mr. Baxter has brought for the proof of Infant Baptism: I see that true which
Mr. B. says in this Position; it is one thing to bring full evidence and proof,
and another thing to make people apprehend and understand it. We may do the
one, God only can do the other. These words are true and faithful, you grant,
I leave you therefore to the Lord, whose work it is to persuade the heart. The
Well of water was nigh enough to Hagar (^he bond woman, who with her son were
cast on:) and yet she could not see, till God opened her eyes, Gen 23. ver. 29.

SECT. 10.
H. H. p. 34. As for your saying, we had need study the Controversy seven
years. I Answer, What rule have you for that? Did the 3000 in Acts 2.41, 42.
study this Controversy seven years, or seven dates either? Or those men and
women in Acts 8.12. or the Eunuch, ^.38? or L^d^^ and the Jailor, Act. 16 etc.

Reply 1. Mr. Baxter speaks of most Controversies: his words are, page 6. Most
of the best (of people) have need to read Scripture, and books of Controversy
seven years at least, before they will be capable of understanding most
Controversies. But it is no wonder that you, who are so frequent in perverting
the holy Scriptures (as has been showed) pervert his writings. The Reader now
may observe how much you have left our.

2. Because (I concess) this is applicable to the present point, (though not
only) I say, your instances our of the Acts of the Apostles are nothing to the
purpose. viz. They did not study this Controversy seven years, before they
(being ^du^) were baptized. Therefore we have no need to read the Scripture and
books of Controversy, before we understand this Controversy of Infant Baptism
A gross inconsequence.

3. But you ask, what rule for that? Mr. Baxter has given you a reason page 5.
(agreeable to the rule) God changes the wi^^ (...) a sudden; but he does not
insure knowledge (e^pecially of difficult points) on a sudden. If this like you
not, I hope you will not recede from your own rule, page 28. where you confess,
That we have all need of seven years education at Cambridge and Oxford, etc.
therefore of seven years study for the understanding of this Controversy, and
that without any danger of incoherence or folly.

SECT. 11.
H. H. You say that men think they can understand plain Scripture if they hear
it, but they cannot. Oh that pride would let them know, that they cannot
understand the plainest Lecture of Geometry, or Arithmetic -- Read the Grammar
to a boy in the Primmer, and he understands not a word you say. Answ. Is it
possible, you would make men believe they cannot understand plain Scripture, if
they have it? But I pray try us with some first, and see; I confess we cannot
understand this Book of yours to be plain Scripture proof for, etc. because you
have packt it so full of such Whimsies, as these, Geometry, Arithmetic,
Grammar, etc. But Sir, God's Word is of another nature, Psalm. 19.7.8. and
119.98, 99, 100. all which I believe you will find to be true, before we have
done.

Reply 1. It Is possible that some men cannot understand plain Scripture, if
they hear it; and Mr. Baxter in this 3d Position gives a reason of it:
Otherwise one man should know as much as another, and all as much as their
Teachers, seeing they all read and hear the same Word. If you will not believe
Mr. Baxter (nor Scripture, nor experience) will you believe your own words? for
a little after the beginning of this page 34. you say; The Apostles preached
very plainly, and yet there were Many hearers which rejected their words,
though very plain --

It Is possible and plain, that you can quickly contradict and confound your
self -- and yet perhaps it is not possible, that you will believe it.

2. You have been tried sufficiently with plain Scripture, and we see you will
not believe it, nor understand it. Like those who are complained on, Isa. 28.9.
Whom shall he teach knowledge and make to understand doctrine? Them that are
weaned from the milk, and drawn from the breasts, etc.

3. It Is very strange to say (as you do often) that in Mr. Baxters book there
is no plain Scripture proof for Infant-Church-membership and Baptism, and yet
you have plain See the Title of the Foundation of the Font discovered.
Scripture Proof for the baptizing of men and women they believ, as a standing
Ordinance of Jesus Christ: I pray you, where are those words, A Standing
Ordinance of Jesus Christ, written in the Scripture?

4. Yea it is stranger to say, Mr. Baxters Book is packt so full of such
Whimsies, as these; Geometry, Arithmetic, Grammar, etc. 1. I am mistaken, if
Mr. B. mentions these, but only in this third Position. 2. You that profess
your self to be a Teacher, how can you understand many places of Scripture, or
make the people to understand them (if they come to you for resolution) without
some skill in these things, which you call Whimsies? E. g. Without Maltae sunt
in Bibli^s quae numerandi scientian quam dicimus Arithmeticam deposcunt, multae
quae sine Geometria intelligi non possunt, Alst. Plaec^g. l. 2. p. 76
skill in Geometry, how can you understand the Cubits of the length, and
breadth, and height of Noah's Ark, made by God's own direction? And without
Arithmetic Dan. 9.25, 26.
Daniel's seven weeks, and sixty two weeks? And without Grammar, whether the
Relative Genesis 6.14, 15.
THIS is to be referred in the end of the 20 ver. of the 5. chap. of the of
John? This is the true God. Whether to the Father (as the Arrians and Socinians
say) or to the Son Jesus Christ, as the Orthodox most truly say? Or without
Astronomy, how can you understand that Text, which makes Arcturus, Orion, and
Pleiades, and the chambers of the South? Unless you look with other men's eyes,
and take things upon meet trust. 3. Now let the Godly judge, whether it be not
a kind of blasphemy, wickedly to term these, he like Arts, by the name of
WHIMSIES. Joh ^.8.
But Learning (against which you do so often inveigh) has no enemy, but him
that is ignorant and unlearned.


5. We honor the Word of God as much as you, and (through grace in some
measure) know by experience the nature and effects of it: and I believ we shall
discover that light which is in you to be darkness, before we have done.

SECT. 12.
H. H. p. 35. You s^^, Po^^^. 4. When the cause is so d^fficult, we must follow
the most prob^ble ^a^^ Answ. ^hen i^ seems it is very difficult for you to
prove, that Infants ought to be baptized, by your own confession, and indeed so
I believ; for that must need^ be difficult to prove, that there is not one word
of God in all the Bible for. I cannot blame you to say. That it is difficult to
prove.

Reply 1. That it is difficult to prove Infant Baptism, is not Mr. Baxter's
conf^ssion; but your own collection; yet you would make your Proselytes believ
(who are very credulou^, taking all for Gospel that you say) that it is Mr.
Baxters own confession.

2. Admit this Confession, it makes nothing for you no^ against us, but rather
for u^, if that saying be t^u^ (...). Diffic^^^ quae pu^c^^a.
The more difficult, the more excellent. It Is ^ard to prove by express
Scripture, the Christian weekly Sab^ath, Family-praier twice a day, Women's
receiving the Lord's Supper, and the re^t mentioned before, Chap 5. sect. 1.
etc.
with many more* yet it hurts not us who conscienciously observe the same, no^
help such who are enemies to them and us. Such is the case of Infant Baptism.

3. It Is but a vain Repetition of (...) loud and lewd calumny, that there is
not one word of God in all the Bible for Infant Baptism: To what end have you
sweat so much in answering some of those Scriptures which are (usually and
rightly) brought for Infant Baptism? Sure the Scriptures are the Word of God
contained in the Bible.

SECT. 13.
H. H. But you say, we must follow the most probable way. Come on then, that we
will. Now whether it is most probable, ^h^^ that practice which is no where
commanded, nor written in Scripture, should be of God, or of Satan; Judge ye!
Now that Infant Baptism is such a practice, as is not written in Scripture,
both M. Hag. and your self confess -- Therefore it is not of God, but of Satan.

Reply 1. Your Argument consists of pure Negatives Altera saltem prae^iss^rum
sit affi^mans, ^anex duabus praemissis nega^tibus nil p^^est legiti^^e conclu^i
Eu stach de Syllo. p 132.
and so concludes nothing: For this is the sum and substance of it: That which
is not written in the Word of God, is not of God, but of Satan. But
Infant Baptism is not written in the Word of God. Therefore it is not of God,
but of Satan.

2. You father another untruth on M. H. and M. B. They no where confess that
Infant Baptism is not written in Scripture; for how many Scriptures do they
bring to prove the practice of Infant Baptism?

3. You do but eq^ivocate in the word WRITTEN, for if you mean expressly in so
many words and syllabl^s, then your Major is fal^e, and rests on you to be
proved. In the mean time the falsehood may be thus discovered to any Reader from
your own principle: That which is not w^itten expressly in the Word of God, is
not of God, but o^ Satan; but women's receiving the Lords Supper. Family prayer
morning and evening, etc. are not expressly written in the Word of God:
Therefore women^ receiving the Lord's Supper, family prayer morning and
evening. etc. are not of God, but of Satan. You have now brought your Pigs to a
fair market. But if by the word WRITTEN, you mean Consequentially written. Then
your Minor is false; For Infant Baptism is so written in the Word of God, i. e.
Consequentially, as has been abundantly S^e M Marshall^ Defense p. 209, etc.
showed out of Mat. 28.19. Acts 2.38, 39. etc. Where there are Consequentiall
commands for Infant Baptism: As (by your own confession, p. 12.) Family Prayer,
etc. is written in 1 Timothy 2.8. etc. -- So that hence I conculde Infant Baptism
is written in the Word of God, and therefore of God, and not of Satan, as you
blasphemously speak and write.

SECT. 14.
H. H. In your 5 Position, you tell the people, that if any have taken up this
p^nion, and have not read and studied Mr. Cobbet, and Mr. Church, and other
chief Books, and been able to confute them, they have but discovered a seared
conscience; which either dare venture on sin without fear, or else do count
error no sin. To all which I answer. How now Mr. B. are you grown to this
height? what must not men obey what they find written in the holy Scripture,
till they have asked M. Cobbet and M. Churches counsel? I pray you, where
learned you this Divinity? at Rome? I thought all this while the holy
Scriptures had been able to make us wise to salvation -- but it seems they are
not: If you say -- True, but we must be beholding to M. Cobbet, and M. Church.

Reply 1. The greatest part of M. B. 5 Position you pass by in silence, (as
being, (it seems) unable to answer it, and the piece you catch at, you curtail
also; as the intelligent Reader may quickly observe.

2. What you seem to answer to, is in a Magisteriall, Prelatical, and scornful
way: e. g. How now M. B! are, you grown to this height? what? must not men
obey, etc. till they have asked M. Cobbets and M. Churches counsel? I pray
where learned you this Divinity? at Rome? -- I am very sorry that you are grown
to that height, as to fit in the seat of the scornful? Psalm. 1.1.


3. The Scriptures (I acknowledge) is able to make us wise to salvation, and
yet we may, and must read other Books, for all that, 1 Timothy 4.14 with Eccl.
12.12.
give attendance to reading -- I believe you speak this out of the height of
your bitterness and malice against all humane learning: which shall be
defended in its place.

4. What a poor and pitiful reason do you give? Mr. Cobbets and Mr. Churches
Books must not be read, because the Scripture is able to make us wise to
salvation. Foundation p. 15. to 21.
Why then did M. Haggar read (if he has read) those Books mentioned in page
15. which make up three whole leaves? Are not the Scriptures able to make M.
Haggar wise to salvation -- without them? Nay, why have you printed this Book
of yours, if not to be read? and yet for all that the Scripture is able to make
us wise to salvation, through Faith in Christ.

SECT. 15.
H. H. p. 36 But I pray, how did men before M. Cobbets and M. Church's B^oks
were written? and how do those ^ow, who cannot come by their Books, or never
heard of them; If it be as you say, you may do well to send some men up and
down the Country to sell them. But I believe this is but one of your
scare-Crows; with which you use to affright silly souls, that set their Faith
in your wisdom, and not in the power of God; but your folly is a making
manifest, and light and freedom is breaking forth to them which you have kept
in darkness and bondage.

Reply 1. Pehaps you might as well ask, how did men before the Scriptures were
written? But

2. You speak in the language of ignorant, superstitious, Popish, and profane
persons; what are become of our Ancestors, etc? How did our Forefathers before
there were so much preaching, etc? The same plaster may be applied to both
sores: viz. They stand and fall to their Master. Where much is given, much is
required; that little measure of light might be saving to them, which will not
be to us. But M. Baxter tells you p. 6. If any of you have taken up this
opinion, without reading M. Cobbets etc. and being able to confute them, at
least to himself, (which words you have left out) you have discovered a seared
conscience, etc. To which you answer not a word.

3. Your scoffing, scorning, and censuring, are unworthy of any reply; only (it
seems) as yet you have not made M. B. folly manifest; (for you say), His folly
is a making manifest) and I am confident, that, that light and freedom (you
talk of) will be found in the event, darkness and Thraldom.

4. Consider in your cold blood, whether you do not keep your Proselytes in
darkness and bondage, by keeping them from the public Ministry. (By the light
whereof, your errors are discovered) under the odious terms of Antichristian,
etc. (one of your Scare-Crows, with which you use to affright silly souls --)
And by keeping them to your Ministry, or to some private gifted-brother (as he
is called); what is this, but to be kept in bondage, or set in the stocks?

SECT. 16.
H. H. same p In your sixth Position, you say you will discover a most frequent
cause of men's falling into errors, viz. All men in the beginning do receive
many truths upon weak and falls grounds, and so hold them a while, till they are
beaten out of their old Arguments, and then presently they suspect the cause it
self, and you are persuaded that it is Mr. Tomb's case. Answ. As for Mr. Tombs,
he is of age, and able to answer for himself. I never knew any receive
Infant Baptism upon any ground at all, weak or strong; neither can they, being
incapable of understanding what they do. Therefore you may well say; they are,
or may be quickly beaten off it again, etc.

Reply 1. What you say of M. Tombs, I may more truly say of M. Baxter; he is of
age, and able to answer for himself. If that be true (of which I make no
question) which is said of M. Baxter; J. G. Catabap
A man as fit and able as any I know, to make straight a crooked age.

2. M. Baxter does not say as you represent him; but you being deceived, would
deceive the simple, partly by leaving out the word ALMOST (For he says, Almost
all men -- do receive many truths on weak and false grounds) and partly by not
distinguishing between the receiving of Infant Baptism, and the doctrine of
Infant Baptism. The Jewish Infants received Circumcision, even when and while
they could not receive the doctrine of it. Your reason therefore concludes as
strongly against Circumcision then, as against Infant Baptism now.

SECT. 17.
H. H. same p. You say, Alas! there are far better grounds which they are not
aware of. Answ. That is, it may be, because you baptize them so soon; if you
would let them alone, till they are men and women, before you baptize them, as
you have example in Scripture, they might receive Baptism on better grounds.

Reply 1. Your interpretation, with, a may be, is but a mere conjecture, a
fancy of your own head, and worthy of no better a reply.

2. Though we distinguish between men, and women, and children in our language,
yet the Scripture does not always. Cain a child is called a man, Genesis 4.1. and
an Infant (upon the birth) is also called in the New Testament a man, John
16.21. where the same word is used, which includes both man and woman, as you
confess, p. 68. Howsoever your expression is as improper, as your advice is
impertinent. viz. If you would let them alone, till they are men and women: I
know not your meaning well, unless you would have every Infant an
Hermaphrodite, viz. a man and woman.

3. You have brought no example in Scripture to justify your practice, for
those who are said to be baptized in Scripture, were not baptized before (that
we read of) as you acknowledge we were, p. 24.

SECT. 18.
H. H. p. 36 and 37. In your seventh Position you confess, some Divines have
reasoned very weakly for Infant Baptism, and used unfit Phrases, and
mis-applyed Scriptures, and to th^se some have wrote three or four Books, and
easily answered, and seemed to Triumph, and yet the truth is not shaken; but it
may be, all the best Arguments and plain Scriptures, have never been answered.
Answ. I desire to answer the plain Scriptures no way, but by Faith and
obedience, by believing and doing them. Therefore if you know of any that
speaks of Infant-bapt^sm, bring them forth, and I will be silent. The first I
see, but as for your best Arguments you talk off, I look upon them but as so
many cunning devised Fables, wherewith you lie in wait to deceive simple souls,
by speaking things you ought not, for filthy Lucres sake, Titus 1 14.

Reply 1. The first part of your answer, I cannot put into my Creed, for if you
desire -- why do you not endeavor? you kn^w, who says (p) The soul of the
sluggard desires, and has noth^ng, Prove. 13.4.

2. M. B. and others, have brought forth plain Scripture for Infant Baptism,
and you in silence have passed by the most of them, because (it seems) you
could not answer them: though you confess you see them.

3. The close of your answer, if it be a sufficient answer, then its an easy
matter to answer any Argument (though never so strong) by mis-applying
Scripture, and scornfu^l terms. And I must needs tell you of your rash, and
harsh judgment, contrary to Mat. 7.1. Judge not etc. -- and to Romans 14.10. etc.
why do thou judge thy brother etc.? And indeed, this last part of your answer
is the reason, why I cannot believe your first.

SECT. 19.
H. H. p. 37. You say Position 8. One sound Argument is enough to prove any
thing true. Answ. Then either the great number of yours in your book of plain
Scriptures are not sound, or else you need not to have brought so many by your
own grant.

Reply 1. What you say of M. Baxters Arguments, may be said of yours more
truly, viz. your twelve Arguments Foundation from p 63. to 73. from p. 73. to
87.
against Infants Church Membership, and your nine Arguments against
Infants-discipleship, etc. which will be found as weak as water; and as unsound
as rotten ground, when I shall come to them.

2. M. Baxter tells you in this 8 Position. It is not number but weight, that
must carry it. Therefore he resolved not to heap up many.

3. It seems you take notice of the great number of M. Baxters Arguments; and
yet you dare not grapple with that huge host, but only cull out one or two,
and that by snatching at a limb, and away Tanquam Caenis ad Nilum, Eras. Ad^g.
as you have done with M. Cook, etc.

SECT. 20.
H. H. But you say, What if all the Texts were put by save one, were not that
enough? Answ. Yes, its enough, if you can show us but one, but I pray where is
that one? I cannot find it in all the book. But it seems you are afraid, that
all should be put by save one. Therefore you make this Apology, but I supp^se
all will do you little go^d.

Reply 1. If you wipe your eyes you may see (if you be not blind) in M. Baxters
Book more then one.

2. I doubt you speak against your conscience. How dare you say, you cannot
find one text for Infant Baptism in all M. Baxters Book, when you seem to be
more Eagle-eyed then others in seeing and finding (as you think) the Font in
Jer. 2.12, 13. p. 8.

3. M. Baxters Apology is not made out of any such jealousy, as you pretend;
as if he was afraid, that all should be put by save one, but out of a desire
and endeavor to rectify the ignorant in their fond conceits; as he himself
expr^sseth it, which you have cunningly left out.

4. I will accept of your grant, and improve it in time convenient, viz. If all
should be put by but one, it is enough.

SECT. 21.
H. H. same p. You say Position 9. The former and present customs of the holy
Saints and Churches; should be of great weight with humble Christians. Answ. I
grant it, if they be now according to the primitive pattern: I am sure the
custom of the Churches in the Apostles days was to baptize men and women when
they believed, etc. Acts 2.41. and 8.12.36, 37. and 10.47. and 16.33.34. and
18.8. Therefore let this custom be of weight to your self, and do not baptize
little babes that cannot believe, etc. because Paul says, 1 Cor. 11.16.

Reply 1. You condemn hereby all the Protestant Ministers of the French
Churches, who preach with their hats on their heads, and yet they think they
may do so without sin, notwithstanding, 1 Cor. 11.4.7.

2. Are not you self-condemned? who (as I am informed) have broken bread on the
second day of the week, when the primitive Disciples Act. 20.7.
did it on the Lord's day: viz. the first day of the week, as you grant p. 13.
nay (Expositors on that place collect) they did break bread once a week, viz.
on the day aforesaid, you once a month, if so often.

3. Those Scriptures so often repeated by you, have been answered already: I
tell you again, That practice is not binding to us, but in the same or like
condition. Beside, the primitive Christians had their Love Feasts, when the
Lord's Supper was administered, and received (as is plain out of Scripture see
Diodat. 1 Cor. 11.20.21. Jude 8.12.
and it was their custom to salute one another with an holy kiss. Do you not
think it a piec of your Christian liberty to swerve from these primitive
practices, etc.

4. The custom of the Churches in baptizing Infant^ is of that weight with the
Paedobaptists, that you must b^ing more convincing Arguments then you have yet
done, to take them off from that custom. As for the manner of Baptizing, Mr.
Cradock (to whom Mr. Baxter referrs you) tells you, Gospel-liberty p. 2^. and.
4.
I hat Christ has not made Baptism such an Ordinance, "as that in all
Climates, and Countries-and Regions they "must go over head and ears in a
River, etc.

SECT. 22.
H. H. You say that you can prove, that Infant Baptism was used in the Church
as high as to the Apostles, as there be many sufficient Histories extant inform
us; and that the deferring of Baptism came in with the rest of Popery, upon
Popish or Heretical grounds. Answ. Oh Sir! have I now sound you out? Truly
seeing I have, I must not conceal your wickedness, least I become guilty with
you of the blood of souls; And therefore I do by this declare to all men, that
you are both a Deceiver and a Blasphemer. The which charge I now come to prove.

Reply 1. Nay stay a while, and consider what you say or do, you triumph before
the victory. If you have but now found out Mr. Baxter, It teems you have missed
of him all this while.

2. Though I have found you out before, yet I must not conceal your weakness,
wickedness, and audaciousness, least I communicate with you in ^our sin; and
here I do declare to all men hereby, that Henry Haggar is both an Imposter and
a Blasphemer, the which charge I come now to prove; but first let us see how
you prove the charge.

SECT. 23.
H. H. p. 3.38. 1. It Is evident you are a Deceiver, in that you have entitled
your Book, Plain Scripture proof for Infant's Church Membership, and Baptism,
when indeed there is no such thing in all the Bible; but you confess that your
proof is from some histories extant, which you judge sufficient, etc.

Reply 1. You notoriously abuse Mr. Baxter, he does not say, that proof for
Infant Baptism from Histories are sufficient in his judgment, see Mr. Baxt.
Position 9. p. 7.
but in opposition to Mr. T. pretenses among the simple, he says, he shall
easily prove, that Infant Baptism was used in the Church as high as to the
Apostles days, as there is any sufficient history extant to inform us: And if
this proves Mr. Baxter to be a deceiver, then blessed see the foregoing Chap.
5. sect. 14. and Inst. 3.4. c. 16. s. 8.
Calvin is one, and many other burning and shining lights in the Churches of
Christ. But your charge is indeed from an Eldern-gun, and is no Musket Shot; it
makes a noise, but (God be thanked) hurts not.

2. Besides the humane testimonies for Infant Baptism in matter of fact, M.
Baxter brings abundance of plain Scriptures to prove it De jure.: And if you
see them not, it is because you are wilfully blind and obstinate. It Is an easy
matter for you with impudence to say, there is no such thing but it is hard for
you to disprove those Texts of Scripture alleged by him. Therefore you have
cunningly waved all, saving two or three in comparison.

3. Your Proposition implied is false: viz. He that intitles his Book so, and
yet brings ancient histories to prove the usage of Infant Baptism as high as
the Apostles days, is a Deceiver; you will never set this crooked leg
straight while the world stands.

4. To set the Saddle (as they say) on the right horse, and to prove you a
Deceiver, I thus argue: He that inti^uleth his Book, Plain Scripture Proof for
the baptizing of men and women when they believe (in Rivers and Fountains) as a
Standing Ordinance in the Church of Christ, is a Deceiver: But H. H. so
intituseth his Book; therefore H H. is a Deceiver. The^e is no doubt of the
Minor, and the Major is as clear -- because those words, viz. [A Standing
Ordinance] are no where written in the Scripture of truth. and with Mr. Haggar,
express and plain Scripture proof are all one.

SECT. 24.
H. H. 2. You are a Blasphemer; for you say, deferring of Baptism came in with
the rest of Popery. Answ. But Sir, do you not know that our glorious Lord Jesus
Christ deferred his baptism till he was thirty years of age, Luke 3.21, 22, 23.
And yet he was the child of believing Parents, I think you dare not deny?

Reply 1. If this example be binding, none ought to be baptized till they are
thirty years old, which (I persuade myself) is against your judgment and
practice.

2. Luke says not, that Christ deferred his Baptism, till he was thirty years
of age. This is your inference, not his Assertion. He does not say, Christ was
thirty years of age before (or when) he was baptized, much less tha the
Deferred his Baptism till then -- but thus; Luke 2.23.
Jesus himself began to be About thirty years of age, etc.

3. Christ was not till then baptized; partly to answer the Types, Numb. 4.3,
35, 39, 43, 47.
and chiefly to receive that Testimony from Heaven, in the midst of such a
great confluence of people, that came to John to be baptized, which is hinted
by Mat. 3.5, 6 -- 13 Then -- and held forth by Luke c. 3.21, 22. Therefore this
was not properly a deferring, see Diodat. on 2 Pet. 3 9.
unless perhaps in the judgment of the Flesh: as, Hab. 2. verse. 3.2 Pet. 3.9.

SECT. 25.
H. H. p. ibid. Again, does not the Commission of Christ defer Baptism till
believing, Mark 16.15, 16. and Philip also, Acts 8 36, 37. showing by these
words plainly, that if he did not believe, it was to be deferred, etc.

Reply 1. In Mark and in the Acts cited, there is not one word of deferring
till believing; you manifest your own folly, and delude poor souls, etc.

2. You are now for Consequences, when you think they will serve your turn. Mr.
Baxter has brought more plain Scripture Proof for Infant Church Membership and
Baptism, then you have done for deferring Baptism.

3. I am mistaken, if you are not guilty of a plain contradictions; For in your
page 26. in your exhortation, you do more then implie, that Baptism is not to
be deferred, saying; Let us not delay the time, (with a woeful misapplication of
Scripture ^sal. 119.60.
but here in this page. Baptism is to be deferred, as you plead.

4. The rest of this page contains nothing but an idle Repetition, or
abominable Censuring, with horrible abuse of Scripture, and therefore shall
have no other answer, but what is made already.

SECT. 26.
H. H. page 39. The sum of which is, that Rev 19.20. and 13.16, 17. are most
properly applied to you, the sign of the Cross being a mark of the Beast, on
the child's forehead, when it was baptized, or rather rantized. Here is a
looking-glass for you but the Gospel is our looking-glass, Acts 2.41. and 8.12.
and 14.3. wherein we see our selves conformable to the image of Christ, and
walk according to the Primitive pattern, being far from compelling any to be
baptized, till they can understand what they do, and amend their lives, etc.

Reply 1. Those Scriptures cannot be properly applied to us, but are woefully
misapplied by you. Why do you rave, of the sign of the Cross, which with other
Ceremonies (groaned under by the godly) are removed? Or of receiving the mark
of the Beast: i. e. Mode on Rev. 4. p. 76.
a subjecting our selves to his Authority, and acknowledging him to be our
Lord, when you cannot but know, that yoke has been happily cast off long
since? But it seems you had a mind to set the mark of the Beast on us, in
favor of the Church of Rome, for whom you are a Factor. But further to show
your error in that misapplication; I pray, what miracles are done by us? As
Rev. 13.14. and 18.20. I fear you show too much the mark of the Beast, by your
kicking, and wincing at, and dabling those that are traveling toward heaven.

2. You intimate that he who is Rantiz^d (as you scornfully speak) is not
baptized: as if I should say, H. Hag. is a man, and therefore not a living
creature: but you acknowledge these 3000 were baptized, and it is most probable
they were Acts 2.41. Videntur 3000 uno die a paucis Apostolicis non potuisse
baptizari si singuli mersi fuissent, Cham. 1.4 l. 5. c, 2. s. 6.
rantized only, there is no mention made of Fonts and Rivers.

3. I wonder in what glass you looked, when you could see a Font in Jer 2.12,
13. page 8. and the sign of the Cross in this of the Revel. and yet cannot see
one plain Scripture for Infant Baptism.

4. Were those mentioned in the Acts baptized before, as you say we were, page
24. or were they Church Members, Receivers of the Lord's Supper, etc. as those
were whom you re-baptize? If not, for shame do not say, that you see your selves
in the glass of the Gospel more conformable to Christ, and the Primitive
pattern.

5. Though you want the Argument of force (which yet you would fain have) yet
you want not the force of Argument (though feigned) to compel some ignorant
and carnal people (whom I could name) to be baptized by you.

6. I may not forget to make good my charge also, that you are a Blasphemer, if
to blaspheme be to speak evil, as it is often rendered in the New Testament E g.
Jude 10, etc. 1 Pet. 4. ver. 4.
For you say, Infant Baptism is of Satan, page 35. when no Scripture speaks so:
That it is an invention of the Pope, page 15. when it has been practiced in
the Church of Christ before the Universa Ecclisia baptismu^ Insantumtenuit
antequam intelligeretur, quid sibi vellet Regnum Papae, aut quicquam de eo
auditum esset. Call Just. in Anab. p. 478.
Pope was born: That Mr. B. Mr. C. and other godly Ministers that dissent from
you are fools, wicked, Antichristian, etc. and that they make Proselytes seven
fold more the children of Satan, then they were before, p. 38. with a great
deal of more filthy stuff disgorged from your rancorous stomach all along your
book. I say no more, but that time is coming that you shall give an account to
him that is ready to judge quick and dead, 1 Pet. 4* ver. 4, 5.

SECT. 27.
H. H. page 39, and 40. You say Pos. 10. Evident Consequences, or Arguments
drawn by reason from Scripture, are as true proof as the very express words of
a Text; and if we have the words without the meaning and reason, we have no
proof at all; for the Devil used the words of the Scripture to Christ. To all
which I Answer; I^ That Consequences or Arguments drawn from Scripture, are as
true proofs as Scripture: This is but one of your untruths. For most certain it
is, that what the Scripture says, we need not prove by Consequence -- As Genesis
1.1* 3, 7 8. And this I do believe without any Consequence: And if you will
deny it, because it is plain Scripture, without any Consequence, you may if you
please; but your folly will be manifest, as it is to me already.

Reply 1. You seem here to deny all Consequences, when you granted some, page
11. One of these must be one of your untruths, for both members of a
contradiction cannot be true (observing the laws of a contradiction).

2. Must that be an untruth in Mr. Baxter, which is a truth in you? For you
have asserted plain Scripture Proof for giving thanks at Meals, praying with
our Families, Women's receiving the Lord's Supper, p. 12, 13, 14. which are but
Consequences and Arguments drawn from Scripture, and ye^ as true proofs as
Scripture it self: so you judge, and I deny not.

3. If you mean, what the Scripture says Expressly, it is granted, we need not
prove by Consequence, if otherwise it is denied. Christ himself (Mr. Baxter
tells you) proves the Resurrection by Consequence, out of Exodus 3.6. so that
you might have spared the quotations out of Genesis 1.1. etc. who denies all, or
any of these? But you have a notable faculty to prove that, which none of your
Adversaries deny.

4. If Mr. Baxter, etc. do believe those Scriptures cited by you, and not deny
the same; then is your folly made manifest, in making such an inference as you
do.

SECT. 28.
H. H. p. 40. Secondly, when you say, If we have the words without the meaning
and reason, we have no proof at all. This is a most subtle Sophistry, much
like to that of Satan, when he beguiled Eve, saving, Genesis 3.4, 5. which was
both a truth and a lie. The truth is, if we have not God's meaning, and the
reason why he speaks to us, how can we understand as we ought? But both are
plainly declared to the sons of men by the Word of Truth, and so plainly, that
if you, or an Angel from heaven shall add to it, or take from it, you shall be
accursed, and he will add, etc. all which if you do not know, read Prove. 30.6.
Gal. 1.8, 9. Rev. 22.18.

Reply 1. Mr. Baxter's expressi^n and Satan's are very unlike; you acknowledge
a truth and a lie in Satan's, but you have showed no lie in M. Baxter's, nor
indeed can you, unless you will also condemn your self.

2. If we cannot understand, unless we have God's meaning and reason, then Mr.
Baxter is in the truth* viz If we have the Word without the meaning and reason,
we have no proof at all. Shuffle no longer.

3. Mr. Baxter knows, and has read those Scriptures men^ioned by you; but do
you read them more seriously, and then you may know more clearly, whether you
be not obnoxious to those plagues and curses; for you are guilty of adding to
the Word, e. g. p 4. you add, That (forth) wilderness, in Mark 1.3, 4, 5. And
ye have added the word Church to Acts 2.41. and the Condition of Faith, etc, to
Acts 2.39. Many more instances might be given.

4. I confess all adding to the Word is (if it may be so called) not simply
forbidden: For then all Annotations on the Bible, or Expositions on any Text,
should be unlawful, which concludes you as well as us; but all Additions for
words or meaning contrary to the Word, according to that usual saying by way of
Sarcasme, Benedicta Glossa quae corrumpit textum.
Blessed is that Gloss which does corrupt the Text: Now if we are guilty of
such a crime, it remains on you to prove it, your calumny to this purpose has
been discovered, in your page 11.

SECT. 29.
H. H. p, 41. You would make us believe, that what is written is not able to
inform us aright, but you must add, or take from it at your pleasure, and those
additions or substractions you call the meanings and reasons of the Word of
God. But I shall prove, that the Word of God alone is able to make us wise to
salvation, without the adding to, or taking from, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16 17. Jam.
1.21. Acts 20.32.

Reply 1. Would we make you believe so etc. --? This is one of those evil
surmizings of yours, which is condemned in 1 Timothy 6.4.

2. You prove that the Word of God is able to make us wise unto salvation, you
are very good at proving that, which none of us denies. But,

3. The Scriptures alleged by you, do not prove what you undertake. For where
is the word Alone in any of these Texts? Is not this one of those Additions,
contrary to the forenamed Scriptures?

SECT. 30.
H. H. And now seeing the holy Scriptures are able to do all these things; I
will boldly and safely conclude, that we have no need of your reasons and
senses to help them, but you have need to help your reasons and senses by the
holy Writings; or else you will be one of those insensible unreasonable men 2
These. 3.2.
who have not Faith, and how can you have faith? Joh. 5.44. And do not you
receive honor one of another, when you prefer one another words above the
Words of GOD, etc?

Reply 1. You will boldly and safely conclude; you should have said, boldly and
falsely, and then you had hit it.

2. By drawing such a conclusion: you put your self into the number of those
unreasonable men. For what an unreasonable reasoning is this? The Scriptures
are able to make us wise to salvation: Therefore we have no need of sense and
reason. Besides, Vatablus translates the (...).
Greek word, Absurd men, and are not you such an one, in denying the Conclusion
in a public Disputation? The Syriack Insolent; and who (save the Quakers)
trample on godly Ministers with scorn and reviling more then you? a lapide, of
no settled abode; but as vagrants, and vagabonds; and do not you wander from
one Country to another, from one place to another to subvert souls, and trouble
the peace of Christians? Our English renders it, (and you read it)
Unreasonable, and are not you one of them, whom no reason (though never so
clearly grounded on the Word) will satisfy? Nay, what an unreasonable thing is
it, that you must allow your self Consequences for the proving of your Tenants,
and disallow all our Consequences brought to prove infant baptism?

3. The close of this Section of yours is a mere calumny; we do not prefer one
another words above God's Word, and the Scripture brought to prove it is
impertinent.

SECT. 31.
H. H. page 42. Whereas you say wickedly, that if we have the words of God
without the meaning and reason, we have no proof. Answ. I am sure -- I may
conclude, that if we have your words, and meanings, and reasons without the
Word of God, we have no proof that we may safely trust. For Romans 3.4. Jerem.
17.5. And thus your folly is manifest, etc.

Reply 1. Any Adversary may be easily answered with saying, You say wickedly;
but you have not proved yet, that Mr. Baxter says wickedly, as to the Position
in hand.

2. Mr. Baxter says truly and holily, That if we have the words of God without
the meaning and reason, we have no proof. E. g. You have the words of God in
Jer. 2.12, 13. Page 8.9.
but without the true meaning and reason, as you do bring them, with impudence
and confidence enough, and yet we have no proof our of that text, against
Infants Baptism, or Fonts.

3. We may more honestly, and in the fear of God conclude, That if we have the
Word of God with your meaning and reason (and not the Lord's) we have no proof,
that we may safely trust. E. g. You bring us the Word of God, 1 Timothy 2.12. for
Women's preaching, provided that they usurp not authority over their husbands,
p. 64. where I shall make your folly manifest.

4. You may now honestly, and in the fear of God conclude, That having God's
Word, with the true meaning and reason, you have proof sufficient, on which you
may safely trust; because nothing is affirmed by us, but what is confirmed by
the Word of God.

5. The rest is not worthy of a Reply, unless I may say, you have made Mr.
Baxter's folly manifest, as he did confute Bellarmine in one word, saying,
Robert Bellarmine thou lie.

SECT. 32.
H. H. page Ibid. To your proof. The Devil used the words of God to tempt
Christ. Answ. Does it follow, that because the Devil and wicked men do
sometimes use the Word of God, to deceive with. That therefore the Saints must
not use it to make them wise to salvation.

Reply 1. Which of us ever said so? you do but fight with your own shadow; and
so let it vanish.

SECT. 33.
H. H. You much mistake the matter. The Devils deceit did not lie in bringing
the Scriptures; but in adding to, and taking fo^m. Compare, Psalm. 91.11.12,
with Mat. 4.6. and Luke 4.9.10.11. Where the Tempter added, Cast thy self down,
and, at any time; and left out, in all thy ways. And yet Mr. Baxter takes the
Devils part, and says, The Devil used the words of the Scriptures to Christ.
But this is but a small fault with you, for you have learned to take the same
leave your self, as I shall now make it appear.

Reply 1. You mistake the matter, and Mr. Baxter too; for he made no mention of
the Divel's deceit, or wherein it lies; but that the Devil used Sripture words
without the meaning and reason. Though I deny not, but the Devils design was to
deceive Christ, if it had been possible.

2. What though the Devils deceit did lie in adding to, and taking from the
Scriptures (I freely acknowledge) yet were not those Scripture words which he
made use of? viz. He shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep th^^, and
in their hands they shall bear thee up, least thou dash thy soot against a
stone? This confirms what Mr. B. said.

3. You would make Mr. Baxter odious, by saying, He takes the Devils part, etc.
But Sir, you know the proverb, A man must give the Devil his due. Surely those
godly Ministers do not take the Divel's part, when they tell sinne^s, that many
times they be-lye the Devil, in fathering their sins on him rather then on
themselves, Mat. 15.19. Out of the heart proceeds evil thoughts, etc. Jam. 1.14.
Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust -- 2 Pet. 1. ver.
4. -- Corruption is in the world through lust.

4. I fear that fault charged on Mr. Baxter, will be found within your own
girdle, before I leave you. Though you say, you will now make it appear. It
seems then you failed in making it to appear, as you said in the foregoing
page. But just so you have learned the Devils deceit in adding to Scripture. E.
g Baptism is to be deferred til a man can believe, which is not written in the
Bible, but in Mr. Haggars book, p. 38. and you say p. 61. God has one way to
save men and women, and another way to save little children, which is no where
written in the holy Scriptures. Again, in the same page you say, Infants dying
in their infancy, are saved by virtue of Christ's death, without actual Faith,
which is no where written, etc. who now writes after the Devils copy? Who
takes the Devils part?

SECT. 34.
H. H. p. 43. The Devil said to Christ; If you be the Son of God, cast thy self
down, which is no where written, as the Lord says, but the contrary, viz. Thou
shall not tempt the Lord, etc. So do you say if you be the children of God,
Baptize your children, which is no where written, but the contrary, Mat. 28.29.
Mar. 15, 16. Acts 2.38, 41. and 8.37.12.37. But you know there is no children
in the Text, neither can they do any thing of those things, notwithstanding all
this, you do the works of Satan.

Reply 1. Though what is said in the foregoing Sect. is a sufficient reply as
to this also, yet I am sure Christ proves two things contrary to you. 1. The
lawfulness of arguing from Scripture by Consequences. 2. That is Scripture
which is contained though not expressed therein, e. g.
Christ must not cast himself down; for it is written in Deuteronomy. 6. ver. 16.
Thus. If the Lord must not be tempted, then I must not cast my self down. But
the Lord must not be tempted; Therefore --

2. You bewray your ignorance in saying contrary; for the baptizing of Infidels
converted to the Faith, and Infants also of one or both Christian parents are
not contrary, but subordinate: Subordinate non pugnant.
there is a consistency of both.

3. The Scriptures you cite in Mat. and Mark, and the Acts have been answered
before; you do but trouble your self, and tire the Reader with vain
Repetitions: Yet to your last I say, Children are expressly mentioned in Acts 2.
ver 39. which you have cunningly left out, as if (to use your own expression)
you meant to take the Devils part, and so to do his work. Beside, your
allegations are as strong against Circumcision, as against infant baptism; for
you know they could not repent, nor believe with all their hearts, etc. and yet
were circumcised. But let us see how Mr. B. or we do the works of Satan.

SECT. 35.
H. H. As he tempted Christ to cast himself down before God's time was come to
send his Angels to take him down, and to that end would have applied a promise
falsely, Psalm. 91.11, 12 leaving out In all thy ways: So do you tempt men and
women to baptize their children before God's time is come to beget them by his
Word, Joh. 3.5.
James 1.18. That they might be born again, nor only of water, but of the
Spirit: And to that end you tell them, It is written, They are disciples and
Church Members, and they were circumcised under the Law; therefore they must be
baptized under the Gospel, etc.

Reply 1. You drive on the Popish design handsomely; for here you open a wide
door for unwritten Traditions; What Scripture have you that says expressly of
the coming of God's time to send his Angels to take down Christ?

2. Here is a very spiteful parallel: What likeness between, Casting thy self
down, and baptizing Children?

3. We have another unwritten Tradition, viz. We tempt men and women to baptize
their Children before God's time is come.

4. You cannot deny but God does beget some Infants by his Spirit without the
Word, else they are none of his, Romans 8.9.

5. Your Gloss on John 3.5. smells too strongly of the Popish Cask: most
Orthodox Divines understand by Water and Spirit, one and the same thing, (the
latter being exegetical to the former, as Mat. 3.11. to be baptized with the
Holy Ghost, and with Fire is all one) which you distinguish as different, in
saying, not only of Water, but also of the Spirit.

6. What a strange piece of Nonsense have we here? God does beget us by his
Word, that we might be born again; when God's begetting of us, and our being
born again in Scripture are all one 1 John 4.18.
He that is born of God sins not, but he that is begotten of God keeps
himself, etc. See also verse 1.

7. These Arguments (to prove Infant Baptism) drawn from Circumcision,
Church Membership, Discipleship, etc. you cannot answer, but by railing, which
shall have no other Reply from me, but Silence and Patience.

SECT. 36.
H. H. p. 44. You tell us, that if we have the meaning and reason, we have
enough for evidence, for words are but to express sense. Answ. Then it seems
the meanings and reasons you talk of without the Word, are without sense by
your own confession. And thus you see, or may see, that God by weak instruments
can take you wise ones, in your own craftiness. But again, are not the words of
the Scripture as good, and better sens and reason, then any you can speak or
give.

Reply 1. It is not Mr. Baxter's confession, but Mr. Haggar's profession, to
wrest M. Baxter's words as well as Scripture. Let any ((...) of judiciousness)
read M. Baxter's 10. Position, and he will quickly (...) Baxter's plainness,
and M. Haggar's craftiness.

2. It Is granted, that the words of the Scripture (in Hebrew and Greek) were
given by the inspiration of the Spirit, but our English words (into which they
are translated) are not, we may without blasphemy say. If you deny this, I must
needs conclude, you are so far from being high-flown, that with the Serpent you
creep on the ground, and pave the way, for making the Vulgar Translation
Authentical, as you would the English.

SECT. 37.
H. H. You say further, Would it not make a man pity such senseless ignorant
wretches, that will call for express words of Scripture, when they have evident
Consequences? Is Scripture-reason no reason? Answ. Sir, me thinks you are very
pitiful, but you are a miserable Comforter; for when you have done, you fall a
railing on us, calling us, Senseless, ignorant wretches, that will call for
express Scripture, when we have your Consequences. But I have told you already,
we dare not trust your Consequences. Indeed Scripture-reason is good reason,
and it is that we would have from you, for which you call us, ignorant, senseless
wretches.

Reply 1. It seems, a just reproving in pity, is a railing with you: If so, you
are far-gone, and very high-flown indeed.

2. It Is your subtle sophistry to call evident Consequences drawn from
Scripture, Our Consequences.

3. If Mr. Baxter say true, (and you do not disprove him) that evident
Consequences drawn from Scripture, are as true proof, as the very express words
of a Text, (which you cannot but grant, p. 12, 13, 14) you may trust them
better then, or as well as your own Consequences, which you often bring.

SECT. 38.
H. H. p. 45. We call Scripture-reason, written reason; now if you would show
us where your reason is written in the Book of God (the holy Writings) the
Controversy were at an end, but till then you have done nothing. But you might
do well to inform the ignorant wretches, that the holy Scriptures in English
are holy writings -- And thus the people would know what you mean by
Scripture-reasons? i. e. written reasons.

Reply 1. If I mistake not, here is a pure Socinian Principle, viz. Nothing is
written in Scripture, but what is expressed in so many words: Then farewell the
doctrine of the Trinity, justification by Faith only, trusting in Christ's
satisfaction, etc. All which, and many more particulars, are not written (in
your sense) in the book of God, but written (in our sense) therein, because
drawn by evident consequence from thence.

2. Christ says, Joh. 5.46. That Moses wrote of him, Genesis 3.15. Deuteronomy. 18.15.
which is true (in our sense), but Truth if self must have the Lie given him in
your sense. For there is not one express written word of Christ in all the
book of Moses, I mean the person of Christ, God-man.

3. We do inform the ignorant wretches as you advize us, nay, we have done it
before you advized us; and they do, or may know, that Infant Baptism is written
in the Book of God as plainly, as women's Receiving the Lord's Supper, and those
particulars mentioned in your page 12, 13, 14. Will you now stand to your word?
and say with Mr. Saltmarsh in another case: An end of a Controversy.

SECT. 39.
H. H. You say, we disdain reason; and therefore not to be reasoned with: and
if we once renounce reason, we are bruit-beasts, and who will go to plead with
a beast? It Is reason that differs a man from a beast, etc. Answ. You put me
in mind how l^ke one of your forefathers you are; for (to my best remembrance)
you speak his very words, and I question not, but if you had an opportunity,
you would do his deeds, viz. Doctor Story to Mr. Philpot: see Fox Martyr. p.
1972.

Reply 1. Mr. Haggar brings in a long story of Dr. Story his conference with
Mr. Philpot the Martyr. I desire the Reader to view either Mr. Haggar, or Mr.
Fox, which for brevity take I cannot transcribe: Yet I say truly, that a Lia^
had need have a good memory. Mr. Baxter does not speak Dr. Stories words. This
Doctor called Philpot a beast, simply and absolutely. M. Baxter calls you so
hypothetically and conditionally, if reason be renounced; nay, he includes
himself as well as Anabaptists on that supposition, as you transcribe him, IF
WE --

SECT. 40.
H. H. page 46. See how like your forefather Dr. Story you speak and behave
you. self -- or would do, if you had but liberty. You are children of one
father, whose works you do, Joh. 8. ver. ^4.

Reply 1. No more like, then an Apple is like an Oyster, (as they say) the
parallel is not right; for beside the forementioned difference. Dr. Story was a
Papist, M. Baxter a Protestant, Henry Haggar an Anabaptist and railer, Mr.
Philpot neither, but a meek Martyr. That learned and godly Mr Philpot was no
Anabaptist it is plain S^e Fox vol. 3. p. 600. etc. Anno 1555.
, for in a Letter to a fellow-pris^ner, thus he writes: The Apostles of Christ
d^d baptiz^ Children. And in another; The Apostles baptized Infants, since
Baptism is in place of Circumcision. In a thi^d, The Apostles did baptize
Infants, and not only men of lawful age. And again, Why do not these
rebellious Anabaptists obey the Commandment of the Lord? Mark 10.13, 14, 15,
16 Now let the Reader consider, whether you or Mr. Baxter is most like to that
blessed Martyr -- and whether you are more like to Dr. Story, if you had
liberty; Sleid. l. 10.
your predecessors at Munster show of what spirit you are.

2. Guilt of Conscience make you fearful of punishment, and uncharitably
censorious of your betters; who without vanity may say, Mat. 23.9.
One is our Father which is in heaven.

SECT. 41.
H. H. Where as you say, we disclaim reason. I Answer; It Is but one of your
false accusations, we own all things written in the Scripture, etc.

Reply 1. You disclaim the plainest and clearest reason deduced out of
Scripture, and so it is no false accusation.

2. If you did own all things written in the Scripture, the Controversy were
at an end, as you say, p. 45.

3. What perverseness and partiality is this? that you can own Women's
Discipleship, and their Receiving the Lord's Supper, etc. (a^ p. 14.) as things
written in Scripture, and yet disclaim some Infant's Discipleship,
Church Membership, and Baptism, which are written in the Scriptures of truth,
as well as the former, and many other instances which might be given.

SECT. 42.
H. H. page 47. Mr. Baxter says; Do you think the Lord Jesus knew a good
Argument, or the right way of Dis^uting? Why how did he prove the Resurrection
to the Sadduces? from that text, I am the God of Abraham, etc. Answ. The Lord
Jesus knew a good Argument, and the right way of Disputing better then Mr.
Baxter, or my self, or any man else, I humbly confess to his praise; and
therefore I desire to make use of his words that he has already spoken,
knowing that he has reasoned and proved all things better then I can.

Reply 1. Then you grant, that there can be no arguing from Scripture but by
deduction; for in all Arguments there must be a Medium, and a Conclusion; a
Proposition, and an Inference, as appears by your own Arguments, p. 63, etc.

2. You grant as much as is desired, that to argue by evident Consequence from
Scripture, is a right way of disputing, as Christ's was. Humbly confess this
also to Christ's praise, and join hands and hearts also with Mr. Baxter, and
say, I shall think it no weak arguning which is like to Christ's; nor shall I
take my self to be out of the way, while I follow him.

SECT. 43.
H. H. p. 47. But though Mr. Baxter confesses, that Christ knew the best
reasoning, yet he is not content with his reason, but adds to it these words;
If God be the God of Abraham, then Abraham in soul is living. 2. That God is
not the God of the Dead, but the Living. 3. If Abraham's soul be living, then
his body must be raised. 4. If Abraham's body shall rise, then there is a
Resurrection, etc. -- To which I Answer, 1. Mr. Baxter in all these
Consequences that he has drawn, has but darkened the counsel of God, spoken by
the mouth of Christ.

Reply 1. The clear light of Mr. Baxter's Consequences has so dazzled your
eyes, that you cannot (it seems) see the truth.

2. How can you without blushing say, that Mr. B. has drawn all these
Consequences: when Christ, Mat 22.32. and Luke 20.38.
(who as you confess, knew a good Argument, and the right way of Disputing)
drew and took in the second expressly.

3. Because of your former concession, and confession (and practice too,
arguing in a Syllogistical way, p. 63, etc.) Christ's Argument being put into
form, lies thus: Abraham's body shall rise, Therefore the dead shall rise. The
Antecedent is thus proved: Abraham's soul is living; therefore his body shall
rise. That Antecedent is proved thus: God is not the God of the dead, but of
the living; Therefore Abraham's soul is living. But how is this Antecedent
proved? Thus; God is the God of Abraham, therefore his soul is living, and by
consequent the dead shall arise: Now if this Antecedent were denied, then the
plain words of Scripture were denied. For these words in Exodus 3.6. were spoken
by the Lord long after Abraham's death, and the some Lord says, not I WAS, nor
I WILL BE, but I AM the God of Abraham, etc. So that now you see, these are
Christ's Consequences, and not Mr. Baxter's only.

SECT. 44.
H. H. 2ly. The Resurrection is more plainly proved by the words of Christ
without all Mr. Baxter's Consequences, as appears by the words of the text,
Luke 20.35, 36, 37. Thus Christ himself (inplain terms) has proved the
Resurrection already; speaking plainly of the happiness of those, who shall
obtain the Resurrection from the dead; and then when he had done, he concludes,
That the Resurrection of the dead is so plain, that even Moses showed it at the
Bush, etc.

Reply 1. Why do you equivocate, and juggle? There is no question but to us
that place in Luke is a plain proof of the Resurrection: but what is this to
the Sadduces, whom Christ would confute as to their erroneous opinion, who
held, Mat. 22.23.
There is no Resurrection. And without question Christ might have brought plain
texts out of the Old Testament to have proved the Resurrection, but you know
the Sadduces only acknowledge the five books of Moses to be Canonical
Scriptures, therefore out of them Christ brings his proof.

2. You here lay down the Wasters, or else I have lost my understanding and
senses; For in saying, The Resurrection of the dead is so plain, that even
Moses showed it at the Bush, etc. you grant, 1. That Christ proved to the
Sadduces the Resurrection of the dead by Consequence out of Exodus 3.6. 2. That
such a kind of proof is plain, (for you confess even now, that Christ knew a
good Argument, and the right way of Disputing) and 3. That something is plain in
Scripture, which is not expressed in so many words and syllables in Scripture.
For I pray where is the Resurrection of the Dead written in so many words, in
Exodus 3.6.

SECT. 45.
H. H. 3ly. Let Mr. Baxter prove if he can, that Christ did draw any
Consequences from his own words, but left them barely as he spoke them, as
sufficient proof without any of Mr. Baxter's Consequences.

Reply 1. Yes, Christ drew Consequences from his own words. The whole Scripture
is called the word of Christ, Totum Verbum Dei est sermo Christi Davenant in
loc.
Col. 3.16. not only in regard of the matter, but Author also; and 2 Timothy
3.16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God: Now if Exodus 3.6. be a part
of the Scripture, and of the word of Christ (as certainly it is) then Christ
did draw some Consequences from his own words.

SECT. 46.
H. H. 4ly. If Christ had never so many Consequences to prove any thing, yet
his words were all Scripture, and infallibly true. So true, that whosoever of
men or Angels should add to, or take from it, they are accursed. But Mr.
Baxter's are none such; therefore we weigh them not.

Reply 1. Are Mr. Baxter's none such? What! accursed? I believe his words are
not accursed, whatsoever you proudly say, or censure. Or do you mean they are
not Scripture (because you say you weigh them not)? If Scripture be written (as
you say p. 45.) so they are: But I suppose you mean (...).
holy Scripture, so indeed they are not; and yet notwithstanding those
Consequences of his are infallibly true, because they are Christ's, you may do
well therefore to weigh them.

2. If you mean, that Christ's words were all Scripture, ( v.z. which are left
upon Record) who denies it? And all the words that Christ spoke on earth, were
infallibly true; for he could not lie, or sin in the least: but all his words
are not written, for surely his words were more in number then his deeds, all
which are not written, Joh. 20.30. with 21.21.

SECT. 47.
H. H. 5ly. p. 48. Whereas Mr. Baxter says; If we had stood by, we would have
said to Christ, Give us a Scripture that says, the Dead shall rise. Answ So
Christ did give them two Scriptures, though Mr. Baxter is so blind, he cannot
see them, for he tells us, Ver. 35. of the world to come, and the Resurrection
of the Dead in plain terms: and ver. 37. That the dead are raised --

Reply 1. A ridiculous shift of him, who is, or would be counted the
Metropolitan Dipper, and great Patriarch of the Anabaptists: for were these
words in verse. 35, and 37. written when Christ spoke them?

2. These are plain proofs to us, that the Dead shall rise (as you intimate, p.
50.) but were they to the Sadduces? (as Mr. Baxter says), which words you very
cunningly left out, for your own end.

3. Christ (if he pleased) could have brought express texts out of the Old
Testament, but on the former account he brings his proof against the Sadduces
only out of Exodus forenamed, saying in Mat. 22.31. Have ye not read (which
you take no notice of) referring them to read what was written by Moses, and
not to what was then spoken by him to the Sadduces; and clearly implying, that
those men stood bound in conscience to have believed the Resurrection of the
Dead, on the account of those words in Exodus chap. 3. verse. 6.

4. Mr. Baxter now is not so blind, but he can see your folly made manifest.

SECT. 48.
H. H. We would have Mr. Baxter and all men know, that we take all the sayings
of Christ to be as good Scripture, and of as great authority as any part of the
Bible: Therefore now Mr. Baxter and Mr. Cook's folly and wickedness is
manifest, who would insinuate into peoples minds, that Christ did not bring
Scripture to prove the Resurrection of the Dead, but they must help him by
their Consequences. But their deceit lies in this, that because Christ did not
bring some other Scripture to prove the Resurrection, therefore they conclude,
he proved it by consequence, never minding that what he said was Scripture, and
what he approved of, is approved, and ought to be of all without murmurings and
disputings.

Reply 1. Do you take all the sayings of Christ to be as good Scripture, and of
as great authority as any part of the Bible? If you understand it of Christ's
sayings left upon Record in holy Writ, I am of the same belief; but because you
speak so largely and indistinctly, I imagine (without breach of charity) your
design is to open a wide door for unwritten Traditions to come in, and be
received (as the Council of Trent has determined) pari pietatis affectu Vide
primu^^ D^cretum qua tae sessionis Comcilii Tridenti^^ Pet. Suar. l. 2. p. 127.
i. e. with the like affection of piety, as any part of the Bible. And this is
not a groundless imagination, for both your tenants and practices speak a
promoting of the Catholic cause (as it is so called), for which (it is strongly
suspected, and rumor'd) that you are an Agent. I pray call to mind the Jesuit,
who pretended to be a Jew, and converted, and was admitted a member of an
Anabaptistical Congregation at Hexham in the North.

2. Your silly evasion, (a Cole wort more then twice sodden) is as apparent
now, as the detection of that Jesuit, and needs no further reply.

3. It Is a notorious slander, that Mr. Baxter and M. Cook, etc. would insinuate
into peoples minds, that Christ did not bring Scripture to prove the
Resurrection of the Dead; For they say plainly Mr. Cooks Font uncovered, p. 24.
, that Christ proves the doctrine of the Resurrection against the Sadduces by
Consequence from that Scripture, I am the God of Abraham, etc. and you are one
of those men (as Mr. Baxter says, p 8.) who have reported abroad, That Christ
was not able to confute the Sadduces, or to bring any Scripture for his
Doctrine. What say you now (for you say nothing in this page to Mr. Baxter's
motion)? Will you allow of such an Argument for Infant Baptism, as Christ here
brings for the Resurrection? Will you confess it to be a sufficient Scripture
proof.

4. If what Christ approved of, is, and ought to be approved of all; and it is
certain that Christ approves this way of arguing from Scripture by Consequence
(as you cannot deny), then do you approve it without murmurings or disputings.
This was Christ's usual way: E.g also, he proves the lawfulness of his
Disciples Mat. 12.3, ^, 5, 6, 7.
pulling the ears of corn, and eating them on the Sabbath day, by consequence
from Scripture: viz. from David's eating of the Shewbread. 2. From the Priest's
sacrificing on the Sabbath: And 3. From that Expression in Hos. 6.6. I will
have mercy and not sacrifice. To conclude this; I see you are like a bird in a
net, the more you stir, the faster you are held notwithstanding your fluttering.

SECT. 49.
H H. p. 48. But now to make their folly manifest, I will reason with them
another way; and if they prove as plainly that Infants are to be baptized, as
Christ did there prove, that the dead should rise, they shall have it, and I
will confess my self in an error. And now to the matter.

Reply 1. Here is another confession of yours, that Christ plainly proves there
the Resurrection of the Dead: now either it is Expressly, or by Consequence (x);
not Expressly, for there is not one word of the Resurrection in Exodus 3 6.
Therefore by Consequence will you now confess your error, and say, That some
doctrine is contained plainly in Scripture, which is not expressly written
therein?

2. You will Now make their folly manifest? You had said but a little before in
the same page, that it is now manifest. Surely you have manifested your own
folly, in indeavoring to do that now, which you said was done before.

3. It seems all this while you came not to the matter, but fell short, or
beside the mark; for you say, And now to the matter.

SECT. 50.
H. H. Mark 12.25 -- When they shall rise from the dead, they neither marry --
Now do you show a Scripture that says, And when they shall baptize little
children, they shall, etc.

Reply 1. This is but the same answer in another form.

2. When you bring a Scripture that says, When they shall dipp actual
believers, or visible Saints, they shall etc. we will show you then a Scripture
that says as you say. --

SECT. 51.
H. H. verse. 26. As touching the dead, that they rise, have you not read, etc.
Now do you produce such a Scripture, if you can, that says -- As touching
little children, that they may be baptized, have you not read, etc. Bring you
but Striptures that come but thus near the matter, and we will grant you
Infant Baptism, but till then, you are unreasonable in your reasoning.

Reply 1. Produce you a Scripture out of Exodus that says, The dead shall
rise, and then you shall have such a Scripture, That children shall be baptized.

2. You say, and unsay: Even now, you approved of arguing by Consequence from
Scripture, and now nothing will serve turn but Express Scripture.

3. You would make the people believe, that we deny the Resurrection of the
Dead; God forbid: We hold, Christ proves the Resurrection by Consequence, which
you cannot deny.

4. When you cannot answer, then you fall a railing; you accuse and condemn
your self, nay Christ as well as us, as unreasonable in our reasoning.

SECT. 52.
H. H. page 49. Some will object, that I tie Mr. Baxter and Mr. Cook to plain
Scripture, but I my self have written many words in this book that are not
plain Scripture. Answ. It Is one thing for a man to use words to express himself
to those that will not believe the Scriptures as they are written, and another
thing to bring the Scriptures to show men a rule to walk by, and what their
duty is in matters of faith and obedience: The former we allow; but not the
latter, either to our selves, or others, etc.

Reply 1. You take to your self that liberty, which you deny to others; who may
not (without a check from you) use the word Sacrament, p. 14. nor Negative, p.
29. etc.

2. The phrase of not believing the Scriptures as they are written, is dark and
doubtful, you had need of an Expositor, yet I know not who those are that will
not so believe.

3. You distinguish foolishly between Faith and Obedidience; for Faith it self
is an obediential act, It Is called the obedience of Faith, (...), i.e Ut
homines fide obediant Deo, Beza in loc,
Romans 1.5. and 16.26. and to believe is to obey, as appear^ by the opposition,
Joh 3.36. (...)
He that believes not the Son: i. e. He that obeieth not the Son, as Beza
translates it; and children of unbelief are called, Ephesians. 22 -- children of
disobedience.

4. It seems by your confession, that your words whereby you express your self,
do not pertain to the rule of Faith and Obedience.

5. I wonder you daresay, that you put not men on believing or doing any thing
as a duty, that is not written in Scripture; For do you not put men to believe,
that Infants are neither Disciples, nor Church Members, nor in Covenant, etc.
That they dying in their Infancy are saved by Christ's death without actual
faith, page 61. And have you not rightly proved praying in a man's family,
giving thanks at meals, Women's receiving the Lord's Supper, etc. to be duties?
yet none of the foresaid particulars are expressly written in Scripture, and
would you have them done, but not in faith.

SECT. 53.
H. H. Herein lies the depth of all deceits, viz. Because Christ expounded the
Scriptures of the Prophets, therefore men will take in hand to expound his
Expositions. q. We could make them plainer then he has left them, or make any
thing true that is not written in them. And because Philip opened the Scripture
to the Eunuch, Act. 8. therefore men will take in hand to open Philip's words,
so as to make them to appear otherwise then they are written.

Reply 1. You are fallen deep into the pit of Deceit, if no Minister may
preach, e. g. on Mat. 5. where Christ expounds the true meaning of the Law, and
clears it from the Pharisees false glosses: or on Mark 4.34. where Christ
Expounded all to his Disciples: or on Luke 24.27. where beginning at Moses and
all the Prophets, he Expounded to them, etc. or on Acts 8. (instanced in by
your self): For what is it to preach, but to expound and apply the Word of the
Lord.

2. You bewray your weakness and wickedness (things usual to persons wedded to
their opinions) in contradicting your self, for you take upon you (all along)
to expound the Expositions of Christ and his Apostles, Do not you make their
sayings plainer then they have left them? But I cry you mercy, you make them
appear otherwise then they are written.

SECT. 54.
H. H. For the plainer manifestation of the truth, I desire all impartial men
to consider these following things. 1. If I would prove by Scripture, that God
created heaven and earth; I must bring a Scripture that speaks so, as Genesis 1.1.
2ly. Or that God created man upright, Eccles. 7.29. Or 3ly. that all men since
Adam's fall were sinners, Romans 3.23. Or 4ly. That God sent his Son to redeem
those sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. and Chap. 2.6. Or 5ly. That the dead shall rise,
Mar. 12. ver. 25, 26, etc.

Reply 1. What need this vain repetition? your first instance has been
answered before in your p. 40. and your last, in p. 48.

2. The other Scriptures do not say in express terms, what (yet) you truly
affirm, you swerve from your own pattern. Let the Reader view your quotations,
and compare them with your expressions.

3. What blindness and blockishness is here? If you would prove that men must
give thanks at meals, pray in and with their families, that women are to
receive the Lord's Supper, bring some Scriptures that speak so, but you cannot
in express terms, though you do it by consequence, p. 12, 13, 14. so do we for
Infant Baptism.

SECT. 55.
H. H. p. 50. To conclude: If I would prove that men and women should be
baptized when they believe -- I must bring a Scripture that says so; as Acts
8.12, 37. And now if any man will prove that little babes should be baptized,
let them bring one Scripture to prove it, and then they will do honestly,
otherwise, etc.

Reply 1. This Scripture, and the challenge, have been answered before. I will
not trouble the Reader with Tautologies, as you do.

CHAP. X. Concerning Consequences drawn from Scripture, etc.
SECT. 1.
H. H. But now a word to Mr. Cook, who says that we never read in the
Scriptures; Go H. H. and J. B. teach all nations, and baptize, etc. nor do we
read, that Christ gave a command to you two to preach the Gospel, etc. Answ.
This is but a cunning devised Fable, a subtle sophistry of Mr. Cooks to deceive
the hearts of the simple, but easily discovered by them to whom the Lord has
given understanding. We do not desire Mr. B. and Mr. C. to bring a Scripture
that says, Go R. B. or go W. C. and baptize Children that cannot speak, nor
understand what you preach, etc.

Reply 1. Bravely done Mr. Haggar! when you cannot shape an handsome answer to
Mr. C. then (according to your custom) you cry, A cunning devised fable,
subtle sophistry, etc. which charge (how unjustly as well as absurdly, after a
long digression, it comes in here, I leave to the judgment of the intelligent)
must pass as words of course, to please or fright the simple.

2. He has lost his understanding (I think) that cannot see you (here) quite
and clean yielding the cause to Mr. C. by a tacit granting, that H. Hag. and
J. Brown are by consequence from Matthew. 28.19. commanded to teach and baptize,
etc. For you say, We do not desire, etc.

3. Infant Baptism has been largely proved by many Scriptures, and Arguments
grounded on Scriptures, specially in that very book of Mr. Cooks, which you
pretend to answer, but scarce meddle with, unless a lapp, and snatch, and away.

4. As to that instance in that book, requiring you to make out your practice
by express Scripture, it is not so easily answered as you imagine. For 1.
whereas you say, you desire not Mr. B. or Mr. C. to bring a Scripture that
says, Go R. B. go W. C. etc. that is nothing: We have no more reason to be
satisfied in your practice without express and immediate Scripture, then you
have in ours without such Scripture, (though many Consequences from Scripture
are clearly brought). Or rather (if you were impartial) you should have
justified your own practice by express Scripture without Consequences, before
you had urged us thereto. For 2ly, where is it expressed in Scripture, that you
are appointed to go up and down in several parts of England, and to draw people
(being Christians by profession, and brought up from their childhood in that
Religion, wherein to they were baptized in Infancy) to renounce their
Infant Baptism, and to be dipped in such a pit or Pool, etc. before such a
company, whether naked or covered, with such a form of English words as you
use, etc. Nay 3ly, you are hereby challenged to prove, even by good consequence
from Scripture, that you have a regular call to preach and baptize, (I have not
heard of any, neither do I know that you ever undertook to clear it). If your
Call be extraordinary (as Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists) a proof from
Scripture grounds is required of you, and we shall own you for such: If
Ordinary (as Pastors, and Teachers) make it to appear according to
Scripture-rule, Acts 14.23. 1 Timothy 3, to 8. Tit. 1.5, 6, 7, 8 9. 1 Timothy 4.11
12, 13, 14, 15, 16. 1 Pet: 5.1, 2.
and we shall rejoice therein. If you cannot prove such a Call; What boldness
is it in you to cry down our Ministry, etc. But they who will bring in a false
Ministry, etc. have held it their policy, to cry out against the true.

SECT. 2.
H. H. p. 51. Mr. Hall says, p. 91. That the Scriptures are the chiefest
strong holds of the Anabaptists, and being pursued, hither we run for refuge,
etc. Answ. It Is well they do so, they are then sure and safe. For Psalm. 119.89.
Joh. 8.31, etc.

Reply 1. Let the Reader take notice, that those Scriptures alleged by Mr. Hag.
in the middle of this p. have been answered already; I forbear therefore the
transcribing, and answering them, least I be guilty of his usual crime,
Tautologie.

2. It makes for the dignity and authority of the Scriptures, that men of all
persuasions (who have owned the Scriptures for a rule) have fled to them for
shelter; yet Heretics and Schismatics who have done so, were neither sure nor
safe, but were found faulty, even at the horns of the Altar, as Joab was, 1
King. 2.28.

3. Mr. Hall does not blame you simply for running to the Scriptures for
refuge, See Mr. Hall's Font Guarded, p. 91, and 92.
but for misunderstanding and mis-applying them, and so your running to them
is in vain, not only as he says, but shows also by six Reasons, which you
take no notice of; and the reason is, because you could not frame a reasonable
answer to them.

SECT. 3.
H. H. p. 52. Mr. Hall has never a word to run to for Infant Baptism, as he
himself confesses, p. 30. in his fifth Argument, in express terms,
Infant Baptism is not commanded, etc. --

Reply 1. Heaven and earth may be astonished at your impudent charge, viz. Mr.
Hall confesses he has never a word to run to for Infant Baptism.

2. Lay your Argument right, and it is your absurd conclusion from his candid
confession: Thus; He that confesses Infant Baptism is not commanded expressly
in Scripture, has never a word to run to for Infant Baptism; But Mr. Hall
confesses so -- Therefore -- Sir, your Major is false, which may appear thus
to the meanest capacity out of your own mouth. The Christian Sabbath, and
Family-praier twice a day, etc. are not expressly commanded in the Scripture. If
I therefore should conclude Mr. Haggar has never a word to run to, for the
Sabbath, and such prayer, etc. he would cry out that I wrong him: For as Mr.
Haggar brings Scriptures in his p. 12, 13, 14. to prove the same by
Consequence: so does Mr. Hall prove Infant Baptism.

SECT. 4.
H. H. I shall now conclude with showing ten undeniable Reasons, why the Word
of God must be understood and obeyed as it is written, without adding to, or
taking from I. Because God never without words made known his mind to men, Heb.
1. ver. 12.

Reply 1. Your Reasons may be called undeniable, as the Spanish Armado in 88.
was called Invincible.

2. If all these Reasons were granted, yet none of them prove what you
undertake: viz. The Word of God must be understood and obeyed as it is written.

3. They conclude as strongly against you, as against us; who prove many points
of Religion by Consequence from Scripture, as well as we.

4. They are impertinent to the main business, and therefore not meet to be
replied to; but least you should crow, I will give you a taste how easily they
may be answered. To your first, If you mean of words written, (or else you say
nothing) it is false, though it should be Heb. 1. ver. 1, 2. For God made known
his mind to the Patriarchs long before his will was committed to writing: Genesis
37 41.
E. gr. To Joseph, read the Catechism with the Exposition (you mention page
96.) and you will find, God made known his mind diverse ways without words. To
the third; Were not those Scriptures the five Books of Moses, wherein the
doctrine of the Resurrection was written, and might have been read by the
Sadduces? To the 9th (it should be 2 Timothy 4.1.2.) compare this with the
beginning of your answer, page 49. and here is another contradiction of yours.
To the tenth, Shall the Heathen be judged by those words they never heard nor
read? I trow not, Romans 2.12. yet you say Christ will judge All Men by his words;
-- which terms [All Men] are not in Joh. 12.48. Do not you therefore pass that
dreadful doom Rev. 22.18, 19.
on your self for adding to the Word.

SECT. 5.
H. H. p. 53. Lastly, I shall propound these ten following Queries, with a
desire to have them answered by any who will, or can.

Reply 1. You said page 52. I shall now conclude, and here you come with your
Lastly. --

2. These Ten following Queries are as impertinent, as your ten precedent
Reasons: though (according to the proverb) a fool may ask more questions then a
wiseman can answer; yet I may (warrantably) Prove. 26.5.
answer a fool according ^o his folly, least he be wise in his own conceit; and
by the assistance of the Lord, I shall answer briefly upon the former account.

Querie 1. Whether God does require the sons of men to believe any thing in
point of Justification, that is not recorded in the holy Scriptures of truth?

Answ If by the sons of men you understand Infants you answer your self, page
25. Christ has no where required them to obey any command, before they can
understand, etc. Therefore not to believe -- But if you mean grown persons, I
answer; If by recorded (which yet is no Scripture word) you mean contained in
the Scripture (as in your second and fourth Querie) I say. No. For the
Scripture is the full adequate object o^ Faith. Therefore could the Romans 10.9.]
word of Faith; if you mean expressly written (as in the eighth Querie), I say,
Yes: And I think you dare not deny, that God requires of us to trust in the
merits and satisfaction of Christ alone for Justification, which is not
expressly written in Scripture. This instance may suffice among many.

Qu. 2. Whether God does require, or command us to obey any thing after
believing, which is not contained in the Word of truth?

Answ. 1. If by contained -- you mean (as in the seventh Querie) in express
terms, you answer your self; God does command us (after believing) to give
thanks at Meals, to pray in Families, etc. I hope you will not eat your own
words: P. 12, 13, 14.
And I say, such a trust (forementioned) is our duty contained in the Word,
though not expressed, as 1 Pet. 2.6. with Isa. 28.16. where the Apostle says,
It is contained in the Scripture, etc. and yet those words, elect and not
confounded, are not expressed in Isa. 28.16.

Querie 3. Whether the Saints have any ground to believe the Resurrection from
the Dead, and eternal life in glory, but as it is recorded in Scripture?

Answ. The Sadduces had ground to believe the Resurrection -- as it is
recorded; i. e. contained in Exodus 3.6. and the Saints too, as it is expressly
written in Scripture, elsewhere.

Qu. 4. Whether, if a man believe and obey all the known precepts and promises
contained in the Word of God (as much as in him lies) will God condemn and
punish him at that great day, because he has believed and done no more?

Answ. A captious Interrogatory, looking toward Quakerism (that new-refined
Papism) about absolute perfection, or freedom from sin in this life; or toward
Arminianism, about the salvation of the moral Heathens; yet I say, God may
condemn a man for the least sin of ignorance, without Christ, Levit. 4, 2, 3,
13, 22, 37. with Luke 12.48.
and for the least defect in duty, Nehem. 14.22. with Romans 6.23.

Qu. 5. If the Scriptures ought to be believed and obeyed as they are written,
then how dare some deny faith in, and obedience to some part of them, and
impose things not written in the Scriptures to be obeyed in stead of the
Ordinances of Christ?

Answ. That phrase [as they are written] is ambiguous: Were your meaning clear,
answer should be returned; however I know none that deny such faith and
obedience, much less who impose things not written, i. e. not contained in the
Scriptures (as Qu. 2.) to be obeyed in stead of Christ's Ordinances: your Qu.
implies a malicious calumniation, and so let it pass.

Querie 7. If the Scriptures be not a perfect rule of faith and obedience
(without the help of any man's inventions) what is? Or who may we trust? or at
whose mouth must we seek wisdom?

Answ. The Scripture is a rule, Eccl. 12.10. with Gal. 6. ver. 16. and a
perfect rule, Psalm. 19.7. and that of faith and manners (as Austin does phrase
it). God we may, and must trust, 2 Chronicles. 20.20. with Isa. 7.9. at God's mouth
must we seek wisdom, Isa. 8. ver. 20. with Acts 17. ver. 11.

Qu. 7. Whether there be any sin or corruption incident to man, that the
Scriptures does not reprove, or make manifest in express terms?

Answ. Indeed you answer your self, p. 69.
Yes; 1. Original fin, Genesis 5.3. Job 14.4 and 15.14. Psalm. 51.5. Ephesians. 2.3. Romans
5.12. 2ly. Some actual sins; as Incest, Buggery, Sodomie, Polygamie, (of which
last you have cause to examine yourself) and many more. 3ly. There are many
Errors and Heresies (which in the general are called works of the flesh, Gal.
5. ver. 19, 20.) Egr. Euty chianism, Ernomianism, Nestorianism, Arrianism,
Arminianism, Papism, (with others more without number) which surely are
corruptions incident to man (to use your own phrase) and yet which the
Scriptures does not reprove and make manifest in express terms.

Qu. 8. Whether there be any virtue or praise in any thing that the best of men
ever did, but what is expressly commanded or commended in the Scripture of truth?

Answ. Yes; there was some virtue or praise in the Disciples eating some ears
of Corn on the Sabbath Day, yet not expressly commanded or commended in 1 Samuel
21.6. To which our Savior does refer the Pharisees, to whom he said, Have you
not read what David did, etc. Mat. 12.3, 4. yea, you your self imagine (at
least) there is virtue and praise in Dipping in a Mere, or Marle-pit, or
Horse-pool, etc. and yet no where expressly commanded or commended in Scripture.

Querie 9. I appeal to every man's conscience in the sight of God, whether
their consciences do not condemn them, when they walk contrary to what is
written in Scripture?

Answ. If by what is written you mean, as in your seventh and tenth Querie, I
say, yes; unless the conscience be blind, seared, or asleep, as I fear yours
is; for your frequent, (if not constant) railing and reviling (to name no more)
is contrary to what is written expressly in Scripture.

Qu. 10. Whether every man's conscience does not justify him, when he walks
according to what is contained in the Word?

Answ. The answer immediately foregoing, will serve here also, without more ado.

SECT. 6.
H. H. p. 54. If all these Queries be granted (as they are stated) to be true,
then those that teach and persuade men to do any thing in matter of
justification or salvation more or less then is plainly written and expressed
in the Word of God, are such as add to, and take from the Word of God, and are
guilty of those plagues, Rev. 22.18, 19. But Infant Baptism is no where written
nor expressed in all the Scriptures, as Mr. Hall, Mr. B. Mr. C. confess;
Therefore --

Reply 1. Some of your Queries are stated sillily; e. g. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6. as is
obvious to any.

2. How can you suppose all to be granted, when some are granted, some denied,
and some in several respects (being doubtfully propounded) may be granted, or
denied?

3. What a wide door do you open again here to Popery, against justification by
Faith only? For you say, to do A*N*Y thing in matter of justification -- more
then is expressed in the Word, is an adding to the Word; this is one of your
dictates, we must take your bare word (without any offer of proof) for it: but
if you make this out, both you and I must fling up a great part of our Religion.

4. As you pass again that dreadful doom on your self, as well as on us; so you
be-lie (in plain English) those three Worthies, who no where confess in their
books (that I can find) that Infant Baptism is No where written in Scripture;
though they say, It is no where expressed in Scripture, which you miserably
confound, for want of wit, or grace to distinguish.

SECT. 7.
H. H. Thus I have answered to Mr. Baxters Ten Positions, which (says he, p.
3.) must be necessarily understood, before we can understand the point in hand:
So that if these Positions are not true, then the rest of his book cannot be
true, by his own confession. Now if I have fully answered the one, I need say
but little to the other. etc.

Reply 1. How this comes in (by head and shoulders) I know not: Thus after a
long digression he closes. The Reader must not blame me in following the
Wild-goose-chase; I must follow my leader, except into an hors-pool.

2. Whereas you say, if you have sully answered these Positions, you need say
but little to the rest of Mr. Baxter's Book. I assume, But you have not fully
answered these Positions, therefore you had need say more to the rest -- All
which I leave to the consideration of the judicious Reader.

CHAP. XI. Of Believers Infants being in Covenant in Gospel Times.
SECT. 1.
H. H. p. 55. Mr. Cook and Mr. Baxter make the Covenant with Abraham, and his
natural seed under the Law, all one with the Covenant made with Abraham, and
his spiritual seed, born of the Spirit under the Gospel. In answer to which, I
thus reason --

Reply 1. In stead of answering Mr. Cook and Mr. Baxter, you wisely wave their
Arguments (with the illustrations, and confirmations,) and argue against some
of those Mediums used by them to prove Infants right to Baptism, which whether
it be not contrary to the rules of reasoning, your promise, and Title of your
book; and whether it import not your inability to answer those Arguments, I
leave to the Reader to consider of.

2. That which you charge of Mr. Cook and Mr. Baxter is pal pably false, you
find no such things in their Books, (specially Mr. Cooks) which you undertake
to answer, and that is the reason (perhaps) that you named neither book nor
page, as you have done elsewhere, and at other times. For we know 1. That the
Covenant made with Abraham and his seed, Gal. 3.17.
was four hundred years and more before the giving of the Law. 2ly. Abraham's
servants also were taken into that Covenant: Genesis 17.12.13.14.23.27.
viz. such as were bought with money, and those that were born of them in his
house, who were circumcised with him; Nay strangers of any Country whatsoever,
becoming Proselytes, were allowed and bound Exodus 12.44 48.
to be Circumcised, and to eat of the Passe-over (both ordinary seals of the
Covenant) sure these could not be called properly, Abraham's natural seed. 3. If
Abraham in any good sense, may be said to have a spiritual seed, then he had
such, E. gr. Isaac, Gal. 4.29.
who was born after the Spirit. 4. Of these who are called Abraham's seed under
the Gospel, being by faith, and the profession thereof Romans 11.17 to 22.
planted into that Olive, from which the Israelites were broken off by
unbelief: Many are but carnal, fleshly, 1 Cor. 10.1, to 12. Gal. 3.26, 27, 28,
29. with verse 12, 13, 14.
as sundry of the Jews were; and I think you dare not profess, that all your
Church Members are born of the Spirit: sad experience would confute such a
presumption. Now let us hear your Reason.


SECT. 2.
H. H. That there is two Covenants, it is evident, Gal. 4.24. If so, then either
we are under the old Covenant still, or else the new is come in place.

Reply 1. To pass by your improper expression, there is two Covenants. The text
you cite, and the Grammar (which you call a whimsey, p. 35.) might have taught
you better: I grant two Covenants in a ^ight sense in the same Church, Deuteronomy.
29.1.
and in the same age, yea, and with the same person, Genesis 15.18. and 17.2. But
that is the most famous distinction of the Covenants: 1. Old, which was made
with the people of God in Christ to be exhibited, and who was signified by
Types, etc, And 2ly, New, made in Christ exhibited, and who has fulfilled what
was so prefigured: Yet these (as different in manner of Administration are two,
and therefore called Ephesians. 2.12.
Covenants) in substance are one, and therefore called Act^ 3.25.
the Covenant. As the same comman clement of love, 1 John 2.7, 8. wi^h Joh.
13.34.
in diverse respects is both old and new, and the same Church, servile and
free, Gal. 4.1, 2, 3. The same person that was a child, is now a man (as we use
to say); So the same Covenant of grace (in regard of essentials) was the Old
Covenant, as is the New, the faithful under that Acts 15.11.
being saved by the grace of God, even as we.

2. You might have saved your labor in proving, that the New Covenant is come
in place of the Old; It Is granted, as the Gospel Ministry, People, Sabbath,
Sacraments (or seals of the Covenant) are come in the place of the Levitical,
and Jewish -- as manly age (in tract of time) comes in the room of child-like,
but all this makes against you, and for us.

3. We do not bring our proof for Childrens right to the seal of Initiation,
from that Covenant in Sinai, of which the Apostle Gal. 4.24.25.
expressly speaks, and sers the Covenant as perverted by the Jews (expecting
righteousness from the work of the Law) but from the Covenant made with Abraham
430 years before that time Genesis 15.18. and 17.7, 8. Gal. 3.16, 17.
; so that though it were proved by you, and granted by us, that the Covenant on
Mount Sinai was a Covenant of works, yet our Argument from the Covenant made
with Abraham (which was undeniably a Covenant Gal. 3.8, 16, 17.
of grace) stands unshaken.

4. Yet I humbly conceive, that that Covenant on mount Sinai (though it was
attempered to the condition of an unbroken people for their humiliation (and
therefore said to Gal. 4 24.
gender to bondage) and grace was revealed therein more darkly, and temporal
prou^ises and threathings exp^essed therein more ^ully, ^et it) was a Covenant
of Grace, according See Dr Holmes Epist. Preface to Mr. Craddocks
G^spel-liberty, and Dr. Reynolds 3 Treat^ses.
to God's primary intention, and as used by the godly, for whose sake it was
principally made. Because 1. God ^el^s lirael, if they will keep that Covenant,
Exo. 19.5, 6.
they shall be his peculiar treasure, a kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation,
which ^ame tides are given to God's people in Tit. 2.14. 1 Pet. 2.9.
Gospel Times; what though all d^d not keep Covenant (no more than any visible
Church now) yet some d^d; as Moses, Aaron, Joshua, Caleb, and many others, with
whom God was well pleased (as is implied 1 Cor. 10.5) which could not be
without faith Heb. 11.6
a^ you your self confess, p. 25. 2. God calls himself their God, Exodus 20.2,
7, 10.
not of their bod^^^ only, but of their souls also, Mat. 22.31.32. with Heb.
11.16.
and that not temporally, but eternally. 3. It was confirmed by sacrifices,
etc. Psalm. 50.5. by which they had communion with God, which could not be
without Faith, Heb 11.4.6. and Faith looks at Christ the object, (though then
not so clearly revealed, yet) signified by those sacrifices, and all the
Levitical service. 4. They that kept this Covenant sincerely, (as many did)
Exd. 20.6. and34.6, 7. Psalm. 32.1, 2. Romans 4.6, 7, 8. and Psalm. 103.17, 18.
were partakers of pardoning, beatifical, and everlasting mercies. 5. All those
Worthies hinted at from Moses to Christ; were famous for their faith, Heb. c.
11. and Acts 15.11.
and saved by grace. 6. (To name no more) Christ is the end of the Law, etc.
Romans 10.3. and the end of the Law (for that is the Commandment 1 Timothy 1.5, 7,
8, 9.
as appears by the coherence) is love out of a pure heart, a good conscience,
and faith unfeigned. What more can be said of the Gospel Covenant (as now
dispensed) then to bring us to Christ, Faith unfeigned, etc.


SECT. 3.
H. H. p. 55, and 56. The old Covenant did properly belong to the fleshly seed,
which had but the promise of an earthy Canaan, under the curse bringing forth
children to bondage, Gal. 4.24, 25. sealed by the blood of Bulls, etc. Heb.
9.19, 20. and found fault with, Heb. 8.6. etc.

Reply 1. Here is another piece of pure Socinianism, viz. The old Covenant had
but the promise of an earthly Canaan. But by you^ leav^, i^ held forth also
spiritual and eternal blessings by Christ: E. gr (beside the foregoing
instances) Ames. medul^l. 1. c. 38. n. 23.
Redemption in Melchizedecks person, and b^essing, Genesis 14 with Heb. 7
Vocation, Heb. 11.8, 9, 10. Justincation, Romans 3.3.9. Sanctification, Deuteronomy.
30.6. with Col. 2 11. and Glorification in heaven, whe^eof that earthly Canaan
was a Type, Heb. 4.1. -- and Chap. 11. ver. 13.14, 15, 16.

2. The Covenant of Grace, though it has been one and the same for substance
since Adam's fall, yet it has been dispensed gradually (as plants, bruits, and
men come to their perfection in their kind by degrees) as is evident, if we
consider how little at first was revealed to Adam fallen, more to Noah, more
yet to Abraham, far yet more to Moses and the Church in his time, etc. and yet
more plentifully in David's and Solomon's time, and more fully in the latter
Prophets: E. gr. A Child is put into a Covenant for a Living, enjo^es the
benefit of it, and is educated answerably, though for the present he
understands but little of the privileges and engagements of the Covenant; but
when at years, is more fully instructed in the nature of the Covenant, that he
may perform the Articles, and reap the benefits of it. So was Israel Ezekiel 16.34
36, etc. Hos. 11 1. Gal. 4.1, 23.
owned in Covenant with God, from its Infancy, etc. So then it is true, the
Covenant of Grace is now more clearly and perfectly dispensed; yet it follows
not, that the former Covenant was not a Covenant of Grace, but rather the
Covenant of Grace in another dress. Hence the New Covenant is a better
Covenant, i.e. gradually, not specifically; and the Old Covenant Heb. 8.7, 8.
faulty, not simply (for it was the institution of God), but comparatively, God
complaining (...).
(as the word signifies) of it is imperfection, in respect of man's corruption,
and promising an higher dispensation.

3 We must distinguish between the right use the godly made of the Old
Covenant, acording to God's primary intention, and the misapprehension, and the
misapplication thereof by most of the Jews. On the former account it was a
Covenant of Grace, as the foregoing instances show; on the latter it was looked
on as the Covenant of Works, most of them expecting Justification, etc. by the
works of the Law, or partly by Works, and partly by Faith, which indeed are
inconsistent. For they were bound to take God for their God for justification,
(which could not be but by Christ) though not so clearly known) and then to
square their lives according to the Law, as an evidence of that Faith.
Notwithstanding it is granted, that those commands in that Covenant were needful
to drive them to the promise, as well as the promise applied by Faith, was to
draw them to obedience of those commands. But when they mistook the proper use
of this Covenant, and sought for justification by the Law, they fell under the
curse and condemnation of it, 2 Cor. 3.6, ^, 9.
thus separating the letter from the Sprit, it became a ministry of Death and
condemnation, but taken with the Spirit, and used by Faith, it was a Ministry
of life and salvation to the faithful in those times; yet this does not make it
a Covenant of Works, no more then now the New Covenant among us, because too
many professing to embrace that covenant, seek righteousness by their own works
without a lively faith in Christ.

SECT. 4.
H. H. p. 56. Paul knew as well the intent and meaning of the Covenant of God
with Abraham, as Mr. B. and Mr. C. and yet he applies it not to a fleshly
seed, Genesis 17.7. with Gal. 3.16, 29. Romans 4.13 and 9 7.8. etc.

Reply 1. You do not offer any proof, that one and the same seed is to be
understood in Genesis 17.7. and Gal. 3.16. your bare word will not be taken, and
that for these ensuing reasons to the contrary: 1. The seed in Genesis 17. is
called Genesis 17.7, 8 9, 10.
four times Abraham's seed after him, and twice after him in their Generations;
implying, that Abraham was the primary party in covenant; and his seed the
secondary, succeeding in time and dignity, but Christ, as to his person Joh.
8.58.
was before Abraham, and in the Covenant of Grace his Superior, yea his Lord,
Psalm. 110.1. with Mat. 22.44.
as well as David's. 2ly. That seed imports many, as ver. 8. I will be their
God; but Christ is one, as the Apostle urges in that place. 3. That seed had
their several generations, or births successively springing up, as ver. 7. and
9. Their generations, so had not Christ. 4ly, All the males of that seed were
to be circumcised (which were great multitudes) but we cannot say properly,
that all the males of Christ were circumcised: The coherence would afford more
reasons, if there were need.


2. Admit (which is not yet granted) that Christ mystical: i. e. the members
with Christ the Head, make one Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12.
or blessed seed, it makes nothing against their being of many in covenant
visibly, who fall short of justification and salvation: Our question is not
concerning the saving benefits of the Covenant, (certainly known to the seacher
of the heart only) but concerning external being in Covenant according to
God's gracious grant. Now the place in Genesis ^7. shows, that not only Abraham
and his children, but Proselytes and their children were taken into covenant,
which grant was never repealed by God, but often confirmed in the Old and New
Testament, the proofs whereof stand firm in Mr. C. book, which you pretend to
answer.

3. The Apostle refers to Genesis 15. Gen 15.6, 9 10, etc.
where after Abraham had professed his faith in that promise, ver. 5. and
thereupon was accounted righteous, ver. 6. The covenant was confirmed by
sacrifice, God saying, ver. 18 In that same day -- Unto thy seed have I given,
etc Now this confirmation was 430 years before the Law: Whereas that which is
mentioned, Genesis 17.7. was not so long a time as is See Pareus on Gal. 3.16.
exactly and largely showed. Indeed it may seem strange, that the Land of
Canaan should be given to Christ, Genesis 15.18. But the Apostle so interpreting
it, you and I must believe it, though perhaps we cannot satisfactorily explain
it, yet (for the Readers instruction) I conceive, that as the Evangelists and
Apostles do unfold many mysteries wrapped up in sacred Oracles, that we perhaps
could never have thought on, without their explication ( e.g. ministers
maintenance, 1 Timothy 5.18. with Deuteronomy. 25.4. and Elias prayer, Jam. 5.17, 18.
with 1 King. 17.1. and 18.42 -- and many more instances) so God would have us
know, that as to us Christians 2 Cor. 1.20.
all promises are yea, and Amen in Christ exhibited, so to the Israelites in
Christ to be exhibited, and that they could not have right to that earthly
Canaan, much less enjoy it by Covenant, least of all the heavenly kingdom
(shadowed thereby) but by Christ; that according to the Flesh, was to be born
of Abraham's seed, whose humane nature had then no existence, but that person
(in whom the humane nature should subsist) was in being before; to whom the
Father committed the disposal of this inheritance. etc. in which respect it is
said, I have given, -- Genesis 15.18.

SECT. 5.
H. H. p. 56. I wonder how the Preachers of the Church of England dare affirm,
That Believers children are in Covenant before believing, by virtue of their
parents Faith, and yet they hold that God did hate, and had reprobated Esau
before he was born, or had done good or evil, etc.

Reply 1. You need not wonder, if you will consider the distinction (even now
hinted) of being in Covenant: viz. Externally; thus all that profess acceptance
of the covenant, are (by God's grant) with their children in covenant, and
internally (so as to partake of the saving benefits of the covenant). Thus none
but those who are circumcised in heart are in covenant. This distinction is
none of our coining, but obvious in Scripture. To go no further then your
instance of Esau, who was in covenant outwardly, though not inwardly; for he
was circumcised as well as Jacob, because of God's command, Genesis 17.10, 11, 12.
(where parents circumcising their seed, is called a keeping of God's covenant,
and circumcision a token of the covenant, and the omitting of it a breaking of
his covenant) and yet he was hated of God, Romans 9.12, 13. before he had done
good or evil -- And when he was come to age, Heb. 12.16, 17.
he was an hypocrite, and profane person, and so wanted the inward efficacy of
the Covenant. The children of Believers may be in covenant then externally,
though reprobated externally, Romans 11.1, 2. where it is evident, all Israel were
his people in covenant outwardly, but only his Flect whom he fore-knew, his
people in covenant internally.

2. I wonder rather, that you should hold, that God did not hate Esau before he
had done good or evil. Are not you one of those, Your p. 53. Qu. 6.
that deny faith in part of the Scripture, for it is so written, Rom 9 11, 13.
Here again you smell too strong of the Arminian cask, who deny peremptory, or
personal reprobation of any.

3. Mr. B. and Mr. C. have weighed you and your principles in the balance of
the Sanctuary, and have found you and them too light: and they do not marvel,
that you confound your own principles, and other men's too, for want of a
Scripture-distinction.

SECT. 6.
H. H. Again, If Believers children be in covenant because they are believers
children, then grace comes by Generation, and not by Regeneration, which is
absurd.

Reply. We do not say, Believers children are in covenant, because Believers
children, but because God has made a covenant with the faithful and their
seed: much less do we say, that the inward blessing of the Covenant is given
to an^, because believers children (though we grant it an effect of God's
favor or grace, that those which are born of parents in covenant, are
externally in covenant, as born of such by virtue of God's promise): Least of
all do we say. That grace ( i. e. the favor of God) comes by generation or
regeneration either. That any are born visible and external Church Members, is
a fruit of God's mere common grace or favor, that any are made members of
Christ by Regeneration, and endued with true holiness, is a fruit of his
peculiar grace, but neither Generation nor Regeneration the cause of grace
properly taken.

SECT. 7.
H. H. If they be in Covenant by virtue of their believing parents, then all
the world ever since righteous Noah, must needs be in Covenant, for they and we
all came of him.

Reply 1. It follows not. Noah's sons presently Apostatized from their father's
God, and so did the greatest part of the other families. Of Ishmael and Esau,
though born of godly parents, and so they did cast themselves out of Covenant.

2. If parents dedicate their children to the true God, whom they own, and
bring them up in the true Religion which they profess, and become not Apostates
to Idolatry, Atheism, and Hethenism, they and their children are externally
(at least) in covenant. But if they so Apostatize, they cast themselves, and
their children out of covenant, who so remain, till by the Gospel they are
brought back again into covenant; else the faith of one parent (continuing in
the faith) intitles the child to federal holiness, according to God's Word and
promise, 1 Cor. 7*14.

SECT. 8.
H. H. But Mr. C. says in his Font Uncovered, page 45. That he does not hold
falling from the inward efficacy of grace, and true sanctification, etc. Answ.
So then it seems by his own confession it is not true, and then it must needs
be false; and it is well, if they fall from false grace and sanctification, etc.
for they that fall from false, must needs fall to true; as they that fall from
true, fall to false, else they abide as they were.

Reply 1. Of four answers made by Mr. C. to a second Objection, you have snatch
at one for your advantage (as you think) and pass by all the other, which you
could not reply to. Cunningly done.

2. That very one singled out by you, discovers as your strange humor to pick
quarrels, so your miserable impotency to overthrow the truth. For these very
words you cite, hold forth the distinction of being outwardly under the
Covenant of Grace, which is common to the whole visible Church, Elect and
Reprobate, and the partaking of the inward efficacy of grace, which is peculiar
to the effectually called; which distinction turns your charge into mere smoke.

3. The Arminians argue in their writings, Called, scripta Antisynodalia.
just as you do, yet the consequence is as senseless as the former. For there is
no necessity of falling from false grace to true, etc. For they may, and often do
fall to open wickedness, which is no very good fall, (though you say, 2 Pet.
2.20, 21, 22.
it is well if they fall from false grace) if you go out of one false way, must
you need go into the true way; the bypath are many, the true way but one.
Nay, some fall from a false and Luke 8.18. John. 15.2.
seeming apprehension of the graces and blessings of the Covenant, to
anapparent rejection and loss thereof, being not only stripped of common gifts
and graces (as they are called) whereby they are kept from shameful practices,
and rewarded with common blessings, (as Ahab's 1 King 21.29.
humiliation was) but also of common Church-privileges (as Cham enjoied, while
he was in the Ark with Noah) and (which is worse) are deprived of possibility
of conversion, and salvation (being cut off from the visible Church by total
Apostasy) which thousands (who were at first but external Church Members only)
obtained, by being outwardly in Covenant, and so were brought through the
outward court into the holy place, yea Holy of Holies.

SECT. 9.
H. H. But to make the folly of these wise men manifest, consider with me 1.
What the New Covenant is. 2. Then judge whether Infants can be in it or no.
Heb. 8.8 9, 10, 11. This is the New Covenant of Grace --

Reply 1. Seeing Mr. C. made no mention of false grace, falls justification,
etc. but of falling from the outward dispensation of the Covenant -- from what
they Seemed to have, I fear you will be found in the number of those, Romans 1.22.
who professing themselves wise -- etc.

2. You do not prove, that this text is to be understood of the covenant as
outwardly administered, concerning which our question is. If of the inward
efficacy of the covenant, the seals thereof must not be administered, till we
certainly know who are interessed in this covenant. I suppose you will not
maintain all your Church Members are such. The covenant of God consists of many
branches; and yet the name of Covenant given sometimes to one, and sometimes to
another, yet not exclusively to the rest. e. gr. 1. To the commands. Deuteronomy.
4.13. 2. To the command and curse, or threatening. Deuteronomy. 29.1.12. to 22. --
Jerem. 11.3, 4. 3. To the promises. Jerem. 31.33, 34, and 32, 40. 4. To the
seals. Genesis 17.9.10, 11; 13. Luke 22.20. and 1 Cor. 11.25. Where the Cup is
called the New Testament, Though the word (...).
is usually translated Covenant else where

3. This Covenant belongs not only to us Christians, but did also to the Jews
(the house of Israel and Judah) and in some sort made good to some of them
upon their return from the Babilonian Captivity. Jer. 31 31, 32, 43: 34, 38,
39, 40.
Now if this Covenant should exclude Christians children, it would have
excluded the Jews children; But it is certain, their children continued the
outward dispensation of the Covenant, till the whole body of the Jews was cast
off by unbelief. Or if it may be understood of their last conversion in the end
of the World, They shall have interest in the Covenant, for their children, as
well as the old Jews had, and so have we; For our conversion from Gentilisme is
called Romans 11.17, 19, 23.
a graffing into that Stock, as theirs is a re-ingraffing.

4. There are diverse expressions here, which bear a favorable aspect to the
being of Infants in this Covenant. 1. It Is said, I will put my laws into their
mind, and write them in their hearts: Cannot God do so in the hearts and minds
of Infants by the spirit of Regeneration? 2. I will be to them a God, and they
shall be to me a people. Did you never read, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12, 13.
that God would be a God to Infants, or little ones? or is it impossible for
them to be Gods people, because they are such? 3. All shall know me, from the
least to the greatest.
Who then dare den^ infants to be included, who are the least (as p. 59, and 65.
you imply?) are they not of all others most incapable of being taught by their
neighbors, and therefore likeliest to be the subject of this promise, as it
lies before us? or because men cannot teach them, until the souls Organs be
ripened will it follow that God cannot? Are they not rational souls (whilst
Infants) capable of knowledge, and is not God able to Supply the defect of
Organs, and instrument^, as outward senses, etc. Christ of water could make
true Wine immediately, without husbandry, as plantine Vine^, etc. Though we
are tied to means (when afforded) for attaining the end, yet God is not, 1 Cor.
2.9, 10, 11, 14.
As all means without the spirit cannot work saving knowledge; so the spirit can
work it, etc. without Joh. 3.8.
means, where he pleases.

5. To your close. No one place of Scripture calls it the Covenat of grace Ball
of the covenant, p. 9.
expressly in so many words and syllables; and I deny not but it may be so
called, Comparatively, in respect of the plenty of grace now vouchsafed. For
surely the faithful under the old Covenant were not simply, and absolutely
without grace. Act. 15.11. But let us hear your Reasons.

SECT. 10.
H. H. page 58.1. Because Infants have not the laws of God in their minds, nor
written in their hearts; as not being in a capacity to know the mind and law of
God, as is plain. Isai. 7.14, 15, 16. Nay Christ (when he was an Infant) was
not capable of discerning between things that differ. Luke 2.40 52. Much less
do other children understand Gods law; Therefore not in Covenant.

Reply 1. The writing of the law in the heart, etc. see Dr. Pressed. of the
covena.
Is nothing else but an holy disposition to conformity with the Law, or all one
with that circumcision, Deuteronomy. 30.6. or Regeneration, of which children are
capable, or else they cannot be saved. John 3.3. Now you make no question of
the salvation of all Infants dying in their infancy. p. 60, 61.

2. If Infants incapacity to know etc. be so plain, then by your grant, some
consequences from Scripture are plain Scripture proof, which justifies Mr. B.
and Mr. Cook.

3. Your Argument from Sensitive, Rational, and natural knowledge (which is
understood by knowing good and evil: etc.) to supernatural, infused, and
spiritual knowledge, i^ (plainly) na^ght* many have the former, who want the
latter, and no reason can be given why many may not have the latter, who want
the former. Since, it depends not on the ^enses as the other. The reasonable
so^l has no Infan^^y, nor decrepit age (no more then other intellectual
spirits, as Angels) but is capable of immediate imp^^ssions from God. Does it
not reason, when senses are bound up? And when it is disrobed of the body, the
unde^standing is more perfect, then while in the body* Heb. 12 23 -- the spirit
of just men made p^rfect.

4. You are g^^sly mistaken (not to say im^udent) with the Scripture, and with
our glorious Lord Christ himself) in the exposition of Isa. 7.15, 16. and
interpreting the same of Christ. For though ver. 14. is doubtless meant of
Christ, yet the two latter v^rses mean Shear-Jashub; the Prophets little son,
ver 3. by whom, as by a sign, the Prophet assures Ah^z, etc. That Judah should
be in such peace, that that child should be brought up (without fear of war) in
peace and plenty* and that before he was grown up: Those two smoking
Firebrarnds, ver. 4. should be quenched: What s^ay could it be to a trembling
King? and a troubled People of God a^ Jerusalem, to hear that those two
Firebrarnds (which threa^ned the ruin of all) should be overthrown, before
Christ should come to mature years, which was many hundred yea^s after. But
this promise (concerning the Prophets Son) being believed, might be a suitable
support to their trembling hearts in that juncture.

5. To your proof concerning Christ. Lu. 2.40.52.
I say truly, you do still like yourself. For before you can make any
consequence from the Scripture, you must approve some gross absurdity, or
blasphemy. viz. They that grow and wax strong in spirit and wisdom, had none
before that time they are said to grow. Whereas the growth of a thing
presupposes the being of it. e. gr. we are commanded to 2 Pet. 3.18.
grow in grace and knowledge, will it follow, that we are void of grace and
knowledge? 2. By your Reason, Christ (while he was an Infant) had no spirit, no
grace of God upon him, no stature, no favor with God or man; For in these
Christ is said to increase, as well as in wisdom. What Christian ear tingles
not at such blasphemies? which yet your unreasonable reasonings (with a
witness) pre-suppose or imply (if not express) for the making up of your
conclusion. Now what think you? had not Christ the law written in his heart in
his infancy? deny it if you dare, or can; all Orthordox Divines hold, Ames
medu. l. 1. c. 21. Jo 1.14. with Luke 2.40.52.
that Christ in the first instant of his conception, received in the humane
nature fullness of grace, in respect of the first act; yet so, as there was room
for growth in respect of the second acts, and of extension to new objects. So
that n^w! must again proclaim you a blasphemer. The charge is now more clearly
confirmed, by this your BLASPHEMY against Christ himself.

SECT. 11.
H. H. But some will object for want of wisdom, that upon this account Christ
will be excluded the Covenant in his innocence. I Answer, such people know not
what they say. For he was given for a Covenant, Isa. 42.6. and 49.8. And he is
the Mediator of the Covenant, Heb. 12.2, 5. and his blood is the blood of the
Covenant, chap, 13, 10. with Luke 22.40. And he is the seed to whom the
promises were made, Gal. 3.13. and in him they are yea, and Amen; with 1 Cor.
1.20. etc. And therefore vain and foolish it would be, for any man to make such
an objection.

Reply 1. To say nothing of some of the Scriptures which should be, Heb. 12.24.
Luke 22.20. 2 Cor. 1.20. you your self do not know, what to say in answer to
the Objection; you seem therefore to be a vain and foolish man, to conjure up
such a spirit which you could not lay, for want of wisdom.

2. All you have said, does not untye the knot, but ties it faster; unless you
grant that Christ in his Infancy was in the Covenant, which yet you do not
deny. And thus you seem to confess one Infant (at least) the holy Child Jesus,
to be within the Covenant, otherwise your answer to the Objection propounded by
you is weak enough, and strange for a man of common sense to give. The
Objection stands firm.

SECT. 12.
H. H. p. 59. They that are in Covenant shall know the Lord, from the greatest
to the least, Heb. 8.11. But Infants cannot: For they know no^ their own
parents, nor their right hand from their left, Jon. 4.11. Therefore the Lord
says plainl^, That children are innocent, Ps. 106.37, 38.
even of those which do sacrifice to the devil. Therefore (though Innocent)
are not, nor cannot be in Covenant. For that which is born of flesh is flesh,
but the New Covenant is spiritual, and they which enter into it must be born
again, for those that worship, must worship him in Spirit, etc. Jo 4.24.

Reply 1. What has been said to the former, might serve here. As many know
earthly and natural things, which know not the Lord: So God can conveigh the
knowledge of himself, to those Mat. 11.25.
that know little or nothing of natural things, and though natural knowledge
cannot be but by natural means; yet super-naturall knoweldge may be, and is
often conveyed without natural means. Notwithstanding they who have use of
reason and senses, are bound to make use of them, to get the knowledge of God
(where God's Ordicances are vouchsafed) though God himself is not tied to these
means.

2. That phrase [from the greatest to the least] is a proverbiall kind of
speech, frequently used in Scripture, to express the generality of a thing,
good or bad, among persons of all sorts and ranks; you may as well conclude,
Infants went up into the house of the Lord, because it is said 2 Chronicles. 3^.30.
All the people great and small -- went up, and that little babes were feasted
by Ahasuerus, because it is said, Esth. 1.5.
He made a feast -- both unto great and small; and that Infants were given to
covetousness, for it is said Jer. 6 15.
Every one (from the least to the greatest) is given to covetousness.

3. Your Sophist^y is discernable. The text ^aith, shall know the Lord, You say
CANNOT know -- Now if you rightly assume, Infants shall not know, you
contradict the Lords promise, which he will perform in his time. Beside, the
conclusion is not to purpose, viz. They shall not be in Covenant, or else there
are four terms in your Argument.

4. What miserable consequences and conclusions are here made? (as your Book
abounds with many more, whereby you abuse your self and others) First, The
Children of Ninivee knew not the right hand from the left. Therefore the Lord
says plainly, that children are innocent. Secondly, The children of those that
sacrifice to Devils are innocent. Therefore little babes (though innocent)
cannot be in Covenant. I shall speak to babes innocence in your next page. But
how will you make good your consequence? The absurdity whereof I leave to the
Reader to consider. Yet if children because innocent, cannot be in Covenant (as
you say), Then it follows clearly, that David, Daniel, and other holy men, Ps.
73.13. Dan. 6.22. Job. 17.8.
whom the Scriptures commend to be innocent, were not in Covenant? and if
innocence keep children out of Covenant, why not the aged also? Nay, Infants
innocence is so far from making them incapable of being in Covenant, that even
the children of Idolaters and murderers are called God's children, and born to
him, Ezec. 16.8.20, 21.
viz. in respect of the Covenant, which though broken by them, yet a bill of
divorce was not yet given to them. Therefore God owns their children as his in
Covenant. Thirdly, They are in Covenant (say you) because that which is born of
the flesh is flesh. As if they were not capable of Regeneration, even while
Infants, if so, no Infants dying can be saved; Jo. 3, 3, 5.
but you grant they may and must be saved, page 60. Therefore of necessity,
they must be born again. But it is no strange thing to find you either
confounding or contradicting your self.

5. To conclude this debate about Heb. 8. Observe, 1. M. Hag. quotes it not
right, page 57 f. who writes it, But this is the Covenant: whereas it is in the
place cited, FOR -- which is a Ratiocinative, not an adversative participle. 2.
It Is not said here, or elsewhere in Scripture, that none are under the new
Covenant (no not under the outward dispensation thereof) but they which have
those spiritual, and saving works on their hearts. 3. Neither does he say,
that all those gracious works shall be wrought on them, the first day of their
admission into Covenant. Though the habits may be infused at once, yet the
growth and actings of those habits are by degre^s. Else we should deny them to
be within the Covenant internally, who cannot discern distinctly such
heart-works. 4. When we are speaking of such an external visible interest in
the Covenant, as gives to the seed right of entrance into Covenant; It is a
manifest flying off from the Question, to talk of the internal Covenant,
proper only to the Elect. Especially it is a mere subterfuge, to deny childrens
being in Covenant, and so right to the seal, because they have not this
spiritual blessing of the Covenant; when they themselves dare not undertake,
that all (or perhaps any are) of those whom they admit to the seal of the
Covenant, have these spiritual blessings, or be in this respect within the New
Covenant.


CHAP. XII. Whether the Infants of Christians, and of Heathens, are in the same
condition, as to their Souls?
SECT. 1.
H. H. p. 59. f. M. B. says p. 71, 72. in his 21, and 22. Arguments, that our
doctrine is false. For it denies any Infants to be members of the visible
Church, and leaves us no sound grounded hope of the justification, and
salvation of any Infants in the world. The same says M. C. in his 13.
Argument, p. 44. It puts the Infants of christians into the same condition with
the children of Turks, and Infidels, and leaves them in the visible kingdom of
the Devil, etc. I Answ. 1. Denying that any children are saved by virtue of
visible Church Membership, or being in the Covenant, as believers are, and let
M. B. M. C. or any for them prove it by the Scriptures, if they can.

Reply 1. What a wide leap have we here? you fairly pass by twenty Arguments
of M. Baxters, and twelve of M. Cooks, though you pretend to answer them in
your Title page. Very good reason, because you could not (or would not) make
any color or show of an answer.

2. What you here say is, no answer at all to any part of the Arguments
propound^d, may your expression (of being saved by virtue of visible
Church Membership, or being in Covenant as believers are) is very ambiguous and
fallacious; Though their Church-member-ship and Covenant-ship (if so I may say)
have been proved by many Arguments, which you have not so much assayed to
answer.

3. Ye^ I shall ( ex abundanc^, prove it (because you challenge any man) by
these few Arguments grounded on Scripture, etc. Though you grant Infants are
saved, and that cannot be but by Covenant, etc. First, They that are saved by
Christ, are saved by Covenant; for Christ is the Covenant, his blood is the
blood of the Covenant, as you acknowledge p. 58. from Is. 49.8 Heb. 13.20.
b^t those children that are saved, are saved by Christ, Romans 5.18. Therefore
-- Secondly, They that are saved by the Mediator of the New Covenant, are saved
by means of being in the New Covenant. (For there is no other Mediator, 1 Timothy
2 5. and christ saves none as Mediator of the Covenant, but those whom he
brings into covenant, else why called a Medit^our of the covenant?) but some
children are saved by the Mediator of the New covenant. Therefore -- Thirdly,
they who are without Christ, Church Membership, and covenant, ^re without hope,
without God in the world, and in a perishing condition, but Elect Infants are
not without God without hope, and in a perishing condition. Therefore not
without Christ, Church Membership, and covenant. 4. The Church and all his
members are in covenant with God, (for it is by covenant Hos. 2.19, 20.
that she is made the Spouse of Christ) but some infants are made
Church-me^bers, (for whom Christ dyed, Ep. 5.26, 27.
as well as for grown persons) herefore they are in covenant, and by consequence
saved by virtue thereof. Fifthly* from your ground, which (surely) you lay on
Scripture. He that proves, Infants dying are saved by Christ's death, proves
that they are saved by virtue of the covenant (for the covenant is ratified by
Christ's death) but M. H^g. proves, that Infants dying, are saved by virtue of
Christ's death (p. 61.) or else he does not prove it by Scripture. Therefore M.
Hag. proves, that Infants dying, are saved by virtue of the covenant. I hope
you will not deny your own assertion, and therefore not yours and my Conclusion.

4. This labor might have been spared. For you confess (if your words bear
any sense) that Infants are in covenant, though not in that manner as believers
are.

SECT. 2.
H. H. p. 60. Secondly I answer, there is no difference between the children of
believers and unbelievers in their Nonage. For the children of the one (at
best) are but innocent, and so are the children of unbelievers Psalm. 106.37,
38. -- and those that are innocent, God will not destroy, Exodus 23.7. with Job
22.30. Prove. 6.16, 17.

Reply 1. If there be no difference -- you grant M. Cooks Minor proposition,
and therefore must own the Conclusion. Abominable doctrine indeed, viz. that
puts no difference between the children of Christians and of Turks, to be
abhorred of all those that have heard of God's Covenant made with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, the people of Israel, and Church of the New Covenant, which I
leave to be considered and lamented.

2. I suppose the word BUT should be left out: (they are BUT innocent) unless
you mean, they are only freed from, and acquitted of the gift of sin, but
without inherent and imputed righteousness, which is as abominable as the
former, and contrary to your allegation, Romans 5.16. p. 6^.

3. But if the best be made of them, they are more then innocent, Isa. 44.3.
for God has promised to power his spirit on the believers seed, and his
blessing on their offspring. And he declares Isa. 65.23. Psalm. 37.26.
their offspring are blessed, and that the kingdom of heaven belongs to them
Mat. 19.14.
etc, These and the like things are not said of the children of unbelievers.
Therefore some difference sure.

4. Yet no children are innocent absolutely, but comparitatively, as David was
(if his prayer was heard) Psa. 19.13. -- So I shall be innocent from the GREAT
transgresion, and Abner, and Amasa, were not without sins, yet their blood is
termed innocent blood, 1 Kin. 2.31, 32.
so those children in Psalm. 106. were innocent, as to actual sin, and in
respect of those that murdered them, but not free from original sin, nor
spotless before God. For had they been altogether without sin, they could not
have dyed, Joh. 14.3.4. Psalm. 51.5. Romans 5.12, 14, 18. and 6.23 Ephesians. 2 3 I
say, God in equity could not take away their lives, if they were simply without
all sin, or else God i^ cruel^ in punishing, as the places you bring seem to
prove, which is prodigious blasphemy.

5 How is Scripture abused? how impertinent is your proof? man must not destroy
the innocent, Exodus 23, 7. Prove 6.16, 17. Therefore God will not. Our Divines
hold, that God by his perogative may Joh. 9.12. with 2^.3.
annihilate an innocent person; yea, lay what evils he please, (as on Christ
who in himself was every way innocent) without any wrong to the creature, and
were not the Sodomites and their children. Josh. ^.24.
Achan and his children punished (and that without any injustice) by the Lord?
and how many children were drowned in Noah's deluge?

6. To return to Psalm 106. Those children were children of persons externally
in Covenant though wicked, yet not dis-covenanted, for after severe
corrections, he is said to remember his covenant for them, verse 45.

7. What you say in the rest of this p. is not at all pertinent to this
Argument, and therefore I pass the same by, only with so^^e brief
animadversions; in the general, we have here (...) bundl of Arminianism, or
refined Pelagianism; First, a tacit denying (or at least a sleighting) See c.
10. and ans. to the 7. (...) qu.
of original sin, contrary to Scripture and experience. Secondly, none shall
be condemned for Adam's transgression, contrary to Romans 3.23, with 5.18, 19
Thirdly, original sin does not deserve eternal death, but only temporal
(what other construction can be made of your words?) though they must all dye
for Adam's transgression, yet etc.) contrary to Rom 6.23. Fourthly, In such
little babes there is no Law contrary to Romans 7.1. with 5* 12. Fifthly, no
transgression can be imputed to them, how then do they dye (as you confess)
for Adam's sin, with a pitiful contradiction is this? Sixthly, None shall be
judged according to original sin, contrary to Rev. 20.12. -- SMALL and great
stood before God -- who were judged according to their works. And if Adams
transgression, be every man's work (save Christ's) then Infants shall be judged
accordingly, or if for the effect, then much more for the cause, which is as
bad if not worse, you harp on the word DONE in 1 Cor. 5.10. I find no such
thing in that Scripture, when you correct your quotation, you shall have a
solution. In the mean time it looks very suspitiously, when the creature is
more merciful, then the Creator (as the pitiful Arminians seem to be) if you
would take that advice, you give, to M. B. etc. viz. Seriously consult
Scripture, your wonder would not be for nine days, but I hasten to your next p.

SECT. 3.
H. H. p. 61. God has has one way to save men and women, and another to save
Infants, as Romans 5.18. whence. I conclude, that Infants which fell in Adam
without any actual sin, or knowledge of Adam's transgression, even so they
dying in their Infancy, etc. are saved by virtue of Christ's death without any
actual faith or knowledge of Christ's obedience, or else it is not EVEN SO, as
Romans 5.18. says.

Reply 1. So then you positively assert, that all Infants dying in their
Infancy, etc. are saved by Christ, etc. Romans 5.18. But 1. Here is no express
mention made of Infants, or their fall in Adam, or any actual sin, or of
knowledge of Adam's transgression, or of their salvation by Christ's death, or
of their actual faith or knowledge of Christ's obedience. Here therefore is no
plain proof for your assertion. All the particulars forenamed are unwritten
traditions, and additions to the Scripture; take heed lest those plagues you
would scare others with so often, become your own portion.

2. The word ALL must be taken largely, or restrictively, not the former. For
then all men, women, and children, within and without the Church shall be
saved, for justification of life upon all men implies so much. Now it is
impossible, that those who are truly justified, Romans 8.30, 32, 34. etc.
should fall short of glorification. If you mean (as your words imply) that all
in their Infancy were justified, though after by sinning, they may perish, that
is repugnant to the forenamed Scripture, nor restrictively. For neither the
wo^d, nor context, admit such an exception. Indeed there is a kind of
universality of those that are partakers of justification of life. i. e. All
they that receive abundance of grace, etc. verse 17. i. e. All the Elect,
Christ's sheep, regenerate, and sanctified ones; But where is it proved, that
all Infants (even of Heathens) so dying, are such? Nay, it is denied by you.

3 How can you satisfy your self with this one Scripture, from whence you draw
no Argument but this; else it is not even so, as Romans 5.18. says, i. e. either
your opinion is true, or that Scripture is false: But as you know that
comparisons do not run on four seet, so you will not yield to many Scriptures
with Arguments deduced from them (though never so clearly, and strongly) for
the proof of Infant Baptism. Is this impartial dealing? will you have Infants
(even of Heathens) saved here by consequence? And shall not ^e have Infants
(even of Christians) baptized by consequence, from Mat. chap. 28. verse 19.

4. I have heard of one, that held universal Redemption of all from original
sin, and that therefore Infants (even of Heathens) while such, are in God's
favor, (which I think is your opinion, I am sure it is of some of your
Proselytes in these parts) and thence concluded that such Infants were to be
baptized, (if parents would permit) and if the Antecedent be granted (which you
do) the consequent cannot be denied by any, but by him that absurdly did and
will deny the conclusion. For who can deny the seal of Redemption to them, who
are acknowledged to have interest in Redemption by Christ's blood?

5. I will not determine what the Lord may do by prerogative, neither must I
believe or assert for a truth any more then his Word holds forth. Leaving
therefore secret things to the Lord, I further will clear it, that Infants
while Infants (even of Heathens) so dying, are not saved by Christ, as being
justified by him, etc.

1. Whatsoever is to be believed by us, is contained in the Scriptures. This
you cannot deny, but that Infants (ever of Heathens) are in state of
justification and salvation, is not contained in the Scriptures, (no not in
Romans 5.18. as is showed before) Therefore --

2. Remission of sins and justification are peculiar to those (m) who are in
Covenant. But Infants of Heathen^, while such, are not in Covenant, as all
parties agree: Therefore -- Or thus; All justified persons are in Covenant,
Infants of Heathens are not in Covenant. Therefore not justified.

3. (To contract my self) Because Esau while an Infant was not justified,
though the child of godly parents (as you said p. 57.) much less the Infants of
Heathens, whilst such.

4. Then it would be a work of mercy to cut their throats, and send them to
heaven, which is absurd (at least) you will judge: Must Herod be a Savior of
Infants? Did he them a good turn or no?

5. They are without Regeneration, as having neither word, spirit, sign,
promise, or covenant of Regeneration, hence said to be without.

7. Baptism does not belong to them, (as you and we agree) which is the sign
and seal of justification. Therefore not justification by Christ's blood, which
is (at least a part of) the thing signified.

More might be added, but I forbear; only I wish you to consider seriously,
how one absurdity draws on many more, whilst some are resolved to maintain
their fancies. What a monstrous thing is it, that all the children of Heathens
shall be partakers of the kingdom of heaven in glory, and yet to deny to
Infants of Christians the sign and seal of admission into the kingdom of
heaven on earth: or to them faith? (if the free gift come on them to
justification of life) I cannot find in Scripture, specially in this Chapter,
Romans 5.1.16. Such justification without faith.

SECT. 4.
H. H. same p. and 62. Secondly, that God has one way to save men and women,
and another to save Infants, is evident, Rev. 2.7, 11, 17, 29. and chap. 3.6,
13. because the Spirit often calls to such who have ears to hear, but we never
find him calling to Infants to hear, and obey commandments, etc. Thirdly, Life
and salvation is promised to them that believe in Christ, Joh. 3.15, 16. with
Heb. 5.9. but salvation is not promised to Infants on these terms. Fourthly,
Death and damnation is threatened 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9. to those that know not God,
and obey not the Gospel, but they cannot know God, for they know not the right
hand from the left -- etc. Fifthly, The ordinary means of salvation is the
preaching of the Gospel, Romans 1.16. 1 Cor. 1.21. Thus is their great invincible
objection (or rather cavil) answered clearly and plainly by the Scripture of
truth.

Reply 1. It is in none of these Scriptures expressly said, that God has one
way to save men and women, and another way to save little children; you are
wise above what is written. Must we trust you, or seek wisdom at your mouth?
as you say, in your p. 53. qu. 5. Secondly, neither do you prove it clearly and
evidently, but by (pitiful) consequences. May not I say to you, as he in
another case? Therefore thou art inexcusable oh man, whosoever thou art that
judge, for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self, etc.

3. They rather prove the damnation then the salvation of Infants, for (you
say) they cannot hear, believe, know, obey, confess to salvation.

4. Is there not another contradiction? for hare you say, we never find little
babes bidden to hear the Commandments -- And yet you say, p. 52. the sons of
men are commanded to hear Christ, I hope some little babes are the sons of men.

5. Sure you live by ill neighbors, you do often commend your self, but you are
strongly and strangely infatuated to believe, that you have both proved what
you undertook, and clearly and plainly answered this invincible objection,
etc. (as you scornfully call it) when any rational man (fearing God) may see
that you have done neither.

SECT. 5.
H. H. And the truth is, they may as well debar little babes from food, because
it is said in Scripture, He that will not work, let him not eat, as to debar
them from salvation, because they are not Church Members, etc.

Reply 1. You debar them from Baptism, because they cannot believe, why not
also from salvation hereafter (on that Scripture, Mark 16.16.) as from food
here on this, 2 These. 3.10.

2. Infants Church Membership shall be spoken to in answer to your twelve
Arguments. But it is your gross mistake, that they are no Church Members,
because they cannot perform the work of a Churchmember. The same may be said
of the Jews Infants, yet they were circumcised, and were Church Members. Nay we
find them joined in Church-Ordinances, as prayer, fasting, etc. 2 Chronicles. 20.16.
Joel 2 16.

3. That God will give them salvation without observing Church-Ordinancer,
overthrows your 12 following Arguments, with the last, which a probable one,
you say, p. 72.

CHAP. XIII. Whether Infants of Believing Parents are Church Members?
SECT. 1.
H. H. p. 63. 2ly, Infants are not Church Members, neither can Church
membership do them any good, but rather the contrary Argument 1. from Joh.
15.2. etc.

Reply 1. Inst^ad of answering our Arguments for Infant Church membership
(which yet you undertook) you tu^n opponent, and dispute after your manner
against their Church Membership: But let any Logician read this your first
Argument, and he will easily see how monstrou^ and misshapen it is, without any
true form. To make the best of it, it is this; If every branch that is in Christ
must bring forth fruit, or else be cut off; then Infants cannot be branches in
Christ, for they cannot bring forth fruit, neither shall they be cut off: But
the former is true, therefore the latter, and by consequent are no
Church Members -- 1. You prove what you have undertaken by Consequences. May
they not be rejected by us, as ours are by you, saying, (p. 47.) We weigh them
not.

2. If you must have that liberty which you deny to us, you have here as many
Consequences as M. Baxter had, which (in the aforesaid p.) you find fault with.
As 1. If Infants be Church Members, they must be branches in Christ. 2. If
branches, they must be fruitful. 3. If fruitful, they must abide in Christ,
etc. 4. If not, they must be cast into the fire, which is absurd. Review I
pray. Romans 2.1. Wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self; for
thou that judge, do the same things.


3. Your Argument proves as strongly, or more -- against all Infants interest
in Christ, and so salvation by him, contrary to your own judgment p. 61. or
more confidently and clearly for the damnation of Infants, according to that;
He that believes not, shall be damned, Mark 16.16. which yet you understand
only of persons of understanding, etc. as 2 These. 3.10. page 62. your answer
there, answers this here.

4. Your Consequence is denied, with your Reason; for though Infants whiles
such, cannot brin forth visible fruit, yet they may have some invisible fruit
(as to man, but not to God) by virtue of their Regeneration; in which estate,
if they die, God is glorified in their salvation.

5. The Similitude you bring, clears the truth: For as the tender branches of a
Vine are not presently cut off, though (for the present) they bring forth no
fruit; so neither little children, the tender branches of the Church, but some
time is allowed to grow, till the season of fruitfulness comes, and not till
then are they to be judged by men, worthy to be cut off. If God cut off some in
their infancy, he may do as he please, gathering his Elect (who if they lived
to years, would certainly have brought forth visible fruit) into heavenly
glory, and so glorifying his mercy, and leaving the vessels of wrath to their
dead condition, and glorifying his Justice on them.

6. Christ does not here Joh. 15.2.7.
speak of or to Infants, who cannot (you say) understand, hear, or speak,
neither can they pray; but to his Apostles (who were not Infants, as you truly
say, p. 64.) as appears from the 3. verse to the 22. but specially he shows
who are the branches expressly, verse 5. Ye are the Branches.

7. It is too narrow for you to expound words by commandments; for promises
and threatenings were to abide in the Disciples (I trow) as well as
commandments, verse 7.

8. The absurdity (you talk of) follows unavoidably upon your own premises,
you may look on it as a brat of your own begetting.

SECT. 2.
H. H. Second Argument from Acts 8.1, 4. -- There was a great persecution
against the Church which was as Jerusalem, and they were all scattered, etc.
except the Apostles, etc. And they that were scattered went every where, etc.

Reply. This Argument (as propounded by you) is almost as misshapen as the
former; therefore (for brevity sake) I past by diverse things there spoken:
only, 1. Your Argument concludes, as if there were no Infants at all in the
Church at Jerusalem, which is very improbable, Acts 2.4.
considering the many thousands which were converted. 2. As it is not said, All
they that were scattered abroad did preach -- but they that were scattered --
ver. 4 so the word Every where is not in the original, though our English
translation so reads; neither does the text say, And (as you do) But, Therefore
-- 3. By the Church is not meant the community or society of the faithful, but
only the Church guides, or Churchofficers. 1. Because it is said, verse 3. Saul
made havoc of the Church: And 2ly, because express mention is made Acts 11.22.
of the Church in Jerusalem, notwithstanding that storm of persecution. 3ly
Because it is said, verse 1. Except the Apostles: Now the Particle translated
here [Except], and el^ where [ Mark 12.32 Joh. 8.10. Acts 15.18.
But] (with the Genitive case) is Exceptive of the like kind. And indeed to
what purpose should the Aposties stay at Jerusa lem amongst Wolvs, if all their
flock were fled? must they officiate, and preach to the walls? Their staying
then at Jerusalem would have been perilous to themselves, and useless to
others, if all the Church (simply) had been scattered, having none to preach
to, or over-see. 4ly, Because that phrase (a) Preaching the Word is (in the
original) no where used, but of such as were in office. 5ly, Because of the
instance given, verse 5. Then Philip, etc. not Philip the Apostle, (he was
excepted, verse 1) but he that was numbered among the Deacons, Acts 6*5. and
expressly called an Evangelist, Acts 21.8. 6ly, Because Women should preach
also; for women were scattered as well as men. To this last you answer anon by
prevention; In the mean time I must tell you, that by the Church, is meant
Church Officers, (as it is certain) your consequence is very lame therefore.



SECT. 3.
H. H. p. 64. Though the Ministers in our days would have neither women nor
men preach, but themselves; yet women did prophecy, 1 Cor. 11.4, 5. Acts 21.9.
and 2.17 18. with 1 Cor. 14.3. Therefore women may preach -- provided, they be
gifted, and do not usurp authority over the men, 1 Timothy 2.12.

Reply 1. It Is well you will own us at last for Ministers, (whom all this
while, and after too, you scornfully call Priests) I commend you for it.

2. You do merely calumniate us, for we would have none preach (in public)
ordinarily and constantly, but such who are ordained (c) by the laying on of
the hands of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14. with 5.22. Tit. 1.5.
in a regular way.

3. By Prophesying (in 1 Cor. 11.4, 5.) is meant singing in, and with the
public Assembly, as in 1 Samuel 10.5. -- and they shall prophecy -- their
instruments argue what kind of prophecy this was, viz. praising God with
spiritual songs, but specially thrice in 1 Chronicles. 25.1, 2, 3. where prophesying
is expounded by giving thanks, and praising the Lord. Now what a poor Argument
is this? Women did then sing -- therefore they may now preach.

4. By Prophesying, in Acts 21.9. is meant, the foretelling of things to come,
Numb. 22.28, 30. with 2 Pet. 2.16. Jude ver. 11.
by the extraordinary work of the Spirit, as 2 Chronicles. 34 22.
Huldah the Prophetess. It is not warrantable or prudential, to make an
ordinary rule of an extraordinary act: E. gr. Because Balaam's Ass did speak,
must we expect that other Asses should speak too? The same is to be understood
of Acts 2 17, 18. which prophecy of Joel is said then to be fulfilled, ver. 16.

5. What an absurd ridiculous gloss do you make on 1 Timothy 2.12. To speak in in
a Church-assembly, by way of teaching and instructing others, is plainly held
forth as an act of superiority, which did not belong to Women, because that sex
was to be in subjection, ver. 11. And if a woman might teach (with your
proviso) how is or should she be in silence (which words you slily left out)
verse 12? Nay in that very chapter (which you bring for the meaning of the word
Prophesying) if you had looked further, you might have found, Let your women
keep silence in the Churches, for it is not permitted to them to speak, etc. 1
Cor. 14.34. Again, if they preach, why not baptize too? He that is half-blind
may see how cunningly you would bring in Popery. But it may be, you have been
so wonted to Curtain-lectures, that in a manner you have been cudgeled into
this belief, that Women may preach. So that all may see, the objection is
sorrily answered by you.

SECT. 4.
H. H. Third Argument from 1 Cor. 1, 2, 10, 12. Infants cannot understand, nor
speak, etc. Therefore no Church members --

Reply If your Argument run thus, They that cannot speak, etc. are no
Church Members; But Infants cannot -- Therefore -- It consists all of
Negatives, and it is an undeniable Maxim in Logic: From pure Negatives,
nothing is concluded. Or if thus: All Churchmembers can speak, etc. But Infants
cannot, etc. Your Major Proposition is manifestly false. Or thus, when improved
to the best: The Saints at Corinth were such as prayed, spoke, could say every
one of them, I am of Paul, etc. Infants cannot do any of these -- Therefore --
To this I say,

1. It is not said, that ALL which were Saints in Corinth did call on Christ's
name, but thus, ver. 2. Unto the Church of God which is at Corinth, to them
that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints; with all that in
every place call on the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, etc where the latter is
distinguished from the former. Neither must those words [Every one] be taken
largely of all the members of that Church, as if every one of the Corinthians
should say, I am of Paul, and every one say, I am of Apollo, etc. much less
that all of them were schismatical, as appears by the Apostle's thankfulness,
ver. 4, 5, 6, 7. and narrative, ver. 11. Some therefore did complain of those
divisions, and sought a redress of them, and so were not guilty of them. The
guilty therefore are exhorted to speak one thing: what is this to Infants?

2. These Saints when fast asleep, cannot put forth any of those acts; do they
therefore cease to be Church Members. Or it a Palfie or Lethargy, that takes
away the use of speech or understanding, (when not asleep) had seized on any of
them, were they therefore no Church Members? And why not children also, who are
called holy, or saints, 1 Cor. 7.14. (...) -- (the same word used) who in time
may be instructed in this, and other Scriptures, to take heed of Schism, as 2 Timothy 3.15. Surely Christian parents are bound to instruct their children, in
the doctrine of the Scriptures, no less then the Jewish were, Ephesians. 6.4. Deuteronomy.
6, ver. 7.

3. To show to the meanest, the palpable weakness of your Argument: Every one
that does righteousness is born of God, 1 John 2.29. No Infant does so:
Therefore no Infant is born of God.

SECT. 5.
H. H. p. 65. Fourth Argument from 1 Cor. 6.4, 5. Infants cannot judge, etc. in
such cases; Therefore none such members in the Church at Corinth.

Reply 1. This Argument is false, both for matter and form, as before: the
meanest may see by this; He that loves not Christ is accursed, 1 Cor. 16.22.
But no Infant can love Christ: Therefore accursed. It Is a poor evasion to say,
the Apostle speaks of a man, not an infant: when the particle (...). If any
one. etc.
is indefinite, and the Scripture calls Cain (an infant) a man (as has been
showed) Genesis 4 1.

2. The word (rendered least esteemed) is but one word, (...).
which might be translated contemptible, as 2 Cor. 10.10. or despised, as Luke
18.9. or set at naught, Romans 14.10. Now you your self (in your cold blood) may
be judge, whether the Corinthians Infants were contemptible, despised, or set
at naught. But if the word least were in the original, (as certainly it is not)
it cannot be understood of littleness in regard of stature, but of state, as
ellwhere often, Mat. 11.11. and 25.40. Luke 9.48. 1 Cor. 15 9. Ephesians. 3.8. etc.

3. It Is plain that the Apostle speaks of such who are able to judge; does it
therefore follow, that Infants are no Church Members at all? I trow not.
Suppose a man being confident of his cause opposed, should say, he would be
judged by the meanest persons in the Town or Country, are therefore Infants no
persons in the Town or Country?

4. Since the Apostle would have such differences composed by them that are
least esteemed in the Church, rather then judged by Infidel-magist^ates;
therefore I humbly conceive, that by the Church is to be understood, the ruling
Church, or Church-guides; for such doub^less they had, 1 Cor. 12.28. (the title
of the whole being given to the part,) and the word Church, or Congregation, is
in the Old and New Testament taken for the Officers of the Congregation, Exodus
12.3, 21. Numb. 35.12. Psalm. 82.1, Mat. 18.17, 18, 19. Acts 8.1. 1 Cor. 5.4.

SECT. 6.
H. H. Fifth Argument from 1 Cor. 10.16.17. with 11. ver. 28, 29.

Reply. If I understand your meaning (for yet you have no Syllogistical form)
your Argument is this: All Church Members did partake of the Lord's Supper; But
Infants did not -- Therefore -- 1. See the weakness of it, as in this very
glass: e. gr. 1 King. 8.63. All Israel feasted with Solomon; But the Jewish
Infants did not; Therefore they were none of Israel. If this be sophistical or
childish, yours is no better.

2. The Apostle does not in this, or any other place, say, that all
Church Members did partake of the Lord's Supper, (or of Bread and Wine) but
speaking of himself, and grown professors of Christianity, he ^^sswades Them,
who had been partakers of that one bread, etc. and so professedly incorporated
into that mystical body of Christ the Church, not to partake with Idolaters in
Idol-Temples, for that were to incorporate themselves into the body of
Idolaters. So then when he says, we are all partakers of that one Bread, he
neither comprehends Infants in the word [all], nor excludes them from the
number of Church Members.

SECT. 7.
H. H. p. 66. But if they be Church Members, they are to partake of the Bread
and Wine: Either then they are no members, or else they eat and drink damnation
to themselves, not discerning the Lord's body. Which absurdity, let any man
avoid it, if they can.

Reply 1. To pass by your calumny, concerning our discovery of abundance of
ignorance, and your misapplication of holy Scripture, 1 Timothy 1.7. which has
been sufficiently spoken to in your p. 30. you seem to go beyond the Erastians,
and Prelatical persons, who would have no Churchmember (of age) secluded from
the Lord's Supper, unless juridically excommunicated; but you would have
Infants also, if Church Members, admitted thereto.

2. Your reasons do not prove it, not the first; for one and the same body is
not to be understood in verses 16, 17, as you your self (if a man can make
sense of your confused expression p. 65.) intimate. Nor the second; for only
those did partake, to whom the Apostle did speak, as to wise ^^en, and to whom
he appeals for judgment, ver. 15. They that did bless the Cup, and break the
Bread, ver. 16. Now you tell us that Infants cannot speak, judge, etc. So our
Infants eat not their own damnation, because they partake not -- And they
partake not, not because they are not Church Members, but because they cannot
examine themselves, 1 Cor. 11.28. Thus the supposed absurdity is easily avoided,
and the h^rns of your Dilemma are run into your side, get them out if you can.

SECT. 8.
H. H. Page ibid. Sixth Argument from 1 Cor. 10 16, 17. with cap. 11.28.

Reply 1. This is the same Argument with the former, and may receive the same
answer; yet (it seems) what you cannot make out in weight, you will in number.
But put it into form, and so the vanity of it is easily discovered. For if
thus: They that partake of that Bread can examine themselves, but infants
cannot, therefore they partake not of that Bread. We grant this A^gament; if it
will do you any good, it hurts not us. Or thus: All Church Members are to
examine themselves, Infants cannot -- Then we deny the Major, and that truly,
prove it if you can. This makes not against us, but against you; if you hold
that Infants may partake of that, we do not.

2. This Particle ALL must be restrained to the subject matter in hand, as in
this very chapter, ver. 23. And I pray you, whom does the Apostle reprove and
instruct but such as can understand, judge, speak, etc. None of these debar
Infants from Church Membership.

SECT. 9.
H. H. p. 67. If any object, we may as well exclude Women as children. I
Answer: It discovers but a wicked cavilling spirit; for that women did partake
of it, I have proved; and that they are members of the body, ^prove it by Gal.
3.27. Acts 8.12. 1 Cor. 11.4, 5, 11. Acts 9.36. Romans 16.1. and 2 John ver. 13.
Now if women are members of the body, then they did partake, 1 Cor. 10.17. 2.
For the word Woman in the Text, it is all one with Genesis 5.1, 2. and here the
word Man includes both sexes, as the Greck and Latin word show.

Reply 1. You take the shadows of mountains for men, who are they that discover
such a spirit? I dare say neither Mr. Baxter, nor Mr. Cook, who deny not but
women did partake of the Lord's Supper, but upon a better account then you
give; for what a pitiful arguing is this? Women did partake of it, because it
is the communion of the body, and women are members of the body of Christ,
which is the Church, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. as though that body in 1 Cor. 10. verse 16.
were the same with this in the Ephesians.

2. You spend your time and labor in vain, in proving what is not denied; yet
when you have done, you prove it but by consequence, and that far fetched. As
there is no express word for Women's receiving of the Lord's Supper, so your
proof from 1 Corinthians. chap. 11. verse 4, 5.11. that they are members of the
body, is far-fetcht, and stretched too.

3. How does the word [Man] include the Woman in verse 28 --? When it is said,
Thou -- (...)
Himself, and Him, which are of the Masculine gender? Yea the word Man is so
far from including the Woman, that it signifies very often the man only. As
the Centurion said, I am a Man under authority, Mat. 8. ver. 9. and Christ
said, What went you out to see? A man clothed, etc. i. e. John Baptist, Mat.
11. ver. 8. and the Evangelist says, There was a Man which had his hand
withered, Mat. 10. ver. 12. and Joh. 1. ver. 6. There was a Man sent of God --
etc. 3.1. A Man of the Pharisees, etc.

4. If you are no Scholar, you amuse your Reader with stolen stuff, in citing
so many Authors, ancient and modern, from your page 15, to 21. If you are, you
grossly dissemble, avoid this absurdity if you can.

SECT. 10.
H. H. p. 68. Seventh Argument from 1 Cor. 12.25, 26. Church members should
have care one of another; But Infants cannot -- Therefore no visible members --
If they be, they are to be dealt with, and reproved, for not having that care.

Reply 1 Any Fresh-man in Logic can epsy four terms in this your sophistical
Argument.

2. It Is neither said in, nor by this, or any other Scripture, that all
Church Members are able, or bound at all times actually to take care one of
another; but only bound hereto when they have ability and call. The best of
them being fast asleep, or deadly sick, or suddenly in a swound, etc. are not
in a capacity to take that care, till they are awake, or well, or come to
themselves (as we say): So Infants as soon as they come to the use of reason,
etc. they are bound actually to be careful of, and serviceable to the Church.

3. Comparisons illustrate, but do not prove; or if they do, they must not be
stretched too far, least blood be drawn instead of milk. The care here is not
proper, but Metaphorical; viz. the exercise of the members, offices, and
operations for the common good of the body, though they cannot actually intend
it. Now when you can persuade us that the hand and feet, etc. of an Infant, are
no natural members of the natural body (because the exercise of reason is
wanting to direct the members in their actings) you shall persuade us, that
Infants of the Church are no members of the mystical body.

SECT. 11.
H. H. same page. My eighth Argument is from Ephesians. 2. ver. 23. where Paul
speaking to the Church of Ephesus, says, That they all had their conversation,
etc. But Infants had not, could not have such a conversation; all that they are
charged with, is, but Original sin; therefore no Infants were Church Members
amongst them.

Reply 1. I grant the Church of Ephesus, because it is expressly so called
elsewhere, Rev. 2.1. but here is no express mention made of Paul's writing or
speaking to the Church of Ephesus in Ephesians. 2.23. (it should be ver. 2, 3. which
is either your, or the Printer's fault) though the word Church is seven times
used in this Epistle.

2. In charity, I passed by (in a manner) the [But] in your page 60. because it
might be the Printer's mistake, but meeting with it here so solemnly, I must
conclude, you smell too much of the Popish cask, making a [But] of Original
sin, and so extenuating and mincing that Quagmire of corruption, that hell of
the heart, (as some understand, Jam. 3.6.) which the Saints of God have
aggravated and lamented with tears of blood. I fear you are a stranger (in
experience) to the woeful depravation of man's corrupted nature, and the
baseness and badness of your own heart, though here unawares you answer your
own seventh Qu. page 53, 54.

3. Your Major again is justly denied: neither does that Scripture (you bring)
prove it; For the Apostle says, that he himself, and the adult Ephesians (to
whom he immediately directs his Epistle) before their conversion (his from
Pharisaism, theirs from Heathenism, both from a state of nature and sinful
life) were wicked livers, yet here is nothing said, that all Church Members
are, or have been actually gross sinners.

4. The Jews were often charged with their fore past wickedness, Deuteronomy. 9. and
Jer. 5.3, 4, 5, 30, 31. yet it follows not that their children must be charged
with those actual sins, or else not be owned Church Members; Nay it is plain
they were Church Members, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 12, 13. Now these converted Ephesians
were incorporated into the same body, and partakers of the same privileges for
themselves, and their children, Ephesians. 2.19.20. Romans 11.17.

5. As Jews and Gentiles of ripe yea^^, in regard of original sin, and the
fruits thereof, needed Christ, the Covenant of Grace, and Church Membership to
save them from the dominion and damnation of sin; so Infants who a e under
original sin (as you acknowledge) and which is all sin (radically, virtually,
eminently,) no less need Christ, the Covenant of Grace, and Church Membership,
being the only revealed way of communicating Christ and his merits, to save
sinners from the wrath of God, dominion of sin, and eternal damnation.

SECT. 12.
H. H. page 69. My ninth Argument is from 1 These. 5. ver. 2, 4, 5.

Reply. To make the best of your Argument, it is thus: All Church Members are
children of the Light, and know that the day of the Lord comes as a Thief,
etc. But Infants are not children of the light, nor know, etc. 1. The same
Answer might here serve, since the Fallacy is the same.

But 2. If a man should argue, that John baptized Infants, because it is said,
Mat. 3.5, 6. All Judea, and all the Regions round about (and Infants may be
said to go out too, though carried in their parents arms, Exodus 10.9, 10, 24.
and 12.37.) went out and were baptized of him -- you would not well resent it,
for it would spoil your cause, and yet the conclusion follows more clearly then
yours.

3. If some Infants be not children of the light, and of the day, they are
children of darkness, and of the right: The Scripture knows not a third state;
but it may be, to carry on your design for Popery, you can tell us of a Limbus
Infantum.

4. The Apostle does not say, that the Saints unto whom he wrote at
Thessalonica, did all know perfectly that the Lord's coming should be as a
Thief in the night (there it no universal particle in the second verse) neither
does he mean, that they ^^^^e ALL the children of the Light; as if there had
been none in the world besides those grown Christians in that Church; ( ver. 5.
speaks of another matter) least of all does the Apostle say, or imply here, or
elsewhere, That all Church Members know perfectly, etc. ver. 2. This you prove
not all.

SECT. 12.
H. H. Tenth Argument, from 1 These. 2.11. If Paul did exhort and charge every
one of the Church to do these things, then there were no Infants (for they are
not capable of exhortation, consolation, etc. ver. 11.) Therefore --

Reply. This (I confess) has some form of a Syllogism, viz. Hypothetical
(though for brevity, it might have been Categorical) to which I say;

1. The Major is granted, if it be understood of immediate present exhortation,
to every particular member of that Church without exception. But then your
assumption, or Minor is denied (though you think it guarded with Scripture);
for it is not said, we exhorted every particular Churchmember, but you, i. e.
to those grown Christians to whom he immediately wrote: And though it be
directed to the Church, 1 These. 1.1. yet it is not said, every particular
Churchmember was bound to read, hear, understand, and obey this Epistle so
soon as it came. It was enough that it was directed to the principal members
(which often have the denomination of the whole) by whom it might be (as there
was occasion) communicated to others. The Apostle calls this Church (for all
whom he gives thanks, 1 These. 1. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4.) Brethren, will it follow
therefore, that Women among them (who are not brethren) are not Church Members?

2. Does not the same Apostle say, If ANY -- would not work, neither should
they eat? yet you are so pitiful, that you will not deny food to little Babes,
page 62. methinks you should be as pitiful, not to deny to them
Church Membership, though they cannot perform all the acts of a Churchmember,
no more then the Circumcised Infants of the Jews could.

3. Yet again to your Major, though the Apostle did not speak or write directly
or immediately to Infants, yet mediately and indirectly he did, in speaking and
writing to their parents, who were to lay hold on the promises, etc. for
themselves and their children; and being instructed in their duties, were to
teach their children when capable, Genesis 18.19. Deuteronomy. 6.7. 2 Timothy 3.15. Ephesians.
6.4. If in this sense Paul's teaching be taken, (as there is no just reason to
the contrary) then the consequence is so far from being true; that the opposite
conclusion must needs be true.

SECT. 13.
H. H. p. 70. Eleventh Argument from Heb. 6.11, 12. We desire every one of you
to show the same diligence -- etc. Little children cannot -- Therefore no such
Babes were Church Members in the Church of the Hebrews.

Reply 1. I do not remember that in this Epistle there is express mention made
of the Church of the Hebrews. Will you be guilty of that fault which you charge
often on your Adversaries, viz. Of adding to the Word? Take heed.

2. This Argument is like the former, and therefore the same answer might
serve. This Exhortation was directly and immediately given to persons of years;
yet remotely to the children of the faithful, who were bound to bring them up
(when grown) as Abraham and the Israelites did theirs, Genesis 18. Deuteronomy. 6. Psalm.
78. of Abraham, I say; for of his chiefly the Author speaks, ver. 12, 13, etc.

3. By this Arguing it might be proved, that none of their Infants were
Hebrews, thus; Every one of the Hebrews is desired to show the same diligence
to, etc. But none of the Infants were desired -- Therefore. Or; Because a
Master of a family writes, that every one in the family should be diligent and
faithful in their places, shall any conclude that his little children are no
members of that family?

4. There is a like universal charge given to all Israel, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12,
-- 18, 19, 20. yet because little ones could not understand, etc. must they be
concluded (or excluded rather) out of the Covenant? No, there is express
mention made of their being taken into Covenant.

SECT. 14.
H. H. p. 70, and 71. My 12th and last Argument from Phil. 4. ver. 21, 22. (the
sum is this) All the Saints at Rome, whence this Epistle came, sent
salutations to the Saints at Philippi, but no Infants at Rome did salute, nor
any Infants at Philippi could receive salutations. Therefore no infants (at
either place) are Church Members. The Major proved by this Scripture, the Minor
by rason and common sense.

Reply 1. If you believe the Subscription of this Epistle to be Canonical
Scripture (for you confidently avouch, this Epistle came from Rome) you smell
again strongly of the Popish cask. Beza says, in one copy it is thus; It is
finished, without any other addition. But no more of this.

2. If you mean there were no Infants at all in Rome or Philippi, a man had
need of the faith of an Anabaptist to believe you or it. I'ts said, All
Jerusalem was troubled with Herod, Matthew. 2. ver. 3. Infants could not be
troubled with him, Therefore there was no Infant in Jerusalem -- This reasoning
is as good as yours, i. e. stark naught. But if you mean (as it seems) that no
little children could understand, speak, etc. who says so?

3. It Is cold comfort to believing parents, that their Infants are not Saints
in Christ (then sure they are little Heathens) but is not this contradictory to
the same Apostle, who calls (indefinitely) children even of one believing
parent, 1 Cor. 7.14. (...) Sancti sunt. So Beza, and the Old Latin.
(g) Saints (so is the word in the original) and are any saved by Christ, but
Saints? you hold all (we some) Infants dying in their Infancy are saved by
Christ.

4. Paul here undertakes nothing less, then the dashing Infants-believers out
of the number of Saints, or Church Members. The universal particles ALL, and
EVERY one, must be restrained (as was said) to the scope and subject matter
e.gr. All the Saints salute -- i. e. All that were with him, at the writing of
this Epistle, as appears by this very Scripture, which you bring, Phil. 4.21,
22. All the brethren salute you -- And so salute EVERY Saint, i. e. That is
capable of such salutations. So that your major is not proved by this Scripture
at all.

SECT. 15.
H. H. p. 71. If children are not concerned in these salutations, then they are
not visible Saints in Christ, nor visible members of his body the Church --
etc. For the text says plainly, Phil. 4.21. Salute EVERY Saint --

Reply 1. As to that, they are Saints in Christ, I have spoken to even now.

2. The Scripture no where mentions visible Saints, or visible members -- Must
we be still troubled with your unwritten traditions?

3. If you might as well conclude, that Infants are no creatures, for (to shoot
in your bow) the Text says plainly, Mar. 16.15. Preach the Gospel to EVERY
creature; and that birds, and beasts, and plants, etc. are not creatures, For
the text says plainly, Col. 1.23. The G^spel was preached to EVERY creature
which is under heaven, or that the Jews Infants were not c^i^dren of Israel.
For the text says plainly, Numb. 36.8. EVERY one of the children of Israel
shall keep himself --

SECT. 16.
H. H. p. 71, 72. There are many probable Arguments remaining, but the answers
to them, take much with those, that set their Faith in other men's wisedoms, and
not in the power and wisdom of the Word of God, 1 Cor. 2* 4, 5. But I shall
omit them. Because these twelve are undeniable, etc. Only I will give you one
probable Argument out of Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17. --

Reply 1. You said your 12 and last Argument p. 70. How is that your last, if
many, or (but) one more be in your budget? or were they demonstrative, and
these probable; what? probable after demonstratives? or were all the former at
best but probable? not to me, but to you, whose faith is built on more
probabilities.

2. If it might be made manifest, then it seems, it ( i. e. your Tenent) is not
yet made manifest to the impa^^ ^ll Reader

3. If you know many seeming Answers would be made to them, how could you
imagine, none would be made to these 12.

4. I know not who those are (you rave upon) except perhaps your poor deluded
Proselytes, who pin their faith on your sleeve, and take (hand over head) all
for Gospel, which you say. Only this I know, you abuse Scripture again. For
the words are, ^ Cor. 3.5 That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of
men, but in the power of God. Will you be still at your old Trade of ADDING,
-- Take heed of the plagues you threaten others with.

5. You may now find by experience the vanity of your confidence, there
A^guments of yours are not only deny-able, and damnable also, (bear with the
word) but truly denied, and justly damned too.

6. For Mat. 18. You have SIN instead of trespass (which though perhaps all
one, yet you should not chop and change at pleasure) a^ you have left AS, For
you say, to thee an Heathen; whose son are you now? p. 42. And for the three
Arguments you draw from this text, there is more in the conclusion then in the
premises, which heretofore has been a great fault in Argumentation. And in
the end, you seem to grant that the word WHOLE Church is not in the text, why
then did you put it into your third particular, but that you had a mind to
cozen your Reader? Indeed by the Church, here is to be understood the
Church-guides (as before out of Act. 8.1.) as appears by the eight and ninth
verses: Whatsoever ye shall bind, etc. Whatsoever ye shall loose, etc. If two
of you shall agree. So that it is as clear as the Sun, that the Church here is
the Assembly of the Ministers and Elders of the Church. And then your threefold
cord is as easy broken, as that was by Samson.

7. To conclude in general, for these Arguments (which are thirteen to the
dozen) let the Reader observe; There is not one word of Churchmember, or
Church-member-ship in any one of the Scriptures cited. Yet Mr. Hag. would bear
us in hand, that he holds nothing but what is expressed in the Scriptures.
Where is your written word for your belief in this very point under debate? 2.
Because you import, that you put but little confidence in your probable
Arguments. I had thought to have left them, as I find them, but least you and
yours should crow, I have given some brief Animadversions; and would let you
understand, that it were very easy to find our (without vanity be it spoken)
many dozens of Arguments in Moses and the Prophets, that might conclude as
probably against the Church Membership of the Old Testament-Infants, as any you
have, or can bring against childrens Church Membership in the New. And as easy
to bring multitudes of Argumemts out of the New Testament, that might as
probably conclude against the salvation of any Infants (so dying) as any you
bring against the Church Membership or Covenant-state of Christians Infants.
Though you profess your persuasion of the salvation of ALL Infants so dying,
yet by your way of Arguing, ALL Infants should not only be cast out of the
Church, but out of salvation too.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Disciple-ship of INFANTS.
SECT. 1.
H. H. p. 73. I proceed to prove in opposition to M. Baxter and M. Cooks
Arguments, that Infants are not, cannot be Christ's Disciples. My first
Argument is from Mat. 28.19. Teach all Nations etc. The plain English of which
M. Baxter himself confesses to be -- Make Disciples, etc. From whence I argue
thus; If those Disciples which Christ commanded the Apostles to baptize, must
be first made so, Then they were not so born; if they had, they should not have
need to be made so. Again, If make Disciples All Nations, and teach all
Nations be all one, as M. Baxter affirms, then it is clear, that Disciples are
made by preaching the Word, But Infants that understand not earthly things, if
we tell them, can much less understand the things of the kingdom of heaven,
declared by the preaching of the Gospel. Therefore --

Reply 1. You still forget the work you had undertaken, which was to answer:
but instead of answering the Arguments brought to prove Infants-Disciple-ship,
you take the opponents place, and say, you will prove, that they are not,
cannot be Disciples.

2. Your Argument here is like that earth, Genesis 1.2. without Form, and void,
confused Chaos, without head or foot, in no mood or figure, (as Logicians know)
and therefore I have transcribed it at large (only paring away some superfluous
words) that all may see what a Babel you have built.

3. Admit your first conclusion were granted, (as nothing touching us) which
should be thus -- Therefore not born so, if you understand the Apostles making
Disciples of adult Heathens only: But your reason is false and foolish; For
not only he that is a Disciple already, need to be made still a better
Disciple or Scholar. But also sometimes to be made and to be born is all one.
Christ himself was made King, Psalm. 2.6. I have set (or as the word is,
anointed) my King -- and yet he was born King, Mat. 2.2. Where is he that is
born King --? Say the wise men. It matters not how they came to know it,
whether from the Prophecy of Balaam, or some other of Daniel, etc. or from the
Revelation of the Angel, which appeared to them, as to the Shepherds, saying,
There is born to you this day a Savior, Luke 2.11. which is the Christ (or the
anointed) Lord, i. e. Prince, or King. The same in another phrase with this
here in Mat. 1. with an Emphasis on THE, i. e. the expected King or Messiah.
Only it is clear, that Christ in God's wise and eternal decree, was made a
King, and yet born a King: And to put it out of doubt, Christ is said to be
made of a woman -- Gal. 4.4. with Mat. 1.16. What is that but to be born of a
woman?

4. As for the Apostles making Disciples by teaching, etc. Whereof Infants are
incapable, there is not the same reason of a Church to be constituted, and of a
Church already constituted, taken into Covenant. The former was the subject
about which principally the Apostles were employed, the latter of ordinary
Pastors and Ministers. Though these Heathens and their children were not
Disciples, nor in Covenant by any birth privilege, when the Apostles were
first to preach the Gospel out of the Pale of Judea, they and theirs were under
the power of the Devil, born and brought up in his school of Infidelity and
Idolatry. But when they were converted, and constituted a Church, the children
of such thus called, were born (by virtue of God's Covenant apprehended by
faith, Man. 10.14. 1 Cor. 7.14. Acts 2.39.) Subjects of Christ's Kingdom, and
holy, and (so consequently) Disciples, and Scholars, in the school of Christ,
as is proved at large in M. Baxters and M. Cooks Books, which you pretend to
answer, but indeed answer nothing to the greatest, and most material part
therein.

5. As for teaching, It is outward, or inward; immediate, or remote; formal,
or virtuall. Infants (while such) though not ordinarily, capable of outward,
immediate, formal teaching by men, yet may be said (truly) to be taught
remotely, and virtually in the teaching of their parents, who are engaged (by
admission into covenant, and further instruction) to hand over these saving
truths to their children, who are for the present dedicated to Christ (as his
Disciples) to be trained up in his School, Genesis 17.7, 8.9. and 18, 19. as
Isaac, and other children in Abraham's Family, were consecrated to God, to be
taught by Abraham in the doctrine of the Covenant; which order holds now in the
time of the Gospel, 2 Timothy 3.15. Ephesians. 6.4. And as for the inward teaching of
Christ and his Spirit, who can doubt but believers Infants (whilst such) are
capable of it, (though God's ^^eer power, and the passive capacity could be no
ground of our persuasion or expectation, that it should be so, yet they being
taken into the School of Christ, kingdom of God, and under the influence of the
Spirit, are within the compass of those promises, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Isa. 54.23. Jer
31.33, 34. Mat. 11, 25*) Howsoever it least become you (of all others) to deny
or doubt, that Christ by his Spirit can illuminate Infants, when you hold
unq^estionably, That by virtue of Christ's death, they (even the Infants of
Heathens) are justified, and saved by virtue of Christ (...) death, p. 60.61.
Surely Christ is made wisdom, and sanctification to them, to whom he is made
justification and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30.

SECT. 2.
H. H. Here M. Baxter and I must have discourse before we part, for he tells us
of diverse ways to make Disciples, besides teaching them, which in plain terms,
is to say; There are diverse ways to make Scholars, besides, or without
teaching of them, which to me is a paradox.

Reply 1. M. Baxters distinction of a Disciple complete and incomplete, largely
and strictly taken, etc. page 14. (which you wisely take no notice of, because
you cannot answer) cuts in sunder the sinews of your Argument, and so makes
your arguing of none effect.

2. He says, p, 23. There are more ways of teaching, then by PREACHING in a
Pulpit; as mothers teach by action, as well as by voice; For Gideon with briars
and thorns, TAUGHT the men of Succoth, Judge. 8.16. And Solomon tells us, a
naughty person, a wicked man, that TEACHES with his fingers, Prove. 6.13. as
you have done by writing this poisonous Pamphlet of yours. All preaching (I
confess) is teaching, but all teaching is not preaching; A Schoolmaster
cannot be said to preach to his Scholars in the School, when yet he teaches
them their Lessons.

3. It is a Paradox to you, that there are more ways then one of making
Scholars, then by preaching (as M. Baxter says) so were Christ's Aporisms,
Paradoxes to flesh and blood, Mat. 5.3. to 12. as the doctrine of Christ, and
the Resurrection were to the Epicureans and Stoics, and yet Orthodox to sound
judgments, Acts 17. verse 18, 19.

I had thought here to have proceeded to your second Argument, and to have left
the Vindication of M. Baxter to himself, who intends to deal with you, and the
rest of your Gang (as I am credibly informed) but because you would construe
this as a mere evasion, I shall (by the help of the Lord) go on, Though I may
say as truly of him, as you do of M. T. (p. 36.) He is of age, and able to
answer for himself, yea and more truly too. For you p. 95. contradict his
judgment (for baptizing in warm water) and condemn him of weakness therein, but
I have no reason to do so to M. Baxter.

SECT. 3.
H. H. It Is enough (says M. Baxter, p. 23.) to make them Disciples, that they
are devoted to learning, if they live, etc. So that he would prove them
Disciples or Scholars first, and have them taught afterward strange doctrine,
and unheard of Divinity.

Reply 1. You leave out M. Baxter's first answer, viz. They can partake of the
protection, and provision of their Master (as the children of those the
Israelites bought) and enjoy the privileges of the Family and School, and be
under his charge and Dominion, and that is enough to make them capable of being
his Disciples. This is not the first time you abuse M. Baxter, and your Reader.

2. You are like those mentioned even now, Act. 17.18, 19. no matter how
strange his doctrine be, if true.

3. I think it is neither strange Doctrine, nor unheard of Divinity, to call
the Jewish Infants, Moses Disciples, Jo. 9.28. (and so Christ's to whom Moses
was subordinate, as M. Baxter p. 22. which you cunningly pass by) And were not
the Twelve first Disciples (and Paul also) and taught afterward, Act. 9.
Secondly, you bewray your ignorance of the Scriptures, which you charge on M B.
and M. H. etc. very insolently.

SECT. 4.
H. H. p. 74. But M. B. stoutly backs it with a learned Argument. Is it not
common to call the whole Nation of Turks Mahometans, old and young, and why not
then our selves and children, Disciples of Christ? As the man that hired a
Philosopher to teach him and his children, were they not all then Disciples of
that Philosopher? Answer, But is this M. Baxters plain Scripture proof --? I
admire, that a man professing so much seriousness, etc. (p. 2.) should resolve
to make the Apostles words true of himself, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. etc.

Reply 1. You told us a story of Dr. Story, p. 55, 56. may not M. Baxter say;
Is this M. Haggar's plain Scripture proof that he tells us of, in the title of
his Book? Physician heal thy self.

2. You need not admire, (to be sure, not much admire) at this story (as you
call it) It Is brought rather for illustration, then for probation.

3. I rather much more admire, that you who profess so much purity, should
bespatter him with so much impure language; as wickedness, folly, blasphemy,
etc. with which your book is stuffed.

SECT. 5.
H. H. If I should grant, that little children, as soon as they go to School,
are Scholars; yet are they then fit to learn the things of God, Jo. 3, 12.

Reply 1. M. B. tells you, p. 14. That believers Infants are Disciples
relatively, long before they actually learn; to which you say nothing.

2. When they begin to learn their letters, Prove. 22.6. Ephesians. 6.4. 2 Timothy 3.15.
we are with the soonest to teach them the things of God.

3. Though they may not be fit to learn the things of God, yet it is fit we
should teach them, even grown persons within our charge may and must be taught,
though by reason of their ignorance, sottishness, and dullness, they are unfit
to learn.

4. What gross mis-application of Scripture have we here again? But it is your
guise, to apply that to Infants, which is spoken to adult.

SECT. 6.
H. H. p. 75. He is a man void of reason, that sends his child to School before
it can speak or understand, yet M. B. affirms such to be Christ's Disciples,
and would have them sent to Christ's School. But the comparison should be thus:
As little children, when first they go to school to learn their letters, are
called men's Disciples; so those babes in Christ, 1 John 5.12. the first day
they go to Christ's School to learn the Principles, etc. Heb. 6.1. are Christ's
Disciples; or as we call all the Turnks, old and young, that are born of the
flesh, Mahometans, so all born of the Spirit -- Christians, i. e. such as are
spoken of 1 John 2.12, 13. with 5.21. -- As for M. Baxter's man that heard the
Philosopher, I pass it over as a cunning devised Fable, etc.

Reply 1. If M. B. affirm such to be Christ's Scholars, how can you for shame
say, he would have them sent to Christ's School, their being Scholars,
presupposes a sending.

2. You set up again a man of straw, and then fight with it. Valiantly done.
Comparisons (you know) do not run on all four. Here is the piety and prudence
of Christ, to count, and own them (who cannot speak or understand) his
Scholars; belonging to him the Master of the Church -- Mar. 9.41.

3. Why do you say, they that are born again, etc. are Christians (and not
Disciples): Are not all Christians Disciples? Acts 11.26. Now if some Infants
are born again by the Spirit into the kingdom of Christ, they must be
Christians or Disciples, especially by your former Doctrine, viz. Dying in
Infancy, they are saved by Christ. Are any saved by Christ but such as are
sanctified, born again, Disciples? Here you plainly yield the cause.

4. If that concerning the hired Philosopher be a story, how is it a Fable?
This cunning devised answer of yours is not worthy of a reply.

SECT. 7.
H. H. p. 76. Mothers (say M. Baxter) can teach their children partly by
action, and gesture, and partly by voice, etc. And me thinks you should not
make an Infant less teachable then some bruits. But nurses will tell you more
in this, then I can. Answer, Oh excellent Divinity, and plain scripture proof!
whence it follows, that Nurses are better Divines then M. B. 2. That some
bruits are capable of being Christ's Disciples, (I am sure that his words imply
noless) Therefore his answer to M. T. (for want of a better) may be more fitly
applied to him then to M. T. viz. Oh, what cause have we, etc. M Baxter's plain
Scripture p. 19.


Reply 1. I have given the Reader the sum of this 76 p. leaving the
bibble-babble to your self and silly Proselytes.

2. Your arguing is so ^idic^lous, that I may justly cry out, Oh excellent
Divinity! and plain Scripture Proof promised in your title page. For Nurses can
tell better then I, (says M. Baxter) how teachable Infants are; Therefore (you
infer) Nurses are better Divines then M. Baxter, which is just like this; Banks
can tell you how teachable his horse was, and an Huntsman how teachable his
dogs are. Therefore Banks and an Huntsman are better Divines then M. Haggar.
Or (if those please you not) a Blacksmith, or a Butcher can tell you how
teachable their Apprentices are. Therefore a Blacksmith or a Butcher are
better Divines then M. Haggar. Again M. Baxter says, ye should not (me thinks)
make a child less teachable then some bruits, you infer here (and you are SURE
his words imply no less) that some bruits are capable of being Christ's
Disciples. I deny your Major or consequences, viz. If Infants are not less
teachable then some bruit beasts, then some bruits are capable of being
Christ's Disciples. And all the wit you have (for I fear you have no grace, I
am sure you have no Scripture) will never prove it. I had thought a Shear-man
could have dressed a piece of cloth more handsomely; if you can, keep to your
trade only, and leave off preaching, and such ridiculous arguing, for very
shame.

3. M. Baxter had other answers to M. T. but you cunningly take no notice of
them.

SECT. 8.
H. H. p. 77. M. Baxter proves from Acts 15.10. That Infants are Disciples, to
all that will not grossly overlook the text, and pervert it; because the false
teachers would have laid the yoke of Circumcision on the Disciples; now that
yoke was to be laid on the Jews and their children, according to Moses's Law.
Answer, 1. An heavy charge against us, I confess, to be perverters of the
Scripture -- 2. If the Argument were granted, M. Baxter has done but half his
work, for then only men-children are to be baptized. --


Reply 1. You do not deny the charge to be true; for you say, how true it will
prove, you shall see by and by. It may prove true for all this.

2. The charge is as true as heavy. How grossly have you perverted, Jer. 2.12,
13. p. 8. q. Our Fonts (lately in use) were those broken Cisterns, etc. And
indeed this is your frequent work through your book. How grossly are those
Scriptures perverted, which you bring to prove your baptizing of men and women,
when they believe, as you say? and all those, that Infants are not
Church Members, from your p. 63. to 72. which are 12. at least? (as has been
made to appear) and those you bring for plungeing and dipping under water? As
you shall find hereafter.

3. You may do well to give M. Baxter this whole Argument, as you do others, in
answering nothing to them, by your own confession in your Epistle about the end.

4. M. Baxter has done his whole work by your grant, for his ^ask was to prove
that some Infants may be baptized, because they are Disciples, which is quite
opposite to your Tenent, That no Infants may be baptized, because no Infant (as
you say) can be a Disciple. Indeed it is true, none but male-children were
circumcised actually (The females being incapable) yet the females were
virtually (and so reputed as if they had been actually) Circumcised. The
Israelitish Damsel is brought in as opposed to Shechem, one uncircumcised,
Genesis 34.14. and how else could women lay claim to that promise, Deuteronomy. 30.6. The
Lord will circumcise thy heart, etc. or be within the Covenant of grace?
(whereof Circumcision was a sign, Genesis 17.11. Nay, called, the Govenant of
Circumcision, Act. 7.8.) did Peter preach only to the male Jews, when it is
said, the Gospel of the Circumcision was committed to him? Gal. 2.7, 9. Or when
he, James and John went to the Circumcision? Was Christ a Minister of the
Circumcision to Jewish men only, and not to women also, Romans 15.8. Or did the
blessedness of justification come on the male Jews only, or on the female
also? Romans 4.9. For the Apostle says, It comes not only on the Circumcision,
but on the uncircumcision also, if this includes both Sexes among the Gentiles,
believing, that cannot exclude the Jews, (at least believing) whether male or
female. And were not women as well as men said to be of the Circumcision? Acts
10.45. and 11.2. Romans 4.12. Surely women are not to be excluded, but included
in this very phrase, I trow. But what need I produce any more instances in so
plain a truth.

5. Nay you your self grant M. B. Argument toward the end of this p. For you
acknowledge in plain terms; the yoke here was Circumcision, according to the
Law of Moses, and this yoke was laid on the Jews, AND THEIR CHILDREN; only
according to your senseless custom, you deny the CONCLUSION, and undertake to
prove the contrary.

SECT. 9.
H. H. p. 78. If M. Baxter or M. Cook prove Infants Discipleship, then we grant
they are those on whom the false teachers would have put the yoke of
Circumcision, but the Disciples are such as could deny themselves, etc. Luke
14. which Infants cannot do. As they cannot hear the Word, and believe, Acts
15.7. Nor receive the Holy Ghost, verse 8. etc. Therefore they are not at all
concerned in that place.

Reply 1. M. B. and M. C. have proved Infants Disciples by clear Arguments, to
which you say nothing, though you undetook to answer them; How then dare you
say, it remains STILL for them to prove, etc? I hope now you will grant they
are Disciples, on whom the yoke was to be put, and therefore that Infants also
are Disciples.

2. Your Argument to the contrary is not worth a straw. Your Major is again
justly denied, viz. All (or else you prove nothing) Luke 14.27. The Disciples
of Christ can deny themselves, take up the Cross and follow Christ. It Is like
this. Subjects can fight for their Prince. Infants cannot. Therefore -- If the
Proposition be understood of all, it is false. If of some, then the Syllogism
is false for form, as before.

3. For Acts 15. It Is granted p. 16. -- by M. B. that they who heard the Word,
etc. were Disciples, but not only they; and M. B. prove^ it out of the
coherence, Acts. 5.1. 5.24. three times it is so. Except ye be Circumcised after
the manner of Moses, verse 1. And it was needful to Circumcise them, and to
keep the Law, ver. 5. and ye must be Circumcised, and keep the Law, ver. 24. So
that Infants are clearly concerned in this place, who as well as their parents
were (by the doctrine of the false teachers) to be Circumcised, and so
necessary engaged to keep the Law.

4. Though Infants (suppose) cannot partake of the Holy Ghost, as to the
miraculous gifts, yet I wonder you deny them the ordinary gifts of
regeneration, and sanctification, specially when you are strongly peswaded of
their salvation by Christ, as p. 60. and 61.

SECT. 10.
H. H. Another Argument of M. Baxter is, page 18, 19. thus: If Infants be
capable of being God's servants, then of being Christ's Disciples; If God call
them servants, why may not we call them Disciples? Levit. 25.41, 42. Answer,
It Is strange he should take on him to prove them Disciples, and when he cannot
find such a word in all the Scriptures, he would turn us off with the word
servants, I say, we may call Nebuchadnezzar God's servant, Jer. 25.9. and 27.6.
and 43.10. And yet if M. Baxter call him Christ's Disciple, his folly is
manifest to all men, as it is now to me.

Reply 1. You would prove women to be Church Members, because they are
Disciples, page 67. May not we retort, when you cannot find such a word in all
the Scriptures, you would turn us off with the word Disciples, and presume to
call them Church Members, and then say, if God call them one thing, why may not
we call them another?

2. If you prove Infants are not Church Members, because they are not branches
(how poorly God knows) It should not seem strange to you, that M. Baxter proves
them Disciples, because they are servants, specially if you consider (to foil
you with your own weapon) that Scripture no where calls them expressly
Church Members, (though we believe they are) but does expressly call them
Disciples I. G. Catab. p, 165. Sidenh. exercit. p. 126.
here, and servants too in the place quoted by M. Baxter.

3. By your Divinity I may not call Paul a Disciple of Christ, whom he calls
a servant, and his servant too: For you say, (even in persons) we must not
call them Disciples of Christ, whom God calls servants.

4. If you had not been wilfully blind, M. Baxter prevented this cavil (p. 20,
which I shall improve) Moses and Nebuchadnezzar are called the servants of God,
but not on the same account, Isa. 42.1. with Rev. 1.1. Christ and John -- are
called God's servants, but not in the same sense, when their use and sufferings
were so unlike, Psalm. 119.89, 90. The Heavens and believers are called God's
servants, but not in the same sense, when their actings do so broadly differ.
So Nebuchadnezzar and the Churches children. He in respect of the work to which
he was designed, and they in respect of the state, wherein they were invested.
Nebuchadnezzar was never brought out of Egypt, nor to have any benefit of the
year of Jubilee, as is said of these children with their parents, Levit. 25.41,
42.

SECT. 11.
H. H. p. 79. Another Argument of M. Baxters p 21. If Infants be capable of
being Christ's Subjects, then, of being Christ's Disciples. Answer, A learned
Argument. All the children in this Nation are capable of being Subjects in this
Commnon-wealth, Ergo, of being Vniversity-Scholars.

Reply 1. An unlearned answer. There is a capability remote, and immediate. Now
remotely all Infants here are capable of being University-Scholars, but not
immediately; they must first be Country-Scholars, before they are
University-Scholars. An Infant is capable of being an Abecedarian by
propinque-power, but a stone etc. is not, either by a propinque, or remote
power.

2. You seem to insinuate, that no child is capable of being a Subject in this
Commonwealth (what truth is in M. B. or yours, you leave to the wise to
judge); your Logic will not save a whore from the gallows, who has been
arraigned; or condemned for murdering her Bastard.

SECT. 12.
H. H. His third Argument is p. 23. Christ would have some children received as
D^sciples, Lo^ 2 47, 48 Mar. 19.5. Mark 9.41. Now what the two first Sori^^ures
are to the purpose, I leave to all that can read, and understant English, to
judge. If the Printer have done him wrong, I have not, neither is there any in
his Erra^^'s; and truly I dare be no Interpreter of his meaning without his
words: I shall therefore only speak to that in Mark, etc.

Reply 1. What a cunning devised Fable have w^here, to mis-cite Mr. Baxter's
two h^d Scriptur^s and to write them out at large, that Mr Baxter might be
rendered odious, or (at least) inexpert in the Word of righteousness? when in
the very page cited, they are Luke 9 and Mat. 18. and for the first, you
confess you after ^od Luke 9. quoted in that page; Would not you think it
dis-inge^^ty to be so dealt with? If I should write out in words at length,
Luke 14.10. (so it is cited by you, page 42.) and then make such a flam, as you
do? What a great cry is here, and no Wool? Where were your ei^s? or your mind
rather? If seems after you had put on your Spectacies, you could see better,
and read English; you seek for a ^not in a Rush.

SECT. 13.
H. H. p. 80. I Answer: 1. The word Disciple is not in the Text, etc. 2ly, in
Mark 9.41, 42. It Is evident he spoke to the Twelve, and of actual believers.
3ly, To that in Luke 9. ver. 48. the Lord Christ himself answers, Mat. 18.1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6. at large.


Reply 1. No more is Churchmember, or visible Saints in all or any one of
those 13 Texts, which you produce from page 63. to 73 -- and from whence you
have drawn 13 doughty Arguments, to show, that such Infants as we baptize,
cannot be Church Members, neither does Church Membership do them any good, but
the contrary ( page 63) your answer here might have served for our Reply there.
But I have replied punctually to every Scripture and Argument there. And what
if the word Disciple be not expressly found in one or two of these texts, yet in
Mat. 18.5. (which Mr. Baxter had rightly and truly cited, for all your
audacious out-facing the matter) he speaks of receiving one such little child
in my name; what is that? Mark 9.41. Because ye belong to Christ; or (as it is
in the original, (...), Mark. 9.41.) because ye are Christ's, and what are both
these, but in the name of a Disciple, Mat. 10.42. Now to receive in Christ's
name, and as belonging to Christ, and as a Disciple of Christ, in Christ's
language is all one. Much more is said in the places (quoted by you) by Mr. B.
which you thought a piece of wisdom to pass by, because you could not answer.

2. To that in Mark I might say, as you a little before; The word [actual
Believers] is not to be found in the text; Therefore by your divinity it is not
Evident, that he speaks of Actual Believers; or else some things are evident,
which are not expressly mentioned in Scripture. And what though Christians
Infants are not actual believers, it is enough if they be habitual believers,
and then Christ speaks of them. But because you utterly deny, that any Infants
are actual Believers, and challenge any to prove it by Scripture, if they can,
I shall try your strength by these few Arguments (though I do not positively
assert it) 1. David says, God did make^him hope when he was on his mothers
breasts, Psalm. 22.9. Now to hope and to believe are all one, or very nigh of
kin. In him shall the Gentiles trust, or hope, Romans 15.12. (...). 2. You have
taught me, that justification of life belongs to Infants, page 61. out of Romans
5.18. Now the Scripture knows no justification of life without actual faith;
even in that Chap. it is said, Romans 5.1. we are justified by faith, What is that
but actual faith? as appears from the illative particle, Therefore; being the
conclusion of an Argument drawn from a famous example of justification, viz.
Abraham's, which was without doubt by actual faith, you dare not deny, it is so
evident, Genesis 15. with Romans 4. 3 ly, John Baptist in his mothers womb leapt for
joy, Luke 1.41, 44. which was no natural, but a spiritual motion (as has been
said) now joy is the joy of faith, Romans 15.33. with Phil. 1.25. True (you say)
faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17. i.e. Ordinarily. But though God binds us to
the means, yet he is not tied himself. And that Christ should speak of such
little ones as John writes to, 1 John 2.12. it is but one of your Dictates. But
let us see how Christ answers it, as you say.


SECT. 14.
H. H. p. 81. It Is clear that Matthew. and Luke speak of one and the same thing,
by comparing Luke 9 46. with Mat. 18.1. etc. Therefore not Infants for age, but
for quality are meant, i. e. humble and converted Christians, as 1 Cor. 14.20.1
Pet. 2. ver. 1.

Reply 1. You that father your Solecisms and blasphemies on God, p. 29, etc.
it is no marvel you father your Gloss on Christ; The mouth of the Lord himself
has spoken it. It was usual with false Prophets to cry, The Word of the Lord,
the mouth of the Lord, etc. How else could they deceive simple souls?

2. If Christ speaks of actual Believers (as you say) and I have proved some
Infants such, then the mouth of the Lord himself has spoken of little children
of a few days old, (to use your phrase). Again, compare the Evangelists
together, and it is plain; For Christ said, Whosoever shall receive This Child (
viz. which he took and set by him) in my name, Luke 9.47, 48. with Mat. 18.5.
And -- whosoever shall receive one Such little child in my name, i. e. not only
this individual child, but any one such for age, etc. 3. It is your frequent
expression, e. g. p. 4. Therefore none Such were baptized by John: And page 64.
No Such Infants in the Church at Jerusalem, and page 65. (to name no more) None
Such members of the Church at Corinth: Surely you meant (if any sense can be
made of your words) such for age -- Though I deny not but Christ might and did
aim at a further document. But let us hear your Reason for your Exposition.

SECT. 15.
H. H. If we understand that little Children are Believers in this place, then
whosoever is a believer, and chastises his son betimes, (as Solomon advises)
it were better for him to have a millstone hanged about his neck, etc. For
certain we are, that whosoever corrects his child, will off end him, which is
an absurdity.

Reply 1. A ridiculous reason: For you should have said, Then it follows, that
whosoever chastises a believer, etc. not, whosoever is a believer, and
chastneth, etc. else you say nothing to purpose; but you were afraid to
acknowledge little children believers.

2. You set the Scripture together by the ears, to bring in your absurdity: It
this Saint-like done? Now mark: He that offends his child, sins; (this is
plainly implied by Christ) But he that corrects his child, sins not; (this
is evident by Solomon, Prove. 13, 24. with 19.18) Therefore (certain we are
that) he that corrects his child, does not offend him.

3. Your absurdity will not follow, if you allow the old received distinction,
of an offense Scandalum datum, vel acceptum.
or scandal given, or taken. The Pharisees were offended at Christ's saying,
Mat. 15, 12. they took offense, but Christ gave none, and children when
corrected may be offended (though they are offended more ways then by
whipping); Children take offense, but parents give none. Thus I have discovered
your foolish carpings, and cavills at Mr. Baxter's Arguments, and the woeful
weakness of your own. Now proceed to your second Argument.

SECT. 16.
H. H. p. 82. My second Argument is from Joh. 8.31, 32. (the sum whereof is
this) They that continue in Christ's words, are Christ's Disciples indeed, and
shall know the truth, and be made free by it. But Infants cannot abide, etc.
Therefore not disciples indeed. The Third from Joh. 15.8. They that bring forth
much fruit to God's glory, are Christ's Disciples. But little children cannot,
etc. Therefore.

Reply 1. I have joined these two Arguments together; for being the sams form,
they may receive the same answer. 1. The Syllogisms themselves are false for
Form, as a Fresh-man in Logic may see, (for they are both in the first Figure,
having the Assumptions Negative) and the meanest rational man may discern,
thus: They who have perfectly learned all the Liberal Arts and Sciences, are
Scholars indeed: But Abecedarians have not learned all the Liberal Arts and
Sciences; Therefore they are not Scholars indeed.

2. Here is a Fallacy Ignoratio Elenchi.
, for our question is not of such Disciples who are truly Regenerate, and shall
be certainly fruitful, etc. which belongs only to the invisible Church. We
never affirmed that all the children of believing parents are such -- But our
Question is concerning those that are visible Disciples, in his visible School,
etc. And you cannot deny, many may and must be owned disciples in the Visible
Church, who fall short of those visible characters; as Judas, Simon Magus,
Ananias and Sapphirae, etc. This your arguing then, makes as much against the
Primitive Apostolical Churches, as against ours. For they did not stay from
owning people Disciples, till they knew whether they would continue in the
Word, and bring forth much fruit to God's glory.

3. The Assumptions in both (taken universally) are not true; for Jacob,
Jeremy, John the Baptist, Timothy, etc. even from children abode in the truth,
and persevered to glorify God. And it is not impossible now; but in regard of
the promise, we may judge it usual in many Infants, though not all. This is
enough: For there was never any society or Church of Men-disciples on earth, of
which any man could say infallibly, that all of them were truly sanctified.

SECT. 17.
H. H. p. 83. The fourth Argument (put to the best) is from Joh. 13.34, 35.
Christ's Disciples are known to all men by loving one another, as Christ loved
them. But Infants cannot love one another so (for they know not it is their
duty.) Therefore --

Reply 1. This is sick of the same disease with the two former: For 1. It has
a Negative Assumption in the first Figure, like this: They that write in the
Hebrew and Greek Languages are known to be Scholars: But they that are in some
(woman's) Country-school cannot do so; Therefore no Scholars. 2. The Question is
not of those true, real, internal Disciples, taught of God to love one another
with a supernatural love, 1 These. 4. (for persons of any false Religion, may
love one another with a carnal, and natural love) for these shall not be known
of all men till the day of judgment, Mat. 25.31, 32, etc. But our Question is
concerning visible Disciples, who are to be esteemed members in the School of
the visible Church on earth, and to have Baptism the sign of Admission into his
School. Will you take none to be Christ's Disciples, and to be baptized, until
they be known by all men to love one another, as Christ loved his people? If
so, you must cease (to the worlds end) from gathering Churches. Was not Judas a
Disciple of Christ? and yet he had no true love to Christ, or to his
fellow-disciples?


2. Though this is one mark by which true disciples may be known by them who
can discern, as a man's renewed conscience in this world, and all men at the
last day; yet this is not the only mark (others have been named before) much
less is it the only mark of That Discipleship, which is necessary to make a
member of the visible Church.

3. Doubtless many Infants of visible Church Members are regenerated, and
sanctified, or endued with the Holy Ghost; so that if they should live to
years, they would actually love Christ and his members with a spiritual love.
Therefore having this love wrought in them by God's Spirit, seminally,
radically, or habitually (though they cannot actually put it forth as grown
persons); they may not be judged altogether to want this love, as may appear by
the forenamed instances, specially of John the Baptist, Luke 1.15, 41, 44. So
also by that promise, I will power my spirit on thy seed, and my blessing on thy
offspring.

SECT. 18.
H. H. Fifth Argument from Luke 21.36. with Mark 13. ver. 37. Christ bids all
to watch and pray: But little children cannot; Therefore none of Christ's
Disciples.

Reply 1. Beside the same diseases that this Argument is sick of (which for
brevity I repeat not) 1. The Word [Disciples] is not in the premises, nor in
this Scripture (though the Disciples were concerned) on which one or both
should be grounded; therefore (by your Answer, p. 80) to be slighted. So that
there is more in the conclusion, then in the premises (which spoils an
Argument). The Conclusion should have been; Therefore little children are none
of those [all] that Christ bids watch and pray.

2. You might with as good (if not fairer) color have argued against little
childrens escaping destruction, standing before Christ at the day of Judgment,
and against their salvation too, from this Scripture. Thus: They that are to
escape, and stand before the Son of man, etc. must watch and pray: But little
children cannot watch and pray; Ther^ore neither escape, nor stand before
Christ. Our Savior speaks only to all that heard, and so to all to whom by
reading, preaching, etc. this commandment may come. But Infants (while such)
cannot read, or hear, etc. this Commandment.

SECT. 19.
H. H. p. 84. My sixth Argument from Mat. 13.10, 11. (the sum whereof is
this) It Is given to Disciples to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven.
But it is not given to Infants to know, etc. -- Therefore Infants cannot be
Christ's Disciples.

Reply 1. Here indeed mention is made of Disciples, i. e. of the Twelve whom
Christ spoke unto, yet ALL they are not meant; for he pronounces them blessed
that know those mysteries, ver. 16. Yea above many Prophets and righteous men,
who (in this respect) were not Disciples (in regard of the clear discovery of
those mysteries, verse 17.) but Judas was not blessed. If you take Disciples in
this (which is the most proper and immediate) sense. The Conclusion will be,
that Infants (while such) were none of those Twelve (or rather Eleven) blessed
Disciplet, which is granted.

2. It may be granted (in a good sense) that what was immediately spoken to
those Disciples, may be applied to others, viz. to all the Elect in
Gospel Times, who upon hearing of the Word are savingly enlightened, as may be
gathered, Mat. 13.12, 16, 17. Then the Conclusion will be concerning invisible
Church Members and Disciples, whereas our Question is about visible ones, as
before.

3. This would conclude no less against the blessedness, then Discipleship of
Infants, verse 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. which Conclusion (without question) you will
deny, as holding that ALL Infants (so doing) are blessed.

4. Seeing some Infants may be filled with the Spirit, from (yea in) their
mothers wombs (as before in John Baptist) what hinders, but that they may know
the mystest^r^es of the Kingdom of heaven? As sense and reason (in their
fullest ripeness) cannot reach to these without the special working of the
Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.8, 9, 10. So the Spirit can reveal them, where sense and
reason are defective.

SECT. 20.
H. H. Thus far I have gone to prove, that Infants ARE NOT Christ's Disciples;
now it follows, that they CANNOT BE his Disciples, etc.

Reply 1. Oh admirable skill and method, in setting the Cart before the Horse!
If you had first proved, that they CANNOT be Christ's Disciples, it would have
followed indeed, that they ARE NOT. But let us hear your proof.

SECT 21.
H. H. My seventh Argument is from the same text, Mat. 13.11. If it be given
to none but the Disciples of Christ to know the Kingdom; Then children (to whom
it is not given) cannot at that present be Christ's Disciples. But it is given
to none but the Disciples of Christ to know the mysteries of the Kingdom (for
to others it is not given ver. 11.) Therefore children (to whom it is not
given) cannot be Christ's Disciples.

Reply 1. Your Argument I have set down in your own words, partly that you and
others may see your great learning, and art in arguing; and partly to intimate,
what great need I had (in diverse of your Arguments) to mend the Form, and make
the best of them. And it being (as you say) from the same text, the same answer
might serve here.

2. Yet I shall add only this. Your Hypothetical proposition hangs together
like ropes of sand, there being no appearance of necessity that the consequence
should follow on the Antecedent. It Is like this; If none but Scholars
understand Mathematics, and Metaphysics, then Petties (that cannot understand
them) are no Scholars; but the former is true: Therefore the latter. Or thus:
(because I know you will cry whimzies) If none but living creatures can
(properly) fly in the air, th^n men, which cannot (properly) fly in the air,
are no living creatures. The absurdity of which Propositions all may see.

3. That which you add in the rest of your page 84. and part of page 85. is
partly a Reperition, therefore to be passed by, and partly an Assertion,
wherein (if I mistake not) you grant Infant Baptism. For you believe (you say)
that little children according to the Scriptures belong to the Kingdom of
heaven, and partake of -- the Redemption that is in Christ, though they know
nor believe nothing of it, etc. If so, why may they not be baptized as well as
Jewish Infants Circumcised, who had no more knowledge, nor faith ordinarily
then they? specially since you say, all free born subjects in a kingdom belong
to it, and may enjoy all the privileges in that kingdom, so far as little
children need to enjoy, though they know not the mysteries of the government,
and order of that kingdom, nor the rights, and customs of it, till they be of
years, etc. I profess I have lost my understanding, if you do not give up the
cause in the open field.

SECT. 22.
H. H. same p. My eighth Argument is from Luke 14.27. (which in it is full
strength, though in fewer words, is this) Christ's Disciples must and do bear
his Cross, and come after him. But Infants (while such) cannot bear his Cross,
and come after him. Therefore they cannot be his Disciples.

Reply 1. This Argument is of the same nature with most of the former. It
concludes only of such as are adult Disciples, savingly taught of God,
sanctified by the Spirit, and accepted of Christ, whereas (again) the Question
is of such who may make visible Church Members, of which sort many are and must
be Disciples, who are without those characters, as Judas, and all Hypocrites
more particularly.

2. This is spoken to, and of persons of years, not to, or of Intants as such,
verse 25.33.

3. (Though this is spoken to, See Sect. 9. of this Chap.
in your p. 78. yet) They that are Infants now may hereafter do (coming to
years) all this; yea, they have these principles in them by the Spirit (as has
been said and proved) that will certainly enable them (if they live to years)
to do this.

4. As Infants may and do with their parents enjoy the privileges of the
Covenant (as you say freeborn subjects do of a Kingdom) so they may and do,
undergo the burdens, and sufferings of the Cross of Christ, and follow him in
suffering. So that Christ suffered (in his Infancy) poverty, contempt,
banishment, etc. Luke 2.7. Mat. 2.13, to 19. So they, penury, exile, and death
too for that Faith in Christ, which their parents profess, and they
implicitly in and with them. He is a^st anger in Israel, that has not heard
of the Massacrings, and sufferings of Infants with their parents for Religion
sake.

5. And this fully answers your ninth Argument, being not new, but dressed up
in a new fashion; only you have the knack of multiplying, and so filling up
Paper; whereas you might have comprehended all these in one, and made me but
one labor; but for the sake of the weaker, I have been content to follow you
in repeating (as you inurging) the same thing for substance.

6. Only let the Reader (if you will not) behold as in a glass clearly the
rudeness, and wildness of your arguing; which reflects on the the Apostles, as
well as on us. For if these characters (mentioned in your nine foregoing
Arguments) be necessary for the making, owning and sealing of Disciples, and if
the Apostles did not keep them from Baptism till they had such characters,
(much less till they knew they had such). Then either those which they baptized
were not Disciples, or else they went beyond and beside their Commission, or
rather their Commission required impossibilities of them. What absurdities (if
not blasphemies) do your unreasonable reasonings lead unto? I will press this
no further, nor say any thing of your wonted uncharitable censuring, (as if we
never yet learned what a Disciple is, and are none our selves).

CHAP. XV. Whether the Anabaptist's way of Baptizing be Sinful.
SECT. 1.
H. H. p. 86. I proceed to answer M. Baxter's eight Arguments, by which (he
says) he proves the Anabaptist's way of baptizing sinful. His first is this:
There is no word of precept or example in all the Scripture for the baptizing
of the child of any one Christian at years of discretion. Therefore to defer
the baptizing them till then, is not the Scripture way. Answer, page 87. I give
him an example, viz. Christ, who was baptized at years of discretion, Luke
3.21, 22. If M. Baxter deny his mother to be a Christian, Luke 1.46, 46. I say
he knows not what a Christian is, and is no Christian himself. But to retort,
there is no word of precept nor example in all the Scripture for baptizing an
Infant; Therefore that way is sinful.

Reply 1. If by Christian, you mean the name or title, I will be bold to say,
(without danger of your charge) that Mary was no Christian; for the Disciples
were called Christians, FIRST in Antioch, Acts 11.26. And I would gladly know
whether you do, or dare judge (to use your own expression) Mary the mother of
Jesus to be no Disciple. If you deny, I am bold to say you err, not knowing
the Scriptures, you know not what a Disciple is, and that you are none your
self. But if you understand the substance and truth (as I may say) of a
Christian, I cordially acknowledge her a Christian. The name Protestant was not
used till about Luther's time, yet our Divines prove soundly against the
Papists, that the Protestant Doctrine, ( i. e. The substance of our Religion)
was professed and practiced long before, even from the time of Christ and his
Apostles to Luther's days. This is helpful, not hurtful to us; but hurtful,
not helpful to you. For as it shows that (for substance) the Covenant of grace
under the Old and New Testament is one and the same, though different in manner
of administration (as has been proved); so the same seal of initiation, though
in a different way of dispensation --

2. As the mother of Jesus was a Christian (So John Baptist even in his mothers
womb, may be called a Christian, who is said to leap for joy, the same word
with Mary's rejoicing, (only there, Luke 1.44. (...), and 47. (...)
the Noune; here Jo. 8.58.
the Verb) Thus Abraham was a Christian, who rejoiced (the same word used by
Mary) to see Christ's day, to whom also the GOSPEL was preached, Gal. 3.8. And
thus all the faithful of the Old Testament were Christians). Now if you prove
by consequence from that Scripture, and truly, that Mary was a Christian,
because she rejoiced in Christ -- May not we prove Infant Baptism, etc. by
consequence from Scripture too? What? will you not give YET that liberty, which
you take?

3. For that in Luke 3. concerning Christ his being baptized, I have spoken
sufficiently to it, (and will not repeat) in your page 38.

4. Your retorting the Argument, has wrought the extorting of this answer.
It Is strange you can find a Font in a broken Cistern (page 8.) and yet cann^^
find in Scripture precept or example for baptizing one child, before years of
discretion, though never so plainly held forth to you. So that M. B. is so far
from being wounded with the edge of his own sword, that with the keenness
thereof, it cutts you to the heart.

SECT. 2.
H. H. same p. M. Baxter's second Argument is; It Is utterly inconsistent with
obedience to the rule of Baptizing. Answer, This is the same with the first
Argument, Therefore the same answer may serve.

Reply 1. Then the same Reply might serve too. But Secondly, you have cunningly
left out the word ORDINARILY in M. Baxter's Argument, which was a seasonable
qualification, and very needful to prevent mistakes, to which you have exposed
him, out of a spiteful design.

3. Nay you answer not one word to all the Scriptures and reasons See plain
Scripture proof. c. 8. from p. 126. to 130.
he brings clearly and soundly to confirm his Minor. In which (it seems) you
found so much strength, that after you had cast a squib, you run away like a
coward, ^ut for all that he has reached you such a back-blow, which you cannot
claw off.

SECT. 3.
H. H. p. 88. Nay, to give him his Argument again: Infant Baptism is utterly
inconsistent, with the obedience to Christ's rule. First, because there is
neither precept nor practice for it, as he grants. Secondly because by their
Rantizing, or sprinkling of babes, they make the command of Christ of none
effect, Mat. 7.7, 8, 9. and Mat. 15.8, 9. Thus they bind two sins together, and
in the one, they shall not go unpunished.

Reply 1. If giving be granting, you do well to give it him.

2. The first reason of your retortion, is but the Cuckoes song. M. Baxter has
been so far from granting it, that he has abundantly showed you, both precept
and example, but you are so wilfully blind, that you cannot see wood for trees.

3. Your Third is both a mere Calumniation, and a miserable begging the
Question. Infant Baptism is neither a Tradition (in your sense) nor a making of
Christ's Command of none effect (in our sense) as has been showed. But I may
not nauseate the Reader with vain repetitions as you do.

4. If we shall go unpunished in the one, I believe in the other too.

SECT. 4.
H. H. Whereas M. Baxter would make us offenders for nothing, i. e. for not
baptizing children in their Nonage. I Answer, First, he can never make it a
sin, till he show us what Command we have broken, etc. Secondly, There is both
precept and practice for baptizing men and women when they believe, Mar. 16.16.
Act. 8.12. and 10.48.

Reply 1. Then it seems a swarving from an example in Scripture is no sin. What
if women should never Break Bread (or receiv the Lords Supper) is it not a sin,
since there is no express command for it, and no example but by consequence?
Your Scriptures shall be spoke to anon, if not heretofore.

2. It has been proved, that you utterly mistake those Commands, and examples
for baptizing men and women at years of discretion, unless you will make the
parties parallel, i. e. mere Heathens newly converted, etc. But I must not fall
into the same crime with you, of idle and senseless Repetitions; onl^ let the
Reader observe, That I have orderly digested this page of yours, which you had
confusedly set down, for the building of your Tower of Babel.

SECT. 5.
H. H. p. 89. His Third Argument is, because the practice of baptizing children
of Christians at age, goes upon mere uncertainties, and has no Scripture rule
to guide it. Therefore it is not according to the will of Christ. Answer, Though
this is the same in substance with the two former, yet, First, our practice is
guided by Scripture rule from the Command of Christ, and examples of the
Apostles, Mark 16.16. Acts 2.41. and 8.12. 37. Na^, (say (...)) your practice
of Baptizing little babes, goes upon mere uncertainties, having no
Scripture-rule to guide it, etc.

Reply 1. I had thought to have said nothing to your charge, on M. Baxter's
chopping one Argument into so many pieces to multiply words: Therefore I did
not transcribe them, yet I shall say this; It seems you had surfeited of the
other two Arguments. And now your stomach turns at the naming of this. If you
had no mind to multiply words: you might have spared this Cavilling Preface.
Crumbs of truth are too precious to be lost, and therefore since you will not
understand the Loaves (which have satisfied some Thousands) Mr. B. did well to
put his fragments into the basket, part. i. c. ^. p. 150.
by sending the Reader back to what went before.

2. Though the Texts alleged by you have been Replied to, yet here your answer
is both wide and weak. If you mean of a Church to be constituted, that is
nothing to the purpose. Mr. Baxter's assertion is still true, though that be
granted, and so your answer is wide. If of a Church constituted, and if you
understand christians children at age, then your instances out of those
Scriptures prove no such thing, because they were not the children of Christian
parents, and so your answer is weak.

3. As your answer is impertinent, so your return of M. Baxter's Argument is
insufficient. To deal roundly. I deny your Minor. viz. There is Scripture rule
for Baptizing babes (notwithstanding your impudent denying it) as may be easily
discerned by any who seriously, and impartially peruse Mr. Baxter's Book, or
this Reply; neither do you bring any Scriptures to prove your Minor, but only
this, I SAY. What arrogance is this in you, to obtrude an opinion on the world
upon your bare word? Could you persuade me that Pythagoras was a Dipper, and
that his soul had transmigrated into your body, I would allow the Haggarens as
well as the Pythagoreans, an IPSE DIXIT, he has said it, and that is enough. Do
you think to carry your cause, against the evidence of Scripture, practice of
Antiquity, consent of Fathers, continued custom of the Churches, strength of
reason, upon such a pitiful proof as this is, I SAY? How long is it since your
confidence has amounted to an Infallibility? I therefore must make bold (your
premises being thus routed) to alter your conclusion. Infant Baptism is
according to the mind of Christ, notwithstanding Mr. Haggars, I SAY.

4. Because I would not have Mr. B. to be in your debt, for the return of his
Argument, I return you an Argument, from one of your Scriptures Mar. 16.16.
cited; and from your own principles. For although you are not so rigid to
damn Infants, and exclude them from Heaven, yet you excommunicate them out of
the Church, cast them out of the Covenant, etc. Here I argue: They who may be
saved without actual Faith, may be Baptized without actual faith: But Infants
(specially of believing parents) may be saved without actual faith, therefore
they may be Baptized without actual faith. The Minor you grant. The Major I
prove thus. If faith be as necessary to salvation, as it is to Baptism, then
they that may be saved without faith, may be Baptized without Faith. But the
former is true, Therefore the latter. The consequence of the Major is evident
from the words of the text, Mark 16.16.
where the same stresse is laid upon faith to salvation, as to Baptism. And
the Minor cannot be denied unless you will have admission to Baptism on Earth,
more difficult then to blessedness in Heaven; and make it an harder matter to
be Baptized, then to be Saved. I leave you to unty (not to cut) this knot.

SECT. 6.
H. H, p. 89. 90. His sourth Argument is; Because the practice of Baptizing
Christians Children at age, necessarily fills the Church with perpetual
contentions, as being about a matter that cannot be determined by any known
rule. Answer: But the Baptizing of men and women, when they believe, is a
matter that can be, and is determined by a known rule in Scripture; Therefore
no just cause of contentions; because it is according to the will of Christ, as
I have proved by those Scriptures in the foregoing Argument. 2. Nay your
practice is a thing for which there is no known Rule in all the Word of God.
Thus I have thrown your Argument on your own head, and you are fallen into the
same pit, you dug for others, etc.

Reply. 1. T^^ same Reply might serve here. But me thinks you shou^^ blush to
say, that the Scriptures (so often mentioned by you) prove what you would have
them. I have seen a Dog mumbling, and gnawing a bone, and then licking in his
own slabber, as if it had been marrow from the bone (bear with the comparison)
so you toss and tumble the Holy Scriptures, and then take in (if not give out)
your own fancy in stead of the word of God; nay, let the Reader observe, that
M. Haggar has not brought one Scripture to prove his doctrines, and let him
do it if he can, and I will be his Proselyte; viz. that children of Christians
are not to be baptized till they be of age, upon their own profession (for that
is the Question) and me thinks they that cry cut for Scripture from the one
side, should bring Scripture Et hanc venia^^ petimus, dabimusque vicissim.
when urged by the other side.

2. It is observable, that M. Baxter has spent almost two pages, proving by
impregnable reasons, what contention among christians, what tyrany and
Lordlyness among Ministers, this practice would introduce, all which M. Haggar
passes by. Is this to answer a book? If this Argument had been false, you
might have denied it; if weak, overthrown it; your silence speaks neither, and
thus you have given up the cause in the open field, and left Anabaptisme to
shift for it self, and the reader to believe that (for all that is said) it is
an Incendiary both in Church and state.

3. Is this M. Baxter's own Argument? As much as the wooden dagger in the sign
is George of Horse-back's own Sword (to say no more of your unlict Lump of
Logic) your Minor should have been; But the baptizing of little babes before
they come to years of discretion, will necessarily fill the Church with
perpetual contentions. This you had not the face (I hope you are grown
somewhat modest) to affirm. If you had the experience of a thousand years
would have confuted you, and (if you can) instance, what breach it ever made,
what fire it ever kindled.

4. It is false which you say. There is no known rule for Infant Baptism in all
the word of God. The Affirmative is sufficiently proved by Scripture, but you
will not see, and you have not yet proved the negative by any express
Scripture, must the world believe it because you say it? did you in your
travells run your head upon the Popes Chair of Infallibility?

5. It seems you are of a somewhat quarelsom disposition, for let the premises
be what they will, you are resolved to contend against Infant Baptism, and that
PERPETUALLY: This shows your spleen, but as little of your reason as of your
Logic.

6. Fie for shame! Yet more boasting, and so little acting? How you have thrown
M. Baxter's Argument on his own head, let the wise judge; had it lighted on his
head without an helmet, it would not have hurt him; you have been so far from
retorting, that you have not rightly repeated his Argument, and is M. Baxter in
a pit? If there be water there, you may hope he is dipped, but do you take heed
of the pit wherein there is no water; and from whence there is no Redemption.
As for your folly charged on him, I will say nothing but this, both he and we
are willing to be counted fools 1. Cor. 4.10.
for Christ's sake, whilst you are wise (in your own conceit.)

SECT. 7.
H. H. p. 90. and 91. M. Baxter's fifth Argument is this: Because this Doctrine
( viz. That those only should be baptized, that are directly made disciples by
the preaching of men, sent according to the text. Mat. 28.19, 20.) would turn
baptism (for the most part) out of the Churches of the Saints. Answer. 1. It
seems M. Baxter's judgment is, that they that preach and Baptize according to
that Commandment, are those which turn Baptism out of the Church, yet he
shows not one Scripture for the baptizing of any but such as were made
disciples by preaching. I confess such a doctrine does not almost, but
altogether turn M. Baxter's Baptism out of the Church; for we have no such
custom, nor the Churches of God, as to baptize Infants.

Reply, I am at a stand even to admiration, that M. Baxter having warned Chap.
11. p. 132.
that this argument is against the Ground of your practice, you say nothing in
answer to his premises. This silence in you gives the conquest to him; for if
you had had any thing to have said, you would now have spoken; such an imminent
danger impending over Anabaptisme.

2. It is a reproach to say, it seems it is M. Baxter's judgment, etc. (you can
rail better then reason) and you have as good as confessed, that it is your
fancy, and not M. Baxter's judgment, in saying, IT SEEMS -- To whom? Only to
you, and your party; whose eyes (it is to be feared) the God of this world has
blinded. But if it do seem so Malta vident^^ quae non sunt.
must it needs be so? poor proof: Does the bell always tink, as M. Haggar does
think?

3. It Is certain M. Baxter does not find fault with the command, but with your
comment, not with the precept, but with your practice, in vindicating that
Scripture Mat. 28.19.20.
from your corrupt gloss, whence M. Baxter infers (and that truly) that this
would near turn the ordinances of Baptism out of the Churches of the Saints:
For though (in a Church constitured) some few (in comparison) may be and are
converted by Ministerial teaching, yet most receive the beginings of grace by
godly education, as M. B. proves largely p. 133,
from Scripture, and experience, (to which you answer not a word) so that these
not being discpled by Ministerial teaching; are not to be baptized, according
to the sense you would put upon the Text. Neither is in enough to say, they
have faith, and so may be baptized; for the words speak of working faith,
(according to your Gloss) by ministerial teaching. And if this doctrine be
true, it were best for parents not to teach their children betimes, (as they
are Deuteronomy. 6.7. Prove. 22.6. Ephesians. 6.4.
commanded) a sad, and most contradictory principle that the carefullest
parent, should he the cruellest foe; and whiles he seeks to bring his children
into Heaven, you should bolt them out of the Church on earth.

4. In condemning M. Baxter for not showing one Scripture, etc. You broach two
errors at once. First, That the discipling of any according to the mind of
Christ, was and is only by Ministerial teaching. Secondly, That none but such
(so discipled) were, or are to be baptized. But on the contrary, are not
examples obvious in Scripture? As the thief on the Cross, who was a Disciple,
yet not Discipled by Ministerial preaching the Gospel, whom yet you
acknowledge to be in a saving condition, p. 25*26. and baptized in will, though
not in deed; and (to omit many instances) Paul was a Disciple, Acts 9.22.
yet not by the preaching of the Gospel, and was baptized too, and I trow both
according to the mind of Christ, to say nothing of Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 6. c.
2.
Origens, and Austins Confess. l. 8. (...) 12.
Discipleship, the one by his parents education, the other by a Voice from
Heaven.

5. For your confession, etc. It had been more ingenuity to have confessed your
own errors, with which your book is stuffed (as may appear by this reply) or
your impudence (with a witness) in denying that which you cannot but know to be
the custom of the Churches of God, for more then a 1000 years, See your p. 3.
or your uncharitableness in disowning them for the Churches of God, who have
owned Infant Baptism. What your custom is I matter not, you shall be none of my
presidents, though God may make you an example, and then I shall remember you
as I do Luk, 17.32.
Lot's wife.

SECT. 8.
H. H. p. 91. But (to retort M. Baxter's Argument) this Doctrine of M. Baxters,
and the rest of the Priests of England, ( viz. That all Children should be
Baptized in their None-age) according to their practice, does turn the Baptism
of Christ (which is, to baptize men and women when they believe) quite out of
the Churches of the saints, therefore, etc. This his Sword, is turned with the
edg against himself.

Reply. 1. In general, you should have given no more then his own, you have
made so little use of the Argumen^, that you deserve to pay no interest; but
how have you put the sheep in Wolves clothing? and besmeered M. Baxter's modest
and meek expression, with the excrements of your own passion.

2. In particular, 1. You call us Priests in derision; you show your self to
be the Son of Hagar by your scoffing, that Nickname neither gains you, not
loses us any thing. Secondly, we do not say all children (but the children of
believeing parents) are to be baptized. And those I trow, are not All children.
Isa. 28.15.
Thus you make lies your refuge, and under falsehood have you hid your self.
Thirdly, you say that our Doctrine turns Christ's Baptism out of the Church,
because the baptizing of men and women when they believe, is the baptism of
Christ. This is b^t a pitiful begging of the Question; and yet without
Question, both the Baptism of Infants, and of the other, are consistent; It Is
well known that many Jews and Heathens converted to the Faith, have been
Baptized by us, as well as the Infants of believeing Parents. Thus indeed the
edge of M. Baxter's Sword is so turned, that for very bluntness it has not so
much as pierced the skin.

SECT. 9.
H. H. Same p. His Sixth Argument is, against the man's of Baptizing by
Dipping, as being a branch of the Sixth Commandment; because it does
ordinarily tend to the overthrow of man's health, and lives; therefore no
Ordinance of God, but an heinous sin, etc. Answer. In order, First, Observe
M. Baxter uses not one Scripture (the ground of faith) to prove it murder,
etc. he has used many vain words, which prove nothing, etc.

Reply. 1. Here is a fair promise of aningenuous proceeding Quind dignum tanto
seret hic promissor hiatu? partuturiunt montes, nasceturridicu^is mus. Horat
but not a suitable performing, seeing folly marches in the Van; rather let it
be observed that you suffer the ground and foundation of your practice to be
undermined, and razed, and yet you make no stir; but what a great bussle do you
make, when M. Baxter comes to the Manner? This is Lapwing (if not Jesuite-like)
to cry loudest, when furthest from the Nest.

2. You will not be kept from your old custom of Fly-blowing men's writings with
your corrupt breath? M. Baxter does not exhort the Magistrates ( p. 134. and
136.) to destroy the Anabaptists, as well as Highway murderers. M. Baxter and
I have so much charity Sic Diligendisunt homines, ut non diliguntur eorum
errores. Prosp.
for you, and yet Zeal for the truth, that we would have (no^ your persons but)
your erroneous practices destroyed, if so be the spirit may be saved in the day
of the Lord Jesus. 1 Cor. 5.5.

3. It was needless for M.B. to bring, and senseless for you to demand
Scripture, for the proving of usual dipping to be murder. Has not God made us
men, as well as Christians? and given us reason, as well as Religion? Is there
not a moral as well as a divine Faith? And is there an incompossibility of
both these? Cannot we act the one, but we must decline the other? If therefore
M. Baxter had proved dipping to be murder by a morall-convincing Argument, I
might have believed him, and yet made the word of God the ground of my Faith
(as it is granted to be) yet,

4. Who did ever produce Scripture-testimonies for the proof of a bond? Or
Gospel-evidence for title to Land? Has the Grand Jury Scripture for to prove
matter of fact? e. g. Murder, yet the bill is found, and the murder justly
condemned. I have heard it considently affirmed, that Mr. Haggar has been
married to two wives (which are both yet living) Now unless he can bring
Scripture to prove the contrary, by his own Logic, none is bound to believe
him. Let him therefore take heed of such arguing.

5. But Mr. B. proves it by Scripture. If the sixth commandment be the word of
God, which forbids the ordinary use of any thing which tends directly to
overthrow health, and life; how else can you prove the tortures inflicted on
the primitive Christians to be murder, but by such a Medium as this is? unless
it be your opinion, That their tormenters were no murderers, Though the
tormented were indeed Martyrs. Nay you your self allow the lighting of one
candle by another Gospel worship no wrok for Infants p. 38.
; So the first be lightted by the fire of of the Altar. i. e. The pure word of
God. You see Mr. B. does so, it is then a Scripture-argument by your own grant.
So that you might well have forborne that peremptory charge, that Mr. Baxters
proof is by affirming from out of his own mouth only, etc.

5. The Reader may do well to observe, your First without a Second, only when
you cannot answer, then you fall to your old haunt to cavil, etc.

SECT. 10.
H. H. p. 92. But he proceeds: I dare not say, that in Cities like London, and
among Gentlewomen that have been tenderly brought up, etc. Their Dipping in
cold water (in course of nature) would have killed hundreds, and thousands
either suddenly, or by casting them into some Chronicall disease -- Answer:
Observe, all M. Baxter's proof is nothing but I dare say; Was there ever such a
piece of Divinity seen as this! Surely M. Baxter is afraid of losing
Gentlewomen, etc. -- If he does lose them, he loses a great part of his
Religion: They will preach no longer then they are paid for it, Therefore,
Titus 1.11. Secondly, He durst not say suddenly, because hundreds, and
thousands can prove him a false speaker. Thirdly, Nor does he tell us how long
after; It may be they might have dyed as soon, if they had not been Dipped, for
all must dye afterward, or else never. Thus every fool may see his folly in
this.

Reply I had thought neither to have troubled my self with transcribing (much
less with replying to) this Section, nor any one else with reading this answer,
but least i^ should have been cried up as unanswerable, I have forced my self
to speak something.

1. Your OBSERVE is as a finger in the margin, pointing out some remarkable
passage. What is that? M. Baxter's proof is, I DARE SAY. Truly if this were
all, it were a wonder; yet in our English Language (which suits best to your
capacity) the phrase imports no more but a confident affirmation, and so it is
clear M. Baxter intends it.

2. But why must the Reader Observe it? Because (say you) was there ever such a
piece of Divinity as this? Yes, in your Book, e. gr. to instance but in one of
many. In your retorting M. Baxter's third Argument you come in with your But I
SAY -- p. 89. And is not his I DARE SAY as good as yours, I SAY? why did you
not bid the Reader observe that?

3. If M. Baxter lose the Gentlewomen, perhaps it may be a courtesy to you;
that if you have not enough already, you may have some more to increase your
number, as your predecessors at Munster had.

4. How many calumnies are heaped up together? viz. those Gentlewomen have the
heaviest purses; in losing them, we lose a great part of out Religion, etc.
unworthy to spend time and paper in replying to them. Only I am compelled to
say, M. Haggar would (I believe) quickly give over his trade of Dipping, did he
not catch some such fish as Peter did, with money in their mouths, Mat 17.27.
witness his late purse of sixty pound from his Ellesmer-Proselytes (as I am
certainly informed). Therefore let him take that text Titus 1.11. to himself
with 2 Pet. 2.3. to boot.

5. You nibble a little at the matter (of which more anon) In the interim, I
reply to you in your words (almost) to M. B. you have used many vain (nay vile)
words that prove nothing, unless we grant Dipping exclusively to be the
Ordinance of Christ, which we cannot, etc.

6. What need M. Baxter positively say SUDDENLY? Is nothing murder, but What
presently destroys? Is not a Consumption a disease, as well as the Plague? All
acts of murder do not suddenly throw down, but leisurely undermine the Garrison
of the body. If you should maliciously wound a man, and he dye thereof within a
year and a day, the Laws of England (which are grounded on (or not contrary to
the) Scripture) would find it murder -- If you dare say no, It is to gratify
also your friends, the Jesuits, in justifying their Spanish or Italian Figgs.

7. But grant that some have lived long after Dipping (as you say) yet that
hinders not but such a Dipping TENDS to the overthrow of men's lives: As a
surfeit, or a wound does, though in providence some have escaped death thereby
for the present, as the putting the three Children bound into the fiery
Furnace, Daniel 3.23, 27. did tend directly to overthrow their lives, though
they were miraculously preserved. So Daniel's being cast into the Lions Den,
Daniel 6, 16. (with a numberless number of the like import) So that M.
Haggar's evidence being thus weak, has called M. Baxter a false speaker too
soon.

8. Nay you are the false speaker and writer, in quoting Mr. B. falsely; for you
leave out these words, IN COLD WEATHER. Which being inserted, it may be truly
asserted, that such Dipping will kill hundreds and thousands. I cannot tell
what privilege your dipping has (God has not tied himself to work miracles)
your pretended obebedience to the Ordinance of Christ, is but a miserable
begging of the Question.

9. As Mr. B. did not tell us how long after, so neither can Mr. Haggar tell us
how soon after. Is nothing murder, upon which we cannot undoubtedly conclude
the time of dying.

10. Is this your Scripture, and experience to prove dipping no murder? It may
be they might have dyed as soor, if they had never been dipped etc. Is not Mr.
Baxters DARE SAY, better then your MAY BE? Did ever any man see such a piece
of divinity or reason from a Champion of a Cause? May not a Murderer at the
bar plead as well? It Is true, I wounded the party; but that did not tend to
the overthrow of his life; he might have dyed as soon, if I had never hurt him;
for he must needs dye afterward. Thus whilst you are a defender of dipping,
you are a pleader for murdering. And therefore if every fool might see in this
Mr. Baxters folly, that was the reason, Mr. Haggar spyed it; for, I profess I
discern it not.

SECT. 11.
H. H. p. 92. and 93. But he desperately proceeds, like a man resolved not to
take heed to his tongue; which is set on fire of Hell, etc. Jam. Chap. 3. ver.
6. I know not (says he) what trick a coveteous Landlord can find out to get
his Tenants to die apace, likelier then to get them to turn Anabaptists; and
covetous Physicians should not be much against them because Catarrhes etc. may
be bred, and increased thus -- Answ. All this is proved by M. Baxters DARE SAY.
Sound Divinity: did Christ and his Apostles teach such doctrine; Is not Mr. B.
rather a Mountebank then a Divine, may not believers say of him as P. of
Elymas? Acts 13.10 and 2 Pet. 1.5 etc. And I can truly say with a good
conscience, he is spiritually blind; for Peter exhorts the Saint, to give
diligence, etc. but whether he has showed any of these virtues in all this
Argument, I leave to the wise to judge, and him to stand, or fall to his
master; And proceed as I am commanded. Prove. 26.5.

Reply 1. Let the Reader judge, whose tongue is set on fire of hell; if any ones
mouth ever smelt of brimstone M. Haggars does. Here is a Skavingers Cart
unloaded, you cannot leave your boys tricks of throwing dirt. Is M. B. a
Mountebank rather then a Divine, any more then Luke was Emperick rather then an
Evangelist Daveot. on Col. 4.14.
because he was a Physician? I fear you are sick of the Miserere, for you vent
your excrements at your mouth.

2. Yet I see an excellent fragment of charity, like Pilates justice: First to
condemn M. B. as a child of the Devil; and then refer him to his Master. But
it is well that there lies an appeal from Mr. Hag. to the Lord Naturam expellas
Furca, licet usque recurre^
though you cannot leave your old humor, you must revile him, before you leave
him. Lets now hear your answer.

SECT. 12.
H. H. page 94.1. If it be the only way for coveteous Landlords and Phisicians
(as he says) then if the Devil had not put it into your head before (yet M.
B. like a diligent servant) has done it now.

Reply 1. What a foolish inference is this? Is Mr. Baxter a servant of the
Devil, because he discovers practices of his Factors? Did 1 Samuel 8.10.
Samuel prompt Saul to a Tyranny, because he painted out the oppressions of an
Arbitray Government. Was Elisha a servant of the Devil, When he foretold 1
King. 8.12.
Hazaells cruelty? or was our Savior a diligent servant (...) Satan. Matthew.
26.21, 23. When he said to his Disci^^es, one of you shall betray me, and he
that dippeth, etc. ^^^rely Christ did not put it into his head, but Satan put
(...) into his heart. Were Paul and Peter and Jude such ser^ants, as to put it
into M. Haggars head. 2 Timothy 3.6. to creep into houses, and lead captive silly
women, etc. 2 Pet. 2.3.10 To make Merchandise of souls -- Jude 8. To speak evil
of dignities? -- and many more lessons which you have learned. But now Mr. B.
must be catechized, and asked 2 Questions about these diseases.

SECT. 13.
H. H. Question 1. Whether Mr. Baxter can say in his conscience, that he ever
did know any dipped person died of it, or fell into any of those diseases
afterward? if he had, be would have named them in his book, etc. We have many
Gentlewomen, etc. that can prove Mr. Baxter a false accuser, and I can boldly
say, that many who have been weak and sickly before, and given ^ver by Doctors,
have recovered health and strength, etc.

Reply 1. Though Mr. Baxter names none, yet it follows not, but some have dropped
into the grave, after they came dropping out of the water, I leave him (in his
reply) to give you instances enough, neither do you name any, for what you
assert may not I say, I question not, if you had known any such, you would have
put down their names in your Book. But

2. You act the part of a Mountebanck now, and tell us stories not inferior to
the Popish Fables, concerning the consecrated Host. Did ever Christ institute
that Ordinance of Baptism for a bodily cure.?

3. Some sick persons have recovered after private Communion, and some children
been cured of the Chin-cough, after a draught of consecrated Wine; is this
therefore an owning of God's Ordinance? It is not always prudentiall, to judge
of the cause by the event, a false Prophet may foretell a truth, (in the event)
and yet not be credited, nor counted a true Prophet, Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3.

4. I would fain know, First, whether you did ever dip any in cold water in
Winter, (for so M. B. lays the case, p. 134.) or ever knew any Dipped in such a
season in this climate? If not, your bold assertion proves nothing. Secondly,
whether you have no Winter converts; it so, according to your own rule, they
must be baptized, as soon as they are Discipled; and then make an experiment,
whether among all your Gentlewomen and Ladies, you canfi^nd so hot an zealot,
before you talk so largely.

SECT. 14.
H. H. Objection, People become Ranters afterward, and that is a sign of
judgment, and not of owning God's Ordinance. Answer. That is, after they are
again gone away from the Faith, and deny the Ordinance of Christ, which once
they owned, then as, 2 Pet. 2.21. etc.

Reply 1. If by the Faith you mean your way, etc. I have no Faith to believe it
or you.

2. You have conjured up a spirit which you cannot lay, and you confound
(whilst you seek to confirm) your Anabaptism. As this Objection is impertinent
(to prove Dipping no murder, whether any turn Ranters or no), so your answer is
dis-satisfactory: For it implies, that Dippers may, and often do fall away from
the Faith, and deny the Ordinance of Christ; from such the Lord deliver us.

3. It Is true, that when men are gone from the truth, and deny the Ordinance of
Christ, they turn Ranters; i. e. when they deny Infant Baptism, as sad
experience, and Mr. Baxter has showed. An Anabaptist and a Ranter differ not
specifically, but gradually, as a Cub and a Bear. Do you show (if you can) one
simple Anabaptist, that denies nothing but Infant Baptism, and is not tainted
with some other gross Error or Heresy. Yea, the Ranters themselves do not
deny, but defend (that which you call the Faith and Ordinance of Christ)
Anabaptism. The school is the same, only they are gotten into the higher
Fourm, whither M. Haggar and the rest (if God prevent not) are removing.

SECT. 15.
H. H. Quest. second, Whether M. Baxter be not convinced in his conscience,
that some or all of those diseases he speaks of, do not frequently reign upon
many that never were Dipped in cold water -- Now let all impartial people
judge, whether M. Baxter be a good Tree by the fruit he bears. What though his
intentions be good, yet he must be one of those, Romans 3.8.

Reply. It is granted, many die of the forementioned diseases that were never
Dipped, and (I hope) have continued such trees to the death, as have have had no
cause to be ashamed of their fruit. But I am ashamed of your scurrility, and
abuse of Mr. Baxter, who says, Dipping in cold water, in cold weather, is one
(not the one^^) cause of perishing; because some temperate people die of
Fevers, will it follow that Surfeiting, Riot. Drunkenness, are not a means of
those mortal distempers? What poor shifts are these?

SECT. 16.
H. H. p. 95. The next thing that Mr. Baxter speaks of, is Mr. Tombs his
salving up all this, with saying, That they may be baptized in warm water.
Answ. I am not of his judgment in that, for I believe it is his weakness.

Reply. Yet you could say, page 36. Mr. T. is of age, and able to answer for
himself; questionless, why could you not say so here? but there you give him a
bit, and here a knock; there his Advocate, here his Judge; there a Shem (in
show), here a Cham (indeed) to uncover his nakedness and weakness.

SECT. 17.
H. H. Then we cannot agree among our selves, therefore not to be believed.
Answ. 1. I would not have people believe us, but the Scripture, Acts 17.11.
2ly, The truth must be believed and practiced, though we do not agree, 1 Cor.
1.12. etc. Acts 15.39. 3ly, Mr. B. and his brethren do not agree well; e. g.
about the subject of Baptism, manner of Administration, etc.

Reply 1. We are agreed, as to the first: It were well if in the main we could
hit it too.

2. Those differences in the Church of Corinth, and between the Apostles, will
not justify yours, unless they were of the same kind; howsoever they might be
impediments to Faith and practice for a time, and to some.

3. You are too lavish, to say, we differ about Cross, Altar, Font, etc. since
these things are laid aside: your Argument out of Jerem. 2.13. (where you took
the broken Cisterns for Fonts) may make us quite out of conceit with them. You
might have forborne the Rails, if you had not loved them dearly, and loath to
part with them and the Scotch-Directory (as you scornfully call it) but your
tongue and Ink must be of a color. If Reformation be so far advanced, as that
the shooing-horns of Popery be cast out of door, I wish you and your Proselytes
in your universal Redemption, Original sin, Free Will, Falling away from Grace,
do not bring in Popery at the window.

SECT. 17.
H. H. p. 96. Mr. Baxter denies Dipping of Believers to be the custom of the
Church in the primitive times, and he is not ashamed to give the Scripture the
Lie before all men, saying, It Is not proved by any. And why? It may be because
our Translators have not put the word Baptize into English, and called it
Dipping.

Reply 1. You are too full of your tongue. Before you had charged Mr. Baxter
for giving the Scripture the Lie, you should have proved it. But this is an
usual scrap of your passionate Logic.

2. Your sore back makes you kick at every one that comes near, even at our
Translators; who yet according to the customary use of the Word, and sense of
the place, have truly and rightly translated it. For in reference to common
actions, it cannot signify a total plungeing over head and ears, therefore
well Englished [Wash], Mark 7 4. Luke 11.38. Heb. 9.10. and in reference to the
Sacramental action the Holy Ghost does never use the word (...) (which
signifies Dipping) but (...); therefore well rendered Baptizing, which is become
English (by use) as well as Hallelujah, and Amen. etc.

3. Mr. Cook Font unc^vered, p. 4, 5.
would have you prove it, if you can, that the word [Baptize] imports Dipping,
either from the proper signification of the Word, or from the nature of the
Ordinance, or from Apostolical practice, etc. All which (with his reasons) you
have clearly past by.

4. Suppose (which is not yet granted) that the word at first did signify
Dipping, (not exclusively to all other) yet it is ordinary in Scripture to have
words used in their Derivative, not Primitive acceptance. E. gr. (...) in its
prime signification is taken for an Opinion, or Sect, Acts 26.5. yet the
context elsewhere puts this meaning on it, Heresies, Gal. 5.20. So there is a
word that signifies Catechizing properly, but used of any kind of Teaching, and
so translated twice, Gal. 6.6. (...), Taught -- teaches. Thus (...) signifies
a Messenger, but custom, an Angel. Fashion put an estimate on clothes, as
custom does a sense on words; or as waters lose the taste of the Fountain from
whence they flow, and retain that of the Mineral through which they pass. Thus
Mr. B. is clear from a Lie, and the Translators from a fault; but take notice,
Mr. Haggar confesses the Translators to be on our side.

5. It is strange, that is answering the Qu. why is it not proved? You say, It
may be; because our Translators have not put the word Baptize into English, and
called it Dipping, To delude your Reader, you bring your dream; and conjecture,
It may be; whereas Mr. Baxter allegeth expressly other certain Reasons, which
shall be defended anon.

SECT. 18.
H. H. But Mr. Baxter confesses, p. 135. the word signifies [to wash] as well
as to Dipp, and so in the Catechism; Water, wherein the person Baptized is
Dipped. Therefore 1. They can no more blame us for Dipping, then we may them
for Washing. 2. How are they to be blamed that do neither? but only sprinkle a
few drops of water on the face of a child, and so delude the people. 3. Then it
must be Washing by Dipping, or wetting all over; for who can wash a thing that
is not wet.

Reply 1. Mr. Baxter has granted more then he needed. For the word signifies
generally no more then Washing (r), See Mr Leighs Critica sacra.
as the learned show out of many Authors.

2. We do not blame you simply for Dipping, but for making it Essential to the
Ordinance. No Dipping, no Baptizing, is your cry; Jesus Christ has no where
limited Baptizing to the mode and externality of Dipping. And the Catechism
which you cite says expressly, the party is baptized by Dipping, or Sprinkling;
which disjunction you have left out.

3. Though I may safely say, with Mr. Blake and Mr. Baxter, that I never saw a
child sprinkled (ours being rather a pouring of water, then sprinkling), yet
it is false that you say sprinkling is not washing; and therefore our people are
deluded, and a third part of the Nation unbaptized. The Israelites were
baptized in the Cloud, 1 Cor. 10 ver. 2. (...), not that they were dipped in it,
but because it dropped on them: There sprinkling is baptizing. If sprinkling (you
say) be neither dipping nor washing, then we have deluded the people all this
while, etc. But I assume, sprinkling is washing (as is proved); Then by your
own arguing we have not deluded the people, as being still unbaptized: but
rather you delude the people by your silly sophistry, and bearing them in hand,
that baptizing signifies only dipping.

4. Your third Inference is as weak, being without Scripture and reason. 1. You
bring no Scripture to prove the word baptizing signifies a washing by dipping,
but only, It must needs be, which is not a sufficient (much less a Scripture)
proof. Thus your great weapon (Necessity) is soon blunted. But I will give you
a Scripture or two, that holds forth a Washing, but not by Dipping, (or as you
say, wetting all over). It Is said Mark 7.4. When they come from the market,
except they wash (the word is, they baptize, Mark 7.4. (...),) they eat not.
Can any rational man imagine, the Pharisees when they came from the market
plunged themselves over head and ears? -- No, it is clear (they washed but their
hands) from ver. 2. yea, in this verse mention is made of washing of cups,
pots, -- and tables (or beds) which is not usually by dipping, but sprinkling,
or pouring water. 2. Your inference is with some reason, but a silly one. For
who can wash a thing that is not wet? It stuck in your teeth, you durst not
speak out All over, as immediately before. For you can wash off a spot from the
face of your child, though the face be not wet all over. Again, how poorly do
you confound Dipping and wetting all over? when the tip of your singer may be
dipped in water, and yet the finger not wet all over. I must now needs tell you,
if your zeal for Dipping be no better then your Argument, it will shrink in the
wetting.


SECT. 19.
H. H. p. 97. As for M. Baxter's Objection, that Christ says, Ye need not but
wash your feet, and ye are clean every whit. I answer, Christ does not there
speak of Baptism, but of Humility, which is shown by washing of the feet, as
well as of the whole body: But when he speaks of Baptism, he does not say, He
that is Baptized on his feet, etc. but is Baptized -- shall be saved, Mark
16.16.2. The Eunuch and Philip went both down into the Water, and he baptized
him, and not his feet only, for then they needed not to have both gone down,
Acts 8.39.3. If the word him and them includes the whole man or men, then the
whole man, etc. was baptized of John in the River of Jordan, and of Philip,
Acts 8.12.4. Christ is said to come up out of the water, Mark 4.10. which
plainly shows, he first went down. 5. The Scripture says, John 3. verse 23.
He baptized there, because there was much water --.

Reply 1. Let the Reader observe, that Mr. Haggar passes by some Arguments of
M. Baxter's without mentioning them. Thus he only storms the Rear, that he may
escape the Van.

2. It Is granted, that Christ's washing of the Disciples feet was to teach them
humility, and it follows (by what you grant here) that washing of a part, shows
the washing of the whole (which is contradictory to what you even now said,
that it must needs be, that washing is by wetting All over). Pride is a
spreading sin, it is in the understanding, Gal. 6.3. in the spirit, Eccl. 7.8.
in the heart, Prove. 16. ver. 5. in the tongue, Psalm. 12.3. in looks, Prove,
6.17. in gesture, Isai. 3.5. Pride you see stains the whole man, soul and body;
that primarily, this secondarily; yet (you say) the washing of the feet shows
the cleansing of them every whit, as well as if the whole body had been washed.
Therefore the washing of one part, signifies the washing of the whole; unless
Mr. Haggar think that pride is only in the feet; because we say, proud people
are high in the In-step, and stand upon their Pantofles.

3. That washing of the feet showed more then humility; Peter then did not know
it, Joh. 13.7. See Calvin in loc.
and Mr. Haggar does not, or will not yet see it: for it shows either pardon of
sin, or newness of life, or both. Now if justification and sanctification are
signified elsewhere by sprinkling, why not also by our pouring on water, or as
you call it, sprinkling water on the child's face? Thus we have Exemplum
Analogum, that a partial washing may signify a total purging.

4. As Christ did not say, He that believes, and is baptized on his feet, shall
be saved; so he does not say, He that believes, and is dipped over head and
ears, shall be saved, every whit. If you Reply, he says, he that is baptized,
i. e. that is all one with Dipped: That Is but a miserable begging of the
Question, and it remains to be proved; though I leave it to be considered,
whether it be proper to say, Baptized on his feet; unless it be Mr. Haggar's
practice to baptize his Proselytes standing. On their feet.

5. As for Philip and the Eunuch there is nothing in that history, that can
convincingly demonstrate Dipping. Acts 8.38, 39. (...).
The Verbs * [going down, and coming up] cannot, for they are often in Scripture
(and why not so here?) used of a motion where was no descent into, nor coming
out, (in Mr. Haggers sense) e. g. Acts 14.25. When they had preached the Word
in Perga, they went down into Attalia, etc. 24.1. Ananias -- descended with the
Elders -- etc. 25.1. Festus -- ascended -- to Jerusalem. Neither do the
Prepositions (...).
into, and out prove it; for the former may be well translated to, or unto, as
elsewhere, Mat. 15.24. Acts 16.40. and Col. 1.20. and the latter, as Luke 1.71,
78. and 20.4. and so often in this book, Acts 14.8. and 15.29 and 17 3, 31. and
22.6. and 27.34. with many more, neither do they do jointly prove it
necessarily. For 1. That water was not so deep for Dipping all the body: they
that have seen it, call it a little fountain; as not only Sandys, but Hierom
and Bid many hundred years before him, which humane testimonies may be
believed, as well as the history of King Henry the 8. The expression Acts 8.36.
(...).
here used imports not a River, but a small Spring; therefore might be best
translated, A CERTAIN (or a kind of) water. 2. If it were granted (which yetis
not) that it was a deep water, yet a man may be said to go into, and come out
of the water, who had not been in it higher then the Ancles; and that they went
in any further, or how far they went, cannot be demonstratively proved out of
this Text. 3. You may as well argue, that Philip was new dipped, as well as the
Eunuch was baptized by Dipping; for it is said (supposing your interpretation)
that they both went into, and came out of the water, without any exception; and
I think you do not Dip your self, when you Dip others, unless you and they be a
Duck and a Drake in your Jordan. 4. The text does plainly distinguish between
the act of Baptizing, and their going down into, and coming out of the water
(upon the former supposal) therefore no part of baptizing. For if going down,
etc. be a Dipping (as you would have it) then the Eunuch was dipped before he
was baptized, and how then is Baptizing (in English) a Dipping? 5. Had Philip
and the Eunuch made use of a Baptismal Ladder (as Tho. Scilito a Naylor
baptized in a Well the wife of a dear friend of mine, that since has seen her
error, and recanted.
some have done in my parish) they might more properly have been said to
descend and ascend: Though we read not, that Philip, or Jo. Baptist used such
utensils. 6. But their descending here, is a coming out of the Chariot, into
which Philip had ascended at the request of the Eunuch; and so both spying
water below them, both went out of the Chariot to it, Acts 8.31. and as it is
an usual phrase among us to say, We went down to, and from the water side,
though perhaps never in it; and it is said, They that go down To the sea in
ships -- Psalm. 107.23, to ver. 31. which Junius translates Into the sea; I
trow, the ship is not plunged all over, nor are they under water in the ship,
unless in case of ship wrack, etc. But that cannot be, because they are said to
do business in great waters (same verse) and to see the works and wonders of
the Lord in the deep, etc. and are delivered and brought to their desired Haven.


6. We say, the whole man is baptized, when not the whole of man, but part is
washed. Whole Christ was crucified, but not the whole of Christ; your arguing
is very weak to all that have understanding. When a man is wounded in any one
part, we say truly, the man is wounded, though not all over. Circumcision was a
cutting off the foreskin of the flesh only, and yet the Jews child was
Circumcised. Sir, when your tongue talks, we say Mr. Haggar speaks; will it
follow, that every part of Mr. Haggar speaks? By this Argument he is all
tongue, Vox and praeterea nihil.
but if his heels had spoken; they might have made as wise an answer.

7. Your next instance proves as little, that Christ was dipped when he was
baptized; for the words may be read, coming up From Mar. 1 10 -- (...).
the water, and that translation is more proper and suitable, because all
Rivers for the most part, lie in the lower ground, in coming to which, we are
said to descend; and coming from, to ascend. And indeed the Preposition is so
rendered in the verse immediately foregoing, viz. Jesus came Mark 19. (...).
From Nazareth, yea it is said -- The Dogs eat of the Crumbs which fall Mat.
15.17. (...) --
from their masters table; yea where the same story is recorded Mar. 3.7.13.
it is so translated twice; as, Who has warned you to flee from the wrath to
come? and then came Jesus from Galilee, and often else where in the New
Testament, what more ordinary then to say, Such a man came from Sea, Thames,
etc. Here appears the weakness of your inference, and the instance does not
plainly show, that Christ went first down into the water, or else how could he
come out of it? Your text in John comes now to be considered.

SECT. 20.
H. H. p. 67. and 98. And the Scripture says Jo. 3.23. John Baptized in Enon
-- because there was much water there. But M. Baxter answers, that Travelers
report, that the river Enon is but a little brook, that a man may almost step
over. 1. Surely it is want of the fear of God, and love to the truth, that he
should turn aside his ear from the Scripture, that says -- There was much
water -- to believe a Man, a Traveller (and Travelers may lie by authority)
why may not Sr John Mandevill be believed, as well as this Travelers news? The
Lord be praised that has delivered my soul from believing him, and such as he
is, Acts. 2.40.2. If it were granted, yet Enon might have much water in another
place, Though but a little water where the Traveller was: As it is with many
Rivers in England.

Reply. Travelers may lie, but may not some speak truth? If not, I shall take
heed of you, and hardly believe you, who have been a Traveller, and that among
the Jesuits, the most exquisite Masters of that Art, and compassers of Sea and
I and to make Proselytes. And had you named the book wherein Sr John
Mandevill's tale may be found, I would shape a suitable reply, but let it pass
in the mean time for one of your cunning devised fables.

2. Your vein of railing at M. Baxter, I turn a deaf care to, when you prove
us an untoward generation (for you calling us so, does not prove us so) your
thanks for your self, and caveat to others, will be seasonable. In the interim
you do mock both God and man. The Turk may as well praise God, Luke 18.11.
he is no Christian, and the Pharisee See 18.11.
That he was not as this Publican.

3. What this Enon was, is disputable, Calvin in Joh. 3.23.
some think it a Town situate in the Tribe of Manasseh; Diodate, a City, as
Salim was, to which (the text says) ^t was near; Others a Fountain or small
brook, As Grotius, Jun. and M. Baxter-Sandys Travells l. 3. p. 141. (...) As
Rev. 1.15. and 14.2
Be it so; yet we are not a jot the nearer for dipping, for the phrase is
elsewhere usually translated, (*) many water^. Now then it signifies many
convenient places at the water, where John, and his disciples might be employed
at once. Not any deep water, or great river, which commonly is hemmed in with
great banks, which deny an easy access for an Administration. 2. Many waters
are sometimes taken in Scripture, (and why not here) for a confluence of waters
on some plain Ezech. 13.10
for the watering of medows, and some trees, as we see in many places in
England, where the ground is low it is plashy and seems to be a little Sea, and
yet not knee deep. 3. Jordane the Prince of Rivers in that Country, (which has
it is name from Jor, and Dan: two fountains, from whence it rises,) was not
above eight fathoms deep, nor Navigable, Isa. 33.21
what a small water then (in comparison) was Enon, not far distant from
Jordane? Now though you will not believe travelers reports, yet I hope you
will notreject these plain reasons.

4. You say Enon might have much water in another place, although but little
where the Traveller was. Here you have only probablity for proof, therefore as
you argue p. 28.
we read but of 4. or 5. whole households were baptized, therefore not likely
they ( i. e. the Apostles) baptized whole; Nations, if they did, we desire to
see i^. So I. It Is not likely Aenon was so deep, for dipping; if so, prove it
by Scripture if you can, and we will believe it.

SECT. 21.
H. H. p. 21. Further M. Baxter says, The Jaylour in the night in his house
was baptized, but the Scripture says; Act. 16.33.34. Now if the Jaylour took
Paul, and Silas, It implies they took them out, and the next words prove it
plainly. viz. He brought them into his house.

Reply. 1. Some enemies are sooner foiled, then found. I know not what to make
of these Fiblets of an Answer. If the Jaylour took Paul and Silas, it implies
THEY took them out. who can make sense of this? It may be you mean the Jaylour
took them out, as may perhaps be gathered from the Antecedent of your
proposition, and the proof you bring for the consequence -- but it seems you
know not what to say, or what you say, you are IN and OUT.

2. May not any unprejudiced Reader, see this to be the sense of the words as
they lie in the text? viz. Act. 16.24. with 30, 32, 33.
The Jaylour brought Paul and Silas out of the prison, (yea the inner-Prison)
into some outward room thereof, where he heard the word) and was Baptized, and
then brought them into his house, which (as it was usual) joined to the prison.

3. You do not tell us whither he took them, nor whence he brought them. It is
not likely the Jaylour had a pond, or large bathing vessel in his house (the
nature of his office, and heat of the Climate, easily convince understanding
men) neither is it likely (I am sure not expressed) that he took them in the
NIGHT to any river or fountain to be dipped in, over head and ears, this
Circumstance of the Time does evince it. Though, if it were so, the action was
carreid on with more modesty and less scandal then your day-dipping is.

4. Let the Reader observe, that the word Dipping is not expressly mentioned in
any of the Texts alleged by you, and that Dipping is proved only by
consequence, and that very properly, e. g. Eunuch, and Philip went both down
into the water, therefore dipped. Secondly, Men and women were baptized,
therefore dipped; for him and them include the whole man or men. Thirdly, Christ
came out of the water, Ergo, Dipped;. Fourthly, John baptized in Enon, because
there was much water, etc. Therefore he dipped, etc. Is this the foundation
that you would have ( p. 1.) the Saints to build on? Do you not now believe and
practice a duty not warranted by an express Syllabicall precept? what
intolerable partiality is this, to allow consequences for dipping believers,
and to deny ours for baptizing believers Infants? None of our consequences for
the one, are so strained, and farr-fetcht, as yours for the other.

SECT. 22.
H. H. p. 99. M. Baxter says, that some desparately conclude, that if it be
God's way, he will save our lives, how probabely soever the danger may seem to
be. To which he answers, First, This is to beg the Question; nay I have
showed, and am showing it, not God's way, Answer, 1. Let the Reader judge by
the word, whether M. Baxter has showed, that baptizing believers is not Gods
way. Secondly, If he be a showing it, we shall take notice of it hereafter, for
by his own confession he has not showed or proved it yet.

Reply. 1. According to your old way of Sophistry, you falsely represent the
Question, which is, Whether Dipping (not whether Baptizing of believers) be
God's way, unless you think there is no way of baptizing but Dipping: which is
a begging of the Question.

2. I confess here is a veyn of unusual modesty, in referring M. Baxters 6
Arguments, and your Answer to the Reader, to be tried by the Word, and so do I.

3. It does not Follow, that M. Baxter has not proved it to purpose, because
he says, he is a showing, etc. You might argue as well against the Psalmist,
Psalm. 78 5
SHOWING to the generations to come the praises of the Lord, etc. And against
Apollos, Acts 18 28
SHOWING by the Scripture that Jesus was the Christ, yea against Christ
himself, Luke 8 1
SHOWING the glad tidings of the Kingdom of God. Surely you did not intend
this, as an Answer to M. Baxter, but a Diversion for the Reader. yet M. Baxter
says, p. 136.
God has appointed no Ordinance contradictory to his great moral commands, of
which rational proof you take no notice of.

SECT. 23.
H. H. Same p. M. Baxter says, Secondly, God must not be Tempted; this was the
Devils trick to have drawn Christ, under pretense of Scripture, and trusting
God, to have cast himself in danger of death. Answer, First, That way that the
Devil took was never the way of God, but ours was, and is, Act. 8.12. Secondly,
There was no Scripture that said, Cast thy self down; nor that said -- at any
time. As I have showed at large in Answer to yous Tenth Position, etc.

Reply. 1. You swarve from the Question in hand, which is now concerning the
manner of baptizing, not who is the subject person to be baptized.

2. In what sense the Baptizing of men and women is God's way, has been
showed, though in your sense it is not yet proved by you.

3. For the rest, yo refer the Reader to your Answer In your p. 4^ etc.
and so do I, to this reply there.

SECT. 24.
H. H. p. 100. You say we might have said so to the Disciples, that if it were
God's command to keep the Sabbath, then they needed not to rubb the ears of
Corn, for God could sustain them without. Answer. So we might, if God had
commanded us so to keep the Sabbath, as not to eat on that day: But it is
otherwise, Exodus, 16.22.23. Though they might not keep a fire to bake, sees,
or roast on that day. Therefore this your objection is nothing, for there is
both command and example to baptize believers. Mat. 28.19.20. Mark, 16.15, 16.
etc. Ergo, Frothy and vain.

Reply. M. Haggar, your Bottle works out little else then Froth; for First,
That Text, nor any other, forbids roasting on the Sabbath, nay it is allowed
and commanded; for the Paschall Lamb was to be roasted in the fire, Exodus 12.9.
Deuteronomy. 16.7.
and the Passover might fall sometimes on the Sabbath Day; See Assem. Annota.
in Joh. 19.31.
why else is it called an high-day, (or great day) but because of the
concurrence of a double Celebrity, viz. The Sabbath, and Passover?

2. It Is a great Question, whether the Pharisees blamed the Disciples for
eating, or plucking the ears of Corn on the Sabbath day; this only is
mentioned, Mark, 2.23.24. But if it were for eating, you grant they might do
so, without breach of the Sabbath, and so M. Baxter's Inference is rather
confirmed by your silly shift.

3. In that you grant, you might say so the Disciples, and to the Dippers too,
It is God's Ordinance, and he can preserve you; what is this, but to tie him to
a constant working, of miracles, for the maintenance of a questionable (at
least) mode of Baptizing? your argument speaks as much for Transubstantiation
as such preservation. There is as much ground to believe a Miracle in that, as
in this Sacrament, i. e. none at all.

4. The Texts you bring for baptizing, are impertinently (and too frequently)
alleged by you, And have been spoken to before. Here is your same fault, to
fly from the manner (which falls now under debate) to the subject of Baptism.

SECT. 25.
H. H. You say, If it were a duty, yet when it is inconsistent with a greater
duty, it is at any time sinful; for it is always a sin to prefer a lesser duty
before a greater. But the duty of self preservation is a moral duty, and
baptizing is but positive; therefore it is a sin to prefer it before self
preservation. Answer. Now M. Baxter lays himself open to purpose, that all may
know he is one of those. 2 Timothy 3.1, 2. Lovers of themselves -- For he prefers
self preservation before obeying the command, and following the example of
Christ. John, 14.15.21. Mat. 10.27, 38, 39. If M. Baxter make so much of
following Christ into the water, how will he follow him through the fire? Mat.
3.15. etc.

Reply 1. You falsely quote M. Baxter, who says, it is AT THAT TIME a sin, not
at any time sinful: There is a vaste difference in the sense, though not in
the sound of the words. The one does absolutely lay aside, the other but
Relatively, and for a time suspend the lesser duty. It is grossly false to say;
A duty when it is inconsistent with a greater, is at any time sinful (unless
some restriction be allowed) to come to the Congregation, may occasionally be
inconsistent with my health and preservation, yet it is not sinful at any
time. And it is as true, that when it is inconsistent with a greater, it is at
that time a sin. For it is a known Rule Semper, and ad-semper.
that Negative precepts bind always, Josh. 5.5, 6, 7.
and at all times, so do not Affirmative, as is clear in the case of
Circumcision. Josh, 5.5, 6, 7.

2. You fraudulently curtall M. Baxter, in leaving out these words, viz.
Especially the manner and quantity of Water in Baptism, etc. You show your
self like an Egyptian Midwife, to truth and reason, what you cannot confute,
you can conceal.

3. You maliciously infer a Calumniating conclusion from M. Baxter's
principles, and premises, and therefore it deserves no other answer then M.
Baxter's Mat. 12.7.
I will have mercy, and not sacrifice; if you had learned what this means, you
would not have condemned the guiltless, you reflect on Christ, as well as on M.
Baxter: Yet,

4. I shall only say thus much to your impertinent Scriptures, John, 14.15.
etc. It is as true, that Christ who has loved us, and given himself for us,
has not given us any precept, which simply tends to the overthrow of our
lives; we may love Christ, and keep his commandments, and yet love our selves
too: we may and must love Christ with a Superlative love, and our selves also
with a subordinate love.

5. You might have spared this handful of dirt, which you have flung at M.
Baxter, till you had proved Dipping to be the Ordinance of Christ by one
express Scripture, or (at least) syllable of reason. But since you think M.
Baxter so cowardly, as that he would not suffer for Christ; I must tell you, I
have read of some Martyers, as Philpot ( etc. mentioned in your p. 45.) that
never were Anabaptists, but never read of an Anabaptist that was a Martyr. It Is
no Argument, because M.B. will not go with you into the water, therefore not
into the fire, no more then this: Because you have gone into the water,
therefore you will endure the fire. There is warrant for the one (when called)
none for the other, which yet you miserably beg, as if it were the command and
example of Christ, etc.

6. You follow your old trade in abusing Scripture, e. g. Mat. 3.15. Those
words do not hold forth the external Formality of the Administration, but the
person that did Administer, and the old ordinance of Baptism, with the person
to whom it was administered; for Christ comes to be baptized, verse. 13. John
out of an high esteem of Christ, and a low apprehension of himself, forbids
him, ver. 14. Then Christ replies, thus it becomes us to fulfill, etc. In
what? Not in Dipping of him (there is no express mention made thereof) but in
baptizing him.

SECT. 26.
H. H. p. 101. Lastly, I desire the Reader to consider, how like M. Baxters
counsel to us, is to Peter's counsel, Mat. 16.21, 22. so does M. Baxter say to
us, and specially to Gentlewomen, old, and weak people etc. This shall not be
to you, for in the course of nature it will kill hundreds, etc. But let all
that fear God, learn of Christ to answer M. B. as he answered Peter. ver. 23.
--

Reply You are got into your wonted haunt, to claw the people, and calumniate
your adversary. There is no likeness between Peter's and M. Baxters Counsel.
Peter advised Christ against that which was written and ordained. So does not
Mr. B. for where is it written expressly, that every one who is baptized must
be dipped? Therefore when Mr. B. disswades any from doing and suffering for
Christ, according as it is written (in your sense) I shall say, His Counsel is
like Peter's; In the mean time (as you do in the close of this Section) I leave
what I have written to the judgment of them that fear God.

SECT. 27.
H. H. same page His seventh Argument is against Dipping of persons naked,
which is against the seventh Commandment, Therefore an intolerable
wickedness, and not Gods Ordinance. Answ. 1. I am sure it is intolerable
wickedness in M. Baxter, and a breach of the ninth Commandment, to say, we
baptize people naked, athing which he never saw, as he confesses, when he
says, he hears so.

Reply 1. Here is more foul play, and the truth held in unrighteousness; for
you leave out these words, OR NEXT TO NAKED, you cite Mr. B. as you answer him,
that is, by halves.

2. Were that false which he affirms, is he a greater transgressor of the ninth
Commandment then you are? page 92.
who say (m) the heaviest purses of our Religion are the greatest part of our
Religion, and call Mr. Baxter a child of the Devil etc. p. 93. You should not
have thrown this stone, unless you had been without fault.

3. Why is it a breach of the ninth commandment to say so? because he never
saw it (you say) with his eyes. What kind of reasoning is this? Does not this
shake (if not take away) the foundation of Moral and Divine Faith? If nothing
must be believed but what we see with our eyes, we must believe nothing. For
that Assent the understanding yields to a thing seen, is knowledge or
experience. This is to make sense says, and the Proverb true, Seeing is
believing. Contrary to Scripture. 1 Pet. 1.8. Nay then all those high charges
which you have drawn up against Mr C. and Mr. B. etc. all along your book, are
false, for you never saw those with your eyes. Then John and the Apostles never
plunged men and women over head and ears in baptizing them, for you never saw
it with your eyes.

4. But how can you tell Mr. B. never saw it with his eyes? he confesses it
when he says, he hears so. Is not this sound Divinity? Did ever Christ and his
Apostles preach such doctrine? Did ever any weak man (but Mr. Haggar) utter
such a reason as this? viz. Because he heard a thing, therefore he never saw
it; as if the same thing in diverse respects, and at several times, could not
be the Object of seeing and hearing also? you saw your ridiculous answers at
Ellesmere exploded, and do you not hear of the same too?

SECT. 28.
H. H. p. 102. It may be that some which he accounts Christians have so little
grace, and of the fear of God in them, as to tell him such lies, and he is
willing to believe them, although for my part, I have baptized, and been at the
baptizing of many hundreds, if not a thousand, and never saw any baptized
naked, etc.

Reply 1. Whither will not malice hu-cry a man? rather then Mr. B. and his
party shall go without a spot, you will bespatter Christianity it self. If
Christians intelligence is not to be credited, whom shall we admit into our
Creed? May not the wicked say, Christians have little grace, they tell lies,
etc. and thus you bring an Odium on Act. 11.26.
that ancient, and honorable Name. Such an one Polycarp confessed himself to
be, Libero audi, Christianus si^ Eusebius. Eccl. Hyst. l. 4. c. 15.
such an one you would be taken to be. It is is an ill bird that defiles his
own nest.

2. Here is a bitter censure past, it is for want of grace -- that they tell
these (if they be) lies. An ingenious charity would have imputed it, rather to
ignorance, or information (which may occasion a lie to fall sometimes from the
best) not to want of grace, etc.

3. Mr. B. must have his share as well as the Christians, they lie, and he is
willing to believe them. Thus he taxes his circumspection, as if he entertained
reports without consideration, when all who know that precious servant of God,
know he is not credulous. But Mr. Haggar, if your will had no^ committed a rape
upon your understanding, you had never believed, that you had found a Font in
Jerem. 2.13. or adeferring of baptism till believing, in Mark 16. verse 16. Or
the Eunuch over head and ears in the water. Act. 8.37. But you was willing to
have it so Quod v^ lumus facile-credimus.
Therefore you believed it was so.

4. You produce your self as a witness, to prove the other liars. This is worse
then ask my fellow, If I be a thief; you are a party, and therefore not fit to
be a witness, you may fly to the Lawers maxim. None is bound to accuse
himself.

5. What arrogance is here? you must be believed against M. Baxters Christians:
why may you not have as lit-grace and fear of God, and tell a lie as well as
they? sanctity and truth are not annexed to your Jordan. Your single testimony
against all theirs shall then be valid, when you are infallible. In the
Interim, this speaks you a Pharisee, in that you count them Publicans.

6. But waving these things, I enter a caveat against your evidence. It is
neither full, nor pertinent to the interrogatory, you speak to the naked
Dipping, but not to NEXT TO NAKED. So that M. Baxter's Argument stands still in
force, as he proves, p. 137. And if the beholding men and women in their
shirts, etc. be not a coasting upon incivility, I have lost my understanding.
Surely Christ never placed his Ordinance so near iniquity, who bids us abstain
from all appearance of evil, 1 These. 5. ver. 22.

7. If they who are baptized, are Dipped in their clothes as there is no
Scripture for so doing, so it is against your principle. For to Dip (in your
sense) is to plunge a person over head and ears in water, so as immediately to
be wet; but he that is Dipped in his clothes is not immediately wet all over.
For his clothes are Dipped primarily, and immediately, he secondarily and
mediately; his clothes by the water, he by his clothes. Thus you who ordained a
Cheese-factor to be a public preacher, may make a cheese-clout a Dipper, and
thus you have met with a Scylla, and Charibdis in the mere of Ellesmer, whether
you Dip naked, or next to naked.

SECT. 29.
H. H. same p. But suppose some men have been baptized naked among men; that is
no more offensive then bathing in the water, Nay Peter was naked, Joh. 21.7.

Reply 1. Never stand mincing the matter with a SUPPOSE, but say, men and women
may be baptized naked; speak out, and tell us, that your naked dipping succeeds
the Roman Lupercatia, the Indian Gymnosophists would blush at this.

2. You tell us of naked Peter, but do not tell us the naked truth. Peter was
not naked (in your sense) the word sometimes signifies to be without any bodily
covering, Genesis 2.25 Secondly poor and mean clothing, Job. 22.6. Mat. 25 36. The
poor members of Christ are said to be naked, as well as Peter, and I do not
think (whatsoever you do) that they were Adamites. Thirdly, them who have laid
aside their upper garment, as Saul and the Prophets, 1 Samuel 19.24. Isa. 20.2.
Thus Peter was naked; for neither his calling (as a Fisher) does necessarily
imply, that he was simply without covering; neither does the modesty of a man,
much less the gravity of an Apostle permit it, nor does it suit with the custom
of the Jews, who was wont to wear a loose upper garment, which being put off,
it was usual to say, they were naked. Thus your answer is pure Quakerism.

3. No truly pious, or morally honest man, but will judge it an immodest act for
men to go stark naked (in your sense). There are Pudenda naturae, which God and
nature would have covered, and to discover them is immodesty, (unless upon
inevitable necessity), why else did the sons of Noah go backward with a mantle
to cover their Fathers nakedness? Genesis 9.22, 23.

4. If you will have your own saying, viz. It is not an immodest thing for men
to be naked together, yet sure it is for men and women; such mixed Dipping is
no more commendable then mixed dancing; Nay, worse of the two.

5. Whether M. Baxter will allow, that men may go into the water to bath them,
yet not sin? let those who have read the former answer judge. If men may, why
may not women? consider that sad story of David and Bathsheba, 2 Samuel 11.2.4.

6. You bewray the subtilty of the Serpent, you mention bathing, but intend
baptizing. That is at the top, like the corn spread over the well, but this
(like the scouts) lies at the bottom, 1 Samuel 17.19. This water-man looks one
way, and rows another: But if it were granted, it is not immodest for men to
bath together, yet it is indecent for them to be baptized naked. For, is there
no difference between bathing and baptizing? Where is the honor of the
Ordinance? Is that comely and lawful in Sacramentals, which is usual in morals?
e. g. At our Tables we laugh, etc. may we therefore do so at the Lord's Table?
Eccl. 10.16. Secondly, does it not trench upon the purity of the Lord Jesus,
that he should institute a standing Ordinance in his Church, that is very
disputable whether it be a wickedness or not? What? only a pair of shears
between a Gospel-Sacrament, and a grievous sin? and for all your Sophistry, you
cannot tell which is the finer end. I am sure, you do not plainly determine it?
Thirdly, does not this tax Christ of inconsideration, that Christ should
institute an Ordinance, at the administration of which all believers may not be
present, men not see women, nor women see men Dipped?

7. If it were granted that men apart and women apart may be baptized, who then
shall Dip the women? If the Minister, there remains still the forenamed
inconveniency. But since M. Haggar has Ordained a Cheese-factor to be a
preacher, may be not Ordain a Da^y-maid, that the one may Dip the male, the
other the female-disciples? And indeed if women may preach (as you hold, p.
69.) why may they not baptize or dip, which (in your language) is all one? So
that to me it is evident, that you saw your nakedness and was ashamed; else you
would never have made Aprons of these Fig-leavs, of such poor shifts. And I
wonder what kind of birds your Proselytes are, who are caught with such chafe
as you have vented.

SECT. 30.
H. H. But M. Baxter does confidently charge us with baptizing maids naked, and
tells it for a certain truth, therefore says, If M. T. cold baptize all the
maids in Bewdley naked, and think it no immodesty, he has lost his common
ingenuity and modesty with the truth. Answer, True, if he does so, but M.
Baxter should first prove, that M. T. or any man else, did ever baptize any
maid or woman naked, in any place of England; till then, he says all manner of
evil sayings on us falsely, etc. Mat. 5.11.

Reply 1. How quickly is the wind turned? Here you are M. Tomb's advocate, but
in p. 45. his accuser. I see Herod and Pilate can soon be made friends, where
Christ is to be Crucified: but why did you leave M. Tombs in the open fields to
answer for himself (p. 36.), would not the same Apology serve here? He is of
age, and able to answer for himself, I question not. Oh! there you were
Nonplus'd, here you have hit (you think) on some color of an answer.

2. What would you have M. B. to prove, your dipping naked, or next to naked?
Is it not your known practice? Does not M. Tomb's answer (in conference)
proclaim it, that in former times, it was thought no immodesty -- etc. Your
self proves it in the precedent Section, saying, p. 102. If a man should be
baptized naked, being none but men together, it is not such an offense as M.
Baxter would make it. Would you have M. Baxter prove that your Sun is up, when
it is Noonday? That M. Haggar is an Anabaptist? or would you have Scripture
that M. T. and M. Hag. did say or write so? what need? you hold it lawful, nay
necessary for men to be baptized naked, (else why do you plead for it)? and if
men, why not maids? are they privileged? out of your own mouth you are
condemned.

3. You might have spared you false accusation, viz. that he speaks all manner
of evil falsely on you, to cast dirt on the truth of Christ. If a man had a
mind to scold as well as you, he might dawb you sufficiently, and not spartle
the truth; the truth and you are far enough off, one from another.

4. You can sooner spy wonders, then answer Arguments. How could he avoid the
mention of it? unless he should have confuted the Anabaptists, as you do Mr. B.
by saying nothing to most of his Arguments. Does not your practice necessitate
him to speak of it? he that digs in a dunghill must needs stir in the dirt.

5. If insinuating untruths into the peoples hearts do make him a liar, you
shall have the whetstone. But what Monster have we here. p. 103? Is Mr. B.
predestined to be a liar? If you take predestination strictly Romans 8.29.30.
It is nonsense, Mr. B. is as much predestined to be a liar, as you are
reprobated to be a Saint, or else it favors of the Arminians cask, Deus ab
aete^no voluit ut reprobi peccarent ad peccatum impellit, Ames. Antisyn. p.
145. and 147.
for they argue thus against Reprobation. And certainly here is a superfetation
of Paradoxes in your expression. Does it not imply a Quicquid facimus mortale
genus quicquid patimur venit ab alto Senec.
Stoicall, and fatal necessity, nay a fathering of impieties on the Almighty,
and make him the Author of sin? Here is little or no difference between that
and this, you will see venture hard for a jeer, reflect on God to revenge your
self on man. Take heed of such unsavory expressions.

SECT 31.
H. H. p. 103. He says again: Me thinks Ministers should have regard to
themselves, and not go so frequently into the cold water to baptize others.
Answ. Truly they are careful enough, they meddle not with so good a work, they
have need to take heed that they kill not themselves in the service of Christ
etc.

Reply 1. You have here bundled together some poor shreds of wit, (such as it
is) in a few pitiful jeers, which deserves no other Reply, then that of Cato to
Cicero on the like occasion (with a little alteration) O! quam ridiculum
habemus respondentem; i. e. O! what a ridiculous Answerer is Mr. Haggar. Yet

2. When you prove dipping (which yet you have not) to be so good a work, and a
service of Christ; I say with Job, Chap. 21. ver. 3. Suffer me that I may
speak, and after that I have spoken, mock on: in the mean time know, that it is
a good work and service of Christ, not which you call so, but by Scripture you
prove so. Now the Scripture no where calls it so. It is rather will worship to
place worship in that which God has no where prescribed in his Word.

SECT. 32.
H. H. same p. But to conclude, we find that in the days of Christ and the
Apostles they baptized both men and women in Rivers, Mark 1.5. Acts 1.12, 37,
38. Joh. 3.23. Now we will be bold to follow their good example,
notwithstanding Mr. Baxter's foul mouth, etc.

Reply 1. To say nothing that we have here again, your First without a Second,
what if I deny your conclusion; your example at Ellesmere has taught me: but

2. Those Scriptures (so often) mentioned do not prove either a Dipping over
head and ears, or men and women apart, or together, or with or without their
clothes, you do not therefore follow the holy example of Christ and his
Apostles, but you are too bold in following John of Leiden and his Apostates.

3. How comes it to pass that Christ and his Apostles are joined with you in
the Bill? for shame never enter them for Defendents, till it is clear they are
of your party. All is not hest you say; Is Mr. Baxter's mouth foul? Does he
belie you and Christ? Are you the servant of Christ, because you say so? As
saying and doing with some are two things, so is saying and proving with Mr.
Haggar.

4. To the close of this Section, I confess we must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, to give account of all our words and works; and then
to be sure it will appear whose mouth is foul, Mr. Baxter's or Mr. Haggars.
Your prayer (the greatest ingenuity in your book) I heartily return.

SECT. 33.
H. H. p. 104. Your eighth Argument follows, viz. Because the Anabaptists way
and practice is such, as has been still branded and pursued with God's eminent
judgments, but never evidently with his blessings. Therefore not likely to be
of God. Answ. By this Argument the Amorites were the children of God; for they
enjoied Canaan four hundred years; and the Israelites were not the children of
God, for they were in bondage and misery. Christ and his Disciples were branded
for Heretics, etc. Joh. 7.34. as you brand us but do you say they were not
God's people?

Reply 1. You are all the Country wide; Mr. Baxter spoke of God's branding, and
you of man's branding. The Reader may see your answer is not to the purpose.

2. The Israelites were oppressed in Egypt, Christ and his Apostles persecuted,
yet God evidently followed them with his blessings. They had Sun-shines as well
as showers, beams of mercy as well as clouds of misery. The Israelites the more
they were afflicted, Exodus 1.12
the more they multiplied; and the more Christ, his Apostles and Church were
persecuted, the more the Gospel flourished, Phil. 1.12, 3.
a strong argument Graecam Philosophiam si quis Magistratus p^ohibuerit,
ea^tatim perit: at Doctrinam Christianam oppugnant reges terrae, and tamen
crescit. D^vn. in Col: ^: 6: ex Clemente:
of the truth of the Gospel. But the Anabaptists were never attended with any
evident blessing of God, but rather eminent judgments of God. How has this
opinion been visibly blasted? Had it been a plant of God's own setting, he
would have made it flourish in spite of opposition. The Lilly has grown in the
midst of Thorns: Thus you see your parallel is not right, and therefore your
answer is wrong.

SECT. 34.
H. H. The Prophet had like to stumbled at the prosperity of the wicked, and to
have said, that they were God's people, Psalm. 73.3, 4, 5. But you so stumble
and fall, as to speak evil of God's people, because of their sufferings.

Reply. That the prosperity of the wicked, and adversity of the godly is a
strong temptation to Atheism Cum rapian^ mala fata bonos -- Solicitor aullos
esse putare does, Ovid,
I confess. But you say, and not prove, that you are the people of God: Thus
did your forefathers the Donatists, thus does every Sect, as Socinians,
Antinomians, Arminians, Quakers, Ranters, etc. style themselves the people of
God; till you prove the Anabaptists God's people, I shall look on those
judgments wherewith they are branded, as on the fire and brimstone which fell
on Sodom.

SECT. 35.
H. H. p. 104, 105. You say further, the Anabaptists hindered the Gospel in
Germany (there be few Divines of note, who do not bear witness of it) did live
idly, forsake their wives and children, abounded with abominable lusts, etc.
Nor can any man show you one of the Anabaptists, who is not blemished with some
of the forenamed wickednesses, etc. Answ. Now by this time (I hope) you have
vented your deadly poison against the Anabaptists: but if all this were true
(which is not) yet it seems M. Baxter's Religion is so tottering, that it must
be underpropped with the Anabaptists failings, or wickedness of those who have
apostatized from us, as if none of us were free.

Reply 1. Your reviling of M. Baxter will not serve your turn; you are now at
the Bar, and now or never must plead the Anabaptists cause in the present
charge drawn up. But it may be this was the Preface to the Plea, and you only
spit that you may speak out; and what you speak, is not an answer, but a
rambling discourse made up of fraud and folly.

2. Your Etes, or Spectacles, or both are naught, when Infant Baptism seemed to
you to be Mr. Baxter's Religion: Part it is, but not all; he looks upon it as
an Ordinance, yet comparatively See Ins^it: B^p: 10: 11:
of inferior consequence. It Is truer that Anabaptists place their Religion
chiefly in Re-baptizing; and are gone so far in Popery, that they make it
necessary to salvation, and Dipping essential to that Ordinance.

3. Were this his Religion, and ready to fall, yet it needs not to be propped
by the rotten posts of the Anabaptists weakness or wickedness, such are rather
fit to build a Babel, then a Temple. This has stood many hundred years before
Anabaptism was dreamed of, and I should be ashamed to own the cause, were
Paedo-baptism only good, because Anabaptism was bad; your principles and
practices being so vain and vile, that they are able (almost) to justify any
Heresy, and to canonize an Atheist. Infant Baptism is not only comparatively,
but simply just and lawful on Scripture grounds, as has been showed, and
therefore we need not the wickedness of your Apostates to support our Religion.
This Diamond has a native luster, and needs no such foyl.

4. You fillily shift off your charge, by saying, The worst of men apostatized
from you, etc. Adam's excuse was as good when he laid the fault on Eve; for
they still maintained their principle and practice of Anabaptism, even when
they wrote their blasphemous lines, and led their beastly lives. So that Mr.
Baxter's light received no advantage (as is pretended) from their darkness.
That Sun will shine, notwithstanding a spitting candle.

SECT. 36.
H. H. p. 106. 2. That the Anabaptists hindered the preaching of the Gospel in
Germany; his proof is nothing, but telling us, most writers of those times
testify it. Answ. He might as well have asked his fellow Priests, if it had
been lawful to take Tithes, and he had been sure of their testimony for it, as
he has now against the Anabaptists, who had rich and potent enemies that wrote
those Histories against them. Zuinglius disputed with them, and could not stop
their mouths; the Senate banished them, etc. Such arguments, that neither Paul
nor Peter, nor John could answer, Act. 24.5.

Reply 1. What other witnesses should be brought, but the writers of those
times? Is not that enough, if there be truth in the History, or Moral faith in
us? Would you have Scripture to prove, that John of Leiden had three Wives.

2. Your scornful term [Priests] I pass by, being on my journey, every bark and
snarle must not stay me; and for the lawfulness of Tithes, that shall be
spoken to anon (God willing) your exception against the witnesses is
insufficient, for they were the most famous Orthodox Divines in those times and
parts, viz. Luther, Melancthon, Zuinglius, Bullinger, etc. Now let the world
judge, which is the more creditable, your Nay, or their Yea: and it is a wonder
to me, that (if those Histories were false) neither you nor your brethren have
discovered the falsness of them to the world, since they are still on every
occasion produced against you. It Is not your poor evasion, Ask your fellow
Priests, etc. will bring you off.

3. These potent enemies (you say) wrote the stories, and therefore may they
not be true? Is the book of Martyrs (as it is commonly called) all Lies, because
an enemy to the Pope and his proceedings compiled it? Had these enemies (as you
call them) been Nero's, Quoddum magnum bonum quod a Ne^ome condemnatum, Eusebius.
Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 25.
their Writings had been some advantage to the Anabaptists. But they were godly
and learned Divines, among whom that there should not be one true and impartial
historian, is incredible; (at least) if those histories be false, why are they
not confu^ed at least by you, who boast of answering M. Baxter, Mr. Cook, Mr.
Hall, etc. with a little more labor, and less truth, you might so answer
Luther, Calvin, etc. cannot you tell us that their books are lies, as well as
Mr. Baxter in your p. 110? I would be loath you should have more manners then
will do you good. Till they be clearly answered, we must take the Anabaptists
for seditious, filthy, unclean, idle, etc. such as they from knowledge and
experience report them to be. There is all the equity in the world, if the
evidence (let who will give it) be true; it should be of force, and valid.

4. Let the Reader observe, that (by Mr. Haggar's confession) the Anabaptists
(ever since they appeared) met with opposition. And I dare tell you, you have
one more rich and potent enemy, then you dream of, i.e. GOD himself, who has
ever followed them with eminent judgments, and written their wickedness in
their almost unparalled wretchedness. He that runs, may read their sin in
their punishment.

5. No wonder Zuinglius could not stop their mouth, they were so wide.
Anabaptists are resolved to have the last word, and nimbler in reviling then
reasoning, being better armed with arrogance, then Arguments. But I must tell
you by the way, you grossly mis-report Mr. Baxter, page 140. for he says,
Zuinglius had public Disputation with them, in which being convict of Error,
they foamed against their Antagonists with blasphemies and reproaches, you
might be ashamed of them that opened their mouths thus.

6. Without question it is meet and just that a religious Magistracy should
punish such obstinate gain-saiers, and unreasonable men, who were not tired
with reviling, nor would be satisfied with reason, such mad creatures must be
bound, etc.

7. Though the Apostles could not repel their adversaries cruelty, yet they
could plead their own innocence; so could not the Anabaptists. But what is that
of the Apostles to these? Will it follow because John the Baptist was beheaded,
therefore John of Leiden was a Martyr? unless namesake make them nigh a kin.
This is even like Mr. Haggar.

SECT. 37.
H. H. same page As the Apostles suffered, Acts 24.5. so were those served at
Germany; yet M. Baxter says p. 140. they did not suffer as Anabaptists, but as
men perjured, disobedient, etc. Answer. And so I thought indeed, that as a
Sheep in a Bears skin is soon worried; so these learned Divines know, the only
way to prison, banish, or hang the Anabaptists, is to cloth them with filthy
names, and reproaches. Then the people will be ready for to stone them; and if
any question it, he is presently suspected to be an Heretic.

Reply. Here is impudence with a witness, but without a parallel. So were the
Anabaptists of Germany served -- Were they like Paul, Peter or, John? and
suffered only under the notion, not for the fault and fact of Sedition,
Rebellion, Murder, etc. Let the Reader see and judge, whether this be not a most
gross and shameless untruth? Sleid. Com l. 6:
At Sengal one of them cut off his own brothers head, (before his father and
mother) saying, The Father had commanded him. The Anabaptists go to the
Marketplace, and command all that were not baptized, ( i. e. rebaptized) to
be killed as Pagans. A little after being armed, they rendevouz, and drive out
of the City all that were not of their Sect, without regard of age or sex.
Again, John of Leiden after his long sleep, broaches his Doctrine of Polygamy,
and marrying three Wives, others follow his example, and such marriages were
counted commendable. Not long after rises from supper, kills a poor soldier
for a ^udas, returns to supper, and jests at the fact, etc. Did these things
proceed from an Apostolic spirit? were the Apostles such as these? or were
these tumultuous Incendiarie, beastly Adulterers, bloody Murderers like the
Apostles? This is most brazen-faced confidence! The Apostles suffered as
Martyrs, these as Malefactors: If these were innocent sheep, Hell is full of
such Saints.

2. What need those learned Divines (as you scoffingly call them) (...) Bears
skin on the Anabaptists? It cannot make them uglier then they are. If they have
clothed them with filthy names, they have but called a Spade a Spade; else why
do not you put off these Bears-skins in vindicating them? The truth is, it
passes your art, you must flea them, Jer. 13.2^. A^^^is Aethiop^m quid
f^ust^a? ab desire; noctis illustrate nigrae nemo potest tenebras, A^ciar.
if you pull them off; for their skins are natural. But it is in vain to wash
the Black-moor

3. It Is but one of your usual Liveries liberally bestowed, to say, we condemn
them as Heretics, that will not believe this, etc. You might better wear it
your self; for you and your party count them Heretics, Antichristians,
Heathens, etc. that are not rebaptized, etc.

4. What you say in the close of this answer, concerning Mr. Baxter's cry to
the Magistrate, etc. It has been spoken to already, in this Reply to the sixth
Argument, whither I refer the Reader.

SECT. 38.
H. H. You tell us that Calvin wrote against them. Answer. True, when they were
dead, and laid in their graves (and so could not answer for themselves) then
Calvin falls a writing against them. But Mr. Baxter, I write to you, and to Mr.
Hall, and to Mr. Cook, while you are alive, and may answer for your selves;
therefore I expect an answer from you, etc --

Reply 1. The meanest understanding may here discern your folly, for all this
Mantle; for were the Anabaptists past answering for themselves, the grave then
could that which (you say) Zuinglius could not. And surely it had been a poor
part in Calvin to become an Opponent, where Death had taken away the
Respondent: I had thought he had been a better Civilian, then to commence a
suit after the winding ^heet. But you deliver a notorious untruth, that blessed
man was not afraid See M^lchior Adam. de vita Calvi^i. p. 68.69.
to encounter your living Predecessors, but did conquer them too, only by the
Word of the Lord. But if they had been all dead, and laid in their graves; I
pray then, where was the Church? If the gates of hell could not, the gates of
death could prevail against it. Do you think you^ Church was like the madman
in the Gospel among Tombs? Mark 5.3, 5. but how came they dead? the Magistrate
(you say) prisoned, banished, and hanged them. I easily believe, that they who
were hanged, were dead; but that the prisoned, or banished were so (unless
civilly dead in Law, or spiritually dead in sin) is beyond my faith. And me
thinks, though the imprisoned could not write, yet the banished might have the
liberty of pen and ink. Thus whilst you would escape the Bears skin, you get
into the Foxes, by misciting Mr. B.

2. As you have manifested your folly, so you discover a piece of daring pride,
in challenging those three worthies to answer you: Goliah-like done. But Sir,
you must not take it unkindly, if I tell you (and so I do) your book is not
worth the answering, by such worthy Champions. Nor had it been by me, had not
some of your brood with a braving importunity forced this from me. Of all
which, and more, I have given an account in the Epistle to the Reader.

3. It had been more meet, in my judgment, that you should first have answered
Calvin, now he is dead, and laid in grave, and past answering for himself, so
you might have cried quittance with him.

SECT. 39.
H. H. p. 107. You say, Calvin in his letter shows two sorts of Anabaptists;
one boasted of Scripture, and pleaded it with great confidence. Answ. 1. If
they so boasted, they boasted of that which is good. 2 Cor. 11.10. Psalm. 44.8.
and if you would boast of them more then you do, it would be better for you. 2.
Does it displease you, to hear men plead Scripture for what they hold? are you
such enemies to hold holy Scripture? Take heed, least white you boast your
selves to be wise without or above them, you become foools. 1 Cor. 3.19.20, 21.
If those two things be the worst that Calvin and you can say of those
Anabaptists, I shall not be ashamed to own them for Christians before all men.

Reply 1. If boasting be taken in the right sense, I agree with you; the more
you and I boast of Scripture the better it is for you and me. Though those
Scriptures you brought to prove this be impertinent.

2. It does not displease Calvin or Mr. Baxter that men boast of, and plead
Scripture; but that they shamefully abuse it, to the maintenance of their
cursed errors (as if God had provided arms for Satan) gathering that which
the Holy Ghost never scattered, and wracking it, to speak that he never
intended. And if you have a love to the truth as it is in Jesus, I think you
will be displeased to see spiders gather poison from such flowers, and brats
draw blood, in stead of milk from those sacred breasts, which is Calvin's etc.
meaning, when he says, they boast of Scripture. Christ liked the Law, but not
the Pharisees Leaven. We commend the Text, but not the Anabaptists Comment. And
therefore while you wonder at them, take heed you be not of those. Act. 13.41.

3. Your civil caveat (which is as a flower in a dunghill) I thank you for it;
I like not truth the worse from whomsoever it coms Si caecus mostravet iter
tamen aspice -- Horat.
I will embrace good counsel ever from an enemy: for those 1000 you talk of I
have replied to.

4. In the conclusion though you have thrust us out at the window, yet you have
unawares, let us into the Church at the door; for if we plead Scripture (more
truly then the Anabaptist) for what we hold, you need not to be ashamed to own
us for Christians before all men. But --

5. Will Mr. H. indeed own all for Christians that plead Scripture? (his words
can bear no other construction) then not only Heretics, but Satan himself may
come in for a room among Christians. Did not Satan plead Mat. 4*6. Et sient
caput tunc capiti nunc quoque memhr^. membris, etc. com. c. 51.
Scripture to Christ? Mat. 4.6. And as impertinently as you have done (as has
been showed) and have not his first born children (I mean Heretics) both
pleaded and boasted of Scriptures? Now let any Heretic have but his book, and
by your doctrine he will never be condemned. Is this boasting and pleading
Scripture, good? Certainly you are too lavish now, when you cut the Devil and
his Imps a piece of the childrens bread. Thus you stand upon such a guard your
self, as defends and patronizes the worst of men, and the vilest opinions of
those worst of men. Why may not any who plead Scripture with confidence, be as
good Christians as Anabaptists are, or boast themselves to be?

SECT. 40.
H. H. As for your other sort you talk of, that are above Scripture, that
confound all things, etc. I, and all that own the Scriptures, do deny and defy
them and their ways; and you do wickedly to call them Anabaptists whom Calv.
calls Libertines, as you confess p. 141.

Reply 1. I believe, all that own the Scripure as they should, do deny and
defy them and their ways. But I doubt whether you do, as you say, for then you
deny and defy Anabaptism; for that is their way still, though they fly higher,
then yet you have done. But as many in word defy the Devil, and spit at the
mention of his name, yet own him in life -- So I fear you do, with those
Anabaptists.

2. To pass by the overflowings of your gall against M. B. the meanest may see
you would fain creep out at any hole. Calvin calls them Libertines. Therefore
M. B. does wickedly in calling them Anabaptists, like this: Protestants are of
two sorts, either Lutherans or Calvinists; Therefore, he that calls the
Calvinists Protestants, does wickedly therein. Or if I should say, there are
two sorts of Christians, viz. Protestants and Anabaptists, is it maliciously
done, to say Anabaptists are Christians upon the supposall.

SECT. 41.
H. H. p. 108. You say page 142. No man can show you one man of the
Anabaptists, that is not tainted with some of these foresaid wickednesses.
Answ. If any of us should say we were never liars, we should be still liars.
Romans 3.10. to 16. This is the condition of all men before faith and repentance.
Luke 13.2, 3, 4. again 1 Cor. 6.9.10, 11. And I dare not say, but such as have
been gross sinners, may on their conversion, be brought into the Anabaptists
Churches, etc.

Reply 1. I will not quarrel with you about the first part of this your
rambling Answer. Its to be acknowledge with shame and sorrow, we are vile by
nature.

2. Surely you have the Art of breathing on your Converts (with Knipperdoling
--) Sleid com. (...) ^0.
bidding them to receive the holy Ghost. If those of the Anabaptists Church
(though gross sinners when of our Church) are now Saints, which is nothing
else but a blasphemous crack, or vain brag, a Paradox to me, and shall be
believed when you prove your Dipping an Ordinance of Christ, and your Baptizing
(exepere operato) the Laver of regeneration: for the persons you name in the
next p. remained Anabaptists, though they retained their errors in judgment, or
practice, or both.

3. Your citation of Luke is impertinent, for it does not appear that Christ
spoke those words to his disciples, or converted ones, as Mr. Baxter is.

SECT. 42.
H. H. p. 109. But I suppose M. Baxter would make the world believe, that the
Anabaptists are all so now, after they become Anabaptists, and would make that
the cause of it, and would persuade the world that it is our principle and
judgment. But if M. Baxter had known any such in fellowship with us, when he
wrote his Book, he should have done well to have named them. Saltmarsh, Hobson,
Williams, are not in fellowship with us, E^bery, etc. are apostatized and cast
out long since and returned to you again. Dennis a penitent, before his death
it is likely, if ye had lived in Christ's days, you would have cried down him
and his ways. For one of his Disciples was a Traitor, another a Liar and
perjured. The Corinthians after den^ed the Resurrection, and were incestuous
persons, 1 Cor. 15.12. after Peter and others dissented, etc. Galatians 2. ver.
11.12.

Reply 1. M. Baxter's challenge remains for all this unanswered, viz. Name one
Anabaptist, that is not blemished with some of these wickednesses; lying,
treachery, perjury, disobedience, sedition, idleness, desertion of their wives,
filthiness. As in nature, the form gives the esse to the creature, so in
humanity the principles give a moral being to a man. A man is what his
principles are. This being granted, I argue thus: They that are of seditious,
treacherous, unclean, lying, etc. Principles are, guilty every one of them of
some of these wickednesses. -- But the Anabaptists are of such principles. Dr.
Featly his Dippers dipped. p. 28, 29, 30.
Therefore

2. Here is a poor shift of yours; M. Baxter names more then you have set down,
and yet you say they are not in fellowship with you. It may be there were
differences among them, (and I partly believe it) but were they not
Anabaptists? and maintained that opinion, when guilty of those wickednesses M.
Baxter charges them with.

3. It Is a senseless thing to imagine M. Baxter should personally know these
men, whose principles (which lead to such wicked practices) he may and does
know by reading their Books.

4. It will not follow there are none such, because he does not name them; are
there no Cut-purses in London, because he cannot particularize them? or
perhaps not one of them? A man may write knowingly of the nature of a Spaniell,
though he cannot tell how he is called. An Anabaptist is idle, seditious, etc.
though I do not particularize the person. How few of the Pharisees and Scribes
did Christ nominate? or of the Romans Paul? Rom 1.26. to 32. Christ says, Ye
shall know them by their fruits, Mat. 7.16. (not their names) as you
acknowledge, p. 120.

5. It Is a very uncharitable inconsequence to say, we would have cried down
Christ and his ways, had we lived then, because we decry yours; there is a vast
difference 'twixt Christ's ways, and yours. We do not stumble at Peter's
denial, nor at Judas his treason, etc. we know tares may be among the wheat,
and grace mingled with corruption, you would fain be creeping into sheeps
clothing, but your paws still discover you: I say, your case is not Christ's,
nor his Disciples, nor the Church of Corinths. All Christ's Disciples did not
deny nor betray their Master. All the Church of Corinth were not incestuous
persons (though you were pleased to say there were more) the Apostle mentions
but of one, 1 Corinthians. 5.2.13) neither were all the Corinthians Sadduces, the
Apostle speaks but of some, 1 Corinthians. 15.34, 35. But what is objected against
you, is not against one particular, or some few persons, but against ALL; there
is none of you but are guilty of some of those sins, your principles lead you
to them. And therefore it was not blindness in M. B. to conclude your way none
of God's way.

6. Let the Reader Observe, that you say, you have cast out those mentioned,
and they are returned to us again. The former shows they were of your Church,
the latter is a notorious untruth. But M. Haggar comes from Vindicating his own
pretended Innocence, to sing the Cuckow's song, viz. To answer a fool according
to his folly.

SECT. 43.
H. H. p. 110. I wonder that M. Baxter and M. Hall should reason thus against
the Anabaptists, when none are more deeply under the same condemnation then
thewselves. It Is strange they should complain of others for lying, and are so
notorious in it themselves, for the very title of M. Baxter's Book is a ly: --
Plain Scripture proof for, etc. and brings not one Scripture to prove either.

Reply 1. Bravely done M. Haggar, you now again confute M. Baxter as he did
Bellarmine (as was said before) Robin Bellarmine thou lie. But do not you
lie, when you say, he has not brought one Scripture to prove
Infants-Church-membership and Baptism? I think I should be justly accused of
Lying, If I should say, M. Haggar has not brought one Scripture to prove
woman's receiving the Lord's Supper, Family Prayer, giving thanks at meals etc.

2. If here be not a tacit confession, that Anabaptists are Liars, I profess
I cannot spell nor understand English, only (forsooth) M. B. and M. Hall must
be deeper in the bog then they.

3. You do not make the least offer of proof, that M. Hall is a Liar, and that
charge against Mr. Baxter might have been spared, if you had listened to that
voice, Physician heal thy self, Matthew. 9. Do not you entitle your Book, An
Answer to M. Cook, M. Baxter, and M. Hall's, when you have not answered any
thing to most of their Arguments; nor to any, satisfactorily. To say nothing of
the former part of your title, viz. The baptizing of men and women, and prove
to be a standing Ordinance of Christ, etc. when there is not one Scripture to
prove it. --

SECT. 44.
H. H. Now for treachery; let them remember M. Love, who was beheaded for a
Traitor; and for Perjury, it is easy to prove most of the Priests of England
perjured, in renouncing the Bishops in their orders, which once they took an
Oath to be true to; and for sedition, it is manifest to all that hear them
praying, or preaching; and for Idleness, they know not how to work, etc.

Reply 1. When you were on the Kings party -- I believ you would not have
called M. Love a traitor; I am sure those London Ministers, who set forth some
of L. books, since his death, have a better opinion of him, then you have here.
If you were not partial, your Apology for M. Dennis (in your p. preceding)
might more fitly and truly serve here.

2. For Perjury (to say nothing of your scornful terms) when you have proved
the Bishops calling, and their Orders to be lawful according to the Word, we
will confess our perjury; till then, you might have forborne this Calumny; an
unlawful oath is void ipso facto, it being a sin to make it, it must needs be
a greater to keep it. It had been better for Herod to have broken, then to have
kept his Oath. No Oath is the bond of iniquity. And it is false, that our orders
are renounced, except by such as you are: it is maintained as a real truth,
that Bishops did Ordain, not as Bishops, but as preaching Presbyters; and
though we have renounced Episcopacy, yet not our Orders, we see no need.

3. For sedition, the witnesses you produce (for you are neither eyewitness.
nor ear-witnesse) can prove you an accuser of the brethren, Rev. 12.10. We do
not use to shoot wildfire from our Pulpits. The Anabaptists are the sons of
Bichri, that blow the trumpet of Sedition. How many seditious Pamphlets have of
late been printed by them, against the Lord Protector, and present Government?
Is not their way of thriving, by setting Church and State on a flame? as if
Salamander-like they delight to live In the fire (their proper element). What
an Incendiary was John of Leyden? This miserably divided Church can sadly
witness what stirs they have made.

4. For Idleness, I wonder you are not ashamed to call us idle; is there no
calling, but mechanical? no labor, but Digging, threshing, etc. Did the
Apostle mean a trade, when he said he labored more abundantly then they all, 1
Cor. 15.10. Or does he mean carting and plowing, or any handy-craft or civil
employment, when he says, specially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine,
1 Timothy 5.17. All are not idle that work not with their hands; and if it be
because the Minister^ live by Tithes (of which anon), by this Argument all the
Priests of the Old Law must be Idle Drones.

SECT. 45.
H. H. p. same. That the Anabaptists deserted their wives, is a lie among the
rest -- If you know any such, why do you not prosecute them according to Law,
as you do your own Church Members -- But your tongues are no slanders, and that
I hope all men will shortly see.

Reply 1. It seems you cannot choose but breath out incivilities, it becomes
not you to give M. B. the lie: but under favor, it is no lie. I will not
instance again in John of Leyden. If you have deserted her, who was your wife,
then the charge is no lie, if she be your wife still, then you have more then
one.

2. If (as you say) our tongues are no slanders, then their testimony (as to
this) is truth and no lie. Indeed our tongues do not slander you, but your
principles and practices justly accuse you. And if you dare not act according
to your principles (the Law of the Nation curbing you) yet we know not how
soon, you may be that in act, which you are in judgment, when you please. A
Lion is a Lion, though in chains.

SECT. 46.
H. H. p. 111. Are not all the whores and thievs, etc. that are hanged at every
Assizes, of your Church? Did not you baptize them into it in their Infancy? do
you not give to the condemned the Sacrament on Sunday, and one Churchmember
hang up another, on Monday morning? and yet are you so audacious as to say, the
Churches of the Anabaptists cannot be of God, because they have corrupt members
among them? May I not say with Christ Mat. 7.3, 4, 5?

Reply 1. I care not to throw a proverb on you; They who are born to be hanged,
will never be drowned. Some of you who have escaped the one, when they have
been dipped, have met with the other at the Gallows. See John Goodwi^ catab^pt.
Admon. to the sheep.-(...).
(All then, that are hanged are not of our Church) And it is observable, that at
the time of his execution for murder, he confessed, that from the time of his
dipping, he sensibly found God departing from him.

2. Suppose all were of our Church. Church Membership does not exemt from
civil government, and therefore if some in our Churches fall into murder,
robbery, whoredom, etc. why should they not be punished? (Indeed it is an
Anabaptisticall Dr. ^^atly p. 29, in Dippers dipped.
principle, that malefactors should not be put to death, and your words imply
so much, p. 27.) But me thinks you should rather for this commend our Justice,
then condemn our Religion and Church: your Arguing proves as much against the
Religion and Church of the Jews, when they were a Nation in Covenant with God.

3. It Is false, that they are baptized into our Church in their Infancy, unless
as our Church is a member of the visible Church, into which properly they were
baptized. But suppose they were baptized into our Church in their Infa^cy, that
is no such fault, if they do not walk answerably to that solemn engageme^t, the
crime is theirs, not that they were baptized. Now (to use your own Argument often
in your Book) where there is no Law, there is no transgression: now there is
not one syllable of a Law, forbidding Infant Baptism. Therefore Infant Baptism
is no sin.

4. Let those who Administer the Sacrament to the condemned, stand up and plead
for it. I know no such practice, though I think it is justifiable. The penitent
Thief might (nay you say would) have been baptized, and why may not any other
penitent malefactor receive the other Sacrament? why should we reject them,
whom God has received?

5. We are not audacious in saying, as you charge us, but we are bold to say
(that it is not dis-proved by you) that there is not one Anabaptist, but is
guilty of some of the forementioned wickednesses; you are therefore too bold in
using (or rather abusing) the words of the Lord Christ, for the beams remain in
your eyes, etc. Matthew. 7. ver. 3, 4, 5.

SECT. 47.
H. H. p. 111. to 117. To pass by the people, lets come to their Teachers, for
which end I refer you to a Book printed by Order of Parliament, and Entitled,
The first Century of Scandalous and Malignant Priests, etc. among whom twelve
are particularly named. But I say with the Apostle in another case, I have but
acted a fools part in laying open their nakedness; but M. Baxter and M. Hall
have compelled me, accusing us of things which they cannot prove, as Ananias
and Tertullus did with Paul, Act. 24. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. with 13.

Reply 1. All this and more is granted, that there were more vile Ministers
(the shame of the Gospel) then are named in that Book; what does this make
against us? Though Elies Sons were wicked, yet the Israelites were the Children
of God, and if they were sequestered (and according to your phrase cast out)
might they not upon their hearty repentance (testified by some signal evidence)
be received again, as well as your M. Dennis, page 111? And if they be yet
alive, and have seen your Book, there may be some hopes of their Reformation;
for God has opened the mouth of the Ass to reprehend the madness of these
Prophets.

2. When we accuse the Anabaptists, our Bill is against ALL; we say, and that
truly, there is not a man of them, that is not guilty of some of those
forementioned crimes. Now though you have face enough, yet you dare not say,
all the Ministers, or all the people of the Church of England were guilty of
some of those wickednesses, the voices of a few are not the qualifications of
all Tantum in propriis and essentialibus a particulari ad universale valet
consequentia.
.

3. You say, you have played the fools part, I think so too, it had been pity
such a Comedy should have been Acted without you, and so unawares you have
given us thirteen to the dozen.

4. Did the tongues and pens of M. Baxter and M. Hall fly at more
uncertainties then yours? Are not the writings of Calvin, Bullinger, etc. as
true as the first Century of Scandalous Ministers, etc. and is not M. B. as
faithful a reporter as M. Haggar?

SECT. 48.
H. H. p. 117. to 120. Now let the impartial Reader consider, whether this
generation of men, are not those spoken of, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Jer. 23.14, 15, 16, 17. Ezekiel. 22.26, 27, 28. Mich. 3.12. Phil. 3.18, 19. 2 Pet.
2.9. to 19. So that I may say with Jeremiah 5. ver. 30, 31.

Reply 1. To all this I will say only thus much; The Lord will cut out the
proud tongue, and the months of Liars shall be stopped. I shall spread all
before the Lord as Hezekiah did Rashake's letter, and the Lord be Judge between
us! Withal know Sir, that you must one day answer for this, Jude 15.
and for abusing Scripture to the venting of your own wrath, bitterness and
malice, for which end the Scriptures were never written. That such Scriptures
may be used out of a holy zeal against the known enemies of God and his Church,
and against false teachers. I deny not, but it is not fit you should vomit up
your gall in them, this is but to put Satan's brats in God's childrens clothes,
and to raise up the Devil in Samuel's mantle. Yet,

2. You say (p. 117.) we are false accusers; for we accuse you, and are in
fault our selves. A wise reason, If reduced into form; They that accuse the
Anabaptists, and are in fault themselves, are false accusers. But we accuse you,
etc. -- 1. Your Major is notoriously false. Those Scribes and Pharisees accused
the woman taken in Adultery in the very act, yet they were not false accusers
of her, though they were in fault in themselves, Joh. 8.3. to 12. The penitent
thief accused the other thief for railing on Christ, and yet he was no false
accuser of him, though as deep in robbery as the other. 3. You say also, the
Lord has promised, they shall proceed no further etc. 2 Timothy 3.9. It Is to be
considered, whether it be not a threatening, rather then a promise, we have only
your bare word for this last, which I cannot credit; for it is said, their folly
shall be made manifest -- as theirs also was, i. e. Jannes, and Jambres, now
that was a judgment executed, and is not this then a judgment threatened?

4. Other Fopperies mentioned in the close of this answer, are but repititions
to a loathing, I Will say no more.

SECT. 49.
H. H. p. 120. Thus having made an end with M. Baxter, I shall conclude with M.
Cook's last end of his Font uncovered, p. 46. where he seems to answer this
Objection --

Reply. And have you done with M. Baxter? Truly then you have done your work
but by halves. What do you say to his trial c. 15. p. 152. to 160.
of the strength of your cause by antiquity? what not a word to all this?
what is become of your old way of disputing? never an Odium to cast upon him? no
clawing Apostrophe to the Reader or people? never a mist to cast before men's
eyes, that they may not see the truth? Cannot you tell M. Baxter he lies, and
all that he writes are but lies? why are you thus cowardly, without any noise
to quit the field? Is not this to acknowledge you are conquered? But you are
about to encounter with M. Cook again. Let Us see how you charge here, if any
whit better then before.

CHAP. XVI
SECT. 1.
H. H. p. 121. He says. The truth often lies deep, and will not easily be sound
out: As it is more precious then Gold and Silver, so it requires more diligent
search. Gold mines are not obvious to every eye, much skill and labor are
requisite to find them out, and bring the Gold to light. Answ. Sir, I am afraid
that this is your Gold, that you have deceived so many poor souls withal,
which you have taken great pains to dig out of the mountains of ancient
Fathers; the mines of men's inventions, you may well compare your work to
Digging, for Isa. 29.15. etc.

Reply 1. That you might be thought (it seems) to have fully answered that
little Book (Though you never spoke to the substance of it) as you have nibbled
at some few words in the beginning, so now you take notice of some few words in
the close of that Book. But whereas you say you are afraid, I tell you the
wicked fear, where none pursues, and Hypocrites pretend to fear the sins of
others, when they intend most to hide, and dissemble their own.

2. It appears indeed, you were afraid of something, when you keep at such
distance from the body of that little book which you pretend to encounter, only
making a few slieghty velitations first at the van, and then at the rear, and
presently run away, not daring to come near the main body, which stands still
in it is full strength, and sees you running away; only giving some bragging,
and railing words, as you look behind you, which any coward may do?

3. If you did discern any counterfeit Gold there, why did you not discover it
by the touchstone of the Word to be so?

4. What occasion you have to complain of Ancient Fathers, etc. I know not; for
they were not urged in that book. But what was there asserted, was confirmed by
Scripture. Though we bless God for any help we have from ancient or modern
writers, and their inventions. For the finding out of the truth, and
understanding the Scriptures, you that stand not in need of the help of others,
may scorn them, if you please, being sufficient of your self.

5. You may perceive now your perverseness in abusing Scripture, Diodat. on
Isa, 26.15.
for they carried on their design secretly with in themselves, never informing
themselves of the will of God, nor commending their said designs to him in prayer
for a blessing. Malice it self cannot charge M. C. thus. Nay, rather he is like
those who have dug deep to find hid treasures, and to expose them to open
view, which all the dust you have raised, and noise you have made, can neither
hide from him, nor plunder him off.

SECT. 2.
H. H. same p. What have you to do to call Christ Lord, and yet will not do the
things which he says, Luke 6.46. Which is to preach the Gospel to all, and
baptize them that believe and gladly receive it, Mark. 16.15, 16. with 2.41.
and 8.12. -- This Gold will endure the fire, when your Rantizing babes will
perish -- Though you plead for cozening poor Children in their Cradles, and
when you have done, you have made them seven times harder to be converted to
the Faith of the Gospel, then they were before.

Reply 1. There is no 41 verse in Mark. 2. nor any thing to your purpose in
Mark 8.12. I suppose the Printer has abused you, for Acts 2.41. and 8.12. But
those and the other Scriptures have been Answered before, though you please
your self in singing the Cuckow's song.

2. All verily is not Gold that glisters; your Gold (you brag of) proves but
gilded brass; Infant Baptism will last, when your mode shall vanish like smoke
in the air.

3. It Is well known, and may be spoken to God's glory, that many after
Infant Baptism, and still owning it, have been converted from their natural and
sinful estate to the obedience of the Faith. Now if Infants before your
Baptizing were seven times more easy to be converted then after, what is
become of all your noise concerning Infants capacity to repent and believe? Is
your mind changed now? Are you indeed persuaded, that Infants unbaptized are
seven times easier to be converted to the Faith, then after Baptism? But your
rage carries you on to rail on us, not without abuse of Scripture in most of
your 122. page, which is unworthy of any other answer but silence, and patience.

SECT. 3.
H. H. page 122. We are not to be blamed, if we declare nothing but the Word of
God, 2 Timothy 4.2. and if we have answered in eighteen sheets, etc.

Reply 1. To the first I need say little. True, if you have such a Call as Paul
and Timothy had, or any just call warranted by the World, to preach and declare
God's Word; but you have not yet proved, that you have any such call: Now then,
if you preach before you are sent, and run without Commission, the speaking of
some truths will not justify you. Satan spoke sometime truth, and that
according to God's Word, but having no Call, had no thanks, nor was justified
therein, Mat. 4.6. and 8.29. Acts 16.17, 18. And his slaves have taken upon
them to imitate the Apostles of Christ in these things, whereto they had no
call. Acts 19.13, 14, 15, 16. 2 Cor. 11.13, 14.

2. How punctually you keep to the Word of God in your teaching, and writing, I
hope appears by this time. Papism, Ar^inianism, Socinianism, etc. with which
your book is more then sprinkled, are not parts of the word of God.

3. I do not marvel at your briefness in answering, when you promise to answer
all, and indeed answer nothing. Besides, Tares are sooner sown then gathered
up, and the ground rid of them; poison is sooner prepared and devoured, then
the body cleansed of it. An hundred houses are sooner burnt, then one built,
yet I have transcribed you and replied to you.

SECT. 4.
H. H. p. 133. It is said, we are they that subvert whole households, but I
answer as Elijah did Ahab, 1 King. 18.18. We do not subvert whole Households,
for we baptize none but those that believe, according to Mark 16.15, 16. Acts
8.12, 37. But it is you (Mr.C.) that subverts whole households, when you baptize
children, and all for lucres sake, etc.

Reply. Sir, it is not your Nay will serve, when your practice proclaims the
contrary; neither can you show any call from God to do what you do, as Eliah
could show for what he did; and therefore you still abuse Scripture. What
warrant have you for re-baptizing those that have been baptized? Christ's
command, and his Apostles practice was to baptize Jews and Gentiles, of ripe
years, that had until that time been Jews and Gentiles; your pretending that
warrant, is confessing, that whom you baptize are Jews or Gentiles; and if you
make them that were professed Christians to become Jews and Gentiles, that you
may baptize them after the example of the Apostles, you subvert persons,
families, and countries to purpose.

CHAP. XVII. Of Humane Learning in a Minister of Christ.
SECT. 1.
H. H. page 123. I shall now show the reasons of our dissenting from the Church
of England, and all other Churches which stand upon these four pillars; viz. 1.
Humane Learning; for take away that which you had at Cambridge or Oxford, and
you have no Ministry; but all men may preach as well as you, nay I might say
better.

Reply 1. It is a notorious untruth (confidently enough asserted by you,
without the least color of proof) that the Church of England is built on the
four pillars mentioned by you. These are of your own framing, and daubed with
untempered mortar; No Sir, it is built on that Rock, against which the gates of
Hell shall not prevail, Mat. 16.18. and on the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone. Ephesians 2. ver.
20.

2. If that we had at Cambridge or Oxford were taken away, it does not follow,
that we have no Ministry. How many precious Ministers are there in the Church
of England, eminent for piety and learning, who never were matriculated in
Cambridge or Oxford? God having blessed their private studies in the Country,
with the attainment of excellent abilities; Violets may be found and gathered
in the Field, as well as in the Garden.

3. It Is a Paradox, that all men may preach as well as we; Multi imperitorum
magistri sue^int, prius^uam suerint doctorum discipul^. Wittenberg. Conles.
Artic. 20.
(suppose University Learning were taken away) for herein you dissent from your
own Church, (if a Church) which has been of this mind hitherto, that none but
gifted men may preach, mistaking that Scripture, * Ye may all prophecy --
Unless you mean that Women and Infants may preach; for they are comprehended in
those terms, [All men]. But Infants cannot speak, you often say, and Women may
not, 1 Cor. 14.34. as has been showed before.

4. It Is worse to say you might say better. Non sacile de Artibus recte
j^dicat, qui Arts ignorant, Cyprian. 1 King. 12.31.
You know in the Fable who judged that the Cuckoo ^ung better then the
Nightingale. It was Jeroboams sin, that he made Priests of the lowest of the
people, and it is your sin and shame to make Preachers of Mechanic and
unlearned men. Alas! we would have learned Lawyers for our estates, The Apostle
says, who is sufficient for these things: 2 Cor. 2: 16. but H. H. says who is
not sufficient?
and learned Physicians for our bodies, and not learned Ministers for our souls?

5. Though Humane Learning is an excellent gift of God, and needs not my
patronage (being able to plead for it self against all the friends of
ignorance, and the works and workers of darkness) yet I shall speak something
of it in this place according to my promise, and others expectance. As I desire
to bless God for the gifts which he has richly bestowed on many of his
servants, and to bewail my own defect therein. So I know God (the Author of it)
has and will execute severe vengeance as on the abusers, so on the contemners
of it. But tell me.

1. Does not wise Solomon (though he acknowledged wisdom ( i. e. humane
learning in natural, moral, and political things) in comparison of the fear of
God, to be but vanity and vexation of spirit, Eccl. 1.17, 18. and 12.13. yet)
tells us, That wisdom excells folly, as far as light excells darkness, Eccl.
2.12, 13.14. Was not Moses learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians? Acts 7
22. which sure was humane learning, Just. Mart. R^sp. ad Qu. 25.
viz. in Geometry, Astronomy, Astrology, etc. which out of your profound
ignorance, or profane scornfulness, you are pleased to term Whimsies, page 35.
Was not Daniel and his Companions skilful in all the Wisdom, which was famous
in the Court of Babylon, Dan. 1.4, 5, 6. Was not Paul brought up at the feet of
Gamaliel, Acts 22.3. and endowed with all the improvements of humane learning,
which those times could afford? What should I say of Isaiah, Isa. 50.4. The
Lord has given me the tongue of the learned.
Luke, Apollos, etc. who had eminent acquired endowments, which all were made
serviceable to God, in the work to which they were called? And whatsoever some
others of the Prophets and Apostles wanted in acquired endowments, was supplied
by infused, in that they were enabled to speak with tongue, (without study)
Acts 2. and 2 Cor. c. 14. What? would you have separated from Moses's Church,
or Daniel's, or the rest, because they stood so much in humane learning? If you
say, that though they used humane learning, they did not ground their religion
on it; no more can you say, and prove truly of us. We ground our Religion on
the Scripture, but make use of humane learning to know the meaning of the
Scripture, knowing it is a means sanctified of God for that purpose; as of
humane eyes to read it, humane reason to understand it, desiring the Lord to
sanctify this humane ability; but not casting away eyes, ears, reason, or
learning. If you say we abuse humane learning, so did not the Apostles and
Prophets. Be it so: But will you reject good things for the abuse? then must
you cast away eyes, ears, reason, meat, drink, apparel. If you will separate
from societies where good things are abused, you must separate from all
societies, and your selves too.

2ly. Has not God's providence made special use of the Exactness of the Hebrew
Scribes, Scholars, and Rabbis, for the preservation of the Scriptures of the
Old Testament, even in the least points and tittles? Yea, how could the
Scripture of the Old and New Testament have been conveyed to us without
Humane Learning, unless we must have had continual miracles? Was not humane
learning both amongst the Heathen, and the Jews, the means of the first
Translation of the Old Testament, to the spreading abroad of Divine Truth
amongst the Nations, and to make way for their call to the Gospel? And has not
this been the blessed means which God has used for communicating the knowledge
of the whole Scripture to you, and many thousands more, who must for ever have
been ignorant of them, if they had continued sealed, and locked up? which they
must for ever have been, had not the Key of Humane Learning opened this
Treasure to us. Oh monstrous ingratitude! to spurn at so happy an instrument of
conveighing the knowledge of God, and of the Scriptures to us.

3ly. Do you not know, that the times of greatest ignorance and decaies or
neglects of Humane Learning in the Church, were the times of greatest
Superstition, Idolatry, and Deformation; when the Prince of Darkness
uncontroulably ruled by his substitute Antichrist? who was in those times
especially, as great an enemy to humane learning, as you your selves; loath to be
at the pains to get it himself, and disdaining that any under him should be
more knowing then himself. Under whom that illiterate herd of Monks and Friars
bore the greatest sway, and the blind led the blind into the pit, Mat. 15.14.
And if here and there a learned man was found in those times, their humane
learning was counted a sufficient ground to charge them with Heresy, or some
other heinous offense. And can you be ignorant, that the grand design of
Antichrist is to keep the people in ignorance and illiterateness concerning the
Scriptures, that they may neither be able to understand them in their original
languages, (which indeed were a work of greater learning then ordinary
capacities, and the generality of the people can attain to) nor yet so much as
have them translated into known languages (which cannot be without much humane
learning, at least of some choice men) least the light of the Scripture shining
forth to the people by means of humane learning, the abominableness of their
Darkeness should be discovered?

4ly. Know you not that the breaking forth of Humane Learning (about 200 years
ago) was a preparative, and introduction to the breaking forth of the Gospel
from under the Cloud, and restoration of Religion? Doubtless the Spirit of God
stirred up those generous spirits (impatient of the torpid ignorance, which by
the cunning of Antichrist, and his instruments, had overspread the world) with
indefatigable industry to recover learning out of the rubbish, in which it had
laien buried a long time: So that in a while the knowledge of the Greek,
Hebrew, and Chaldee tongues (in which the Scriptures were first written) and of
the Syriack and Arabic (into which there were most famous and ancient
Translations) and other Arts and Sciences (by which the Writings of the Learned
might be better understood) were speedily brought to a wonderful splendour and
perfection. And then presently after these dawnings of Humane Learning, Christ
the Sun of Righteousness arose, in the sincere preaching of the Gospel; and
expelled the darkness of ignorance and superstition out of many Nations in
great measure.

5. How is it possible, that the Scriptures (confessedly the rule of true
Religion) should be understood by us Englishmen, or any other Christians,
without the help of humane Learning, unless by immediate inspiration, and the
miraculous gift of speaking with, and interpreting of strange tongues, and
other sudden Revelations? (which were peculiar to the Prophets and Apostles,
and those primitive times) which none of you (as I know) pretend to, and which
to expect now were high presumption, if not tempting of God. The Original
Languages of the Scripture cannot ordinarily be understood without Grammar
Learning; there is much Oratory in them which cannot be understood and improved
without skill in Rhetotorick, specially the knowledge of Tropes and Figures is
necessary, least men affix^ monsters on the Scriptures, as the
Anthrapomorphits, Transubstantiaries, and Consubstantiaries do. There is the
strongest reasoning and arguing therein, and excellent method, which cannot be
rightly discerned, without skill in Logic. In a word, there are none of the
Liberal Arts, no part of genuine Philosophy, but may be useful and helpful for
the more clear and solid understanding of the Scriptures. Indeed these Arts and
Sciences the Scriptures do not professedly teach, but presuppose, in those who
will be expert in the word of righteousness.

6. Must not those gallant Monuments of Learning and piety, ancient, and modern
lie without use (as to us) and be utterly lost (as some of you have burnt all
your books save the Bible) if we have not Learning? Indeed you may think it no
loss, but scorn us for using them (though in our private studies) yet sure it
is great unthankfulness to God, and those his instruments, pride and sloth in
our selves, and injury to the Church, if we should wave such helps for the
understanding of the Scripture, and the state of the Church in several ages and
places. And tell me, what do you think of this your book (whether learned or
unlearned let others judge)? Is it worthy to be read, or no? If no; To what
purpose was all this waste? if yea, how can it be read and understood without
humane Learning? Though there are a thousand of books besides more worthy to be
read then yours. Nay, the blessed Bible it self is wrested by them that are
Unlearned, 2 Pet. 3.16.

7. How could you have attained to any knowledge of the Scriptures (of which
you boast, with the Jews, Romans 2.17, 18, etc.) without the help of Humane
Learning? or have read them translated without it? or heard them read (as some
of you know not one letter in an English Bible) without it? For (I pray) is not
the learning of the A B C, a point of humane learning? And yet I am sure you
cannot read the Bible without the knowledge of the Letters. And if to be able
to read and write English, be a good gift of God (though a small piece of
humane learning) sure, much more to be able to read and understand the
Scriptures (in some good measure) in the Original Languages. Nay, how could you
hear of Jesus Christ, and know the meaning of those learned words, without
humane learning? The one being an Hebrew (...)
word, signifying a Savior; the other a Greek word, (k) signifying Anointed.

8. Does not this inveighing against Humane Learning proceed from a threefold
spring? Dominus noster Jesus, qui liberat nos a peccatis, morte and inferno,
Schind. Pentaglot. (...).
viz. From Carnal Lusts, Jesuits, and Satan. 1. From Carnal Lusts; as, 1.
Pride, which as it is usually accompanied with, and cherished by ignorance (for
such as are proud know nothing, 1 Timothy 6.4. but dote about questions; and the
most knowing, the most humble, Psalm. 19.13. and 1 Cor. 13.12.) so who insult
over Learning, and Learned men, more then the ignorant and unlearned? Oh how
sweet is it to proud Diabolical natures to sit in the Throne, and make Learning
stand ( Acts 25.16.) as arraigned, condemned, and presently drawn to execution
at their command? Though this be done but in your fancy, yet it mightily
pleases them. But because Pride is scarce counted a Lust of the the flesh,
what say you of ease and sensuality? They who have tasted Learning to purpose,
have found by experience, that much study is weariness to the flesh, Eccl. 12,
13. and the work of the Ministry a painful work, when men must give attendance
to reading, exhortation, and doctrine, meditate on these things, give themselves
wholly unto them, etc. 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15, 16. Now what an easy, pleasant
life have these, who count humane learning so needless, that they judge it
dangerous, and execrable. You need take little or no pains for the instruction
of the people. Nay, Mr. Haggar is not ashamed to say, Take away humane
learning, and all men may preach as well as we, nay better. Is not this the
singing of a Requiem? But the lust of Covetousness, and desire of filthy Lucre,
is another bitter root of this opinion and practice. Though you have the
cunning to cite Whore first, who knows not that mean Artificers, Day-laborers,
and broken Tradesmen (who usually have large Parishes, or rather Diocesses, who
say, Sirs, you know, that by this craft we have our wealth, Acts 19. ver. 25.)
have got more by unlearned preaching, or railing against Learning, then by
their Callings? and if they follow them too, they have two strings to their
bow; however they need not lay out their moneys on Books, on their supposal.

Secondly from the Jesuits those Emissaries of the Prince of Darkness; If the
hand of Joab be not, yet the head and hand of a Jesuits is in this, though not
discerned by all. Jesuits and P^^^^s know well enough what deadly blows their
Kingdom and cause has received by the sword of the Spirit, wi^^^d by Learned
Arms; I mean the tongues and pens of (...) Learned, as well as pious Champions,
which our Lord Christ ^^th made us^ of again, and again to rout the
Antichristian forces. But in decrying Learning, and Universi^ies, you carry on
the Jesuits design. See Jus Divinum Ministerii Evangelii, by the Provincial
Assembly of London, p. 62. etc.
Adam Conizen a politic Jesuit in his Politics, among other things
prescribed for the reducing of Popery, this is one? To banish Learning out of
the Commonwealth, and that at once, if it can conveniently be; if not,
insensibly, and by degrees. And if you have not learned this subtilty of the
Jesuit, I pity you, if you have borrowed it from Julian Speed's History, p.
168. Primum vetuit ne Ga^i^ae: (sic Christianos ^umcupabat) Poericam,
Rhetoricam, aut Philosophiam discorent, Theatot. l. 3. c. 7.
the Apostate, who among other designs to root out Christianity, forbad
Christians the public Schools, and study of the Arts and Tongues.

Thirdly from Satan, who has a principal hand in this, which (I think needs no
proof) beside what has been said but this: His great design is to hinder the
glory of God, the Kingdom of Christ, and the salvation of men; he knows all
this is done by keeping people from Christ, that is done by keeping them from
Faith, that is done by keeping them from Scripture, and the right knowledge of
it. This will be certainly done, if prople be deprived of right Translations
and Interpretations of Scripture, which must needs be wanting, if there be no
Learning, nor Learned men. For it is as possible for people to see the letters
and words wherein Scripture was written without open eyes, or to hear the sound
of them without open ears, as to understand the Scripture without some skill in
the original, or without Translation by others. In the former we see with our
own eyes, in the latter with others, but neither can be (ordinarily) without
Learning. So that it is plain, Satan will set up his Kingdom of Darkness, where
ever the light of humane learning is suppressed.

9. To convince you, and the rest of your Gang: Suppose you meet with an
Arrian, that denies the Godhead of Christ, you bring for your faith those
words, The Word was God; he replies, this Text only proves, that Christ is God
by office (as the Angels and Magistrates are) but not by nature, and gives this
reason, because the Article is wanting in that Text John 1.1. (...)etc.
. How without Learning will you confute this Heretic, I marvel? These things I
thought good to say to this unreasonable and unlearned opinion, which would
explode humane learning, though much more might have been said, if the opinion,
or opinionists deserved it) knowing, that if people be possessed with this
persuasion, that humane learning is unlawful, whatsoever is done in way of
endeavors to reduce simple seduced people from their errors, will be in vain;
for they say, All this is but the fruit of humane learning; therefore to be
slighted, yea abhorred.

SECT. 2.
H. H. p. 126. But you plead Humane Learning to be the glory of your Ministry;
sleighting all who have not served an Apprenticeship at Cambridge and Oxford,
calling your selves Orthodox Divines, and the other illiterate Mechanic men.

Reply 1. Reader, I thought good to take in this (which Mr. Haggar calls his
second reason of dissenting from us) in this place, as properly belonging to
this head under consideration, which he has miserably confounded in the
building of his Babel. Therefore 1. Where is it written, that it is a sin to
plead Humane Learning, next to grace, to be the glory of our Ministry. To use
your own words in the next page If there be such a place, let us see it; but if
there be not, for shame leave this idle fantastical reasoning.

2. That Humane learning (sanctified) is a glorious ornament to us, and our
Ministry, none but inhumane and illiterate men can deny; since it is no small
piece of Moses his honor, that he was learned in all the wisdom of the
Egyptians (as was said before) i. e. in Mathematics and Physics, etc. Acts 6
22. as Doctor Hammond shows. Now though we glorify God for humane learning
bestowed on his servants, yet I say with the Apostle, Gal. 6.14. God forbid
that we should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

3. To say nothing of your scornful term, serving an Apprenticeship, etc. It is
false, that we slight all that are not University men: for we do not only
honor some godly and learned Ministers, who never were brought up at the feet
of Gamaliel; but the Reverend Commissioners for Approbation, have upon
examination approved some to be public Preachers, who never saw Cambridge or
Oxford.

4. It Is as false, that we call all those Orthodox Divines, who have (as you
scoffingly say) served an Apprenticeship at Cambridge or Oxford, we know some
to be Heterodox (the more is the pity) as your brother Brown sometime See his
Answer to Mr. Troughton Title page.
of Oriel College in Oxford; and it is as true, that we call some other
illiterate, mechanic men, and why should not we call a Spade a Spade?

SECT. 3.
H. H. p. 27. When you are put to it you will confess, that Learning is but the
Handmaid, and Grace the Mistress. But where is this written? It Is one of your
cunningly devised Fables, 2 Pet. 1.16. Grace in the heart can do her work
without a Maid, 2 Cor. 12.9. Mark 16.15, 16. Mat. 24.13. John 10.27, 28. He
does not say, if they have Humane Learning, or been educated at Cambridge or
Oxford Nay, God threatens to destroy the wisdom of the wise, 1 Cor. 1.19. and
whom does he choose, see 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28, 29. And the Lord is so far from
setting up learned men above unlearned, that Christ says, Luke 10 21. and Jam.
2.5.

Reply 1. You might have had the wit or honesty to have told us, who they are
that confess Learning is Graces Handmaid. I confess I have heard it
acknowledged, that humane Learning is an Handmaid to Divinity. But be it as you
say, yet we say withal, that the maid must not perk it over the mistress, as
Hagar d^d over Sarah.

2. When you show us in what Scripture it is written, that Christening of
Children is a couzening of Children; and that when we have done, we make them
seven times harder to be converted to the Faith, etc. page 121. we will show
you where that Apophthegme is written; nay this is one of your cunningly
devised Fables, 2 Pet. 1 16. The word is rendered by some, artificially
composed, by others (as our Translation) subtly devised, that they seem to
be true, which indeed are false. Store we have of such in your book, as is
obvious to the judicious Reader.

3. What if Grace can do her own work without a maid, yet a gracious Minister
cannot do his work handsomely without humane Learning. A Minister must be able
to convince gain-saiers, Tit. 1.9. Now how an unlearned Minister should
ordinarily convince a learned Heretic, I am yet to learn.

4. I cannot but express some pangs of holy indignation at your gross (but
usual) abuse of Scripture, cited by you in this page out of Matthew, Mark,
Luke, John, and the Epistle to the Corinthians. 1. None of these places
expressly speak of, or against humane Learning; what you speak from them is but
by consequence only, and that very miserably. 2ly, Most of these places speak
nothing directly in reference to Ministers, as such, but to people under a
Gospel Ministry. 3ly, It Is granted, that grace saves a man without learning,
though learning cannot without grace; yet Ministers are to be considered in a
double capacity: As Christians, and so it is confessed, grace can do his own
work without the handmaid of humane Learning; or as Ministers, and so it must
be acknowledged, that grace cannot do the work of a Minister without humane
Learning, unless perhaps weakly and bunglingly. This is no blasphemy against
the God of Grace, nor disparagement to the Grace of God. 4. Because I hinted a
little before in the general Mr. Haggar's miserable consequences, I shall
present some of them to the view of the Reader, which indeed I had thought to
have passed by in silence, as unworthy to be named, Mark 16.15, 16 e. gr. 1. He
that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, John 10 27, 28. Therefore
grace in the heart of man or woman can do her work without the maid of humane
Learning. 2ly, Christ's sheep hear his voice, and follow him -- and none shall
pluck them out of his hand. Therefore grace can do her own work without a maid.
Beside, what a piece of nonsense do you bring in? But he does not say, if they
have humane Learning, or if they were educated at Cambridge or Oxford, or at
some University? 3ly, My grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9. Therefore,
etc. For what if by grace is meant the favor of God, (as Diodat and Dr.
Hammond, etc. expound it) will it follow, that therefore grace In the heart is
able to do the work of the Ministry without Learning? But if it be to be
understood of habitual grace, the Argument is much-what like this: God's grace
is sufficient for M. Haggar, therefore Mr. Haggar is able to do the work of a
Shear-man, without skill in that Art or Trade. 4. God will destroy the wisdom
of the wise, 1 Cor. 1.19. etc. therefore no need of humane learning. 5. The
like may be said of 1 Cor. 1.19, 26, 27, 28, 29. Jam. 2.7. As if I should
argue, God has chosen the poor of this world, therefore not one rich man in
this world; and yet Abraham and David, etc. were rich in this world, I trow in
the number of God's chosen. Again, God has not chosen many wise men after the
Flesh; Therefore not any one -- when yet Paul that wrote that Epistle, Crot.
and Calv. in loc.
was a wise man after the flesh before his Conversion, and yet a chosen vessel,
Acts 9 15.6. Christ does thank his Father, that he hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and revealed them to babes, Luke 10.21. Therefore he is far
from setting up learned men above unlearned, and by consequence no use of
learning. For what if by babes are meant those that are humble, (that think
meanly of themselves) then by the wise and prudent must be understood (by the
rules of opposition) those that are proud, and think too highly of themselves,
will it now follow, that because the Father hides the mysteries of eternal
salvation from the proud, and reveals them to the humble, he therefore prefers
the unlearned above the learned? But suppose by wise and prudent, were meant
learned ones, and by babes, unlearned ones; experience may convince us, that as
all unlearned ones are not enlightened (how many live without grace, as well as
without learning?) So all learned ones are not left in darkness, as we may see
in Moses, Paul, etc. the Lord is a free Agent, and absolute Sovereign (and
being not bound to any) may dispense or deny his grace to whom he pleases. Ad
circumstantium Argumenti ne parum habet ponderis, quod patrem vocat coeli and
tenae Dominum, quia hoc modo declarat non aliunde quam a D^i arbitrio pendere
discrimen, quod sapientes caecutiant, rudes and indocti ca, iunt Evang clii
mysteria, Calv. Harm. in loc.
Therefore Christ in his Doxologie bespeaks his Father with the title, Lord of
heaven and earth. Now let the Reader judge, whether Mr. Haggars arguings do not
hang together like ropes of sand, and so whether his reasonings are not (like
himself) unreasonable, and whether he need not serve an Apprenticeship (as he
calls it, p. 126.) at Cambridge or Oxford, before he can prove his
consequences, and not then neither.



SECT. 4.
H. H. p. 128. It was always God's way (or for the most part) to choose his
Prophets out of unlearned men, and honest laboring men, that knew what it was
to get their living by the sweat of their brows, and not such who were brought
up idly, so that they cannot digg, and are ashamed to beg, and therefore prove
unjust Stewards. These are not fit to be Ministers of Christ, because they must
preach for hire, or else they cannot live, etc. But the Lord chose -- Moses a
Shepherd, Exodus 3.1, 2. Elish^ a Ploughman, 1 King. 19.19, 20. David a
Shepherd, Psalm. 78.70, 71. Amos an Herdsman, Am. 7.14, 15. and Fishermen, etc.
Mat. 4.18, 19, 20, 21, 22. -- Likewise he chose ignorant and unlearned men,
Acts 4.13. Thus all men may see how contrary the Priests of this Nation do walk
to Christ and his Disciples.

Reply 1. The greatest part of this Section is not the language of Canaan, and
of the holy Scriptures, but of Ashdod, and of the Quakers; who being once
members of your Church, have since charged you to your face to preach for hire,
etc. as you charge us. Is it therefore so indeed? I would have you know, that
maintenance is neither the cause of our preaching, nor the end of our
preaching. Nor that which guides, orders, and regulates our preaching, and so
dear is our calling to us, and so precious are the souls of our people, that if
maintenance should fail, we would preach the Gospel, though we beg our bread.

2. It Is strange to me that you say, we cannot digg, when you positively charge
Mr. C. p. 121. (and there is the same reason of others) that he had taken great
pains to dig for gold out of the mountains of Ancient Fathers.

3. You answer your self, in saying, for the most part God did choose his
Prophets out of unlearned men, etc. Therefore not always, by your own grant.
But Sir, though extraordinary Prophets and Preachers were for the most part so
chosen, yet the Priests and Levites were not. The Lord by his prerogative royal
may choose whom he pleases, who of Shepherds, Herdsmen, Fishermen, etc. made
Prophets or Apostles -- will you therefore presume (unless you be God's Ape)
to ordain Tanners, and Tailors, Nailors, and Cheese-factors to the office of
preaching? will you make an ordinary practice of extraordinary presidents? when
you can show us such a warrant, we will believe; till then, we believe you are
a Deceiver.

4. Some (at least) of the persons chosen were learned men, as Moses
abovementioned, Acts 7.22. and Peter, and John, who had the gift of Tongues,
Acts 2. It Is a wonder to me, that Mr. Haggar should jump in his judgment with
the Priests and Rulers. As if Peter and John were indeed unlearned and ignorant
men; But their judgments differ. The first (...).
imports they were illiterate; i. e. they were not skilled in the learning of
the Jews, as those Lawyers, i. e. expounders of the Law were. (For they that
are called Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23.13. are termed Lawyers, Luke 11.52.)
The other (...).
word properly signifies Idiotes, (and so translated by some) Beza, and Old
Latin.
i. e. not Magistrates instructed in the Laws, but ordinary vulgar persons,
whom the Jews called by that name -- rendered thrice unlearned, 1 Cor. 14.16,
23, 24. So that the meaning is, when the learned Priests and Rulers (as Mr.
Haggar calls them) observed the elocution and freeness of speech, Dr. Hammond
and Grotius.
with which Peter and John taught; and considering withal, that their
education had not thus elevated them above other men, being neither skilled in
the learning of the Jews, nor placed in authority as Magistrates, they were
amazed. Now Mr. Haggar would have them void of all humane learning. Truly when
I see the boldness and confidence of Mr. Haggar, and perceiv that he is an
unlearned and ignorant man. I cannot but marvel.

5. Thus all men (to be sure judicious) may see, whether the Priests of this
Nation (as M Hag. scornfully calls them) do walk contrary to Christ and his
Discipes.

SECT. 5.
H. H. same p. Object. Christ was able to teach them all wisdom, and did give
them extraordinary gifts for the perfecting of his work, but now there is none
such; Therefore men must get abilities by humane learning. Answer, This is a
gross mistake, for we have nothing else to do, but to believe and obey that
Word, which was by them preached, when they were so endued with those gists
aforesaid. And now if any man preach, he must preach that Word, 2 Timothy 4.2.3,
4. For that is able to do all the work of conversion, and sanctification, and
to make us wise to Salvation, etc. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. See whom the Apostle
accurseth Gal. 1.8; 9. Therefore we are commanded, 2 These. 2.15. and Christ
prays, Joh. 17.20. Therefore they are the preachers, by whom (...) do
believe, and the Word is already preached that I must believe and obey;
Therefore no need of a little dirty humane learning, to make a man a preacher
of that which is so plainly preached already, but every Englishman man declare
it to his native Countrymen, and so may men in all Nations.

Reply 1. Here we have again some ropes of sand; if that word must be preached
which is able to convert, sanctify, and save -- Then the preacher has no need
of Humane Learning. 2. They are accursed that preach any other Gospel, etc.
Therefore no need of Humane Learning. 3. We must stand fast, and hold the
traditions we have been taught. 4. Christ prays for all those that shall
believe in him, etc.
Therefore no need of Humane Learning. Are you not ashamed of such absurd
Arguings? If you will not serve and Apprenticeship at either of our
Universities, I will give you twice so many years to prove the consequence, you
may delude your unlearned, ignorant Proselytes, but not us, who can distinguish
between a Syllogism and a Paralogism.

2. What? nothing else to do but to believe and obey that word which was by
them preached? must not I read and meditate on that word: And must not you work
at your calling in the week day, or ride up and down the Country to make a
Proselyte? May not any man preach and declare the Word by your doctrine? Nay,
why did you write, print, and publish this Book, if you had nothing else to do,
but to believe and obey that Word, etc. If any of the particulars be expressed,
or employed in that Word, I would fain know, how without Humane Learning, the
Scriptures could have been translated out of their Originalls into known
tongues; Suppose English? or how you could have read and preached in English
without Humane Learning? but enough of this before.

3. Me thinks I see you in Hieram's temper 1 K 9.13.
who called the Land (that Solomon gave him) Cabul, which word in the
Phaenician Language, Jun. and Tremel. Bercho. of Humane learning says, justi
^ecipiunt, docti recipient, stulti despiciunt.
signifies displeasing, and by some of the Jews, it signifies Dirty. So that
Humane Learning which Christ (greater then Solomon) has given to some of his
Ministers, is displeasing to you, and therefore you call it DIRTY Learning, in
scorn and indignation. No marvel it makes your folly manifest.

4. Whereas you say, any English man may declare the Word to his Country men,
and so may men in all Nations; either you lispe in the language of the Quakers,
who call even the holy Scriptures but a Declaration; or if by declaring, you
mean preaching, as in your page 64. (women may preach or declare the mind of
God to others) then least women should want tongues, by your doctrine, men in
ALL Nations may preach by virtue of M. Haggar's Ordination or Approbation.

CHAP. XVIII Of Infant Baptism.
H. H. Secondly, your Rantizing or Cozening of poor babes in their Cradles take
away that, and you have no Church. But others who have Faithfully preached the
Gospel, and converted souls to the Faith, and baptized them too in the name of
Jesus Christ, have a far greater,

Reply 1. How many crude Allegations do you here assert, without any proof at
all; as that we Rantize babes, nay cozen them, nay, in their Cradles, etc. all
which are as truly denied by us, as they are confidently (yet barely) affirmed
by you.

2. If baptism (according to your Doctrines confuted) be essential to
constitute a Church; then take away that, and we have no Church: but the
Antecedent is false, and therefore the Consequent.

3. If by others, you mean the Anabaptists, I deny that you or they have
faithfully preached the Gospel. (witnessed the many errors vented by them,
and discovered to be such in this book) or that you have converted souls to the
faith, I never heard of an ignorant profane person, wrought upon by your
Ministry, only you build on our foundation, and gather where you never
scattered, subverting simple and unstable souls.

4. How pitifully do you again contradict your self? For if you have a far
greater Church then we, how is it that we have no Church? If Goliath be a
greater man then David, does that hold out that David is no man?

5. I suppose you mean, that Infant Baptism is one of our pillars, on which our
Church stands; The answer to the first may suffice here. But whether Infant.
Baptism be according to the will of Christ, has been the main subject of this
debate. And therefore let the Reader compare your Answer, and this Reply
together, and judge accordingly. Only I will close with this; This Pillar
remains unshaken, or is more settled by being shaken.

CHAP. XIX. Of Tithes.
SECT. 1.
H. H. p. 123. Thirdly, Your Tithes or forced maintenance, The wages of
unrighteousness, 2 Pet 2.15. after which you all go astray; take away that, and
we may preach who will for all you. By which it appears, you are all
Hirelings, and will labor no longer then you are paid for it, neither do you
care for the Flock, any longer then you are paid for it; by all which you make
that old Papisticall Proverb good upon your selves, viz. No penny, no Pater
Noster: So say you all in effect, no money, no preaching, etc.

Reply 1. If our Tithes be the wages of unrighteousness (in the place cited) by
your corrupt gloss, Numb. 23.23, and 24. with Josh. 13.22. a Soathsayer -- or
Magician.
The Prayers of them must be Balak's: the receivers of them must be Balaam's,
then preaching must be cursing of God's people, and what then must H. H. be,
who speaking with man's voice 1 Pet. 2.16.
rebukes --? But

2. Our Tithes are not wages of unrighteousness, (neither does the Holy Ghost
call them so). 1. From your own confession, you make them all one with a forced
maintenance, but this wage^ was not forced but free, being a voluntary gift,
Numb. 22.5, 7.16, 17.
or tender sent from Balack and that by the Elders of Moab, Abutensis.
and of Midian, who lived many hundred miles from Mesopotamia, where Balaam
lived, who was killed Diodat. and the E^glish Annot. on Number. 24, 25.
in the way as he was returning homeward, Numb. 31.8. And I pray which of the
people pay, or of the Ministers (that receive and gather Tithes) live at such a
distance? Secondly, this wages is called a reward, nay rewards of Divination,
Numbers 22.7. the Elders of Moab. and the Elders of Midian departed with the
rewards of Divination in their hand -- and though our Ministers are called by
some Divines, yet they use no Divination, nor enchantment against Israel.
Thirdly, this reward (whatsoever it was) is called the wages of
unrighteousness, (...) See Critica Sacra, or Calvin.
which word unrighteousness signify all such injustice as is joined with
injury to ourneighbour. Now what injury is it to take from the people that
which was never theirs? when they buy or take leases of their Land, it is only
the nine parts they pay for, and if the tenth were sold them, they should pay
themselves a tenth part more; or if it be so cal^ed, because it was again,
Lucrum ex scelere quaesitu Beza in Loc.
sought for by wickedness -- being ready (if it could have been done without
impurity) to curse the people of God, whom he knew to be blessed; or because
Estius.
it was a reward loved, desired, and expected for an unjust and impious work.
And are our Tithes for a flagitious and impious work? Fourthly, this
unrighteousness (without doubt) is the same with iniquity (...) insolentia
legibus repugnans nequi ia, improbitas, iniquitas, contra leges, fas, and
aequum commissa Scap. Lexicon.
mentioned in the 16 verse following. Now that word signifies a transgression
(and so rendered by Beza) whereby one does willingly violate the Law. Such was
the sin of Balaam, who knowing the will of God, would fain have done the
contrary. Now to use your own words (on some other account p. 60, and 58.)
whosoever commits sin, transgresses the Law, for sin is the transgression
of the Law, 1 John 3.4. you can never make that a sin, till you show us what
command we have broken in taking Tithes, for all sin is the transgression of
some Law. Therefore the Apostle says; where there is Romans 4.15.
no Law, there is no transgression, beside Answer to your seventh Querie, p.
53. Whether there be any sin or corruption incident to man. That the Scriptures
does not reprove and make manifest in express terms.

3. You have asserted, but not proved, that Tithes are wages of unrighteousness
(For now all may easily discern your abuse of Scripture) but I assert and (by
the assistance of the Lord) shall prove, that Tithes are wages of righteousness
Certum est ea quae Ministris ratione sui Ministe^ ii Deb^ntur five DECIMA RUM
nomine veniunt five ali, insis deberi ex JUSTITIA. Rivet. in c. 14. Genesis
exercit 80. p. 326.
I will not wade into that controversy, whether Tithes (now) are due jure
Divino, ye cannot deny. That Tithes were once devoted to God for his service,
and whether they be of Divine institution still, I believe it is more then you
can disprove. Sure I am, when Christ tells them of Tything Mint and Cummim, he
says these ought ye to have done, Mat. 23.23.
and not to leave the other undone. And I am as certain that the Apostle says:
Do ye not know, that they which Minister about holy things, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14.
live of the things of the Temple? And they which wait at the Altar, are
partakers with the Altar? Even so has the Lord ord^ined that they which preach
the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, i. e. The Levites that did M. Mede p.
325. and Grot. in L^c.
Minister about holy things (there was their office) did live of the things of
^he Temple, i. e. of Tithes belonging to the Temple (there was their
maint^n^nce) and the office of the Priests was to offer Sacrifice on the Altar,
and were fellow-sharers with the Altar, i. e. with the Sacrifices offered
thereon (there was their maintenanc^) well therefore, as in the Protasis of the
similitude, the wages was compared with the work. So it must be in the Apodasis
too, and consequently to live of the Gospel, must here express the wages, as to
preach the Gospel does the work. Indeed the word Gospel is no where else used
in the New Testament, for the wages and reward of good tidings, but only in
this place, yet the Septuagint, (...)
does so take the word in the Old Testament, 2 Samuel 4.10. -- He thought I would
have given him a reward for his tidings. Now as the Levites and Priests had
their maintenance out of that which was offered to God in the Law. So God has
ordained (that is appointed or given order, that the Ministers of the Gospel,
should be maintained of that, which is consecrated to him in the Gospel; or
else (to use your own phrase, p. 61.) It is not EVEN SO. Ordinavit ergo
Do^inus, non praecipiendo ut accipiant sed dando potest^tem accipie^di Estius
in loc.
Not that Gospel preachers are here commanded to receive, but are allowed a
power and liberty to receive, as is manisest by the example of Paul, and
Barnabas, ver. 6. with 12.15. But to leave this. Is not that Righteous which is
equal? Now is it not equal, ^ Cor. ^.11.
that they who sow sprituall things, should receive carnal things? Augustine
tells us, that i'ts equal and reasonalbe, that Tithes be paid, because all
things are the Lords, by whom we live, etc. Again does not the law of this
Nation A^ civil government is an ordinance of God. Romans 13.1.2. but this or
that form or sort is an ordinance of mar. 1 Pet, 2.13. So is maintenance for
the Ministry --
peremptorily enjoin the due payment of Tithes? It Is so evident, I need not
prove it, which makes H. H. etc. grin their teeth at it. But they need not. The
same Law of the Land that makes the tenth part ours, does make the ninth part
theirs: If we have no title to the tenth, they have none to the Rest. And are
not the wholesome laws of Magistrates to be Romans 13.1.7. 1 Pet. 2.13.14.
obeyed? Indeed the Law of the Land permits 6l. in an 100l. but withal,
cautions, that therefore usury is not to be concluded to be lawful, etc. But
it cautions no such thing in point of Tithes, and till Mr. Hag. proves the
sinfulness of Tithes -- They are not to be counted and called ways of
unrighteousness. Again is it not the Righteous practice and custom of the
Church of God in this Commonwealth, for many hundred years? And does not the
Apostle enjoin -- Romans 13.7. To render to all their dues -- Custom to whom
custom, etc? I remember Hierom says somewhere, that he, whoever he be, that
shall refuse to pay tithes to the Ministers of Christ, do condemn themselves
for unjust men^* The receivers therefore must be just men, and Augustine says,
-- res A^^enas invadune Aug. 119. Ser: De Tempore.
Tithes are due to be paid, and who-ever refuses, invadeth another man's right.
But I forbear to cite the judgments of the Fathers, and the decrees of
Councills, for H. H. will turn them off with a wet finger, saying, He weighs
them not. It were well if he could weigh the learned piece of Bishop Carleton,
and of Sir Henry Spelman Knight, and Doctor Selater etc. which lie unanswered
to this very day, For ought I know.

4. It is as false, which you as boldly assert, that we all go astray after
this wages of unrighteousness. You cannot be ignocant (unless willingly) that
many precious Ministers in this land have their maintenance not by tithes, but
by a No man may more freely speak of Tithes then my self, who receive none, nor
ever shall do: B: Hall Case of Conscience resolved: p. 229. And you say in the
close of this Section -- So nomony, no preaching. Some preachers then receive
money, not tithes? By your own confession.


Salary. With what face then can you say, that we all go astray after the same;
To say nothing of your wonted custom, and excellent faculty in perverting
Scriptures, for going astray must needs refer to the right way, and that is the
true and sound doctrine of Christ bringing in Heathenism, after the example of
Balaam Numb. 24.14, with 25, 1. Jude 11. Revel. 2, 14.
who to get a reward, taught Balak to curse the Israelites, by enticing them to
filthiness, and idolatry together -- Do our Ministers so? This dirt the Lord
will wipe off to your shame.

5. No marvel you are an enemy to Ministers maintenance, when you are a sworn
enemy to the Ministry of the Church of England. You imagine both stand, and
fall together. For you say, take away that, and we may preach who will, for all
you. This is some of your left handed Logic, to make way for the taking of the
Ministry, by taking away Tithes. This design you have learned either of Julian
the Apostate, who thought by this means to root out the Christian ministry, or
of the Jusuites whose plot in the same, as before.

6. Its strange, that you therefore conclude we are all Hirelings, and will
labor no longer then we are paid for it, etc. But Quakers language is not
strange to you. If we are Hirelings, while we labor, is it not fit we
should be paid? For the Luke 10, 7, The ministry signifies a service -- whereto
the wages is no less due then meat to the payer. Bishop Hall Ibid.
Labourer is worthy of his HIRE. I will not trouble the Reader, or my self,
with any Answer or Reply to your inconsiderable and unseemly flirts: only
observe what a reverend Mr. Ven. Milk and Honey.
Minister of the Gospel says: Some men will be finding fault where no fault
is to be found INVEIGHING men are most commonly ENVYING men. They who inveigh
much, are men of envy much.

SECT. 2.
H. H. p. 124. This is one reason of our dissenting from you, because you take
Tithes, or a sorced mantenance, from those whom you call Herticks; whereas the
Priests under the Law never demanded Tithes of the uncircumcised Gentile^, etc.

Reply 1. Suppose Tithes to be a forced main^en^nce, yet it will not follow
that they are unlawful; the Landlord may distreyn on his Tenant for
non-payment of his Rent; The Collectors on the people for non-payment of their
monthly Tax, and the day-labourer for his hire or wages.

2. You should have described those whom we call Heretics, who are they? but
you love to ^alk in the dark, and keep yourself within Generals. If you mean
the man of your own pers^^ation, I am clearly o^^is mind, the says, Qui^
regant (^^^th thrist^e^) ^^^um wigi^ale, and Sim^^^^, sint Here^^^, Ames cas.
do C^sc^ent. l. 4. c. 4. s. 9.
As Anabaptists deny original sin, etc. They are Heretics, And why may we not
call you Heretics, as well as you compare your selves to the uncircumcised
Gentiles?

3. All of us do not take Tithes of such heretics, for some of us have no such
cattle within our folds, not an Anabaptist in many of our Parishes.

4. Your parallel is not right, for though the Priests under the Law did not
demand Tithes of the uncircumcised Gentiles, yet they might of the Jews,
suppo^^^ng there were heretics among them. Heb. 7.5. -- They have a
commandment to take Tithes of the people, i. e. of your Brethren, whether
sound or unsound in the Faith.

SECT. 3.
H. H. Ibid. Though the Jews paid Tithes under the Law to their Priests. Yet
the converted Gentiles did not. Act. 15. ver. 24, 25, 28, 29. Wherein there is
no one word or syllable spoken about the intolerable burden of, Tithes, which
is Antichristran, and denies Christ to come, in the flesh; who changed the
Priesthood, and therefore of necessity there is a change of the Law, Heb. 7.11,
12. Now seeing the Priesthood and Law are changed, where is the ground to take
Tithes as Priests, or what Law compells the people to pay Tithes to you as unto
Priests? Answer if you can.

Reply 1. If by the Law, you mean the Leviticall Law, I d^re be bold to affirm,
that Tithes were paid before that Abraham paid Tithes and that of all, to
Melchizedeck, Genesis 14.20. with Heb. 7.2. as if he had followed the
Commandment of the Apostle, Gal. 6.6. Let him that is taught (or Catechized)
communicate to him that teaches (or catechizeth), in all good things, or in
all his goods, (...).
Jacob also vowed to give the tenth also, Genesis 28.22. So that the payment of
Tithes is antienter then the Leviticall Law. Indeed though Levi received Tithes
afterward by a particular grant from God, yet he paid them generally with the
Congreation, in the Loins of Abraham unto the Priesthood of Christ personated
by Melchizedeck. Heb. 7.9, 10. Therefore they are not abolished by the Gospel,
but may be continued as an Evangelicall revenew, for the maintenance of those,
who give the Sacramental Bread and Wine (the materials of Melchizedeck's
beneficence) to the people.

2. Though the converted Gentiles were to abstain from those four things
mentioned in the Acts: yet it will not follow, that therefore they were to
abstain from paying Tithes, no more then this, that therefore they were to
abstain from obedience to the Roman Magistrates, under whose Dominion they now
were; or, that they were to abstain then, therefore now. For this was but a
Temporary injunction, or prohibition, thus for to comply with the Jews for the
present, for unity, and amity sake. For when the contention ceased, we know
this Law was repealed; The Apostle saying, that there is nothing unclean of it
self, Romans 14.14. And again whatsoever is sold in the Shambles, that eat -- 1
Cor. 10.25. and every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if
it be received with thanksgiving, for by Fornication we are to understand, part
(at least) of the Sacrifice, which the Harlots did offer to the gods for
expiating their sin. Such a custom it seems there was among them. Deuteronomy. 23.18.
Thou shall not bring the hire of an whore -- into the house of the Lord, and
the Harlot said, I have peace Offerings with me this day, I have paid my vows.
And of the four particulars, three of them are meats, why not then Fornication?
for that (properly taken) must be perpetually abstained from, it would rather
follow, that they were to abstain only from those four things mentioned.
Therefore not from paying Tithes.

3. They are called necessary things, Dr. Hammond.
* not to all Christians, but to the Proselytes of the Jews, or those converted
Gentiles, which lived at Jerusalem and Antioch; This compliance therefore was
then necessary, to the making up of a Church of Jews and Gentiles, which
otherwise would not have associated.

4. Whereas you call Tithes that intolerable burden, and Antichristian, you
only again say it, but you do not prove it. They are only an intolerable
burden to the enemies of Christ's Ministers: As the Carriers pack to the galled
back of his horse. To others they are not a burden at all, See Phil. Trelcin.
Gent. proving that never any Ministry in the Church of God has been or is
maintained with less charge to the subject, then the Ministers of the Church of
England.
much less intolerable. For it is the fittest maintenance for Christ's
Ministers, as appears by this, that after all the serious consultations, and
deliberate debates concerning a change into some other settlement, it is
concluded, as of his sword 1 Samuel 21.9.
none like it, and M. Jer. Stephens preface 10 Sir H. Spelmans Treatise of
Tithes.
the State would be a loser of many thousand pounds which are paid in Tenths.
First, Fruits and Taxes which in reason must fail, if Tithes fall. And whereas
you are pleased to call them Antichristian, you who affirm, must prove. It Is
storyed of one Lieutardus, Sir H. Spolm. de noa temerandis Eccles, p. 20, 21.
who taught the payment of Tithes to be superfluous, and idle, and then growing
desperate, drowned himself -- And so gave us a badg of his doctrine. The truth
is, Tithes are no more Antichristian, now, then Tenths and first Fruits are to
the State, and Churches are to us.

5. Neither will you be ever able to prove, that taking of Tithes does deny
Christ to be come in the flesh. For Tithes (as received by the Law or the
Nation upon the general account of a Gospel Ministry) are no appurtenance of
the Leviticall Priesthood, nor are they any necessary appurtenance at all, as
being paid before there was any Leviticall Priesthood, as before: yet thus the
Prelates argued of late, that the very name Sabbath (much more the strict
observation of it) denies Christ to be come in the flesh, and I might as well
argue, that your so frequently calling us Priests; denies Christ come in the
flesh, but I spare you.

6. To Heb. 7.12. I say, that change may import not an abrogation, but an
Alteration, i. e. a Translation. So v. and Erasmus do render the words (...).
So the sense would be, that the Priesthood being translated from the Tribe of
Levi to the Tribe of Judah, of necessity, there is a Translation also of the
Law for paying Tithes, but if you understand it of an abrogation or abolition,
It Is no advantage to you, nor disadvantage to us. For then the meaning is, If
the Leviticall Priesthood be abrogated; then the Leviticall or Ceremonial Law
is abolished, even that Commandment to take Tithes of the People (for those
words according to the Law, refer to the people, which were under the Mosaicall
Law, not to taking Tithes, for that was sufficiently expressed in those words,
Have a Commandment, and need not suddenly be repeated again). The Lord gave
those Tithes for a time to Levi, so long as he served at the Tabernacle, when
Levi ceased to serve at the Altar, Tithes ceased to be due to Levi, but they
ceased not to be due to the Lord. For as they were before the Law, so they
stand his for ever. The Assignation of Tithes to Levi (or that Lease) being
expired, Heb. 7.8.
they return to the Lord again, and to speak properly, There is nothing
Ceremonial in paying Tithes, and if any Ceremony was affixed to them, the
Ceremony is abolished, but the thing stands still. As some Ceremonial
signification was superadded to the fourth Commandment, Ez. k. ^0.12.20,
yet that Ceremony being abolished by Christ, the fourth Commandment remains
in full force and virtue, as you seem to grant, p. 13.

7. To your Qu. I have said something before, Nostre ho^ie accip^unt Decimas,
v^^ion quo jure? non sane Ceremoniali. Sed jure morali. Par siquidem est ut
(...) irister a populo Alatur, 1. Tim. 5.18. 1 Cor. 9.14 proinde stipendia
Minist^is sivepersolvatur ex Agris, sive ex aedibus sive ex pecunia numerata,
sive in DECIMIS nihil resert, p. Mart. L^c. Com. Class. 4. c. 13. s^ 1^.
the Law of the Land, is a sufficient ground (if we had no more) for us to take
Tithes, which Law is not yet proved to be contrary to the Law of God. Nay, it is
the will of Christ that Ministers should be maintained in the general; and
suppose there be no special or particular way of maintenance prescribed, yet
that will of Christ does evince the righteousness of any lawful way, such as
that by Tithes is, which yet has not been disproved. Though we do not receive
them as Priests -- Yet there is a Law to compel the people to pay Tithes to
the Priests, using the language of the time that then was, as some of the
Fathers, call the Lords Table an Altar, and both we and they call the Lord's
day, Sunday; when properly we have neither Sunday, nor Altar, nor Priest.

SECT. 4.
H. H. p 125. 1. Ob. But Ministers of the Gospel must live of the Gospel. Ans.
Then it seems you grant, they must not live of the Law but Tithes are by the
Law, therefore they must not live by Tithes. 2ly, Why do you not then live of
the Gospel, and be quiet, and take what people will give you, etc? Mat. 10 10
with Lu. 10.6, 7.

Reply 1. You trifle egregiously; For if by the Law, you mean the Ceremonial
Law of Moses, I told you even now out of P. Mattyr, we do not live of that Law.
But if you mean the Law of this Nation, so we live of the Gospel and by the Law
too. The Gospel requiring that Ministers be maintained, and the said Law
prescribing the particular way, or manner how, as has been said. Magistrates
by the appointment of Christ are to be nursing-Fathers to the Church, who are
to provide, that the Ministers of the Church may not want maintenance, that the
children of the Church may not want Milk, Isa. 49.23.

2. What a miserable consequence is this? Tithes are (suppose) by the
Leviticall Law, Therefore Gospel Ministers must not live by Tithes, just like
this, the Levites formerly had Cities with their suburbs, etc. for themselves
to dwell in, and ground for their Cattle; Therefore Gospel Ministers may not
have houses to dwell in, nor Glebe-land for their Cattle.

3. We do live of the Gospel, and are quiet -- but you disturb us, by
endeavoring (though in vain) to turn us out of possession; and to strip us of
our right.

4. It is your gross mistake, that these Commands are binding to
Gospel Ministers; Inscite quidam puta^^at verbi Ministris vel Apostolis
perpet^a^ hic legem praescribi Calv. in Loc.
For though the ends of these Commands is perpetual, yet the Commands
themselves are temporary, as Grotius notes on Mar. 6.8. and in part (at least)
has been showed before. And it is manifest from the places themselves. 1. For
the Apostles Commission extended at first, no further then to the Pale of
Judea, Mat. 10.5, 6. Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any City of
the Samaritans enter ye not. But go rather to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel. Afterward it was enlarged, Go ye and teach (or Disciple) all Nations,
Mat. 28.19. and go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every
creature, Mar. 28.19. 2. They were to heal the sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise
the dead, cast out Devils, Mat. 10.8. with 1.6.and had power to do these things
which I think you do not, nor dare challenge no more then we. 3. They were not
to provide either Gold or Silver -- in their purses, v. 9. which you have left
out are as binding as those things mentioned by you. 4. Nor scrip for their
journey, nor two coats, nor shoos, nor yet staves -- ver. 10. It seems they
might have Mar. 6.8, 9.
one pair of shoos, and one staff, but not two pair of shoos, nor two staves,
i.e. a walking staff they might have, but not a fighting i. e. Defenso^ium Nam
itinerarium seu Sustentatorium quem Latini Scipionem nominant apud Marcum
permisit. Pise. Schol.
staff. But do you go up and down without Gold and Silver in your purse? or
without two coats? and if you ride without shoo's, yet not without boots; if
without a staff in your hand, yet sometimes not without a sword by your side.
It seems you are the man that is neither quiet, nor content. 5. The same
Commands were laid on the 70. For Calvin conceives, that after the Twelve
Apostles were returned, he sent out 70. in like manner, only they are bidden
salute no man by the way, Luke 10.1, 4. If you do so, I know no difference
between you and a Quaker. 6. Nay, both the Apostles then, (and the Seventy
afterward) were sent out two by two, Mar. 6.7. with Luke 10.1. If you never
went to preach without another, I know no difference between you and th^e
Romish Priests and Jesuits, who (in an Apish imitation) walk two by two. By
all which it appears, those Commands are, and were but temporary.


SECT. 5.
H. H. 2. Object. This maintenance is not sufficient, and if it be left to the
people, they will starve you. It may be you will say. Answ. 1. If it be not
enough, then you may labor with your hands to supply your wants, as Act. 18.1,
2, 3. with 1 Cor. 5.11, 12, and 2 These 5, (...), 8,
Paul and the other Apostles of Christ did, who were as good and better
Ministers of Christ then you are. 2. If the people would starve the Ministers,
then they are no Christians, for they durst not let your teachers starve, if he
take but any honest course to live. But to conclude, if you can neither trust
God for a livelihood, while you are about his work, nor be content with what
the people will freely give you, nor yet labor with your hands to supply your
wants, you are not yet fit for the work of the Ministry, and therefore you may
leave it to those that are better able to go through the work, and to be
content with the wages that Christ has allowed them.

Reply 1. It Is readily acknowledged that Paul and the other Apostles were as
good and better Ministers of Christ then we are. But it does not follow that we
must labor with our hands as they did; (as you suppose). For first this labor
(for maintenance) was not the practice of all the Apostles, but a peculiar case
of Paul and Barnabas* For Paul says, or I only and Barnabas* have not we power
to forbear working as the other Apostles and brethren of the Lord and Cephas? 1 Corinthians. 9.6. Secondly, their refusal of maintenance was upon special
occasion; as in case of extreme necessity, etc. Thus marriage might be forborne
-- Yet he is silly, that will conclude from hence, the unlawfulness of
marriage, or unneedfulness of maintenance. 1 Cor. 7.26, 27. 3. When Paul was
necessitated to labor with his hands, he put it into the catalogue of his
sorrows. 1 Cor. 4.11, 12. As a part of his sufferings, in the very place quoted
by you. Even unto this hour we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are
buffetied, and LABOR, working with our own hands -- Hunger and thirst,
nakedness, and bufferting, etc. were pieces of his sufferings, so was such,
his labor. 4. Notwithstanding all this, viz. refusing maintenance, he tells
the Corinthians, that he received much from others, I robbed other Churches,
taking wages of them to serve you, 2 Cor. 11.8.
etc.


2. Who those are, whom you heard say, that the people would starve their
Ministers, if it were left to them, I know not, you never heard me say so, and
when you bring in the names of those, I know what to say; but whereas you say,
they are no Christians, that would starve your Teachers -- it is one of your
absurd inconsequences, and unsavory paradoxes, for if they be Christians in
truth (as heis a Jew which is one inwardly) perhaps they are unable to maintain
their Teachers, Romans 2.29, as Mr. Robinsons Church was to maintain him: or if
they be Christians in title only, Romans 11.7, 8, 9, 10. Mede in Lee.
it is no wonder, they dare let their teachers starve, who can rejoice and make
merry when their teachers are killed, i. e. suspended, and sil^eed.

3. What you conclude is Illogicall, and Atheologicall; For (without boasting)
we can trust our Master for a livelihood, whiles we are about his work.

4. Whereas you would have us content, with what the people will freely give
us, you have no precept for that. What is said in Mat. 10.8. Freely ye have
received, freely give, is proved but a Temporary command, and that in reference
to those miraculous works, mentioned in the beginning of that verse. Besides,
you bewray whose Successors you are. viz. Even of those false Teachers who were
crop^ into the Church of Corinth, and boasted of themselves and their doctrine,
and that they would preach the Gospel freely, and to cried down Paul and
Ministry, 2 Cor. 11.12, 13. being themselves deceitful workers, and transforming
themselves into the Apostles of Christ.

5. As you superciliously judge your self, and illiterate mechanic men, better
able to go through the work of the Ministry then we -- So unwares you call your
selves Hirelings as well as us, for you say, p. 123. And to be content with the
wages Christ has a lowed them, and who but Hirelings receive wages?

SECT. 6.
H. H. same page, Third Obj. 1 Cor. 9.7. Who goes a warfare at his own
charges? Answ. True, neither do any go awarfare at their enemies charges, such
you say are the An abaptists; Therefore you cannot in conscience expect any
from them, because you war not for them, but against them. That Scripture only
shows you should have charges of them you fight for; and good reason, if the
cause be good; but it must be freely: if you force them, you fight not for
them, but against them, and make them your enemies, and l^se your privil^g^s

Reply 1. If it be true, you grant as much as is d^sired, that Ministers as
well as soldiers must be maintained, not at their own, but others charges.

2. It Is false, that none go a warfare at their enemies, charges The State
wa^^s against Papists in (...) ^^^ly at the charges of the Papists in England.
The^^fore (...) one your frequent inconsequences: They or you a^ (...) ^^emies,
therefore we cannot in conscience expect an^ from them.

3. It Is as false, that we war not for them ( soil the Anabaptists) But against
them; we fight not against their persons, for whom we pray; but against their
practices, against which we pray and preach too. Therefore if this be all (as
you say) we can have from that Scripture, that we should have charges of them
we fight for, then they are to bear our charges, and furnish us with
necessaries.

4. The rest is but a piece of Seditious doctrine. 1. No maintenance, unless
the quarrel be good: Must the common soldier fit in judgment on the cause? 2.
This maintenance must be free, and not forced. May not soldiers or Constables
distrain for non-paiment of the monthly Tax? 3. Forcing is a losing of
privilege -- Is not the former instance an Argument rather of gaining and
confirming your privilege?


SECT. 7.
H. H. p. 126. Fourth Objection: You say, who planteth a Vineyard, and eats
not of the fruit thereof. Answ. True, But you never planted the Vineyard of the
Separatists and Anabaptiss, therefore you may not eat of the fruit of their
labors, except you buy it, or take it from them wickedly by force. Nay you say,
we are not the Lord's Vineyard, but rather an accursed people, like the ground
that brings forth thorns and thistles, therefore you cannot possibly expect any
fruit of us, for men cannot gather grapes of Thorns, nor Figgs of Thistles.

Reply 1. If it be true, you grant again as much as is desired.

2. The Vineyard of the Separatists and Anabaptists (as they are now called and
termed) were once planted by us, and had so continued, if you had not broken
down the wall, and stolen away the plants. Nay, the Lord himself may complain
of you, as he does of Israel, I had planted thee a noble Vine, wholly a right
seed, how then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange Vine to
me? Jer. 2.2.

3. Your exception is a mere begging of the Question.

4. We do say; You are a Vineyard, but bringing forth wild grapes, Isa. 5.2,
3, 4. your Vine being the Vine of Sodom, Deuteronomy. 32.32. and of the fields of
Gomorrah, your grapes are grapes of gall, bitter clusters.

5. As the Frenchman (they say) had rather leese his God, then his jest. So you
are content to be thorns and thistles, rather then we should have the grapes,
and figs of maintenance from you. I pity your lamentable abuse of Scripture.

6. If we cannot possibly expect any fruit from you, much less force you; yet
it seems, by you, we may from the Vineyard, which we tend and dress.

SECT. 8.
H. H. same page Again you will say. Who seedeth a flock, and eats not of the
milk thereof. Answ. Truth. But you do not feed the flock of the Separates and
Anabaptists, nay you say they are not of the flock of Christ, but Wolves and
Tygres, therefore you have no right to their milk, nor can you expect any from
them --

Reply 1. The Separates and Anabaptists were once of our flock, till you ^tole
them away, and therefore by your expression you grant, We might then eat of
their milk.

2. If they be degenerate into an^h^rd of Wolves and Tygres, yet while they
live within the Fold of our parishes, we may (by the law of the land, which is
not repugnant to the law of God, as has been showed) require lawfully milk
from them. i e. subsistence -- or maintenance.

3. As we HAVE fed them, so we WOULD feed them, if you had not stolen them
away, or they themselves leapt out of the pasture. And it is a great Question.
Whether we may not claim them as part of our flock still. Absolon could not
shake off the relation of David's son, though he did shake off natural
affection to David, and by rebellion endeavored to dethrone him. A Landlord
may demand, and exact rent of his Tenant, though de does treacherously attourn
to another, a meerstranger compritively.

SECT. 9.
H. H. same p. Lastly you say, we must not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that
treads out the corn. Answ. True. But what is that to the other beasts, that
tread out no corn, but rather destroy it, and will not suffer it to grow till
the Harvest, but will pall up wheat and tares together, contrary to Matthew.
13.28, 29, 30.

Reply 1. If by beasts you mean the Ministers of the Gospel, you include your
self, by saying, OTHER BEASTS; and who they are, that tread out no ^orn, I
cannot imagine, we have now no dumb Sir John's nor bare Readers, but such as
are apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3.2. with
and chapter 5.17.
labor in the word and doctrine.

2. Though Christ does not tell us in the explication of the parable, I^ta ad
parabolae sinifieatione^n, no pe^tnebant. M^ulta eni^n in parabol^s. non ad
significa^dam, sed ad in len dam, narra^i^nem adh^bentur. Maldon. in loc.
who the men were that sle^t, and who the servants were, that would have plucked
up the tares (as not pertinent to the signification of the parable) yet he
tells us who the tares are, etc. ver. 38. -- The children of the wicked one,
yet ver. 29, 30. do not forbid either excommunication of heretics (for you
say, you cast such our, p. 109) or execution of malefactors (as murderers,
thievs etc.) by the civil power, (as you insinuate) but rather foretell that
such shall be in the Church til the end of time, as our Savior expounds it,
verse. 39, 40. The Ark Aug Ep. 146.
contains the Raven as well as the Dove, till the deluge pass away. Neither
does the householder absolutely forbid the pulling up of the tares, but least
the wheat be rooted up with them, but when there is no such danger, it is
clearly imply^d, the tares may be pulled up, but if they cannot be be^d
stinguished, or safely separated from the wheat, both are to grow till the
harvest. But I profess I cannot see to what purpose you bring in this place,
unless you and your pa^ty be the beasts that tread down the Tyth-corn, unless
you be of that mind, to let it continue, till the day of judgment.

3. Let the Reader observe, that H. H. cannot deny Gospell-maintenance to
Gospel Min^sters, the Apostles Arguments are so clear, Cornel. a Lipid, in 1
Cor 9.
1. From the example of other Apostles ver. 5.2 From the simi^itudes of
soldiers. shepherds, and husbandmen, v. 7.3. From the Law of Moses v. 8.4.
From the example of Priests, and Levites in the Old Testament. v. 13.5. From
the Ordinance of God and Christ v. 14.6. From the nature of the thing it self.
v. 11 -- As a labourer is worthy of his wages, yet he concludes this Section
with railing (which he cannot do with rea^on^ng) which shall have no other
reply, THEN WHAT IS MADE, except it be, The Lord Rebuke thee.

CHAP. XX. Of the Magistrates Power.
SECT. I.
H. H. p. 124. The fourth Reason of our separation is the Magistrates sword, by
which you have been upholden these many years, etc.

Reply 1. In your 52. p. (falsely printed 24.) you truly cite diverse Scriptures
to prove, we ought to be subject to Magistrates. 1 Pet. 13, 14, 15 Tit. 3.1.
and 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. Romans 13. Now whether you do not contradict your self in
denying here their power -- and drawing us from it, I leave it to any rational
man to judge.

2. Whether you do not, or would not wind in another piece of Popery,
concerning the exemption of the Clergy (as it is called) from the secular power,
let the wise consider. But.

3. The Ministers of Christ have as clear an interest in the Magistraticall
power of this Nation, for the preservation of their persons, and prevention of
their wrongs, and provision for their rights, as any of the good people of the
Commonwealth of England, For, 1. Its our birth-priviledge, Act. 22.28.
we have not bought it, but were born to it, and therefore if unjust persons do
injustice to us, we are free to complain, and to make use of the M^gitrates
power for justice against them, for he bears Romans 13.^.
no the sword in vain. But you would have the Ministers of the Gospel mo^e
miserable, then the meanest Englishman in this land, who by birth-priviledge
may implead any that detain their Rights from them. 2. As it is our birth
privilege as men, so it is our perogative as we are Christians, nay as we are
the Ministers of Christ. The Law and Authority of the Magistrate reaches to
us, and to our right, as well as to any other. For this end (among others) are
they set up, and ordained of God, that we as well as others (as occasion
serves) may seek to them for justice. It has been said by an ancient Father,
Decimae ex debito requiruntu^, etc. Agustin. --
Tithe is required as due debt. And they that will not give the tithe to whom
it is due, invade upon the right of others, which is not theirs, 3ly. As
Ministers faithfully and freely submit to all their lawful commands, so are
they tied by the law of God and this nation to protect us in all lawful and
just complaints, and therefore they are called Gods, Psalm. 82.6, with Joh.
10.34.
now God regards not persons. Deuteronomy. 10.17. but without respect of persons
judges according to every man's work -- 1 Pet. 1.17.4. The Low Dutch confessi^n
^uns thus: We believe, that Magistrates are not only to believe the civil
state, but also the Ministers of the Word, that THEY be maintained etc. Indeed
when there was no Christian Magistrate to relieve his wronged Ministers; God
then, as Lord chief Justice, did punish the sin of Sacriledgeas, on Ananias and
Saphira etc.

SECT. 2.
H. H. Ibid. Unto the Magistrates sword you have applied your selves, when poor
souls out of conscience have denied you to eat of the milk of that flock, which
you never fed, and to taste the fruit of that vineyard, which you never
planted, etc.

Reply 1. This has been answered before in Chapter foregoing, s. 8. concerning
the flock, and milk, Vineyard and fruit.

2. If fruit and milk be denied by your poor souls, I fear it is not out of
conscience but covetousness. That may swim in the top, but this lies at the
bottom, and yet too v^sibly discovers it self. Though I grant they may deny --
out of conscience too, but erroneous.

3. Our Application to the Magistrate is no sin, I trow, when people out of
malice or avarice, not out of want or weakness, refuse to pay us our dues, for
what law have we broken thereby? since sin is a transgression of the Law.
Indeed the Apostle says, It is a fault, 1 Cor. 3.7. Camero. and Dr. Hammond
(...).
but the word there signifies, a defect or failing, or low pitch of a Christian
but not such as can be absolutely and universally counted a sin, as not being
against any precept. All you can have from that Scripture is (to use your own
words. p. 125.) is, that it is a diminution, a less degree of Christian
perfection. But if it were a sin, then it lies in this, in that one Christian
did implead his Fellow-christian, before Heathen Tribunalls, or as the Apostle
says v. 6. before unbelievers or infidells, not using that method prescribed
by Christ to Christians, Mat. 18.15. etc. If our Magistrates were Heathens we
would swallow our complaints (though perhaps you (count all heathens, that are
not baptized after your new mode) and (according to the Apostle) suffer wrongs,
and be defrauded, but ours (blessed be God) are not such.

SECT. 3.
H. H. You plead you have right to it (Tithes I suppose you mean) from
Scripture, and that you can prove the right from Scripture -- Thus have you
made the Kings, and Rulers of the Nations drunk with the wine of the wrath of
the fornication, etc. Revel. 17.13.14.

Reply 1. Has M. Haggar no right to his house or horse etc. unless he can
produce an express place of Scripture? where he has fair evidences for the
one, and tolled in the Fair for the other?

2. You have been told that we have as good a right in the tenth part, as the
people have in their nine parts, and if our people have liberty to seek
redress, in case any shall wrong them in the nine parts, or any part thereof,
then have we the same -- in case of the tenth.

2. I discern your cunning craftiness, whereby you lie in wait to deceive;
what Scriptures we have brought justly against Antichrist, you bring unjustly
against us, that your holy Father of Rome, may not be so called. This is your
design. Gallant service. Sure his Holiness will reward you with an hallowed
sword, or a Phoenix-feather, as he has done some other of his Champions. As
you cry against our carnal weapons. p. 132. When your predecessors at. Munster
used those carnal weapons, Sleid. com. ^^^o A. D. 153^.
you falsely father on us.

What is set down in H. H. two last leaves, is but an idle repetition of the
samethings, or else Quakers, and Billingsgate language; and therefore I will
not trouble my self, or the Reader with any farther reply. Only let him take
notice, tha^ if all his four Reasons were granted, they are no grounds for
Separation from us. For the strength (if there be any) of his Argument may be
thus discerned: That Church which is built on humane learning, Infant Baptism,
Tithes, and the Magistrates sword, may be lawfully separated from, but such is
the Church of England, etc. Therefore -- I say the Major and Minor are both
false, and H. H. can never make them true, while the world stands. I will
give his Argument again: (if he will be beholding to me) whosoever does
causelessly, and unjustly separate from a Church, is a Schismatic. But Mr. Hag.
etc. do causelessly, and unjustly Separate -- Therefore -- The Major is true by
the unanimous consent of ancient, modern Divines (to say nothing of Scripture)
who describe Schism by an unjust separation, etc. The Minor is proved, because
there is no Scripture to warrant a separation on all or any of those
forementioned grounds, which H. H. calls four Pillars, etc. -- But enough of
this, which has learnedly, largely, and Religiously been spoken to by others
and left to the Candid Reader to consult and consider, with Prayers to the
Throne of grace, that it may find favor in the hearts of Gods people, and be
crowned with his blessing.

FINIS.
Solides, Honos, and Gloria,
Books Printed for Tho. Pa^khurst at the three Crowns, etc.
A Learned Co^mentary, or Expositi^n upon the I Chapter of the second Epistle
to the Corinthians, by D. ^^ch. Sibbs, published for the public good by Tho.
Manton, Fol.

The dead Saint speaking, to Saints and Sinners living, in several Treatises;
viz. The fullness, and greatest evil that is in sin, on 2 Samuel 24.10. The love
of Christ to his spouse, on Cant. 4.9. Nature and Royalties of Faith, on Joh.
1.15. The slowness of heart to believe, on John 1.50, The cause figns, and cure
of H^pocrisie, with motives and helps to sincerity, on Isa 58 2. The wonderful
workings of God for his Church and his people, on Exodus 15.11. Never before
published: by Samuel Bolton, D. D. late Mr. of Christ College in Cambr. Folio

Four profitable Creatises very useful for Christian practice, viz. The
Killing power of the Law: The Spiritual Watch; The New Birth: Of the Sabbath.
By the Reverend William Fenner, late Minister of Rochford in Essex.

Mr. John Cotton, his practical Exposition on the First Epistle of John, the
second Edition corrected, and enlarged.

A theat^e of flying Infects, wherein especially the manner of right ordering
the Be is excellently described, with discourses Historical and Physical
concerning them, with a Second part of meditations and observations Theological
and Moral in 3 Centuries upon the same subject, by Samuel Purchase M. A. in 40.

Catechizing God's Ordinance, in sundry Sermons by Mr. Zachary Crofton.
Minister at Buttolphs Aldgate London, the second Edition corrected and
augmented.

The godly man's Arc. in the day of his distress, discovered in Diverse
Sermons, the first of which was preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Elisabeth
Moore. Whereunto is anexed Mrs. Elisabeth Moors Evidences for Heaven, composed
and collected by her in the time of her health, for her comfort in the time of
sickness. By Ed. Calamy, B. D. Pastor of the the Church at Aldermanbury.

Peoples Need of a living Pastor, at the funeral of Mr. John Frost, M. A. by
Mr. Zach. Crofton.

The Gale of opportunity and the Beloved Disciple by Thomas Froysell. in 80,

The Wedding Ring sit for the Finger: in a Sermon at a Wedding in Edmonton, by
William Se^ker.

Enchiridion Judicum, or Jehosaphats Charge to his Judges.

Together with Catastrophe Magnatum, or King David's Lamentation, at Prince
Abners Incineration. By John Livesey Minister of the Gospel at Atherton.

The Journal or Diary of a thankful Christian: a Day-book of National and
public, personal and private passages of Gods providence, to help Christians
to thankfulness, and experience. By John Beudle, Minister of the Gospel at
Barnstone in Essex, large 8.

Mr. Robinsons Christian Armor in large 8.

Book of Emblems, with Latin and English verses made upon (Lights) by Robert
Farly, small 8.

A most Excellent Treatise concerning the way to seek Heavens Glory, to fly
Earths vanity, to fear Hells horror, with godly prayers, and the Bell-mans
summons, 12.

Johnsons Essays expressed in sundry Exquisite Fancies.

Sion in the house of mourning, because of Sin and Suffering, being an
Exposition on the fifth Chapter of the Lamentations, by D. S. Pastor of
Vpingham, in the County of Rutland.

Groans of the Spirit, or a Trial of the truth of Prayer.

A Handkercher for Parents Wet-eyes, upon the death of their Children or
Friends.

The one thing necessary; by M. Thomas Watson, Minister of Stephens Walbrook 8.

A Plea for Alms; delivered in a sermon at the 'Spital, before a solemn
Assembly of the City, on Tuesday in Easter week, April 13, 1658. by M. Thomas
Watson Minister of Stephens Walbrook, 8.

Moses unvailed, or those figures which served unto the pattern and shadow of
heavenly things, pointing out the Messiah Christ Jesus, briefly explained;
whereunto is added the Harmony of the Prophets, breathing with one mouth, the
mystery of his coming, and of that redemption which by his death he was to
accomplish. To confirm the Christian, and convince the Jew, very profitable and
full of comfort. By William Guild, Minister of God's Word at King-Edward in
Scotland.

TA DIAPHEPONTA; or Divine characters in two parts, acutely distinguishing the
more secret and undiscerned differences between 1. The Hypocryte in his best
dress of seeming virtue, and farmal duties: And the true Christian in his
real graces, and sincere obedience. As also between the blackest weeds of
daily infirmities of the truly godly, eclipsing saving grace; and the reigning
sins of the unregenerate, that pretend unto that godliness they never had. By
that late burning and shining Lamp, M. Samuel Crook, B. D. late Pastor of
Wrington in Sommerset. Folio.

There are going to the Press some new pieces of Mr. William Fenners, late of
Rochford in Essex, never yet Printed, preserved by a special Providence, one of
which is a Second part of his wilful impenitency; being five Sermons more that
he preached upon the 18. of Ezekiel, and the 32. ver.

(...), or the Saint's Worthiness and the world's worthlesness, both opened and
declarad in a Sermon preached at the funeral of that Eminently Religious and
highly honored Knight Sir Nathanael Barnardiston, August. 26. 1653. By Samuel
Faireclough, Pastor of the Congregation at Ketton 40.

The Agreement and resolvtion of several Associated Ministers in the County of
Cork, for the Ornaining of Ministers.

The Sacred Ordinance of Ordination: by Imposition of the hands of the
Presbytery. As it was lately held forth in a Sermon preached at the solemn
Ordination of Ministers in the City of Norwich, June 11, Anno 1656. By John
Brinsley, Minister of the Gospel at great Yarmouth. 80.

The Life and Death of M. Ignatius Jurdain, one of the Aldermen of the City of
Exeter; who departed this life, July 15, 1640. The second Edition published and
enlarged, by Ferdinan. Nicolls Minister of the Gospel at Mary Arces, Exon.

The dangerous rule: or a Sermon preached at Clonmel in the Province of Munster
in Ireland, upon Aug. 3. 1657. before the Reverend Judges for that Circuit. By
S. L. Master in Arts, and lately fellow of C. C. C. in Oxon.

The woman's glory: a Treatise, first asserting the due honor of that Sex. By
manifesting that Women are capable of the highest improvements: The second
Edition enlarged, By Samuel Torshell.

Holy things for holy men: or the Lawyers Plea nonsuited, etc. In some
Christian reproof and pity expressed toward M. Prynn's book, Entitled The
Lord's Supper briefly Vindicated, by S. S. Minister of the Gospel.

Divine Principles, or a Scripture Catechism, etc.

Good Company; being a collection of various, serious, pious Meditations;
useful for instruction, consolation, and confirmation. By J. Melvin, Minister
of the Gospel at Vdimer in Sussex.

A Religious Treatise upon Simeon's song; or instructions how to live holily,
and dye happily: by T. Woodroffe, B. D. Pastor at Kingsland in Hereforshire.

An Antidote against H. Hagger's poisonous Pamphlet, Entitled, The Foundation
of the Font discovered* or a reply, wherein his audaciousness and sophistry in
arguing against infant baptism, Discipleship, Church Membership is detected,
his cavils against M. C. M. B. and M. Hall are answered, etc. By A. Houghton,
Minister of the Gospel at Prees in Salop. 4.

Five Sermons, in 5 several ways of preaching; the 1. in B A. way, the 2. in B.
H. way, the 3. in Dr. M. and M. C. way, the 4. in the Presbyterian way, and the
5. in the Independent way of preaching: by A. W. Minister of the Gospel.

The Reformation, in which is reconciliation with God and his people: or a
Catechism unveiling the Apostles Creed, with Annotations; in which Faith,
Ordinances, and Government are professed as in the Primitive times, in
oppositon to all Errors and Heresies. by W. K. Minister ^f the Gospel.

FINIS.

