HEAVTONAPARNVMENOS: Or a Treatise of SELF-DENIAL.

Intended for the Pulpit; but now committed to the Press for the PUBLIC
BENEFIT.

-- Inutilis olim
Ne videar vixisse. --
1 COR. 2.6, 7, 8, etc. (...).

But we speak wisdom among those that are perfect: but not the wisdom of
this world, etc.

LONDON, Printed by W. WILSON, for RICHARD ROYSTON, at the Angel in Ivy-Iane.
1646.

A Treatise of Self-denial.
MATTHEW. 16.24. If any one will come after me, let him deny himself.

(BUt in the first place, let us with all thankfulness adore the Divine Bounty
for this inestimable Jewel of His most Holy Word, revealed to us; and with
all humility implore the light and aid of his most Blessed Spirit, that we, who
can do nothing without Him, may with Him be able to see His Truth, and seeing
it, sell all we are worth to purchase it: To this alone Glory, in our Eternal
Good, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.)


THE Occasion of these words will be the best key to our Discourse: And that
was this. Our Savior now drawing fast upon the Catastrophe of His Life, and
being in the last Act thereof, to express the Perfection of Self-denial, that
the suddenness of the Tragedy might not drive his Disciples into an unwonted
ecstasy, Verse 21.
acquaints them often with it beforehand, well knowing, that the blow
foreseen in time, when it came, would make the less impression. Yet Peter, it
seems, Verse 22.
somewhat moved above the rest, whether by the instinct of flesh and blood, or
the suggestion of the Devil, or both, which is most likely, taking him aside,
began to rebuke Him, saying; Sir! favor your self, this barme shall not
befall you. Most strange audaciousnesse in a Disciple to his Master, whether we
look at his words, or his behavior! No such thing shall befall you; and yet
but just then, He had flatly affirmed the contrary? What else was this, but,
with the Devil in Paradise, to oppose his own infallibility to his Masters,
Genesis 3.4. Jer. 5.12.
that is (in plain English) to give Him the Lie? An intolerable presumption.
And yet, thereupon to infer, He ought to favor, that is, make much of, or
seek Himself; this was no other, but a downright Devilish Temptation: A
true, but slyer, Copy of that Original one of the Serpent, who tempted our
first Parents, by self-love, to affect a Deity. But lastly, the better to
persuade this, Gen 3.5.
to take Him aside, to put Him beside His course, and there earnestly to advise
Him; this was just like the Devils tolling Adam from his Work, to the fatal
Tree of Perdition. All which seriously considered, we cannot but (though with
no small admiration) aknowledge Peter but even now made a Claviger of the
Heavenly Kingdom, Verse 19.
was herein the Devils Spokes-man. Such was the daring boldness, that by long
practice he was grown to: No less Instrument could serve him to frustrate the
Second Covenant, then the Senior Disciple of our Savior's, who used but a
despicable Serpent to do as much to the First. All that can be said in Peter's
behalf is, he meant no harm to our Savior in those words; but good rather:
the reason, as I suppose, why he made so bold with Him, as he did. But this,
though the common pretense of blind zeal, is not enough to excuse it; the
Devil, to be sure, meant harm enough, who in those words of his had no less
matter in design, then the irrecoverable Destruction of all Mankind: the
reason, as it may seem, why our Savior checked not him, Verse 23
but Satan speaking in him. The best of it was this: Our Savior, the Second
Adam, being the Lord Himself from Heaven, 1 Cor. 15.17.
did not, like that First Adam, formed out of the earth, give way to this
temptation, no not for a moment; but forthwith repelled it; bid Satan, be gone.
And whereas Peter endeavored, in a sort, to divert Him, He converted Himself
into His course again, bids Peter not stand like Satan, thus before Him, to
oppose Him; but, get him behind Him rather, and become His follower in this,
though never so hard, enterprise of Self-denial. Which that Peter might resent
more kindly, and not conceive himself hardly dealt with, as if evil had been
returned him for his good, our Savior to undeceive him, vouchsafes a Reason of
his Reproof: Because he savourd not the things of God, meaning this great
matter of Self-denial; but only the things of men, to wit, that traitorous
sin of Self-love. And not content with this, that He might the better set Satan
packing, Verse 24
and yet keep Peter by Him; by way of Antithesis, He lays here the Foundation
of what Peter went about to destroy, such a Schools or Sect of men, as should
savor the things of God, and not the things of men: that is, a Sect of
Christians, or self-denyers.

That this was the sole Design of these words we are now upon, will evidently
appear from the foremost of them, If any one will come after Me, rightly
understood; for they being a Si quis of Invitation of any man to this School,
import no more but this; If any one will become my Disciple, or a Christian.
It Is true, the Name of Christian was not then taken up; but here was the
Foundation laid thereof. For as the Pythagoreans were so called from the first
Author of their Sect, Pythagoras; and the Epicureans, from the first Author of
theirs, Epicurus; so were the Disciples, from their first Author, Christ, Acts
11.26.
at length in Antioch first called Christians. Disciples then and Followers, in
this sense, becoming terms Synonymous, this coming after must not be so
literally understood, as if the Disciple were continually to tread in his
Masters steps; but that, if he did jurare in verba, that is, take upon him to
defend his Masters singular Dogmata, or Opinions, though he seldom or never
bare him company, 'twas sufficient. Thus a Metempsychosis, or Transanimation,
being the singular Dogma of Pythagoras, it became the Characteristick of the
Pythagoreans; who, in pursuance of it, abstained the eating Flesh. Thus an
Acatalepsia, or Incomprebensibility of all things, being the singular Dogma of
Arcesilaus, it became the Characteristicke of the Academicks, who, in pursuance
of it, called all Sciences in question. Thus, the maintaining Pleasure to be
our Summum Bonum being the singular Dogma of Epicurus, it became the
Characteristick of the Epicureans, who, in pursuance of it, denied Gods
Providence in sublunary matters. And thus, this Doctrine of Self-denial being
the singular Dogma of Christ, above all others, He would have it here become
the Characteristick of all Christians, who, in pursuance of it, should become
Crucigeri, or Cruciani, as anciently they were called, that is, Crosse-bearers,
yea takers of it up.

This difference, though, we may observe betwixt theirs and this Dogma of our
Saviors: theirs had no necessary influence on whatsoever else they taught, but
so has this Dogma of Self-denial, being the very Foundation of Christianity,
yea the Grand Design of all Theology. The Law of Nature, that which was
Adam's Rule in Innocence, did not design this, but suppose it. There was no
such thing then in the world, as our Self, contradistinct from God. So that
had Adam persevered in his Integrity, our Theology had been Geneticall
altogether, that is, by the Progressive method of Works of the Law, not the
Regressive method of Faith and Mortification, we should have attained, after a
perpetual tenor of liquid Happiness here, the eternal Fruition of it
hereafter. But now, by the Intrusion of our Self into the world upon Adam's
Fall, our Theology is turned Analyticall altogether; St. John plainly telling
us, 1 John 3.8.
our Savior appeared, (...), that be might analyze, or dissolve the works of
the devil. What those Works were is evident, their sole Foundation being that
work of his on Adam, whom he tempted to seek himself, yea so far to seek
himself, Genesis 3.5.
as to become Aemulus to God Himself, the Natural and last aim of Self-love,
if it never receive check. This was the Devils first Handsale, his
Masterpiece, that Grand Fundament all Design, on which he has built his
Kingdom ever since. That therefore our Savior might dissolve all his works as
compendiously as might be, He, by this Doctrine, strikes at the Foundation,
knowing, if that were undermined, the whole Building would soon totter. By this
He lays the Axe to the Root of the Tree, Matthew. 3.10.
knowing, if that were up, the Branches would soon come to the ground.

But, that He might do this the better, and to provide lest His Postulata
should not be granted, necessary it was, Mankind should be thoroughly convinced
of these Particulars. That there was such a thing as our Self crept into the
world: That it was utter enmity with God: I ^^^ly, that it was beyond our
Hability to remove it. A Glass^ (...) might reflect these Particulars to our
view, was wantin^ (...) a more commodious one could not possibly be found, t^t
old, almost obliterated, Law of Nature, retriv'd. Hereupon the Divine Majesty
(Himself) committed that Law to writing: which, though it were, to prevent the
like obliteration for the future, done in Tables of stone yet, could not have
effected it, had not Moses beside recorded it in his Pentateuch; a far more
lasting Monument; Matthew. 5.18.
for, when Heaven and Earth shall pass away, that Record shall not, but
continue to a tittle, as our Savior tells us. Now by this Glass was soon
discovered, what a Masst of Self-love we were buried in: How irreconcilable
enmity God conceived thereat: Lastly, our own utter Imbecility, to subdue it.
This was plain. No longer then might we flatter our selves with a conceit of
our still continuing Innocence. Romans 7.9.
Nor could we still pretend in our excuse any Ignorance of our misery, either
from our Guilt, or our Imbecility. But, of necessity we were forced to pray in
aid of some Savior beside, yea above, our selves, to deliver us out of it.

The World now being by this means made ripe for this purpose, (for so John B.
had made sufficient discovery) the Fullness of time then came, wherein our
Savior was to appear, to take this Work in hand Himself, and so put the
last Complement to our Theology. This He did at large in His Sermon on the
Mount, but briefly in this Text, the Epitome of that; And, because the Method
of teaching is, both more short, and more efficacious by Example then by
Precept, He has left us in His Life, but especially in His Death, The
Consummatum est of all, as perfect a Pattern of this Precept, as Mortality can
reach to. By which Death making a full Satisfaction for us, in a most admitable
compendium, He has likewise obtained of His Father, for those that live by His
Faith: First, a Pardon for Adam's self-love imputed to us: Secondly,
sufficient Grace to enable us (sincerely) to deny it in our selves: And lastly,
a Pardon for all our own Defaults therein, and Frailties, repented of. Upon
all which necessarily follows, our Adoption first into God's Favor by Him:
And then our Readmission into that Patrimony we forfeited in Adam.

Self-denial being thus, as we see, the Catholic Design both of Law See
below in the fifth Point in the Margent.
and Gospel, it must needs have some Influence, more or less on every Virtue
we can practice. It Is no marvel then, our Savior makes it here the only
Fundamental, or, if ye will, (...), the Probatum est of a Christian, since,
Eccles. 12.13. Quod caput est rerum quas lex praescripsit Jesu? crucem subire,
semet a se abdicere. H. Grot. in Instit. puer.
as the Wife-man said of keeping the Law, we may well say of this Doctrine, It
is totum hominis, Amans whole Duty, to fulfill it. Wherefore else is it, that
all things, now under the Gospel, go so by Contraries? To Exalt, we must abase
our selves: To be the First, we must become last of all: To be strong, we must
become weak: To be wise, we must become Fools: To subdue our enemies, we must
love them: To save our Lives, we must lose them, with many such like.
Wherefore, I say is it, but because we are now to work out our salvation by
Self-denial; that is, by such a way as pulls down our high thoughts, that
thwarts our perverse Principles, that so God only may be exalted, and as at
first he was so, may at last become All in all? 1 Cor. 15.28.
Wherefore was it, that all the Precepts of the Decalogue were penned in a
Negative form, none in the Affirmative, but the two Middle ones, the more
strictly to oblige us to them, but because they were calculated for our Lapst
estate? For hereby God taught us, that our Obedience to it now was to proceed
(not as formerly:) first via remotionis, then via positionis: First by way of
the Removal of Self-love, before it could proceed to the production of works
of Love: Psaline 34.14.
first by flying that which is evil, before we can come to do that which is
good. Whereupon we may well conjecture that, had Adam persevered Innocent, and
the Moral Law then been written, as it was since, all its Precepts had been
penned in the Affirmative. Does not Esaias tell us, Chap. 27. Ver. 9. (...) This
is all the fruit, to take away our sin? If then no sin, but proceeds out of
Self-love, as is most certain, and so no Virtue to supplant it, but proceeds
from self-denial, then is this Virtue of Self-denial, the only fruit of our
Religion. And so much appears in the words next following in that place: for
how does he mean our sins should be taken away, but when even the Holiest
stones of the Altar should become as Chalke-stones (...) pulverizated or beaten
asunder; that is, by this Virtue of Self-denial analyz'd, Matthew 7.1^.
or reduced to Atoms? Our Savior too, much to the same purpose, tells us,
This is all the fruit of the Law and the Prophets, what? Self-denial? no, but
one branch of it, Equanimity, to do as we would be done to. If that Virtue
then were the Sum of the whole Old Test. what may we think of this Precept
of Self-denial, that goes far beyond it, but that it is the Sum also of
the New? And sure our Forefathers were all of the same Opinion, as appears by
the Primitive, Constant, Necessary Form of Baptism; wherein we stipulate with
God, to Deny the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; and that we may do so,
manfully to fight under the Cross, which is, Christ's Banner, wherein to
continue Christ's faithful Soldiers, and Servants to our lives end. So that as
long as we live in the Church Militant, and that is even until we arrive unto
the Church Triumphant, so long must we be Soldiers exercised in this
spiritual Militia of self-denial, and the Cross. If then this be to be
Baptized into, and conformed unto, Romans 6.3. Phil. 3.10, 11, 12, 14.
the death of Christ; if it be to arrive unto the Resurrection of the Dead, as
it, no question, is Compare that place with Romans 6.3, 4, 5, 6 verses, and it
will appear plainly; Besides the word there (...) seems to relate to the
Ancient manner of Baptizing in hot climats wherein the party baptized rose
again out of the water, as if from the Dead. Romans 15.3.
, then this is the Prize of the High calling of God in Christ Jesus; that Mark
which St. Paul did, and every true Christian ought, to propound unto himself
in all his Actions.

But let us not thus rest in Generals, but descend to more Particulars. We
hold that the Sum of the whole both Law and Gospel is comprehended in those
three Theological Virtues Faith, Hope, and Charity. Now let us see what
dependence each of these have on Self-denial. First, for Faith, the most
Evangelicall Virtue of them, it is plain, it is implied in this Negative
Precept of Self-denial, by the same reason that our Expositours say, the
Affirmative Precepts are implied in the Negatives of the Decalogue. It Is true;
to Deny our selves is formally an Affirmative action, but materially it is a
Negative, it being no more but this, not to assent unto our selves. He then
that, by Antithesis, would raise an Affirmative thereunto, must acknowledge it
to be no other but this, to Assent and Adbere unto God. Now what else is this
but Faith, which is no other but an Affiance placed in God, whether it be by a
simple Assent of the Mind only, which is Faith strictly taken; or by an
Adberence also of the Will and Affections, Genes. 15.6.
which is Faith truly Justifying and Evangelicall? This was that Faith of
Abraham, when, Romans 4.18.
not considering his own and Sarah's ineptitude to be Parents, he had an
immovable respect unto the Infallibility of God's Promise: And that Faith I Am
sure, was Justifying. This was that Faith, by reason of which St. Paul said,
Galar. 2.20.
He lived not, but Christ lived in him, and the life that be lived was by the
Faith of the Son of God. So that, to preach this Doctrine of Self-denial is,
not to preach up the Law and Works again, but, clean contrary, to preach the
Gospel (...), purely, and the Righteousness of Faith. For, besides that our
Savior urged this Doctrine, never any more, and yet sure was no Minister of
the Law, as it is opposed to the Gospel: The Jews, by the Law of Works, sought
to establish their own Righteousness, by their own Strength, to their own
Glory, all which are utterly inconsistent with Self-denial: Whereas we
Christians, by the Law of Faith, establish, not our own, but God's
Righteousness; not by our own, but by God's Strength; not to our own, but to
God's Glory. It must needs be so where Self-denial takes place: it cannot be
so, where it does not. We need no more proof for the matter then that alone
Text of St. Paul, Phil. 3.10. where the Apostle, having first Denied his own
Righteousness, to wit, that of the Law, plainly describes the Righteousness
of God by Christ upon Faith, to be a Righteousness (...), of Knowing Christ,
and the Power of His Resurrection, and the Fellowship of His sufferings, and to
be conformed to Him in His Death. Now if this Conformity be the Fellowship of
His Sufferings, and that Fellowship be the Power of His Resurrection, and that
Power be the Experimental Knowledge of Christ, to wit, Crucified within us,
(all which is clear) what else is that Conformity, and consequently the
Righteousness of Faith, but the Denial of our selves, being a Conformity to
that act of Christ wherein He Denied Himself most perfectly? Thus much for
Faith.

But now for Hope, the Second of the Three Theological Virtues, there is more
doubt of that indeed, whether that may be reconciled with this Doctrine of
Self-denial; since that, having our own Good for its Object, seems to be a
Self-seeking act proceeding only out of Self-love. But yet upon more serious
examination of the matter, we shall see, it will not prove so. For though Hope
(such only I mean as is truly Christian) have Good alone for its Object, and
be a Self-seeking act (in effect) yet, is not built on Self-love, but wholly on
Self-denial.

To clear this seeming Paradox the better, we must lay down Three Grounds, all
of them, as we conceive undeniable. First, that God alone is good, as our
Savior plainly tells us, and so the only Object of our Hope. Matthew. 19.17.
Secondly, that all love of our selves is not vicious: for certainly He that
bids us love our Neighbor as our selves, Ibid. verse. 19.
bids us love our selves in some sort, otherwise that could not be the Rule of
our love to our Neighbors, since we cannot make a Rule of Nothing. Lastly,
that that love of our selves, which is terminated in our selves, is only
vicious, as supposing our selves, and not God alone, to be Good; but that
which arises from, and may be resolved into, God, that only is lawful.

Now hence we argue thus; That Hope which aims only at the Fruition of God,
and yet at our own good, but only in and from Him, must needs be both a
Self-seeking act, and yet an act of Self-denial, (for it seeks our good,
though not as it is ours.) But such is true Christian Hope, as appears from
those Three Grounds, I laid; Ergo. But, that this may be the more rightly
understood, we must observe; such Hope is a Self-denying act properly, and
directly, but a Selfe-seeking act only improperly and at second hand; for it
supposes our good to be finis rei, not agentis; not our Design, but our
Felicity. Did it in every sense Deny our selves, that is, no way conduce to our
Good, it could not be so much as Hope: On the other side, Did it wholly seek
our selves, and not deny our selves, it could not but be vicious, as appears
from the last ground; But thus coupling both these together, it deservedly
becoms the Second of those Three Grand Theological Virtues, I spoke of.

By reason of this, sure, it was, that God promised Abraham, the Faithful: He
would be his exceeding great Reward. Genesis 15.1. Psalm. 71.5.
That David says of God, Thou art my very Hope, o Lord God; Thou art my Trust
even from my youth. And in another place, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and
there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee See a Harmony of Texts for
this, Psalm. 2.12. and 34.10. and 125.1. Prove. 16 20. Esaias 30.18. Jer. 17.7. etc.
. And that we may not think the Gospel behind hand with the Law in this
matter, because it promises to us the Life Eternal, our Savior, speaking to
and of His Father, plainly tells us, Joh. 17.3.
This is Life Eternal, to know Thee, the only true God, and whom Thou have
sent, Jesus Christ. Now the Apostle tells us, who they are alone that know God
So Jer. 22.16 And such is God's Knowledge of us, Gen 22.12. Matthew. 7.23. Genesis
3.9 1 John 5.3.
, 1 Corinthians. 8.3. If any one, says he, Love God, He, that is, God, is known
of him. And so does St. John 1 Epist. 2.3. In this, says he, we know, we know
Him, if we keep his Commandments.

If any one doubt, how this Hope can commend any Means to us in this life,
proportionable to that end, the Fruition of God Almighty, let him consider
those latter words of our Savior's, That Eternal Life was, not only to know
God, but also, in order to that, Joh 14.5, 6.
to know, Him whom He had sent, Jesus Christ. So then, the way to enjoy God is
to enjoy Christ, the bright splendor of His Glory, and Character of His
Person; Heb. 1.3.
as the way for us to partake of the Sun, is, to partake of his Rays and
Brightness. But then what is it for us to know, Christ now, so that we may
enjoy Him? Is it to know Christ only in His Person? No, but also in His
Example. For His Person is in Heaven, and so must be till the Last day, but His
Example He has left behind Him for us. Many enjoyed His Corporeal Presence
upon Earth, 2 Pet. 2.21.
that are now in Eternal chains with the Devils; therefore the Apostle
plainly tells us, If he did know Christ after the Flesh, henceforward he knew
Him so no more, 2 Cor. 5.16. For, says he, every one that is in Christ is a
New Creature. Hence it was, that he says in another place, Phil. 1.21
To me to live is Christ. How so? why, because Gal. 2.20.
he lived not, but Christ lived in him: that is, he expressed in his life 2 Cor.
4.10.
the Life and Dying, or the Virtues of the Life and Death, of the Lord Jesus.
These Virtues then let us embrace and enjoy here, in order to the Fruition of
God; And, that we may truly do so, let it not be for their Vtile, if it be
Possible, whatsoever we fancy it to be, but their Honestum only: As for their
Vtile fear it not, it will follow.

Consonant to this, the Wiseman affirms, that not only a Back-slider in
heart shall be filled with his own ways, but also that a Good man shall be
satisfied from himself, Prove. 14.14. Consonant to this, Mat. 5.3, etc.
our Savior pronounces all his Beatitudes, yea in the Present tense, on those,
who, but for that of God and Godliness that is in them, 1 Cor. 15.19.
are the pittifullest men in the World. Consonant to this too the Apostle
affirms, out of the Prophet; That neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, what God has
prepared (and that in this life) for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. This now
is that Hope that makes not ashamed (of any Crosses) because of the love of
God shed abroad in our hearts. Romans 5.5.
This is that Hope whereby we must be saved: Romans 8.24.
And, if ye will receive it; This is that Spiritual, that better Hope of the
Gospel, Heb. 7.19.
by the bringing in of which it leads us to Perfection; whereas the Carnal
Hope of the Law could perfect nothing.

Thus at length I have made appear, how true Christian Hope is so far from
being evacuated, it is only solidly established, by this Doctrine of
Self-denial. As for all sensual Hope, let it go and perish for, what it is,
a mere Cheat, and Lie, no better, for the Good, it aims at is just like
Adam's forbidden fruit, and indeed was represented by it, which in appearance
promised the knowledge of Good, but in effect performed nothing but the
Experience of Evil. But as for those that embrace the Commandments of God,
only out of Hope of the Promised Reward, as the Scripture, condescending to
our Infirmities, does encourage them so, I dare not by any means presume to
censure them. We condemn not Attrition, though we commend Contrition above
it; neither do we condemn them that embrace Virtue for its Reward, though
deservedly we commend them more highly, that embrace it for it self. With the
Prophet, Zach. 4.10. Matthew. 12.20.
we must not despise the day of small things; and, with our Savior, not break
the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax. But yet these are to be
admonisht, that such Hope is rather Legal then Evangelicall, therefore that
they are not to rest still in their Minority, but to grow on toward
Perfection; it being a shame to a Christian not to aspire to that, which even
the Heathen by their speculative Learning could descry, when one of them says,
Oderunt peccare Boni virtutis amore. I have been the larger in this Point, lest
this Precept of Self-denial should seem to want that maine Engine of
Obedience Hope of a Reward. Indeed, this seems to be the Reason why our
Savior no sooner had delivered this Precept, with its Attendants, but straight
in the next Verse He prevents this maine Objection against it, saying, He that
will save his life shall lose it; Verse 25.
but he that will lose his life for my sake, shall save it.

I come now to make amends in speaking more briefly of the Third Theological
Virtue, and that is, Love or Charity. See the sixth point below toward the end.
That this Virtue is totally built on Selfe-denyall, if not the very same with
it, appears plainly from the Natural effect of Love in General, which is to
resign up its proper Interest, and place it in another: Hence we say, Animus
est ubi amat, non ubi animat; The mind is where it loves, not where it lives.
Colos. 3.4 John 3.16.
Hence Love is called vinculum unionis, and to that the Apostle alludes, when
he calls it the Bond of Perfectness. God so loved the world, says our
Savior, that He gave His only begotten Son for us. He, as it were, gave up
His Interest in His Son, to procure an Union with us. In another place, He
says, Greater love then this has no man, John 15.13.
then to lay down his life for his friends. May we not say, Greater
Selfe-denyall then this no man can show? surely, we may; for it appears by
that verse following our Text, that to lose ones life is one of the greatest
acts of Selfe-denyall. This then is the great commendation of Selfe-denyall,
that it is, not Faith alone, nor Hope alone, but the love of God, the Bond of
them; That Love of which St. Paul gives so vast commendations, amongst which
one is, that it seeks not its own; 1 Corin. 13.5. Galat. 5.6.
That Love by means whereof Faith producing its works becomes to tum
Christiani, the Total of a Christians Duty. By this means it is, that Love
climbes up even into Heaven it self; whereas Faith, that, shall cease, when
once we come to Vision; Hope, that, shall be explete, when once we come to
Fruition: But Self-denying Love is strong as Death, Cant 8.6.
that therefore shall be perfected, not abolished, when once we come to Union;
Then when our corrupt selves shall be swallowed up of Perfection, and God
shall be All in all.

I hope, by this time it appears fully of what General importance this Virtue
is to the whole Body of Theology, all those Three Theological Virtues being
so immediately founded on it. Other Arguments might be used to this purpose: I
shall only produce one more, as irrefragable, as it is brief, out of the
Apostle's words, 1 Cor. 2.2. I determined, says he, to know nothing but Jesus
Christ, and Him crucified in you; now when is Christ crucified in us, but when
we are crucified to the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, in conformity unto
Him? Thus does St. Peter expound it plainly, 1 Pet. 4.1. Christ therefore
suffering for us in the flesh, be ye also armed with the same mind: for he
that suffers in the flesh has ceast from sin. By this now it appears,, that
Selfe-denyall is not only the Vnum, but also the Vnicum necessarium of a
Christian; which had the Corinthians but learnt, the Apostle would have
required no more of them.

Here perhaps you will ask me. But does not our Savior, even in this Text we
entreat of, require more then so of us, to wit, that We should take up our
Cross, and that we should follow his Example? Does he not usher in these with
the very same Siquis, He does that Precept of Self-denial? it is plain, he
does. Why, then we may well conclude, that this Precept of Selfe-denyall has
no pre-eminence above the others. No; the very positure of it in the first
place, proves the contrary, and gives it the pre-eminence above them. For
hereby, we being absolutely in the first place obliged to that, whatsoever
obligation the other fasten on us, either it must be Nothing and Void, if it
contradict the first; or, if it do not, but make for it, it must be
subservient to it. Now who sees not that the two following Precepts are so
far from contradicting the first, that they make exceedingly for it? For
first; if Self-denial be a Virtue of such General importance, as we have
proved, it cannot be, though a reflext act in it self yet, a mere immanent
act, in its consequence; it must be perfected without, though it be begun
within our selves; it must be expressed and held forth to others; partly, to show
the sincerity thereof to others: Mat. 5.10.
that the Glory thereof may be rendered to God our Father, which is in Heaven.
Now what fitter expedient could possibly be found to do this, then the
Cross, whereby the world is crucified to our selves, and our selves unto the
World: whereby the Flesh, the Old Man, is crucified within us? For, as our
Savior by His Cross was lifted up, like the Brazen Serpent in the
Wilderness, so our Selfe-denyall is, as it were, lifted up by that Cross we
are to take up, and made conspicuous.

Nor is this Cross an Evidence only of our Self-denial, but also a Mean to
help us thereunto. Certainly, every Cross must be contrary to our selves,
otherwise it is not a Cross; and as certain it is, our Self-denial must be
performed by the help of Contraries; No fitter Mean then can be imagined, to
help it forward, then the Cross. For, if, as Hippocrates and all Physicians
tell us, all Cures must be performed by Contraries, we may very aptly compare
Self-love to the Disease or Humor, that is to be purged out of us: the Cross
to that Physic which must help to do it; and Selfe-denyall to that expulsive
Faculty, wherewith the Grace of God endues us.

As for those other words, and follow Me, they also have a plain reference to
this Precept of Self-denial; as being not only our Savior's Grant, wherein
He gives full power, license and authority to all that shall come to Him, with
those two precedent Qualifications, to become His Followers and Disciples, that
is, Christians: but also a Third Precept, enjoining us, with Constancy and
Perseverance, to imitate the Perfectest Pattern of Self-denial in our Saviors
own example, who, as the Apostle tells us, Romans 15.3.
did not please, that is, Denied himself. Whereas therefore, we compared the
Cross to that Physic, that must cure us of Self-love, we may compare this
Precept to that Rule of Diet, which must prevent our Relapsing. So then,
notwithstanding what can be alleged out of the words, Self-denial must still
have the pre-eminence.

But yet this is not enough: for here some perhaps will fly to Argument, and
wonder how all our Religion should be built on Self-denial. What? All of it
Anasceuasticall, no Catasceuasticall part thereof? All tending to
Mortification, no part to Vivification? All to doffe the Old Man, none do on
the New? I look this should be cast in my way, by those qui ad pauca
recipient. But it is nothing; These Distinctions are but of diverse Notions. not
of diverse Things: Our Deeds of Mortification are at once Deeds of Vivification:
Our putting off the Old Man cannot be without putting on the New: Our Aversion
from the Creature, if regular and uniforme, is our Conversion unto God. It must
needs be so, if God and the Creature be (as to us) (...), Contraries without
any Mean imaginable betwixt them: for then he that forsakes the Creature must
needs betake himself to God: even as he that forsakes the Earth must needs go
toward Heaven. As for this present World, it is no other but our Exile,
because our Enemies are Masters of it: Our Life is our Pilgrimage, our Journey:
Heaven, that is our Country; and our Religion is our Motion from the one to
the other. Now this Motion you may term as you please, according to its
several Intentions, either a Flight from our Selves, or a Journey unto God;
either Self-denial, or Charity; either Hatred of the Creature, or Love of God;
it matters not much which of them: The Motion is still the same, whatsoever
Name you give it. But, if you join both these together, as our Savior does in
the next verse, and style this Motion Selfe-denyall for the Love of God, which
is no other, but our Self-denial here, in Precept, then all Objection is
removed, and you have a complete Epitome of Religion.

To illustrate this somewhat further. We must consider; Our Virtues (now under
the Covenant of Faith, not of Works) are not to be looked upon as Actions of
men in perfect Health so, as they were in Paradise: but only as on the way of
Recovery, that is, mixed with much feebleness and imperfection. As long as we
live here, the Flesh does lust against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
Flesh: by reason of which contrariety we do not the things we would, as the
Apostle tells us, Gal. 5.17. Therefore, as Plato conceived of Knowledge, it was
all but Memory, so, must we of our present Righteousness and Holiness, that
it is all but Recovery.

But then will not this make much for the disparagement of the Gospel, though
for the advancement of Self-denial, that our best Estate under it is but
Recovery, whereas yt of Adam in Innocence was of perfect Health? No, it will
not: For though our Virtues now considered in Arithmeticall Proportion be
inferior to Adam's, yet considered in their Geometrical Proportion, with
reference to the Natural auknesse and weakness of the Workman, and so the
Difficulty of the Work, thus, they are Superior, and ask a greater measure
of Grace to perform them. Briefly; compare our Works with his, and they are
Inferior: compare our Working with his, and it is Superior. We perceive the
Suns heat far more intense in the Summer, then in the Spring, and yet in
the Springtime it is in its Ascent and acts more strongly. What Is the reason
of it? One maine one seems to be, the Winter's remaining Cold, which is his
task to Master: so Adam's Virtues in Innocence would have appeared more
perfect and glorious, then ours do now or can do; and yet we have a greater
measure of Grace by Christ's Redemption, then Adam had by Creation. What Is the
reason of it? Surely no other reason can be given but this, We have Self-love
and Sin to master in us; Adam had not: Our Grace therefore acts more
vigorously, though it be not so successefully, and so ours has more of Virtue,
Adam's more of Felicity in it. Therapeuticall Physic is both more Difficult
and more precious, then Prophylacticall; It Is far more hard to recover our
Health, then to preserve it; Harder to recover the top of a Hill, as we are
descending, then being at the top to keep our Station; so a far greater
measure of Grace is required to recover our lost estate, then was at first to
have retained it. No Virtue shines so gloriously, as that which grapples with
most Difficulty: No Victory is so Triumphant, as his whose Enemy was most
Puissant; If then the Ministration of the Law had been glorious in Adam
persevering, it was Nothing to the glory of the Gospel, which excells it in our
Recovering. For, though the Law and Gospel, both, drive at one and the same
mark, yet, does the Gospel by its Method attain that, which the Law could not
retain at first, nor re-attaine afterward by its Method, to wit, our Union
with God. Accordingly therefore the Promises of the Gospel are more Glorious:
The Gospel promises a heavenly Paradise, the Law but an Earthly one; The Gospel
promises it Eternally, the Law but Temporally. Heb. 11.40.
These are those better things, without which the Law could not be perfected,
nor lead us to Perfection. And such indeed it became the Son of God to bestow,
who, it is believed, never restored any to their former health and Limbs, but
with far greater strength and Vivacity. We Conclude then, notwithstanding what
has been alleged, Self-denial is the (...), the Breviate of Christian
Religion.

What Praise then in former time was given to Lawgivers for the Abridgement of
their Laws, the same is most justly due to our Savior for His Abridgement of
Christianity in this one Precept of Self-denial. For, if we esteem the sum
of the Moral Law, in those Ten Words of the Decalogue, a most excellent
Compendium, this must needs be more admirable, that has contracted the whole
both Law and Gospel into these few words, Deny thy self. We know, the Benefit
of that was, that the Law might be written on the Phylacteries of their Hands,
and the Frontlets between their Eyes, that so, whatsoever they did, whether
eat, sit, walk, or meditate, the Law might still be in their sight, to keep
them from all evil. And may not then greater Benefit be made of this short
Precept, which even by the finger of God is in some measure written in every
ones, not Head alone and Hands, but Heart also, that he may do it? Surely, if
the Heathen thought their (...), worthy to be written in Gold on the Doors of
their Temples, with much better reason may we engrave this Precept (...), in
Golden Letters on the Porches of our Churches. Or if we like the Jewish Rites
better, as is reason; we may make this Precept (...), the Phylactery of our
Hearts; That whatsoeever sin the World, the Flesh, or the Devil tempt us
unto, whether it be the lust of the Flesh, or the lust of the Eyes, or the
Pride of Life; whatsoever Temptation God proves us with, to part with our
Goods, Friends, Gifts of Body or Mind, yea our very Body and Life it self, we
may resist and overcome them all by this alone Delphick Sword of Self-denial.

For, if we shall do so, mark the Benefit will accrue to us thereby: This
alone Precept, constantly attended to, will carry on the General Work of our
Regeneration in so Natural and Uniform a Method, as no other Precept
whatsoever can do. The Works of Art and Nature differ mainly in this Point;
that Nature working from an Internal Principle, carries on its work uniformly,
in all parts at once, in our Nourishment and Augmentation: whereas Art, working
from an External Principle, as we see in the Statuaries trade, is feign to
frame one part after another, until at length the whole is finished: Just so
it is in the Forming of the New Creature in us; if our spiritual growth
therein be Uniform, in all its Members alike, it is a figne it proceeds from
this Internal Principle of the Divine Nature in us, whereby Denying and
Forsaking our selves, we firmly depend on God: But if our Growth therein be
Partial, that is, if one Member of the New Creature in us runs out into a
Monstrous exuberance, while many others fare the worse for it, consume, wither,
and pine away to Nothing, it is a sign this Birth is, not the New Creature, but
some New Monster raised up in us, not by the Incorruptible seed of the Word,
such as this Precept of Self-denial is, which is the first Principle our
Savior sowes us with, but by I know not what Extrinsick Principle of that Art,
whereby the Devil in an Angel of Light, seeks to frame his Image in us. If
this may not be credited, the Event will prove it so: For observe it, if those
who have taken up their Religion, moved by some extrinsick Principle of Honor,
Profit, or Pleasure, when that Principle is removed, do not suddenly make a
Halt, and then turning faces about return into their old Posture; herein
plainly proving that Maxim in Philosophy true, Nullum violentum est permanens.
But it is not so with those that act out of this Internal Principle we speak of:
for they taking their Religion from no External Accidents whatsoever, but
merely induc't by the Inward, Native worth of it; mark it, if they will not
suffer for it, and that, not out of spite and stomach, but out of a true
grounded Patience, rather then they will forgo it.

Nor does this Virtue of Self-denial contribute only to the Duration of our
Piety, but also to the very Essence and Power of it. Other Virtues may
superinduce (...), an empty, impotent Vizour of Godliness in our actions, but
(...), a true, substantial, powerful Form they cannot. The reason of it is;
Other Virtues not founded upon this, are not indeed, what they seem, true,
substantial solid Virtues, but only their Appearances, so that it is no
marvel, if they do not contribute to their actions what they never had in
their Habi^s: But this Virtue of Self-denial is the Substantial Ingredient of
all others, which as it enstamps them with true Worth and Value, so infuses
Life and Power into them; it being, Fortior est qui se quam qui fortissima
vincit Moenia. Horace. Romans 1.16.
even in the Heathen man's account, the most Heroical achievement of
Fortitude, to Overcome ones self. By this it is we truly show the Gospel to
be the Power of God, that is, such a Power as appears, not in Sight, but by
Faith; as consists, not in our Arm of Flesh but, in our own weakness; as
makes, not for our own, but for God's glory. Which Power, though to those that
walk (...), it seems to be Impotency, Folly, yea Madness it self, yet is
indeed to the Spirituall-sighted man the Power of God, that is, by an
Hebraisme, the most Excellent, mighty Power we can imagine.

Upon the whole matter then; we may well affirm in that Parable of our
Saviors, He that enters upon the Christian profession this way, (as our
Savior here calls upon every one to do;) he, enters in by the Door, and to
him the Porter opens, he may go in at liberty, and find pasture; but he that
enters upon it elsewhere, as by being at many Sermons, long Prayer, or an
illgrounded Zeal, he, clambers up elsewhere, he enters not by the Door; and
that with as manifest danger of his Ruin, as little hope of Proficiency. And
accordingly, the Self-denying man, entering the only right way on his Religion,
is so firm to it, that rather then forgo it, he will forgo his life first:
but he that takes up this or that Virtue on some squint-eyed by-respects, being
but a Mercenary, no sooner sees the Wolf come, but instantly he flies for it.

Or, we may compare one that is exercised in this Virtue, to him that built his
House opon the Rock, which stood out all storms and tempests that beat upon
it: But those that are Strangers to it, to him that built his House upon the
Sands, which upon the first Tempest that beat upon it fell, and that with a
mighty Ruin. Romans 9.32, 33.1 Cor. 3.11.
In a word; this Doctrine being that stumbling stone laid in Sion, must be that
Foundation spoken of by the Apostle, other then which no man can lay. If any
one having truly laid it, build thereon Wood, Hay, and Stubble, his Work
indeed shall be burnt, and he thereby be damnifi'd: but himself yet shall
escape, howbeit so as through the fire. But, if any one say, he has laid this
Foundation, when indeed he never did, he is a liar, he and his Works both shall
be consumed by unquenchable fire; for he knew his Master's will, but did it not.

Thus have we seen the Universal Influence and Importance of this Precept,
which lest we should think to be therefore of less force and efficacy, we
must furthermore observe, it comes as full home to every man's Several, as what
Precept soever is most Particular. And this is the admirable commendation of
it, that its Generality hinders not its efficacy, for usually it is otherwise.
The Sunbeams diffused at large rather cherish then offend, they burn not,
till contracted into a narrow cone. Thunder removed at a far distance from us
scarce moves us any whit, but a clap just in our Zenith makes us startle. A
piece of Iron that touches in many points at once, being blunt, does not enter,
but make a bruise; but a Needle, touching but in one point, enters to the
quick: So General Precepts usually make but superficial Impressions, a
bruise at most: but those that come home to men's Particulars, as that Prophet
came to Jehu, with a Message to thee; or as the Prophet Nathan did to David,
with tues homo, thou art the man, these, have an edge set upon them, and ever
make the deepest Impression. Now this Precept, notwithstanding it is of that
General Importance, I have showed, yet comes home to All and every ones
Particular self, and that puts force and power into it. The Subject of it is,
not any thing above us, to wit, God, nor any thing beside us, to wit, our
Neighbor, but our own particular selves; and therefore he that can, by
Introversion retiring into himself, say, I am the man whose corrupt
Understanding is to be resigned up to the Faith of the Son of God; whose
depraved Will is to be Regulated by Obedience to His Heavenly Example, he, and
he only, is the proper Subject of this Precept. In brief: This Precept, being
the Word of Faith, as I have made appear, shows the Gospel to be that Word,
which is neither too high, Romans 10.8.
nor too low for us; but very near us, even in our mouth and in our heart,
that we may do it.

THEN now at length let us proceed and see what this Precept is, we speak of.
The Words are, (...): If any one will come after Me, Let him deny himself.
Words, you see, very brief, and yet of most rich Contents; like Gold,
containing much value in a small quantity; or like Pythagoras's letter Y,
narrow at first sight, but after a while of larger extension; or rather like
the Virtue it self of Self-denial, Matthew. 7.14.
which our Savior calls a strait entrance into a spacious Kingdom. In
handling of them therefore, I shall not be so press as to insist strictly on
the Words, lest doing too much honor to the Cabinet, I prejudice the Jewel:
But I shall take some liberty to my self, and, though I neglect not the Words
yet, shall handle them Common-place-wise, and so insist upon this Method:
First, show the Nature and full Meaning of this Precept: Secondly, its
Possibility or Peisablenesse: Thirdly, its Congruity in Reason: Fourthly, its
Necessity in Religion: Fifthly, its Excellency, above any Precept of the Law
whatsoever: And lastly, its Vtility to all those that shall obey it.

To show then the Nature of this Precept, we must let you see, first what is
meant here by our Selves: Then what is meant by Denying: Lastly, what by
Denying our selves. By ones Self here He means that, which the Stoics call
(...): or rather that which the Apostle calls (...), Ephesians. 2.3. That is, those
Principles and Opinions which by Nature, now corrupted, are in every one, and
incline him to establish his own Independencie of any other whatsoever, yea
even of God Himself, and to crook every thing toward himself, so making
himself the sole end of his thoughts, words and actions. In a word; Our Self
strictly taken is, (...) Bas-Resp. Interrog. sextae, (...).
our own Will to be or have any thing contrary to the Will of God. Our being
any thing may well be styled our Selves, there is no doubt of that: So may our
having any thing too, for as much as we have and own nothing, but what we
adhere unto, and becomes a part of our selves by Love, which Love does
interesse us therein.

But that we may the better understand the true Nature of our Selves as
contradistinct from God, we must consider, that the whole Systeme of Ens
consists but of two parts, God and the Creature, as it were of the Sun and
its radius, its Beam or Ray. That God is of and by Himself; or (to speak
more properly) not of nor by any other: Therefore, that He alone claims
Selfnesse (as I may term it) to Himself, Exodus 3.14.
because He alone is what he is; His Essence and Existence are both one, He is
his own basis and foundation. Then we must consider, that the Creature is no
ways of it self, but wholly of God, because Existing eminently and radically
in Him. God therefore, He, cannot possibly Deny Himself, as the Apostle tells
us; but as for the Creature, that, cannot but Deny it self, 2 Timothy 2.13.
if it act as it should do.

But then, surely you will ask: How comes it to pass, there is any Selfnesse
in the World, beside that of God alone, that our Savior should speak here of
the Creatures Self? For this we must know, that indeed and in truth, there is
no such thing in rerum natura as the Creatures Self, contradistinct from God,
but only in Corrupt Opinion and Desire: And so even now I intimated, deriving
its true Original from our own proper Will: And so much our Savior intimates
here to us, commanding our act of Denial to attend it, the proper Adjunct of
Non ens, of that which in very truth is nothing.

Now this Opinfonate, affected Propriety or Selfnesse comes about thus. God,
having in the Beginning created the whole World for Himself, and therein
manifested His Power, in making all things to serve and fear Him, as their
Lord, would also manifest his Goodness, and therefore made some things to love
Him too, that is, to serve Him as a Father no less then as a Lord. This that
He might do, 'twas fit His Service should be Rational; Romans 12.1.
that is, proceed from a rational Appetite, to wit, the Will informed by the
Understanding. So then He made such a Creature as was capable of such an
Appetite, and therewith He endu'd it. Now 'twas necessary this Appetite should
be free so, that it might love or not love God's Goodness freely: The Reason
is, Because God is a Perfect Good, and so requires Perfect Love to attend it.
But now Perfect love, as it casts out Fear, according to the Apostle, 1 John
4.18.
so it casts out Force too; as which would argue Imperfection in the Good it
loves, that it could not, of it self, without the aid of an Extraneous force,
attract love proportionable thereunto. For this cause He made the Apperite of
the Will free, as by His Assistance to continue in Obedience to His own Will,
so by its own mutability to deflect from that, to desire an Independent
subss;istence, of it self, and thereto to bend its whole Activity. Being thus
enfranchised, it made use of its own Freedom to the worst part, and so
rebel'd against God, its Maker, forgetting Him, and directing all things to it
self. For so, (to omit the Sin of the Angels not revealed to us) we find that
Adam, not content with that Condition wherein he was set by God, brake that
Law, wherein he was to acknowledge his Dependence and Obedience; by which act
of his he did interpretatively renounce God his Maker, and directly sought and
set up himself. Here now came in our Propriety, Self-love, Self-will into the
World, and therewith sin, the Original of all evil; as well of that which
is simply such, sin, as of that which is such to some things only, and in
some respects, misery. For, so we find in the story, that Adam, thus seeking
himself, found himself indeed, but to his own Destruction: Or rather, to
speak more truly, did not sinde, but quite lose himself, as will appear out
of God's words concerning him. For, when he had done that, for which he was
so ashamed and afraid together, that he was feign to hide himself, God
coming into the Garden asked, Adam where art thou? Not but that He knew very
well where he was, but, that Adam knew not, what he had made himself, and so
God asked the question, merely to show he was no where or Nothing, at least, in
His Account. This, lo! had Adam gotten by his late Prevarication: that he, who
by Creation was newly made like God Himself, by Sin and Rebellion became the
next degree to Nothing.

And by this we have already delivered may sufficiently be perceived what this
(...), this same Self is, which our Savior here speaks of; that not our Self
only, that which here is to be denied, but the immediate consequents of it,
Sin and Death, are indeed, nothing in the World; to be sure, not of God's
making, but, if any thing, Creatures of our own, and therefore evil, wholly
evil, and that continually.

But now, more dictinctly to unfold the Nature of this Self we have brought
into the world, we may observe three sorts of things we are bidden to Deny in
Scripture, and in them a threefold Self. They are either such things as are
absolutely evil, and so to be Denied of us (...), in all cases whatsoever; or
else they are evil only respectively, and but in some Cases to be Denied.
Tit. 2.12.
Of the first sort are all Ungodliness and worldly lusts, in the words of the
Apostle: Which that they are our Selves ye may see by this alone, That
whosoever goes about to Deny or reprove them in any one, when he hits upon his
peculiar darling lust that which has most of himself in it, he Winches
presently, and Complains, he spoke against himself.

The other sort, which are evil only in some cases, are such things as are
either without us, as our Goods of Fortune, our Wealth, which we ordinarily
term our Selves, when we say, such a man has undone himself, meaning his
estate; also our Friends, Father, Mother, Wife, Children, etc. For these we use
to call our Second selves: Or else those things that are within us, as our
Life, which, without any Trope, we usually term our Selves, and our Savior
makes the highest Object of our Actual Self-denial, John. 15.13.
then those things that accompany it, the Goods of our Body and Mind, our
Beauty, Strength, Learning, etc. All these three selves are comprehended here
in the Text: for here we are bidden to Deny, non nostra, sed nos, not ours
only, but our Selves, without any Specification at all, and therefore to Deny
what we take to be most properly our Selves, our Lives and Livelihood; and
that contains the other two Virtually in it.

As for our Soul; though that be our better part, yet comes it not within the
Precincts of our Text. For, if by it we mean its two essential Faculties, the
Understanding and the Will, these so far as they are corrupted, are Denied in
that first sort of things we spoke of even now, which are absolutely evil: and
so our Understanding is to be Denied by Faith, strictly taken; our Will by
Obedience to the will of God; and both together by that Faith which is truly
Evangelicall, that which works by Love. But if by the Soul, we mean its Life
and Happiness in its conjunction with Gods favor, it is a great question
indeed whether that may be Denied of us, fince that conjunction cannot be
violated, but by the commission of some sin or other by us. And yet, seeing
we have two famous examples of it in Moses and Paul, that really wished it might
be done, could it have consisted with God's glory, and never were reproved
for it, we may admit it may be done Voto, in Wish, (if it might stand with God's
Honor) howbeit, that so it is not required of us. But that this was ever done
de facto is hard to say; though some have adventured to affirm, Se Calvin
Inst. cap. 16. Sect. 10., 11, 12. Perkins on the Creed. The Consession of Faith
Printed cum Priviligio 1629. And Jacob against Bilson, An. 1600.
it came to pass once, to wit, in our Savior Himself, who suffered, and
subjected His Soul to the Sorrows of Hell and Eclipse of God's Favor toward
Him, for certain hours, upon the Cross, for our Sins: But that indeed His
Acts 2.27.31.
Soul was not left therein, because in so short a space He made an Infinite
Satisfaction. But I dare not presume to dogmatize in so Dangerous a Point.

Thus we see, in the General, here is a double Self to be denied of us; One
absolutely evil, and ever to be Denied; the other Evil only in some cases,
and but at sometimes to be Denied; That therefore is to be Denied for it self,
this for that. For had not the First Adam brought that into the World, he had
never been brought to Deny this: And yet for all that the Second Adam came to
thrust that out of the World, He was brought to Deny this, but then it was for
our Self-love imputed to Him.

Selves. Next see we what it is to Deny; and then lastly, what to Deny our
selves. To Deny; we know what that is, either when we contradici what is
affirmed, and affirm the contrary: or else when we refuse to grant ones
Request, and neglect or oppose it. The first is Logical, in words; the other
Moral, in our actions of commerce one with another. For the Word here, it is
(...), of (...), and that, they say comes of (...), to take away, so that it is
the same, upon the matter, with (...); and then it seems our Saviors meaning
was, first that we should take away our selves, then take up the Cross; or
rather take up this, to take away that. In the Latin it is abneget, which
signifies to deny one, and denying him, to thrust him from one, so that it is a
Verbal and Real denial, both. Howbeit nego, if we look at the Original, is
to deny Really too, coming of ne and ago, to do nothing for one: Therefore
nego is to deny Morally, (...) Logically. This for the Word.

Now for the Meaning of it, it is not amiss to consider those other terms,
whereby cur Savior was wont to illustrate this Denial, Luke 14 26.
in other places parallel hereunto. In one place, He bids us Hate all, even
our very Lives, to be His Disciples. Now he that Hates one will never consent
or yield to him in any thing, but ever denies what he desires. Our Savior
therefore desiring we should Deny our selves, not formally in Word, but, really
in Heart and Deed, bids us do it out of the Affection of Hatred to our Selves.

But, because our Selves (in some sense) and every thing that belongs to our
selves, are not always bad and to be Hated, as I have said: And it were
Incivility, contrary to the Laws of God and Nature, to hate our Parents, or
go about to make away our selves, therefore must we take Hating for loving
less. And so in another place our Savior expounds it, Mar. 10.37, 38
saying, He that loves Father or Mother more then Me, (or so much either) is
not worthy of Me. So then thus we are to take it; Deur 20.16, 17, 18.
We are to Hate our selves and ours, Deur. 20.10, 11, 12, etc.
when they are Contrary to Christ; when not, yet to love them less, that is,
only in Him.

Laftly, Because Love is the Affection of Union, Hatred of Division, and we
use to separate our Selves from what we Hate, therefore in Denying of our
Selves, He bids, forsake all we have, Luke 14.33.
that is, as usually it is expressed, to come out of our Selves, as Abram out of
Chaldaea, Lot out of Sodom, Israel out of Egypt. The word is (...), and that is
contrary to (...), therefore it signisies, we should not subordinate our own
things to our selves, not make our selves the Determinate end of them, but,
though they be ours and God has given us them, yet we should be tanquam non
habentes, use them as though we used them not. For thus we must distinguish
between (...) and (...), Lib. 4. in locum cap. 14.
between Renouncing and Forsaking our selves, as Beda well observes.

Now, if we join these two in one, we shall plainly see what Deny our selves.
It is not only to break our selves of our Natural, Wild, Untamed Wills, that
is, to mortify our Ungodliness and Worldly lusts, those especially we are
most addicted to, as which have most of our selves in them; but also to esteem
of our Selves, Friends, Goods, yea and Life too, as Nothing in respect of God
and His most blessed Will; therefore not to humor our own Wills, unless they
be consonant to, and proceed from God's; but to Deny them heartily, therefore
to Hate them, when contrary, yea when consonant to God's Will to love them but
a little, that is, only in Him.

Lastly, it is to forsake and come eat of our selves, that is, to become
contrite, humble, and obedient, like little children, to be of Readiness mind,
when he cried, Lord! what will Thou I shall do? and His Will to do, and none
but His, what e're it cost us. And, because these Outward things sometimes
follow us, even when we, seek not but, forsake them, yet to behave our selves,
as if we had them not, or they were none of ours, that is, to behave our selves
as Stewards, not as Owners of them. This if we shall do; If we shall, not
acknowledge only but, love our own Abjection, Contempt, and Nothing; If we
shall no longer live, but Chrish live in us; If we shall make it our Meat and
Drink to do the Will of God our Father; If we shall be to God as the Clay to
the Potter, as a Hand to him whose hand it is; then we may not doubt but we are
good Followers of Christ, that we are comne to apprehend that for which we are
apprehended of Him, to a perfect Denial of our Selves, a full Union with God.

But must we then indeed Deny our selves? must we become, not only Vile but,
Nothing in our own eyes? then I doubt not but it will be said of most of us, as
once it was by the Disciples; Here dur us est hic sermo, Marth 19.^5
quis potest servari? This is so hard a saying, scarce any man can be saved.
And indeed we may better complain of this saying of our Savior's, then the
Disciples could of that He then spoke to them: for there He only spoke of
Denying their Wealth; here He speaks of Denying their very selves; therefore
durior his sermo, this is the harder saying of the twain by far. But, as our
Savior then answered them, so may I any that shall murmr now, and tell them,
that, though with men this be impossible, yet with God it is not; for with him
all things are Possible, and therefore this.

Why, me thinks this were enough to show its Possibility, that it is here
enjoined us by our Savior, which shows, not only a bare Possibility, but so
high a modus of it, as amounts to little less then a Necessity, as hereafter I
shall show you. The plain truth is, to acknowledge it commanded, and yet
maintain it impossible to be obeyed, mustargue either injustice in God, to
command it, when impossible, or ignorance, not to know it impossible, when
commanded; either of which to say were Blasphemy, deserving the rending of
clothes.

Did there not go power with the Word of God, Heb ^ 3
in the Creation of things? why may not then power as well go along with His
Word in the Gubernation of things? I Am sure, when Moses hoped to excuse himself
from obedience to Gods Command by reason of his Impotency, Exodus 4.10, 11, 12.
God answers him with no other Reason but that taken from His Creating Power.
Nor is it any maryaile; for indeed there is a strait affinity betwixt them,
since it were a great disparagement to the Creation, if any Creature should not
be endu'd with a sufficient Capacity to attain its end.

That Gods commanding Word does not ever obtain its Prime intended End, that
is, Obedience thereunto, as His Creating Word ever did, makes nothing at all
against this. For that may proceed from the Diversity of Subjects; (not the
want of Power) that of the Creation being merely Natural and Passive, whereas
that of Gods Laws and Commands (such I mean as are Moral) is Voluntary and
Active; is (...), left in manu consilii sui, and so has power of Resistance.

Nor does it make anything against this; that now we are not able to fulfill
the Law of God. For, if we understand it, of fulfilling it in the Rigor, it is
true, we are not now able to do it; therefore neither is it now so required of
us. But, when it was, as it was before our Fall, then, no man doubts but, we
had sufficient ability to do it: If we understand it of fulfilling it in
Sincerity, so indeed it is now required of us, and so to fulfill it we have now
sufficient ability: He that denies it is a Liar, Romans 6.14. Romans 1.16.
and the Truth is not in him. Now, I say, especially in these days of the
Gospel, which, as the Apostle tells us, John 1.17.
is the power of God to every one that believes; Now, that our Savior has
brought with Him that Grace and Truth which the Law of Moses could not; Now,
Acts 2.16.17.
that God powers forth of his Spirit plentifully upon all Flesh.

But, if any one be yet so hardy as to deny it, let him reconcile his Denial
with that Assertion of our Savior's, Matthew. 10.30. 1 John. 5.3.
My Yoke is easy, and my Burden is light: Or with that of St. John, Verily,
His Commandments are not grievous. For sure His Yoke must needs pinch and gall
us, in which we cannot stir our Necks, to draw in it: His Burden cannot but
be heavy, to those that have no ability to lift, much less to bear it; And
His Commandments cannot but be grievous to those that are allowed no manner of
Grace to perform them.

Were not this to make God as tyrannical as Pharaoh, to set us a task and
afford us no Straw to do it? or as Austere as that Master, that looked to reap
where be never sowed? No, Mich. 6.8.
I have showed thee, O Man, what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee,
says God by His Prophet. And the Wise man asks the question (thereby leaving
every Fool, as without all answer, Prove. 17.6.
so without all excuse:) Wherefore is there a Price in the band of a fool, to
get Wisdom, seeing he has no heart to it? Matthew. 13.12. and 25.29. Luke 8.18.
Does not our Savior tell us, in more places then one, that every man is
habens, that is, has the grace of God, as well he from whom it was taken, as
he to whom more was given? I Am sure, He says, every Servant had his Talent and
Pound, as well he that laid it up, Luke 19.20.] Luke 12.48.
as he that improved it double. If that be not enough, He tells us, He looks
for men's service proportionable to His Grace and their abilities; for much
where he bestows much; for little where little: And where there is none at all
(as sometimes possibly it happens) He will accept of the Will for the Deed. In
one place the Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 8, 12.
God accepts every one according to that he has, not according to that he has
not. In another, That no man is tempted above that he is able, and the like.
All which shows us the Truth of, 1 Cor. 10.13.
what God Himself told St. Paul in his Extremity, His Grace, His Strength, 2
Cor. 12.9.
that He affords us, is sufficient for us; as also that of Basil the G. in his
(...), Homil. 28.
where speaking of Christ, in the person of that Compassionate Father meeting
his Prodigal Son returning, he confidently affirms, (...). If we do but
seriously will and resolve to return (as we may, though not as of our selves)
God will prevent and meet us.

But now, to speak more pressely to our Text, and this action of Self-denial,
I hope plainly to make it appear, to any Ingenuous man, and that out of the
Text it self, that God affords any man sufficient grace to do it. The words
are (...); which (...) (to give you the full Grammar of the word) is the third
Person of the first Aorist of the Imperative Mood, of (...) An Impersonall it
is not, nor of the Passive voice, but the middle so, that, although no Person
in the Original be expressed yet, of necessity, it must be understood, by that
Rule of Qu^^ fubintelligitur non deest. Accordingly therefore, our English
truly supplies the Person wanting, but understood, rendering it, Let him deny
himself.

Now the Question is, what our Savior meant by this him, which in every man is
to Deny himself. That himself is wholly to be Denied for God, I have showed
you, nor do the word import any whit less: this Him therefore must be
something in Man differing from himself: and so much our Savior seems to
intimate, making him the Subject, and himself the Predicate, as we speak,
thereby plainly distinguishing the one from the other. Nor was this any more
then needs; for him is here the Agent, himself is the Patient, and these two
must necessarily be distinguished; Nothing can be Agent and Patient, Cause and
Effect, both in respect of it self, since every Passion is an Alteration, and
nothing can alter that which is but like it self, much less its own self;
for a General Rule it is, impossible to be contradicted, Idem qua idem, femper
facit idem; the same Cause, as it is the same, always produces the same
effect: Therefore nothing, continuing the same it was, can produce an
Alteration in it self.

If it be said, This is true indeed, of transient, but not so of immanent
actions; we answer, It cannot but be true of all actions whatsoever: For
nothing what soever, whether by an immanent or transient, whether by a reflext
or direct action, can truly and properly, of it self melierate it self,
though by reason of its Mutability, it may corrupt it self, that is, decline
from its Perfection. The Reason of it is, that General Principle of Nature,
Nihil dat quod non habet, nothing can give that it has not. For nothing can be
Meliorated or bettered, but by the Addition of what Good it wants unto it
self: And that nothing can add unto it self (for then it should have that it
has not, which were a Contradiction) therefore nothing can meliorate it self.
Now this denial of our selves for the love of God, though it seems to our
Infected eyes a Corrupting act, yet indeed is an act of melioration, for it
draws up both our Soul and Body to the Participation of a Higher Nature, as
will appear more hereafter.

So then it is plain, this him that here is Agent, is something different from
himself, that here is Patient, and must Deny him. And yet something without
himself it is not, for it must Deny the whole Man, every high Thought, every
strong hold, every power and faculty in him, not only the errors of his
Understanding, but also the contumacy of his Will, and the Pravity of his
Affections; and all this Uniformly, without any Partiality at all: But this it
cannot do, unless it be within our Inmost parts, unless it be intus and in
cute, as near us as our very thoughts; therefore an Angelick Nature it cannot
be, for to our Thoughts they are all strangers.

Nor can it be any Nature beneath our Selves; for, ye see, him is here the
Agent, our Self is the Patient, that must be Denied: Now, as the Greater must
Bless, so must it Deny the Lesser too, Heb. 7.7.
(especially this Denial being no other, but, as I said, an act of Melioration
or a Blessing) for it is a general and true Rule, Quicquid patitur, patitur a
fortiori, The weakest ever suffers and goes to the Wall. Here then sure it must
be so, for, I ask, How if it should happen, that the Patient, being the
stronger, should refuse to be Denied, and, like a sturdy Beggar, turn the
Denial upon the Agent, as surely it would do? should it then be Patient and
the other Agent any longer? No sure, the Denial would be frustrate, it would
be but formal, at the most, it could not be real.

It follows then; this Him must be something in us, above our selves, yea
above any Angelick Nature whatsoever: and what is that but God alone? You will
say perhaps; That Is true indeed, God is every where, fills Heaven and Earth,
and all things, as well as Man, yet does not this enable them to Deny
themselves. It may be so; But then it is, because nothing but the Intelligent,
Rational Creature is disposed for such an Ability or Assistance, and so that
alone is thereby enabled to this great work. Man therefore (and we may say no
less of Angels) is only properly furnished and disposed thereto, seeing he
has an Understanding, to be enlightened, he has a Will, to be excited and
sustained in the performance of it, which Will, though Dead and depraved before
yet, by this exciting, assisting, and subsequent Grace of God in us being
quickened, is elevated and raised above it self, and so becomes this him, or
Better Nature, in us, that is to Deny our Selves.

Hence it is, that, though this whole Action proceeds from that Partickle of
God in us yet, it is not entitled here to God directly, or His Grace in us, but
said, Let him, that is, any Person that shall desire to come after Me, thus
actuated and renovated by the Grace of God with him, Deny himself. The Reason
of it is this; This Grace of God, though (...), as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor.
10. 4. that is, exceeding or Divinely powerful yet, does not work after an
Omnipotent manner in us, but se decenter and creaturae convenienter, in a
manner befitting it self, and convenient for the Creature, so, as neither it
is deficient in necessary power to assist us against all Difficulties; nor yet
so violent, as to alter the Nature of that it is but to assist.

Now, that God affords this Grace of His to every one invited to this Duty by
our Savior, is plain, by those General words of Invitation, in the Preface
to our Text, for to that our Precept must be adequat. St. Matthew indeed seems
to restrain them only to the Disciples: But not only St. Mark, in his
parallel, Chap. 8.34. assures us, they were meant as well to the whole
multitude, but also the Words themselves plainly involve a Generality. For it is
certain this (...), If any man will come after Me, is an Universal
Invitation; and, it is plain, to that must this him in the Text, be
commensurate. If any man will, etc. let any man deny himself: What fuller
Universal then can we wish for, then that any man should, not only be able
but, be called to do it? The word any indeed includes none, but it excludes
not any: It supposes all will not, yet implies any one may, Deny himself, if
at least he be one of those (...), those that have a Will or desire to come
after Christ.

And this, I suppose, is sufficient to have shown, that this Adjutorium Dei,
as the Fathers called it, this Assistent Grace of God is not wanting to all
those that do what lies in them to Deny themselves so, that by the help
thereof it becomes a thing feisable unto them. But yet, that we may conceive
the manner of this more distinctly, both what this Denyer in the Text is, and
what the Denied, likewise the Nature of the Denial: It will be very expedient
to conceive of our selves, as Origin following St. Paul, 1 These. 5.23. Heb.
4.12. Orig. lib. 1. in Romans Eras. in Enchir. page 57. Edit. Lugd. Bat. An. 1624.
and Erasmus Origin, represent our selves to us. For they tell us, Man is said
to consist of Spirit, Soul, and Body: and that whereas it is said, The Flesh
lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh; the Soul must
needs be supposed to stand indifferent betwixt them so, that, if it rests it
self in the desires of the Spirit, soliciting her on the one side to Virtue,
it becomes one Spirit with it; but if it join it self to the Flesh, 1 Cor.
6.16, 17
soliciting her on the the other side to naughtiness, it becomes one Body with
it, in the lusts and pleasures of it. That all this is but mere solicitation,
without any manner of force on either side, that so the soul may be left at
liberty to make her free-choice, whether of the two she will side with: Howbeit
the Power of God is ready to attend the motions of the Spirit, when the Soul
cleaves unto them. But no power accompanies the motions of the Flesh, the Soul
being too able to embrace those Motions of it self, through its own
mutability.

Now, after we have first considered, what St. Paul minds us of, that that
which is Natural is first, then that which is Spiritual, 1 Cor. 15.46.
that is, that the soul is first polluted by cleaving to the corrupt Nature of
the Flesh, before it can be purified by cleaving to the Celestial Nature of
the Spirit, we shall easily conceive, that this him, we spoke of, or the Denyer
in the Text, is the soul united to the Spirit, of which the Apostle says, If
ye walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.16.
ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the Flesh. That our selves, or he that is
Denied in the Text, is the Soul (earst-while) cleaving to the Flesh, of which
the Apostle says, Romans 8.8.
They that are in the Flesh cannot please God. Lastly, that the Denial is no
other, but the Souls Conversion from the Flesh to the Spirit, renouncing its
former cleaving to the Flesh, and Repenting of it: And, for the time to come,
covenanting and resolving, never more to have to do with it, but henceforward
for ever, to persevere in the Spirit.

I have been the larger on this, because a Point of much importance to all
Piety; for who sees not, that in the Feisablenesse of God's Precepts is laid
the first stone of its Foundation, seeing no man will but offer to attempt that
which he cannot phantsie to be Possible? Accordingly therefore the Devil seeks
mainly to overthrow it, having had such good success on the Israelites in the
Wilderness; who, giving more credit to the perfidious spies then to God's, not
Pramise only but, command, were overthrown, and could not, Heb. 3, 18, 19.
a Man of them, enter that good land, not for their Impotency, but Disobedience
and Unbelief.

Besides; It much concerns us we agree amongst our selves, against the Common
enemy: when we are to deal with them we hold, necessaria manifesta; have we
not then as good reason to hold amongst our selves, Necessaria possibilia; that
necessary Procepts (and sure this is a Chief one) are as Possible as necessary
Truths are manifest? surely we have, and better. For of the two, Practice is
more necessary then Knowledge to Salvation, seeing Knowledge puffs up, 1 Cor.
8.1.
but it is only Charity that edifies; And, for our part, we are naturally as
destitute of the one as of the other, being no less Blind then Impotent, to
all saving Good.

Again; were it not absurd to think the God of Nature less provident, then
that Nature He created? now that is deficient to Nothing in things necessary to
attain its and, and therefore sure God is not deficient in things necessary to
attain His, Far beyond that of Nature.

Yet further; Were it not more absurd, to make the Word of God less Potent
then the word of an earthly King? Eceles. 8.4.
and yet with the word of a King there is Power: but so there is not with the
Word of the King of Kings, if we deny His Precept feisable.

Nay, more; Were it not most of all absurd to make the Word of God less Potent
then the Word of the Devil? And yet we do it by this Tenet of ours: for, if
he bids his Creatures, besotted Inamoradoes, Covetous Misers, or Ambitious
Aspirers, Deny themselves in some things, to enjoy themselves in others, we
see, they do it, even to admiration; and then shall we affirm it impossible
to Deny our selves in all things, to enjoy our God? What a Solecisme, what a
Shame were it, that the Devils servants should be more active, to their
Perdition, then God's servants to their Salvations? Pray God, that one day they
rise not up in Judgment against us.

Finally, that it is generally believed, this Precept has been performed by few
or none in its Perfection, is not presently to be imputed to its Impossibility,
but, with more reason, to our waywardness in the Use of the Means, Prayer,
Fasting, and a firm Resolution to fulfill it. For, if it has not yet been
performed in its utmost perfection (as I believe it has not by any Viator, any
living Man) it follows not therefore, it is impossible. Will any reasonable man
say, the Israelites could not have entered the land of Promise, because they did
not? If so, then certainly the Apostle hit upon a wrong Cause, imputing it, not
to their want of strength but, to their want of Faith and Obedience. Heb. 3.18,
19.


Again, because this Virtue is Impossible now to us in its utmost Perfection,
shall we therefore conclude it in any degree Impossible? What a Paralogisme is
this? it is all one, as to say, Because we cannot straight be Angels, therefore
we will not be so much as Men. No, if we cannot attain the Perfection of
Degrees, let us labor for the Perfection of Parts, that is, Deny our selves
sincerely, with all our Hearts; Uniformly, without connivence. When we have
done that, let us make on toward the Perfection of Degrees; for he cannot be
so much as Good, that labors not to be Perfect. St. Paul, when he wrote to the
Philippians, could not say, Phil. 3.12. etc.
that he was Perfect, or had attained the Prize. What? did he therefore set him
down, and give over the pursuit of it? No, but this one thing he did;
Forgetting what was behind, he pressed onwards to that that was before him,
making his Aim at the Prize of the Heavenly Calling of God in Christ Jesus.
And the same mind ought to be in every one of us; for so there it follows in
his words, As many of us, says he, as are perfect, that is, make toward
Perfection, let us be thus minded: And if any one be otherwise minded, God
shall reveal this also to him.

And let thus much suffice to have shown the Possibility of Selfe-denyall,
that it is a thing Feisable and may be done of us. But, because this is not
sufficient (for should we undertake every Possible thing we might sinde work
enough) the next thing we intend to show you is the Congruity of it, that it is
sit in Reason and Equity to be done. In Reason, I say, for this is so unkind a
piece of work to the common course of Nature, that she is averse from it; and
Sense, that, abborres it; No, nothing but Reason is capable of doing it, and
that too not, unless actuated and elevated by Divine Assistance. So that, to
persuade you to take it seriously in hand, we had need muster up in vincible
Reasons for it, else our Text may be in danger to be inverted, and that
Patient, we spoke of, become Agent, and the Agent Patient, and be Denied of
him. Eccles. 7.29.
I Am sure, at first, notwithstanding God made us upright, multa ratiocinia,
many Reasonings and Inventions were mustered up by the Devil, by our Selves,
to overthrow this Truth: These now, we are to show you, were but Paralogismes
and False reasonings, by bringing you into the Sanctuary of God's Word, which
affords us abundant Reason to the Contrary, why we should renounce and forsake
our selves.

This that we may do, you may remember, what I told you even now, that to Deny
our selves in Logic or Reason was to contradict our Being: tollere, to avoid
and take it away. Not that we are to endeavor our own Annibilation, for
besides that that were Impossible for us, to that nothing is more contrary then
Selfdenyall, but to endeavor to disannuall our Self-being, and totally to
depend upon God. So then in our Self-denial we are wholly to renounce and
abjure the Being of our own: and, if we be not our own, whose else should we
be, but Gods? His then we are by two main Titles; Our Creation, and Re-creation
or Redemption, which is the Title of our Creation re-inforc't.

As for the Title of our Creation; That plainly demonstrates Nullity of Being
our own, and our Total dependence upon God. For I told you what Creation was;
Such an act of God, whereby the Creature is wholly and solely of and from Him,
and of nothing else in the World. So then no Creature is of it self; and if not
of it self, it is not its own, but another, to wit, God's for Him; therefore
it must be made: whence Reason argues thus. No Creature is by God made for it
self: But Man is one of God's Creatures, Ergo. The Minor we take to be confessed
on all hands. The Major is to be proved: And first that de facto, it is so,
then that de jure, it should be so. For the first, in the Creation of things we
find, that All things were by God made, not for themselves but, for some
higher end, which End, the Wise man tells us, was no other but Himself, Esa.
43.7.
The Lord, says he, has made all things for himself, Prove. 16.4.

But this is not to be understood of all things in the same manner; for some
things he made more immediately for Himself, as Men and Angels, other things
more mediately for Himself, but immediately for Man. We find in the Story of
Genesis, that God imparted to other things but of His Being, but to Man He gave
His Image also; therefore to Man He gave the rest of the Creatures, that they
might serve Him for food and other purposes, the Heavens, yea the very Angels
themselves not excepted; But Maus service and Obedience He reserved by a
special Command unto Himself.

But yet, though all things were made for a further End then themselves, this
hindered not, but they might lawfully provide for themselves; for, that they
might serve that End, necessary it was, their several Beings should be
preserved, and that as well in their Kinds, as in their Individualls. Hence
every thing by Nature was inclined to the proper place of its most happy being,
Heavy things tending toward the Earth, Light things toward Heaven. Hence,
every Creature was endu'd with a strong Appetite of its Nourishment, likewise
of its own Multiplication.

But these Appetites, though put into them for their own Preservation yet,
show them not made ultimately for themselves; so much appears plainly by, that
they call, the Motion of Nexe, or ne detur vacuum, wherein the Nature of most
senseless Creatures dispenses with their, necessary but, Private Appetites,
for the Continuation of the Universe. So much Nature teaches those Inanimate
Creatures by her occult, but uncontrowled Law: But us men Religion further and
more manifestly instructs, to Deny the Appetite of our Nourishment by Fasting,
of Multiplication, by Virginity, yea of Life it self by Selfe-denyall, when
the Glory of God requires it. And let this suffice to have shown that de
facto, no Creature was made terminatively for it self.

Now that de jure, it ought to be so, will appear, if we consider that, God
being the Summum, yea the solum Bonum, Matthew. 19.17.
the chiefest and Only Good, as our Savior tells us, Self-love is His alone
Prerogative, He alone may, He alone ought to Love Himself. Which, if it be so,
then how can it stand with His Nature and Prerogative, to make such a Creature
as, in its Energie, should proceed directly forward, that is, work only for it
self, but no ways reciprocate any Good to Him, the Author of its Being?
Certainly, it cannot; 2 Timothy 2.13.
For, as the Apostle tells us, God cannot deny Himself, therefore must needs
make all things for Himself, for His own Glory.

Hence it is, that all things which any way savor of Independency on that
supreme end of all, by being done to no end, but merely for themselves,
become, to the judgment of Right Reason, absurd, odious, monstrous; such is its
Loyalty still toward its Creator. In Logic, we call it the woman's Syllogism
to prove a Question by it self, without a Third Argument, It is so, because it
is so, and account it Ridiculous. We do no less in Morality; but dubb him for
a Fool, and laugh at him for his pains, that does a thing in vain, or to no
End and Purpose. In Policy; we hate those Commands as Tyrannous, that are
Arbitrary, and directed by no Law, but Will; where star proratione voluntas,
the Command has no aim or limit, but the mere lust of the Commander. And have
we not then good reason to believe, that, in Theology, that Monstrous sin is
most diametrically opposite to God and His Holy Spirit (and so the sin
unpardonable) which is committed for it self, that is, not for any seeming
either Profit, Pleasure or Prefement that it presents but, merely for its
Obliquity and Contrariety to God and Goodness? for my part, I think, we have.
For what sin can we imagine to be more sinful and malicious? what sin to be
more likely the sin of the Devils, who, as they sinned without a Tempter so,
sinned without any hope of Pardon or a Savior? what sin to be more likely that
sin unto Death, 1 John 5.16.
St. John speaks of, then this?

In a word; It Is so consonant to Reason, that every thing should be made, not
for it self but, for some Higher End, that Reason it self is taken from the
several Ends of Things and their Affections to each other. For the Object of
Logic, or the Art of Reason is, not the T (...) (that belongs to Physics and
Metaphysics) but, the T (...) of the Creature, that whereby it relates to its
Neighbors; and therefore Argumentum is well defined to be, quod ad aliquid
arguendum affectum est, which we shall find true of all the Topic Heads of
Logic, if we examine them. Hence too it is, that in our Natural Logic and
ordinary Discourse, we call the end of a Thing its Reason; for so, when we ask
the Reason, why such a Thing was done, we assign the end or Design thereof
as the only Reason for it.

What Reason then can Man possibly phantsie to himself, why he should be
exempted from the common Condition of all Creatures, and flatter himself to be
made for no end, but himself, since that is indeed to be made to no end at
all? Hos. 10.1.
Certainly he has no Reason for it. Nay, he has so much the less Reason for
it, by how much he is endued with Reason, above all other Creatures; for that
shows us, even Logic it self cannot find a Reason, why any Creature should
be made for it self.

Surely then, so it is; Man cannot claim any Title to Himself; not to his
Hands, to do what he pleases; not to his Tongue, to speak what he pleases:
No, not to his very Heart, to think what he pleases: But acknowledge he must
God to be the Lord Paramount of them all, and esteem himself but as His
Steward, to render an Account of them. Since then we are and have nothing of
our selves, but what we received from Him; if He require them (all) of us
again, let us by no means grutch them Him: We give Him but of His own, and
may He not do what he pleases in suo, with that which is His own? We think
it good Reason in our own case. But yet, if by His Grace we can but do this
willingly, which is all we can pretend to, we shall in no wise fail of our
Reward, seeing we bestow our Selves on Him, who is the Lord God of
Recompenses, Jer. 51.56.
as He is styled in the Prophet.

And this may serve for a kind of Demonstration, which may (...), stop up the
mouths of all Gainsayers: But now to persuade those that are more Equitable
to this Duty, this perhaps may be sufficient: That we see nothing made by any
one, but who expects some Use and Service from it. Indeed a thing may come from
and break out of one, which he will not own, but be glad to be rid of; as
Augustus, meaning to disavow Julia for her lewdness, would say, she was, not
his Daughter but, an Impostume broken out from him; But make a thing one will
not, but we will own and be glad of it. And therefore God having made us by
Creation, ownes us all for His Sons, as it is in the third of Luke and the last;
but this is so long as we are Sons indeed, that is, such as He made us, very
good and serviceable to Him. Now serviceable to Him we cannot be, but by
manifesting His Glory; and manifest his Glory we cannot, but by manifesting our
own Vileness, Emptiness, and Nothing, which is to be done by Selfe-denyall;
this Service therefore His making of us for Himself, obliges us unto. If then
we refuse to perform it, and become a refractory Generation, then he disavowes
his own Workmanship; says, You are of your Father the Devil; your Father was
an Amorite, your Mother an Hittite: John 8.44. Ezekiel. 16.3.
Then He will not own us for His Sons, as we would not Him for our Father, but
proscribe us for Children of Darkness, Sons of Belial, of the Devil.

This Title of Creation and Making we may see in things Inanimate. Shall the
Pot lift up its self against the Potter, Esaias 45.9.
says the Prophet? that were monstrous, seeing it is wholly his, and from him,
Matter, Form, and all, therefore in Reason, it should be none but his, if for
his turn, to use; if not, to break it. Somewhat appears in things animated
with Sense; though they be, not Makers but, Instruments of their Young ones
Making yet, we see, so long as their Young are not able to shift for
themselves, they are in a kind of Subjection to their Damme. But more may we
see it in Men, who are presumed to do nothing without Reason: We know, no title
of Government is more just then of a Parent: no tie of Subjection more strict,
then of a Child. Lastly, we may see it in matters Civil; If any one make a
man in the World, as we term it, we look, he should be our Creature, our
Servant for it. If he be not, what think we of him? but that he is uncivil,
ungrateful, yea worse then a Beast.

Hencethen we may see the Bond, that obliges him, and the rest, to such
Observance; It is no other but that of Gratitude and Thankfulness; A Virtue
never sufficiently to be commended; as the contrary, unthankfulnes, is never
sufficiently to be condemned. We say, Ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris; and the
Heathen man could say, In hoc Vitio nihil non mali inest, that it is the worst
of Vices, and contains all in it. What should be the Reason? Surely, it is
nothing else, but a Result of this Principle we plead for; for Gratitude being
an Acknowledgement of Dependence, is no small part of Selfe-denyall, the root
of all Virtue; Ingratitude being a disavowing of Dependence, is an Attributing
all to our selves, the root of all evil.

Now, an Appendix to this Title of our Creation is that of Gods Preservation of
us; for that is no other but the Act of Creation continued and sustained by
that Word of God, whereby at first He enacted the Law of Nature. And indeed, if
we consider the Creatures Mutability, from one thing into another, by reason it
is Contiguous with, and consists of, the Elements, that are altered every
moment by the Heavens, and every moment alter and impair us, more or less,
it will appear, that God's Preservation of us is, though not formally yet,
materially as beneficial to us as our Creation, and therefore ought to infer
the same Right in us, and involve us in the same Obligation.

But this especially, if we consider it is such a Preservation of us, as withal
includes a Benign Providence in it: Such as, besides our Being, provides for
our well-being, well-being for our Bodies, in the things of this Life, and
well-being for our souls, in the better things of the Life, to come. And this
may lead us to that Other Title, whereby God claims us to be, not our own
but, His, the Title of our Redemption.

The first way God gave us a Perfect Being, 1 Pet. 2.25. Heb. 2.16. Qui curat
esse, nisi propter Te, pro nihilo est, and nihilest. Denique quid-est homo,
nisi quia Tu innotuisti ei? Propter temet ipsum, Deus, fecisti omnia, and qui
sibi esse vul^, non tibi, nihilesse incipit, inter omnia. Deum time, and
mandata Ejus observa: hoc est, inquit. Omnis homo. Ergo, si hoc est omnis homo;
absque hoc nihil Omnis homo. Bern. 200 Serin Cantic. Can. Luke 23.43.
by this he He restores it: We were all lost in Adam, so lost, that we declined
and were falling away to Nothing: But then He that was the Good Shepherd and
Bishop of our souls, (...), to use the Apostles phrase, caught hold of man, as
he was even going, brought him back again and restored him to his first
Perfection. For indeed our Redemption is nothing else but a Bringing of us
back to the first Point of our Creation, a re-instating us in the Condition of
the Protoplasts. So much is plainly intimated in those words used by the
Gospel, Redemption, Renovation, Regeneration, Reconciliation, (...) and the
like, all which argue a Repetition of an act, a Returning to the First Point.
For what was that first Point, but Paradise? But that was the last Point of our
Redemption, our Savior never making the least mention of Paradise, till he was
Sacrificed on the Cross, and then too He did not promise it till after all was
fulfilled.

The Eccles. 7.29.
Wise Man tells us, God at first made us upright, that is, in such an estate
wherein had we persever'd, we had been happy: But then we sought out many
Inventions; We would needs take upon us to be seeking of our own heads; and
seeking many Inventions, therefore sure not the Will of God, which, beside that
it was most One and Uniform, was obvious too, needed no seeking, being in our
mouths, yea in our hearts to do it. Thus seeking these Inventions, and our
Selves in them, we forsook God our Maker, and betook our Selves to His Enemy
the Devil, by which seeking we even lost our Selves, and so had perished for
ever. But God was too merciful to behold so great misery without Pity; out of
His abundant Compassion therefore He sent His Son, Luke 9.10.
to seek and save that which was lost. To seek us, He came into the World; and,
to save us, He preached salvation by His Life and Doctrine, the Foundation
whereof He laid in this Precept of Self-denial. Mat. 4.2.
The Example of His Life began with a Fast, and a large one, that of Forty
days; His Doctrine began upon this Text, and 17.
Repent for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand: Now Fasting and Repentance are
the Principal acts of Self-denial and Mortification.

Thus doing He did, that which the Prophets foretold He came to do: Daniel
9.24. Amos 9.8.
Finish the transgression, and make an end of sins: Or, as one of them
speaks, destroy the Kingdom of Sin from off the face of the earth. Whereas
therefore the Devils Method in erecting this Kingdom was, (...), to scatter
and, as I may say, rout the orderly works of God; whence it is, we read of some
that were (...) 2 These. 3.2.
, out of their places, others (...) and verses 6, 7, 11.
, out of their ranks and orders: Our Savior, (...) Heb. 12.2. and 2.110.
; The Leader General of our Faith and Salvation, coming to set in order the
Works of God again, did (...) 1 John 3.8.
, as I told you out of St. John, in like manner scattered and routed the works
of the Devil, Ephesians. 1.10.
that he might (...), as another Apostle speaks, recapitulate and set in
rank, under their proper Heads, all things in Heaven and Earth.

We see then, this Title of our Redemption, is that of our Creation
re-inforc't, and therefore must needs argue Gods Propriety in us no less then
that, nay more by far, because a work more Difficult; For in our Creation,
God found no Opposition, and therefore by His Word and Spirit all things were
made, as I may say, liquidly. It was not so in our Redemption: No, there He
found great Opposition, such as required, not only His Word and Actions but,
Sweating, Sighs, Groans, yea His very Death to Master.

Now by His Death He laid down a Price, such a Price as redeemed and purchac'd
to Him all mankind so, that having redeemed us by a Price, by the Law of all
Nations, we ought to be, not our own but, His that bought us. And thus much
indeed the Apostle tells us, in so many words: That we are, 1 Cor. 6.20.
not our own but, God's, because redeemed by a Price: whereupon he straight
infers, We ought to serve, not our selves but, God with our Bodies and our
Souls, seeing they are His. If then we must serve Him with them both,
certainly we must Deny our selves. For in all Reason, we ought to obey His
Will, whose Servants we are; but, we see, our Text tells us, it is His Will, we
should Deny our Selves; therefore Deny our Selves we must, because of our
Redemption.

But yet, because this is the Command of Him who is (...), the Word and Reason
of His Father; and our Design in this Point is, not to Draw but, Lead men to
this Duty: Necessary it is we show you the Equity thereof: That the Injunction
of this Duty flows, not from the mere Will of our Redeemer but, from the
Nature of our Redemption, which exacts no less at our hands, if we mean to be
Partakers of it. That we may partake of the Redemption wrought by Christ, it is
necessary we be in Christ, as to partake of Adams Curse, it is necessary, we be
reputed in Him. But in Christ we cannot be otherwise then by Representation, so
therefore, and no otherwise are we reputed in Him. For, amongst other things He
is likened unto for this purpose, as a Head, a Root, an Elder Brother, one
notable resemblance of Him is to the First Fruits; therefore more then once he
is called the First Fruits from the Dead, by virtue of whom we partake, not
the Corporal only but also, the Spiritual Resurrection: Now, we know, the
First Fruit is the Mass merely by a Representation of it, as we may see in
the Law of the First Fruits, 1 Cor. 15, 20, 21.
Lev. 23. 10, 11. but more plainly by the Apostle, Col. 1.14.18.
Romans 11.16. If the first fruit, says he, be holy, the Mass is also holy.
Represented then we are in Christ, as the Mass in the First Fruit, Mat. 3.17.
and so in Him God is well pleased with us. But now represented we cannot be
without some Similitude and Conformity; as a Picture cannot represent a Man, if
it be no ways like him. Accordingly, therefore, the Mass is ever like the
First fruits, the First fruit being nothing else, but, as the Name imports, a
certain portion taken out of the Common Mass or Heap: And so the Apostle
says, there must be a Conformity betwixt us and Christ: 1 Cor. 5.49.
that as we have borne the Image of the earthly Adam, so we must bear the
Image of the Heavenly.

Now to what Image of Christ must we be conformed? the Apostle tells us, Romans
8.29. to the Image of his suffering, that so He may be, as the First fruits so,
the First born amongst many Brethren. As He, being in the form of God, and
accompting it no robbery to be equal to Him, yet took upon Him the Image of a
servant; humbled, emptied, displeased, that is, to use his own term here,
Denied Himself for our sakes, that were his Enemies: so we, who most truly are
Nothing, Galat. 6.3. Esaiah 40.17.
yea less then Nothing and Vanity, of our selves, should in acknowledgment
thereof, humble, empty, displease, yea crucify our selves for His sake, who
first loved us, and gave Himself for us.

To this, says St. Paul, we are predestined Romans 8.29.
; and in another place, he says, we are appointed 1 These. 3.3.
. To this, says St. Peter, we are called 1 Peter 2.21.
. Hence proceed those frequent Axioms of the Apostles; If we be planted into
the Likeness of His Death, we shall be also in the Likeness of His
Resurrection Romans 6.5.
. If we suffer with Him, we shall Reign with Him Rom 8.17.
. If we Dye with Him, we shall live with Him. If we Deny Him, He will Deny us 2 Timothy 2.11.12.
; and the like. Hence also those that are His true Brethren, are said to bear
about with them, the Brands Gal. 6.17.
, the Dying of the Lord Jesus 2 Cor. 4.10.
, to be crucified together with Him Gal. 2.20.
; yea (...), vicissim replere, that is, by way of correspondence, to fill up
again, (...), the Leavings, as I may say, of the afflictions of Christ in
their own flesh Coloss. 1.24.
.

And this, one would think, might be sufficient to stop the mouth of all false
reasoning; But yet we cannot expect it should do it so, but that Nature, not
yet satisfied in the Point, will set Reason on work to confute what has been
said; And at length, it is conceived, enough may be bolted out of Scripture it
self to do it. Ephesians. 5.29.
For does not St. Paul make the Love of our selves, our motive to love our
wives, because no man ever yet bated his own flesh? Matthew. 19.19.
And does not our Savior, out of the Law, make it the Rule of our Love to our
Neighbors, commanding us to love them, as we should do our own selves? Now,
if it be so, then certainly we are not to Deny our selves, for to love and to
Deny our selves are contrariant acts; Love, that, tends to Union; Denial, to
separation.

To this we answer fully, (having somewhat touched it before) that so much of us
is in this place termed our selves, and consequently so much of us, and no more
to be Denied, as is Contrary and Repugnant to the Will of God. Now the Will of
God is, In this Point.
as I showed even now, that we should preserve our selves, our Being, and our
Wel-being too, by all Means possible; But ever provided those Means be
Honest, that is, such as He bath set us out plainly in His Word, which is His
will. Now this makes nothing against Self-denial, for here we must observe,
that in loving our selves so only and no more, we are to Deny our selves,
seeing this we are not to do in love and obedience to our selves, but only to
the Will of God. Thus much, I say, of necessity we must note for this; Because
if, whenever it shall please God to make an extraordinary exception to those
Ordinary Means, as sometime he has done, and does still to the Martyrs and
Witnesses of His Truth, if then, we shall love our selves, our Lives or any
thing that we have, we take the ready way to lose them for ever; but if we lose
them, we shall indeed save them, as our Savior tells us. So then, Verse 25.
notwithstanding what Nature and Reason can object, it remains a firm
Conclusion, we must Deny our selves.

And so, we hope, enough has been said, to convince any Reasonable man of the
Equity and Congruity of this Precept of Self-denial. But yet, because there
are many Unreasonable men in the world, that will not live by Faith and Reason,
but by Sense and Experience, and therefore will nor do nor believe what they
find to offend their senses; for these it is fit we use some forcible
Club-Logicke, that may cogere intrare, in a sort, compel them to enter in and
obey it.

Now this we cannot better do, then by laying before them the Necessity of
Selfe-denyall. But this, not a Categoricall or Fatal one but, an
Hypotheticall, Conditional one, one that may very well be Voluntary too. For
it is true, this Precept linckt with the Precedent words, by that vinculum
connexivum, If and then; If any one will come after Me, then let him Deny
himself, makes but a Connexe Axiom, and so it requires not truth of parts;
No man may come after Him, and so, no man may Deny himself; this, to speak
(...), is possible. The Necessity therefore of this Precept rises, not from its
truth of parts but, from the Necessary Connection of its parts; That, if the
Antecedent be granted, the Consequent cannot be denied, because of the
Necessary dependence that is betwixt them; the one being of the Cause
(commonly) the other of the Effect, and no stronger dependence then of the
Effect upon the Cause; For the Cause gives it existence, and therefore, if the
Cause be and be Operative, (as it should be) the Effect must follow thereupon.
Now who is there, at least what Christian, but will grant the Antecedent part
to be true, That We ought to come after Christ? if he will not, John 6.68.
that of Peter must compel him, Whither shall we go from Thee? Thou have the
words of eternal Life. Thou, and Thou only, so he afterward expounded it:
Acts 4.12.
There is no other Name, says he, under Heaven, whereby we can be saved, but
by the Name of Jesus only.

Well then, if we grant the Antecedent necessary, we must not hold the
Consequent a matter of Indifferency, as the Masters of our Logic tell us. No,
we see, these Parts stand not together upon terms of Indifferency, but of
plain Necessity: It Is not, If any one will come after Me, it is expedient, he
Deny himself, but he must Deny himself; (...), let him Deny himself. which
let we must not take to be a word of Permission, as if for this matter Christ
did let us'doe as we pleased, that is the Poverty of our Language, but (as it is
in the Original) Imperative, he must Deny himself, it is so commanded, so
decreed. Now any Decree or Command are manifest arguments of the Necessity of
the thing Commanded, either in respect of the Commanders Will, or the
Importance of the Thing commanded.

For the first; As in Nature there is no greater obligation then Necessity,
which therefore is said to be stronger then any Law, because it cannot be bound
by any, so in Policy there is no greater Charge then a Command, and, that which
ever should attend it, the effectual prosecution of it. And then certainly the
Command of God, of Christ, must needs impose on us the greatest Necessity that
can be. For we ever measure the force of a Command by his Authority that
Commands it, by his Power to Reward it, if obeyed; or Punish it, if neglected.

As for Gods Authority, He is our Creator, we His Creatures; He our King, we
His Subjects; He our Lord, we His Vassals; He our Father, we His Sons; yea,
He is every thing to us, that may challenge either Sovereignty in Him to
Command, or Humility in us to obey: Therefore we ought to obey Him in this
Precept, were it for nothing else but for those so many and strict Relations
betwixt Him and us.

But, alas! if this were all, there were but small hold to be taken of us;
these are but weak Motives, and far in feriour to the force of a Necessity,
especially to a mind void of all Ingenuity; therefore, to these, God has a
twofold Power, which indeed are the maine sinews of Government and cart-ropes
of Obedience: Power on the one side to Reward and allure us; on the other side,
to Punish and affright us. His Reward, the greatest that can be imagined, the
Eternal Fruition of Himself, and therewith Everlasting Happiness; His
Punishment, the terriblest that can be devised, Exile for ever from his
Presence, and therewith everlasting Misery. I trow, these will, if duly
pondered, impose on us a Necessity of obeying with a witness, velfaciendo, vel
patiendo; either by doing His Will, of our selves; or by enduring it upon our
selves.

So then, were this a Precept of Peremptory Will and Pleasure, a Precept of
mere Sovereignty, yet did it conclude us strongly necessitate Praecepti, by
reason of that Necessity the Command of Christ imposes on us. But this is, not
such a Precept but, as I showed you, imposed upon us on Urgent and Weighty
Reason; It is the Consequent to an Antecedent, and such an Antecedent as is of
the highest necessity that can be, therefore we must needs more strongly be
concluded under it necessitate Medii, by reason of that Necessity that is in
the Thing it self, for the obtaining that end for which Christ has prescribed
it.

And indeed a plain necessity there is, we should Deny our Selves, on
Supposition that we mean to follow and come after Christ. For, we know, Two
contrary Extremes cannot meet together; but, if the one be approach't unto,
the other must needs be forsaken: As for example, Egypt and Canaan were two
contrary Extremes to the Israelites, while they were passing from the one to
the other, so that, to go toward the Land of Canaan, they must needs go out
of Egypt; and to return to Egypt, they must needs forsake the Land of Canaan.
Now Christ and our Selves are two such Extremes, and indeed were typified by
them; Christ and His Kingdom by the Land of Promise; our Selves, and our own
Lusts and Wills by the Fleshpots of Egypt. Therefore as they could not tend to
the one, Ille negat Christum qui se non abnegat ipsum. Geth.
but they must needs recede from the other, no more can we follow or come after
Christ, but we must needs Deny, renounce and forsake our selves.

That Christ and our selves are two such Contrary Extremes is easy to see,
from their Contrary Originalls, Contrary Effects. Our Selves are from the
Earth, Earthly 1 Cor. 15.47.
, Carnal, Sensual; but Christ is a Spirit and Verse 45.
, and that from Heaven, Heavenly. Our Selves meditate evil, nothing but evil,
and that continually; we are all gone astray and become abominable, there is
none that does good, no not one Romans 3.11, 12, 13, etc.
: But Christ did all things well Mark. 7.37.
, there was no guile found in his mouth 1 Pet. 2.22.
, in his hand much less: he was without all Sin Heb. 4.15.
, all Spot Heb. 9.14.
, for He fulfilled all Righteousness Matthew. 3.15.
. There is no Communion then between Light and Darkness 2 Cor. 6.14.
, as the Apostle tells us, betwixt Christ and Belial, that is, our Yoaklesse
Selves, that we should ever hope (...), as he there speaks, to join two such
Contraries and make them draw in the same Yoke together.

From this Contrariety it comes, that every one, that in any measure follows
Christ, feels a manifest conftict in himself, between Christ and Himself,
the Old Man and the New; the Flesh and the Spirit; the Seed of the Woman and
the Seed of the Serpent, drawing contrary ways in him. Gal. 5.17.
Hence it is, Christ tells us, He came to send Matthew. 10.34.
not Peace on Earth, but the Sword: What Sword? that devouring Sword of War,
to master every one that is our weaker? God forbid we should once think it:
No, but the Sword of the Word of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17 James 4.1.
to fight against our Lusts that make an irreconcilable War in our Members.
For our Lusts like Sturdy Beggars, if Christ Deny them in us, fight straight,
and there begins the fray.

This fight is more or less, one time or other, in every one that has any
thing of Christ in him. He therefore that enjoyes perpetual Peace within him,
as the Heathen man said of him that lived in perpetual Solitude, aut Deus est
aut Demon; either he is a Saint in Heaven, or a Devil in Hell; either
perfectly united to God and Christ and out of that World into which our Savior
said, He sent no Peace; 1 John 2.16.
Or else he is wholly his own self, his heart hardened, 1 Timothy 5, 6. Ephesians. 2.1.
his Conscience seared, and generally cast into a Reprobate sense, so that he
may well be said to be dead, while he is alive, dead in Sins and Trespasses,
and in the very verge of that place, which is called the Second Death; from
which, Good Lord! deliver us.

But here some may likely interpose; Grant there be such a Contrariety betwixt
Christ and our Selves, that they cannot possibly be brought together, perhaps
we may run a Middle course though, may partake with either of them, and so
forsake neither. No, by no means: This will not be taken for a Following or
Coming after Christ, which is supposed to be with Constancy and Resolution, 1
Kings 18.21.
but rather a Halting between two opinions. For what is Halting but a default
of one of our legs, when we can use but one of them at once? when therefore
we lend one leg to one Opinion, another to the contrary; one to God, another
to Belial; one to Christ, another to our selves, must we not needs limpe there
while, yea halt downright? it must needs be so, it cannot otherwise choose.
But, if we do so, we cannot follow Christ, which he Himself expounds here to
be, not a Halting but, a Coming after Him, with uprightness and perseverance.
For indeed Christ is jealous of any Partner, Exodus 20.5.
must have all or none, because all is but too little for him, both our feet
too weak to follow Him.

Hence it was He forbad mongrell Procreations, Miscellany Seminations, and
Lintsie-Woolsie Garments, under the Law; Lev. 19.19.
that He threatened so many woes against Hypocrisy, under the Gospel; Matthew.
23.13. Rev. 2.15.16.
that He exclaimed on Laodicea for her Luke-warmenesse, and, as if he had been
sick at stomach of her, threatened he would Spue her out of his mouth, the
effect of lukewarm water. Hence he found fault with Peter, because coming to
Him, he did (...), Matthew. 14.31.
look two ways, or asquint, as proceeding from a small Faith (and Love too or
Self-denial.) By all which it manifestly appears, that Christ and our selves
are (...), Contraries without any Mean at all betwixt them: that which our
Savior Himself tells us, saying, Whosoever is not with me is contra, Matthew.
12.30. Mark 9.39.
Contrary to Me. And likewise, Whosoever is not contrary to Me is with me.

Thus have I shown the Possibility, Congruity, and Necessity of Obedience to
this Precept of Self-denial. And this indeed seems enough to elicit our act
of Obedience thereunto: But yet, because it is not one act or two that can
entitle us to a virtue, but many Acts are required to the begetting of a Habit;
and many Acts cannot be exercised without they be done cheerfully, which is the
Reason, that in all our Acts of Religion, God more especially requires the
Heart; Prove. 23.26.
therefore yet have we two Arguments behind, to win our Hearts, if it be
possible, to do, what must be done, cheerfully: And those two are, first the
Excellency of this Precept an it self; then its Vtility, to all those that
practice it.

That this Precept Understand this of this Precept as it is purely Evangelicall
that is, enjoining us the Denial of things in themselves Indirse^ent.
is more Sublime and Excellent, then any in the Law, will appear hence, That
this Precept bids us Deny our Selves, yea even in that which the Law permitted
to us, whereas the Law rather bade us seek our selves, what else is the desire
of a Temporal Reward but an effect of Self-love? Which, though it be not
Vicious, being done in relation to a Promise yet, certainly cannot be so
excellent as to embrace Virtue for it self. But now the Law, that, makes the
Hope of a Reward the Chief Motive of Obedience; whereas the Gospel, though it
have its Reward, and a far greater one then that of the Law: (for indeed this
is the Substance whereof that was but the shadow) yet does it not bid us look
at the Reward as such, but do the thing for it self: or rather, to speak
more clearly, it tells us the Reward we are to do the Duty for is ^o-incident
with the very Duty it self, Page 11. Rom 8 15.
as I showed you before out of John 17.3. Hence it is, the Law, according to
the Apostles intimation, is by the Schools truly called Lex timoris, the Law
of Fear; Fear as well of losing the reward, as of enduring Punishment: But
the Gospel, no less truly, 1 John 4.18.
called Lex amoris, the Law of Love, of Love that once perfected casts out
Fear, and, as Ber^^ard truly says, Vires non sumit de spe, is no whit
fortified by Hope of a Reward. Hence our Savior called those that obey merely
for Temporal Reward, John 10.12, 13
Mercenaries, (thereby intimating the Pharisacal Doctors of the Law) and says,
those, when the Wolf came, would flee away, as loving themselves more then
their Flock: But the Good Shepherd, says he, that loves his Flock, and is
loved of them (such as Himself was) will dye first, before he will do so.

The plain Truth is; if we love only because we are loved, obey God because
he obeyes our Desires, and trust Him, because He gives us His Counterbond to
save us harmless; Mat. 5.46, 47.
I may well ask, with our Savior, (...); What extraordinary matter do we?
What more then Publicanes, then wicked men; yea then the very Brutes
themselves, whom yet we think our Inferiors? But if, out of the love of God,
and Goodness it self, we obey, for nothing else, then indeed, we do somewhat
worthy of the excellency of our Master, 2 Cor 3.7, 8, etc.
Christ, and the Perfection of His Evangelicall Doctrine.

This is it that made the Ministration of the Gospel far more glorious then
that of the Law; Matthew. 5.20.
this makes our Righteousness exceed that of, the Laws strictest Sectaries,
the Scribes and Pharisees. Whence come all those (...), those Transcendent
Precepts, of the Gospel, but from this Precept of Selfe-denyall? How should we
come, not so much as to speak hastily to our Brother: not so much as to look
upon a woman to lust after her: not so much as to affirm or deny any thing,
more then by yea and nay, except we deny our selves? How should we love our
enemies; do our Alms, Fast and Pray, all in Private; Never Censure our
Brother, never be sollicitous for food or raiment, but wholly depend upon God
for them, if shut up from the Means, without Selfe-denyall? Do these things,
says our Savior, that ye may be perfect: Matthew. 5.48.
A plain Argument, these Precepts are the Perfection of the Gospel, and the
want of these, the Imperfection of the Law, which brought nothing to
Perfection, Heb. 7.19.
as did the Gospel by bringing in a Better Hope.

But mean time, that I may be rightly understood, I intend not this to
disparage the Law, or its Work in any one whomsoever; We acknowledge, the Law
is holy, just, and good, Romans 7.12. 1 Timothy 1.8. Gal. 3.24, 25.
so it be used lawfully: that is, as a Pedagogue, to bring Children on to
Christ: not as a Doctor, to build up perfect men in Christ. We say further; It
is, not only Good but, Necessary for those that would come after Christ;
because none can come to Him, much less come after Him, John 6.44.
but those whom God the Father draws first by the Law: but those that believe,
God is, and is a Rewarder of them that seek Him, Heb. 11.6.
and so consequently a Chastiser of them that neglect Him. It must needs be
then, those that obey as Servants do well, for they rebel not: but those that
obey as Sons, they do much better, for they obey indeed, with their whole
Hearts and minds, without respect to themselves. What shall we say then? but,
that those who are brought on by the Law, and ingraffed into Christ, may say to
the law, Romans 7.1, 2, 3, etc.
as the Samaritanes to that Woman, John 4.42. We do no longer believe now
because of thy speech; for we our selves have heard and seen that this is the
Christ, the Savior of the World.

Let this suffice to have shown the excellency of this Precept Doctrine of it:
But now to show you the Transcendent Excellency of it in the Practice and
Exercise, we will in the last place lay before you briefly and succinctly, the
abundant Vtility thereof. In which doing, 1 Cor. 9.22.
we shall become all things to all men, that so we may gain some: we shall
direct our speech as well to those that are but (...), as to those that are
(...), as well to the Hearers of the lowest, as of the highest Fourm: For such
Auditors I Am sure we have most cause to look for in this f^^^-Romuli we live
in; at least, to calculate our speech to such must needs be the safest way,
because then it may serve indifferently for all Capacities whatsoever.

But here I might well lose my self, should I hoise up full sail, to pass
through the Ocean of Particulars: Let it be sufficient, if we can descry them
afar off, and so draw up all. The Apostle tells us, 1 Timothy 4.8.
that Godliness is profitable for all things: which, if it be true, as it is
most certain, it must be as true of Selfe-denyall, since as we have showed
abundantly, no Godliness without it. The Truth then of both he shows us in
the sure Foundation of Gods Fidelity, who has promised to it all things, as
well the things of this Life as of that which is to come. For the Promise we
send you no whither, but to the tenth of St. Marks Gospel, Verse 29.30. Where
for this Life, our Savior promises, Whosoever has forsaken Houses, or Lands,
or Wife, etc. shall receive an Hundred fold, with Persecution: For that which
is to come, and, says he, in the World to come, Life everlasting.

For the Fidelity of the Promiser; we must consider the Promise is to be taken
of us, as 'twas meant by him that made it: And how was that? literally? as if
we should receive the same things in specie, in kind, a Hundred fold? Surely
it cannot be. For, besides that we never read nor heard of any that received so
much, it were absurd to believe, He promised a Hundred wives for one, Polygamy
never heard of, whereas even Bigamy is forbidden by the Gospel. Matthew. 19.9.
And sure, that he meant it not literally, is more then evident by that Clause
affixt unto the Promise, with Persecution. For, did He mean it literally, what
else were this but to give the thing Promised with one hand, and take it away
with the other? it were like an Abatement in a fair Coat of Arms, yea it were
Contradictio in Adjecto, and Additament Contradicting what before he Promised.
I wonder, what are all this Worlds goods with Persecution, when we can neither
joy in, nor enjoy them, as daily experience shows us? What is meat to the
Sick, that cannot eat it? what Music to the Deaf, that cannot hear it? or
Beauty to the Blind, that cannot behold it? Or should we think, our Savior
meant us those things, as Covetous men seek for Wealth, to keep, but not to Use
them, (though Persecution will not allow us that neither) yet were this but to
delude us; For since all things here are given us, ut utamur, non fruamur, tha^
we should use, not enjoy, them, we could not but, with Covetou^ men, want as
well what we had, as what we had not.

But now taking this Promise spiritually, in an Anagogical sense, we can easily
reconcile it with Persecution, were it needful here to show it, so easily
that, as we shall make appear, it will be a hard matter not to suppose
Persecution, or that which is tantummount, to the right under standing of it.
Surely then our Savior's meaning was, Those that parted with those things
there reckoned up, should receive the same, not in Kind but, in Worth and
Value a Hundred fold, even that which every one aims at in the enjoyment of
those things.

For this is certain; Every man, in the enjoyment of those things, seeks for
Good unto himself: this Good he is never satisfied with, till it become
Summum, at the height and best: Now the Summum Bonum, the Best Good is
Happiness; Every one therefore, enjoying those, or such like things uses them
as the Means whereby to obtain their End, Happiness. But now, we have a
General Rule, The Means are to be sought after, not for themselves but, only
for the End: It must needs therefore be, he that helps us to the end, though he
does not withal to the Means yet, gives us the Means too, because he gives
us that for which only the Means are good and desirable. If then Christ
promises and gives us the end we seek for in those things, (as He does, and
that in this Life) to wit, Happiness, He must needs therewithal by
consequence give us the Means, the Things themselves.

But does He, moreover and above, give us an Hundred fold in too? Yes, that he
does, and more. For, we must know, that though we seek for Happiness by such
Means yet, they are not the true Means to obtain it: for then some time or
other, in them we should find it. But that no man ever yet could do: but
still, having enjoyed any or all of them, they were feign to complain with St.
Augustine, Cor irrequietum est, donec veniat ad Te, That Man's desire cannot be
satisfied in any Creature; not, till it come at God. And so much we find
wittily insinuated by a Spanish Author, Mat. Aleman. 1 Book. chapter 7.
in his Fable of Jupiter, who being offended with Men for worshipping their
Petty God, Content, to a neglect of himself, took Content away from them unto
himself, and clapped his Brother Discontent into his clothes, that so men
finding no Content on Earth, might seek for it only with him in Heaven. The
Fable does Moralize it self, and signifies nor more nor less unto us, then
what is the Subject of Solomon's Ecclesiastes, Eccles. 1.1.
Vanity of Vanities, all is but Vanity: that therefore here we must not set
down our staff, but seek further to that City in the Heavens, whose Maker and
Builder is God. But now thither those Means we spoke of would never lead us,
for then our Savior would never have bidden us forsake them, to follow Him: A
plain Argument, they are, not Means and Helps but, Remoraes and Hindrances,
rather from Following Him and obtaining Happiness. And then, I hope, it cannot
be, but Christ, in bestowing on us that Happiness we seek after, but being
blind and erring cannot arrive unto: and this too by making us forsake what,
we mistake for Happiness but, is indeed our Shame and Misery, does bestow on
us the full worth of those Means and an Hundred fold to boot.

But now, to the maine Point, That Christ promises and bestows, even in this
life, true, (though not full) Happiness on all those that forsake all and Deny
themselves: This we think possible to make appear, the Promise, out of the
Text, the Performance, out of the Nature of Self-denial. The Promise, we say,
is contained in the Text, not in so many words indeed but, by most plain and
infallible Consequence: For the Text says, If any one will follow Christ, he
must Deny himself to do it: I hope then, if he does so, if he does Deny
himself, He promises he may and shall follow him. But now what is it to
follow Christ? It is to be wheresoever Christ is; So He Himself expounds it,
John 12.26. But how does He mean that? by a local Motion? Certainly, Nothing
less; for then all Christians must get them wings, and fly up to Heaven,
where now our Savior is: But in Spirit, for He says, they are to be with Him,
to see His Glory, 2 Cor. 3.18.
John 17.24. That is, as the Apostle expounds it, to be transformed from Glory
to Glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord, which is nothing else but to be
spiritually Happy.

For the Performance of this Promise; that will be evident in the Act of
Selfe-denyall. Which that we may see, you must know, that Happiness is the
Fruition of and Union with God Himself: That that Union must be by Love, the
Uniting affection. Now, if there be nothing in the whole world beside God and
the Creature: If these two make up every thing, then certainly he that Denies
and forsakes the Creature, must needs love God or not love at all. That the
Will should not love at all is impossible, for then it should not be a Will,
seeing to Will and to Love are both one: Therefore Denying the Creature, 1 John
4.16.
it must needs love God, therefore be United to Him, therefore be Happy.

Again, God being our Summum bonum (as we all grant) the Perfect Good; he must
needs attract proportionable, that is, Perfect Love. If He does not attract
such love every where, as it is plain He does not, very few loving God in
Sincerity, there seems to be no other Reason of it, but this, the defect of
men's sight, that they see Him not to be such, that is, their Perfect Good. Now
of this. Defect there can be no other Reason rendered but this, The
interposition of the Creature betwixt us and God, and our beholding and loving
of it more then Him. These are the Clouds that hinder us from beholding and
admiring the Glory of the Sun of Righteousness; this that (...), Heb. 12.1.
Aquin. Lect. 1^. in locum.
the Apostle speaks of, that sin, or (as Thomas) that Occasion of sin,
that does so easily, so every way beset us, and therefore must be put away
before we can run the race of Happiness, that is set before us. So then, it
must needs be, If we shall put away that sin, if we shall doffe our Selves,
and (...), Heb. 12.2.
look off the Creature, to look on Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith,
and so see God only in every thing, then we shall be united and one with Him,
as He with us; then our Will shall no longer be ours, but swallowed up of His,
and we shall no longer be ruled by it, but His Will shall rule within us: In a
word, we shall be in this World, as we were in Paradise; that is, enjoy true
solid Happiness.

But (mark ye) with this difference it is; Our Happiness here is but
Inchoate, not as hereafter it shall be, Consummate. Here our Paradise is beset
with Briars and Thorns, not as the First, where was nothing but what was
profitable and delightful Therefore though our Savior promises a Hundred fold
here, yet it is with Persecution: and therefore the Apostle tells us, we must
run our Race with Patience; Heb. 12.1. Heb. 10.36.
for in another place he says, We had need of Patience, that so we may
attain the Premise.

For the need we have of this Patience arises hence, because of that Cross we
must bear, as soon as we begin to Deny our Selves; for so it follows in the
Text, Let him Deny himself, and take up his Cross. What Cross is that? it is
no other but that which wicked, Selfe-will'd men will lay upon our backs. For,
though we, for our parts, Deny our Selves never so much, yet, because the World
will not do so too, so long as we remain in the Body, that will hate and
persecute us, as those that do the Works of Darkness hate, John 3.20.
and curse the Discovery of the Light.

This is the Happiness of every Particular Man, that shall Deny himself. But
now if every Man should do so, Good God! what a Happiness were that to all
men! what an Alteration would that make in the World! What a Golden Age should
we have! All things then would become New, and these Old things, Old
Principles, would pass away and vanish. For, whereas there was never more of
Hell upon Earth, then now; the Devil never looser, never more raging then now,
by reason of the generality of Self-love and Self-will, that would banish the
Devil out of the World, or at least so bind his hands, he should not hurt
us; that would make this Earth a true perfect Paradise, where no other Will
should rule but God's, and He only should be exalted, He should be All in all.
For then our Understandings being full of Truth and Knowledge, and our Wills of
Candor and Ingenuity, and our Affections absolutely commanded by them both,
all Factions, and Fractions in the Church and State would be salv'd and
removed: Then all our actions being measured by Temperance and Moderation, our
Bodies should not be impaired by Diseases or Physic, and Death be, not an
Abridgement but, a Period unto Nature: And then too all Covetousness, Malice,
and Envy being exterminated the World, Charity should be the sole Proprietour
of our Wealth, and our Goods. we should then think best bestowed, when upon God
and His Churches service. Finally, then there should be Pax perennis, a
Perpetual Inviolable Peace, the Gates of Janus's Temple should continually be
shut, so fast, that the Gates of Hell should never open them.

Let this suffice to have shown an Hundred fold of Happiness, in this Life, to
follow, according to our Savior's Promise, upon our Self-denial. But He
stays not here, in this life, for He tells us moreover, this Precept has the
Promise of the Life to come, of Life everlasting. For the Proof of this,
tomake shore work, I shall only use one Prosyllogisme, and that is this: The
Knowledge of God is Life Eternal; The Love of God is the Knowledge of God; And
Self-denial is the Love of God, therefore Self-denial is Life eternal. The
first Proposition is our Saviors John 17.3. Jer. 22.16.
; The Second St. Paul's 1 Cor. 8.3.
and St. John's 1 John 2.3, 4.
; The third is plain by necessary consequence See Page 55. Mat 16.26.
: For he that Denies himself, must do it for somewhat that is better to him
then himself: But now our Savior tells us, The whole creaned World is not to
be prized of equal value to any one with Himself, therefore certainly he
that Denies Himself must do is for the Love of Him only who is the Creator
of Himself and all things else.

And accordingly the Apostle shows us, that there is a plain Identity in
Nature of Charity with Self-Donyall, where, 1 Cor. 13.5.
amongst other things, he says, Charity seeks not his owns things. He speaks
of Charity thereas a Person, which yet, we know, is but a Habit; his meaning
therefore is, by Charity we seek not our c^^^e. May we not then by the same
reason say, Self-denial loves and adberes to God, that is, by Self-denial we
come to love God? Surely, we may. We conclude them, Self-denial is, not only
the way but, the Life Eternal it self? But this we understand, not of
Self-denial inchoate, but consummate. Nor is this any marvel; for, if that
be our Happiness in this life, as I have already proved; this must certainly
be that of the Life to come, the Life eternal.

Now this Life Eternal being a thing to us as yet future, and to come, during
our abode in the Body, we have no tenure of it otherwise then by Hope, that
Hope which, to use the Apostles Phrase, is substantiated by Faith Heb. 11.1.
. But this Hope must not be Absurd, we must render a Reason of it 1 Per. 3.15.
: And that Faith must not be lifelesse James 2.20.
, it must operate by Love Gal. 5.6.
, Then let us see whether we can render any sensible Reason, or make any
evident Demonstration of that Hope, without this act of Self-denial. If we
examine those acts of ours, whereon we ground any Reason or Evidence to entitle
us to that life, we shall find them all to be weak, yea nothing at all,
without it. What else is our Repentance, the maine Evidence of our Salvation,
but this act of Selfe-denyall? Its Aversion from the Creature is formally the
same with it; Its Conversion unto God is necessarily implied in it; for who,
that has once put in practice the Denial of Himself, can say otherwise to
God, John 6.68.
then Peter did to our Savior, Whither shall I go from Thee? Thou have the
words of Eternal Life.

What else is our Faith, that universal Engine of all Gospel-Righteousnesse,
but this act of Self-denial, as formerly I have shown? Certainly without it
it is no better then Presumption, for then only, as the Apostle tells us, We
live by the Faith of the Son of God, when we no longer live, but Christ lives
in us Gal. 2.20.
. What is our frequent and attentive Hearing? The Apostle tells us, it will not
profit us, except the Word be mingled with Faith in our Hearts Heb. 4.2.
: I Am sure, our Savior tells us, that to rely upon it, without Practice, is
but to build our House upon the Sands Mar. 7.26.
, a dangerous Paralogisme James 1.22
or Deceit of our selves. But practice the Word we cannot without the Denial
of our Selves, unless we shall think it so Parasiticall, as to sew Pillowes
under our Elbowes Ezekiel. 13.20.
.

In a word, we can yield God no true Obedience, do Him no sincere Christian
service, without this act of Self-denial. Suppose a Self-wil'd lover of
himself practice some Virtues, they are such as Naturally he is not averse
from, and so costing him but little or nothing, they are the less valued by
God; yea, perhaps they are such, as whereby he hopes to make amends for his
darling beloved sins. But for one to stabbe and mortify his peculiar bosom
sins and to practice their opposite Virtues, to sacrifice his Isaac, to pull
out his Right eye, cut off his Right hand; hic specimen specitur, hic certamen
cernitur; this, this is the Trial of the Saints; by this at length God
experimentally knows that we fear Him; Genesis 22.12 16, 17.
this act of ours therefore He swears that in Blessing He will Bless, that
is, will Bless with the Blessing of Blessings, even no other but that of
Eternal Blessedness.

AND now at length, to draw up all: What Arguments can you possibly expect
more, then we have used to persuade you to Self-denial? The Possibility ye
have seen, the Equity, Necessity, Excellency, and Vtility of it. Here we are
even at a full Stop, and can say no more but this, Go you and do likewise.
For this indeed will prove a further and more forcible Argument, then any we
have used yet, the Experience of this Truth by your Practice, which we have
taught you in the Precept.

It may be that after this Change of life, diverse alterations will arise in
your hearts, and that this great and General farewell, which you must bid to
your own Follies and the Vanities of the World, well stir in you some
discouragement. If it happen so, let me, or our Savior rather, win thus much
at your hands, as to have a little Patience, for it will come to nothing; it is
but a little Astonishment which the Novelty of another life brings unto you;
let that once pass over, and you shall receive Millions of Consolations.

But then perhaps some Cowardly, faint-hearted men will affright you with tales
of Giants, the Sons of Anak, of Cities walled up to Heaven, that the Land EATS
UP the Inhabitants, that is, Number. 13.32.
that it is impossible for you to Deny your Selves, to remove the Mountains of
Self-love; Or, if you do, you shall but undo your Selves, and therefore with
Peter, they will rather persuade you to make much of your Selves, and return
to the Fleshpots of Egypt. But believe it, these are but the Delusions of the
Devil and Devilish men, that seduce themselves and others into the Pit of
Destruction. Therefore, with our Savior, listen not to them, no not for a
moment, but resist them, or the Devil in them, and he will soon stye from
you. But believe Joshua and Caleb rather, that tell you, and tell you truly,
you may go in and conquer them: that is, believe Him, who is the true Joshua,
our Savior Jesus Christ, who tells us that, Matthew. 17.20.
if we have a true Self-denying Faith, though but as a small grain of
Mustard Seed, in comparison, we shall be able to remove those Mountains of
Self-love, and cast them into the bottomless Sea of God's Mercies. Those could
not enter in because of Unbelief; but these two searchers did enter, and
conducted the People of God into the Land of Promise. No more can these
timorous Pseudo-Christians, that smell too rank of the Servile Economy of the
Law, find entrance; but the True Christians indeed, believing, not in
themselves but, the Gospel, the Power of God to their Salvation, Romans 1.16.
shall enter and enjoy the Heavenly Canaan.

Do you try and see, and believe your own Experience; my life for yours, not
any one that will buckle himself sincerely to this work, whom God will send
away empty, but He will make him taste of His Salvation. Do but begin once to
make a strict search and surview of your Hearts; above all search out those
same Cities and Strong Holds, that they talked of, that is, those high and
haughty Thoughts, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.
whether they be Principles you have laid in Speculaction or in Practice, apply
to them these Heavenly-mighty Engines of Self-denial, Faith and Charity; and,
like the Walls of Jericho, at first hand they will stall slat before you,
though after a while you must look to put more strength to it.

But this when you have done, be sure you search diligently for that same
Regulus, that Petit King, that domineered in the City; that is, 1 Kings 8.38.
the Peculiar Plague of every man's own heart, (for such an one there is most
certain, if the Word of God deceive us not) and though he hide himself as
deep as Hell in the Cave of Hypocrisy, Josh. 10.22.23, 24, 25.
pull him out, set your feet upon his neck, smite him, slay him, hang him up:
that is, Deny that Lust of yours, which you are by Nature most addicted to,
your Presumptuous sin, Deny it with all your might, spare it not, but
mortify it utterly: And fear not, but encourage your selves, that, having
destroyed that, God will do so and more also, to all your other enemies. It
shall be no grief to you (when Death shall foroe you to it, if you Deny not
your Selves the sooner) to recompt what Lusts you have quelled, what
Temptations you have resisted, what hardships you have endured for Christ's
sake; No, all your Hearing, Praying, and Sighing will be nothing to the comfort
of it.

But, I told you (and you must expect no less; neither let it deter, but
excite you to grapple with the Difficulty;) this will seem durus sermo, a harsh
crabbed Lesson to you, 'twill be grievous at the first hand, as it were
ever-night but then Joy will come in the morning. Does not our Savior tell us
so? John 16.21.
that a Woman both sorrow indeed while she is in Travail, because her Hour is
comne; but having brought forth, she remembers her Sorrow no more for joy, that
a Man is borne into the World. I Am sure, the Psalmist tells us, He that sowes
in tears shall reap in joy, Psalm. 126.5, 6.
and bring his sheaves with him. His Joy, says the Prophet, is like the joy of
men in Harvest, Esaias. 9.3.
or them that divide the spoil, whose joy is sweetened by the remembrance of
what pains they first took for it. For indeed we have no Satisfactory title,
either to our Meat, 2 These. 3.10.
the food of our Bodies, or to Joy, the food of our Souls, without our
precedent labor for it. Therefore our Savior tells us, Matthew. 11.12.
The Kingdom of Heaven (...), is forced, stormed or suffers an Onslaught, as I
may say, and the Violent must take it by force, if they mean to have it.

Was ever any Crowned in a Comhat, that did not combat for it lawfully? or did
ever any Farmer gather in a Harvest, for which he labored not beforehand? The
Apostle thought not so, 2 Timothy 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and therefore exhorted Timothy, to suffer affliction patiently, as a good
Soldier of Jesus Christ, and not to entangle himself with the affairs of this
life, that so he might the better please his General.

Non esi e terris mollis ad astra via: Our journey to Heaven lies, not through
a spacious, smooth way, but a straight narrow one Mat. 7.14.
, leading us through such a gate, as is compared to a needles eye Matthew. 19.24
. If therefore thou be a small slender thread, that is, a Self-resigned man,
thou may find entrance, and unite thy Self to the Eternal Being; but, if
thou be (...), a huge unweildy Cahle, that is, encombred with thy Self, and
that (...), that we spoke of, Hebr. 12.1.
either look to untwist thy Self by Self-denial, or else despair of Entrance.

Nor can you think this durus sermo, if you will (...), but look upon our
Savior: For can thou part with more then He did for thy sake? thou can not
for shame think it. Why, He was equal to God His Father from all eternity,
Phil. 26, 7, 8.
nor thought it any robbery to be so, and yet emptied Himself in becoming a
Servant for us: But thou can not so much as equal thy Self to any thing:
therefore can not keep any thing to thy Self, Gal. 6.3.
without Robbery from thy Maker, who is, and in despite of thee, still shall
be All in all 1 Cor. 15.28.
. Is the Disciple above his Master? Surely, he is not: nay, it is well if he
may be like him Mat. 10.24, 25.
: Christ therefore, our Master, looks for so much at least at our hands.

But, John 14.12.
if we think His Example above our Reach, (though He seems to tell us
otherwise) look but upon mere Animals, yea Inanimate Creatures, and, they will
tell you, they Deny themselves for the Universe; then shall not we much more
for God? Certainly, we should, and so much the rather, by how much God has
endu'd us with Reason above them, which tells us, we were made for Him, not for
our Selves. The Chemists do not so truly affirm, that Nature intended Gold
in the composure of all Metalls, as the Scripture tells us, God intended His
Glory in the Creation of all things; And yet they, presuming upon that, venture
to decoct their whole Substance many times to find out the Semen auri or
Philosophers Stone: And shall not we decoct our sinful Being to find our God
in Jesus Christ? we have infinite more Reason for it. For they cannot promise
to themselves so great a Multiplication of their Wealth upon that Invention of
theirs, were it feisable, as we may promise our selves the Advancement of our
Being by our Conjunction with God upon our
Self-denial, the truer Art of Multiplication. If you consult with an
Arithmetician, he will tell you, that an Unit multiplied by an Unit, is but an
Unit still, it gets nothing by the hand: Now our Metaphysics truly tell us,
Every thing is an Unit; and our Physics and Scripture tell us, Every thing is
made to be multiplied, that is, advanced to some further end, then it self: He
therefore that shall seek that end by a Multiplication or Seeking of himself
shall get nothing by it. But he that, confessing God only to to be that Monas
or Unit, (as He is) shall quit his Unity, and reduce himself to a Cyphar, he,
being added to that Only Unit, shall become a most Perfect Number, and be
Multiplied 10, yea, (which is the superabundant (...) Romans 5.20.
of the Gospel) 100 Mark 10.30.
for one.

Take heed then, you neither act nor speak with that slothful Servant that,
Luke 19.20, 21
in stead of Multiplying, wrapped up his Pound, that is, himself, in a greazie
Napkin, and buried himself in the Earth all the time of his Life, the only
time of our Improvement and Negotiation. Take heed you speak not as he did,
who called his Master an Austere man, for reaping that which be never sowed. A
most injurious Slander; his own words plainly witnessed as much; Here, Sir,
says he, is your Pound again: Why then a Pound he had by confession,
therefore so much, at least, was sown. Well, and what did his Master expect to
reap from him? 'twas but his own with Usury; must he then be voic't an Austere
man for this? I wonder, what less could he look for? will any Dealer trade for
less then common Interest? any Farmer sow for less then a competent increase?
If they do, they should be losers by the hand, and so should his Master have
been. Then take heed, I say, you blaspheme not God in your hearts, for
requiring Self-denial of you. But above all take heed, you act not with that
Servant, you bury not your precious Soul, wrapped up in your greazie Flesh, in
the Bowels of this Earthly World; for, as he so, you will gain nothing by it;
No Improvement, no Multiplication can come of such Beastly sloth: No, but like
him you will be losers, even Bankrupted, by the Means. He lost his Pound
first, so shall you your Parts, your Natural, yea and Spiritual Endowments.
Then he lost his Person, being cast into utter darkness, that is, into such a
Condition as is far worse then nothing. For Nothing is but a Negation: but
Darkness, we know, is a Privation, that is, the Loss of a Habit: If then it
be far better, as it is, never to have had a Blessing, then having had, to
lose it, then far better it is, never to have partaken of God, Matthew. 26.24.1
John 1.5.
who is Light, then partaking of Him to be cast into utter darkness.

Yet such shall be thy Condemnation, whosoever thou art, that art a Theevish,
Traiterous, Idolatrous Lover of thy Self: It Is certain, God must not be a
loser, whatsoever come of it: His Will must be done, His Glory must be shown,
vel a nobis, vel de nobis; either of us, or upon us. If then we would judge our
selves, that is, 1 Cor. 11.31.
by the Denial of our selves confes^e God to be (...) the only (...) or
Selfe-Beer of the world, we should not be Judged of the Lord, not deprived of
that Fountain of all Being; But, not Judging our selves at all, that is,
seeking our own things, and not the things of God, by endeavoring to
establish our Self-being, and so denying into be God's Prerogative, He
condemns us with the world, that is, banishes us from his Gracious Presence,
so manifesting Himself to be the only Selfe-Beer of the world, but our
selves, now by our own Default, to become more Vile then Nothing.

So then, we see, God is no loser in His Glory, if we shall seek our selves;
and as certain it is, we shall be no losers in our Happiness, if we Deny our
selves; because we have to do with Him, who is the Lord God of Recompense
Jerem 51.56.
; One that will not suffer us to lose any thing, we lay out for His sake, not
so much as a Cup of cold water Mat. 10.42.
. For though, when we have done our best, we have done no more then was our
Duty Luke 17.10.
yet, will God reward that Duty now; He deals with us, not upon terms of
strict Justice, but of Grace and favor. Matthew 6.4.
Do thou then quit thy Praise, by Praying, Fasting, and Almes-giving in
Private? God will one day commend thee openly. Do thou quit thine Honor by
Humility? God will one day exalt thee. Do thou then quit thy strength by
Patience? God will one day Revenge thee. Do thou quit thy Wisdom by
Simplicity? God will one day manifest that to be the only Wisdom. I might be
infinite in all Particulars.

Let us hear the Conclusion of the whole matter: It is no more but what our
Savior tells us in the verse behind our Text, Verse 25.
almost in so many words: He that seeks himself, shall indeed find himself,
but to his own Destruction; But he that Denies himself, shall indeed be rid
of himself, but to his own salvation. Then what profit will it be to thee to
gain thy self, yea the whole world, if thou must loose thine own soul? what
Recompense can thou give for it? the whole World will not be sufficient, nor
any thing in the World, but Him that overcame the World for thee. If it be
grievous to Deny thy Self, Luke 12.9. Matthew. 7.23.
what will it be, to be Denied of Christ, when He shall say, I know you not? If
thou can not find in thine heart to say, Depart from me Iniquity; how shall
thou find in thine heart to hear (that Thunderclap) Depart from Me ye
workers of Iniquity? Esaias 33.14.
If thou art not able to abide with this consuming fire, how will thou be able
to Dwell with everlasting Burnings?

It may be now, on the contrary, there will be found, to whom this duty of
Self-denial is so far from being grievous, they are sorry, they have not now
(as those in the Primitive times had) occasion to express it fully. They could
willingly resist, that is, patiently yield themselves, though it were to blood,
were it (as those Martyrs did) for the Cause of Christ: But to suffer for the
Circumstantialls only, not the Substantialls of Religion; yea to suffer for
those Moral Duties, which a Heathen man would suffer for, this, they esteem
not worth the while, not worth the Denying of their Estates, Honors, Ease, at
least their Lives; and therefore they easily persuade themselves, they are not
hereunto obliged, or, if they be, to neglect such Duties is but a Peccadillo, a
small sin, they can cry God mercy for it; and so gilding the Pill over a
little, they swallow it down smoothly, without any Remorse at all.

Hence it is that others, to get the Reputation to themselves of (no less
then) Martyrs for the Truth, strongly flatter themselves, they suffer for
Christ, that they do; when yet, even in their own pretense, it is but for His
Garment, but in the judgment of Humbler Men, is not for that neither, but
their own Wills, then which nothing can be more contrary to Christ, or
Suffering for Him, and therefore to Self-denial.

But to the first, I ans. That even in this it appears, they are not
Self-denyed men, that they take upon them to prescribe to God Almighty: As if
he knew not, by calling them to what Sufferings, they should glorify Him, and
benefit themselves most. For in true Self-denial we ever part with our own
Election, our own Will, and submit it to another: Now this he cannot do, that
will bear no other Cross, but what is of his own choosing.

But then especially does this Election fight with our Self-denial, when it
pitches upon such Crosses only, as are more Glorious, such as were those of
the Primitive Martyrs; For in such Sufferings we seek our own Things, not the
Things of God, we seek our own Repute, our own Reward: not our own
Abjection, Vileness, Contempt, and Nothing. But this, in some degree, must be
done in the true Denial of our Selves: and this, we must know, may be done as
well, if not better, by Suffering for small as greater matters. For the less
Motive our Sufferings have from without themselves, it is a sign, they have the
more from within, that they proceed merely from a Conscience of our own Duty
and Abjection. But now, the Meaner that is we suffer for, if we suffer for it
with equal Patience, as for a Greater matter, the less is our Motive from
without, and and so must argue the greater Conscience of Duty from within,
which is so far from disparaging, it sets a Price upon our Self-denial.
Again, what we shall suffer for, when and where, is not in our Election, but
in God's Providence calling us thereunto: So is not our Willingness and
Cheerfulness in suffering, for that, by the Grace of God, is; this therefore
is to be reckoned to our Praise, that rather to our Recompense.

Now it pleased the All-wise God to call the Primitive Christians to be
Witnesses to His more Fundamental Truths that being done abundantly, it
pleases Him now to call Us to be Witnesses to His Truths of inferior Nature.
What then? shall we despise these Meaner ones, as not worth our Suffering for?
let us take heed of that; None of them but are God's: None but in the Sequel
are of infinite concernment: None but are more worth then all we are or have,
yea then the whole World it self: None, but which in suffering for, we suffer
for Christ Himself, who calls Himself the Truth. If then we suffer for Christ
in suffering for His Meanest Truth, John. 14.6
we ought to be so far from excusing ourselves, or declining such suffering, as
which were Interpretatively to Deny Christ, that we ought rather to comfort our
selves in this behalf, that we are thought worthy any ways to suffer for Him.

But much better it is wholly to wave the Cause of our Sufferings, leaving that
to God's Providence, and, reflecting upon our Selves, look to the Quality of
our suffering, take thought, not how great but, how good Sufferers we are, with
what Willingness, what Love of God and Resignation of our Selves we suffer.
For thus we may equalize, if not out-goe those Primitive Christians. If they
suffered for more weighty matters, we may suffer with more obedient Affections;
if their Sufferings were more Glorious, ours may be more Virtuous; If they
suffered for the justifying of our Faith, why may not we be called to suffer
for the justifying of Suffering it self, of the Scandal of the Cross, of the
Necessity of Self-denial? For my part, I judge, we are. Our Sufferings
therefore seem the more Arduous and Difficult of the two, by how much more
difficult it is to contest with Ignominy then with Error, to renounce our own
Wills, then our own Understandings.

But here, it may be, some will say, It cannot be denied though, but that the
Sufferings of Christians now are far inferior to those of the Primitive
Martyrs, which were most horrid. I cannot tell, whether that also may be
allowed or no. For so it may be, that one may Deny himself much by suffering
in a small matter, and on the contrary may Deny himself but little by suffering
in a greater; for all goes as the Mind is and sets a price on that we suffer
in. Our Self-denial receives its value from our Interest in things; Now our
Interest lies in things, not ever according to their Worth but, most-what
according to our Apprehension and Love of them, which, by reason of our
Blindness since our Fall, is seldom proportioned to the just Worth of any
thing. Hence it comes to pass that, as the Schools tell us, we often stamp a
high price on those things amore intensivo, by our affectionate love, which
amore appreciativo, by a discreet judicious Love, we should esteem of little or
no value: A Child will not part with his Boble for his Dinner, not because it
is more worth but, because he has not the Discretion to judge aright of
either: So a man may prefer his own Will, his own Glory, before his Estate,
yea and his Life too, as may easily be gathered from the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.3.
not because they are more worth but, because he is so mad to judge so. Now if
this be so, as it is most plain, then are we not to judge of men's Self-denial
by the Outward face of their Sufferings, but by that Private Interest, which by
their Affections they have in the things they suffer in. For by reason of this
it is, that a man may suffer more, that is, with more Resignation of himself,
by the loss of a commodious Vtensill, by a Frump from a Great Personage, or an
open Disgrace, then by empaling, or any Death of greater torture.

Then why should any man judge e're the meanlier of his Self-denial, because
he suffers not either for or in so great matters as others heretofore have
done? Let him look only to himself, that, through Pride of heart, he does not
rise up against that Cross, which it pleases God to lay upon him. Let him
freely resign up the Trial of himself to God, who knows well enough how to
deal with him and sift him out. If it pleases God to prove him by that which
is a Toy in it self, though such an one as to which he is much affected, (for
so usually God deals with us at first) let him accept of the Cross, embrace
and welcome it, God, who is well skilled in the rule of Proportions, takes our
Patience equally, at our hands, as if our Cross were greater. He lays not
Afflictions upon us, thereby Envying us His Blessings; No, He would have us
enjoy them still, could we but get the Art, to use them, as though we used them
not. If we can (or rather will) not, Psalm. 119.75
then He, in very Faithfulness, weanes us of them, to make us look after those
that are greater, but more Spiritual. Finally, let him consider, that the
least Cross he suffers under is far above what he is able to bear, were he
left unto himself John 15.5.
; that by the Grace of God he is what he is 1 Cor. 15.10.
; that God works in him both the Will to suffer, and the Performance, and that
of His good will Phil. 2.13.
, but not against his own: That our Part only is purely to Deny our own Will
and Resign up our Selves to Him, which yet we cannot do of our Selves, 2 Cor.
3.5.
as of our Selves, that is, we cannot do without Him.

Now, in the last place: If any tender Conscience be discouraged, that he
finds the Relics of Self-love struggle in him, let him comfort himself in
this, that the Reigning power of it is subdued, as for the taking away of the
Remaining power, it is not to be expected in this life. Is he sure, that same
Regulus, we spoke of, Before Page 60.
is destroyed, his old Habit resisted, his old Haunt broken off, that he has
run counter to the broad road, of the Epidemicall Vices of the Times? If it
be so, then has he whereof to rejoice. As for the Dead Body of that Regulus it
must hang up till the Evening, Josh. 10.27.
till our Death: but when our Sun sets, that shall be taken down. Mean time,
it is enough he is Dead and Mortified, that the Canaanites which are left are
Inferior and not considerable to the Israelites, that the Flesh is kept under
by the Spirit, the love of our Selves, by the Love of God. What says St. Paul?
1 Cor. 5.10.
he says not, we should be wholly free from all commerce with evil, because
then we must be out of the World, but that we should not consent to it. And
therefore, he says, Romans 8.23.
(...), even the very Saints themselves groan in themselves, looking for the
Adoption, the Redemption, that is, the Glorification, of their Bodies; Phil.
3.21.
to wit, then when their Mortal Bodies shall be swallowed up of Immortality,
and made like to the Glorious Body of the Son of God, the last, and greatest
of Miracles.

This is certain; so long as we are in the Body, this vile, vain Body of ours
will be as Thorns in our eyes, and Goads in our sides, Josh. 23.13. 2 Cor.
12.7.
that is, we shall be tempted of it. But then, we must know, it is not evil to
be tempted, but to be overcome of a Temptation; Yea, our Temptation, if
resisted, will redound to our advantage and God's Glory, which is perfected in
our weakness. Ibid. Verse 9.


Mean time, we had need of Patience, Heb. 10.36.
to run the Race that is set before us, that so we faint not and draw back.
And, though we see totum mundum jacere in Maligno, 1 John 5.19.
as St. John said of his time, and we may more justly of ours, yet are we
bidden by our Savior, even in the midst of Tempests and Calamities, Luke 21.28.
to lift up our Heads because then our Redemption draws nighest.

And so we see indeed oft-times it comes to pass, 2 Cor. 4.6.
that God draws the greatest good out of the Extremity of evil, the most
Glorious Light out of the thickest Darkness. So cum duplicabantur lateres
venit Moses, when the Israelites task was doubled Moses came: when the
Government was taken from Judah, Shiloh came: And so we may assuredly expect,
after all these Tempests and Garboyles are blown over, a greater calm of
Peace and Piety then ever. Such a thing has been foretold long since by the
Prophets, but never was yet; never was less then now, now that Self-love
plays the Tyrant in the shape of Self-denial, and therefore yet we may expect
it. This is certain; Christ must lay all His Enemies at his Feet, 1 Cor. 15.25.
the greatest of which is Self-love, and the last, its Wages, Death; these
must be subdued under Him. And when, think we, should this more likely be
effected, then when Christ shall come the Second time, Heb. 9.28. Tit. 2.13.
not in Humility but, in Glory; when the Church shall triumph Victoriously over
all her Enemies? In the mean while, that it be not now brought to pass, let
us not be in fault; and therefore let every one in particular reform and Deny
Himself: this will be a good forwarding of the General. Which though, no
question, we shall fail of in this deplored, Selfe-flattering Age we live
in, yet, this we may be assured of, to our comfort, liberabimus animas
nostras, we shall free and save our own souls. Which He grant unto us, Who by
Denying Himself most perfectly has left us an Example, that we should follow
in His steps. To whom be given all Honor, Glory, and Praise both now and ever.
Amen.

Postscript.
I Should have proceeded to raise two Consectaries from this Doctrine: One
whereof is, That Adversity is a safer Condition for a Christian man, then
Prosperity: Answerably whereunto, our Savior bids us take up our Cross. The
Other is like unto it: That Subjection and Obedience is a far safer Condition
for a Christian man, then Sovereignty and command; Answerably whereunto, our
Savior bids us, Follow Him. But this Adventure must wait another Tide.

FINIS.
April 3. 1646. Imprimatur.

JOHN DOWNAME.

Corrigenda.
PAGE 8. line 17. for (...). p. 10. l. 23. for, is not, r. is it not. p. 27. l.
1. for, He bids, r. He bids us. Ib. l. 38. place this figure II. in the Marg.
p. 30. l. 1. for, also that, r. also of that. p. 34. l. 29. for, Precept, r.
precepts. p, 36. l. 29. blot out the semicol. after Him, and place it after
God's. p. 43. refer the 2d. quot. in the Marg. to l. 24. the 3d. to l. 26. p.
64. l. 7. recompense, r. recompenses.


