NEW ENGLANDS TEARS, FOR OLD ENGLANDS FEARS.

Preached in a Sermon on July 23. 1640. being a day of Public Humiliation,
appointed by the Churches in behalf of our Native Country in time of feared
dangers.

By WILLIAM HOOK, Minister of GODS Word; Sometime of Axmouth in Devonshire,
now of Taunton in New England.

Sent over to a worthy Member of the honorable House of Commons, who desires
it may be for public good.

LONDON, Printed by T. P. for John Rothwell and Henry Overton, and are to be
sold at the Sun in Paul's Churchyard, and in Pope's Head Alley. 1641.

TO THE READER.
COURTEOUS READER;
THou have here presented to thy view, a Sermon preached to some in New England
for Old Englands sake: wherein is expressed much love, to a Country left. It
was once imputed to Anaxagoras, that he cared not for his Country, because he
seemed to be little moved with the ruins thereof. This cannot be imputed to
our brethren of New England; for they, not seeing, nor hearing of, only
fearing the ruins of this our Country, were deeply affected with it; a sign
they love us. Some have applied that of the Apostle to them, 1 John 2.19. (They
went out from us, because they were not of us, for if they had been of us,
they would no doubt have continued with us,) but how falsely it is applied,
this Sermon does discover: for certainly they are of us, though they be gone
from us, for if they were not of us, their affections would not have so
continued to us, as to fast and pray for us. Amor poscit amorem Let our
affections be endeared to them.

As for this Sermon, expect not care-pleasing, but heart-affecting phrases in
it: the Author sought not so much to please as to profit; nor to inform the
judgment, as to work upon the affections; If thou bring thy heart with thee
to the Reading of it, thou may find thy heart melting by Reading of it, and
then thou shall have cause to bless GOD for it. Vale.

NEW ENGLANDS TEARS, FOR OLD ENGLANDS FEARS.
JOB 2.13. So they sat down with him upon the ground seven days and seven
nights, and none spoke a word unto him, for they saw that his grief was very
great.


THE words are spoken of Jobs three friends, who were now come to visit him,
and sympathize with him in the time of his distress. They had made an
appointment thus to do, verse. 11. viz. to come to mourn with him, and to
comfort him. For thus the godly should send to one another in like case, and
acquaint one another with the sorrows and calamities of their friends and
brethren, and agree to contribute and cast in their sorrows and sympathize
when their friends are afflicted. A godly practice, and which the Churches in
this Land do well this day to imitate.

Now then are Jobs friends coming toward him, and when they lift up their
eyes a far off, they knew him not, etc. Affliction may so alter the outward
face of things and friends, that ancient acquaintance may not know them. Upon
this, they sat down with him upon the ground, etc.

The sum of what is now read unto you, is the sympathy of Jobs friends in the
time of his calamity; and from it we may observe this point,

That it is the part of true friends and brethren, Obser.
to sympathize and fellow-feele with their brethren and friends when the hand
of God is upon them. For thus, you see, did Jobs three friends here do; and
they performed a very brotherly office of love in so doing. When therefore
afterward their hearts grew more hard toward him, he calls upon them for the
same compassions, Job 19.21.
Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends, for the hand of the
Lord has touched me. From whence we may likewise collect, that when the hand
of God has touched a friend, all his friends should have tender pity upon him.
And such affections have the godly shown forth, as we find in Scripture. Who
is weak, says Paul, and I am not weak? 2 Cor. 11.29.
Who is offended, and I burn not? When David was in great heaviness, as being
under a great affliction by the rebellious insurrection of the son of his
own loins against him, Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan, David's dear
friend, did neither dress his feet, 2 Samuel 19.24,
nor trim his beard, nor wash his clothes, until the day that the King
returned in peace. And Jeremy writes a book of Lamentations for Judahs misery,
though himself had then his life given him for a prey. When the natural body
of Christ was to suffer, he said to his friends, Weep not for me, but weep
for your selves; but when his mystical body suffers, he expects that we should
not weep so much for our selves as for him.

Nay, David sympathizeth with his very enemies; As for me, when they were sick,
my clothing was Sackcloth, and I humbled my soul by fasting; I behaved my
self as though he had been my friend or brother, I bowed down heavily as one
that mourns for his Mother, Psalm. 35.13, 14. Whence we gather, what our
affections and behaviors ought to be for our friends, brethren, and mother, in
their distress. Yea, which is yet more, we find one wicked man fellow
feeling with another. Ahaziah, a wicked King went down to visit wicked Joram
the son of Ahab, because he was sick, 2 King. 8.27, 29. And both God and his
Church and Children will complain in the want of this brotherly affection.
Among all her Lovers, says Jeremy, she has none to comfort her, Lam. 1.2. It
was indeed Jerusalems misery not to be pitied, but withal it was her Lovers
sin. Therefore she complains, verse. 12. Is it nothing unto you all, ye that
pass by? Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, etc.
Again, I called for my Lovers, but they deceived me. Verse. 19.
And Obadiah prophecieth against Edom for their cruelty, and want of compassion
with their brethren of Judah in the day of their distress. When Christ is any
way afflicted, he expects to be pitied, Matthew. 25.
and will openly condemn them before all the world that omit this duty. And
that parabolicall speech of Christ to the Jews, of children sitting in the
Market place, and calling one to another, Luke 7.32.
and saying; We have mourned to you, and ye have not wept, is taken from this
ground, that it is matter of just complaint, if when friends do mourn, their
fellows do not weep.

But the Scriptures are express in the command of this sympathy. Romans 12.15,
16.
Rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep; be of the same
mind one toward another. When the Apostle had said, Let brotherly love
continue; in the verses following he instanceth in two duties thereof; Heb.
13.1, 2, 3
first, In enterteining strangers; secondly, In remembering them that are in
bonds as bound with them, and them that suffer adversity, as being our selves
also in the same body. God does then expressly require this part of brotherly
love. The Doctrine is clear enough, It is the part of true friends, Prove.
17.17.
etc. A friend loves at all times, and a brother is borne for adversity.

Reasons.
Remember them that are in adversity, as being your selves also in the same
body. Now it is the part of one member to fellow-feele with another. When the
Shunamites son was sick, especially in one part, his whole body complained,
saying, My head, 2 King. 4.19.
my head. This made David to say for my brethren and Companions sake, I will
say, Psalm. 1 22, 8.
Peace be within thee. He desired the peace of Jerusalem, because of his
brethren and companions there, who were as it were, bone of his bone.

Solamem miseris socios, etc. sociall sorrows do somewhat solace the
miserable. Which we see in Jerusalems Complaint for want of pity from her
Lovers, and Jobs (at last) from his friends. Now it is the part of friends and
fellows to bear one another burdens. Yea it is of the Law of Christ, Gal.
6.2.
which is the Law of Love. And surely, if a man does but see his horse
over-burdened, he will run presently and lighten the load that is upon him.

Prove. 18. last.
says Solomon, must carry himself friendly. He may soon else loose his
friends when he expects to be dealt with friendly by them. One reason why mercy
rejoices against judgment, Iam. 2.13.
is because as it has yielded mercy to others in time of Judgment, so now it
expects the same from them in like case.

Jobs friends but little to come and bestow their tears and their sorrows
upon him. What can a friend do less? true friendship and brotherhood goes
further, it will, nay it must, if need be, lay down its life for the brethren.
1 Ioh. 3.16.


Use.
Obad. verse. 12.
for Edom rejoiced over the children of Judah in the day of their destruction,
and spoke proudly in the day of their distress: and these were a cursed
generation. And indeed the Psalmist implies it to be a property of abjects thus
to do: In mine adversity they rejoiced, Psalm. 35.15.
and gathered themselves together, yea the abjects, ( i.e. the cast-awayes)
gathered themselves together. And it is commonly observed, that men and women
who have turned Witches, and been in league with the devil, thereby to do
mischief, are never given over so to do, till they begin to have an evil
eye, which grieveth at the Prosperity, and rejoices at the misery of others.
Hence Witchcrast is described by an evil eye.

I know not what eye has bewitched my young Lambs. And when any are
bewitched, Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi fascina^ agnos.
it is a phrase of speech among many to say, they are overseene, i.e. looked
upon with a malicious eye. Nay, it is the property of the devil to be thus
affected. Man's prosperity is his p^ine, and man's adversity his rejoyeing, as
we see in Job; neither is there (scarce) any thing that does more import the
seed of the Serpent in a man, then this same (...) rejoicing in the evil and
misery of another. It is then the property of Edomites, abjects, witches and
devils, to rejoice in the misery that befalls others. And though I am not
able to charge any of you with this cursed affection, yet I do wish you to
look into your own hearts; for this I am sure, here are strong temptations
sometimes, leading toward it in this Land, which when they meet with an heart
void of grace, must needs stir up the disposition in it, and not only
emulations and envyings, but witchcraft it self is a work of the flesh. Gal.
5.19, 20.


England, to condole with them this day in their afflictions. Jobs friends, you
see, did it for him seven days and seven nights, i.e. many days, oh let us
do it then this one day, at least, for these.

Indeed when we look upon our selves at this time in this Land, the Lord has
given us great cause of rejoicing, both in respect of civil and spiritual
peace. God has at once subdued the proud Pequats and the proud opinions that
rose up in this Land; and for plenty, never had the Land the like. Yea, which
is much better, the Word of God grows and multiplyeth; Act. 12.
the Churches have rest throughout the whole land, and are edified, Act. 9.31.
and walking in the fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the holy Ghost, are
multiplied. This is much, and more it would be, if the edge of these and other
our comforts were not this day turned by the fear of civil strifes and
combustions in the Land of our Nativitie, which do not a little abate the
sweetness of all other our happiness to us, and call for Lamentation and sack
cloth at our hands.

When Artaxerxes said unto Nehemiah, Neh. 2.3.
Why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou art not sick? Have you not read the
answer? Why should not my countenance be sad, when the City, the place of my
Fathers sepulchers lies wast, and the gates thereof are consumed with fire?
Why? Nehemiah was well enough at ease, he had honor, and power, and favor,
and pleasure enough, and being the Kings Cup Bearer, he had Wine enough of all
sorts at his command, which makes glad the heart of man. But what is all this
not to cloud his countenance, and to overcast it with grief and sorrow, when
the City of his Fathers was laid wast, and the gates thereof consumed with
fire? Thus Beloved, if our comforts were treble to what they are this day, yet
could it not but much abate the sweetness of them, to consider what distresses
may lie at this time upon ^ur native Country, for ought we know, a^^ have too
just cause to fear. When the Arc and Israel and Judah abode in tents, and
Joab and his men were encamped in the open fields, 2 Samuel 12.11.
Vrijah took no comfort in his beautiful wise, nor in his house, nor in his
meat and drink.

Let us therefore, I beseech you, lay aside the though^s of all our comforts
this day, and let us f^sten our eyes upon the calamities of our brethren in old
England, calamities, at least, imminent calamities dropping, swords that have
hung along time over their heads by a twine thread, judgments long since
threatened as foreseen by many of Gods Messengers in the causes, though not
foretold by a Spirit prophetically guided; heavy judgments in all probability
when they fall, if they are not fallen already. And not to look upon the
occasions given on the one side or the other, between the two Sister Nations
(Sister Nations? ah, the word wounds,) let us look this day simply on the
event, a sad event in all likelihood, the dividing of a King from his Subjects,
and him from them, their mutual taking up of Arms in opposition and desence;
the consequences, even the gloomy and dark consequences thereof, are killing
and slaying, and sacking and burning, and robbing and rifting, cursing and
blaspheming, etc.

If you should but see War described to you in a Map, especially in a
Country well known to you, nay dearly beloved of you, where you drew your
first breath, where once, yea where lately you dwelt, where you have received
ten thousand mercies, and have many a dear friend and Countryman and kinsman
abiding, how could you but lament and mourn?

War is the conflict of enemies enraged with bloody revenge, wherein the
parties opposite carry their lives in their hands, every man turning prodigal
of his very heart blood, and willing to be killed to kill. The instruments are
clashing swords, rattling spears, skul-dividing Holbeards, murdering pieces,
and thundering Cannons, from whose mouths proceed the fire and smell and smoke
and terror and death, as it were, of the very bottomless pit. We wonder now
and then at the sudden death of a man; alas, you might there see a thousand men
not only healthy, but stout and strong, struck dead in the twinkling of an
eye, their breath exhales without so much as, Lord have mercy upon us. Death
heweth its way through a wood of men in a minute of time from the mouth of a
murderer, turning a forest into a champion suddenly; and when it has used
these to slay their opposites, they are recompensed with the like death
themselves. O the shrill care-piercing clangs of the trumpets, noise of drums,
the animating voices of Horse Captains and Commanders, learned and learning to
destroy! Job 39.19, 20, etc.
There is the undaunted horse whose neck is clothed with thunder, and the glory
of whose nostrills is terrible; how does he lie pawing and praunsing in the
valley going forth to meet the armed men? he mocks at fear, swallowing the
ground with fiercenes and rage, and saying among the trumpets, Ha, Ha, he smells
the battle a far off, the thunder of the Captains and the shouting. Here ride
some dead men swagging in their deep saddles; there fall others alive upon
their dead horses; death sends a message to those from the mouth of the
Muskets, these it talks with face to face, and stabbs them in the fist rib: In
yonder file there is a man has his arm struck off from his shoulder, another
by him has lost his leg; here stands a Soldier with half a face, there
fights another upon his strumps, and at once both kills and is killed; not far
off lies a company wallowing in their sweat and goare; such a man whilst he
charge his Musket is discharged of his life, and falls upon his dead fellow.
Isa. 9.6.
Every battle of the warrior is with confused noise and garments rouled in
blood. Death reigns in the field, and is sure to have the day which side
soever falls. In the mean while (o formidable!) the infernal fiends follow
the Camp to catch after the souls of rude nefarious soldiers (such as are
commonly men of that calling) who fight themselves fearelesly into the mouth of
hell for revenge, a booty, or a little revenue. How thick and threefold do
they speed one another to destruction? A day of battle is a day of harvest for
the devil.

All this while, the poor wife and tender children sit weeping together at
home, having taken their late farewell of the harnessed husband and father (o
it was a sad parting if you had seen it!) never looking to see his face
again, as indeed many and the most of them never do; for anon comes Ely's
messenger from the Camp, saying, 1 Samuel 4.17.
There is a great slanghter among the people, and your husband is dead, your
father is dead, he was slain in an hot fight, he was shot dead in the place
and never spoke a word more. Then the poor widow who fed yet upon a crumb of
hope, tears her hair from her head, rends her cloths, wrings her hands, lifts
up her voice to heaven, and weeps like Rachell that would not be comforted, her
children hang about her crying and saying, O my father is slain, my father is
dead, I shall never see my father more; and so they cry and sob and sight out
their afflicted souls, and break their hearts together. Alas, Alas! this is
yet but War through a Crevise. Beloved, do but consider; There is many times
fire without war, and famine and pestilence without war, but war is never
without them: and there are many times robberies without war, and murdering
of passengers, ravishing of matrones, deflouring of virgins, cruelties and
torments and sometimes barbarous and inhumane practices without war, but
war goes seldom or never without them.

War, it is malum complexum, a compound of Judgments, Psalm. 75.8.
amixt misery, the cup in the hand of the Lord, the wine whereof is red, and it
is full of mixture. The wine is indeed as red as blood, and the ingredients are
fire, famine, pestilence, murders, robberies, rapes, deflourings, cruelties,
torments, with many other miseries. The voice of melody cease, relations that
were lately the comfort are now become the grief of the life of men; the high
ways are unoccupyed, Judges 5.6, 7, 11.
the travelers walk through by ways, the Inhabitants of the villages cease,
and the noise of the Archers is heard in the places of drawing water. War, it
is the immediate hand of such whose tenderest mercies are cruelties, 2 Samuel
24.14.
commonly therefore the last of Gods strokes upon them that will take no
warning. But yet there is difference in wars; a war in the borders of an
enemy is held better then a war in ones native Country; for commonly, the
land that is as the garden of Eden before an enemy, Joel 2.3.
behind them is like a desolate Wilderness; and it is very woeful when people
and land shall be wasted together. Or if it be war in our own and, yet a
war against a foreign enemy invading, is far better then a civil war. It
is grievous, but not admirable, to see an Egyptian and an Hebrew contending,
but to see, as the Prophet says, Egyptians against Egyptians, Isa. 19.2.
and every one fighting against his brother, and against his neighbor, City
against City, and Kingdom against Kingdom; or to see, as the same Prophet
says, Manasseh against Ephraim, Isa. 9.21.
and Ephraim against Manasseh, and both against Judah; O, this is both
lamentable and wonderful! The mad Soldier in the heart of his blood, and the
depth of his Atheism, may account it perhaps at first with Abner but a play,
to see Israelites catching of Israelites by the beard, 2 Samuel 2.14, 15, 16.
and thrusting their swords in one another sides: but of all wars none so
bloody, neither has any play such bitterness in the end.

It is a sad play, wherein not only men's goods and bodies and souls do
commonly lie at stake, but wherein also even the very Conqueror is conquered,
as one that played but for his own money, and at such a desperate play whose
very gains are loosings. No wars so cruel, so unnatural, so desolating, as
civil wars. You have heard, Beloved, of the dreadful German-warres; why, if
there be any in our own Country this day, I may call them German-warres,
because they are the wars of Germans, even the bloody contentions of
brethren; and when relations turn opposites, nothing more opposite. A Kingdom
at wars with a foreign enemy may stand, but a Kingdom divided against it
self, can never; there can never be prosperity within Jerusalems palaces,
Psalm. 122.7.
if first there be not peace within her walls. Unity and peace are a bond,
Ephesians. 4.3.
and where that is broken, there must needs follow dissolution.

When the Philistines went beating down one another, 1 Samuel 14.16.
the multitude (mark the word) melted away. A thing never consumes faster, then
when it falls to melting: and how do such weaken themselves for an enemy
without, and sight for the conquest of some foreign adversary? Gedeons men
may stand still every man in his place, Judge. 7.21.22.
so long as Midianites turn their swords against Midianites. 2 Chronicles. 20.
Neither needs Jehosophat strike a stroke, when the Moabites, Ammonites and
Edomites his enemies, lie in ambush one against another; first Moah and Ammon
fighting against Edom, and then Moah and Ammon one against another. And what
was the issue of the eleven Tribes wars with their brother Benjamin, but
lamentation, Judge 21.2, 3, 6.
mourning and woe? And yet too among civil wars, -- En quo discordia cives
Perduxit miseros.
some are worse then other. I have read, I remember, in Lucan, of wars
between Caesar and Pompey worse then civil: Bellaper Ematheosplusquam civilia
campos.
and such especially are mutining wars, when there is little trust to either
side, and friends are scarce known from foes, but all things are filled with
conjurations, treacheries, distractions, factions, fears, suspicions, tumults,
combustions, spoy lings, etc. The Lord be merciful to old England, as hitherto
he has been, yea more then to any Land this day under the Sun, which indeed
heightneth its sins above the Sun, and makes it more sinful then any Land at
this time in the whole world, insomuch, that we cannot but yield that there are
no wars that Englands sins have not deserved. Let us therefore fear the
worst at this present in behalf of our dear Contrymen (considering also
what ill tidings we have heard thence) that nothing, as we doubt, but a miracle
of divine power and mercy can preserve them from the miseries of the devouring
sword. I remember what the Auxiliaries of Egypt said in their distress, Jere.
46.16.
Arise, and let us go again unto our people, and to the Land of our Nativity
from the oppressing sword; but if we were now under that misery, I doubt it
would be in vain for us to say the like. But that which we are now called
unto, is Brotherly Compassion, and to do the part of Jobs friends in my Text,
to sit astonished, as at the crying sins, so at the feared sorrows of our
Countrymen, for in all probability, their grief is very great.

To this end, you may think a while upon these particulars.

England, we are distinguished from all the Nations in the world by the name
of English. There is no Potentate breathing, that we call our dread
Sovereign, but King CHARLES, nor Laws of any Land have civilized us, but
Englands; there is no Nation that calls us Contrymen, but the English.
Brethren! Did we not there ^aw in our first breath? Did not the Sun first
shine there upon our heads? Did not that Land first bear us, even that
pleasant Island, but for sin, I would say, that Garden of the Lord, that
Paradise?

know, have Fathers and Mothers there, some of you have Brethren and Sisters,
others of you have Uncles and Aunts there, and near kinsfolk. All these
sitting in grief and sorrow, challenge our sympathize; and it is a fearful
sin to be void of natural affections: Romans 1.31.
nature wrought in Abraham, as well as grace, when his nephew Lot was taken
captive by the four Kings. Genesis 14.


Matthew. 12.50.
O there is many a sweet, loving, humble, heavenly soul in that Land, in whose
bosom Christ breaths by his blessed Spirit every day, and such as I hope we
shall ever love at the remotest distance, were it from one end of the earth
unto the other. Why, they are bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh in
Christ, nearer by far then friends, and kindred, oh let their sorrows be our
sorrows, and their miseries ours.

whom you prize above the rest. O if you could but see them, your souls would
hardly stay within your bodies for running forth to meet them; At lest, you
would strive to incorporate your selves into them by the closest embraces.
Alas, these now, perhaps, are weeping in their secret places, these are now
sitting with Job among the ashes. If you could but see the expressions of their
sorrows, and hear their present speeches and complaints, and how they, their
wives, and little ones do sit and lament together, it may be some of them in
expectation of daily death, and how they fast and pray, and afflict their
souls, or how, peradventure, they wish themselves at this very instant with
us; O you would weep and cry, and melt away into tears of sorrow.

abounds?) does Judgment begin to reign, as we may greatly fear.

Baal, swear by the Lord and by Malchom, were neither hot nor cold; there some
of us blasphemed the dreadful name of the ever blessed God, polluted his
Sabbaths, despised his messengers, contemned his holy ways, profaned and
abused his mercies, and his good creatures, ran with others to the same excess
of riot, etc. And how ever some may say, they have repented hereof, yet little
do they know what evil examples they have left there behind to fill up the
measure both of sin and wrath. If thy sins committed there be pardoned, yet
thy sins sins may be punished, like as a Father may be spared, and yet his
children executed.

Thy sins; oman, have begotten many sins there; there is many a formalist,
and many a conformitant the more for thee, as indeed I fear there is for me.
Alas, how have they kept on sinning upon our examples? Another drunkennesses
have begotten many a drunkard there, as another spiritual cowardice many a
Nicodemite, and another Lukewarmenesse many a Laodicean. Now, do we fear
that the Lord is gone forth this day to call that Land to an account, and to
visit for these and the like abominations, and is this nothing unto us? Shall
men be slain for our sins, and we afford them no sorrow? What? shall the old
Prophet in Bethel rise up in judgment against us? for when he had slain the
man of God by his lying and dissembling to him, he yet mourned and lamented
over him, 1 King. 13.30.
saying, Alas my Brother. Ah my friends and brethren, let us do the like; our
sins have slain, perhaps by this time, a little Army of men, what can we
less then lament over them, saying, Alas, Alas, our Brethren. Surely, we in
this Land have great cause to do as we do this day, if for no other respect,
yet for this; for we have done enough and enough to overwhelme old England
with the wrath of God; that our hearts at this time could be but over-shadowed
with a cloud of sorrow!

us, yea and power out many a prayer for us: for they did as much, I know, when
this Land lay sometimes under dearth, another time when the Indians rebelled, a
third, when the monstrous opinions prevailed. And how have they always
lissened after our welfare, ebbing and flowing in their affections with us?
How do they (I mean all this while, multitudes of well affected persons
there) talk of New England with delight! How much nearer heaven do some of
their charities account this Land, then any other place they hear of in the
world? Such is their good opinion of us! How have some among them desired to
dye, if they might not be vouchsafed to live in this Land? And when sometimes a
New England man returns thither, how is he looked upon, looked after, received,
entertained, the ground he walks upon beloved for his sake, and the house held
the better where he is? how are his words lissened to, laid up, and related
frequently when he is gone? neither is any love or kindness held too much for
such a man.

Moses said to the Reubenites and the Gadites, Numb. 32.6.
Shall your brethren go to war, and shall ye sit still? So, shall our
brethren go to war, and we sit still, and not so much as grieve with them?
shall they be wounded with the sword and spear, and not we pierced so much as
with brotherly sorrow? Surely then, if ever the LORD should bring the like
hour of temptation upon us, as his people here have not been long hitherto
without exercise, he might justly shut us out of the hearts of all our brethren
in the world. And whereas too perhaps here and there one in our native Land,
especially in their passions, may have had some transient thoughts, touching,
it may be, some of us, as if the exorbitant spirit of John and James were in
us, desirous that fire from heaven should fall upon them, as if, I mean, we
would be glad to hear of Judgments upon our native Country (o cruel, and
unnatural!) our fellow-feelings this day, I hope, shall wipe away all such
prejudices. And truly, if Gods Justice might be satisfied with that Lands
amendment without one drop of blood, though we should shed store both of tears
and blood to effect it, we would greatly rejoice, and soon turn this day of
Humiliation into a day of gratulation, graise, and thankesgiving.

Iere. 29.7.
lastly, that in the peace of that Land, we shall have peace, and therefore in
the misery of that Land, we shall never be happy. You know, that God has
hitherto made that Land a blessing unto this; If Christ has a Vine here, that
Land has as yet been the Elm that has sustained it. Thence has the Lord
thus stockt this American part with such Worthies, there were they bred and
nursed, thence hitherto have been our yearly supplies of men, and of many an
useful commodity. If then they suffer, we may easily smart; if they sink, we
are not likely to rise. And this, at least, may be a persuasive to a sordide
mind, that will not be wrought upon by more ingenuous Arguments.

The merciful God stir up all our affections, and give us that godly
sympathy, which that Land deserves at our hands, and teach us to express it
upon all occasions of ill tidings coming to our ears from thence. Yea, let us
sit at this time like old Ely upon the ways side, 1 Samuel 4.
watching, as he did, for the Ark of the Lord, with a trembling hand and
heart. And let us be every day confessing of our old England sins, of its
high pride, Idolatry, superstition, blasphemies, blood, cruelties, Atheismes,
etc. and let us never go to our secrets without our Censors in our hands for
old England, dear England still in diverse respects, left indeed by us in our
persons, but never yet forsaken in our affections. The good God of Heaven, have
mercy upon it, and upon all his dear people and servants in it, for Christ his
sake, Amen.

FINIS.

