WISDOME'S JVDGMENT OF FOLLY. DELIVERED In a SERMON at the SPITAL, In the
Solemn ASSEMBLY of the CITY, on Monday in Easter-Week, April XI. A.D. MDCLIII.

By THOMAS HORTON, D.D.

PROVE. 1 20, 21. and 8.2, 3. WISDOM cries without, she utters her voice in
the Streets, she cries in the chief place of concourse, in the opening of the
Gates; in the City she utters her words. She stands in the top of high
places, by the ways, in the places of the paths. She cries at the Gates, at
the entering in of the City, at the coming in of the doors: O ye simple,
understand Wisdom, etc.

J^^. 9.23. Thus says the LORD, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom.

1 COR. 1.27. God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the
Wise.

London, Printed by T. Maxey for SAMUEL GELLIBRAND, at the BALL in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1653.

To the Right Honorable JOHN FOWKES LORD MAYOR, Together with the Court of
ALDERMEN of the famous City of LONDON.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
I Here present you with a Sermon, which is many ways Yours, but two
especially: The one, as it was first preached upon your Invitation; and the
other, as it is now Printed upon your Importunity. The Subject it treats of is
WISDOM, which (if it may prove so in the Event, and a wise man may be Judge in
his own Cause, and magnifying of his own Perfections) is much better then
either Eccles. 9.15, 16, 18.
STRENGTH or WEAPONS OF WAR; and whereby (for the greater Encouragement of
those which are Rich) even the Poor have sometimes been able to deliver the
City. All the matter is this, What this Wisdom is, and wherein it consists. The
World commonly mistakes it, and lays it in that most, which has least title
to it of any thing else; from whence it justly incurres the censure of the
contrary Denomination, and that in the sense of Him who is best able to judge of
both. In this short and slender Discourse (which ye have here before you) you
may perhaps find something, which may in some measure tend to the unfolding of
this difficulty to you, and a right Determination of the Cause: which if it
shall please God by his Spirit to set on effectually upon any of your hearts,
(as you have cheerfully entertained it with your Ears) or upon the Hearts of
any others, whose eyes together with yours may be made partakers of it, I shall
not then altogether repent me of exposing my self in this manner to public
view; which yet otherwise, in an Age which abounds so much with Sermons and
Censoriousnesse both at once, I very well might. The Lord who is the God of
wisdom, give us all the Spirit of wisdom answerable to the several Services
whereunto he designs us: And power forth a large Measure of this Spirit more
abundantly, and especially upon Your selves, for the menaging of those great
Affairs which these Times put you upon in the Government of this populous City;
The welfare and happiness whereof, with your Own (as a part of it) shall be
always most unfainedly desired by

Your Servant in and for Christ, THO. HORTON.

A SERMON Preached at the SPITAL, on the XI. of April, being Monday in
EASTER-WEEK, A. D. MDCLIII.
1 COR. 3. ver. 18, 19. Let no man deceive himself; if any man among you
seems to be wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise;

For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. --


IT is the part and manner of all Wise and skilful Workmen, The Introduction.
that they may carry their work on with so much happier success, and may the
better go through with it, to have special heed and regard to it in the Grounds
and Principles of it. That House will be best settled, which is strengthened and
made good in the Foundation: That Disease will be best cured which is removed
and taken away in the Root and Causes of the Distemper: That Wound or Sore will
be most readily and happily healed, which is first searched and examined at the
core and bottom of it. And as it is thus in Corporals and Temporals, and the
things of this Life; so also in Spirituals, and the things of a Better; as in
the distempers of Body, so in the distempers either of Church or State. This
the Apostle Paul, who was a Wise Master Builder in the house of God (as he
styles himself in the tenth verse of this Chapter) who was an able and skilful
Chirurgian and Physician about the Body of Christ, as appears by his daily
exercise in it, was very sensible and apprehensive of, The Coherence.
for his own behalf. Therefore being now desirous to correct some grosser
Abuses and corruptions, which were at this time crept into the Church of
Corinth in point both of Doctrine and Manners, he does very carefully apply
himself to the practice of this Observation; where he does not immediately fall
upon the consideration of the Evils themselves, which were prevailing amongst
them, but first of all very seasonably strikes at the General rise and Original
of them and the Spring and Fountain whence those evils did proceed in them. Now
because this indeed was a grand mistake of themselves, and an overweening
conceit and opinion of their own worldly wisdom, to the slighting of Gods
wisdom in Christ, and the dispensation of the Gospel, he does therefore in
this Text, which I have now read unto you, begin with them, and deal with them
most effectually in this particular. Hic ulcus ipsum digito attingit, as Calvin
well upon the place. Here he lays his finger upon the sore, strikes the nail
on the head, and comes home to the very root, and bottom, and foundation of the
business it self, Let no man deceive himself, if any man, etc. This is the
proper Coherence and Dependence of these words in this Scripture.

Now in the Text it self we have three General Parts considerable of us. The
Division


First, A word of Caution or Admonition. Three General Parts.
Secondly, A word of Counsel or Exhortation. Thirdly, A word of Inforcement.
The Caution, that we have in those words, Let no man deceive himself. The
Counsel, that we have in these, If any man among you seems to be wise in this
world, let him become a fool, etc. The Inforcement or Argument to persuade, in
these, For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God.

WE begin in order with the first, The first General Part.
viz. the Caution or Admonition which is here exhibited, Let no man deceive
himself.] This speech, it is not absolute but respective; It has a double
aspect with it, (...), The Reference double. Backward. Forward,
and it casts either backward or forward. If you take it as looking backward
upon that which went before, so it has in it the force of a close and serous
conclusion, as leaving a very good tang and relish behind it. If you take it
as looking forward upon that which immediately follows, so it has in it the
force of a Preface, and preparatory introduction, as making a very good
entrance and passage for that which comes after. Take it which way you will, as
either way you may take it (though I incline rather to the latter, which is by
way of Introduction and Preamble to the succeeding Exhortation) the Caution is
very good and seasonable, and such as may be very well administered to any
persons whosoever they be. Indeed, at the first hearing it may seem to be a
little superfluous, and such as might well have been spared: Let no man deceive
himself: Why; is there any great fear of that? Can we think that any one should
be so mad or foolish, as ever to do so? If Saint Paul had said, Let no man
deceive his Neighbor, then perhaps he had said somewhat: if he had said here,
as we find him to have said elsewhere; 1 These. 4.6.
Let no man go beyond or defraud his BROTHER in any matter, we might then have
thought he had spoken to purpose. But to give so strict a charge and caution
against self-deceiving, what need was there of that? Beloved, the Apostle knew
very well what he said, and he knew also to whom he said it; and this is that
which he says, Let no man deceive himself; which he speaks not only to the
Corinthians (that we may not by the way deceive our selves in regard of the
Persons spoken to) but he speaks it to every one of Us. Mutate nomine de TE. It
is a Caution of a General Latitude and Extent, which it carries with it to all
Ages and Times whatsoever, even to these more particularly and especially
wherein we live; then in which, as there was never more defrauding and
deceiving of others, so neither more deceiving of men's selves. Self-deceit a
general Disease.
This Self-deceit it is the common and general Disease that reigns amongst us:
yea, indeed, upon proof we shall find it to be the ground and foundation of all
other deceit in the world. What ever deceit is abroad, it begins at home, and
takes its rise and original from thence. If men were true to their own
interests, they would never be false to others: If they were faithful in what
belongs to themselves, they might be trusted with their neighbors; but now
whilst they first try conclusions upon their own hearts for the deceiving of
them, they do more readily practice it upon their brethren for the deceiving of
them, with them.

Therefore it is that the Scripture does so often lay such a Caution and
proviso as this is, Do not err; Be not deceived; Let no man beguile you; and
here, Deceive not your selves. All still for this reason, to signify the
general proneness and disposition which is in our Nature hereunto; as
oftentimes to be cozened and deceived, and beguiled by others; so as often
amongst the rest by our selves, to be the Deceived and the Deceivers both at
once.

The Holy Ghost himself gives us a very good account of it from whence it
proceeds; The ground of self-deceit.
namely, from the nature and quality of the heart it self, which is fraudulent
and deceitful above all things. Jer. 17.9.
A deceitful heart will not spare so much as it self, but will be ready to
deceive that: And this is that which all (more or less) have remaining in them.
Those which are in a state of Nature and Unregeneracy, they are nothing else
but deceit; their hearts do continually frame and fashion deceit in them, as
the Scripture speaks. Those whose natures are changed by Grace, yet they have
some Relics and remainders of the Old man abiding in them, which is corrupt,
according to the deceitful lusts. Ephesians. 4.22.
Ever since the Serpent deceived us, we have still been ready, more or less, to
deceive our selves.

Would you know by what Means and in what ways this is done? The ways of
self-deceit.
Take it briefly thus:

First, By false conceits and apprehensions which men have of themselves. 1. By
false apprehensions.
Self-flattery has a great stroke and influence upon self-deceit. He that
thinks himself to be something when he is nothing, he deceives himself, (...),
It is the Apostles own judgment and conclusion which he give of it in another
place, and it is that which he has a special respect to here in this, as we
may see by that which follows, and shall see more by and by. If any man among
you seems to be wise, etc. so then, Let no man deceive himself; that is, by
too high a conceit and apprehension of his own wisdom, thinking himself
wiser then he is, or has cause to think himself. This is that which many
persons oftentimes are subject unto, and thereby to deceive themselves.

Secondly, 2 By false hopes.
By false hopes and promises which men make to themselves. It is a great
deceiving of any, when they shall expect and look for more then they are I kely
to enjoy; it was that wherein the Devil did at first deceive our first Parents
Adam and Eve in Paradise, by raising their hopes and expectations beyond that
which it was probable they should partake of: And thus in like manner do men
also deceive themselves, See Jam. 1.26, appliable to any other miscarriage.
by vain and groundless persuasions of their own happiness and the welfare of
the condition in which they are, especially in reference to Spirituals and a
better life. There are diverse which are ready to think the case is here very
well with them, with whom indeed it is far otherwise; take it for granted that
their state is good in order to salvation, who yet never were careful in all
their lives to work out their salvation, or to walk in such ways as might tend
to such an end as that is, but rather quite opposite to it. There is many a one
who makes as full an account to go to Heaven when he goes out of the world, as
he does to go out of the world (nay it may be a great deal more) who yet if God
be not more merciful unto him, must go to another place. It is a Point which
were worth the following (if we had nothing else to speak of) especially in
this confident age which is fallen upon us, wherein so many both opinions and
practices are swallowed without any scruple, even to rowse and awaken men in
this particular, and to cure them (if it were possible) of this self-deceit.
But we have not leisure for it, and must leave it to a better hand.

Thirdly, By false performances and duties, men deceive themselves also here. 3
By false performances.
He that does not any thing as he should, he does thereby deceive himself in
the doing of it. Slothfulness and deceitfulness they come both of them to one
effect; and so the same word in the Hebrew Language signifies both, (...)
and is taken promiscuously; as Jer. 48.10. where some read it thus, Cursed is
he that does the work of the Lord negligently: there are others that read it
thus, Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord deceitfully; because to do it
negligently is indeed to do it deceitfully. And so the Prophet Malachi implies
likewise, Mal. 1.14 Cursed be the deceiver, which has in his flock a Male, and
voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing. The Deceiver, that is,
the formal Worshipper, which is careless and negligent and customary in the
Service of God; such an one as this is, he is the deceiver, and so accounted.
And as a deceiver of others, so especially and particularly of himself: Ye have
an express place to this purpose, as to one part of Religion amongst the rest,
and that is, as to the hearing of the word, Jam. 1.22. Be ye doers of the word,
and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves. Whoever is a careless hearer,
he is upon this account a self-deceiver, and so is every one else that does
allow and content himself in any perfunctory and superficial performance of any
part of Gods worship besides. He deceives himself both of the comfort and
sweetness which is contained in the duty it self, and of the reward also which
is annexed unto it. Thus have we briefly seen by what means, and in what ways
especially, men may be said to deceive themselves; although, as I conceive, the
first of them is that which is chiefly aimed at, and more principally intended
in this place.

Now that which lies upon us in reference hereunto, The Inference.
is in special manner to observe and take notice of the Apostles Caveat, and to
suffer it to prevail with us, that we avoid this rock our selves which we have
heard how prone we are to split upon; especially considering the grievous
aggravations which are attendant upon it; Aggravation of self deceit.
for as all Deceit is very odious, so self-deceit more then any other. And that
in these following respects

First, 1. Unnatural.
It is most unnatural: It carries a kind of Monstrousness, and Barbarousness
with it. Every evil is still so much the worse as there is the greater
engagement against it, and has somewhat within a man's own breast to take him
off from it. The less temptation there is unto sin, the greater provocation
there is in it: and the more cause there is to forbear it, the more iniquity it
is to commit it. Now such are those sins which men are guilty of in regard of
themselves; they are in this respect sins of an higher rank. How does the
Apostle aggravate the sin of fornication? 2 Cor. 6.18.
From hence, that it is a sin against ones self in a peculiar manner. The like
may be also said of self-deceiving, which therefore makes it so much the more
heinous. The nearer at any time the relation is, the worse alwais is the
deceit; as most contrary to the Principles of Nature, and those dispositions
which God has placed in the heart: which is one thing in this self-deceit.

Secondly, 2 Least suspected.
It is the least discerned or expected. Those evils are most to be avoided,
which are worst to be detected, which a man can hardliest find out the root and
bottom of them. (...). Socr. in Plato.
Why such now is this self-deceit, it is a close and secret evil, which no body
almost is aware of, or does think will come upon him, and therefore not so
easily prevented without a great deal of heed and care. Besides that (as he
said) The Cheater is always at hand, and sticks fast and close by ones Quomodo
avertam me ab inimico meo, cum inimicus meus sit inter latera mea? Arab. Poet.
Ano^ym.
sides, without separation.

Thirdly, It is most pernicious, because it is in regravi, 3. Most pernicious.
it is always in a matter of consequence and special importance; for a man to
be deceived but in a trifle, though he would not like it, yet he might be able
to bear it: But to be deceived in matter of life and death, this is
intolerable. Yet this now is that which is remarkable in this self-deceit, He
that deceives himself, deceives his soul, which is the better part of himself,
and wherein deceit of all other else is least dispensable Curritis propter
Animam; Tota exaggeratio haec est quod dicitur propter Animam. Augustine.
.

I shall not need to say much more for the pressing of this point upon you,
Means of avoiding it.
except it be only by showing you how to shun such a mischievous evil as this
is, and to prevent it in your selves; 1. Spiritual Watchfulness.
which is done no better way, than by carrying a narrow watch over your own
hearts. He that would not deceive himself, he must take heed of trusting
himself; if he does, he will be soon overtaken and ensnared before he is aware.
He that trusts in his own heart, is a Fool, says Solomon, Prove. 28.26. And so
indeed he is, and at last will prove to be so. Look then, as you would do with
one who is a known and professed Jugler, or Cheater; you will trust him no
further than you see him, never have your eye off on him, as long as you have
any thing to do with him; In like manner must ye also deal with your own false
and deceitful hearts. It is a good rule here, which is given and observed by
Politicians, as concerns their converse in the world, (...) Epicha^m.
Be watchful, and remember to mistrust. Because there is a great deal of
Treachery and false dealing which ye are likely to meet with, if ye look not
better to it, therefore our best defense will here be our own jealousy and
self-suspicion. Sola istic securitas est, Grosted. Episc. Linc.
nunquam esse securum.

And especially desire of God himself to watch over us, 2. Recourse to God.
and by the sweet and gracious guidance of his holy Spirit, to instruct and
direct us, to show us our own hearts, with all the windings and turnings of
them; who alone searches and knows them: To show us them, not in the event,
(which is very sad and grievous) but aforehand in the pre-discoveries and
apprehensions of it: Psalm. 1 39.23, 24.
Say here with the holy man David, Search me O God, and know my heart, try me,
and know my thoughts: See if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the
way everlasting.

But I forget my self, considering, that as yet I am but only in the Threshold
of the Text, and the opening of the door unto it. So much for the First General
propounded, viz. The word of Caution or Admonition, Let no man deceive himself.

WE come now to the second, The 2d General Part.
which gives us further Entrance and Admission into it, and that is the word of
Council or Exhortation, in these words, If any man among you seems to be wise
in this world, let him become a fool that he may be wise.

Wherein again we have three Branches more: First, Three Branches of this. 1.
Branch
The Person spoken to, If any man. Secondly, The Advice which is given him, Let
him become a fool. Thirdly, The End or Motive, That he may be wise.

For the first, 1 The Person spoken to.
The Person spoken to, If any man among you seem to be wise in this world.
Here Is an implicit Censure of three things in this expression. Three things
more here censured.
First, of the Mistake of false wisdom for true, or of that which is less
weighty and considerable, for that which is more. Secondly, of the pretense to
true wisdom in the want of it, Seeming to be wise, whenas indeed there is no
such matter. Thirdly, of Conceitedness and self-applause in that wisdom which
is enjoyed and partaken-of, whatsoever it be. Each of these are in this
supposition.

First of all, I. The mistake of Wisdom.
I say, here is a censure of the mistake of wisdom it self, Wise in this world.
[(...)] It is terminus Diminutivus, an expression of some Diminution and
Disparagement which it carries along with it; which therefore would be a little
opened and explained by us what it is.

To be wise in this world, Wisdom in this world double: as to the Time and
place, Nature and kind of Wisdom.
according to the sound of the words, has a double respect in it: Either first
to the Time and Place of wisdom: or Secondly, to the Nature and Kinds of
wisdom. If we take it according to the first sense, only for the time and
place, To be wise in the world, that is, to be wise whilst we live in the
world; so there is nothing that is justly taxable or reprovable in it, but
rather the contrary; for it is that which we must be, if ever we be that which
we should be; and it will be the worse for us, we be not: Take it for the
truest and best wisdom of all, (which we shall speak to more anon) wisdom
toward God and salvation; it is that which must be first in this world, if it
be ever at all: He that's not thus wise in this world, he will be but a fool in
the next, who ever he be. The space and season of our abode here below, is that
which God has appointed for our improvement in Spiritual wisdom, and which
accordingly we are to make use of for such a purpose. Be wise now, O ye Judges,
etc. Psalm. 2.10. Therefore it is not to be taken in this sense, in reference to
the Time of Wisdom

The second is as to the nature and kind of wisdom, wise in this world, (...)
i.e. (...).
that is, wise with worldly wisdom. This is that which the Apostle seems to
disparage, and to take off the Corinthians from, with all other Christians
besides, in the Extravagancies, and Inordinacies of it; such a wisdom namely,
as does take its rise, and ground, and progress from this present world. All
the Question here, The nature and kind reduced to three Heads specially.
will be, What it is? Now for this, if we take it in its latitude, it may be
reduced to three heads especially.

The first is the wisdom of the mind, 1. The wisdom of the Mind.
Natural wisdom, which lies in Parts, and Learning, and humane Knowledge, and
such accomplishments as those, the wisdom of Man, Sapientia hominis (...).
Twofold: Of Words, Of Notions.

, as it is called 1 Cor. 2.4, 5. And this again of two sorts. First, The wisdom
of words, Sapientia verborum, as it is called 1 Cor. 1.17. Secondly, The wisdom
of Notions, Sapientia conceptuum, which carries the strength of some Reason and
demonstration with it; there is (...), and (...). Now either, or both of these
taken together, make up to us this Natural wisdom, which is in a sense also the
wisdom of the world, for as much as it is such, as is only exercised here in
this world, [(...)] according to the Elements and Rudiments of the world, as it
is there expressed in Coloss. 2.8. being that whereby the world does in a
Spiritual manner subsist, whereas in the world to come there will be no need at
all of it: Whether there be Prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be
tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away, 1
Cor. 13.8. That is one branch of this wisdom.

The second is, the Wisdom of the flesh, carnal wisdom; 2. The wisdom of the
Flesh,
this is another sort of this wisdom of the world Sapientia carnis; and we find
it named so in Scripture [(...),] the minding of the flesh, Romans 8.7 And
[(...)] Fleshly wisdom, 2 Cor. 1.12. And [(...)] Making provision for the
Flesh, Rom 13.14. That wisdom which does consist in the contrivances and
prosecutions of Lust, which if it be Bodily, or such as is feated in the
inferior faculties of the soul, then it is called (...), Sensual wisdom,
twofold: Sensual. Diveliish.

Jam. 3.15. If it be Spiritual, and such as lies rather in the Superior
faculties, of Will and understanding; then it is called (in the same place of
Scripture) (...), Divellish wisdom, the wisdom of the Devil, as that before,
(...) Ephesians. 2 3.
the wisdom of Man; the Apostle Paul joines them both together in one place,
Ephesians. 2.3. The lusts or desires of the flesh, and of the mind.

The third and last kind of Wisdom which is here struck at by the Apostle, 3
The wisdom of the World, in terminis.
is that which is so properly, and in terminis, and in the first acception of
it, worldly wisdom, which does consist in the inordinate pursuit and
prosecution of worldly contentments, and these accommodations here below,
whether of Riches, or Honors, or Pleasures, or any such things; this is called
in the place before cited) Earthly wisdom, (...), Jam. 3.15. and the Professors
of it, such as mind earthly things, (...), Phil. 3.19. This again is of two
sorts, Twofold: (...). Of the World, Of the Age,

as considerable under a double notion, each of them expressed in the Text; the
one is Sapientia Mundi, The wisdom of the world, in ver. 19. and the other is,
Sapientia Seculi, the wisdom of the Age or Time, expressed in ver. 18.

First, 1. The Wisdom of the World.
The wisdom of the world considered at large. The Apostle strikes at such who
are so addicted and wedded to this: If any man among you be wise, thus; he has
a saying to you to tell you, that this is not that which ye should so much
study and apply your selves to. Those which profess themselves Believers, and
have given up their Names to Christ, they should not judge and reckon of
themselves by such matters as these are. Though so long as they live in the
world, they must, from the necessity of their condition, converse in it and
with it, yet this is not that which they should look upon as their chiefest
aim, or the mark whereunto they direct and order their course, but regard
better things, and of an higher nature; Saint Paul gives us both his Precept
for it, and his example: His Precept, (...).
Coloss. 3.1, 2. If then ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are
above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God: Set your affections on
things above, and not on things on the earth. And his Example, Phil. 3.20. Our
conversation is in Heaven, from whence we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus
Christ.

Of a contrary Disposition hereunto are all such persons as those who give
themselves to nothing but the world, and the interests of it: All their
thoughts, and meditations, and desires and affections which are in them, they
run out upon this: If ye could Anatomize a carnal person, rip him up, and see
what is in him, ye should find the world in his heart as his chiefest Good, and
Treasure and Delight, worldly Plots, worldly Policies, worldly Contrivances,
all savouring of the world, as if he were made and created for nothing else but
to live here below, and to enjoy the comforts of this present life. I would
that this Distemper had been only the Distemper of Corinth, and confined to
those times wherein the Apostle wrote this Epistle; But it is not so, it runs
down all along in a Succession, even to following Generations, and so will do
whilst the world it self lasts. That is the first Explication of the wisdom of
the world, considered more Generally and at Large in the common notion of it,
Sapientia Mundi.

The second is Sapientia Seculi: 2. The wisdom of the Age.
The Wisdom of the Age. Not only of the world, but of this world; that is,
this moment of the world in which we live: As the world in general has its
defilements of worldly wisdom adhering to it, so every point and estate of the
world has some particularity or other of this worldly wisdom in it, as a
Branch or slip of that General, which does run out and express it self in
several Ages and times of it, and for the most part one worse then another.
Aetas parentum pejor avis. Now this is that likewise which is here implicitly
censured by the Apostle in this Expression: If any among you be wise in this
world, that is, wise with the subtilties and miscarriages of this present Age.
Hence we read of the fashion of this world [(...)] 1 Cor. 7.13. The shape, or
form, or appearance. And of the course of this world, (...), Ephesians. 2.2. And of
the lust of this world, (...), 1 John 2.17. So 2 Timothy 4.10. Demas has forsaken
me, and embraced this present world: (...), The world, and the world that now
is. And that he might deliver us from this present evil world, (...) Galat.
1.4. Every Age and Time of the world, it has its particular Corruptions and
Extravagancies both in matter of Judgment and Practice, which are redundant in
it. There are the Errors of the Times on one hand, and there are the Vanities
of the Times on another; and men are then said to be wise in either of them,
when they do close and comply with them, and suit and conform unto them. And so
now you have the first particular, as a part of the Apostles censure in this
respect, viz a Mistake of False wisdom for True, or of that which is less
considerable, for that which is more; which you have had in a threefold
Explication laid open to you: In the Wisdom of the Mind, Natural Wisdom: in
the Wisdom of the Flesh, Carnal Wisdom: in the Wisdom of the World, Secular
Wisdom.

The second thing which he here censures is the pretense to true Wisdom, II.
The mere pretense to Wisdom.
in the want of it; That you have in the word (...), if any man seems: It is
not, If any man be wise; but if he seem to be. In which expression, as the
Apostle does implicitly cast a reproach upon the Wisdom of the World it self,
as being such only in appearance, and not in reality, which things have a show
of wisdom, Col. 2.23. So he does cast a reproach likewise upon those which are
pretenders to it, as making show and profession of more wisdom then is indeed
in them, such as seem wise, but are not so. This is that which we find by the
Apostle Paul in another place to be laid to the charge of the Gentiles and
Heathen Philosophers, Romans 1.22.
That professing themselves to be wise, they became fools. Wisdom was that
which they pretended to; but Folly was that which was most observable and
remarkable in them: This is the case of many more besides: All that Wisdom
which they seem to lay claim to as their interest and belonging unto them, if
it be brought to a just trial and examination and discovery of it, it will at
last prove to be no better then Folly.

The third and last part of this Censure extends it self to
Self-conceitednesse, III. Pride in wisdom.
and Pride, and vain applauding of themselves in that Wisdom which they
conceive to be in them. If any man seems, that is, seem to himself, and to his
own mind, and fancy, and imagination (...). Justin Martyr. ad Zen. and Seren.
Epistola. So also the Sir. and Arab.
; so some Translations carry it, and express it, Si quis sibi videtur sapiens.
This was that which these Corinthians were especially guilty of: They were
wise men, and they did too much pride themselves in their wisdom, and were
lifted up with it: now the Apostle does very seasonably set himself against
such an humor as this, as the Spirit of God does likewise in other places of
Scripture besides this, Prove. 3.7. Be not wise in thine own eyes, fear the
Lord, etc. So Romans 12.16. Be not wise in your own conceits: And Isai. 5.21. VVo
unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight.
Again, Prove. 26.12. See thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more
hope of a fool then of him. Thus is this Self-applause in Wisdom every where
almost cried out upon, Qui seiplum habet pro sapiente, Eum habent Deus and
Homines pro ignaro. Arab. Adag.
according to that saying of the Arabians, which is frequent amongst them, He
that accounts himself for a wise man, God and men account him for a fool. And
Saint Paul to the like purpose, elsewhere, 1 Cor. 8.2. If any man think that he
knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know. And thus much
may suffice of this first Branch in this second General; viz. The Person spoken
to, or implicitly censured by the Apostle; If any man among you seems to be
wise in this world: where the Censure reaches and extends it self to these
Particulars: 1. The Mistake of Wisdom. 2. The mere pretense to it. 3. The
Priding in it.

The Second Branch is the Counsel it self, The second branch of the 2d
General, The Advice which is given, [(...).
in these words, Let him become a Fool. This will require a little Explication
in what sense it is to be taken by us here in this place; which we shall the
better understand by reflecting upon that which before was said to be Wisdom:
Accordingly as we there understand being wise in this world; in a proportion
hereunto are we to understand this becoming a Fool: Now this (as we may
remember) was reduced to three Heads, which I must now again here bring to your
thoughts, though somewhat inverting the order of them. First, The Wisdom of the
Flesh, Carnal, or Divellish Wisdom. Secondly, The Wisdom of the World, Earthly
or Secular Wisdom. Thirdly, The Wisdom of the Mind, Natural or Humane Wisdom.
Now to become a Fool, is in regard of the two former to be in a state of direct
opposition against them, and contrariety to them: in regard of the latter, to
be so only by way of Interpretation.

We begin with the former; I. In opposition to carnal wisdom.
and here the first of them which I have now named is Carnal, or Divellish
wisdom, The wisdom of the Flesh: Here now to become a Fool, is to be at the
greatest Distance and Separation from this that may be: Thus Romans 16.19. I
would have you wise unto that which is good, and simple concerning evil. And
there is another Expression like unto it, 1 Cor. 14.20. In malice, be you
children; though in understanding perfect men. To be a Fool, as to matter of
sin, is the highest Craft and Wisdom that is, and so to be esteemed: To bungle
and falter here, is to show the greatest skill that may be; which therefore we
should all study and endeavor our selves unto. There are many sad wretches in
the world which have nothing to glory in but their shame, and what is matter of
reproach unto them; that they are skilful in wickedness: but alas, this is but
a poor matter to pride themselves in: Why boastest thou thy self in Mischief,
O mighty man! Psalm. 52.1. It were better here to have no wisdom or skill at all.
If any man in this sense be wise, let him become a fool indeed, that so he may
be wise in good earnest.

Yea (which is pertinent hereunto likewise) let him become a fool in the
opinion of the vile and wicked world, which are ready so to esteem him. A Fool
in the opinion of the world.
Carnal and naughty persons, they are ready to scoff at any which have any
savor of goodness in them, and to cry them down for a company of fools and
witless persons, as profane Michol did her Godly and Religious David, when he
danced before the Ark with all his might: it is said, She despised him in her
heart, 2 Samuel 6.16. And she expressed it also with her tongue, ver. 20. of the
same chapter. How glorious was the King of Israel to day, who like a Fool
uncovered himself, etc. But how does he answer her again? I will be yet more
vile then thus, and will be base in mine own sight, etc. As who should say, If
this be to be a fool, I am resolved to be a fool still; which I look upon as an
high piece of Dignity and glory to me. Thus then here in the Text, Let him
become a fool, it is to be taken by us, not (...), but (...), and (...),
secundum Opinionem Vulgi, as men count Folly. As the world and the men of the
world esteem of it, so let him that is wise as to matter of wickedness, become
a fool, For if we be besides our selves, it is to God, 2 Cor. 5.13. And who
then would not be besides himself so, even to choose, rather any thing else?
Stultus fiat (says Aquinas) abjiciendo istam sapientiam apparentem, ut sit
sapiens secundum sapientiam Divinam, quae est vera sapientia.

This is so far the sense of the Text, as that some have so read the words by
pointing them thus, If any man among you seem to be wise; (...).
in this world let him become a fool; that is, a fool in the opinion of this
world, which will be ready so to reckon him, when he applies himself to the
truest Wisdom. Thus we see how it holds in opposition to carnal wisdom.

Secondly, II. In opposition to worldly wisdom.
Take it in opposition to worldly wisdom: Let him become a fool even so
likewise; that is, as less spending his time in worldly matters, and making
them his chiefest business and employment: it does not become a Christian to be
thus, Like Martha, troubled about many things; to be nimis attentus ad rem,
given to the imbracements of the world, in the Riches, and Pleasures, and
Fashions, and Vanities of it; but to keep himself here unspotted as much as may
be.

Thirdly, III. In the qualification of natural wisdom.
Let him become a fool; it may be understood likewise with a reference to
Natural Wisdom: That Wisdom which consists in Parts, and Learning, and Humane
Knowledge. And here now to become a fool is not to be taken as it was in the
former, by way of Negation and Opposition, as if the Apostle did require those
which had such perfections as these in them to cast, them off, (...) Oecum. and
Theophylact. ex Curysost. Stultus sit Voluntate, non Natura. P^imasius.
and to lay them aside from them (for that had been contrary even to his own
practice): But to become a fool here, is to be taken Interpretative and
oeconomice, by way of special qualification and dispensation: This Folly will
do no body hurt that has it, but rather the contrary. As death to the world is
life, so folly to the world is wisdom.

Thus it may be further laid open, I. A Fool; in a sense of humility.
according to these following Explications: First, By taking it in a sense of
Humility. A Fool, as to his own Apprehensions, and high flown Conceits of
himself; therein he must be a Fool, though otherwise never so wise. And so the
Arabic Translation expresses it directly, even in the Text, rendering it thus,
Let him become a fool as to himself. There is no Fault in Humane wisdom; but
there may be a Fault adherent to the Person which is he Subject of it, when as
occasionally from it he shall swell and exalt himself in it. When Knowledge
shall at any time puff up, and make a man proud, here now, as we take it in
concreto, it is a matter of some disparagement, which accordingly is to be
heeded unto, and the Apostles counsel is here very seasonable, Let him become a
fool; that is, Let him no more glory or boast himself in this perfection then
as if he were a fool indeed. The Learned and Wisest man that is, ought to be
as low, and humble, and meek in his own apprehensions, as if he had no Wit or
Learning at all in him, but were the veriest Fool and Dunce in the world. It is
the Determination this of (...) etc. (...) etc. Basil. Mag. Reg. Brev. in resp.
ad Interrog. 274.
Basilius Caesareensis, who putting this to the Question, How a man may be said
to be a fool in this world? Gives this answer to it, If he be afraid of the
Judgment of the Lord, who has said, Woe unto them that are wise in their own
eyes, and prudent in their own sight, and imitate him that has said, I am as a
Beast before thee: and laying aside all opinion of his own wisdom, approve of
nothing as right in him any further, than as well-pleasing to God. Thus He.

Secondly, 2. In a sense of Modesty.
by taking it in a sense of Modesty. Let him be a fool; i. e. content to be a
fool: namely, as to prying into the secrets and Counsels of God, which he has
locked up in his own Bosom. Great Wits they are for the most part full of
curiosity; they are subject now and then (...), to stretch beyond their
measure, and to go beyond their line; they which are wise already, they would
be more wise than they should be, and be carried above their reach. Now the
Apostle here by this expression does correct this extravagancy in them, and
reduces them to their Line and Rule, that in this sense they become as fools;
to wit, as being willingly ignorant of those things which belong not unto them,
Psalm. 131.1. (...)
but are too high for them; which he expresses also very elegantly in another
Scripture, Not to be wise above that which we ought, but to be wise with
sobriety, etc, Romans 12.3.

But thirdly, 3. In a sense of Self-denial.
(and indeed chiefly) Let him become a fool, in a sense of Self-denial: A fool
as to the owning of that Natural wisdom which is truly in him: so as thereby to
be kept off from the imbracement of the Doctrine of the Gospel, and Christian
Religion. This sense does best suit with the scope of the place, and the
Argument which the Apostle takes upon him in the beginning of this Epistle,
which is to meet with the pride of those wise and learned Greeks, who did
therefore scorn the Truths of Christ, as not complying with their humane
Reason; Chrysostom. in loc.
So Chrysostom undrstands it: He (says he) is a fool to the world, who
slights the wisdom of the world, (...), as to the comprehension of the
Doctrines of Faith. To such as these the Apostle here turns and directs his
speech, that if there were any such amongst them who were wise in a way of
parts, and natural understanding, they should not absolutely cast them away,
but veil them to the wisdom of Christ. This is the meaning of the text; He that
will be wise to God, must be thus far a fool to Himself: he must believe more
then his Reason and shallow Understanding is able to fathom and comprehend.
Look, as in Providential Truths and matters of Divine Promise, we must believe
beyond Sense and outward Appearance; so likewise in Theological Truths and
matters of Divine Proposition, we must believe beyond Reason and inward
Apprehension: And he that will not be a fool thus he is a fool already. This is
the nature of the Gospel, as the Apostle speaks of it, that the weapons of it
are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds,
Casting down imaginations, or reasonings, [(...)] and every high thing that
exalts it self against the knowledge of God; and bringing into captivity every
thought to the obedience of Christ: To the obedience of Christ, that is, to
yield obedience unto Christ. And obedience not only practical, the obedience
of works, for the doing of that which Christ imposes upon us: but obedience
also which is mental, or cordial, the obedience of Faith; for the believing
and closing with that which Christ propounds unto us. The Spirit of Christ in
the Gospel has this prevalency and efficacy with it, as to bring the highest
thoughts that are, into this subjection: and so we must be content to have it,
without wrangling or quarrelling against it. The proud heart of man is in this
case loath to stoop: but it must for all that, if ever it will be that which it
should be; and it is that which is here intimated by the Apostle Paul in this
present Text, If any man among you, etc. But of this I shall have occasion to
speak more afterward, out of the last General; and therefore shall refrain it
here. So much of the Counsel, or Exhortation exhibited, Let him become a fool.

The next is in order to what this Counsel or Exhortation is given; The third
branch of the 3d General. (...).
the End and Scope of it: and that is, That he may be wise. It is well this is
added to the other: If the Apostle had said, Let him become a fool, and had
stopped there, it might have seemed somewhat strange; and besides, had less
efficacy with it. Now whiles he sub-joynes this further: That he may be wise.
He takes off all scruple from it. That Is a good folly which at last ends in
wisdom, as the proper and natural Effect and Consequent of it. Here 2 things
more: The End it self. The Means unto it.

There are two things which are here pertinently considerable, the one is the
end it self simply propounded; and the other is the connection of this end, with
the means leading and tending to it.

For the first, 1. The End it self, Wisdom.
The end here propounded to the Corinthians, and in them to all of us, It is
wisdom: But in a Spiritual and Supernatural acception. To be wise to God, to be
wise to Eternity, to be wise to salvation, to be wise for the good and welfare
of our own precious and immortal souls: this is the wisdom here spoken of, as
a Prize which is worth the seeking and looking after. And indeed (to speak of)
there is no other wisdom but this. What the Philosopher spoke of Wisdom and
goodness in his Politic and Moral Consideration, is more especially true of it
in our Spiritual; It is impossible for him to be a Wiseman, that is not a
Good Man (...) Arist. Ethic. l. 6. c. 13.
. This is that which every one should aim at especially, above any thing else.
Wisdom, (as Solomon tells us, and he means it of Grace) it is the Principal
thing; therefore we must get wisdom, and in all our gettings, get this
understanding, Pro. 4.7.

What does this Wisdom consist in? Wherein this wisdom does consist. 1. Sight
of natural misery. 2. Apprehension of Christ.
Briefly in these particulars. First, In the sight and apprehension of our own
natural misery, and corruption, and folly, together with the sleights and
subtilties of Satan our spiritual Enemy, to improve them. Secondly, In the
discerning of he sufficiency and excellency which is in Christ, and the
Knowledge of Him; when we have that bestowed upon us, which the Apostle prays
for concerning the Epesians; Ephesians. 1.17.
The spirit of Wisdom, and Revelation in the Knowledge of Christ. And then
Thirdly, besides this work upon the Understanding, 3. Closing with Christ.
an inclining of the Will and Affections suitable hereunto, whereby this wisdom
becomes not only Notional, but Practical; our hearts being proportionably
sanctified and filled with it, and our lives and conversations receiving the
like tincture from our hearts.

There are diverse Arguments which I might press to the pursuit of it, but I
cannot now insist upon them; Motives persuading to it. 1. The Excellency. 2.
The Benefit. 3. The Dignity or Renown.
1. The Excellency of it, it is wisdom of the highest nature. 2. The Benefit
of it, it is wisdom that will stand us most in stead, and which will be most
useful to us. 3. The Dignity of it, it carries the greatest Honor, and Renown,
and Credit with it; all these are considerable in it.

But all which I will do now, An Use of Examination.
shall be only to call you to an inquiry about your own interest in it.
Wisdom is that which every one almost pretends to, and Spiritual wisdom too:
But it is not such as every one has, or indeed partakes of. Would you know for
your own particulars, whether you do so or no? Would ye show it, and evidence
it, and demonstrate it, that in truth ye do so? I shall need to give you no
other discovery, than that of the Apostle James, in that eminent place of his
to this purpose, Jam. 3.13, etc. Who is a wise man, and endued with knowledge
amongst you? Let him show out of a good Conversation his works with meekness of
wisdom. But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not,
and lie not against the Truth. This wisdom descends not from above, but is
earthly, sensual, and divelish: For where envying and strife is, there is
confusion and every evil work. But the wisdom that is from above, is first
pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good
fruits, without partiality, and without Hypocrisy. And the fruit of
Righteousness is sown in peace, of them that make peace.

This Text, it is very pregnant, and significant, and full of Emphasis, and
such as I desire in a special manner to commend unto you, and leave with you,
as a good Comment upon this which I have now taken to handle amongst you; it is
such as would be well thought of sometimes by you, even then when ye are
somewhere else besides in this place, and are otherwise employed: thereby to
consider how far you express this wisdom here spoken of, or degenerate from
it; you see the Apostle sets it in the way of a double description, that we may
the better take notice of it. In the Negative, and in the Positive, and both of
them very seasonably considerable of us. For which purpose it is not amiss for
us to take a brief view and account of the whole Scripture it self, as it lies
before us. The Apostles scope in the fore going part of the Chapter, was to
restrain the exorbitancies of the Tongue which he does amplify and set forth
by many singular and special illustrations: Now this, because it does (for the
most part) proceed from pride and haughtiness of spirit, and this pride does
also commonly arise from a conceit, and false persuasion of men's own wisdom,
that they (forsooth) are a great deal wiser than any body else; therefore does
he here also descend to treat of true wisdom it self, and to show the
properties of it, Who is a wise man, etc. As if he had said, Jam. 3.13 ad finem
Cap. paraphrased.
There are a great many of you, which go for wise men, and such as are in dued
with special gifts of knowledge far above others; now it is not enough for
you, that ye have the name and profession of it upon you, it will concern you
to show it, and make it good in the thing it self. This ye cannot do better,
than by a conversation suitable to such Principles, which may produce the works
of meekness, and sweetness, and quietness, and peaceableness in you, which are
the effects of true wisdom indeed; whereas, if ye allow your selves in
contrary distempers of envy, and strife, and emulation, and contention, and the
like; howsoever ye may happily please and applaud your selves in such courses as
those are, yet you are exceedingly short of the mark, and of that wisdom which
ye falsely attribute and assume to your selves. There is no shadow of wisdom in
it, except it be of that, which deserves not the name of wisdom, the wisdom
of the World, and the wisdom of the Flesh, and the wisdom of the Devil: Foe
where such passions and humors as these are do at any time take place, there is
nothing but tumults, and turbulency, and disorder, and confusion, and every
evil; work which are in the greatest opposition to true wisdom, that possibly
can be. Which that ye may know to be so indeed, I will give you a short
Description of this wisdom what it is: That wisdom which comes from above,
(which I suppose is that you pretend to, and desire to have noted in you) it is
in the first place Pure and Holy, that is, clean from any eminent vice in him
which is the Professor of it. Then peaceable, that is, full of tranquillity and
calmness of spirit. (...).
After that, gentle and easy to be entreated; that is, not selfish or too much
addicted to ones own judgment, and opinion, and resolution; but where there is
ground and reason for it (and in such things as are lawful and honest) pliable
to the wills and understandings of other men. Without partiality (say some)
that is, making no difference of persons, so as to esteem or contemn any for
carnal respects: Without wrangling (say others) as that which does proceed from
the envy and strife before mentioned. And without hypocrisy, that is, the
pretenses of standing for Virtue, and Piety, and Justice, and Religion, and the
like, without cordial affection to it; and the fruit of Righteousness is sown
in Peace of them that make Peace. These two they are not inconsistent or
opposite one to the other. If any pretend to this, that they stand for
Righteousness, this he tells them, that so they may, and for quietness too both
at once. There Is no necessity for it, that whiles they stand up for Justice,
they should withdraw from Peace, for they both agree very well together, Psalm.
85.10.
Mercy and Truth may meet together, Righteousness and Peace may kiss each
other.] Thus, as briefly as I could, have I opened this Scripture to you, as a
Discovery of True and Right Wisdom, and (as I said) leave it with you. And so
much of the first Point, to wit, the End here propounded, which is wisdom it
self; That he may be wise.

Now in the second place, 2. The connection of the End with the Means.
it is worth our observation, the Connection of this End with the Means tending
to it, by reflecting and turning back upon the words before, Let him become a
fool. This is a strange Connection in the first Representation of it: To become
a Fool that one may be made a wise Man: Yet thus it is: Folly the way to wisdom.
We see here how Religion has its seeming Contradictions and Inconsistencies in
it. Gods ways are not as our ways, nor His Thoughts as our Thoughts, as
Himself has expressed it Isai. 55.8. With Him, Folly is the highway to Wisdom
it self, and leads unto it. When he once makes us Christians, he takes a quite
contrary course with us then has been hitherto taken: As that Philosopher did
with his Scholars, he teaches us first forgetfulness of whatsoever we have
learnt in the School of Vanity and Sin. We must (when we come to him to be
taught by him) let go all our former Principles which were settled in us: There
are many that imagine otherwise, think they may be wise to the World, and to
God both at once. But it will not be: If we desire to embrace the one, we must
forsake the other: If ever we will attain to Spiritual Wisdom, we must
renounce Carnal: We must come to that Wisdom by this Folly. This is the Course
and Method which God has appointed.

And the Reason of it is clear, The Reason.
because that Corrupt Nature and Grace they are of a contrary Strain. This
world in the Lusts of it, and that world which is to come, they are opposite,
and of different Interests. Now look as it is with Kingdoms or States here in
this world, which are of contrary Factions, he that will be Wise for the one,
he must in a sense be a Fool for the other, because their Counsels and
Interests, and Advantages do not agree and accord together; even so is it here
in this business as concerning Earth and Heaven, Nature and Grace, this World
and that which is above: Their Engagements are different, and so accordingly is
the Wisdom that tends to the furtherance and promotion of either.

Therefore this is the first work that is to be done in the preaching of the
Word, The first work in Preaching, what?
to take men off from their their own bottomes, and to show them that Emptiness
and Insufficiency which is in themselves, that so they may look after that
Fullness and All Sufficiency which is in another, even in Christ himself; which
they will never do till the former be well evidenced and demonstrated unto
them. This was that which stuck in the stomachs of these Proud Greeks, and made
them unwilling to close with the Preaching of the Gospel, and the Truths
contained in it, because they were unwilling to be fools, and to be taken off
from adoring of that wisdom which was now already in them, as it became them
to be. Going about to establish their own wisdom, they could not submit
themselves unto the Wisdom of God. Isidorus Pelusiota resolves this very well
in his Epistle to his friend Epimachus 'H (...), etc. Isid. Pelus. li. 4. Ep. 6.
, who desired of him the sense of this Scripture. Hear (says he) in brief what
it is; The Conceit and Opinion of Proficiency is a very great Hinderance
thereunto; wherefore a man must lay aside all Pride and Swelling in himself
(for such was the wisdom of the Greeks, having no solidity in it) that so he
may be filled with Divine Knowledge and Instruction. And he sets it out by a
very lively Comparison, (...) etc. For look (says he) as it in the Body, if
some windy or flatulent Humor get into the Belly, it does thereby hinder
concoction; so Pride and Conceit, if it once prepossess the mind, it does
thereby exclude all sound knowledge, and much impair the health of the soul.
Thus He, a Grave and an Ancient Author. And thus much of the Second General
Part of the Text, which is the Word of Counsel or Exhortation, If any man among
you seems to be wise, etc.

THE Third and last is the Word of Inforcement or Argument to persuade unto it,
in these words, The 3d General.
For the Wisdom of the world is foolishness with God: It was somewhat strange
Counsel which was given, as we hinted before, and therefore needed a Reason to
back it and set it on: and this it is. According to the common form and
regularity of speech, so it should rather have been thus, The foolishness of
this world is wisdom with God. But the Apostles aim and intent was to depresse
worldly wisdom, The wisdom of the world foolishness with God.
and therefore he chooses rather to give it in this manner of expression which
we have now before us. What this wisdom of the world is, we have formerly
declared out of the foregoing passages of the Text: It remains now that we
should see here what is said of it, and the Censure which is fastened upon it,
and that is this, that it is Foolishness; not in the sense of a Fool (which
even the best wisdom is) but in the sense even of wisdom it self; its
Foolishness with God: (...). According to as double Explication.
This it may be said to be according to a double Explication. First, Because He
counts it so: And secondly, Because he makes it so It is so according to the
Opinion and Estimation which he has of it; and it is so according to that
Event and Condition which he disposes to it.

First, It it is soin his Opinion; I. In his opinion.
he reckons and esteems it but Foolishness. This is true of the wisdom of the
world taken in its fui Latitude and Compass, without any further Explication;
especially of that which we call Carnal wisdom, the wisdom of the Flesh. But if
we speak of some other parts of it, namely that which is Secular or Natural,
which seems here (as we showed before) to be very much aimed at, so it is thus
only according to these following Qualifications which are agreeable to it.

First, 1. Comparative.
Comparitive, being compared with that which is higher and better than it self.
Take the wisdom of the world, for no more but the wisdom of natural parts and
abilities for worldly employments, and so it is not foolishness simply, no,
not in the eyes of God himself; it is foolishness in the eyes of God, for any
to think it so: wit, and learning, and arts, and such qualification as these
are, they are foolishness with none, but such as are fools themselves, and that
know not what belongs to them. The only wise God look upon them, as no other
than Beams and Emanations of his own Wisdom, which do issue and proceed from
Himself in a special manner; they are the Gifts of his Spirit, which he is
pleased to bestow upon Men, for the good, and benefit, and comfort, not only of
the world, but of the Church: they are the Fruits of his Sons Ascension: those
Largesses and Bounties which he let fall, and left behind him, when he went up
into Heaven. All the three glorious Persons in the Blessed and Sacred Trinity,
they have an hand in the dispensation of this wisdom, 2 Timothy 2.13
which God cannot disallow of Absolutely, unless he should deny Himself, which
He cannot do.

For a man to be a prudent Statesman, an understanding Magistrate, a deep
Scholar, a skilful Merchant, a man well seen and versed in that way and place
and calling wherein God has set him, whether of Council or Government, or
Study, or Trade, or whatever it be, these abilities nakedly considered, have no
disparagement in them at all, but rather the contrary; it is an Honor and
Commendation for every man, as much as may be, to excel in his kind, though in
a worldly consideration: And we may not so far abuse either our selves, or the
Spirit of God, as to fancy and imagine otherwise. These things in their place,
and in their rank, are very Excellent, and such as the Lord Himself often in
Scripture (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 1.
does give the name of wisdom unto them.

But now, we shall compare them with greater and higher matters, here they are
no better than foolishness. If we compare Wit with Grace, Learning with
Religion, Sagacity with a spirit of Discerning, a strong and Politic Brain
with a Gracious and Savoury Heart; here now they are not to be named the same
day (as I may say) together, there is so much difference betwixt them, and the
latter so transcendent to the former.

This is that which the Apostle would signify by this Expression; he applies
himself to the present state and condition of these Corinthians, and cures
contraries by contraries. They were very much taken with the admiration of
worldly wisdom, and had too high a conceit of it, whereby they did also
overvalue and esteem of themseives: And now, that he might correct and reform
this distemper in them, he does, by the bowing of the stick as it were another
way, put the name of foolishness upon it, thereby to take off their inordinate
affection from it. As if, when ye should see one that was fondly enamoured and
ravished with the Beauty of some Creature, ye should, to cure him of that
fondnes in him, tell him, that in the eyes and judgment of all those that had
skill in features, this Beauty, it were no better than Deformity; even thus
does Saint Paul with these Corinthians: And it was suitable to the apprehensions
which himself had, being now converted, who counted all things but loss, Phil.
3.8. 1 Cor. 2.3.
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, and determined to know nothing
amongst them, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. To know, and to make known,
there is both in it, Nothing but Jesus Christ: What? Nothing absolutely? No, but
nothing comparatively: Nothing so much as this, or that, which does some way or
other belong unto it: So He desired to know, and to make known nothing else.

This is so much the more remarkable, as it comes from such a kind of Person as
the Apostle himself; which was a man as eminent for that which he spoke
against, as any that he spoke unto, and a great deal more. For a fool to speak
slightly of wisdom, it may be (perhaps) because he wants it, and is destitute
of it (as those who want any excellency or perfection themselves, they are apt
to disparage it in other:) But for the Apostle Paul to do it, who was so famous
and admirable for it, one that had sat at the feet of Gamaliel, and spoke with
Tongues more then them all, an accurate and complete Scholar in all kind of
Learning, this proceeded from an Higher Principle, which was moreover and
besides in him, which made him to look upon the other, as so much inferior. And
that is the first qualification. The wisdom of the World, is foolishness with
God, taken comparatively.

Secondly, 2. Solitary.
Taken solitarily and alone by it self. Natural or secular wisdom is such, as
may be good within its compass; but it is not good for us to have no other
wisdom in us but only this. As ye shall observe it sometimes to be the
condition of abundance of people, that take them (it may be) at some Bargain,
or Purchase, or Conveyance, or worldly contrivances, here they are old
excellent, in their sphere and proper Element: But bring them to any matter of
Religion, and here they are to seek, and not able to say any thing to it. There
are many which are of admirable parts for any thing which belongs to the world;
which yet in the ways of God are absolute Dunces. Religion is a business which
they do not much regard, or trouble themselves with; God is not in all their
thoughts; or if he be it is in such a notion of him, as is almost a good as
none at all. There are many Christians which have no other thoughts of God then
if they were Heathens; look upon him only as a Creator, as the Maker and
Governor of the world, and that is all, (as any of the ancient Philosophers
would have looked upon him:) But as he has revealed himself in his Son, and has
made known himself in the Gospel, here they care not for him, nor apply
themselves to him: Now this is that which the Apostle does here condemn. Even
Godliness it self is Foolishness, if you take it abstracted from Christ,
especially in the Church of Christ, where it is his maine design to be advanced
and set up by us. That wherein God himself would manifest his greatest Wisdom,
viz. the Extolling of Christ, in the contrary thereunto do men manifest their
greatest Folly, viz. by diminishing from Christ. Thus did many of these Greeks
which Saint Paul here reflects upon, and censures them for it; these
Corinthians they had diverse amongst them which were great Philosophers,
Understanding Merchants, eloquent and well spoken men, which had the command of
their tongue and Language, but all this while they were to seek in the knowledge
and wisdom of Christ; the Gospel it was Foolishness unto them: Now, is not this
extreme fondness and foolishness in good earnest; for men to be wise in any
thing rather then in that which they should be? or which does more chiefly and
principally concern them? To be wise to get Money, and to get Lands, and to get
Estates, and such things as these, and not to be wise to get an interest in
Christ, and an inheritance in a better world? To be wise to lose their souls,
and not to be wise to save them? this, it is Foolishness with a witness. And
that is also the second Explication, Sapientia Mundi, i.e. Sapientia quae sola
est Mundi. The worlds wisdom is foollishness with God, so far forth as it has
not his own wisdom annexed unto it and joined with it, taken Solitarily and
alone by it self.

Thirdly, 3. Abusive.
the Wisdom of the world is Foolishness with God in the Abuse and
Mis-improvement of it: Sapientia Mundi, i. e. Sapientia qua utitur mundus: The
worlds wisdom, as it is for the most part carried by the world, to Pride and
Scorn, and Contempt, and undervaluing of the Gospel and Ministry of it. When
men are so fully possessed with their worldly wisdom, as that they despise the
poor Servants of Christ, which in such matters are inferior to them: here God
looks upon it as no better then Folly. These natural perfections which we have
now spoken of, its not Foolishness to have them, but it is Foolishness to be
puffed up with them; and from thence to contemn others which are simply destitute
of them. There is no man that has any of these things in the greatest measure
that can be, who has any reason to swell in himself for the enjoyment and
participation of them; whether he considers how he comes by them, which is only
by gift; or whether he considers how easily he may lose them, and be deprived
of them; or whether he considers how they are such gifts, which for the nature
and quality of them may be bestowed upon those who are Reprobates, and Cast
awayes; and Enemies, and Wicked men. So that that's another Qualification of
this Expression, The wisdom of the world is Foolishness with God, in the abuse
and Mis-improvement of it; more particularly as it is at any time made a Ground
of Arrogance and Carnal confidence.

Fourthly, 4. Effective.
In ordine ad talem affectum, In reference to such an Effect as is here implied
and to intimated to us. The wisdom of the world is Foolishness with God;
namely, as to bring men to God, and acquaint them with him. In which respect
there is an Insufficiency in it; and this according to a twofold Explication.
First, A double Insufficiency in worldly wisdom.
An Insufficiency Passive; In ratione Objecti. The wisdom of the world has not
that in it by way of Motive, which might persuade God to accept, or to make
choice of it. Secondly, An Insufficiency Active; In ratione potentiae. The
wisdom of the world has not that in it by way of Faculty, as whereby it may
reach and apprehend the things of God. According to either of these
Explications may it be justly said to be foolishnes with him.

First, I say, taken Passively, or Objectively, I. Passive; in ratione Objecti.
and by way of Motive, it is Foolishness and Insufficiency here. God does not
accept of any persons so far forth as they do only abound with worldly wisdom;
it is not that which he does so much regard and look at in them. And this
again, as to a twofold purpose; In reference to the Means. the End.

whether we take it in reference to the Means, or in reference to the End: If
in reference to the Means, he does not for this bestow his Grace and Gospel
upon them. Act. 20 32,
If in reference to the End, he does not for this bestow his Glory or Salvation
upon them: Take it which way you will, there is in this respect an insufficiency
in it.

First, In reference to the Means, 1. In reference to the Means,
he does not for this bestow upon them either his Grace or his Gospel, which is
the word of his Grace. It Is Foolishness with him so; this worldly wisdom, as
the Scripture does abundantly inform us, and experience does sometimes manifest
unto us: This is clear from that speech of our Savior in his acknowledgment
which he makes to his Father, Matthew. 11.28. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of
Heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and have revealed them unto Babes; even so, O Father, because it seemed good in
thy sight. And so 1 Cor. 1.26. You see your calling, brethren, how that not
many wise men after the flesh are called. If not many wise men are called, then
not any are called for their wisdom, it is not this which God has a respect to
in his calling of them, forasmuch as he oftentimes passes by, and lets these
alone, whilst he fastens upon others.

There is a double undervaluing of the wise and prudent of the world, Double,
in reference to the Means: For dispensing them to it, them by it.

as concerns the Means of Grace: the one is, for dispensing them to them; and
the other is for dispensing them by them: and God did in either of these
respects look upon the wisdom of the world as Foolishness, and so accounted it.

First, For the dispensing them to them: He does not always do that; nay, he
does commonly otherwise, as we have heard out of the former place. The great
Rabbis and Sophies of the world, they have been such as never had the Gospel
preached unto them, or heard of the least word or syllable of it, but have been
such as have sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death, Ephesians. 2.12.
having no hope, and without God in the world.

Then secondly, As for dispensing it by them. He has not always done that
neither; but rather taken a quite contrary course, as we see in those persons
whom he first made choice of to send abroad into the world, and to lay the
first beginnings and plantations of the Church, they were such as were the
greatest strangers to this worldly wisdom of any, and which knew least what
belonged unto it.

This is not so to be taken (as some now a days would improve it) as if all
sorts of persons promiscuously might take upon them the Exercise of the
Ministry, A Qualification of the truth last propounded; by way of explication.
and the preaching of the Gospel of Christ, though never so rude and
illiterate, and unqualified for such a work, because God made choice at first
of a company of such kind of persons as had no such kind of Learning in them.
For first, There is a difference of time, and so of Gods dispensations in them.
As it was in the first Creation of the world, all things were complete at
first, and came up in their absolute perfection, which yet now afterward do
not reach thereunto but by leisure, and time, and degrees, and the use of the
means tending to such a purpose, sowing, and planting, and watering, and
manuring, and the like. Even so was it also in the first framing of the Church:
The Apostles they were qualified immediately by the extraordinary Endowments of
the Holy Ghost inspiring of them: Succeeding Ministers they are qualified
partly by such Natural abilities as do much incline them to such an employment
(which are still the Gift of God) and partly by study and industry, polishing
and further improving these abilities in them, with the Blessing of God upon
them, and his Spirit in a special manner assisting them in the work it self, as
to the particular occasions of performance which are administered to them.

Again (secondly) The Apostles they were also qualified; observe that. Though
God found them under such inabilities, yet he did not so leave them, but
supplied those defects in them: And though they were not men of parts when he
first chose them, yet they were men of Gifts when he used them, and such Gifts
as were proper to that work which he imposed upon them. He gave Gifts to men,
yea, and he gave them another Call too for the exercise of those gifts which he
had given them. Therefore we may not carry this point beyond its line, which is
indeed to pervert and abuse it, and our selves in it. But only thus far, which
is the Truth, that God oftentimes makes choice of men of meaner and lower
parts, whom he qualifies and fits for his Ministry, and imployes in it, whiles
he lays many others aside of greater Natural and Secular perfections, whom he
will not make use of; and so indeed he does. Thus we see how the Point holds
good, as to Grace and the Gospel, as the Means.

Take it further in the next place, 2. In reference to the End.
as to Glory and Salvation, for the End: God does not accept of this worldly
Wisdom neither in this particular. He will not bring men to Heaven, according
as they have such and such Parts and Natural Qualifications, but rather as they
have such and such Holy and Heavenly Dispositions. He will not save them as
having so much Wit, but as so much Grace. Wit is no further an help to
Salvation, then so far forth as it improves Grace, and Grace it; which
sometimes it does. That man which has his Wisdom sanctified, will be able to do
a great deal more good then either one that has so much Wisdom without
Sanctification, or else, that is so far sanctified without such a measure of
Wisdom in him. These things do well in their Conjunction and Connection
together, which being severed, do not so well. And so you have the first
Explication, in regard whereof the Wisdom of the World is Foolishness with
God, as to Religion and the things of God; namely, from an Insufficiency
Passive considerable in it, In ratione Objecti, as not moving God to accept of
it, either to Grace, or else to Glory.

The second is an Insufficiency active, II. Active; in ratione Potentiae.
in ratione Potentiae: The wisdom of the world in its best and highest
perfections, is not able to comprehend the Truths of Christ. Mere Natural
reason in the exactest sublimation of it, Natural Reason unable to reach the
things of God two manner of ways:
cannot reach the Doctrine of Religion; and this again it cannot do according
to a double sense and explication of it. First, Not in Propositione. Secondly,
Not in Mysterio.

First, I say, not always in the Proposition. There are some Doctrines in
Religion, 1. In propositione. Ephesians. 3.9.
which the Highest reason of man does not know what to make of them, neither
can understand them as barely propounded. I do not only say, that it could
never find them out before they were discovered, (for that to be sure it could
not, as being merely dependent upon the Wall and Counsel of God, and so said to
be hid in him) but that they cannot conceive of them neither fully, even now
that they are revealed. Such as these are, the Trinity of Persons in the Unity
of Essence. The eternal Generation of the Son: The Procession of the Holy
Ghost: The Hypostatical Union of the Divine and Humane Nature together. These
Doctrines, they are such kind of Points, as do exceed and go beyond the
Apprehension of the highest Humane reason; so that the wisdom of the world
cannot reach them, or attain unto them, not so much as in Propositione.

But then secondly, to be sure not in Mysterio. 2. In Mysterio.
Here it cannot reach them indeed: Mere Natural reason, it cannot discern the
Excellency, and Beauty, and Sweeness of Religion: It cannot savor it, and
relish it, and taste it in the spirituality of it, this it cannot do; we have
it plainly in the fore going Chapter, 1 Cor. 2.14. The Natural man receives not
the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him; neither can
he know them, because they are Spiritually discerned.

The Natural man, (...). (...). Jude ver. 19.
(...) That man which has only a Rational soul in him, and no further
qualified, who is not (...), that is spiritual; (...), He does not receive
them, neither into his mind and judgment to understand them, nor into his will
and affections to embrace them, and close and comply with them; he does neither
way receive them. This is that which must come from above, from the Father of
lights, as every good and perfect Gift besides; as our Savior told Peter,
Flesh and Blood has not revealed these things unto thee, but my Father which
is in Heaven, Matthew. 16.17. This wisdom of God in a Mystery, it is such as the
wisest worldlings cannot attain to: Therefore the Apostle speaking of it, has
this passage concerning it, Which none of the Princes of this world knew, 1
Cor. 2.7, 8.
etc. The Princes of the world? Whom does he mean by them? Not only Princes
for State, but Princes for knowledge. Not only Kings and Emperors, but
Philosophers and Learned men, which did dominari in Scholis; These are the
Principes seculi here spoken of, who notwithstanding all their Learning, and
Humane wisdom, and strength of reason which was in them, yet did not rise to
the knowledge of Christ, and the Mystery of God manifested in the flesh.

(...); An use of Confutation.
(to speak in the Language of St. Chrysostom:) Where now then are those, who
affirm as much as this comes to, and would obtrude such things as these upon
us? which with the Greeks, seek after wisdom, 1 Corinthians, Chap. 1.22. Which
cry all for Reason, and Argument, and Demonstration; (...), as Clemens
Alexandrinus calls them; Strom. lib. 9.
and will believe no more than they can fathom and comprehend with their own
understanding; which would make the Truths of God stoop to their capacities;
and bring the strait line to the crooked Log? (...); (to speak further in the
Language of Saint Paul, 1 Cor, 1.20.) Where is now the Wise? Where is the
Disputer of this world? How little do such as these understand, or at least
consider with themselves, that the wisdom of the world is in this respect
foolishness with God, who looks upon it as very shallow, and inferior to his
Divine truth? Yea, so far from leading them to it, as indeed rather (in some
kind of persons, (...) C^rys. in 1 Timothy 1.19.
as in those Gentiles) drawing them from it.

There are many Truths in Religion, there are many Mysteries in Providence,
which our Reason staggers at; where it must be sufficient for us, that God
himself tenders them to us to be received and entertained by us; whom it is the
Highest Reason to believe, even then, when the Things themselves which we
believe are Riddles and Paradoxes with us.

And yet we do not hereby take away men's Reason from them, The qualification.
nor the use of it, even in Religion it self. It concerns us to see upon what
grounds we do entertain the Gospel and Christianity in the Profession of it;
that we do not take it up only upon trust, because it is offered to us by men;
but that we discern some excellency in it, and receive it as that which is
propounded by God himself: Yet that we should be able to search into the
Intrinsecal reason of the Doctrines and Mysteries themselves, by the strength
of our wit, and parts, and natural understanding, this is not to be expected by
us, or agreeable to us; which the Apostle here signifies to us, by this
expression in the Text; in calling the wisdom of the world foolishness: Which
it is, in order to this effect, (among other things) to wit, of bringing men to
God and salvation. And so you have the first Explication: The wisdom of the
world is foolishness with God; namely, because he counts it so; II. The
wisdom of the world, foolishness in Gods Dispose.
it is so according to his opinion and estimation of it.

The second is, Because he makes it so. It is so according to his disposal and
ordering of it. (...),
Every one that counts any thing foolishness, cannot presently make it so; but
God can make it so: He has made foolish the wisdom of this world, as it is in
Chap. 1. of this Epist. v. 20.

But how does he come to do so? As we may conceive it, too manner of ways.
First, by way of Frustration and Disappointment; He spoils the world of those
Ends and Purposes, which it propounds to it self. Secondly, By way of Confusion
and Contrary improvement; He turns their very Counsels and Devises against
themselves: In each of these ways does he infatuate them.

First, 1. In a way of Frustration.
By Frustration and Disappointment. God makes the wisdom of the world
foolishness thus, In that he does often cross it of its expected success. Thus
Psalm. 35.10. The Lord brings the counsel of the Heathen to naught, he makes
the devices of the people of none effect. So Job 5.12. He disappointeth the
devices of the Crafty, so that their hand cannot perform their Enterprise. And
Job 12.17. He leads away Counselors spoiled, and makes the Judges fools. This
is that which God many times does with your worldly wise men; he over-turns
their greatest Designs, and breaks them in the purposes of them.

There are many whom God sometimes lets go on in their vain and frivolous
projects, and when they are full of expectation for the ripening and perfecting
of them, he does then restrain them in them. The Egyptians were never more
fools, than when they said, Come on, let us deal wisely, Exodus 1.10. We have a
notable place for this purpose, Isa. 19.11, 12, 13. etc. Surely the Princes of
Zoan are become fools, the counsel of the wise Counselors of Pharaoh is become
brutish. Where are they? Where are thy wise men? etc. Let them tell thee now,
and let them know what the Lord has purposed upon Egypt. The Lord does by
these expressions signify, how far he frustrates the Counsels of the wise, and
prudent of the world, and (as he did sometimes with Achitophel) turns them into
foolishness. 2. Sam. 15 31, and 17, 14.


Secondly, 2. In a way of Confusion.
As God makes the wisdom of the world foolishness in a way of Frustration, so
also in a way of Confusion; in that he turns it against it self: For so also he
does, as we have it in the latter part of this 19th verse; proved by a
Testimony out of Job, Chapter 5. v. 13. He takes the wise in their own
craftiness, and the counsel of the froward is carried headlong. This is that
which God does with his Enemies and wicked men: Psalm. 7.16. Exodus 18.11.
He brings their own mischief upon their own head, and in the thing wherein
they deal proudly, he is above them. Thus ye see the truth of the Point in the
full proof and Explication of it, That the wisdom of the world is foolishness
with God. First, Because he counts it so. And secondly, Because he makes it so.

Would we now have some good account and reason given us of it, whence this
comes to be so? The Ground of the point.
It is very easy for us to have it; and that is this: Because that deals so
with him, as much as it can do. The wisdom of God, that is foolishness with
the world; and therefore the wisdom of the world, that is foolishness also with
God Sapientia munda stultitia est apud D^um; hoc est, rationibus caret apud
Doum, quatenus est Author super naturalium: Nam stultum est, quod fine ratione
est. C^jetan.
: So he is but even and quit with them for it. As it is said there, Zach. 11.8.
My soul loathed them, and their soul abhorred me: Just so it is here. The
world, that thinks scornfully of God, his Truth, and Ways, and Ordinances, and
Children, and Ministers; and he thinks as basely of Them, their Counsels, and
Projects, and Designs, and Practices, and the things which they take up to
themselves.

What does all this now teach us by way of improvement to our selves? The Use
of all threefold. 1. To be of the mind of God.
First, let us from hence learn to be of the mind of God himself: Let us think
as he think in this particular. If worldly wisdom be indeed foolishness with
God, let it not then be wisdom with us: Let not us then so much dote and rely
upon it. There Is a great Argument in it, from the Person who is here exhibited
to us, which is much to be considered by us. The passing of any censure or
verdict, is much according to him that passes it, what an one he is. And so it
is here. It is a good observation of Austins upon that passage there in the
Gospel, Luke 12.20.
Thou fool, etc. Non sic dicit Deus Stulte, quomodo Homo dicit: God does not
call Fool, so as man calls fool: For man, he does it for the most part out of
passion, and prejudice, and rashness, and Folly it self: But God, he does it
always discreetly, and for very good cause. We are sure that the Judgment of
God is according to truth. Romans 2.2.
Therefore this may serve for the awakening of all such persons as those are,
which are no better affected, which are no more but worldly wise, and do rest
and applaud themselves in it, to think with themselves this, that they are but
fools in Gods account; which it may be, is more then at the present they do
well consider: If they did, it would make them more out of love with their
Natural and Carnal condition.

Secondly, 2 To despise this worlds censure.
We see here on the other side, how to set by the Censure of the world in that
which at any time they lay and fasten upon us, especially for doing of our
Duties, and of that which belongs unto us: Not to weigh it, or to be moved with
it. There are a great many Christians who are sometimes much discouraged and
hindered in themselves from their Duty for fear of this, lest the world should
censure them for it: Now, alas! what is the censure of the world, whose very
wisdom it self is foolishness with the God of Wisdom? Who cares much for the
censure of a Fool? To be counted foolish by such an one is no discredit or
disparagement at all. Now thus it is here; this is that which may satisfy us
here in this business, that our Adversaries themselves are censured, and have
folly laid to their charge, from whence they are disabled in their sentence: 1
Cor. 2.15.
The Spiritual man judges all things, yet he himself is judged of no man, 1
Cor. 2.15. And whiles the world condemns the Church, it speaks evil of those
things it does not know, nor is acquainted withal Doctus novit indoctum, quia
doctus suit. Sed indoctus nen novit doctum, quia doctus non fuit. Adag. Arab.
. Well (Beloved) to draw up this Point; you see here now how it is? God and the
world, they stand in a direct Opposition and Contrariety one to the other. The
strength of the world is weakness with God; the Friendship of the world is
Enmity with God; the Wisdom of the world is Foolishness with God; And that
which is highly esteemed among men, Luke 16.15.
is an abomination in the sight of God: And why then should any of us be so
glued and addicted to it, and to our opinions of it, as for the most part we
are?

Thirdly, 3. Not to glory in men.
Let us make the same Use of it which the Apostle himself makes in the Text and
the Sequel of it, (which I hold to be still most proper and natural in the
handling of any Scripture) and what is that? see in ver. 21. of this Chapter,
Therefore let no man glory in men, for all things are yours; whether Paul, or
Apollo, or Cephas, etc. Because men are but men, even the best and wisest that
are, therefore not to glory in them, not to rest upon them, not to attribute
too much to them, not to wrangle and quarrel about them, but to think of them
so as they are, and so to take them, and to make the best improvement of them
that possibly we can. And it holds especially and more particularly as to the
Ministers in the variety of their Gifts and Abilities, not here to divide about
them, and to take occasion of making differences from them, but with
thankfulness to enjoy them all. I shall never have done if I say shall all
which may be said by me to this purpose; and therefore I must of necessity
break off whether I will or no. So now, I have done also with the Third General
Part of the Text, which is the word of Inforcement, or Persuasion to that which
was before advised, For the wisdom of the world is Foolishness with God.

ANd now (Right Honorable and Beloved) whereas perhaps you may be ready to
think that I have done with the Text, The Application of the Text to the
Occasion.
yet I have not for all that, I must with your good leave go over it once
again before I dismiss it, or you with it (although not in so large a manner
as I have hitherto done) and that so far forth as it carries a very good
sutableness and correspondency in it to the present occasion of your meeting
together at this time, which me thinks it does very fully in all the several
parts of it. This Scripture which I have now set before you, it is a good Item
and Caution to you, to keep you from all those Temptations which are ready to
rise up in the hearts of worldly men against the works of Charity, and
Hospitality, and Liberality, and Beneficence to the poor. We will take notice
of the Parts in their Order

First, I. Of the Caution.
Let no man deceive himself, It is a very good Preface and Introduction here,
and such as men have need of, as much as in any thing else; forasmuch as in
very truth there is nothing wherein for the most part they do more easily
coozen themselves then in matters of this Nature; whether fastening on such
Arguments as may serve to keep them off from it, or nourishing such Principles
as do pervert and corrupt them in it. It is good for all such persons to be
here awakened, and bid to take heed and to look to themselves. We shall find
that in Gal. 6.7. when the Apostle had premifed this Injunction, Let him that
is taught in the word, communicate to him that teaches in all good things: He
presently adds hereupon, Be not deceived, God is not mocked. Why does he so?
Because men are commonly subject to put off such Duties as these are from
themselves. And so may we now say here, when we are urging the works of
Charity, and such kind of Performances as these, Be not deceived, or Let no man
deceive himself. Take heed of such Collusions and False-reasonings as those are
whereby men are hindered from such a Work and Service as this is whereof we now
speak. That you may not defraud the poor, take heed first that ye delude not
your selves, and your own hearts, which does lay ground, and make way for the
other. Do not consult with Flesh and Blood, nor hearken to the suggestion of
lust and corruption in such a business as this; for if ye do, ye will quite
undo your selves, and others with you. It is good and safe for us, in every
duty which God requires of us, to be still most jealous and suspicious of those
inclinations in us which are most favorable to our own ease and carnal
advantage, because they are most likely to restrain us and interrupt us in it.
And let that suffice for the Preface or Preamble or word of Caution, as
applicable to our present purpose, Let no man deceive himself.

Now (secondly) I may apply to this likewise, II. Of the Counsel.
even the Counsel and Exhortation it self, If any man among you seems to be
wise in this world, let him become a fool that he may be wise. Surely, if there
be any men in the world that think themselves Wise in the world, -- Populus me
sibilat, at mihi plaudo Ipse domi, quoties nummos contemplor in arca^. Hor. de
divite avaro.
it is those commonly which are Rich in the world: The Rich man is wise in his
own conceit, says Solomon, Prove. 28.11. Whiles he lived he blessed his soul,
etc. says David (Psalm. 49.18) that is, he flattered and applauded himself. And
we have an instance of it in the Gospel, Luke 12.19. Soul, thou have much goods
laid up for many years, take thine ease, etc. Riches and Self Admiration
(although I do not say always, yet) very often go together. Unless it pleases
God by his Grace wonderfully to restrain it, it is very rare for those which
are Wealthy, not to think too highly of themselves, and to applaud themselves
in that condition: Therefore when the Apostle Paul would instruct his Scholar
Timothy what counsel to give to rich men, 1 Timothy 6.17.
he bids him, charge them that they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain
Riches; as laying the greatest Caution there where was the greatest danger.
This is that which is here supposed and taken for granted, as that which,
through man's corruption, lies in the very nature of the condition, without the
more heed and caution. Rich men they are apt to think themselves wise men, and
to think themselves the wiser as they can hold their Riches the better, and
keep themselves from parting with them, though upon never so good an occasion.
There is a piece of worldly wisdom which does keep off men of the world from
those good works which are to be done by them; and they are not commonly
without their pretenses, and carnal reasons, and shifts, and excuses, which
they are pleased to make use of to this purpose.

Well, but hear now what is the Apostles counsel and advice (us we may very well
apply it) even to such as these, If any man among you seems to be wise in
this world, let him become a fool. A Fool: how is that? namely, by doing that
which the world is ready to reckon and judge of as Folly; viz. to do good, to be
rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, etc. as you
have it there propounded to you, 1 Timothy 6.18 Such persons as are thus employed,
they are indeed the worlds fools, 1 John 3.17.
yea, but they are Gods wise men; and such as it becomes you to be, if you will
be that which you ought, according as God does any way enable you for it; and
you cannot discharge your selves of such a Duty as this is without closing with
it. I know that worldly wisdom will be ready (as I said) to take up many
Arguments against it, and as much as may be, reason it out: but they are such
as the wisdom of God is able very easily to scatter and bring to nothing.

Oh (say some) but the Times are hard, Objections answered.
Trading dead, Money scarce, the World uncertain; we would be willing to do
some good with our Estates, but we know not what will become of us, nor how
things may hereafter go with us. This at the first hearing may seem to have
some what in it, but in good earnest it will not hold water. It is not that
which will excuse you, nay, does rather in some respects more engage you: And
so we shall find even the Holy Ghost himself to improve it, Eccles. 11.1,2. Cast
thy bread upon the waters, for thou shall find it after many days: Give a
portion to seven, and also to eight, for thou know not what evil shall be
upon the earth. Because the Times are hard and uncertain, therefore those whom
God has furnished with Estates above their Brethren, they should be so much
the more imparting of them, that so by this means they may do the greater good
with them. For first, The greater is the Necessity, the greater consequently
will be the Mercy: others distresses make our charity so much the more which we
enlarge unto them: It is a Service more acceptable unto God, more beneficial to
men, more comfortable to our selves, and we shall hereby reap the greater fruit
of the greater good which is done by us. But then, secondly, (which is also
expressed in this Scripture) Because thou know not what evil shall be upon the
earth: Therefore do it upon this ground likewise, as being uncertain whether
you shall have the like occasions and opportunities afforded unto you. It is
wisdom for every man to do good whiles he may, to lay hold upon the present
season which is administered unto him. And as for every thing else, so amongst
the rest, for the works of Charity: Whiles you have opportunity (says the
Apostle) Gal. 6.10. Give whiles you have it by you, the time may be when you
have nothing to give, and then would give if you could, and wish that you had
given already, when it will now be too late. This is the drift of the Preachers
Argument, and so an answer to the fore mentioned Objection.

Why, but (say some again) we know not whether our Gifts may hold; the times
may be such as the very matter and subject of our bounty may be taken away,
Colleges, and Hospitals, and Almes-houses, and places of Relief, they may not
always continue in being, and then what will become of all the Good which is
done by us?

This is still a piece of the wisdom condemned in the Text, but such as has no
strength in it. For first, Are ye sure that your Estates will hold good
hereafter in any other way besides? those Inheritances which ye leave to your
Posterity, and those Conveyances which you make to your Heirs, whosoever they
be: Can ye assure your selves of the continuance of them without any
distraction? Will your own houses continue for ever, and your dwelling places
to all generations? and the Lands which ye call by your names, and the Wealth
that ye leave to others which are related to you? Indeed, it may be (for some
of you) your inward thought may be so, as it is signified there in that place,
Psalm. 49.10,11. but it is more then you can promise to your selves, or any one
for you. And yet notwithstanding is this no hinderance at all to you, for your
care and endeavor about them, or your disposing them in such a way as that is.

But (secondly) Admit it to be so, yet is your Engagement never the less, nor
yet your Reward. We are to do that which is our Duty, and to leave the event of
things to God to be ordered and disposed by Him as himself pleases, who does
not require of us to take care for the government of the world (being his own
proper undertaking) but to do that which belongs to us in the places in which
he has set us. If we be but careful for our parts to do that good which is in
our own power, we sall have comfort and recompense for it, let things
themselves fall as they will, or as they may, for the particular issue and event
of them. But I will not put Objections into your heads, and make them for you,
ye can make them fast enough you selves; but what ever they be of this nature,
you must still remember of what condition they are, and to what Head they do
truly belong as the spring and rise of them; namely, what is here expressed to
us, the Wisdom of the world, and accordingly make it your business thus far and
in this sense to be fools.

Yea, and that for this Reason also which is here specified in the Text (to
take in that too) that so ye may be wise men, To be fools in a way of charity,
is wisdom. 1. In the way of the world it self.
which (no question but) ye shall be in observing; and that likewise in a
twofold explication. First, in the very way of the world it self, and within
the compass of worldly wisdom, go no further with it then so. He hat's thus a
fool to the world, he shall by this means be wise to the world. We Will begin with
it thus, My meaning (in brief) is this, That by those Acts of Charity and
Bounty, and relief of the poor, whereby the world in the wisdom of it, thinks
an Estate is so much the more disparaged, it is hereby so much the more
advanced. And that especially (which ye may take notice of) in three
particulars. Three ways,
First, In the increase of it. Secondly, In the comfort of it. Thirdly, In the
security.

First, 1. As to increase.
for the increase: Observe it there. Its one Objection, which worldly wisdom
makes against works of Charity. Oh, I shall by this means diminish mine own
Estate; the more I give to others, I shall have so much the less my self. But,
I pray, who told you so? Did you never read or hear in all your lives, of the
Barrel of Meal that wasted not, and of the Cruse of Oil that failed not, to
that Sareptane widow, that relieved the necessities of the Prophet? You Will say,
that was a Miracle: True, but such an one as God works every day in the year in
the proportion and equivalences of it. Believe it, and you will find it to be
so. There Is no man (I am confident of it, mark what I say) which is one jot the
worse, no not in an outward and temporal respect, for any good that he does
with his Estate, in such a way as God does call him, and enable him to do it;
but has it abundantly, one way or other, made up to him even in this present
life: And there are many who have experience of it, that are able to bear
witness to this truth, which I now deliver. If there be any, who sometimes have
suffered, notwithstanding their Bounty this way, it has not been from that, if
they search and inquire into it, but rather from some other cause and occasion,
which has been joined with it: nay, it may be, if it had not been for this,
they had suffered more a great deal then they have done, and their losses had
been so much heavier upon them then now they are. The Scripture is very full of
promises of this nature, if we had but hearts to receive them, and so much
faith, as to make trial of them.

Secondly, 2. To the comfort.
Add to this the comfort of it. Is there nothing to be looked after in an
Estate, but only the increase of it? To have so much coming in? So many
thousands gathered together? Such Wares? Such Houses? Such lands? Such heaps
and treasures of gold, and silver in great abundance? Alas! What is all this,
if ye had as much as ye knew where to put it, if ye have not in the mean time a
mind to take contentment in it? What Is a Great Estate, with a sad and
disconsolate spirit? I do not now speak of it in a Religious way, but only in
a Natural. What is it to have large Revenues in a way of the world, and to have
no delight or satisfaction in a man's self, or those about him? Beloved, shall I
tell you? There Is many a man in the world, which would make a very good and
wise Bargain of it, even in a worldly consideration, (to say no more) if he
could purchase it so, to let go three parts of his Estate, that he might in joy
but the comfort of the fourth; and I believe, that there are many of you, that
hear me this day, who would with all your hearts close with this offer, upon
these conditions: See here now the most probable way, that may be, for the
attaining unto it; namely, by doing good with those Estates which God trusts
you withal: this will sanctify and sweeten, and put a gracious savor, and
relish, and tincture upon all the rest; make ye more comfortable in your
selves, in your families, in your relations, in your employments, in all that
ye either are, or have, or do: It is the Blessing of the Lord that makes rich,
and ADDS NO SORROW WITH IT. Pro. 10.22. And it is faithfulness in the use of
Riches, which, as soon as any thing, does procure this BLESSING from him.

Thirdly, 3. To the Security.
Take in to this further, the security of it; that is another thing which I know
ye all desire; to be sure of that which ye have, that when ye have got it, ye
may keep it, and that others may keep it after you, when you are gone, and in
your Graves. This is as great a care as any thing, which those that are Rich
are exercised withal: It is looked upon as a great part of the Miseries of these
present times, that people can be sure of nothing, whatsoever they enjoy.

It was never more uncertain Riches, 1 Timothy 6.17.
(...), the dis-appearance and vanishing of Wealth, then now it is. See here
now, how to secure it as much as may be, and to make the best assurance of it
that you can; namely, by laying out some of it to the relief of the poor
Members of Christ. Put it into his hands, that is, into the hands of his
Brethren; it is the surest hold of any, and such as will never fail.
Chrysologus.
Manus pauperis est Gazophylacium Christi. The Hand of the poor, it is the
Treasury even of Christ himself, which needs neither Bolts nor Locks, nor Bars
to fasten it with.

This for your selves, whilst ye are here. Now then afterward for your
Children, when ye are gone hence (for I know ye take some care for them, and it
is fit ye should): Do ye desire to secure your Estates in their hands? that
first, neither they themselves; may squander them away by ill-husbandry, (as
many do after their Parents decease) nor yet that others may wrong them, and
deprive them of them against their wills? Here Is the way to this also, viz. By
a Charitable employment of that wealth which God has given you; ye cannot
better provide for your own Children, then by an helping, and relieving of
others; these Widows, and Orphans, and Fatherless which are here before you,
and such as they; to whom you are Fathers, as well in a Politic sense, as ye
are to the other in a Natural; and when ye dye, ye should make account, that
there is a Child's Portion which belongs to them also: It is that, which by
doing, ye might very much lay ground for the safety of all the rest ye leave
behind you.

Thus ye see how by being as it were fools in the judgment and practice of the
world, in this particular, ye shall become even wise to the world, and do that
which will even promote you in worldly respects.

But that is not all, 2. Wise for our Souls.
nor the chief which is to be considered by you; ye shall by this means be also
wise for your souls, and a better life; which is the best wisdom of all.
Provide Animae tuae bona in operibus bonis; as he said. Ye provide good for
your souls in good works, which are the better for them; not as they lie in
opere operato, the works barely performed; but in the works together, with the
Affections and Principles from whence they come. To do these things, and to do
them out of conscience, out of respect to God, who does command them; and love
to your Brethren, who do partake of the benefit of them when they are done;
thus they have a blessed and everlasting Reward which does follow upon them.
This is to lay up Treasure in Heaven, where neither Moth nor Canker does
corrupt, nor Thieves break through and steal. Luke 16.9.
This is to make us friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that so when we
fail, (that is, dye) they may receive us into everlasting Habitations. This is
to lay up in store to our selves a good Foundation against the time to come, 1 Timothy 6.19.
laying hold on Eternal life. So that if we think it is not enough for us, that
in doing thus, we shall be wise to the world; yet at least this may satisfy
us, that by this means we shall be wise to God. And so ye have also the second
part of this Text in the Occasional Application of it, viz: The Counsel or
Exhortation.

Ye may subjoyn, III. Of the word of Inforcement.
in the Third and last place, the word of Inforcement: For the wisdom of this
world is foolishness with God. This is that which does quite dash, and break
in pieces all pretenses and conceits of this nature whatsoever, which any
people do frame to themselves, as impediments of them in these duties; that
their wisdom in this respect is but folly, and that with God himself. We read
in the Gospel, that when that good Husband (as he took himself to be) had
pulled down his Houses, and enlarged his Barnes, and laid up his goods for many
years, and that only for himself (Soul, thou have goods laid up for THEE) and
hereupon counted himself to be a very wise man; that the Lord thought Otherwise
of him, and past another sentence upon him; but GOD said unto him, Thou fool,
etc. thereby showing the opposition and contrariety of His judgment to his.
And the same is that which he is ready to do also to any others of the same
temper with him.

To draw toward a Conclusion, The sum of All.
Let all which has been hitherto spoken to this purpose of these Duties and
works of Charity, thus far prevail with your selves, as to persuade you to the
conscionable observiation and practice of them, as your own hearts do any thing
tell you, that God has furnished you, and enabled you for them. And let this
(amongst the rest) be a special Argument to you for it; that it is the Business
which ye are now met about for. Make not a Sermon a Complement, a matter of
mere pomp, and course, and formality, but let it have its due efficacy with it,
and let not the Ordinance of God go away without its errand, whereunto it is
intended. Oh, what an happy thing were it, if every Sermon which is Preached
here upon this occasion, might have the same success with it as that A Sermon
of Charity preached to K. Edward the Sixth by Bp. Ridley Martyr, the first
occasion of building these Hospitals.
Sermon which first gave the occasion!

I hope it will so in part, yea, I doubt not of it. There are many occasions
and opportunities which are offered to you, and never more then in these sad
time wherein we live. If ever ye had occasions given you for the exercise of
true Charity, now ye have them. Many poor Families quite undone, which would be
supported. Many young Beginners in Trade, which would be stocked Many people
which want employment, that would be set on work. Many Aged, and past
employment, which would be relieved. Many sick, and wounded, which would be
healed. Sad, and disconsolate, which would be comforted. Distempered, and out
of their wits, (poor creatures!) which would be restored. Restrained, and
imprisoned for debt, which would be enlarged. Orphans, and friendless Children,
which would be Educated and brought up. Give me leave to add one more, and not
the least considerable, Scholars at the Universities, which would be
maintained, and encouraged in Learning. For by the way, let me tell you this,
That Learning will be Learning, and must be, if England be England; it is but a
Folly for any to think otherwise. The time may come, when you will stand in
need of Scholars, and would be glad to have them for your money; and if ye be
not careful to cherish them and maintain them, where will ye have them? If ye
set not young Plants, where will ye have grown Trees? These are not like Jonahs
gourd, to come up in a night (nor I hope will not be like his gourd neither, to
go down in one) There is somewhat more belongs to it then so, and so you will
find it. There are no extemporary Scholars, what ever there be of any thing
else. As it is a matter of Industry on their part, so it is a matter of
Forecast on yours. It will therefore be a great piece of your Wisdom here, by
your care and bounty herein to provide for Posterity, and to prevent that
Barbarism, and Brutishness, and Savageness, and Incivility in this particular,
which in some men's thoughts, and apprehensions, and expectations (I say not
desires) is coming upon us.

Thus you see (Well Beloved in the Lord) how I have labored with you all
along, to draw you off to these Works of Charity, and Beneficence in every
kind: but that is not all which I have to say to you; Qui monet ut facias, quod
jam facis, etc. I am further to add hereunto (both to Gods Glory and your
Renown) what you have happily and worthily done already, for which the loins
of many Christians daily bless you; The great Good which is continually done by
your several Companies, and Societies, and Corporations, with so much
Faithfulness, and Integrity, and Sincerity as indeed it is, would speak for you
there, where I my self should hold my peace. Yet I cannot but speak it, and
make mention of it both for encouragement and imitation.

And that I may not altogether speak without book, but may have some Ground for
which I speak, take a real account of it out of this Paper which is put into my
hands to present unto you.

Here follows the great Cost and Charges of the City toward the five
Hospitals this year last past, etc.

AND now I have no more to say, The Concusion.
but only Euge, and Macte: Well done, and proceed still in doing. You that have
done well already, be persuaded to go on and continue: You which have not, now
at length to begin; it is never too late: You see here what a fair Copy you have
set before; your next work will be to follow it, and to write after it. Vade
TU, and fac similiter. It is that (which to say no more) God looks for from
you, who will not only call us to an account for good Precepts, but likewise for
good Examples; not only for the Counsels which have been given us, how far we
have been wrought upon by them; but also for the Patterns we have had in our
view, how far we have conformed unto them, as having from them greater
advantage of being better, administered to us, if we had but improved it.

This (as I said) is a main end of such Assemblies and Performances as these in
which we now are, which is not only to tell a fair story of what has been done
heretofore in former Ages (in diebus illis) through the Goodness and Bounty of
our Forefathers and Predecessors, but to signify likewise what is to be done
in Succeeding, by our selves after their examples, that so we may be heirs,
not only to their Estates, but to their Graces, and to the Comforts and
Benefits which by Gods blessing do attend thereupon in a Conformity and
Correspondency thereunto.

Take one Argument more (for a close) among many other; The Ho^^^, and
Dignity, and Reputation of this Famous City (which you are entrusted withal,
as well as with the safety of it:) This City which has been one of the great
Wonders and Gloryes of the Christian world for many Ages and Generations
together, (and I hope it will be all our cares in our several places that it
may be so still) for the entertainment of the Gospel, for the encouragement of
the Ministry, for the Grave and Comely and Well-ordered Government in it. And
amongst the rest, for this part of the State and Magnificence of it, in its
Liberal and Bountiful Provision for the Relief of the Poor: That so as Piety,
and Justice, and Charity may abound in it on one Hand, so also Peace, and
Plenty and Prosperity may answer it on the other.

This, for mine own part, I have very great Cause to wish and pray for, as out
of the respects of common Interest, so likewise of special and peculiar; not
only as to the Place of mine own Birth and Education, but also of the Exercise
of my Ministry and Theological Profession, which I do here now with a great
deal of GRATEFULNESS AND THANKFULNESS ACKNOWLEDGE.

It is time for me to have done, and so I shall; and the Conclusion which I
will make, shall be that of the Prophet David's concerning his Jerusalem, Psa. 1
22.3. etc.
which I will apply in like manner to Ours. Let LONDON be a City compact, which
is at Unity with it self; whither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord to
give thanks unto the Name of the Lord Pray ye for the Peace of LONDON; let them
prosper that love thee! Peace be within thy walls and Prosperity within thy
Palaces! For my Brethren and Companions sakes, I will now say, Peace be within
thee; yea, because of the House of the Lord our God, I will always wish thy
Good.

FINIS.
Page 13. lin. 4. for Spiritual r. special. p. 20. l. 7. r. rather then any. p.
52. l. 6. for too r. two. p. 56. l. 5. r. shall say.


