THE PEASANTS PRICE OF SPIRITVALL LIBERTY. Wherein is represented the
Complexion of the Times, and Considerations to Cure it. In three Sermons.

By Nathaniel Homes, D.D.

LONDON, Printed by R. O. and G. D. for Benjamin Allen in Popeshead Alley, 1642.

THE PEASANTS PRICE Of Spiritual LIBERTY.
1 Chronicles. 4. Verse. 21.22.23. I begin so high as the 21. verse, and take in all
three Verses, because they make up one distinct complete Table of the
Genealogy of Shelah, the third Son of Judah, Genesis 38. And in some Greek
copies the 4. chap. begins at verse. 21.
21. The Sons of Shelah, the son of Judah, were Er, the Father of Lecah, and
Laadah the Father of Maresha, and the families of the house of them that
wrought fine linen, of the house of Ashbea.

22. And Iokim, and the men of Chozebah, and loash, and Saraph, who had
dominion in Moab, and Iashubi-Lehem. And these are ancient things.

23. These were the Potters, and those that dwelt among Plants and Hedges.
There they dwelt with the King for his work.


THese Books of Chronicles, are in the Hebrew calle^ (...) Books of days, i.
e. of times, because they more exactly set down the times of the reigns of
the Kings of Israel and Judah, Answe^able to the sen^e of the Hebr we call them
Chronicles.
and of the tributaries and captivities of the State. The Greek (the Sept.)
call them B (...), i. e. Books of things omitted. For Chron. goes as low in
repetition as as 1 Samuel 27. compare 1 Chronicles. 12.
Because what the Holy Ghost of purpose passed over in the Books of Samuel and
Kings, it reserved and posted over as more proper and pertinent to the Books of
Chronicles Of which Books of Chronicles, that long since perished, these Books
of Chroni^les out of which I take this Text are a divine, authentic epitome.
Pellic. A^sted.
And among the things omitted in Samuel and Kings, these Genealogies are here
inserted, as the foundation of all complete history.

The order of these Genealogies runs up to the head, begins at the beginning
both of the world and the Word, viz. Adam, 1 Chronicles. Chap. 1. And by that time
it comes to this Chapter, it is come to the posterity of Juda, one of the
twelve Patriarchs, borne of Jacob; and by the 21. verse of this Chapter, it is
run down as low as the third son of Judah: namely, Shelah.

And the sons of Shelah, the son of Judah, were Er, the Father of, etc.

To tell you what is in my Text, before I open it, were to bid you look into a
box of Jewels, whiles I hold down the cover.

Give me leave for the opening of it, to go my own way (as God dispenses to
his Ministers several gifts, all for edification) that I may satisfy my self
and you:

Grammatically, these things necessarily are to be observed.

1. That there should be a fuller stop, or point in our English at Maresha,
then the Comma ['] For it is in the Hebrew [^] Athnach, which answers to our
English [:] Colon, which pointing (if observed in our English) would more
explain the true reading, thus: That as Shelah was the son of Judah; so the
sons of Shelah were first Er, the father of Lecah: secondly, Laadah the
father of Maresha. And thirdly, the family of the house of Ashbea, that wrought
fine linen; and not that Laadah was the father of Maresha, and of those of the
house of Ashbea too; as at first sight, by the English pointing, or stop, it
may seem.

2. Thing observable in the Grammar of the Text is; So in the Heb. They were
the Families of the house of the work of Linen Cloth, (...) byssini operis.
that the families of the house of Ashbea are said to work or to have wrought
fine linen, i. e. made linen cloth. They were Cloth-workers or makers of
linen cloth, not workers in linen cloth; as may be said of Seamsters or
Embroderers. Thirdly, the men of Chozeba may be rendered: The men of a Ly So
Pelican. So old Lat. Viri mendacii. 1
or of lying, or deceit, or deceiving. And this is expressed in a Chaldean
dialect: For (...) signifies a ly, deceit, etc.
and although here it be admitted, that Chozeba be a proper name; yet
questionless some ly in words, Note that herein the text sounds of Babylon.
For (...) is ^haldaised in being written (...)
or in works; some telling, or (as Rev. 22.15.) making a ly became ominous,
and at first gave the name of the place. For places of themselves are not
named; and after that, here the place gives name to the men that dwelt-there.

There is yet one thing more to be considered in the Grammar of the words, viz.
Whether we are to understand in the Text, Hedges, or Walls; and consequently,
whether Hedgers or Maisons: For their dwelling, viz. among plants, etc. notes
their occupation, as we shall touch more in the laying open of the parts of
the Text. The question is occasioned, because (...) signifies a fence, whether
of an Hedge or a Wall; especially a wall of mere stone without mortar.

Our resolution is, that no doubt, Hedgers must be employed in the Text, because
they had fences about their plants; and it is not likely they were all of stone
walls; yea, to make quick-set hedges, is a part of planting, and very probably
here supposed, else how should the King have so much employment for so many,
for so many years? But for the particular word (...) in express terms, it is
more like that this Gederah is to be rendered wall, and so signifies the men
were Maisons. Thus Rabbi Solomon Iarchi On the text on the word ^edaran, a
fence; or as was he erendred, hedges. (...) i. e. Fence they were Architects,
or Masons, or makers of Wall, namely of Stone wall, for the business of the
King.
absolutely affirms, a man in a point of this nature to be regarded, it being
touching the acceptio^ of a word of their own natural language, i. e the
Hebrew.

2. The Holy Ghost necessitateth me to touch upon the Rhetoric of the Text;
or else I cannot make you understand the Text: as after the shuts of a window
of an house are taken down, things in the house are discerned, by their
colors. The maine thing in this way to be noted, is a Rhetorical prolepsis,
pre-occupation or anticipation; whereby the Holy Ghost speaks of that now,
which long after was done in order of time. For the Jews here genealogized
were not in captivity, till the last Chapter of the 2. of Chron. yet here is
mention of certain that carried in Babylon, after they had freedom granted to
return, namely, these Potters, etc. This way of setting down things we call
anticipation, or prevention. That these generations now set down before the
stories of King David (who was fourteen generations before the captivity) are
noted to stay in the place of that Babylonish captivity, Math 1.17.
after the seventy years captivity were ended.

And this anticipation is manifest, 1. By considering who is deemed to be the
Penman of this Book of Chronicles, viz. Ezra, So Vatablus Pellicanus, Innius.
in Tit. prior^^ libr. Chronicorum. And so the Hebrews themselves. who do
therefore put the Books of Chron. after the Book of Ezra. They collect that Ezra
penned the Ch^on. By that in the end of the said Book. For both but one Book in
the Heb.
viz. Ezra, who was a principal man of them that returned out of captivity. 2.
By considering, that although the ten Tribes of Israel are here reckoned as
they were lest recorded in the greater Chronicles before the captivity: (For
they never returned to bring a copy with them) yet Judah is reckoned after the
Records brought out of captivity, as the Sea before p. 3. marg. And see after p
7. in marg.
Chaldean dialect witnesses. And so Ezra in the compiling of these epitomized
Chronicles, does recite some passages of them in Babylon, For this senerall
re^koning of their ge^ealogies let the learned remember the Hebr. Accents, 1 Chronicles. chap. 9. v. 1. comparing Nehem. 7.6 Ezra 2.1. whereupon Innius ^e^ds
thus. Et om^e^ guidem Israeli^ae ve^^nsits sunt, uteree s^ript: sunt in
lib^oregum Israeli^. I chud^^ vero ut cum deportati sunt in Babilomam propter
praevari cat^^nem.
as he goes: and this anticipation is common in all Histories, both Divine and
Humane, to the end that things may be dispatched at once as they go, and
prevent needless repetition.

Lastly, for the Theological consideration of the Text, to find out the
Divinity that lies in it; the golden Key to open it, is, 2 Chronicles. 36. verse.
ult. Thus says Cyrus, King of Persia; All the kingdoms of the earth has the
Lord God of Heaven given me, and he has charged me to build him an house in
Jerusalem, which is in Judah, who is there among you of all his people? the
Lord his God be with him, and let him go up.

The wards filed in this golden Key, that nothing may let or hinder the
unlocking of their liberty, are described, Ezra 6.8.9, etc. Moreover (says the
King of Babylon) I make a decree, what ye shall do to the Elders of the
Jews, for the building of this house of God; that of the Kings goods even of
the tribute beyond the river, forthwith expenses be given unto these men, that
they be not hindered; and that which they have need of, both young Bullocks and
Rams, and Lambs for the burnt offerings of the God of Heaven, Wheat, Salt,
Wine, and Oil, according to the appointment of the Priests which are at
Jerusalem, let it be given them, day by day, without fail. That they may offer
sacrifices of sweet savor unto the God of heaven, and pray for the life of the
King, and of his sons. Also I have made a decree, that whosoever shall alter
this word, let timber be pulled down from his house, and being set up, let him
be hanged thereupon, and let his house be made a dung hill for this. And the
God that has caused his name to dwell there, destroy all Kings and people that
shall put to their hand, to alter and destroy this house of God, which is at
Jerusalem. I Darius have made a decree, let it be done. Notwithstanding this
Key, and these wards, yet the bolt on these men's hearts in the Text, their
sordid obstinate spirit will not turn, they will not return, but as if it
were hereditary to them to live among Heathens, they will tarry in Babylon. I
say sordid and hereditary; because the more honored of their stock were only
such as had (...) They ruled in Moab, prorage. to Iun. Therefore the Septuagint
read it only (...).
some under-rule, and inferior authority committed to them, made Deputies. And
that authority they had, was in Heathenish Moab, and it is not altogether
improbable, that they might at their first coming into Judea be (by the
mothers side at least) Moabites; having their first descent and original from
Ruth 1. v. 1. compare v. 6.
Ruth the Moabitish, Ruth Chap. 1. For Jashubi. Lehem The Heb^^l^ (...) which
words with a small (...) ^a lectiene (putting (...) for (...)) common in Heb
Bib. may be rendered (...) And the Heb By. magn. with the Major. writ, with (o)
over it, as a note of a defective writing, that (...) was put for (...) And
Rab. Shol. Iarch. puts (...) in the middle, as of the root, (...) REVERTERE.
(...) by a Chaldean tang, or dialect of short speaking, for (...) As in the
Gospel, according to the Syria k which is in a manner Chalde) Lazar for Eleazar
Luk 16. Or the name Lechem, barely without the addition of Beth, i. e. the
house of Lechem. For this reading, See Pellic. and Bib. Graec. Complut. which
render thus, (...). So old Lat Some read them, Habitatores Lechem. Pagn. As if
Iashub: were of (...). Arias. So that learned pious Italian protestant
Commentator Bruccioli Et gli. Habitatori di lehem.
with very little change, even of one letter, and with no violence to the Text
may be rendered, They that returned from Moab to Lehem. i. e. Bethlehem. And so
long had these contemners of liberty settled in Babylon, that all their former
condition, more or less, better or worse, either by their linsey woolsey
habitation in Moab, or by their linen web in the house of Ashbea, is worn
out, through the antiquity of their last and worst condition. These are (says
the Text) ancient things. Their linen cloth weaving or working is now become
to be in the memory of man as old rotten rags. Their Moabitish honor is
become obsolet. So many, many years since, have they made mortar, twirled the
Potters wheel As the men of China. The next generation only living to see the
pots made by the former.
; sown Cucumbers, hedged and ditched: so that now all former civil
indifferent condition is drowned and buried in dirt, and dunghilgardens; and
that for the Kings work there, i. e. The King of Babylon, Iun. in verse. 22. in
verse. 23. in Tabul 4. Dyke in a Sermon on 1 Ioh. 5.21. The 72. Greek
Translators also thus understood the Text in all probability. And they were
learned Jews. For thus they translate. The^e they abode, (...). i. e. They not
lonely abode there, but were comforted there, or established there in their
work, which had been no wonder of Judea, but spoken as a remarkable passage,
must be meant of Babylon.
an Heathen King, that heathen King that had captivated them, and he that had
done it once before to the ten Tribes, That Heathen King of Babylon they serve
in'very mean employments. To aver this interpretation, beside that which has
been already touched, that Ezra (one of the returned captives from Babylon) is
the Penman: That the Text has in it touches of the Chaldean Dialect, where
they were captivated; and that the Genealogies are reckoned up in relation to
their captivity: I say, beside those things, much more (if meet for a Sermon)
might be said. But to say in a word what we shall say.

1. This abode there with the King for his work cannot be meant of Moab: for
to say that they had dominion in Moab, and yet they were Potters in Moab, were
an unlikely thing, if not a contradiction. The period of their Moabitish
condition was Jashubi-Lechem; they returned to Lechem, not to Babylon; but many
years after, yea, many generations after, they were carried (not went of
themselves, much less returned) unto Babylon.

2. This abode there with the King for his work, cannot be meant of Judea,
with King David, as the Geneva notes express. For then the Holy Ghost would
not have closed at Jashubi-Lechem, that those aforesaid things only were
ancient things: but would have first taken in this note of their Potter-trade,
etc. and then have concluded; these are ancient things. For King David's time,
in comparison of their return from captivity was ancient, viz. threescore and
ten years above fourteen generations and upwards: so that any man may easily
perceive that the Holy Ghost puts a clear Antithesis, or flat opposition of
distinction between these two. First, the sons of Selah wrought fine linen,
and had some rule in Moab, and after returned to Lechem. And these are ancient
things. But their being Potters, etc. these in comparison of those, are modern
and late, especially their continuing in that condition to this day.

Therefore these words, There they abode with the King for his work, must be
meant of the King of Babylon, in Babylon. To which purpose, contemn not the
observation of the Tense or Time the Holy Ghost uses in expressing their
habitation or dwelling. viz First, the Present Tense, or Time Hebr. (...).
Benoni Page Habitantes. So the Septuagint, and without a conjunction (...). So
Iun. and without an and Istisunt figuli illi, desidentes ad etc. So old Lat. Hi
sunt figuli habitantes. So Vatabl. Isti sunt figuli illi habitantes.
. There they do dwell: as if he should say, there they do now dwell to this
day. And then after the past time; there they have dwelt. i. e. A long time
they have dwelt, where they now dwell. And surely it had been a strange thing
for an Historian to tell us of that which was necessarily to be supposed. That
anciently in King David's time these dwelt there, i. e. in Judea with King David
for his work: why, where should they dwell else, whiles in his work? Nor can
it be likely, but that men of other tribes might be King David's Potters (if
David had any) and would have been as soon mentioned, as those of the same
royal Tribe, of which King David himself was; if the story of David's time had
been here intended (mentioned no where else.) Lastly, Josephus in his
Antiquities affirms, that some, Lib. Antiq. 11. cap. 1. Edit. Aug^.
when this liberty of returning out of Babylon was offered, refused to return.

Thus you see I build upon Reason, not upon bare Authority of learned men's
judgments (which is not my way) Not that I am alone in this sense of my Text.
I have before noted, that the Septuagint. Iunius, and Mr. I. Dyke so take this
Text, and so do diverse others; and that not only in their translations in the
languages of the Schools, but also in the languages of Nations. Dase. bet.
Nemlech in Babylonien.
Piscator in his High Dutch Bible translates it, v. 22. emphatically there; and
then in his Notes says, Namely in Babylon: So Di mora^o^^ quivi apresso de^re
per far^^l lavero di esso. Secondo alcum in Babilonia done eferci^avano queste
a^t^, seaz^ curarsi di ^^^nare al lore parss.
Deodat in his Italian Bible, there they abode, etc. That is, (says he)
according to some, They abode in Babylon, where they exercised those trades
without any care to return to their own Country.

And thus all Shelah his posterity was metamorphosed into dirt; from the Loome
they sell into the Lome; from their Moabitish honor, they fall into Babylonish
mire.

In the words thus opened, Observe 1. The Matter. Observe 2. The Form.


The Matter is the men mentioned.

The Form is the phrase and scope of the Pen mentioning.

The Matter contains, 1. The generation. 2. The degeneration.
Of the sons of Shelah, the son of Judah.

1. The Generation, or, first or better Condition of them all, or any of them
at the best, are notable, but Either for their Practice, Or their Place.

1. Practice.

First are named Cloth-workers, or Weavers of Linen.

Secondly Deputies, Deputy Governors, or Judges, or some such inferior
Magistrates in Moab; but still note the phrase, in Moab.

2. Place; as their practice does not lift them very high, so their place does
not help much after. They are (as the Proverb is) but ill holp up: for they
(especially some of them) are said to be men of Chozeba, i. e. men of The ly,
probably appliable to all; sure enough men of mechanic Art, Handicrafts-men,
have in their callings many temptations to Ly. And lying and poverty are
oft-times companions, Prove. 30. And lying is a principal piece of a carnal
Politician; his Maxim being that:

Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit vivere.

He that cannot lie, cannot live.

Or, if we take the place as a proper name, not as a common term, yet still
the place is rather a meannesse than a mainnesse of commendation; so that if
we do not call them the men of the Ly, Le, Ley or ^eigh. But. signifies a
place, or. Pasture, Camd. Remai.
but men of the Le (a name of many places in England) yet so mean a place was
this Le, or Chozeba, that it is never more mentioned in the Scripture that I
can find.

2. Degeneration, They in succceding ages much degenerate from that their
ancestors were; of which you heard but just now; and fall down to a very mean
condition, from cloth to the clay, from ruling to reeling, or turning the
Potters wheel.

Distinctly their degenerating is set forth: 1. By their practice. 2. By their
place. 3. By their project. 4. By the prorogation of all:


Practice or Calling.

For the places of them habitation intimates their employment. So Rab. S Iarch.
(...) (I need not come o^ translate any further, you having heard of their
walling before. p. 4. marg.) i. e. These were potters or fashioners of some or
clay for the business of the King. And also belonging to the sordid or
drudgery employment of the King, and the Princes. Those dwellers among plants,
were those that were employed in the plantations of the King.
1. Dirty Potters. 2. Dunghill Planters. 3. Dusty Wallers.
I set them forth thus; not but that the callings are to be respected; but
their preferring these before liberty, is to be disgraced according to the
intent of the Holy Ghost.

2. Place.

With the King of Babylon. Yea, in Babylon; Yea, Laboring there; Yea, most
sordid works there, in the mire.
Merchandising may transport a man beyond the Sea, yet not always to Heathen
Kingdoms; if to a heathen Kingdom, not to the work, or to any relation to,
or dependence on a King, opposite to true Religion; if so, yet not in
businesses of the most sordid nature. But these descend to the lowest step of
baseness of spirit; and that with all aggravations, choosing and preferring
rather to be the King of Babylons dirty day-laborers, then to enjoy their
civil liberty of body and state; and their spiritual liberty of ordinances of
soul: Neither longing after their native soil, nor listening after their
spiritual Temple; nor hoaning after their kindred and nation in the flesh, nor
harkning after the Priests and Prophets endued with the spirit. In a word; nor
the good of Iudeah, nor the bad of Babylon can make them desire a change of
condition, though to the better.

3. Project.

All these mean employments in this mean place, are by them projected and
chosen;

Voluntarily, Sordidly.
1. Voluntarily; this is strongly touched in the word dwell: for, though for
seventy years they were carried away captive: so 2 Chronicles. 36. and seventy
years captivity were to be fulfilled (as Ierem. and Dan. prophesied) yet now
they are inhabitants, and there they dwell. For both these n^ed of these
potters etc. (...) and also (...)
They took houses, leases, or purchased: they might, and should (but would
not) go up; they accepted not of liberty.

2. Sordidly, The best of the project could be but for work; and a mean work
too, neither handsome nor wholesome. To tread clay, dwell in poor Cottages;
see what ropes of sand, what cords of grass draw carnal men from salvation,
both of body and soul. Was there no work in Iudeah to be had, that might
entice them thither?

4. The Prorogation, the time they had thus degenerated; had used these poor
plots and means for a maintenance, set forth in three degrees.

1. Dwelling, which is more then sojourning. 2. Dwelt with the King; therefore
more then seventy years there: for seventy years they had been captivated
there. 3. These are ancient things: they so long had degenerated, and used
these mean employments, that all things preceding these employments are very
ancient and obsolet, so as not to be mentioned scarcely.
So that this custom of their sordid employment prescribed against imitation
of any better things imitable in their ancestors.

Thus of the Matter of the Text.

Next of the Form or Manner, used by the Penman. Ezra, out of all doubt (with
all modesty to dive into the scope) sets down these things, at least some of
them by way, of disgracing the men here mentioned.

1. Because speaking the best of them, he puts it off; But those are ancient
things: as if not to be looked at in their behalf that had so imbased
themselves: As a natural man in his natural Dialect or Phrase of speech would
say: Etgenus, and proavos, and quae nonfecimus ipsi,
Vix ea nostro voco --


2. Because Ezra tells every circumstance of their baseness of spirit, without
any mitigation, or helping the matter afterward, viz.

In what place of the land?

Among Plants and Hedges.

And what was the cause?

Even for work, for no better, or greater preferment.

Lay all these together, and they will compose this one point.

The Lord records with disgrace, and discards as graceless men of such
unworthy spirits, who prescribe antiquity to prefer a sordid condition before
a God-given liberty.

The illation or deduction of this point is evident: For it contains, or is
made up of all the limbs, joints and parts of the Text. So that take the
Doctrine asunder, and presently it is resolved into all the parts.

In the explication of the point, let us go according to the order of the
nature of things in the Doctrine. And so to resolve every Quaere.

1. Q. What is a God-given liberty?

Res. I call it so, because it proceeds from Gods gift by proclamation, and
contains two liberties: first, Personal; of body, state and condition:
secondly, Spiritual, of soul and worship. See Ezra, Chap 1, v, 1, 2, 3.
the King proclaims not only liberty for them to go up from Babylon, but also
to build Gods house at Jerusalem.

All these put together, are a right platform of Christians purchased liberty,
viz. The partition wall is down; all are subjects to Christ's Kingdom; all
brethren; no longer slaves, so much as civilly. And Ecclesiastically; all
needless Ceremonies Some derive the word Ceremony, a Ce^tibis ^s a people of
Hetrutia that carefully observed the Heathenish Superstitions of the vestall
Nuns belonging to Vesta, when Heathen Rome was taken of the Galli. To whom I
thus far assent, that Abundance of the Ceremonies now in use in Christendom,
are Heathenish in their form, and also in their original; as may be seen at
full in Papatus seu Depravate religionis origin et incremento, per Thom.
Mor^sinum. Others derive Ceremon^ea Carends, To which Etymon I must needs
assent: For even the Jewish Ceremonies intimated a want or absence of the
Antitype, as not yet come in the flesh: But I think not unfitly are they
derived of (...) time, or occasion, and (...) to abide. Because they were to
endure, the best of them at most but for a time.
superstitions and humane inventions are put dawne. And so Christians are no
longer subject to those rudiments of the world, of which Saint Paul speaks,
Colos. 2. longer to live in subjection to such ordinances as these, Tou^h not,
taste not, handle not; after the commandments and doctrines of men, which
things have a show of humility in will worship and neglect of the body. For
(says he) ye a e com^leat in him, i. e in Christ, both for salvation Co^^
penul^.
, as also for matter and form of worship, doctrine and discipline Heb. 3.6 7.
; and therefore in all to hear his voice Heb. 5. v. 2.
lastly, spiritually sin is put down, Romans 6 2.14.

2. Q What is that sordid condition which some prefer in opposition to a
God-given liberty?

R. These in the Text prefer first sordidnesse in civil things; if they
could, as yet to this day weave, or spin linen, it seems by all circumstances
they would rather do it for the King of Babylon, then for the Temple; If they
had yet left in them any spirit of government or rule; they would sooner
exercise it in a Moab an Heathen Kingdom then in Iudeah. It is an honor to a
civil Art, if it works for some great personage, King or Prince, or for some
great project, Exodus 31. v. 1. to v. 7.
some state design. But these men are far from this; yea, far more sordid
in civil things then this; They embrace the dirt-daubing condition of Potters,
etc. they subject themselves to Heathen Laws and Commands, and are among
Heathen company.

Secondly, Sordidnesse in spiritual things; to see so much idolarty,
Heathenish impiety, etc. The true worship of the true God for the general not
here, no sign of a Church there: for these in the Text seem to be all for the
King of Babylons work, and they dwelt among Plants, etc.

All these put together, are again a Platform of imbased spirits in all ages;
that regard not what become of Laws, Religion, Liberties etc. They are
contented to grind at the mill with Sampson, having their eyes put out (they
must not see who hurt them) so as they may but live, and have for back and
belly; if they may have their oves and boves, their flocks and herds, its no
matter to them, if the Church and State be made Asses, to to bear intolerable
burdens; or as it is said in Job: The Oxen were plowing, The Papists make this
moral. The Oxen signify the Clergy, the Asses the Laity. But by the
idleness of their Clergy, the Oxen should not fitly signify them
and the Asses stood feeding by; so the worthyest in Church and State are
toyled, and the dull worthless Asses oftentimes pampered and promoted; but
with men of this spirit we speak of, it is nothing, if the Oxen, the most
profitablest pillars of the Church and Commonwealth be yoaked and drawn hard,
and gaulled: Such Asses care not how Ecclesiastical and Civil liberties be
yoaked and hampered, so they may stand still and feed. (...).


3. Q. How do such imbased spirits prescribe and plead antiquity for their
evil way, so to love a mean condition, Tit 1.12. and Col. 2.
and neglect their liberty?

R. So as they do here; having time out of mind been Potters in Babylon (for
so they had been above the age of a man:) a better condition of making linen,
or returning to Lechem, i.e. Bethlechem is too far out of mind to be regarded
by them. It would, as it were, seem an Innovation to change from what they had
been. A just pattern of later times. Men have been (a many of them) so long
in love with Pope and Popery and foppery; with Popishnesse and apishnesse,
that to turn to a spiritual substantial divinely warranted worship, were in
their opinion an Innovation. And therefore Popish spirits for all their musty,
Gibeonitish dissembled old stuff, either of any unwarrantable sorts of
Prelatie, or of an unmeet unworthy Ministry, or Popish ceremony, or practice of
impiety; still, still they cry up antiquity. Plead custom or prescription;
thus it has been, say they, and thus long it has been thus, in the Church.
And therefore never to be altered; though it would very easily be replied: have
such rags grown old in the Church? Quo jure, what equity was there for it? The
longer they have been suffered in the Church, the ancienter is the sin. If they
have been so old; in all likelihood they are grown rotten and nasty in the
judgment of men, ( emunctae naris, of acute judgment.) And if rotten and
nasty, for shame why are they not cast out? If a yard of cloth make an infant a
sufficient coat; we must not think that when diverse years are run over, the
same scantling will serve. As Commonwealths, so Churches have their infancy,
youth and manhood: and so still they must be clothed and dressed up with a
more perfect and spiritual Discipline. The Apostle himself alludes to this,
Gal. 4.1. The heir as long as he is a child, is under Tutors and Governors.
The Jewish Church was a child.

4. Q. How does God record such unworthy spirits as we speak of with disgrace?

R. By writing, in holy writ, of such men, and their manners, and reckoning
them up together, and casting the words into the eyes, ears and mouths of
men, never to be forgotten, as long as men upon earth have senses. Just as the
Lord dealt with King Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. etc. And (says the Text) In the
time of this distress (that is, that the Edomites and Philistims oppressed
Judah, and the King of Assyria, being hired to help, helped not, but distressed
him) did he, that is, Ahaz, trespass yet more against the Lord. This is that
King Ahaz: For he sacrificed to the Gods of Damascus which smote him; and he
said, because the Gods of the Kings of Syria help them, therefore will I
sacrifice to them, that they may help me. Not for honor, as Demosthen. Quam
pulchrum est digite monstrati dioter hic est.
See what a pointed-at-man he is here made for disgrace. This is that King
Ahaz, and to the worlds end will it be read of him: So Jeroboam by his
Idolatry, gat him in sacred story of Kings and Chronicles an addition of title
of disgrace. Jeroboam the son of Nebat that made Israel to sin. Yea,
sometimes it is of divine providence in a special manner, that humane stories
pen the ill lives of evil men. This is clear, when as the Holy Ghost has by
way of approbation repeated such stories; as the Talmuds mentioning of Jannes
and Jambres their withstanding Moses; 2 Timothy 3.8.
and diverse of the Poets expressions: 1 Tit. 12. p. 28. marg.
as that of the Poet touching the Cretians, of which before.

5th. and last Q. How does God discard and leave them graceless?

Resol. God leaves them to themselves, that they shall be without the presence
or power of the ordinances that should work grace in them: as these at the
general hurry of Judah's return from Babylon (for that could not be sine
strepitu, sine alique pulvere, but some notice must be taken of it) being not
awakened to go up, fall asleep with more then an Endymion sleep. So there
now (as Christ said to the drowsy Disciples) they may sleep on; there they
may sit till their bones ache, yea, till their hearts ache, without a Temple,
without a Sacrifice, without a Prophet, Ephesians. 2.
without a Priest, and without the Congregation of Israel, and so without the
pledges of Gods well pleased presence among them. So in all ages, people
contented to be without a teaching Minister, when time served, and which others
took, usually are left long time in that perishing condition; if ever they
live to see half the like opportunity. But usually it costeth many a
generation, before that place or people are relieved, especially if a general
opportunity be neglected. These Potters in the Text, are still in Babylon in
their generations, for ought we know, scattered with the ten Tribes, never
likely to be relieved till the general calling of the Jews.

Thus of the explication of the Doctrine; next of the vindication of it. To
clear it from Objections and scruples.

1. Object. God cease now to write, therefore cease now to record men's ill
manners with disgrace.

Sol. 1. Parallel, or like sinners and sins will bring them all under the
same disgrace. How did England, growing cold and formal, like Laodicea, cause
men to call her Laodicea. Brigstman on Apocal. So that John in the Revel. who
suffered banishment under the Tyranny of Rome.
And Rome imitating Babylon in persecution and tyranny to be termed Babylon;
imitating Sodom * in lust and lasciviousness, to be termed Sodom; and
imitating Egypt * in Idolatry and superstition to be termed Egypt. Revel. 11.8
The Adulteries and Lust and the Idolatries and Superstitions of Rome, being so
notorious that Poets have sung of them. Mantuan of her Lusts, Roma est jam
totalupanar. Yea the Heathen Poet Persius, Iuvenal and Horatius so much and in
such gross terms as is not meet to be mentioned: So of Romes Idolatry and
Superstition, Mantuan thus, Eclog. 9. Famaest Aegyptum coluisse animalia qu^dam
et pronuminibus, multas habuisse ferarum. Illa superstitio minor est, quam
nostra ferarum. Hic aras habet omue genus, contraria ceyte, Naturares atque
Deo, qui dieitur olim, Praposuisse hominem cunctis animantibus unum. Yea
Iuvenal the Heathen Poet of Aegypts superstition thus. Sat. 15. Quu neseit
Volusi^ Bit^^nice, qualia demens Aegyptus portenta Colat? Crocodylon adorat
pars bac^^^la pavet saturam se^pentibus Ibim. Illic Ceruleos, hic piscem
fluminu, illic, Oppidatota canons venerantur. -- Porrum et Cape nefa^ violare
et frangere morsu. O sanctas gentes, quibus ha^ nascuntur in hort^ Numin^. --


2. It is Gods Divine providence that orders men's pens still, much more then
Crows and Sparrowes; and therefore Gods providence so provides, that sometimes
mere men write of the vices of men: as Livius, Tacitus, etc. Sometimes open
persecutors and enemies of all goodness, write of their own facts to their
own shame: so the Records in the offices of BB. and Chancellours and Registers
in Queen Mary's days preserved for us a History to fill a Book of Martyrs,
of and concerning their own tyrannical persecutions. Di^^ neguts quam
in^redibil^ Christianorum tun. pudore, tum ettam little qui vere tales sun
cordolio ut Judah filia scortari non liceat. Dei filialiceat. Imo Is^acl^s filia
meretricar^ non aliter ante poss^t quam facta per baptismur. sanctum, Christ's
soror, (...) fi^^a, ^^spen. de co^^^^. l b. 3. c. 4.
The Papists themselves write with detestation, that in Rome a Jewish maid
might not be admitted into the Stews of whoredom, unless she would be first
baptized. That 80. Martyrs were put in an house by the massacrers, and fetched
one by one by the Executioner to a blood pit, over which he cut their throats
as Calves, he putting his bloody knife like a Butcher, in his mouth, whiles
he dragged another to the pit. Book of Martyrs.


2. Object. It seems not to stand with Gods mercy, to cast them off for
graceless; nor with his truth to forsake them, seeing he has sworn he
desires not the death of a sinner.

Sol. We may see in the 65. of Esaias, and the first seven verses, that when the
Lord has first freely and fully revealed himself in his Ordinances, then has
he left sufficient testimony of his mercy, and of his willingness that men
should not perish; 2 Chronicles. 36.16. For them that slight the means of Grace,
there is no remedy.
so that if then men come not in by the ordinances, the Lord is discharged from
all his engagements, and justice is to succeed in the place of mercy, and to
proceed against the contemners of mercy.

Thus also of the vindication: next of the probation of this point, by
testimony of Scripture. First, we find in Scripture a prophecy, that this
unworthy spirit should emasculate some tribes of this Jewish nation. Genesis
49.14, 15.
That Isachar should be a strong Ass couching down between two burdens; It
is in the Hebr. without any tense of is, or shall. But it is meant in the
future tense. See v. 1. of that 49. of Genesis
and seeing that rest was good, and that the land was pleasant, he bowed his
shoulder to bear, and became a servant to tribute; upon this prophecy of
Jacob the father of the twelve Tribes, Moses after descants, Deuteronomy. 33.18.
saying, that Isachar should rejoice in his Tents, as Zabulon in his going
forth, that is, Zabulon should be of an Heroic ventrous spirit for seafairing;
and Isachar should be of a duller domesticke spirit, like a Snaile always
fastened in the shell; or as a Be, sucking the honey in the hive; though both
Tribes should partake of worldly blessings, the one by sea, the other by land.
Dent. 33.1^.
Nor is this meannesse of spirit prophesied only of Isachar: but,

Secondly, it is practiced also by other Tribes; others of them could couch
between two burdens as well as Isachar, Judges 5. ^erse (...). So Iun. Quand^
quidem sumit ultiones per Isiaclem. And to read the words otherwise, As to
avenge Israel, seems to overforce the Hebr. phrase which is (...) In ulcis endo
(...) ultiones (...) which last word to reader In Israel, were to speak as if
the revenge had bin wrought upon Israel: Therefore (...) must be rendered per, by
the means, as ofttimes it is.
Praise ye the Lord for taking vengeance (that is, on the enemies) by the
means of Israel, by the means of those of Israel that offered themselves
willingly: for it seems all came not forth to the battle: Some indeed rode
forth voluntarily and valiantly, v. 9.10. And Zebulon and Napthali jeoparded
their lives to death, verse. 18. But Deborahs song expostulateth which Reuben,
Gilead, Dan, and Ashur, v. 16.17. For there was great wondering, that Reuben,
though divided by Jordan, should be divided in heart, at least in hand, at such
a time of common danger, wherein they might all have lost their spiritual
liberty, for want of a little more help; not to be regained with much help.
Therefore the author of this song expostulates with Reuben, why now, after
Isachar had left off couching between two burdens, and played the men, that
Reuben would turn Isachar, and couch between two burdens? Why abodest thou
(O Reuben) among the sheep folds The Heb. word is the same, as Genesis 49. is
interpreted to signify, Isachars Burdens. viz. (...) And being in the Dual.
Numb. sign. two Burdens. However we sound the word; that is the sense, some
worldly reasons were as poyses upon the will, that they would no^ come out to
help. They were pressed down to sit still, by the love of ease and wealth.
, to hear the bleatings of the flocks? And therefore it is again repeated,
For the divisions of Reuben there were great searchings of heart. He goes on to
the rest; And Gilead abode beyond Jordane (that is, the Inhabitants of the
Country, or County of Gilead) and came not to help in the war, And why did
Dan remain in ships? Ashur continued on the Sea shore, and abode in his
breaches, that is, of the Rocks. The steep naturally fenced clifts, forts, or
holds in Rocks Heb. (...) Super fracturas.
; yea, add to all these cowards, Meroz, v. 23. that is, the Merozites, there
prophetically cursed with repetition, for not coming out to the help of the
Lord.

Thirdly, for proof, let us bring in Israel indefinitely, without distinction
of Tribes, that is, a many of Israel, of all Tribes, The unworthine^se of their
spirit.
showing abundance of baseness of spirit in opposition to their deliverance
from their former captivity in Egypt, even from the first attempt of their
liberty, till they came almost to enter Canaan.

1. When Moses came the first time to a few of them, playing the Praeludium,
making a Preface to his delivering them under God, killing the Egyptian that
set upon the Israelite; the morrow who should first cry out of this, Exodus
2.11.12, 13 14, 15.
but a very Israelite? because Moses did but advise him not to wrong his
Israelitish brother. This noise made Moses fly; and the question about the
Israelites deliverance was laid aside for forty yeeers, hidden in the dark.

2. At the end of forty years, when the Lord by a fiery bush, began to bring
the matter to light again, and put Moses on the design of an open, public
regular way of delivering them. Because upon the motion of Moses to Pharaoh to
let them go. Pharaoh was the worse, and more harsh to Israel, Israel is angry
with Moses. Exodus 5.21. comp. cha, 6 v. 9. Yea and at this time said to Moses,
Let us alone^ that we may serve the Egyptians. Exodus 14.12. See the ^a^g of the
^^bl.


3. When they came to the red sea, there they showed of what spirit they were
toward their liberty. And they said unto Moses, because there were no graves
in Egypt, Have thou taken us away to dye in the Wilderness? Wherefore have
thou dealt thus with us to carry us forth out of Egypt? For it had been better
for us to serve the Egyptian, Exodus 14.11, 1^.
then that we should dye in the Wilderness.

4. When they come to the Wilderness of Sin, they murmr against their
deliverance thus far; yea, the whole Congregation (i. e. for the general)
murmr against Moses and Aaron, saying to them, Exodus 16.1, 2.3.4.
Would to God we had died by the hand of the Lord in the Land of Egypt, when
we sat by the fleshpots, and when we did eat bread to the full: For ye have
brought us forth into this wilderness to kill this whole assembly with hunger.

5. When their deliverance came as far as the wilderness of Riphidim, Exodus
17.1, 2, 3.
there they murmr for water: the people did chide with Moses, and said, Give
us water, that we may drink: And the people thirsted there for water, and the
people murmured against Moses, and said, wherefore is this, that thou have
brought us out of Egypt to kill us, and our children, and our Cattle with
thirst?

6. And lastly, Kades Barnea is a City of the Idumaeans 40 miles from
Jerusalem. Itine ar. I ot. S. Scrip.
(^or we will follow them in their humor no further) when they came to Kadesh
within 40. miles of Jerusalem, or therabouts, from whence the spies were sent;
when some of them returned with tidings of some difficulties, though the other
spoke divine demonstrations of possibility to win the land, the Israelites fall
into one of their old fits, but with more violence. Would we had dyed in Egypt;
Numb. 14.1, 2, 3.4 5, etc. 10 11.
were it not better to return to Egypt? Come, let us make us a Cap^aine, and
return to Egypt; and when Josuah and Caleb endeavored with most gracious
words, and strong consolations to still them; saying, God was departed from the
Canaanites, and the Lord is with us; so that they shall be bread for us: the
Israelites, yea, all the Congregation ( i. e. for the general) bad stone them,
i. e. Josuah and Caleb with stones. Thus by ascending up a pair of stayers of
six steps you have seen the spirit of these men. In whose story also there is
a touch of their secret heart prescribing antiquity: 2. They prescribe
Antiquity.
they sat (...) that is according to the first and proper sign^^. of (...) in
hab^tando nos ^^^les we dwelt by the flesh pots. 3. The sordid condition they
preferred.
by the flesh pots in Egypt, Exodus 16.3. And yet tempted him forty years,
Psalm. 95. In whose words and actions there is also to be seen the sordid
condition they prefer, viz. an Egypt before a Canaan. An Egypt, that must
needs be, besides a most toyl-some laborious place, a loathsome abominable
place to Israel, when Israel knew what an abomination they were to the
Egyptians, Genesis 46.34 Exodus 8.26.
the Egyptians so hating the Israelites sacrifices, and their calling of
Shepherds, that the Israelites were put in Goshen by themselves. An Egypt,
that was full of Idols, they grew in their gardens, crawled on the earth, ^
^43. marg
flew in the air, etc. (as we touched before) and therefore full of Idolatry;
and therefore ought to have been a soul abomination to them. ^ God
reproacheth (...) upon re^ord
And whether God does not reproach upon divine record, this prelation, and
esteem of Egypt, let any man judge that observes the manner or style of the
story, the phrase and language of the relation: For the two opposite, Caleb and
Joshua are commended. Ergo, therefore the murmurers discommended. Their
carriage in this business is called tempting of God; and because it had been
frequent, therefore summed up, and numbered to be ten times; and because they
had iterated their rebellious baseness of will and words, Numb 14 ^2.
therefore the Holy Ghost repeats the sum of all at least three times, in
three several far-distant ages. In Moses time, by Moses; in the time of the
Psalmist, In Ex. Number. etc. before cited. Psalm. 95. Acts 7.
by him; in the time of Stephan, by him; and lastly, observe how God casts them
off as homines perditos, lost men; some to perish in the wilderness, some to
all impiety in Egypt, 2 Kings 23.3^, 32, 33, 34.
and others to be captivated in Egypt, or to Egypt; or tributary to it: and
then you have the full proof of the whole Doctrine, in every part, made up out
of the carriage of the Israelites, in relation to Egypt. We might add (but
that we have been so long in proof already) diverse things out of the New
Testament; Math. 15.
the madness of the Pharisees and Jews upon their dirty ceremonies against
Christ, Mar. 26.61. Acts 7. Acts 21. Acts 19. Acts 14.
Stephan and Paul preaching to them Gospel liberties: The clamours of Demetrius
and the Gentiles in the behalf of Diana, and her silver shrines, and of
Jupiter, and Mercury, and diverse other passages, in Christ and the Apostles
time; Revel. 17.12, 13, 14. and 18.11, 12. etc to v. 20.
and out of the prophesies of the Revelation: But it is high time to pass to
the demonstration of this point.

In sum, we shall give but one maine Reason for demonstration of this point
of Doctr. Therefore does the Lord so deal with refusers of spiritual liberty
with such severity, because in refusing they add iniquity unto iniquity,
incurably. And when God does impose judgments by way of gradation, as to
disgrace, and discard as graceless; then we may easily suppose that man's
sins with ascending aggravations; when the sea bank is made high, it is
because the tide swells high: So that man professing, at least practicing that
unjust way o^ sinning; God pronounces this as his just way of vengeance in
punishing. For God is mightily offended with ascentions and aggravations of
sin, Jer. 2.13.

That we may see the ascent or risings of this sin of the Anti-libertine; of
this opposite of spiritual immunity; note, first how it begins in omission or
remission, carelessnesse to know the glass and glory of this liberty;
secondly, that it is radicated, habituated and settled in the very complexion;
or settled into a very complexion; it becomes his corrupt natural disposition;
thirdly, that it is maintained and continued with a full, if not a professed
resolution; fourthly, by all is made up an Idolatrous ungrateful retaliation.

1. This spiritual vassal will not learn nor understand what the liberty of
the Gospel is: and that's a strange thing, seeing it is a liberty; What was our
maine occasion for which the Jews took away the life of the Lord Jesus, but
their perverse blindness, Math. 27.6^. Ioh. 6.
so much extolled by the moral Philosopher, Math. 15.
if but civil; they will not endure the light of his glorious Doctrine
touching the annulling of Moses and the Temple-ceremonies? If he did but in
sound of words, Math. 23.
glance at those, they indicted the fact as a great crime. What was that which
provoked the Jews to the stopping their ears, and the martyring of Stephan,
Acts 6.
but the Doctrine of the liberty of the Gospel, in opposition to Mosaicall
ceremonies? Acts 7.
What kindled the contention between the ceremoniously imbondaged Jews, and
the enfranchised and freed converts of the Gentiles: but the Jews sticking to
the Doctrine of works and ceremonious performances? ^p^o Rom (...).
on all which (that I may t^uch the very reason of this unteachablenesse) they
were so mad, ^p to Gala^.
not under the notion of bondage, nor did they oppose Gospel liberty under the
conceit of liberty: but man naturally loves a sensible service, and loathes a
spiritual worship, that he may seem to himself to be able of himself to
do somewhat for himself in matters of salvation. This makes the Papists to
turn all their worship into (as the Apostle calls it) a bodily exercise; 1 Timothy 4.8.
as formerly the Colossians into lust not, touch not, handle not; Coloss. 2.
and an afflicting of the body. See the accusation of the Martyrs in the Marian
persecutions: Fox Book of Man
The Papists sacrament of the Supper, is the flesh and blood, and bones of
Christ. The water of Baptism washes away original sin: Their repentance,
whippings and Lent, and flesh fasts and almost all their services are according
to their doctrine, efficacious ex opere operato; their bare doing the duty,
does effectually do the spiritual thing. So the Popish Prelaticall faction
turn all worship and devotion into sensible ceremonious actions and motions.
Now this first step is an high one, even ignorance, especially affected
ignorance; 2 Thessalonians ^.8.
for it is that which stops up the way against the light, and makes men to
wander in every way of sin.

2. Such persons as these that will not understand the excellency of their
liberty, but stand out against it with custom, naturallize themselves into a
liberty-loathing or depising complexion. So that as the great Philosopher said,
(...).
some are servants by nature. Foolish, passive, silly, in regard of governing
others, but in regard of subjection to be governed, they are instrumenta
rationalia, they have reason enough to work according to the direction of
another. So these men by corrupt custom, are fitted to be led by the stream
of times, and the examples of corrupt men, and the rotten principles of blind
guides. There is that power, or rather tyranny of a vain conversation received
by tradition, that nothing but a redemption, and that by the blood of Christ,
will fetch a man off, 1 Pet. 1.18. We see to this day, the sad event of this
truth. How hard it is to take off the old wives, and doting men, and idiots of
all sorts from their old mumpsimus. That as conscientious persons wander for
the pure practicing of the word, the meat of their souls; so these traditious
persons wander for their pottage. And alas for them, what mean they make for
Swines broth! Sure, if this stuff were of God, the rude multitude would never
be so eager; they would not cry out that reformation were Innovation. But sure
their broth is not good, their meat is so bad, Esaias 65.4. They eat Swines
flesh, and broth of abominable things is in their vessels. Certainly the best
prayers, the best forms of worship are not commonly consistent with the worst
kind of life: But as these pottage-bellies, these Swine-eaters, of which the
Prophet speaks, live among graves and monuments; so these that cry up customary
forms of Discipline, worship, though corrupted, live commonly among the dead,
they love the company at the best but of the Pharisaicall painted Sepulchors.
Ma^h ^^.
But to break off to go to the next head, we see, we hear, we know, that
custom has, and does prove another nature, a new complexion to men, to hold
them strong to their customary way of worship and Discipline, be it never so
much corrupted and degenerated.

3. To all this the opposers or contemners of liberty, add resolution: they
know no better, as we said in the first Branch; they are accustomed to this
condition, as we said in the second. Therefore they resolve, and sometimes
profess their resolution, that they will not go out free, they will not,
because they will not. As the civil servant, Exodus 21.6. So these spiritual
vassals in effect say, They love their Master, they will not go out free. For,
observe their relish of, and carriage toward the sound preaching of spiritual
liberty, of, and toward the word that must set them free, Joh. 8.32, 33, etc.
And you shall find that they despise it. And to despise the word, is to make
ones self incurably culpable, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. The least that can befall
them in this life, is, that they shall have their ears bored, and shall serve
their old Master for ever. As to reveal the ear signifies knowledge; Ruth.
Ps. ^0.
so to boar the ear, signifies obedience: so these not learning the truth,
shall be obliged in obedience to all doctrines of spiritual vassallage; they
shall, (as the Apostle speaks) 2 Co^. 11.20.
suffer i.e. contentedly, if a man bring them into bondage, if a man devour
them, if a man take of them. Have we not seen this? Have we not seen men of
the ceremonious way, submitted to any cost imposed by their superstitious
taske-masters, for a state-disturbing project, when as they are ready to roar
out complaints against a religious and regular way, requiring half the charge
toward reformation.

4. Out of all these, the Antagonists of liberty hatch up an ungrateful
Idolatrous retaliation. These men will not come out of the ditch, they thank
you; they Idolatrously love their bondage better then God or his liberty; all
their requital to God is, he may take his labor for his travel, and his
expectation in vain for his charges to send to these men, ^^^.
and rising up betimes, and sending, to bring them out of their slavery. Of
such ingratitude, the Lord complains bitterly, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do ye thus requite
the Lord, O foolish people, and unwise? Is not he thy father that bought thee?
Though God has bought them liberty with the precious blood of Christ, Gal.
5.^, ^.
yet these vassals will not go out free. God bitterly threatens
unthankfulness; Prove. 17.1^.
a plain sign that these are of the unthankfullest sort of men, 2 T^m. 3.^.
because of the unsanctifiedst sort of men. The greatest neglecters of
spiritual liberty, are the greatest loathers of piety. And what sin more
unreasonable in the unthankful person, then unthankfulness? And what more
provoke full of the person offended, than unthankfulness? This is a natural
principle in all men, to let fall squab in the dirt one that strikes him, that
almost pulled him out.

Thus you see the liberty loathing man, illiterate in the first degree,
illiberall even so in nature and disposition in the second; * By all sour man
1. would disgrace liberty, therefore God records him with disgrace.
irrationally resolute in the third; resolutely peremptorily Idolatrously
ungrateful in the fourth; opportunely therefore God comes in with his Divine
vengeance-maxims: 2 He would cast off God the fore God discards him.
What measure ye meat shall be meated to you again; with the froward God will
show himself froward. Math. 7.2.
If man will rise by steps in sin, God will rise by steps in his judgments.
Ps. 18.26.
Three times God raises his note of threatening, Levit. 26. against the
despiser of his Word of Wisdom and Counsel: and he raises it by sevens,
and those are discords in Music. Such sayings will be heavy songs, and their
execution heavy Pangs to the wicked. In the 21. verse he says, If ye walk
contrary to me, and will not hearken to me, I will bring seven times more
plagues upon you according to your sins. And in verse 23.24. he adds, If
you will not be reformed by these things, I will punish you yet seven times
more: And yet further adds, verse 27. And if you will not for all this observe
the (All) Hearken unto me, then will I walk contrary to you in fury, (mark
the addition) I, even I, note also that reduplication, will chastise you seven
times for your sins. It is not said seven times more, as intimating a period,
but indefinitely, they shall not know the end of his judgments. I can hardly
hold my peace from intimating how God plagued this Land, perhaps about seven
years, in the Commonwealth, by irregular Counsels, then seven years more in
the Church, in the time of our new bbb. the Arochronogram of Antichrist; I
warrant you will think I mean not William the Conqueror, but William the
Corrupter. But think as you please, I will say no more of that by superstition
and persecution. And since that in Church and Commonwealth, both, as if the
last seven years were now concurrent. And why? I doubt, because we are not
weary of superstition, or at least, do not desire reformation. When the
Israelite, Exodus 2.
I say the Israelite, for it was but one of them, clamoured against Moses,
beginning to deliver them, it cost all Israel forty years bondage longer for
it, as we heard before. How much more may one thousand, yea, one million of such
perverse spirits hinder the Churches deliverance many fair year? I am sure
Israel got out of Egypt when they willingly and hastily packed up to depart
from Egypt, not when they murmured against Moses and Aaron the Israelites. When
the hearts of a Nation depart from the abominations of a nation, then shall the
abominations be made to depart from a nation. But whiles the General of a
people will not conceive what is spiritual liberty, nor receive it, but
resolve against it, God will fill such people with the filth and foyl of their
own ways. I have been long in the Reason, yet not without reason. Therefore
think it not tedious if I give some particular instance, and then I will step
to application.

1. Will men embrace Idols (and an Idol is any medium cultus, This I have
proved in that sermon 2 Pet. 3.
any mean of worship which is not of Divine institution) though God has
revealed himself to the contrary? God has recorded this for their disgrace,
that thus they shall be discarded as graceless, Hos. 4.1^.
Ephraim is joined unto Idols, let him alone. As if the Lord should say, ear
and burst; or commit spiritual whoredom till thou have got the filthy disease
of incurable sottish sinning to damnation: so Rome for that is left, no more
Hus or Luther sent; no more such a Goose or Swan sent to waken their Capitol,
let in their Tr. Council to curse the truth.

2. Will men have many altars to sin? God has recorded this for their
disgrace, that thus they shall be discarded as graceless, that altars shall be
unto them to sin, Hos. 8.11.
because Ephraim has made many altars to sin, altar shall be unto him to
sin; as if the Lord should say, Ephraim has made there, and those altars;
and thus many, more then ever I appointed or approved, and so sins in making
of them; (though altars were then in use) therefore they shall sin abundantly
in sacrificing upon them, or worshipping at them; and their lawless worship
shall produce in them a lewd life; their multiplied Idolatry, shall multiply
impiety: observe those men that by change of times became so altared. How in
their lives became altered? How soon did that bow-backed faction fall as it
were down, and tumble in the dirt of profaneness?

3. Will men serve God after their own fashions and fantasies, as to presume
to make any thing (though one of his own creatures) a representation of God
present with them, through which to worship God, which God never commanded?
This in Gods opinion, is to turn him into the Image of that representation of
that creature whatsoever it be, ^om 1, 21, 22, 23, 24.
and for that God will give them up. Read the place considerably, and you shall
find, that to make a cross a representation of Christ, through which to look
upon Christ, is to turn Christ into a cross; to take the bread in the
sacrament, and through or toward it to worship Christ as a medium adorationis
a mean of adoration, Apt.
and not only of representation, is bread-worship, such men worship the bread,
not Christ. So that the Popish distinction of objectum relativum, seu
representativum, and terminativum, in point of sensible worship devised by man,
comes to coincidere, I mean, that all things devised by man to look on, as
representations of God, or Christ, whereby to carry them on to worship God
himself, and Christ himself, do absolutely in Gods account stay their
devotion and worship there at the creature; it does not radiat through; it is
not strained through the gross Idol, even to come near Gods acceptance as
unto him. The King of Heaven concludes, that whiles she that says, Rev. 18. 7.
She is a Queen, stands kissing and complementing with his servants, the dumb
creatures, that she is not his spiritual loyal Queen, but an Harlot, yea,
the mother of Harlots, making all those to be spiritual Harlots whom ^hee
teaches so to do, Rev. 17.5.

4. Will men put all holiness in outward shows, to seem to men to be devout,
in bodily performances to have praise from men; as in cringes, creepings,
noddings, moppings, or any other antic motions? The Lord returns them this
answer, Ite, be packing, you have that for your reward, That, and that in this
life, and no more, Matthew. 6.5.

5. Will men put Religion in a ceremony, though once Divinely instituted? much
more with men will place Religion in humane instituted ceremonies; so that
their Cake is dough, if things be not ceremoniously done? The earth must be
disquieted, if with those rattles they be not quieted? Christ shall be
questioned, if he eat with unwashen hands; then will the Lord say to a
people, Take, eat, surfeit with thy ceremonies, but they shall not profit
thee, Mat. 15.13. The observation of traditions does evacuate and anull true
adoration. And the Apostle says, Gal. 5.2. If ye be circumcised, Christ shall
profit you nothing.

6. Would men advance a restrained way of prayer, I say, a restrained more or
less, and advance it? be proud of a crutch, and use it when the leg is well,
would they chiefly have such a way, as generally perishes with the using? As
Papists rest in such words; so many short Avemarics, etc. till all the Beads be
knocked down? Would not people willingly have their Ministers to use such
gifts as Christ gives to men, since his ascending up on high and led captivity
captive? Men shall have such ways forms, Ministers, and long enough, comp.
Engl. with Fr. Den Scot. Church. But these things God records as faults, Job
15.4. If to restrain in whole be a great fault, then to restrain it in part
is a fault, though a less one, Colos. 2.22. No true devotion rests in cut
scantlings of the same size and fashion for all times and occasions, especially
when they leave no more impressions of devotion on men generally, then the
words and noise at the very times of using, Ephesians. 4.11. Ministers have gifts
from Christ, not from men; And such as are for the perfecting, not the stinting
or stunting of the Saints, when the Church was newborn out of the bloody
persecution of Popery, she might be swadled up in clouts and swathbands of a
small scantling, but now she is a woman, she should have large loose garments,
as the Israelites wore, when at men and woman's estate; sure the Church should
have leave according to the leave of Gods bosom and lap, to stretch her limbs,
and grow.

7. Do men love blind guides, bad guides, soule-starvers, Religion-stroyers?
they shall have them, Matthew. 15.14. Jer. 5.31. Hos. 4.9.

8. To close up the Reason: If any shall refuse any liberty that God offers
them, they shall have their bellifulls to servitude. These Potters had enough
of it in Babylon, both spiritual and corporal; and as the servant that would
not go free, was bored to serve for ever: So those that will not accept of
Christ and his liberties, who had his ear bored, Psalm 40. that we might go
free, shall dye in their sins, and perish as spiritual bondslaves, Joh 8.
ver. 36. compared with verse 44.

So that the Cardo or main hinge of the reason moves upon this; Gods most wise
and just retaliation: as an eye for an eye, so blindness for blindness, a
leaving in bondage, for a loving of bondage; Ma. 13.14. -- Nec lex est justior
ulla, Quam necis artifices art perire sua. No juster Law then that men of
wicked devices should perish by their own devices, Psalm. 10 2. Prove. 1.31. and
this is most apparently fulfilled upon liberty loathers, where has been the
longest and largest revelation of God in his Word, whether to a Town more then
a person; or to a County more then a Town; or to a Kingdom more then a County.

Useful is this Doct. for Examination, Reprehension, Exhortation,


Examination, to find the Character of a Caitif^e; the complexion of a carnal
man; a man of whom, if you say there is no hurt in him; I will say there is no
good in him, yea, Christ will say, there is some danger in him, you had need
(says Christ) beware of men, Matthew. 10.17. A mere man, a dangerous man. And
who more dangerous to hinder reformation, then men morally good; good in civil
actions, but spiritually bad, bad in spirit. The man I am to speak of is such
a one, of whom, if you say it does not appear that the spirit of the Devil is
in him; yet I affirm out of Gods Word, that the spirit of God is not in him;
Sensual, not having the spirit, Jud. 5. 10. yea, they have the spirit of the
World, 1 Cor. ^. 12. and this is that by which I must find him out, even by his
worldly, or world-like spirit. The Text and doctrine cast me upon that; for he
is not painted out by outward gross impieties, but is charactarised by his
base mind, and Peasant-like spirit. In general, he is of an illiberall or
illiberall spirit of a noningenuous spirit toward spirituals: he is an
Antilibertine spiritually; he is an Antagonist, and opposite to spiritual
liberty.

In particular; he is in relation to acceptance of spiritual liberty of A
Mean, Negligent, Secure. Perverted,
Spirit.

These appear in the Text and Doctrine; on these therefore we shall insist.

1. Of a mean or low spirit, These Potters, etc. flew as low as the dirt: the
work was dirt, and the Workman was dirt; in the worst sense, materiam super
abat opus, they wrought in mortar, with an unmortified mind; They tempered the
dirt with and earthly mind; they were not like the laborers that were
Nehemiahs workmen, to build the wall of Jerusalem, holding the Spade or
Trewall in his hand, and having his Sword by his side, and his ear attentive
to the sound of the Trumpet, to resist the enemies of the Church, in case they
had set upon them: not like that late Martyr, who, though one of the greatest
Scholars and Christians in Christendom, yet in banishment, or flight for
conscience, served the Mayson. Be bold, his mind was above his hodd; but to
these men their mind, and that an earthly one, a dirty one is to them a
Kingdom, yea, more then a kingdom, more than the Kingdom of Judea, the
Kingdom where the only Church inhabited And thus it is with all such carnal
mean low-spirited men, matters of Religion, Conscience and Salvation, are but
Questions of quiddities, unworthy the consideration: outward pomp, and carnal
peace and plenty, those are material things: Acts 23.29.
matters of Religion to the most learned worldly minded man, are but newalties
and strange things: Acts 17.19.20.
they lie without their Sphere and Compass; the reformation of the Church, the
restoration of the Church is nothing to them, so they pass it by, Lam 1.12.
Their spirits are not large enough for such considerations: It is as bad as
conjuring, to tell them they must stand within the circle of the reformation of
the Church, and be a member of the Church, if they will be saved. As these
Potters, etc. So all of the carnal, whom, Non meliore luto finxit praecordia
Titan, we find to be of the same dirt, think that without the Church is
salvation to be had; they think not that their welfare consists in puncto, in
the middle of the Church, though Christ be there; they are not of David's mind,
that prayed for the prosperity of Jerusalem that he might prosper; psalm 122.
they consider not the afflictions of Joseph, though the not consideration
brings them into captivity with the first; so that indeed these men are not of
a faithful, Amos 6.
loyal and loving spirit toward themselves; such a man as this finds not
what can be higher then himself; he conceives not how he may be raisd above
himself by a gracious spirit; he is in effect a Pelagian or Arminian, good
parts of nature are with him grace, 1 King 22.24. he is in effect a Papist, he
hold op ^opera^u^ a work that is ma^^rially good, is with him a good work
^orma^^, Is^y ^8.3 yea, he is worse yet; he is an Ido^a^rous worldling; a work
is with him a ^ood work, a civil work; a gainful work is a (...), a godly
work with him; gain is god^^ss, 1 ^^m. 6. These ^otters, etc. sure enough did
not ho^d themselves guilty of ungodliness, whiles they preferred this mortar
before the goodly stones of the temple, whiles they pre^erred these pots before
the curious Lavers, molten se^s, and golden Basins of Gods House; their hearts
in the fastening to their bowels is broadest; the broadest part is next
themselves; they are all for themselves. To set forth this mean low-spirited
man more distinctly; his mean spirit is an imbased spirit, it is degenerated,
from governors in Moab, and workers in linen, they fall to be day-labourers,
or clay-labourers; of Israelites or Jews, they become Babylonians: and so all
men of this strain that live in the Church, they are baptized, called, etc. as
being for Christ; they plot, they plead, as if they were Antichrist, at least
they plot, Revel. ^om chap. (...)
they plead for Antichrist; for the tail, if not for the head; and the tail
of the Dragon did much hurt, swept down the Stars: Popish ceremonies have
swept down the Stars, the good Angels of the Church, when erroneous
doctrines never endangered the peace of the bad. How many of late days have
degenerated from their Ancestors; their forefathers blood sometimes boiled in
their hearts with z^^le and prayer, sometimes sparckled in their faces in bold
confession of the truth; sometimes flowed into the f^^ in martyrdom for the
truth; and these men gladly own their names and kin, in the books of
Martyrs; but decline the imitation of them. When did these imbased degenerated
spirits dye their faces with a blush to hear profession disgraced? When heat
they their blood in the heart with prayer? When dipped they their foot in sweat
to go in the behalf of the Church? yea, when did they ever wet an hair of
their horses, to ride for a Christian or a good cause?

Again, this mean spirit is a Cowed spirit, a cowardly spirit. These Potters,
etc. once conquered, are for ever conquered, they cannot raise their spirits
above an habituated vassalage; the mean spirited man thus cowed, can easily
fall with the times, but not rise with the times. If lately times have been
hard; profession out of fashion; he was no egregious man that could not make
void the Law, and evacuate the Gospel; cast off profession, and give large
dispensations to conscience. Since that, this mean cowed spirited man
i^stinted, or stunted (as you speak) in goodness, his legs are asleep, and
his tongue smitten with the palsy: he is ashamed to return to profession,
lest he should seem to be contrary to himself, left times should turn again
to be contrary to him: he cannot tell how for shame, to fall in with God, or
fall out with spiritual bondage.

Again, this mean spirit is a pusilanimous spirit, a petty spirit, looking a^
small things; as these Potters, rest in the name of Jews, but care not for the
privileges, parts and properties of Jews: So this mean petty spirit, where
ever it be, looks more at small things then at great things; he looks at
earthly things in general above spiritual; Matthew 22.
a Farm, an Ox, a wedding, lust is more to him than to come to the marriage
feast of Christ: He preferres an exchange before a change; and like the
Emperor that saved the urine of his Subjects, he prizeth the filth of the
world. And if he must look upon Religion, he looks upon as little of it, as
little things of it as may be; upon Mint, upon minute things; upon Cummin, upon
bare coming to the ordinary: His position of Religion is that of machiavel of
Moral virtue, the show of it is useful, the practice cumbersome.

Again, this mean low spirit is a private spirit; the mean spirited man, is
a man of a private spirit; totus inse, like the Snayle, still within doors at
home: 1 Cor. 2.
he is, (...), a mere Animal. And no wonder then that he neglects all but
that which tends to his own welfare; and though he may go to the ordinances
of God, yet he seeks himself, Hos. 9.14.
as the Snail creeping abroad out of the walls or hedges, yet still keeps within
it is own house. And though he may seem to bussle in the common good sometimes,
in some things; yet it is out of private ends, and higher then that level, his
desires and bent of spirit will not run. If the wheels be not oyled with his
own advantages, they go heavily; howbeit, whiles he thus seeks himself,
he loses himself: As the Sailers in a storm shipwreck themselves, if every
one cares only for his own cabinet: a stone in an Arch must needs fall if
left alone, whiles this man fixes the sharp ends of his heart downward toward
the earth, toward the round world, he cannot be established. Christ is among
the Myrtle trees, Zach. 1. Among the Tribes in the type of the Ark, Number. 2.
Among the Candlesticks, Revel. 1. The private spirit therefore neglecting the
Church, neglects Christ, the eldest brother, in whom every son of God must
have his legacy.

Lastly, this mean spirited man is of a straitened spirit; This man cannot
advance his endeavor, he cannot mend his pace on any good occasion. Where
these Potters were, there they are. This opportunity of their return, stirs
not them. The strait spirited men are like the Egyptians, sitting still in the
dark: like the Corinthians, straightened in themselves; they can go but their
packhorse pace, in frozen forms, general prayers, eye-profession, etc. If
their wives or children were sick, or in danger, they would do less for
themselves, and more for them. But the more the Church is sick, the more they
look after their own occasions.

I endeavor to set forth the first branch of this liberty-loathers spirit,
that he is a man of a mean spirit, but I cannot satisfy my self, no wonder
therefore if I satisfy not others. These Potters are not reported for any
heinous prancks; mean spirited men may be are free from foul facts. But note
the place where you find them, and the times when; so that a man may say to
them ordinarily, as the Lord did once upon a special occasion to Elijah, What
do you here? If you were men of a right spirit, what do you pusling in the
world, when you should be for the Church? what do you in your own houses,
when you should be at the Parliament? What do you contending for earthly
things, when you should be contesting for heavenly? What do you in carnal
private spirited men's company, when you should be pleading to the Worthies of
Israel? In sum, this mean spirited man has not in him a man's spirit. (...)


On the contrary, the godly man that has learned and lowed his liberty in
Christ, his liberty in the Gospel, to his power and place, is of an eminent
heretics spirit, he could wish himself an Argos, a man of an hundred eyes,
to watch the Churches welfare, and warn her of danger. He could wish himsefe
as Briaries, of an hundred hands to do for the public cause; and of fifty
bellies or bowels to compassionate her more. He makes good his Scutchion to be
of the Lion, of the Tribe of Judah. Abraham willing to plant a Church, H^b 11.
forgot his own things, and followed God into a strange Country. David minds
amidst all his own miseries, the building of Jerusalem, Psalm. 51. And the
more Atheistical and impious the enemies of the Church are, the less are the
thoughts of the Church put out of the hearts of the Saints; the more the Saints
mind and desire the welfare of the Church, Psalm. 14. verse last, compared with
verse. (...).

Thus you have seen the first note of this illiberate spirited man, of how
mean a spirited man he is. The dimensions, proportions or measures of his
spirit, prove very small, very scanty. The height, depth, length, breadth of
his spirit are very minims, petty, and as nothing: For depth, his spirit is as
profound as deep as the clay pits and unclean dirt in Babylon; as the
Bricke-kilnes, as Leekes and Onions in Egypt; as humane inventions, and
soule-bondages of the place where he lives; as high as the Potters wheel, as
the heaps of burnt Bricks, as high as he can stand up-right. He climbes not
with Zacheus to see a Christ, to hear the voice of Christ, salvation,
soule-deliverance is come to thine house: as long as his arms; what he can
reach to by his senses and sensible actions. He is natural, savours not the
things of the spirit. The breadth, as broad as Babylon, as Egypt: He will be in
Babylon, and of Babylon, in Egypt and of Egypt, rather then to trouble himself
to come out of them, with feet or affections, that he may touch no unclean
thing. His spirit is as low as a cowards: as high as a selfe-seekers: as long
as the basest of his ancestors: As broad as his own particular way. And to
all, add his activity; he is not like other smaller creature, to recompense
the smalnesse of bulk, with greatness of activity; as smaller birds, men,
etc. But is like filthy nasty vermin, to be small, and to crowle: He is like a
Snayl, as well in motion, as keeping at home with his own advantages. This man
will be, and do in Religion as little as he can for shame.

Whereas the free spirited man reaching as high as heaven, as low as the
deepest corruptions of his heart, as long as eternity, as wide as the
universal Church, is as active as lightning; he will prayer-blast the enemies
of the Church. Amalek is beaten down by that he could not see: By Moses
praying, rather then by Joshuah fighting; for when Moses slacked, Joshuah gave
ground. Yea, he is so active, that he is like the Sun beams, whiles they
are on earth, they are in heaven too. Nehemiah talks to the King of Babylon,
and to the eternal King of Heaven, and all at a time, Nehem. 2.4.5.

2. This liberty-loather is of a negligent spirit, apt to lose the most golden
opportunities through leaden negligence. Nor the name of Jews, nor the noise
of the Kings Proclamation, nor the stirs among the Jews to pack away, nor
the fame of Jerusalem, nor the sense of bondage could move these Potters of a
negligent spirit to take opportunity of returning to their bodily and
spiritual liberty. They cannot put an Emphasis at this or that special time,
as Mordecai did to Hester. Who knows whether thou wast not advanced for such a
time as this? Whether thou shall do well to hold thy peace at this time. Such
kind of men as these we speak of, are of an unprepared spirit, and therefore
of an opportunity-losing spirit. See a remarkable place, 2 Chronicles. 12.14. So
Saul lost his establishment in his Kingdom by loss of waiting for, and
watching one opportunity. ^ Sam. ^^ 13.
And thousands lose their comfort, and find their remediless misery, by not
observing every one his own opportune time God offers unto his hands. Eccle^.
9.2.


The Jews lose much time of comfort, by saying the time to build the house of
the Lord was not yet come, whiles they deferred, Hag. 1 1. comp. chap. 2.15 18.
they had famine and want, whiles they built and went on they prospered. What a
loss had they in the wilderness, that in forty years could not know their
time? Psalm. 85.
and how irrecoverably undone was Jerusalem for not knowing her day, even that
her day? Luke 19.4^.
The foolish Virgins also, by loss of opportunity, lost Christ and heaven,
Matthew. 25. I need not multiply places; the case is too clear, that such
spirited men will easily lose the opportunity of obtaining of that spiritual
thing what ever it be that is offered them, and consequently of that spiritual
liberty; for they care not. Some let slip those occasions which God has
appointed to be in the present Tense, and these men are constantly in the
Future. The Lord cries, to day if you will hear, Heb. 3. And now it is the
accepted time, now is the day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. But this negligent
spirit (as once Augustine) cries, cras Domine, to morrow Lord; his repentance
is adjourned to the day of his death. And all his good deeds exist and have
their being only in the purpose: his will and his testament are alike, they
both take force at last; at last he has a will to do good, if he had time.
And at last, he bequeathed his good deeds by testament, because he cennot live
to do evil any longer, yea, although God offers him some more special
present time opportunities, apples of gold, with pictures of silver, Diamonds
pointed with gold, striped with Ophir, yet he cannot be enamoured with them.
Some such God offers him for himself. Heart knocking time, Revel. 3.20. If a
man did but entertain these, he may be made for ever, so Psa. 27.8. Cant 5.
Acts 16.14. Math. 13.15.
But these men shut the heart, dry their tears as Saul and scalded in their
greas. The blushing once for sin, has woaded an impudency in their faces; Acts
7.
and they are as good at resisting the holy Ghost, as ever their Fathers were.
Other some such opportunities God offers such men as these, wherein they might
advantage the Church for ever. These Potters, etc. might have gone and helped
in the repair of Jerusalem: the Pharisees might have helped forward
reformation, whiles under John and Christ's Ministry, the Kingdom of God
suffered violence.

And now, in these active stirrings of Parliaments, men (in public place
especially) might put on for the Churches reformation; but as the Potters were
dull, and stuck in their dirt, and the Pharisees violent in a contrary way: So
the modern Pharisees of these times are opposite, and others, like the
Potters, are dull. And generally, men at best hearken after good news, yet
send neither good prayers nor good endeavors in their errand to bring them any
such tidings: the most like Atalanta, by stouping for the golden balls of the
world, spend time, and lose the Goal; they come in a day after the fair, and
say, Si putaram, O if I had thought it would have been so, what would not I
have done!

On the contrary, the spiritual liberty-lover is a time observer (not server).
A time catcher, as Benhadads servants, caught at the King of Israel words of
mercy. 1 Kings 2^.33.
Godly men of that temper, of which, Eccles. 9.10. What they have to do whiles
time serves, to do it with all their might, whether for themselves, or for the
Church: For themselves, Saint Paul describes the manner to be as conquering in
battle; 1 Timothy 6.12.
Lay hold of eternal life. In battle the opportunity must be taken; no use of
after-wit in war: their hearts catch at opportunities of good, as the echo
catches the voice, Psalm. 27. For the Church, as Nehemiah and Ezza, and Saint
Paul, Gal. 2.5. Hester took the nicke of time.

And thus you have the second note of the liberty-loathers spirit. He is of a
negligent spirit, of an opportunity losing spirit; he is the greatest
time-server, but the least time observer, he looks at the worlds time, not at
Gods time, Pro. 17.^6.
the price of wisdom is put into his hand, but being a fool, he has no
heart; he will take none of Gods great penyworth; if he be invited to Christ's
wedding he will not come; Math. 22.
if a Kingdom or Church lie at stake, he is wholly taken up with his fiddles
and his feasts, A'mos 6.
his fillings and foolings; he does not for Church or State, or himself, serve
his generation, Act. 13.36.
as good men are wont. In all such things he is an Epimetheus, a Postmaster,
an after wit: Pro. 5.11.
For evil he mournes as his later end, as spiritual fools do; and for good
he has no mind to do it, Pro. 1.28.
till he has no time to do it. He comes, says Hierome, when the gates are
shut: therefore no peevish novell position, much unlike to the liberty-lover,
that is, a Prometheus, a fore-wit, a foreman, a forward man: For all
spiritual good for himself, he is as a waiter at Bethesda. And for the
Church; how does he like Moses, Psalm. 85.8.
stand in the gap, to prevent a danger? How does he wait as a Petitioner to
expect an answer of peace for the Churches good, rather then to lose speaking
with God for the common good, ^s 27
they will dwell in the house of God all the days of their lives; they will
amidst all thoughts, Gen 49.18.
sorrows, sickness, etc. wait for Gods salvation.

3. This liberty-slighter is of a secure spirit: Security is a groundless
tranquillity in a dangerous condition; these Potters and Planters sit and sing
at their work in Babylon; never dreaming of any danger to themselves or
souls, now, or for time to come. One would have thought, that the very name
Babylon (being Hebrew) might have minded them of confusion, Genesis 11.9.
and how it had been their confusion by captivating them, and might be their
eternal confusion of soul, if they should continue there, when the Church and
Ordinances were removed, as now they were removed. And it might be the Churches
confusion, so far as the want of their help might cause it by withdrawing or
staying behind them in Babylon: So then the footing of this third note is broad
enough to bear the grounding of general security in this man's spirit. That
this man's spirit is carnally secure, and fears no danger to the Church or his
own soul; Fools make a mock of sin: P^^. 14 9.
and for the general state, the cry of such men usually is, Peace, peace, and
things were never better, 1 Thessalonians 5.
till sudden destruction be ready to come upon them: As the Philosophers say,
that before a Snow, the air will be warmish; when the wind lies, the great
rain falls, and the air is most quiet, when suddenly there will be an
earthquake. So the nature of security is to conceive a safety in the midst or
approach of danger; like the people of Laish. And as this is a sleepy eviil,
Judge. 18.20.
men will strive to sleep spiritually, notwithstanding the noise that is made,
that might keep them waking: so often times the Lord in Justice, powers on such
the spirit of a deep sleep. I^^. 29.1^.
When was the Church of England more secure, Romans 21.8.
then when it was in most danger?

To descend as low to particulars, as the Text and Doctrine carries us, we may
note three things in these Potters, etc. which in all likelihood caused their
carnal security that they regarded not the spiritual danger of themselves, or
of the Church.

1. Great Necessity. 2. Worldly goods. 3. Negative goodness.
1. Great Necessity, they were constrained by conquest in war at first to
go down into Babylon, therefore having so just a call to come thither, they
thought they were not bound upon and terms to return.

2. Wordly goods, they were not pinched in back or belly, they had so much of
the world, mea^, drink and wages that made their mind to them a Kingdom; yea,
that the Kingdom of Babylon seemed to be be their Kingdom.

3. Negative goodness, they are not said to be guilty of notorious vices, or
lewdness of conversation. And such morality and civility might make them
conceive they need not fear their spiritual condition, or any doing amiss,
in deserting the Church: For one particular great omission is nothing with men
that are not guilty of gross Commissions.

And thus it is with every carnal secure spirit, these three make them secure,
both for themselves, and for the Church.

1. For themselves: First, necessity at first, becomes a voluntary impiety at
last. Say the world, we are borne in sin, we have all our faults, therefore
they take it not to heart, to be unconverted, unchanged; they think they shall
do as well as others; we are all sinners, say they, therefore, as they
think, we are all alike sinners, and we shall all fare and speed alike; so
because a man by necessity must deal with profane men, 1 Cor. 5.10.
therefore he thinks he does not offend, though he be not shy of their company
when the necessary occasion is ended.

2. By reason of the world a man is made secure in his own carnal condition;
the profits of the world, the not feeling of worldly want, rocks many a man
spiritually fast asleep in a carnal condition: the rich man, Luke 12. having
fullness in his barnes, has fullness of peace in his heart, that he needed no
more to enable him to say, Soul, take thy pleasure: when the belly is full,
the bones are at rest. And this is one of the causes that the Apostle says,
not many mighty, not many noble are called. 1 Cor. v. 26.
The poor, says our Savior, are (...) Gospellised, not only receive it, but
are changed by it.

3. By reason of negative goodness, men are very confident of their safe
spiritual estate, though are deeply in a carnal, Luke 18.11. Mat. 25.44. If
men omit never so much good, so as they do not commit gross evil, they
think their condition safe. The hardy man fears not a defect, so long as he
feels no pain in his limbs.

2. For the Church, these three also do make the secure spirited man so
secure, so fearelesse and careless of the common good.

1. Necessity at first, because the Church of the Jews had been captivated to
the Romans civilly, therefore now they can do nothing for the truth, but
against the truth spiritually, to the persecuting of the Apostles and
crucifying of Christ: Though the government of the Romans did not intermedle
with their Divine Laws, Acts 18.15.
or Religion. Though in Christ's time they had the most apposite time of the
Church reformation, yet they were then most opposite, Matthew. 23.37. Matthew.
21.37. they were all against the truth. Thus mightily does a
beginning-necessity grow to a perpetuity. As the Philosopher tells of a Drunkard
that excused himself that he could not choose but be drunk, because by
custom he had habituated himself to it, it was come to a necessity upon him;
he thought not on this, that by time he might unhabite, unnecessitate himself
again: So because at first, till Christ should come, there was a necessity of
Divinely instistuted ceremonies, as circumcision, etc. to point at his coming,
Genesis 17.13. therefore the Jews think this necessity is upon them always when
Christ is come, Acts 15.5. Just so it is with us, because in King Edward the
sixth's time we were newly come out of thick dark Popery; and in Q.
Elizabeth's time newly come out of bloody persecution; so that those noble pious
Princes had neither opportunity of time, nor space of time to draw an exact
platform of Discipline, the times were so full of troubles; therefore all the
cry is, that if we have just no more reformation then was in those Princes
days, we are perfectly well. Is there not, as we said before, the infancy of
Churches, Gal. 4.1. and consequently the youth and manhood? Must she not be
clothed with Discipline suitable to her growth, till she come to full manhood,
though she grow slower then other Churches; as Geneva, Holland, Scotland.

2. Worldly goods, ease, peace, contentments. When is the afflictions of Joseph
slighted, the troubles of the Church disregarded? When men are at ease in Zion.
These times are for the general of the same complexion: If dangers of wars
be over, conspiracies discovered, pursepayments past, then they think the
Church is well enough reformed, which is as irrational as to think a man
wounded is whole, because he has a gay suit on.

3. Negative goodness, because the conclave of the Pharisees were outwardly as
painted sepulchers, therefore their Church needed no more reformation, but
opposed it, whipped it; they could not be better. Because the General of the
Jewish Church then was, as the foolish Virgins, Virgins in outward show, though
foolish inwardly; therefore 1. (...), they slumbered. 2. (...), they slept.
First a sleep in carnal security. And because Samaria is not at a time so bad
as Judah, therefore Samaria conceives her self to be justified, Ezech. 16.52.
So now adays, because England is not so superstitious as Rome, so profane as
Germany, therefore we are well enough reformed: as if one should think,
because he is not sick of the Plague, therefore he is not sick; on the
contrary, the spiritual liberty-lover cannot trust himself, or the Church
upon principles of carnal security.

1. Not himself; the principle of necessity is with him of no validity. What
greater necessity is there (as a man's natural condition is) then in sin? A man
has brought himself into that condition, that he cannot cease from sin. 2
Pet. 2.14.
What therefore shall he not set against sin? yea, the more he will call for
a Christ and his Power, to turn his Will: As a man inclining to an hereditary
disease, diets himself the more; because Saint Paul could not do the good he
would, but the evil he would not, therefore he cries out, Romans 7.24.

The principle of worldly profits is no pillar to his safety. He minds, Prove.
30. and he minds that of our Savior What shall it advantage to win the whole
world, and lose his own soul? Luke 9.25.
Luke 9.25. The much wool on the the Sheeps back is ofttimes his ruin, he
is caught in the thorns, and famished; the fatter the Ox is, the sooner he
comes to the slaughter.

The principle of Negative goodness to him, is of no satisfaction. James 2.10.
Says he, if I keep all the Commandemens save one, and voluntarily live in
the breach of one, I am guilty of all. And I regard but one sin, and that but
in my heart, God will not hear my prayers. Ps 66.18.
He cries out of secret evil thoughts, ^^^e 19.
of concupiscence, a wound with an awle, Romans 7.
inward bleeding will kill.

2. Not the Church; those carnal principles does not secure the Church in his
judgment.

Not that of necessity, or constraint: For, says he, Necessitas facit
ingen^s^^.
that should more awaken the Church; while Israel in Egypt, might voluntarily
work and use diligence in labor, they were quiet. But when they were forced
with austere necessity, then they beat the skies with their groans: whiles
things indifferent were left indifferent, the Church of England was
indifferently quiet: But when things indifferent were imposed as necessary,
then she began to stir, and not to endure them. To make a thing indifferent
to be necessary, is to take upon on the place of God: and a thing indifferent
imposed upon me as necessary, and unavoydable, makes it utterly to lose the
indifferency to me. It is made to me all one as necessary: Galat ^
Saint Paul glories in this, that Titus was not constrained to be circumcised.

Nor can worldly prosperity assure the godly man of the Churches felicity. He
remembers that the Church waxing fat, though called Jesurun, i. e. The
righteous, Deuteronomy. 32.15.
was most wild and wanton, as a fatted pampered Horse kicks them most; that
Israel more transgressed in Canaan then in Egypt, or Babylon, when the Church
was in persecution; and to fly into the Wilderness, Revel. 12.
she was clothed with the Sun; when clothed with Scarled, Revel 17.
she is called an Harlot. Prosperity is a Popish note of the Church; and I
doubt, some of those that urge prosperity as a note of a pure Discipline, are
somewhat affected that way: Dr. Tay^^.
For (as once a Reverend Pastor of this Congregation maintained in a Sermon
here) the Church ever loses most spirituality in her prosperity. When the
Chalices are gold, the Priests are wooden: In rest the Church contracteth rust.
How did impiety and error abound, when the Ministry of late grew pompous?

Nor lastly, can Negative goodness be a good argument to the liberty-lover,
the spiritually spirited man that the Church is in a safe condition: For
Negative goodness does no more but confess that a Church is not universally
bad. Pergamos had not denied the faith, Ephesus had not fainted, and yet they
wanted so much good, as that Christ sent Epistles or letters from heaven, that
he was highly offended with them, and threatens them, if they repented not. It
is the same case in these times, if men plead for many unnecessary things in
the manner of Gods worship, that they are negatively good, that is, there is no
hurt in them; It is easily answered, because there is no good in them, they
have no place in Gods worship. The Church is commendable for positive good, not
for bare absence of evil.

4. This liberty-loather, is of a perverted spirit, I mean, a more particular
pervertednesse, by custom: he is of a custome-pleading spirit, from long
custom to err in judgment and practice, and to defend it: So these Potters,
etc. because they had been in Babylon, and long time had been Potters,
therefore they knew not how to take off their spirits from that way and to set
forward toward Jerusalem. So in all ages, men that are carnal, and cannot
see the excellency of any spiritual liberty, are of a time-prescribing spirit.
Tell one of these he is a sinner, why so says he are all men, in all ages:
tell him of his usury and unjust dealings, of his deceitful commodities, his
unreasonable prices, he answers again, so have men done in all ages, in the
same manner do all men of my trade deal. So touching the Church, tell these
time-prescribers that such things are enormities in the Prelacy; presently they
plead antiquity. If we might dispute so, then we might conclude, that Bishops
may, and must err, because so many particular Bishops, and what Counsels of
Bishops erred soon after 300. years after Christ: tell them Ministers are not
regularly and relatively set over their congregations, many things are amiss
in the Lyturgie, the Sabbath day ought not to be spent in spores. etc. still
they oppose antiquity. As M^cha for his Gods, because Gods, and of ancient
Demetrius for Diana, that come from Jupiter, that was of old.

On the contrary, the spiritual Gospellised libertine(I do not say licentious
man) sees that all these pleas to be paralogismes; fa^se arguments, as Saint
James calls the errings of Hypocrites, Iam. 1.12. That by the same reason theft
should be no sin, because it is above sixteen hundred years old since a
thief was crucified with Christ. And that this is no inference of any peevish
spirit only, hear Augustine affirm the same. Quast. ex veter. Test. 114.
Possunt etiam latrones, and adulteri pro se antiquitatem adferre. Thieves and
adulterers may plead antiquity; but custom not grounded and guarded with
reason, is a corruption, not a custom: Consuetudo n^n munita ratione, non est
consuctudo sed cotruptela, Iust^nian. Vetust as error is ^ot veritat^
entiquitas, I citul.
it is rather to be accounted an antiquity of error, then a countenancing of
verity. If bare antiquity might go for verity, then ^alsheka might justify
his speech, that because his Masters had tyrannised over Kingdoms and States,
and their heathen Gods, that therefore now his Master might over the Church,
and their true God, Isay 36.18.

Yea, the true spiritual man is so far from pleading such prescriptions,
that himself makes the heaviest complaints against old customs, if corrupt:
As against original sin, Romans 5. Romans 7. Against the old transgressions of the
Church, Ezra 9.7. The antiquity o^ a fault, does nothing mitigate it, or
prevent it is deserved judgment. 2 Samuel 23.1. etc.
The Church in David's time, is punished for a fault committed in Saul's time
against the Gibeonites; and who knows but many of our late evils have been,
because we plead for the corruptions of the Church; and because forty years
since so many score of worthy Ministers were suspended for trifles, to the
undoing of them outwardly, and yet this Land never humbled before God for this,
nor made satisfaction to the persons. To plead antiquity or custume for a
fault, is to aggravate it, that it is inveterate, it has reigned to long, it is
high time to remove it.

2. Use is of reprehension; if God will so punish the losers of, and
prescribers against Christian Church-liberty, how are they to be reproved that
cannot endure Ministers in Sermons to plead for this Christ-purchased liberty?
As if their judgments were, that they would ever have the Church fettered in
spiritual slavery; they come to Church, and if they hear any word let fall,
tending to the Churches freedom; presently there they bite their lip, and in
the streets the lips of him that spoke it: They whisper in the Church, and
backbite abroad; like those, Isai. 57. 4. that make a wide mouth against God.
And surely such whisperings against the truth, are an extreme bad sign, and
has diverse other bad vices for it is companions, Romans 1. Whisperers,
backbiters, false accusers, haters of God, inventers of evil things. Drive a
Mastiffe from his carrion, and he will snarle and grin; and scare-crowes from
the carcass, and they will make an hideous cry: let Micha be robbed of his
Idols, and he will roar, as if his throat were about to be cut. I close the
use with that, Ier. 5.31. The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear
rule by their means, and my people love to have it so, and what will ye do
in the end thereof?

3. And last use is for exhortation to particular Churches and their visible
memberr; Not to lie still willingly in a sordid condition of spiritual
slavery, when we may obtain a God-given liberty; I speak not of
licentiousness, but of liberty; liberty of the soul, from ignorance,
unregeneratednesse, unmortifiednesse: of the Church from unreformednesse; And
indeed, these go together. An unreformed Church is the mother of personal
sinfulness. Therefore thrust we with dint of Divine inforcements to drive you
to a due consideration of the Churches liberty.

See that we want not voices for the Church in Sodom, I mean her hemmed about
with gross impieties, and persons: see there want not a man to stand in the
gap: see what our minds and spirits be; observe the sound of our prayers, Ier.
5.1^
whether we stand for ciphers, or do give our voices? or vote contrary to
liberty? Observe, whether all, viz. our minds, prayer, practices tend to the
rooting up, or rooting in the Garleek, Leeks and Onions of Egypt? whether we
love to be Potters, ye, Porters, Brick-makers, yea, Brickelayers to build new
Babel, or else are we those that would by prayer, and lawful practice pull it
down? Psalm. 137.

To put us and press us the right way, we will lay down Motives and Means.

Motives to put us on to make out after the Churches spiritual liberty are
these.

1. God will record: this implies Gods taking an account of the number of
opposites to liberty, both so far as they provoke God, and so far as God
intends to punish them, yea, and looks frowningly on the Church, that has
suffered such to abound, has educated her visible members no better, Rev.
3.20. And truly great is the number now of men of contrary minds: As in
Egypt, when the Flies and Frogs swarmed, and multiplied, they were a judgment;
so in these times, the vermin of the Church lighting and croking every where;
persuading or stinging every where, are a sad omen, an ill Prognostication of
deliverance; and especially because, as those vermin keep together: so the
enemies of reformation swarm and buzze, and croke together. A kingdom divided
against it self cannot stand: Mat 12.25.
an Army in a mutiny cannot oppose a common adversary; were are weakened this
day to seek a reformation, our cries are mixed with contraries. As at the 2.
Temple some cried, and some shouted; and for the wickedness of the great
opposite number, and for the fewness and coldness of us of another mind, a
want of voices, or vigor in our praying votes, the Lord may justly leave the
yoke upon us, if we do not bestirre us. Do the birds of prey crow and whule
about their carrion? then let the birds of song sit in the wood, Can^. 3.6.
the wilderness of the world, and hold up our beaks, our mouths to heaven,
and sound out a loud our devotions to heaven, and never leave till an echo, P^
85.8.
an answer of peace be returned. Out cry the murmurings of the perverse minded.
It Is true, the sin of Sodom cried loudly, and loudly to heaven, so that God
came down to hearken to the cry. But had there been but a voice or two more
of Saints, their prayers had out-cried them; a few birds of song are shriller
then many crocitating birds of prey. Up and be doing, the thing still is
feisable; though many are opposite. The time is not long since, wherein the
prayers and fastings of a few particular family-meetings, and congregations,
prevailed more on the one side for the peace of the Church, then a Land of
secure ones, and an army of soldiers in the field, on the contrary, to plunge
it in blood.

So then the energie or sin of the Motive is, that we so bestirre our selves,
and so multiply our prayers and supplications, above our persons, that when God
comes to record, he may find more cries on our side then on theirs.

2. Motive, God records with disgrace those that decline, or any way neglect
their spiritual liberty. What a brand is left upon Israel, that they so often
returned into Egypt in their hearts? What a brand is left upon ten of the
spies, for disheartening the people from going up to Canaan? What a brand upon
these Potters for not returning? How are we ashamed of our names in the Books
of Martyrs, if the persons belonging to those names were Popish, and helpers
forward of the Churches bondage? How in later times have we seen, when our
Parliament men were chosen, the names of Gentlemen that loved their Countries
bondage, torn with the teeth of the multitude, shaken as Dog or Swine will a
rotten clout? They were cast aside as a potsheard, huffed and puffed away as
chafe, Projectors rejected: So for those Ministers thad had been innovators,
cringers and bowers to names and tables, or old superstitious Ceremony-mongers,
how are they cast off as an old nasty suit, as the object of all men's scorn?
yea, all yeomen, tradesmen, and freemen whatsoeever, that have contended in the
behalf of men of men unfit for public place in Parliament or Pulpit, that
would willing by have set over us hard taske-masters if they could, how are
they the byword of all ingenious men. And be sure of it these times and
passages will be recorded in future ages; for never any age afforded more
matter for history then these times, I say they will be recorded, if they be
not already. I have heard of an history of these times printed in France: but
be sure we shall in after times have it in plain English, there by divine
providence shall all be set down, if men carry themselves unevenly: as suppose
that such men did so much, were at so great cost in going against the
Protestant Scots, that in conclusion carried themselves so innocently: but did
nothing against the Popish Irish, that in the very beginning exercised such
bloody cruelties: that such Gentlemen hindered the reformation, which the
Parliament would have effected, had not they been opposite; that such
Ministers still preached, plotted, petitioned that they might were the yoke of
bondage. I make but a supposition, with Ifs and Ands, what may be storied of
us. But you may happly imagine. that positively gross men shall be more
grossly set forth to all future ages, never to be forgotten to the worlds end.
If therefore you have any true blood running in your veins if any esteem of
your reputation before God and the world, show your selves worthy men in the
behalf of the Churches liberty and pious tranquillity.

You see the force of the Motive is, that God and men shall conspire to blot
your names with reproach to the worlds end, if you do not write your names
fair with noble actions, and write over them this Motto, I will do what I can
for God and his Church, then will God prevent, and men forbear to mention you
but for honor. How did God and Moses heal the reproach of Levi in matter of
the Sechemites, when after, upon command of public authority they stood up for
God against the Idolaters?

These times are full of eyes, every man is an Argos; Be you full of hands, a
Briareus for God, and the Church, and the Historians shall not leave out a
title of your honor, ye never had such a time, or shall have to be graced or
disgraced in your name, as this is.

3. Mot. God will discard, cast off such, he leaves them to lose themselves, by
losing the opportunity of time. These Potters losing this opportunity, never
returned that we read of. The design was infinitely too great for them to
undertake alone: Jerusalem losing her day, all other days were hid from her
eyes, and her house was left desolate, Matthew. 23. Luke 19.

So now is an unparalelled time for us. Three Kingdoms awakened and their
Parliaments. Now let us join purses, prayers, powers, petitions, practices,
and great things may be done.

Lose we this opportunity, and we shall in all humane probability, never see
the like again, because now in all Kingdoms, God has (it seems by their
common vote) put it into their hearts to hate the whore of Babylon. Rev. 17 16.
And powerful is the general consent and vote of the people to move forward
any good work; Rev. 19.6.
their very voice is as the sound of many waters: and how prevailing is a flood
or river of water? Now we may go on in good with the stream; in some degree
omit this opportunity, and after we must go against the stream. Now pe^ltion
may do that, which after the point of the sword cannot, as it ought not. Now
may be bought with words and tears, which after cannot be blood and spears.

Yea, lose we the opportunity but for a piece of our redresses, and it cannot
be well with us. Have we not a propriety in our goods? then our estates are
gone. Have we not deliverance from oppressing Courts? then our persons or
bodies are lost. Have we not a right settlement of a right ministry? then our
souls are undone.

So that the maine point of this motive is, punctum temporis, Articulus
temporis, this is the point of time, that may settle all in joint.

4. Motive, God will cast us off, if we slight such offers and times of offers,
as graceless; cast us off from the means of grace, or the means from them,
and give them up to the cruelty of men. If we be sluggish to the undoing, if
not damning of our children, we shall lose the means of grace and so grace.
If we secretly prescribe (for in our hearts we dote upon the continuance of
corruptions in the Church) God will prescribe openly. If we by sluggishnesse
in the forefront lead our posterity for future into captivity, we shall go
first into captivity.

Remember the rule; Amos 6.
Our enemies love the treason against the Church, not the traitors; Remember
how they served Cranmer, after he had recanted, they burnt him whiles he was
in a good mind to serve their turn. And note how the Prelates among
themselves served the great Antiscibbatarian Prelate, when he had served their
turns, he was much cast off by them, as I gathered from one his of own
servants; happily, because he held not Transubstantiation too. Fides non est
servanda cum Haereticis. It Is burning, not turning that they aim at in eminent
professors.

See the sum of this Motive: If we make God cast us off, we lose his Grace,
and all favor of men. It is not Religion only, but our lives also, that we
shall lose; No merciless ruin like to that which arises out of contrariety
of Religion.

Tantum Religio potuit suadere molorum. 5. Liberty-losers says the Doct. are
men of unworthy, unready spirits. Shall we be unready for our own good? Not
rightly informed in judgment; not ready in affections to practice upon
opportunities? Not ready in affections, as not sensible of the misery of
spiritual bondage? Not ready in judgment, as not enlightened touching the
excellency of Christ's reformation of his Church? unprepared in prayers,
fastings, etc? Yea, unfit in prayer, and unfit in person? For God must prepare
the heart, as well as to receive the thing petitioned for; as to make the
prayer. Ps. 10.17.
There were some fitted in prayer, as we may say, but not fitted in person,
Isa. 58.3.4. Forget not this, that reformation goes on when the heart is
prepared, especially in public persons: 2 Chronicles. 27.6.
So in Jothams time; 2 Chronicles. 29.36.
so in Hezechiahs time.

6. Who prefer, Who are they? Peasants for the most; Their stock was
dissembling, projecting Politicians, Deputies, Judges in Moab, men of the Lie.
And the stalk, the men themselves, Mr. Dike in a Sermon on 1 Ioh. 5.
Planters, Hedgers, etc. One in a Sermon called them Hedge-rogues. And sure
under such terms does God set forth such Peasants spirits, despising
spiritualls, Job 30.7. They bray under the bushes, and under the nets, they
gather together, Zeph. 2.9. Moab shall be as Sodom. how is that? The breeding
of nettles and salt pits. For Sodom despised Lots Ministry, and became a
desolation, Luke 14.23. Go ye into the high ways and hedges; the Gentiles,
yet spiritually in bondage are supposed to lie under hedges, as it were, that
is, men despicable.

And observe all along the course of times, men base or mean in the stock,
being suddenly advanced become in their spirits (and that is worst of all) most
base and unworthy in the stalk; they prove Daubers with untempered mortar,
Ezech. 13.10. Planters, but envious ones, sowing Tares, Matthew. 13.25. Hedgers,
but not to hedge in, as Hos 2. but hedge out the Church; such as throw thorns
into the Churches way. So that she had need be fenced with shoes, as the
Apostle speaks; yea, iron, as the Prophet speaks. Ephesians. 6.
Remember for a president, Cardinal Woolsey, and many since that, ejusdem
farinae, of the same branne.

Observe whether the Motive drives; that to be base in spirit, accuses of
baseness in stock: or if not in stock, yet in stalk, which shall be a
stock to a future breed, (...), And often times God casts blemishes of nature
upon men notoriously peccant. One observed, that in his time all Arminians had
a blemish in one of their eyes. Another observed, that one turning with the
times, beginning to bow toward Altars, never went upright more. Cavendum est
ab eo quem naturae notavit, say the Naturalists, Men in common experience, are
marked for exceeding good, or extreme bad.

7. Mot. prefer a sordid condition; in body to be Potters; in state to be in
comparison poor; in freedom of person liable to Babylonish Empire and taxes;
in life liable to be pressed to the Heathen Kings wars, to fight for Babylon;
yea, and, perhaps, against Israel, this is a type of us of our times; in crying
up the corrupt persons and things of the times: Babylon is a type of Rome,
Romes Religion is partly Heathenish: So Morisinus in a Treatise. Romes slaverie
as bad or worse then Babylon; Rev. 1^.
they are nearer to us, even partly amongst us. If ever we be inslaved, it is
to Rome; we have felt it often and often in former ages. And when cast off the
yoke once or twice, still they endeavor to cast it on, like Vulcans net,
invisible; or like the great Turks golden fetters. If we fall into slavery to
them, our bodies must be inslaved, we must have their mark in the hand, as
well as in the forehead; we must work for them, as well as dispute; our
estates must be subject to them: See in Histories what pollings the Pope
exercised upon all men's purses. B. Bonner said, that the Pope had more out of
England then the crown; our souls must be subject: For the Pope deals in
souls; we must believe as they believe to our perdition.

See then, prefer, speak for the corruptions of the times, and it is a
stirrup for Antichrist, to get up on our backs, and ride us for Asses.

8. And last Motive is, that if we refuse, we refuse a God-given liberty.

1. Spiritual liberty, Gospel liberty, more freely to do good, Job. 24.^.
Psalms 119.68.
makes us like God, the freest agent, and the fullest of doing of good; when a
man is a slave, or but a servant, he cannot do good, what, where, and when he
would: So spiritually, when subject to humane inventions and ceremonious nets
of men; but when the Sun has made us free, like Christ we are free indeed,
to go about doing all good, at all convenient times. 1 Cor. 1. penul^.


2. It is purchased by God-Christ: for by Christ is redemption; and if every
thing that is for freedom, Isa. 4.18. Luke 1. Luke 4.18. Gal. 5.12.

3. God has given us some pledges of the particular spiritual liberties hoped
for in these times. It is a wise decorum, that when Bills of piety are to be
signed, bills of profit should be sealed. An Act for subsidies is subsidiary,
to put forward a Bill for sanctity: The Act of pol-money, to the acts to push
down oppressing Courts; but the maine Bill for the Churches liberty is yet
behind; if that come last and alone, that it may not be lost, we must join
with it subsidy-prayers, pole-prayers, every one must pay a pension of prayer.
The acts for God should be accompanied with that which is most agreeable to
God; and that is prayer. Niniveh in their distress paid by pole, I mean,
prayed by pole for their deliverance; men; women and children, and beasts after
their kind, cried out for deliverance, much more should this be done in a
Christian Kingdom.

2. means Remove, Move.


Remove those things that hinder these Potters.

Move those things that may help you.

Remove: 1. They might think, that it was but arbitrary whether they returned,
not necessary. Know we, it is an injunction, not a permission to sue out our
liberty, Gal. 5.1.

2. Long continuance of their travel in an heathenish land did much mar
them: So traveling into Italy and Popish Countries do much mar our Gentry
from doing the Church that service in suing out her liberty. Pity therefore but
there were a Statute against such travels; however there is a Divine statute,
Come out from among them, (...)
does not imply go in among them that are unclean. Men of place must forget
to allege how much worse other places, and see how much worse we be then the
rule.

3. They loved the King of Babylon, yet did not love the man, because an
heathen. In Judea they had just cause to love the King and the man both,
because religious: Let men beware of that Alexander the King said to his
attendants: many of you, says he, love Alexander, but do not love the King.
Men that will reform, must love as well him the Christian, as him the King.
The man as well as the Magistrate, must seek the good as well as the
greatness of the higher Peers and powers. If reformers admire only
greatness, they will only comply to please men. But, if as Christians they
love their King and Country as Christians, they will petition and practice for
such a reformation as may please God, and bring inward joy and outward glory to
King and kingdom; they will so Christian-like speak to a Christian King, that
Agnoscat sentiatque sibi non principi dici, Plin. 2. Pa^^. ad Trajan.
That they wish him well, and not flatter greatness.

4. They did not reckon time as those that went up did, Dan. 9.2. let Daniel
reckon for us too. cap. 12.11. The abomination was in Julians time, 360. then
Julian would set up the Temple again in despite of the Christians, Bright.
Sym. G.
and withal set up the Jewish Religion.

To this time of 360. add 1290. and there is made just 1650. And it is 1641.
already, yea, drawing 1642. Now therefore in all probability is the high time
for the work to be on foot for all Christendom, and I hope Ireland will be
the last public resistance against reformation.

5. They did not deem this the only opportunity; this is ours only, A
Parliament like to continue, The Irish tugging for a bloodshedding Religion;
therefore we for a blood-saving Religion, but not in their way: we by
petition and Parliament, not by sword and rebellion. The dumb daughter of
Cresus could speak when one was about to kill her father, saying, Will ye
kill Cresus? Who would not speak for the Church, and against Popery, when it
is about to kill our mother, the Church? Postest occasio calva, The Church, I
am sure will be bald, if we catch not hold on Christ, who waits our
reformation till his locks be wet, yea, with blood and tears of his Saints,
And God will wound the hairy scalpe of him that goes on in his iniquity to
hinder the Churches returning to liberty, Psalm. 68.21. compared with verse 22.
Now, the King and all Israel is met to bring in the Arc, therefore let the
Priest and people go on with supplications and acclamations.

2. Move on those endeavors, and put on those persons that will best advantage
the cause.

1. Let every man as he is set in the orb of the Church, do that which is in
his power. The stars (though of several magnitudes) fought in order against
Sisera, the enemy of the Church: the son of Themistocles persuaded his
mother, (...). 5.
the mother persuaded the father, and the father ruled the City: the Prophet
spoke to the Queen, the Queen to the King, and so Adonijahs disobedience was
suppressed; (...).
Morcai speaks to Hester the Queen, Hester to the King Ahashuerus, and so
conspiracies were prevented. Every man must improve that, or so many talents of
power, Mat. 25.
prayer and purse, that God has put into his hands, in a regular way to put
forward the Churches reformation, till it come to perfection.

2. Consider what are leading Cases and Causes. And every one in his order, and
to his power regularly to put on such. Nehemiah and Ezra first built the walls,
secondly, oppose Sanballat and Tobiah: thirdly, built the Temple, and set up
it is services. Regular reformation first sets the State or Commonwealth, the
walls of the Church in good repair; secondly, opposes those that conspire
against the Church and her Christian Sabbaths. Removes the men that have got
into their hands the Monopolies of the Churches misery; such being removed, the
misery they bring is removed: when the bodies of trees fall, the sprigs fall
and break: thirdly, sets up the pure worship of Christ for matter and form;
Christ's Doctrine and Discipline, which set up, bear all manner of good fruit.

3. Means: Of Causes or Cases of an equal consequence, put on that which will
first go; the good workman drives that nail that will first go; till he
has well fastened his work: so spiritually, E^za 9.8.
* when an Architect has set up diverse bays of building; E^c 12.1^.
or several posts and beams; there falls out diverse little rooms for
cupboards or closets, or, etc. that could not be so well foreseen. In
mechanic arts often times one piece occasioneth another; be always doing,
building of the Church, according as God has made you Besaleels, or Aholiabs,
or Moseses, and Aarons, or, etc. And after a while you shall see your way
better to go on; and at last God will give you an eternal habitation in the
heavens: and even so be it to all that love Sion, Amen.

FINIS.

