THE COPPIE OF A LETTER From Major General Poines his quarters of the taking
of SCARBOROVGH.

With the Coppie of the 12 Articles agreed and Concluded upon the 22. of July,
1645. between the Honorable Sir Matthew Boynton, Knight and Baronet, one of
the Millitarie Committee, for the Northern Association.

And Sir Hugh Cholmniley Knight and Baronet, Governor of the Castle there,
concerning the Delivering of the same.

As also a List of What was taken in SCARBOROVGH.

Printed, and published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by B. Alsop, and J. Coe. 1645.

ARTICLES CORCERNING The surrendering of SCARBOROVGH and POMFRACT Castle, SENT
IN A LETTER To a Gentleman of note living in the old Jury, July 28, 1645.
Son Thomas, I pray God bless you and keep you in all your actions; These
are to let you understand, I received your Letters dated the 15 of this
instant, and two books; for the which I thank you: also since another Letter
dated the 17 of this instant. For news here, after so long and tedious a
siege, it pleased God to deliver pomefract Castle into our hands upon Monday
last, I was in it my self on Tuesday, and truly it is a very strong hold; If
they had had but provision, it had been impossible to have taken it. The enemy
was to march to Newark with Drums and Colors, and 200 Musketeers, but no
Officer to have more then what was really their own, to carry no more then is
portable; there is great riches left therein: And General Poynes took this
course, he sent the enemies with a strong guard, and appointed one Captain or
Officer of every Regiment to keep the Castle, and to prize all things in it,
and so to be sold, and the owners of any goods that is in it to have the first
proffer; and so himself drew off all the rest of the Army that night, and
marched to Sandall Castle, and summoned it, but they are very stiff, and will
not yield it, so I carried three battering pieces to it, and am about sending
more to beat it about their ears: Also this day is Scarborough Castle yielded,
I have sent you here enclosed the copy of the Articles verbatim, so I will say
no more of that, but refer you to them. God knows they have been two
troublesome pieces of work, I am sure they have made me many an ill nights
work, and day, and now we are for other Castles, so that my pains and care is
never at an end, the Lord enable me to go through it, as he has wonderfully
done hitherto, his holy Name be praised for it.

I would desire you to send me down a pot of salve for my leg, for healing
and cleansing of it, and you shall hear more of the effect of it afterward.
Thus being glad to hear of your health and welfare, being the only joy your
Mother and I has in this world, with our prayers to God to continue his
blessing upon You and us all, desiring to hear from you by the next Post,

I rest your ever loving Father, till death, JA. HOPKINSON.

Articles agreed and Conclded upon the 22. of July, 1645. between the
Honorable, Sir Matthew Binton, Knight and Baronet one of the Military Committee
for the Northern Association, Colonel Francis Lashells Colonel Simon Needham
Commanders in in Chief of the Forces, for the Forces for the King and
Parliament, in Scarbrough, and the Honorable Sir Hugh Cholmnely Kn. and
Barronet Governor of the Castle there concerning the redention thereof to the
pearsons before mentioned.
I. THat the Castle be surrendered upon Friday nex being 25 of this instant July
by 12. of the Clock at none, that all the Arms, Ordnance, Ammunition and
provisions and goods of what sort Soever now in and about the Castle except
what is herafter excepted, shall be safely delivered to the Commander in chief
in Scarborough, or to whom they shall appoint to the use of the King and
Parliament.

2. That all prisoners now in the Castle be set at liberty within six hours
after the sealing of these Articles.

3. That the Governor Sir Hugh Cholmley and those Officers, Gentlemen and
Soldiers, who desire it, shall have a safe convoy from hence into Holland, or
safely convoyed to Newark whither they shall choose, and if any after their
coming to Newark, shall then resolve to go into Holland, giving notice thereof
within six days to the Committee, then to take shipping at Hull; Scarborough,
or Burlington key, to be accommodated paying usual rates, so that they take
the first opportunity of wind and shipping, and such others who desire them,
shall have passes from the said Committee, to go to the Kings Army, or any of
his Garrisons as they please; not traveling above twenty in a company, where
the Governor, or a Colonel shall be in person: otherwise not above ten in a
company; the time to be limited in their several passes, as the distance of
the place they go to shall require, none of them passing through any Garrison
of the King and Parliament, if there be any other way.

4. That no person whatsoever going from this Castle, be plundered, arrested,
or staid upon any ground or pretense whatsoever, and in a case upon complaint
made to the aforesaid Committee at York, to be speedily redrest.

5. That the said Cholmely shall have liberty to live at her own house in
Whitbee, and enjoy such of his estate as is allowed by Ordinance of Parliament,
that she may have two men servants, and two horses to carry her self and such
necessary things as shall be granted her.

6. That all inferior Officers, Commananders, and others who desire to live at
home, shall have passes granted them for that end, and shall not be forced to
take up Arms against their minds, that the sick and wounded shall be provided
for until their recovery, and the passes to travel to what place they please,
having sufficient time allowed them for their journey, and two persons
committed to take care on them.

7. That the Governor march on his own horse with Sword, Pistols, Carbine,
and defensive Arms, and all field Officers upon their own horses, with their
Swords and Pistols. All Captains whatsoever, Lievtenants and Cornets of horse;
in like manner three servants of the Governors, and for every field officer,
as aforesaid; and all other officers and soldiers whatsoever on foot without
any other Arms but their swords: and not to be compelled to march above ten
miles a day.

8. That all Officers and Soldiers may carry with them what is really their
own, that nothing be carried in cloth-bags or snapsacks but their own wearing
apparel, writings, evidences, or bills.

9. That every Officer Gentleman and Clergyman may have liberty to buy or
lawfully procure a traveling horse for himself, and his servant, that all
sick and lame men may enjoy the same privilege.

10 That all Gentlemen of quality and Clergy men, have liberty to march,
Gentlemen with their swords, but none of them carry above the value of 5. l. in
money or plate about their persons, and nothing in their cloake-bags but as is
expressed in the 8. Article.

11 That there be no fraud, deceit, whatsoever in spoiling or imbezeling any
thing before mentioned or comprised in these Articles; and if any of them shall
be violated, the party offending shall be delivered to the Commander in
chief, where the fact shall be done, to give satisfaction for his offense, and
his particular act shall not be understood as a breach of these Articles, nor
be prejudicial to any others.

That the Garrison and all therein be surrendered to the Parliament. There were
about 200 in the Castle, and 100 came in to the Parliament. There was taken in
the Castle of Scarborough; viz. Five brass Pieces of Ordnance, 30 Iron pieces
of Ordnance some Field pieces 1000. Arms a great quantity of Powder, Match,
Bullets, and other Ammunition, all Cholmleyes bag and baggage.

Hugh Cholmley.

FINIS.

