Sir John Hothams Letter to a worthy Member of the House of Commons, concerning
the late discovery at Hull; Together with Master Beckwiths Letter, a Recusant,
to Lieutenant Fooks his son in law, in service at Hull, under Sir John
Hothams command, who was a great Actor in that dangerous business.
SIR,
SInce my last to you, It has pleased the Almighty God, out of his great mercy
to us here, and the Kingdom, to preserve us from, an eminent danger, and ruin
plotted against us here, which I thought fit to acquaint you with. I writ a
word of it to the Committee at York, but since have made a more ample
discovery, I have within my Company, a Lieutenant, his name is Foolks, Son in
law to one Master Thomas Beckwith a Recusant at Beverley, a good Soldier, but
poor. This man, his Father in law, thought a fit Instrument to work upon, and
to that end, sent for him, to come over to him. The Gentleman presently
acquaints me with it, and asked my leave and advice therein: Protesting, that
both in regard of the honor of a Soldier, and a Gentleman, nothing should
pass, but I should know. He had formerly been obliged to me, and therefore I
gave him leave to go with directions to yield to such Propositions, as should
be made him; for otherwise being in their power, I knew not how they might have
used him. At his return he told me, that at his first coming, after an unusual
kind welcome, that Master Beckwith broke the matter to him, That if he would
do service, etc. he should be rewarded in a great measure, intimating to him
how unable I was to prefer him in any way of subsistence: To be short, He
made a plain contract with him, That if he could betray a Port, he should have
five hundred pound in hand, and two hundred and fifty pound, per annum, for his
life, this he willingly accepted; then Beckwith discoursed with him of the
means, how he could do this: he told him, That upon Thursday night, the six and
twenty day of this May, he had the guard at the Northgate, and if Alarm were
given at another Gate, called Hessell Gate, he could then let them in. This
thus overnight concluded upon, next morning he was brought into the presence of
one Trist, he was a Papist, and commanded Mr Percies Troop of Horse at the
defeat at Newbourne, and one Captain Courtney, and six others; some of which,
his father in-law told him, were Lord disguised: these promised him to make
good his reward; but they doubted, unless some Captain might likewise be
ayding, it might miss of performance, and therefore propounded to him to draw
his Captain into the business. Lowanger a Dutch man (a man truly of that
faith, courage, and ability, that were I to manage an enterprise of the
greatest moment that might be, I would not wish a better second) they
propounded to him that he should have in reward 1000 pounds, 500 pounds for his
life, and be made a Knight. You see, Sir, what ever the performance would have
been, they were not spare in promises. Trist told him he had a man of his, whom
under color of carrying Arms as a Voluntiere, he might employ as he saw cause.
Beckwith, it appears some time before, had an eye to have corrupted Lowanger,
for he had invited Lowanger to his house, and sent him word he would bestow a
Gelding upon him, which he presently then acquainted me with, and told me he
though there was some ill meant in it, and so would not go: He has exceedingly
labored in the discovery of this, being in a great measure sensible of his
honor herein. Upon Tuesday we caused the Lieutenant to write back to his
father-in-law that Lowanger liked well of the business, but desired some
better assurance of his reward then Trist and Courtneyes words, and sent a boy
with the Letter; and that it might appear to Mr Beckwith to be carried with
more secrecy, the boy was caused to put the Letter in his Shoe: the return was
this letter enclosed; the original (being well known to be his hand) I keep
(to be sent when the Parliament shall command) lest it might miscarry, as some
other Letters of his, whereby his hand may be known. I have Trists man in hold,
who confesses h(...)s sent hither by Trist (under color to carry Arms) to
give Intelligence: and I find he had endeavored to send to York (...) of my
soldiers. This morning I received a Letter from Mr Major of Beverley, the Copy
of which I send you, of diverse assembled at Mr Beckwiths house: We had another,
as I think, to surprise the Block-house, being the strong Fort of the Town; but
how that is, I have not yet made a full discovery.

I have sent to the Major of Beverley to search Mr Beckwiths house, being a
Recusant, and to tender them the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, and to know
their names. If there had been open War, I could soon have told what to have
done in this business: And truly, If I should have let the Plot gone on, and
given them what they deserved, I think, being they came that way to have taken
the Town, I might have justified it before God and man: But being loath to be
the first letter of Blood, I resolved of another course, which was, To
advertise His Majesty of the Plot discovered, least some should advise Him upon
a design might prove dishonorable and dangerous to Him. This dispatch I sent
away last night. I shall trouble you no farther, but rest,

Hull, 1642.Your affectionate faithful friend, John Hotham.

The true Copy of Master Beckwiths Letter, a Recusant.
Son, the Iron is hot, I guess at the sense of your Letter, that all is
right as was intended, for more security, in the morning, I expect strong here.
My Son went yesternight to York, comes with great ones this night Lor: I send
what I have from you this night thither: if it may breed inspition, Let your
friend believe well, and not come to morrow; If I could send safe, I would, But
the trust holds on our part, as I shall be advised by your Fathers Master to
morrow, I must work; yet this Boy is a fine way to come and return; Your
Letters are so wasted in his shoe, as I guess at the sense, Yet send it broken
with my exposition, for I dare not bogle with promises, no doubt is to be made
of any thing promised; I write more confidently, because I know your hand, I
name non^ but your self, he cannot come to morrow I fear, without suspicion,
But I refer all to your selves, wishing to see him I mean (in the morning) it
will be better satisfaction to him, to all here:

T. B.

London, Printed for Edward Husbands, and are to be sold at the next door to
the King's Head in Fleet Street. 1642.


