HONORS INVITATION, OR A Call to the Camp.

WHEREIN The Triumphant Genius of Great Britain by a Poetical Alarm AWAKENS
The Youth of the three Nations, to Generous Attempts, for the Glory of their
Country: With a Prospect of the present Gallant Campaign on Black Heath.

Written by a young Gentleman of Quality now in the Service;

Dignos Laud Viros Musa vetabit Mori: LONDON Printed by H. B. for John Clark
at the Harp and Bible in VVest-Smithfield. 1673.

HONORS INVITATION OR A Call to the Camp, etc.
BRED by fond Mothers too Indulgent Care,
My vainer life spun on its thirtieth Year:
Charmed with the Poisonous sweets of barren Ease,
And all the luxuries of wanton Peace;
To duel Rampant miss on a soft Bed
Hector the watch, or break a Drawers Head
To drown a younger Brother in a Look
Kick a poor Lacquey, or berogue a Cook
Top a small crew of Tenants that dare Stir
In no language, but, please your Worship Sir,
To chase the Stagg, and now and then pursue
The timorous Hare, were all the Wars I knew;
When drunk over night with generous Burgundy
I thought (as Gallants use) to sleep all Sunday
But scarce could Morpheus leaden plumets close
My Eye, and lock my Senses in repose,
When, lo! A reverend Spectrum did appear
Surprising me with equal joy and fear;
It seemed a Personage of Noblest Race
A Manly presence, and Majestic Face
An Azure Mantle flowing round his VVast
And his strong hands with Neptunes Trident Graced
Three Crowns he bore, and under them his Brow
Circled with Laurels fresh plucked from the Bough.
I gazed a while, till it approacht more near
And thus (with voice like Thunder) pierced my ear
VVilt thou, Degenerous Youth! Ignobly Blot
The Trophies which thy Ancestors have Got?
Prove them the Sires of a spurious Race?
Ore'turn their Statues, and their Tombs Deface;
Forfeit those Honors which they left to thee
By sleeping in a senceless Lethargy?
Now, when each Noble Soul, greedy of Fame
Feels his breast glowing with a generous Flame
When Sceens of blood on neighboring shores appear
And furious Mars sways all our Hemisphear;
VVilt thou alone, stupidly drowned, prefer
Sordid delights to the Glory of the war?
Decline that Road of Honor which Displays
To every daring hand a wreath of Bays
And in a wretched sloth consume thy days?
Can the poor yelpings of a deep-mouthed Hound
Vye Music with the warlike Trumpets Sound?
Or faint Applauses of a Horse race won
(When sprightly Sorrel out-flew nimble Dun)
Equal those Acclammations that are sent
In Vollies to the Ecchoing Firmament?
Which every Victor justly calls his own?
For Kingdoms conquered, and proud States ore-thrown?
Shall Troops of Heroes from all parts resort,
That quit the softer pleasures of the Court?
Charge death ith face, and forward still Aspire
Through midst of dangers swift as Heavens Fire?
Shall the Drums Rattling Summons nimbly bring
Crowds of vulgar in, to serve their King?
That laugh at hardships, and dare bravely dye,
If Fate requir't, to purchase Victory?
And their Example neither move thy spirit
Nor Emulation of the others merit?
What drowsy Opium has possessed thy Brain
Dull soul! That all these Joggins are in Vain?
For shame at last awake lest it be said
Your courage does not slumber, but is dead;
From before paltry Beauties raise your seige
Who thinks by feigned resistance to oblige
Nor let the kinder Ladies tempting Charms
Confine you still to their enfeebling Arms:
(When Fate turned prodigal, freely affords)
The Destinies of Nations to your swords*
Let mighty cities be your Mistresses
Whose dowry brings the spoils of Provinces;
Level their prouder walls, and let it be
A doubt hereafter to Posterity
When only shattered Monuments they vieu
Whether Joves thunder has been there, or you;
These are atcheivments fitting to be done
By each dares call himself stout Englands son.
As a brave courser standing on the sand
Of some swelling Sea-channel vieus a land
Smiling with sweets upon the distant side
Garnish in natures best Embroidered pride
Larded with springs, and fringed with curled woods
Impatient bounces into the capering floods
Bigg with a nobler fury than that stream
Of shallow violence he meets in them
Thence armed with scorn and courage ploughs a way
Through the Impostum'd Billows of the sea
And makes the grumbling surges, slaves to Oar
And waft him safely to the further shore
Where landed in a sovereign disdain
He turning back surveys the foaming main
Whilst the subjected waters, flowing, reel
Ambitious yet to kiss their Conq'rours heel.
At such a generous rate should thou engage,
In the grand Expedition of our age,
Thy active soul in gallant fury hurled
To club with all the Worthies of the world
Then rouz at last from this Lethargick dream
And let Heroic actions be thy theme.
No more to base Effeminate follies yield
Thy countries GENIUS calls thee to the field.
No sooner these last Accents had I heard
But straight the glorious vision disappeared;
And round about methoughts a glittering ray
Was spread, creating in my soul new day.
As Caesar once on banks of Rubicon
Stood shivering and scarce durst venture on,
Till lucky Demon by a signal chance
Becken'd him over and made his Troops advance,
So I confirmed by this good Omen found
Those mists exhaled which had my courage drowned.
Blushing I rise, and to the Eastwards spy
As brave a sight as ever courted eye.
Encamped there lay upon a spreading plain
Of sprightly warlike youths a numerous train;
Dressed in such arms as those where with Mars lays
Worlds wast, and new ones from their dust can raise;
Led by a Chief whose valorous fervor can
Hatch him whom nature broached but half a man,
Whose trumpets, like the Angels at the last
Make the soul rise by a miraculous blast
Were the mount Athos carved in shape of man
(As fancied by the Macedonian)
Whose right hand should a populous land contein
And the left be a channel to the Main
His spirit might inform so vast a figure
Yet still straight laced sweat for dominion bigger Like
Under this sun a thousand sparks bare place
Like stars, Honors bright Firmament to Grace
Whilst common Soldiers from their Tents arise
As small Sporad's to Beautify the Skies.
Ah Glorious Art of war I cried! from whence
All Honor and all Power did first Commence,
By which the Grandeur of each state does grow
And unto which Nations their safety owe,
Henceforth my Mistress thou alone shall be
And all my strength I consecrate to thee,
Hence then you gay diversions of the Town
Your bubling vanities I must disown,
Morning long sleeps adieu, let sordid Ease
Silken Buffoons, and painted Peacocks please,
Whose laboring souls being stiffled with Excess
Scarce keep from stench their rotten Carcasses,
Whilst I'mid'st blood and sweat and toils of war
Through storms, cold, hunger, and many a scar,
Pursue my Fate, resolved thus to have
An Honored Life, or else a Noble Grave.
With Allowance, June 21. 1673.
FINIS.

