A brief EXPOSITION OF THE Lords Prayer: Wherein the meaning of the words is
laid open to the understanding of weak Christians, and what the carriage of
their hearts ought to be in preferring each Petition.

By Mr. THO. HOOKER Preacher of Gods Word.

LONDON, Printed by Moses Bell for Benjamine Allen, and are to be sold at his
shop in Popes head Alley at the sign of the Crown. 1645.

A brief EXPOSITION OF THE LORDS PRAYER.
IN the Prayer are three things observable.

1. The Preface, Our Father. 2. The Prayer it self, divided into six
petitions. 3. The conclusion of faith in the word Amen. The soul goes up to
heaven, and follows the petition, hallowed be thy name, let it be Lord as thou
may have glory. Look as a man that darts an Arrow, he puts the utmost of
his strength unto it: So the word Amen speeds all the rest, speeds all and
brings a good issue to the soul by all.
First, for the Preface, and there we must examine in general two things, the
sense, and meaning of the words.

Secondly, what ground of encouragement it affords us to seek God: And

First, observe the party sought, Father.

Secondly, the excellency of him, which art in heaven.

Thirdly, the interest we have in him, he is Our Father.

Why, Quest.
or in what sense is God called a Father?

First, Resp.
He is the Father of Christ by eternal generation.

Secondly, he is the Father of men two ways: 1. By creation, so the Scripture
runs, Job 1.9. the Angels are called the sons of God, Job 1.9.
because they were created by God; so God is our Father by creation, and thus
he is a Father to the just and unjust, Psalm. 139.
Psalm. 139. I am wonderfully made, says the Text. 2. By adoption and grace in
that he does freely take us to be his sons in Christ; he puts us into the
right of his children, as a man puts a stranger into the right of his son:
And thus God is a Father to his chosen only, that look what Christ has, Romans
8.17.
they have, Romans 8.17. If sons then heirs, we are heirs, Gods chosen
children; both these ways God is our Father.


Do we only pray to the Father, Quest.
in that we say, Our Father?

No, Resp.
we pray not to the Father only, but we pray to the holy Trinity, we make
mention of the Father only, yet we must direct our prayers to one God in three
persons in that Godhead; however we mention not all, yet we direct to all, all
our petitions, the reason is this, because otherwise we should have made an
Idol of God; I say concerning but of one person we make an idol of God, and
call not upon him as he is.

How may we apprehend of God aright in prayer? Quest.


Thus: Resp.
as God has revealed himself in his Word, so we apprehend him, not putting
any image at all upon him; as Instance thus; two ways:

First, he that creates all, governs all, knows all, sees all, by whom I live,
move, and have my being; to that God I pray. The Scripture has revealed God
thus, and he fills heaven and earth, etc. To that God then that is thus
infinite, to him I call; I go now no further to the seeing of an image, but to
an all-seeing God I come.

Secondly, instance thus, look abroad into the creatures, and in all you shall
see a power and a goodness: Now from whence came this power? The power of
Beasts came not from the power of trees and the like, but there was a first
power which gave all power to the creatures: The Creator is infinitely more
powerful then the creature.

There is goodness also in the creatures; all that came from the first
goodness, that let out it self; now that which lets forth it self to the
creature, is in the Creator infinitely above the creature; that is, the Lord.
Thus you must quit your selves of an image; he that gives all, is above all;
God gives all, therefore he is above all; and to that God I put up my petition.

Why do we not mention the Son and the Holy Ghost as well as the Father?
Quest.


Because the Father is the first person in the Trinity, Resp.
and the Fountain from whence all flows; the Father works of himself, the
Son of him, the Holy Ghost from them both: therefore we mention him only,
though we may mention the other, yet we pray only to the Father.

How does this word Father help a man to call on God by Prayer? Quest.


When we conceive of God as a Father, Resp.
it puts us in mind of his mercy, that he will pity us as a Father. A man
will be reconciled unto his son easily, and will spare his son, though he
be a prodigal, yet a father will pass by and cover all. So I pray to a
Father; did I pray to a Judge that will condemn me, or an enemy that would not
be reconciled to me, little hope I had to speed because I have wronged him? yet
I will arise and go to my Father, and say, Father I have sinned: Psalm. 103.13.
As a father pitties his son, Psalm. 103. 13.
so God pittieth them that fear him: He is my child, says God, though
stubborn, and I must look to him. When a man's rebellions witness against him,
and Satan vexes him, and says, What, do thou think to have mercy, and art
so vile? True, says the soul, I am naught, but I go to a father. If a child
do but aim at a thing, the father accepts him; if he speak but half a
sentence, the Father interprets it: So this is the great encouragement of the
faithful to go to God, that notwithstanding so many failings, and though so
dead and so barren, yet a father bears all. The Lord interprets all, though
but broken speeches, he accepts all, and regards all. We have a Father to to
go to, that is willing to pass by many failings.

Secondly, we have a ground of pity, if it be but a sigh, he receives it. So
this may persuade us of the willingness of God to help us. If a man were to
go to him that is hard-hearted, little hope he had to speed; we say he is a
cruel man, we had as good pull water out of a flint, etc. A child will not beg
of a stranger, but will go to his father; so we pray to our Father, that is
more willing to hear and grant then we are to ask. Luke 15.
I will go to my Father, says the Prodigal; as who should say, I am
unworthy, yet I go to a Father. Nay, the Lord hears before we call; he
prepares the heart to call, and answers what it craves when they ask. The
father puts into the child's mouth what it shall say, and then he will give it
what it craves: so God would have us seek for abundance of mercy, open thy
mouth, etc. God would feign give, but none will crave: it is God that must give
a heart to crave, and this is got by prayer. As water put into a Pumpe will
bring forth much waters: so pray that you may pray. If your earthly father
knows what to give to you, how much more can your heavenly Father give you a
heart; nothing shall be wanting to them that go to God as a father: God bows
his care to the prayer of his people; he condescends to our weakness, buckles
himself to hear us.

Thirdly, we are here to take notice of Gods fatherly providence, to provide
what may be suitable to our occasions: God has all in store, All the beasts of
the field are mine; he is the God of all comfort, herefore he is provident. He
that provides for the Ravens, and causes the Lillies of the field to grow; if
God care for these how much more for you? Matthew. 6. has the Lord a care for
Oxen? He that feeds the Ravens, Matthew. 6.
and clotheth the Lillies, he will much more provide for him that calls on him.
Who then would not have God to his Father? As the Father provides for the
son, so God is a provident Father: let us walk in his ways, and commit our
selves to his providence and care.

Fourthly, this must teach us an awfulnesse to come before him. What awe should
be in our hearts to come before an heavenly Father?

Our Father.
FIrst, observe that it is the term of relation, and it is in two things: 1.
Consider the sense of the words. 2. The Motives.


For the sense of the words, three things are employed.

First, a propriety: an interest we have to challenge in special, not as one
friend to another, or one neighbor to another, or the like; but he is our
Father; as we say it is our Land, so when we say Our Eather, we imply a
special claim to God; all that compassion and mercy in God is mine, as Nabal
said It is my meat. Deuteronomy. 32.
The word my implies a possession, Deuteronomy. 32. Our God is not like the gods of
the Heathens: and as Job says, My Redeemer lives.

Secondly, this laying claim to God, implies a community to all the household
of God; as the Sun is every man's, so God is every man's that is faithful.

Thirdly, it notes a bond of society between the faithful children of the same
Father. This is the meaning of the word Our; as the members agtee with the
head, so they are helpful; so God is helpful to all his faithful ones.

Now the Motives whereby the soul may be furnished to call on God are three:

First, a cheerful readiness to repair unto the Lord; 1. Motive.
and why, we have an interest in him, he is our Father. The interest a child
has in his father stirs him to come readily to his Father, he craves not of a
stranger, as when the child cried they did carry him to his mother; If any
thing befalls the child, he says, I will tell my father, and complain to my
mother, and the like: So ask the child, who will provide for him? he says,
My father: So it is here with our God. There is a fresh and living way that is
mavelous easy and open, Whosoever seeks shall find, whosoever knocks it
shall be opened unto him; therefore whatever our injuries be we should not
complain to the world: No, pour forth your prayers to your Father, and he will
be sure to hear you.

Secondly, as there should be a chearie readiness to come to the Lord, 2.
Motive.
so there should be a spiritual boldness to challenge what may be needful.
Among strangers we are strange, but amongst friends we are bold; we have a
right and title to these things, and we may be bold with our own. Thus David
challenges God, As thou art faithful deliver me, I am thy servant, etc. If a
servant wants food or raiment he goes to his master: So says David, I am thy
servant, therefore give me understanding that I may live. When they bragged of
Paul and Apollo, says he, All is yours. This should comfort our hearts; let us
claim our portions, God is our Father, and he will give it: therefore be
humbled in regard of your weakness and unworthiness, and confident in regard
of his mercy, and walk comfortably in regard of the Lord. If I should see the
child doubt in regard of my readiness, I should wonder: Care not, says he,
it is your own, and he is our Father, Marth. 6. 32. 3, Motive.
and all that is in him is ours, Matthew. 6.32.

Thirdly, this stirs up our hearts to have a fellow-feeling of our brethrens
misery in our prayers, therefore God cuts off all in-seekings of our own. Our,
as if he should say, Is there never a Joseph in prison, never a Daniel in the
Lions den, remember and pray for them. If one suffer all suffers, we are all
members of one body; we should mourn with those that mourn, and weep with
them that weep, Isa. Isai. 58.
58. Pus up a Prayer for the remnant: Oh that our hearts would have a
fellow-feeling of their trouble. Ephesians. 6.
Paul begs for prayers as for a penny, Ephesians. 6. for me also; nay, he entreats the
Romans to wrestle for him in prayer.

Which art in Heaven, etc.
FIrst, we are to open the sense of the word Heaven; secondly, the motives to
move the heart thereto.

Whether is God more in Heaven then in any other place? Quest.


No: Resp.
God, in regard of his essence, is in all places alike, he is wholly every
where. The Godhead is altogether indivisible; things of quantity fill a room,
but God is indivisible; as he is unchangeable, so he is a simple being;
therefore all of God is in the whole compass of Heaven and Earth. Psalm. 139.
If I go to hell thou art there, etc. God is in the same manner every where;
Psalm. 139.
you must conceive no parts in God, if God be immense, then all of him is every
where and altogether in every place. All creatures have their being from God,
he is in them and beyond them, he is excluded out of no place, included in no
place.

If all of God be in every place, Quest.
why then is he said to be in Heaven only?

First, Resp.
because God would manifest the glory of his power more in Heaven then in
Earth, because we see him not here, Acts 17. we grope after him; Acts 17.
but we know the royalty of a King appears more in Court or Parliament; so the
excellency of God appears most in Heaven.

Secondly, there are three Heavens; the Heaven where the birds are, the Heaven
where the stars are, and the highest Heaven: now the third Heaven is meant
here, for God has reserved this place as his chair of state, the Heavens
(says David) are the Lords, no unclean thing can come there. The Angels
sinned, and all the visible Heavens are defiled by man; the sun is abased,
the air polluted, all these creatures that serve man are by man defiled; but
the highest Heaven was never defiled, because it is the chamber of God; God
leaseth out these things to man, but he reserves this Heaven for his own
habitation. This is the special reason why God is said to be in Heaven.

What motives have we to prepare our hearts to prayer, Quest.
which is the scope of the Preface?

They are specially three.

First, Resp.
it teaches us to take notice of the purity of God, what ought to be the frame
of our spirits when we appear before him; he cannot abide sluggish prayers
from an impure heart, heavenly dispositions best suits with Gods holiness; the
sanctity of our affections ought to answer Gods purity. Kings (we know) as they
will be entertained, so their entertainment must be that which suits to their
greatness. God is in Heaven beyond all corruption, therefore if we approach
near to God we should answer to his purity with hearts purged, that our hearts
may be in Heaven, because he is in Heaven to whom we pray, Mal. 1. 14.
Cursed be the deceiven that has a male in his flock, and offers a female,
etc. our sacrifice is our service, and prayer is one of the chief. The God of
Heaven is a pure God, then cursed be the man that has strong love, desires and
other affections, and offers the wealtest to God, and serves God with rubbish,
cursed be that man; the pure God of Heaven will not look on such service and
impure prayers; God is pure, therefore the service ought to be so. When men are
to sit before Princes, they are to fit themselves accordingly, so it is here:
Let us then think it an indignity to God to appear with rubbish dispositions
before him. He that will perform a solemn duty to a Prince will lay aside all
other occasions: so as he said in another case well, lay by all; world, let me
now have heavenly joy, for I come before a heavenly Father.

Secondly, it is a ground of comfort that our spirits may be cheared; since God
is in Heaven he is able to effect whatever our hearts desire. To be in Heaven
it argues Majesty; now we do nor prays to an earthly parent, who is liable
to corruption, but to an heavenly Father we pray, who can do what we will. He
that is in a high place has the advantage; so our heavenly Father has the
advantage of all other things, therefore what we crave is done already, he can
do it; and our God is in Heaven, he will do what he will. A vileness ever
accompanies earthly things, but our Father is in Heaven; therefore Nehemiah
made his prayer to the God of Heaven. There are dunghill duties in the world,
but our Father is in Heaven. The King could not help the woman, but our Father
is not an earthly father, but we pray to the God of Heaven. We have but earthly
opposition here, but our Father is in Heaven, who can overpower all wrongs
done to his children and rewards them.

Thirdly, this shows we should with trembling approach his presence: The God of
Heaven is powerful; we are creeping worms, and dare we come carelessly to such
a Father? A father implies a readiness, and Heaven an awfulnesse; when the
mountains move, and the devils shake at the presence of God, and the blessed
Angels tremble before him, how dare we approach his presence unseemly, lest we
have no answer; or to turn the eye one way and the head another? We are not
able to bear it in a child. Do not suffer your minds to wander; dare we
press in headily into the presence of God, when as the Angels cover themselves
before him? Let the fear of the Almighty fall on us: since God is in Heaven,
let our hearts be reverently affected, Acts 17. 28.
for in him we live, move, and have our being. Thus much for the Preface.

Hallowed be thy Name.
NOw we come to the Petitions, which are six; the Lord condescended to our
weakness and feebleness, and therefore contrives them into a narrow
scantling, three concerning Gods Name, Kingdom, and Will; three concerning our
selves, things of this life, things of grace, and they in respect both of
justification and sanctification: In all observe;

First, the meaning of the Petition.

Secondly, the carriage of the heart in pressing of it, Hallowed be thy Name.
In it observe two things:

First, what is here meant by Name.

Secondly, what it is to hallow this Name.

What is here meant by Name, Quest.
or what is the Name of God?

I answer; by Name is meant whatever God is made known to us by, Resp.
this is his Name; as a man is known by his name, so the Lord reveals himself
to us by his Name. Now this consists in two things:

First, all the glorious Atributes of God, as Holy, Pure, Wise, Infinite, etc.
these are the Names of God.

Secondly, all the Ordinances of God, and the graces of Gods Saints, and the
providence of God in the creature; and it is not the thing it self, but there
is a declaration of God in these that is his Name. The creature is not the Name
of God, but God working there; grace is not so much as the appearance of God in
that grace.

What do you mean by Hallowed? Quest.
can you make God holier then he is, or add any thing to God?

No: Resp.
we cannot add any thing unto him that gave all to us.

How then do we hallow Gods Name? Quest.


When we make Gods Name to be discovered as a holy thing; Resp.
the expressure of this is that we would hallow.

How shall we do that? Quest.


There was a consultation in Heaven how that the Godhead might be manifested,
Resp.
might be observed, else were here none to apprehend it from eternity: Nay, if
there had been any, they could not apprehend it. I will, says God; have my
Attributes expressed; therefore God would have a Word, wherein his goodness
should be discovered, Exodus 33.23. Exodus 32. 23.
Thou shall not see my face but my backparts thou shall see. As it is with a
torch, carry it from one place to another, and it will leave a glimpse behind
it: So it is in the surpassing beauty of God, he leaves some beams behind him,
that we may say, Justice and Mercy, etc. have been here. Now we are said then
to hallow his Names when as we make this appear, when we deal with Gods Name
as with a holy thing, and that appears in three particulars:

First, when we acknowledge the excellency of him, we ought to take notice of
the beauty and glory of God: Men of place think themselves abused, if we pass
by them and do not reverence them; so when we come to deal with Gods
Ordinances, do you know what you do? Gods Name is there, therefore observe it.

Secondly, as we should acknowledge the worth of it, so we should labor to
preserve it. Upon things of great weight and worth, what a price do we set
upon them? and how tenderly do we look to them that no blemish be cast upon
them? So should we do with the Name of God. Go to the Isle of Shittim, etc.
they cast the Commandments of God behind their backs; the Heathen (says God)
would not do so, they kissed the threshold where Dagon was. So deal with Gods
Name, let no blemish betide it, but deal with it as with a holy thing. The
least stain of sinful distemper does not become the Name of God; you respect
a holy thing, so do the Name of God.

Thirdly, as we should acknowledge this worth, so labor to set it out that
others may see it, as occasion shall be offered, when any honor may come to it
thereby; express the beauty of the virtues of God, that they may be observed;
holy things are not to be kept secret when opportunity serves; Let your light
so shine (says the Text) that men may see the good in you: So whatever we see
in the Name of God, as we should keep it from blemish, so we should set it out
in the glory of it. A man should hold out the light of the Gospel, not hide it
under a bushel: show as much of God as we can, that men may say, God has been
here indeed; that a man's word should be like Gods Word that indites them.

How does the heart behave it self in the putting up of this Petition? Quest.


First, this behavior of the soul does mainly appear in two things: Answ.


First, it heartily desires in all things that it shall do that it may lift up
the glory of God; now this we do when in all things we have or do there is a
disposition for the furtherance of Gods praise. All our life should be like a
lantern to convey light to others; so the heart should desire that in all
things Gods glory should be furthered, that we may do nothing but we might
further Gods glory by it. Silver and gold are fit to stamp the Kings image
upon; so, a man's practice should be good mettle to instamp Gods glory upon: not
as painted windows to hinder the light, but to rebound the light. The Text
says, Herod did not give God the glory, the voice of God and not of man; he
took the glory of God to himself, and did not give it to God. There be some
kind of glasses will reflect a man's image, so there should be a conveying of
glory from our selves to God. Look as it is with a ball, the falling of it
makes it rebound: so it should be with our hearts, they should rebound Gods
glory when it falls upon us: This is a great skill. The Soul should have
nothing but whereby God might be honored. Any sinful course blemisheth Gods
glory; any priding of a man's self furthers not Gods glory, but the soul
should desire that in all, God might be acknowledged and glorified.

When does the soul do this? Quest.


When the soul labors, Answ.
that in all things something more then humane excellency may appear: For, if
any thing of a man's own be discerned, we fall short of Gods name in every
action. Such should be our dispositions, that something more may be seen then
a base mean shadow. This is a skill in preaching and praying, there should be
more in all then humane discovered, as parts, gifts, and the like. If nothing
appear but self, the Name of God is deprived of what it should have: As Paul
said, Do I speak as a man? But he demonstrated the Spirit in him, it should
be discovered what I do, that God works it, that he might have all the honor
of it. God the Author of all should have the glory of all; we talk of this and
that, and say, let him be glorified, but we do it not in our conversations.

What be the several works of the heart in doing this, Quest.
that it may appear God is the Author of all, and the honor is due to him?

The acts of the heart are two, Answ.
whereby it sets forth the glory of God.

First, in all services a man should not be quiet in his affections and
endeavors till he comes to the highest pitch, that is, Gods glory. All actions
are in the way one toward another; as a pair of stayres, one goes from
another and above the other. A man should go higher and higher till Gods glory
mounts and surmounts them all. As a Minister first studies to teach the people,
that they may be informed, but why informed? that they may appear to be
Christ's, and that Gods grace may appear in their conversations: the soul
never rests till it be here. A man goes to prayer in his Family, and why so?
that he may show God in his courses. The servant sends for his wages, and so is
gone, and where is God all this while? This should be our desire, that in all
our actions God may be discovered to be the Author, and to have the honor of
all.

Secondly, the soul must be sure not to go beyond Gods glory; as thus, a
Minister preaches that the people may be instructed, and he be honored as well
as God, this is to be above God: A man prays to honor God, and that it may be
known he is a glorious professor, thus; A man is above God as a Bird steps
from one bough to another, till it come to the highest, and then it flies away:
So we step up to Gods glory and go beyond it, we would have God glorified to
glorify us; but this is hypocrisy, to have God honored that we may be
secretly base: This is the deepest dishonor to God, and he will be revenged of
them one day, and pluck his praise out of their bowels. The three Wise men
would not stay till the star stood and went no further: So where the statre of
Gods glory goes, let us go, and not stay till we come thither, and when we are
there, go no further: This is the carriage of the heart, Phil. 1.20. that in
life and death God may be honored and exalted. Look as it is with a workman
that makes a piece of curious work, we do not give the honor to the tool,
but to the Workman; so God should receive the honor of all, and from all.

Secondly, as the soul should make God discovered by himself; so he should
desire that God might be acknowledged by others as we our selves express it;
and that appears in two particulars:

First, that they might embrace the excellency of God; Matthew. 5.16.
Let your light so shine before men; why so? not that they may see you, but
that they may see your good works; that is, God in your good works, and
glorify him. Do not think I would have others see my good parts, gifts, and
the like, but only that they may see God in them. The Fisher desires that the
fish would see the bait, not him: So he that angles for the souls of others,
does not desire that others may see him, but the grace of God. An Apprentice
does not stand in the shop to call over others to look on himself, his person,
properties, and the like, but to sell his Masters wares: And so we desire that
God may lift us up, but that is not the rule that men may see our good works,
but God in them: A child or a servant should so walk that others may admire
Gods grace in him; we are Gods workmanship.

Secondly, we should have hearts enlarged to bless God, that he has been
pleased to reveal himself to us. Thus much for the first Petition.

Thy Kingdom come.
Why is this added immediately to the former? Quest.


Because it is a special means whereby the heart is fitted and the glory of
God advanced; Answ.
the first was to hallow Gods Name, and to that end the Kingdom of Christ must
be set up; for no natural man can glorify God, because so long as sin and
corruption prevails it will never be; therefore the power of Christ's Spirit
must do it, and by it we must be swayed unto it.

What is the scope of this petition? Quest.


The main scope of it is thus much, Answ.
that the government of God by Christ might be set up and prevail every where;
as before Gods name was highest, so here the power and government of Christ is
to be universal; that is, the general: now we come to the particulars, and
here consider the sense of the words.

First, What is this Kingdom?

Secondly, the carriage of the heart in putting up this petition.

Thirdly, what is the coming of this Kingdom?

By Kingdom is meant that rule that Christ has set up in the hearts of his.
For the general providence of God, I take it, is not so much aimed at in this
place, or that ordinary providence of God over the creatures; this is set forth
in the fourth petition, (Give us this day our daily bread,) but it is the rule
of Christ that is set up in his Church.

How many fold is it? Quest.


It is two fold: Answ.
which are these,

Of Grace. Glory.
both aimed at here.

What is the Kingdom of grace? Quest.


It is that whereby Christ by his Spirit and grace, Answ.
by the ministry of the Word, takes place in the hearts of his, and this he
does two ways.

First, by over-powering and casting down all other things which are opposite
thereunto, all the power of sin and Satan, which are opposite to him.

Secondly, he sets up that frame of Spirit, whereby it is subject to grace, and
it takes place two ways,

First, by cutting down and killing of every sin.

Secondly, the soul takes the stamp of every condition, and is ruled by it.

What is the Kingdom of glory? Quest.


Gods immediate ruling in the hearts of the glorified Saints. Answ.


How does the Kingdom of grace and glory differ? Quest.


Here in the Kingdom of grace God rules. Answ.


First, by his Spirit.

Secondly, by the Word and Ordinances.

Thirdly, by the ministry of the Word: But in Heaven he rules immediately: no
more words and means, but Christ fills the soul fully, and then he rules
gloriously, when the understanding, will, and affections are full of Christ,
and are fully and wholly subject to him; here in the vale of tears we meet with
many rubs and oppositions, but then Christ shall shine fully and immediately.
In all his Ordinances we seek a Christ, but then we shall have all of him; so
that we that have the Spirit have a glimpse of heaven; therefore ashamed should
we be to be weary of God, let us be weary of sin: I tell you, it is a heaven
to live here with God upon earth, and if it be a glorious thing to have a
glimpse of God here, how much more to be filled with God hereafter in his
Kingdom?

How is this Kingdom said to come? Quest.


The coming of these Kingdoms implies three things. Answ.


First, that the Word may be revealed in these places, where it has not been,
Luke 1.
That the dayspring from on high, may visit them that sit in darkness, that
the Sun of righteousness might visit them that want it, that the banquet of
the Gospel might be set up, Mat. 24. If any man say he is in the wilderness,
go not out, for where the Carcass is, thither will the Eagles resort. This is
the first thing. A Kingdom is said to come when a King rules in a place where
he did not before, so it is here; Let all the people praise thee, says David:
he desires not, that some tongues only, but that all tongues and languages
should do this.

Secondly, where ever the Gospel does shine, we desire that it should discover
it self more fully, and spread it self where ever it comes; we desire the Kings
government should enlarge the territories more and more; so we desire not only
that Christ should be revealed, but that more and more should be gathered, that
God may be taken in every where, and that every knee may bow to Christ, and
lick the dust, that so there may be an addition made to the Church, that every
man in every kind may come to Christ, and that God would cast his skirt over
him that more may be caught in his net, that the Jew and Gentile may be
gathered into one sheepfold, and have one Shepherd.

Thirdly, that the power of it may be more and more settled, as the house of
David grew stronger and stronger, 2 Samuel 3.1.
but the house of Saul grew weaker and weaker, so, when Christ sets up his
candlestick, that the seed that is sown there may take deep root. When a King
has erected Castles, then he has his Kingdom; so we desire God may entrench
himself, and rear Castles of defense against his enemies which would remove
him; that he would set himself up strongly, that every Traitor may be crushed,
and every base lust; that God would slay them, and none but his Laws take
place; in a word, the issue returns to thus much, we beseech Christ that his
Gospel may spread and be strong, and these days of sin may be wasted, and
that he may come in the clouds, Revel. 22. and then, come Lord Jesus, come
quickly; that he would accomplish the number of his Elect, and gather those
that belong to his glory, and that they may be everlastingly with him.

What is the carriage of the soul in putting up this petition? Quest.


It appears in three things.

First, the soul desires and so labors to be subject to the good pleasure of
the Lord: the heart says, oh that I might be so disposed, that I might be
subject to the pleasure of the Lord: we desire that all those things that are
set up in our hearts, that are contrary to the good pleasure and will of the
Lord might be subdued, Psalm. 119.4. Thou have commanded us to keep thy
commandments, but, oh Lord, that my soul were so, thou have enjoined me to do
so, oh that I could do so, the Spirit should be as wax to the seal, and ink
to the paper, that the soul might take the impression of every rule that God
would set up in our souls; thus the soul should be disposed, to wish that the
Lord would put this frame into us; this is a heart worth gold: thou have said,
seek me; oh, says the soul, that I could seek thy face, and echo, behold
Lord, thy face I seek, to submit wholly without any contending, not that the
Lord should force us, but that we should take up our yoke, put our necks to the
yoke, let the Word of the Lord bear the balance. When Mary wanted wine, and our
Savior checked her, and Martha cumbred with too much business was reproved;
thou art troubled with many things, etc. they submitted presently, not a word
more: so what the Lord commands let us do without any quarrelling, let the
least inkling of the Word bear the balance. When our Savior sent his
Disciples for the Asses Colt, they might have said, but happily the man will not
let him go, how then? I tell them, says our Savior, the Master has need of
him, and then they will not deny him; that is enough, do but speak and it is
done, this the soul should labor to attain unto.

Secondly, the soul carries it self with an inward opposition to whatever is
opposite to the government of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the utmost of our
power, it is in vain to say, it were well if it were so, and I would it were so,
and yet to stand still and not to set to our hands; but we must join sides with
the Lord, and as he spoke of Merosh, Cursed art thou, because thou will not
help the Lord against the mighty. So truly the Lord Jesus is coming to our
Towns, to our families, therefore we should step out and help the Lord against
those mighty mountains of pride and stubbornness of heart: when a proud heart
stirs, do you join sides with it? or cry out and say, good Lord help down with
that proud heart, and stubborn spirit, and the like? the Lord says it, and
does your heart yield? But if you say, come pride, and you and I will join
sides together, and if the Word can remove us, let it, but we will join sides.
Is this calling for the Kingdom of Christ to come? No, no, you are traitors
and conspirators, and no subjects; therefore stop your mouths, this is not
submitting but conspiring; when Jezabel looked out of the window with her
painted face, says Jehu, Who is on my side, fling her out: so the Lord says,
will you have pride, or me? if you be on my side, fling down that proud heart
which hinders the Lord Jesus Christ from taking place in your souls; you paint
your selves in a sturdy humor, but if you be on Gods side, fling down those
painted strumpets; you must not only oppose great sins, but every sin; we must
not fodder and side with any secret sin, although it be but with the appearance
of evil; you must abstain from it; you know what Moses said, of losing not a
hoof; another said, he would not start a hairs breadth from Gods Commandments
in any particular; so let us subdue all, not leave an inch, not a stamp, not so
much as two nails of the Dagon of our cursed lusts, to rule in us; thus it
should be with the soul.

Thirdly, though the soul cannot be as it should, yet it does desire the Lord
that neither sin nor self-will may rule in us, lay all flat down under the
government of Christ. When the heart finds a great deal of outwardnesse and
power of sin, then it says, Lord, thy Kingdom should prevail, but the Sons
of Zeruiah are too strong in me; therefore take power to thy self, and pluck
away whatever does oppose thee. It was a good speech of a good Christian, that
he desired the Lord to rule whether he would or no. Thus the soul should be
disposed to entreat the Lord, that he would break open the door; when the Lord
comes and we will not open, we desire the Lord would come in by violence. The
white horse in conquering conquered; so the soul desires the Lord to conquer,
to break in and make way into the soul, and to take possession wholly in the
soul; now when the soul is loath this should be, it is a wretched spirit, that
when the Lord will take sin whether we will or no, we are loath it should be.
Do we then pray Christ's Kingdom should come, when we are not able to bear a
commandment? No, no, the soul will labor to oppose sin, and pray the Lord for
power against corruption.

Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.
THis is the third Petition, and in it are three things observable.

First, the order, it is in the third place.

Secondly, the sense and meaning of the words.

Thirdly, the frame of the heart in putting up this Petition.

First, for the order, the reason of it is, because the two former make way for
this third; he that glorifies God in all things, and has his power set up in
him, he only does what he commands; for naturally there is no ability in man to
do the will of God; but when the Spirit works within, then we are able to frame
our hearts to Gods will: David was a man after Gods own heart, and then he did
his will; this is the reason of the order of the Petition. From the ground
observe two grounds of directions.

First, he that thinks out of his own power to do Gods will, it is impossible
he should do it, no, he will never do it.

Secondly, we must first submit to the Kingdom of Christ, before we can do his
will; be under the government of Gods grace, and then go on cheerfully. We
fail before we have submitted; we would be doing, but first Christ must do
terrible things to the heart, before it yield obedience. Now for the words.

What is the will of God? Quest.


It is the purpose of the Almighty touching the accomplishment of any thing;
Answ.
there is nothing done, but the LORD does it: Whatsoever is brought to pass,
that GOD wills in general, Ephesians. 1.

How many kinds of will are there? Quest.
or how manifold is the will of God?

It is twofold; not in regard of it self, Answ.
but in regard of us.

First, the revealed will of God.

Secondly, the secret will of God.

What is the secret will of God? Quest.


It is that secret purpose he has in himself before all worlds, Answ.
and has not discovered it to the creature, Ephesians. 1.9. Having made known unto
us the mystery of his will according to his own good pleasure which he has
purposed to himself. The Gospel was hid in the bosom of the Almighty, not
observable by man or any creature under heaven, but now it is revealed; this is
the secret will of God which was hid in himself before all words, 1. Cor.
2.16. Who has known the mind of God? The deep things of God none knows but
the Spirit of God; and as it is not made known, so we have nothing to do with
it in this place.

What is the revealed will of God? Quest.


It is the purpose of God that he has made known to us by his Word, Answ.
and revealed to us in his works, whatever is done in heaven or earth is the
will of God. I did not know God would destroy Bohemia and the Palatinate before
I saw it; this is the will here meant. I did not know of such a friends death
before he dyed, and then we must say, Thy will be done. What ever God has made
known either by works or words, that we pray to have done.

What is this doing of the will of God? Quest.


It consists in, Answ.
and implies two things:

First, that whatever God makes known to be his will to bring upon us, we
should willingly submit and yield unto it. If God would have me poor, when it
is done, we should approve of the accomplishment of Gods will. It is the breach
of many commandments, that when God thwarts our desire, we are unwilling it
should be done: The wife is unwilling her husband should dye, and the husband
that the wife should dye, never lost a man such a wife as I; this is
professedly against this petition: We must imitate that of the good Prophet
David, Psalm. 39. I held my tongue and said nothing: Will the Lord have it not a
word more? then his spirit yields presently, takes the stroke, does not thwart
the good will of the Lord, this is the practice of David, Eli, Hezekiah, It is
the Lord, let him do what he will: Nay, our blessed Savior himself says,
Not my will, but thy will be done. But this is the folly of our hearts; we take
up Arms against Gods will; God would have us to be poor and we will be rich:
This is not to do the will of God: Though God force us to do it, yet that is
no thanks to us; Thus we sin desperately.

Secondly, the heart is not only content with what God will have us suffer,
whether loss of life, friends, liberty, and the like, but there is another
will must be done by us; what God reveals to be a duty, must be discharged by
us. If there be a truth to be made known to us, we must acquaint our selves
with the will of the Lord, and then with all diligence practice it: Make my
heart one with thine, that I may ever fear thy Name: Let thy will be mine: Oh
says the soul, that I might ever fear thy Name; this is to do the will of
God. We do not say, let it be spoken of and considered of by me, but let it be
done, let it be accomplished by me: We must not lift at it, and give God good
words, and talk, and leave it undone, but labor to do it. It is not enough
for the child to say, I know what my father commands, but I must do what I
list. Such hearts cannot pray to expect any thing at the hand of the Lord; now
and then to look at a duty, etc. and to say, I would it were so, will not serve
the turn. Away with that sluggishnesse, to wish the will of God were done, and
yet you will have your own wills.

To this precept belongs, that we should set on others to do Gods pleasure. In
vain do we wish it to be done, and yet do not provoke on others to do it.
Paul, when Agrippa and he was grapling together, says Agrippa, thou have
persuaded me almost to be a Christian; not almost, says Paul, but I would have
thee altogether as I am, except these bonds: I would not have thee fettered as
I am, but enlarged in heart to do Gods will. So that of Joshua, I and my house
will serve the Lord; he that not only neglects Gods will himself, but hinders
others, that man does not pray this petition aright; he that says, Thy will be
done, and in the mean time withdrawes others by his secret allurements, and
says, what? should I be such a fool to be at other men's bow and beck to sit
howling in a corner as thou do? No, no, well be it known to thee, thou that
wilt not do Gods will here, the Lord will have his will done on thee one day to
thy cost: He that will not do Gods will here, God will send him packing to
Hell, and there he will execute his will upon him whether he will or no?

How must we do the will of God, we do now and then stumble at a duty, and
now and then take up a service, Quest.
and we are neither whores nor thieves, but yet we are now and then peevish and
wayward, etc. is not this enough?

No, Answ.
no, you must do it in earth as it is in Heaven; not now to be something, and
then to be nothing; now a Saint, and then a Devil; but you must do the will
of God as it is in Heaven.

But can a man do the will of God on earth, as the blessed Angels do it in
Heaven? Quest.


A man cannot do it in that measure the Angels do it: Answ.
but we may do it as they do, and perform equal obedience with them, though
not in quantity, yet in quality: A child follows the father, though it cannot
run so fast as the father: A Scholar may imitate the copy, and write after
it, though not write so fast and well: So the servants of the Lord cannot do
the will of God here so, in that measure that the Angels do it in Heaven, but
in quality like them: Let their obedience be our pattern, not in the measure,
but in the manner of it.

In what things must it be done, Quest.
and how can we express any action like theirs?

This resemblance is in four particulars. Answ.


First, they do it readily, they are pressed, and ready at hand to do the good
will of the Lord upon all occasions; they do not withdraw themselves, but
presently upon every occasion do what the Lord requires. We read, Job 1. that
the sons of God appeared before him, they are ever in his sight to give
attendance upon him, as the handmaid is ever at the hand of her Mistress: So
that of Isaiah, the Text says, they cover their faces before the Mercy Seat;
they cover their faces in token of awfulnesse and reverence, and cry Holy,
Holy. They are ever before him as a dutiful servant is ever at his Masters
beck. They are at hand in this readiness of theirs to do the will of the Lord;
we should imitate them, to be ever prepared and at hand to do the will of God;
not to have our affections straggling, but with Ananias we must say, Here Lord;
with Abraham, Behold thy servant is at hand. Thus it should be with the soul;
the Lord says, you must not have this sin, and that corruption; we must
reply, Thy will be done, LORD; we must not say as Moses when the Lord commanded
him to go to Pharaoh, says he, Who am I, Lord? send another: 1 Samuel 3.
No, it should not be thus with us, we should be ready at hand, Here Lord,
speak Lord, for thy servant hears, Acts 9. Go to Paul, says the Lord to
Ananias, and he went though he had been a persecutor. Contrariwise, Jonah will
go to Tarshish rather then to Nineve: We should not do thus, but as the
Angels, and as Cornelius, when he sent for Peter, Acts 10. says he, we are all
here before thee to take notice of whatsoever it shall please God to reveal to
us by thee. Let our Lamps be light and prepared, that whether the Bridegroom
come at midnight, or at any other time, all may be in readiness at a push,
that we may go when the Lord calls; when the Lord says, here is a sin to be
sorrowed for; here Lord, says the soul. We must not let God stay for us, nor
be haled as a Bear to the stake in any duty: No, but we must attend the will
of God; neither must we stout it out, I will be wicked, and I will walk in my
own way, etc. so you may, and perish; and so you may and be damned, and go to
Hell too when you have done. It is nothing what a man hales out whether he will
or no, that is nothing. This is not to do the will of God as it is in Heaven,
but we must always be fitted and ready to do what God requires. The Angels
came before God, and the Text says, the Devil by force full sore against his
will came also: So wicked men dare not but leave some sins, but it is
perforce, they are either constrained to it by the Laws of men, or by the
horror of conscience, and the like, not with ready cheerfulness and
willingness. But we should have our Lamps light.

Secondly, the Angels do the will of the LORD speedily, they are not delaying,
but are willing and pressed in the performances of Gods will. If the Lord do but
beck, they are gone. Isa. 6.
The Angels are said to have diverse wings, some to cover their face, in token
of humility; some to cover their feet, to show their prestnesse and readiness
to do the will of God, and with all speed and haste to do what God at any
time shall enjoin and command. Thus we should do it as they do, we must shake
off all lingering and stiffenesse of spirit when we see Gods will should be
done, and that God requires it: But naturally we are marvelously lazy in our
christian course. When a man comes as a Bear to the stake, is that to do the
will of our heavenly Father as the Angels do? do they thus? No, nor we
should not, if we do it aright: We must imitate that of David, he will praise
the Lord with his best abilities, and run the ways of Gods Commandments; thus
should we do, make haste and delay not. Psalm. 119. 32.
As when the Prophet Elisha sent his servant post-haste to the woman's son, he
bade him, salute no man, make no stay by the way. This mavelous care should
be in us; we should pray for our lives, and run on in a Christian course for
our lives; not trifle, but go with all speed till we come to our journeys end;
not sluggishly, as if a man cared not whether he did it or no, but a man should
pray for his life. If profit or pleasure would be tampering with us, salute
them not, we should take up our resolutions to reject them. If honor or profit
would be hanging about us, fling them off; let us not regard them, but ride
post-haste. When our Savior sent his Disciples to preach, he bade them carry
neither scrip nor staff to hinder them in their course. When Paul was
converted, the Text says, he never consulted with flesh and blood; he advised
not with carnal reasonings, but what God commands, he did: So when God calls
for duty, we should not reason with profit, pleasures and honors, to pull off
our caps, and ask them leave to take up this duty and these performances. If
the holy Apostle had done this, it would have hindered him; but he consulted
not with flesh and blood: So we should do what ever God commands: It matters
not what men would have of us, but let us have an eye to Gods command.

Thirdly, the Angels in Heaven do the will of God faithfully, and their
faithfulness is in this, that they perform the whole will of God: They fail
not, but do it to a hairs breadth. He is a faithful servant that does his
Masters will and command fully; so should a Saint do: Now faithfulness
appears in two things:

First, we must do it all as they do.

Secondly, we must do it in the right manner, not only the thing, but in the
right manner God requires it.

This is faithfulness: The Angels do not accomplish what message they will,
but God sets it down, and his good pleasure takes place, Psalm. 104. They
fulfill the good pleasure of the LORD, they start not at any service, no
crossenesse they stand at; God commands, they do it, and because he commands
it. So it ought to be with the hearts of the people of the LORD; we must not
pick and choose, and do it in an aguish fit, when we list. It is said of David,
he did all the will of God, a man after GODS own heart. It was the charge Mary
gave, whatever he bids, do it. It is sufficient GOD commands, though it be
tedious; the Angels care not though all the Devils in hell rage: so the Saints
of GOD should do; be it tedious, that skils not, our care must be, that we may
finish our course with comfort. A Saint does not pick and choose, but fears
every sin, and takes up every duty; if all the Devils in hell oppose, yet the
people of GOD will do his will. The Text says, that Caleb and Joshua followed
God fully in the day of Maceba and Miriba in times of trouble; there is an
Angel-like Spirit, to go thorow-stitch with the work; though father and mother
were against them, yet they would go on. The contrary was the sin of Sardis,
which GOD reproves sharply; I have not found thy work fall. It Is not enough to
do some of GODS will, but we must do it all, or else the LORD regards not. The
Devil will do well sometimes for his own ends, if he be pleased; but that is
nothing, thou must do GODS will, pleased or not pleased, or else thou have a
satanicall spirit; we must not say, the days are troublesome, etc. but go
thorow-stitch with it as the Angels do.

Thirdly, as we must do the will of God, so we must do it after the right
manner, as God requires; thus Abraham did, when he was commanded to go offer
his Son Isaac, he went early in the morning, as God required. If he had been to
offer an Ox, it had been nothing, but Abraham must offer his only Son Isaac,
the Son of the promise, and he must be the Sacrifice. So, for us not to be
drunk, and to commit outrageous sins, that all the Crows cry out of; that's
nothing; but thy secret lusts, thy beloved Isaac's, they must be sacrificed and
abandoned, else thou do no more then the Devil. Thus thou must do the will
of God, not as thou will, to sanctify half a Sabbath, but on Gods terms, or
else it is nothing.

Fourthly, the Angels do the will of God constantly; where they were they are,
Mat. 18. They are daily before the face of God, they hold out and persevere to
do Gods will. This should be our practice, though we cannot do it in that
manner, and so much as they, yet endeavor for it: Continue to the death,
(says the Text,) and what then? I will give you the Crown of life. Our reward
shall be for ever, let our labor be so, hold it out with constancy: A Saint
should be foure-square, the same for ever; the fruits of righteousness are
according to the parts of the year, spring and harvest, autumn and winter;
and the first fruits is fatness, not to fall back, to be good in good company;
with professors, profess; and with swearers, curse; and with drunkards, be
drunkards; and with Devils, be Devils; the blessed Angels do not thus: the Lord
commends the good steward, Happy shall that servant be, that when his Master
shall come, shall find so doing. When the Lord shall come and find a Saint
persevere to the end, he shall be blessed indeed: the Angels will out-bid us in
the measure of performances of Gods will, but yet we should be speedy, and
ready, and faithful, and constant as they: our hearts are holy in
uprightness, although not in that measure of exactness, as theirs are.

What is the frame of the heart in putting up this Petition? Quest.


It appears in two things. Answ.


First, it is willing to do it it self.

Secondly, it is willing, and desires to help and stir up others, to the utmost
of its power, to do the will of God.

First, the soul ought to be forward to know the will of God, and to labor to
do it it self, and this appears in four particulars.

First, the heart is willing to do the will of God in laying down its own will,
so far as it may be a hinderance from doing Gods will, for oftentimes our will
and the will of God are contrary: there is naturally a sturdy toughness that
lifts up it self above the LORD, this must be removed, Not my will, (says our
Savior) but thy will be done. If our will and Gods will cannot stand, we must
lay down ours; but sometimes we say desperately, (as they did) We will walk in
our own ways etc. and we will have a King as other Nations, we will have our
base lusts to sway and rule us. But so long as this is in us we cannot do the
will of the LORD, we cannot serve two masters: I came not (says our Savior)
to do my own will, but my fathers that sent me. It is often times with our
will, and the will of GOD, as with two buckets; the letting down of one is the
lifting up of the other; and the lifting up of the other is the letting down of
that; so when we let down our own wills, we lift up Gods; but the lifting up of
our own wills, is the letting down of the good will of the Lord. Now the cause
why we stick in service, and cannot come off, is because we would have our
pleasures, we would be this and that; so that the will of God is justled
against the wall, and shut out of doors; but let this distemper be crush't,
and then the will of God will take place. When we have done this, then we must
repair to the Lord to know what his pleasure is, take his Warrant before we
set upon the work; conscionable attendance of Gods will should be the root and
spring of all our actions, not to go without it, but to have our spirits
carried by it. This is as a Master-comptroler that swayes the balance, and
bears all before him. Tell me not, I cannot do it for my liberties sake, etc.
But, I have no Warrant of Gods will; unless the good will of the Lord go
before me, I dare do nothing, Ephesians. 5.10.11. Proving what is acceptable to the
Lord. As a Goldsmiths lays the gold to the touchstone, so prove yourselves,
and find out what is acceptable to the Lord. In the time of the old Law they
put on the linen Ephod, and went to inquire of the LORD whether the men of
Kedar would come up; so should we come to the LORD, (that is the touchstone)
and see what the LORD will have us to do, and not to go to a company of carnal
Counselors, to consult with honor, ease, wife and family, etc. whether shall
I suffer? says the soul; says honor, if you do thus, I am laid in the dust;
says ease and profit, for my part, if you take this course, I am utterly
undone and lost; then says the soul, if it be thus, I will not do it, let all
sink and swim: thus they do not GODS will, but their own; but they that do
the will of GOD, let them inquire what his will is. Let honor, and profit, and
ease, and world and all say what it will, but they will do the LORDS will, we
must not master conscience (as it was the speech of a wicked wretch,) one of
his companions being in horror of conscience, he bade him master it as he did,
for before that he could never live quietly, but now he was not at all troubled
with it. Mastering of conscience, in English, is searing of conscience, but
that must master you; and lead you to the performance of duty.

Thirdly, when this will of GOD is revealed, we must yield to it, without any
quarrelling against it, or questioning of it; but let the soul be delivered up
to the will of GOD, as David says, let my will be done with thine; when the
LORD calls, seek my face, we should echo, thy face Lord I seek, 2 Timothy 2.19.
we should be prepared for the LORD, so to have our affections strike as the
LORD sets them, and then we should have hearts like GOD, then we should do his
will aright, then would it be in our hearts to do the will of the LORD, as
David says, Psalm. 40.

Fourthly, we should have a courageous constant resolution to go on with that
work, and in that way GOD has revealed to us, and has laid open before us; so
that the soul should say, not my will, but give me a heart that may do thy
will; thus we should have a constant resolution to go on, not to do it by fits
and starts, but as the Apostle says, Fight the good fight of faith, and lay
hold of eternal life. And except a man have this, he prays not this Petition
aright, but out of hypocrisy; it is his own will he seeks, not the will of the
LORD.

Now we must come to the second thing: As we should do the will of GOD our
selves, so we should further on others, and that appears in two particulars.

First, we should further on others in the discharge of duty.

Secondly, we should join sides with others in the performing of duty.

First, for the first, we must further on others. That is a pregnant place,
Heb. 10. Provoke one another to love and good works, we must not only stand by
and look on others, but provoke and egg on others, to stir up them to do the
will of the LORD, 2 Cor. 9.3. the LORD there commends them, because they gave
good example to their brethren. It is good to have a stirring heart. Satan sets
on others to sin, A little leaven leavens the whole lump. A man uses not to be
drunk alone, but to draw on others with him. If Satan and his instruments be
so, how much more ought we to do the contrary? There is not a duty that more
promotes GODS glory then this: wicked men, as infectious persons, labor to
infect others; so should we be forward to help others. These be as Stewards,
they provoke their fellow servants, go about reproving, exhorting one another.
Thus a Christian should set on every man, and spur on others to do the will
of GOD, not only to take a Lecture our selves, but call on others to it.

Secondly, we should labor to join sides with them to do GODS will. It was
the practice of the Scribes and Pharisees to lay heavy loads and burdens upon
others, but not stir them themselves; but we should join sides, and lend a
helping-hand, in the performance of duty. When a Cart is at a set, it is not
enough for a man to stand by and say, I would it were out, etc. and yet never
lend a helping hand, but he must join with others to help it out; and if one
teame will not do it out, on another to it; so when time of troubles comes, we
should be at the Cannons mouth at a dead lift; when another is not able to get
out, by reason of temptation, then we must join sides with them, and pray and
mourn with them; Zac. 8.12. Let us go to the House of the Lord, and we will go
also. So it is not enough to profess our selves GODS servants, but we must
pray also for others, and suffer also, if necessity requires; as it was David's
speech, Psalm. 38. Let us praise the Lord together, at a lift. So, if we would
do GODS will, it is GODS will, as to pray our selves; so we should say to
others, let us pray and study together, that the will of GOD may be done. It is
not enough to wish that GODS will might be done, and we stand by with our hands
in our pockets, and do not provoke on others; and lay reproaches on them, what,
you pray? etc. This heart is professedly against the will of God; these are
fore-men in the Devils shops, and scholars of the highest form in Satan's
school; but, if we desire to have GODS will done, let us set to our shoulders
to the burden, and help others. Thus much for the third Petition. Thy will be
done, etc.

Give us this day our daily bread.
WE come now to the other three Petitions; and they concern our selves merely.
The first is concerning the things of this life. And the other is concerning
spiritual gifts; and it consists partly in justification, and partly in
sanctification.

But first for the order, Quest.
why do we beg for the things of this life before spiritual mercies? our
bodily bread before our spiritual? Answ.


Because in nature a man must have an outward being before we have a better.
This life is the time of our trading, and after this life there is no grace to
be had. Therefore we must have this life before we can live everlastingly with
GOD hereafter; no man can get GOD by the means that does not live; therefore
though the other be more necessary, yet a man, except he have this, he cannot
have the other, that living here bodily, we may live spiritually hereafter.

Now for the sense of the words.

First, what is meant by giving?

Secondly, what is meant by bread with all the circumstances, daily bread, and
our daily bread? etc.

First, for the word giving implies 3. things:

First, that the Lord out of his goodness and wise bounty would provide what
may be profitable for us, and which we stand in need of; in a word, what we
want he would supply.

Secondly, that he would preserve and continue these good things that he has
bestowed upon us, that he would graciously continue that lot and portion unto
us, Psalm. 16. thou maintainest my lot: the Lord does not only give patrimony
to his children, but preserves and continues that which is needful for them to
them.

Thirdly, that the Lord would be pleased to send in the sweet of his blessing
upon all the blessings and mercies he has been pleased to bestow on us. The
blessing of the Lord is the staff of bread. It is not enough to have these
things: for, bread may choke us, the houses we inhabit may fall upon our
heads, if they be not blessed to us. The covetous man is as if he had nothing,
if the Lord let in but a secret curse and vein of vengeance into his soul. A
man may have many outward blessings, and yet have all the sweet took from him;
yea, many times all that a man has may be a torment to him; the Lord can take
off all the sweet; therefore we pray and entreat that the Lord would give us
the sweet of them, that they may be comfortable to us, as they are in
themselves; that the Lord would give all, bless all, and preserve all, and
sanctify all to us, that they may be all to us as they are in themselves.

What is meant by bread? Quest.


Under this word bread are included all necessary helps and comforts of this
life, Answ.
whatever concerns our lives, good name, estate; all things belonging to these
is bread.

Because bread is the staff of life, most especially useful for life; Reason.
other things are necessary, but we cannot be without this bread. Therefore
the Lord puts a part for the whole, and therefore we pray, that the LORD would
give, and continue, and bless all things, that are necessary for us, unto us.

What kind of bread must it be? Quest.


Our bread; Answ.
not that we can procure or purchase it, but the word, Our, implies two things:

First, that we may have a right and title to all these things in Christ, that
we may have a tenure of them. For all these things are not the wicked man's
properly, he usurps them, and he shall answer for them; he sits at a rack-rent,
he shall be plagued for them. Now we pray that they may be our fee-simple, not
that we must pay for them, but that we may have the right and tenure of them,
that we may claim them in Christ, that we may not answer for them, but that
they may be ours.

Secondly, they may be ours in way of policy between man and man, that we may
not have them by violence; not to have another man's riches and honor, but that
we may have a politic right: this a wicked man may have by a politic right,
to have it by the sweat of our brows, now this we crave also. Now the
difference between the politic right of a natural man and spiritual man is
this, the Lord does only Lease out by his politic right these things to the
wicked, but they sit at a rack-rent: But they are not so to the godly, they
have them for their fee-simple by a politic right between man and man. Both
these ways we beg that they may be ours, that they may be ours in Christ, and
that we may have our own, not others to pluck it from others, but that it may
be ours by our labor, means, patrimony, etc.

What is meant by daily? Quest.


The word in the Original signifies supersubstantiall bread, that is, Answ.
we crave all these things and the right and title to them. And for the
measure, not barely so much food and clothes as will keep the life and soul
together, and no more, but that we may have to our lawful delight, and, as one
spoke, so much as will keep even at the years end, and a knot at the end to our
lawful society.

Why this day? Quest.


It implies three things: Answ.


First, it implies a daily need of succor that we have from the Lord: we do
not say, give us this mouth or this quarter, but give us this day; as who
should say, we stand in need of a daily succor from the Lord. The Lord would
not have a Christian have too much, Luke 12.19.
that he might be secure as the rich man in the Gospel, Soul take thine ease,
etc. But the Lord would have us come for our breakfast, dinner, supper, and
all from him.

Secondly, it shows a man must be content with his allowance; his desire
should not be catching after future things, we beg not for our monthly and
quarterly bread, but daily bread, enough for the present time.

Thirdly, it implies, that we must pray for this daily bread, every day: A man
must be daily begging of the Lord. This is the meaning of this day. Gather then
up all, and the sum returns to thus much; we in this Petition beseech the
Lord, that all good things that concern life, good name, or food, may be
supplied to us, and that we may have a spiritual right to them in Christ, and
a politic right to them between man and man, that we may have more then
barely enough, not to wring from others, to be content with the least pittance,
and daily and continually to beg for these things we want and stand in need of.
Quest.


What is the frame of the heart, Answ.
in putting up this Petition?

It appears in three particulars:

First, a man's careful painfulnesse in his course and calling God calls him to
and sets him in.

Secondly, an humble dependence on GOD.

Thirdly, a quiet contentedness with what God allows.

For the first: he must be painful; no man can say, Give me this day my daily
bread, unless he be painful in his place; if we expect any thing otherwise,
it is a mocking of God. We must be faithful and painful in our places: if we
expect any thing, honor, goods, good name, and labor not for it, we do not
pray aright: it was the command God gave, Genesis 3. In the sweat of thy brows
shall thou eat thy bread all the days of thy life. There is no allowance for
idleness and carelessness; the LORD sets Adam to till the ground; so that if
we will have any thing necessary for us, we must labor for it; for, says the
Apostle, He that will not labor shall not eat. The diligent hand makes rich:
but God makes rich, you will say; It is true, yet it is by a diligent hand. A
Scholar must labor if he will have learning, etc. Look as it is with a man
that has promised a man so much, and so much, at such a time and at such a
time, and at such a place, if he will come for it; now if the man comes not for
it, he loses it. Even so it is here; the LORD promises success to our
labor; the Lord will give the Plough-man by his Plough, the Tradesman by his
Trade, the Scholar in his study; and except we be painful in our places, we
can expect nothing. The Lord gives us our daily bread while we walk with him:
So that a man hinders himself more by idlenesle then he profits himself by
prayer without diligence.

Secondly, the soul must have dependence upon God, when it has done what it
can. It must look for a breathing on them. A man should be so painful in the
use of the means, as though they could do all, and yet so depend upon God
above all means, as though all outward means could not do any good without
the Lord. We must not catch it out of Gods hands, but look to God in the way
he has chalked out before us, and then expect of him what we want. It is the
Lord that gives a man substance. In vain it is to rise early in the morning,
and go to bed late, and eat the bread of carfulness; Psalm. 127. 1, 2.
except the Lord bless all, all is in vain. Let us look therefore to him for
all we stand in need of. It is the phrase of the Wise man, The blessing of the
Lord makes rich. It is not policy and craft, and outward means that make
rich, but the blessing of the Lord, from that expect all: though the Plowman
plow, though the Gardener manure, and cut, and prune, yet nothing thrives
unless the dew of Heaven falls: So it is here in our course, all our labor,
pains, means and cost, though it be much and great, yet it will not thrive,
unless the Lord bless. The Spirit of the Lord moved on the waters: Let us
therefore look to his blessings upon all. A Scholar may labor and take much
pains, and yet shall never attain his end; either he shall not have it at
all; or if he do, if shall be as Vriahs Letter, choke him at the last: So
that except we depend on God, all labor and pains is nothing.

Thirdly, there must be a quiet contentednes, to be content with what God
bestows and we receive; else we cross our selves, we crave for bread, and
will have what we list. We do not pray for dainties and costlinesse of
apparel, but for bread, that pittance the Lord shall be pleased to bestow upon
us: Now if nothing but dainties and curiosities will serve us, it is more then
the Lord allows, and we can expect to be bestowed upon us. If we have meat and
cloth we must not look to the quantity, not for a month, or a quarter, but
go to the Lord as to a market; let him dispose it, or else we beg one thing
and desire another; the Lord will be content to give us bread, not pearls; not
to cocker us, but to give us what we stand in need of. That of Hagar should be
our prayer; Give me not too much, lest I be proud; nor too little, lest I put
forth my hand to wickedness, Prove. 30.
but give me food convenient. It is better to be at Gods allowance then our
own. A child happily would have a coat four or five yards too long, and to
tire him, or fire to burn him; but a father will not have it too long, to tire
him, or fire to burn him. So our Father, we would overflow our measures:
outrun our portions too beyond our need. It is with us as it is with dyets,
sick men would have hot wines, and salt meats, and eat excessively; but the
Physician orders all his diet; for if he should have his fill, it would kill
him. A full body and a full stomach would increase the humor: So the Lord is a
marvelous skillful Physician: we have proud hearts and would have dainties; and
if we should have riches as we would, God should lose his honor which now he
has by us being kept under hatches; therefore the Lord dyets us. Diverse
creatures are kept in diverse things; Cherries are kept in Sugar, but Beef is
kept in salt pickell, and not in sugar, for otherwise it would stink. Nothing
would serve some if the Lord should not diet them, but they would be as proud
and as saucie as ever they could; therefore the Lord is compelled to diet them:
Thus we should be content with the least pittance that the Lord sees fitting
for us; and he that is thus, the Lord will give him enough for his baits in
this pilgrimage. And thus much for this Petition.

And forgive us our trespasses, etc.
THis is the fifth Petition touching the good of man.

There are three Petitions concerning God, and three concerning us, this life
and a better; the first we have handled; and those that concern our spiritual
being follow:

First, for the order.

Secondly, the sense and meaning of the words.

Thirdly, the frame of the heart in putting up this Petition.

First, for the order; why it is thus placed? justification before
sanctification? Reason.
The reason is, because sanctification flows from justification; being
justified we are sanctified; first we are acquitted of our sins whereof we
stand guilty before him, and then he sanctifies us; first this, then the other;
the other are the sprigs, and this the main branch; we beg for faith, etc. but
they are included in this.

Secondy, for the sense of the words.

First, here is the Petition, Forgive us our trespasses.

Secondly, the Reason, As we forgive others, or, For we forgive others that
trespass against us, so Lord forgive thou us; this is the argument whereby we
win the favor of the Lord.

What is meant by debts? Quest.


By debts are meant all sins, Answ.
all failing of all kinds, of omission or commission; now they are called
debts, because we owe all obedience to God, to love him above all, and our
neighbors as our selves; and these being the articles of agreement, the
sleighting and neglect of this brings us into debt with God.

For first, we are bound to these.

Secondly, by breaking these we deserve the punishment due to the breach of it:
now when we omit any thing, we forfeit and are cast behind hand.

And thirdly, we are liable to the execution of the punishment due to us in
the breach of this; thus sins are debts; and debts sins, of omission or
commission.

What is it to forgive?

To forgive is this: Quest.
we beg that the Lord would be pleased not to take advantage of us because of
our debts; Answ.
nor yet to proceed in the rigor of this Law, to do that it requires: Now, our
sins require we should be condemned and executed. A malefactors forfeiting his
bond is cast in his cause, and then cast into the prison, and execution sued
out for the satisfaction of this debt: now we beg of the Lord, that he would
not condemn us in the Court of conscience, nor execute his justice on us; this
is to forgive, and this proceeds from mercy.

But how can God do thus? will this stand with the justice of God, Quest.
not to be satisfied for our faults, to pardon without satisfaction?

No; Answ.
but though the party do not satisfy, yet if the surety do, it is sufficient;
so though he does forgive us, yet he looks for it at the sureties hand; as the
creditor does not require the debt at the debtors hand, but at his hand that is
bound to make satisfaction for the debt; so the Lord does not require
satisfaction of us as he might, to exact the utmost farthing: because thou
sinnest thou shall die, the LORD will not exact this of us, but he requires
this satisfaction of the LORD JESUS; so that GOD the Father is satisfied,
though not by us; mercy to me, and justice to CHRIST; mercy on my part, and
justice on CHRIST'S part. Thus we see what it is to forgive us; that is, that
the LORD would not arest us, but the surety; that he would not exact of us, but
take all of CHRIST.

Whether are a man's sins forgiven at once, Quest.
or at sundry times?

At the first time; Answ.
when a man believes in the LORD JESUS CHRIST, at that time all his sins past,
present, or to come, are remitted. The sins he commits after believing, or in
believing, or before believing, are all pardoned: Justification does not
increase or decrease, but sin it is pardoned at the first act of believing;
Though sanctification may have degrees, one man may be more sanctified then
another, but this has none; but he is fully justified, and all his sins past,
present, or to come, are pardoned to him in CHRIST; all phrases in Scripture
implie thus much. Jer. 32. I will pardon their sins, and remember them no more.
Ezekiel. 38. I will blot them out of my remembrance.

Now the Argument is this: I will conclude in diverse Propositions.

First, Argum.
our Savior by once suffering suffered for the sins of the Elect, past,
present, and to come; the infinite wrath of GOD the Father fell on him for my
sins; now this wrath is all one in him: and, being all one and infinite, and
our Savior suffering this whole and infinite wrath of GOD the Father, if he
had suffered for 10000. worlds he could have suffered no more: Gods wrath could
not be but infinite, so were his sufferings; he might have applied his
suffering to many thousands more if he would, and yet have suffered no more:
Adam's sin was enough to infect a thousand worlds; and our Saviors merits
are sufficient for a thousands worlds.

Secondly, those sufferings that he suffered for my sins past are sufficient
for him to suffer and satisfy for my sins present and to come.

Thirdly, the sinner stands justified not for any thing in himself, but by the
mercies of the LORD JESUS CHRIST. Now then gather up all, and the thing is
clear: if our Savior suffered for all sins, and this, being infinite, is
sufficient to pacify all his wrath due to my sins past, present, or to come.
And if a man is not justified of, or by any thing of his own, but from CHRIST;
from this I argue, by what death is my sin remitted? by the death of CHRIST;
and have not I the whole death of our our Savior to satisfy? Yes, for that
death that suffered for my sins past, suffered for my sins present or to come;
the death CHRIST suffered for all sins. Now this death of CHRIST is applied to
the soul at the first act of believing in the LORD CHRIST, therefore my sins
past, present, or to come, are remitted at the first act of believing.

That remission of sins that leaves no condemnation to the party offending is
the remission of all sins; for, if there were any sin remaining, a man is
still in the state of condemnation; but justification leaves no condemnation.
Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ. Argn. 2.
Thus it is evident, there is no condemnation to those that are in CHRIST,
therefore there is full remission of all sins past, present, or to come, to the
soul at the first act of believing.

If the remission of all sins be not at once, Arg. 3.
it is either because my faith cannot lay hold on it, or because there are some
hindrances; but a man by the hand of faith can lay hold on all the merits of
CHRIST; the Word can reveal all; the Sacraments seal and confirm the pardon
of all; and then there is no inconvenience, for it makes the soul more careful
of a command. Psalm. 130. If thou should enter into judgment with us, who
were able to abide it? but there is mercy with thee, that thou may be
feared. Forgiveness makes a man yield faithful obedience; then it is clear,
that the forgiveness of all sins, past, present, or to come, is made to the
soul at once, at the first act of believing.

First, because CHRIST dyed for all, and that is all applied at once.

Secondly, justification leaves a man without condemnation.

Thirdly, there are no hindrances; for my faith is able to lay hold on all the
merits of CHRIST, and the Sacraments able to confirm all; therefore all the
sins of the Elect, whether past or present, or to come, are pardoned at once
in CHRIST.

But then why do we pray for daily forgiveness of sins? It seems needless
thus to do; Quest.
if they be pardoned already, what need we pray daily for the forgiveness of
them? This is one of Bellarmines chief holds. But I answer.

First, if a man do believe, Answ.
yet he prays for more faith.

Secondly, we entreat the Lord that he would be pleased to renew this
repentance, write over and renew this our evidence of the remission of our
sins, and more and more confirm it to our selves; this a man does though he
have faith.

Thirdly, that he would be pleased to continue this his evidence.

Fourthly, that he would make it increase and be more strong. This a faithful
man craves; Lord, says the soul, that my sins may not only be pardoned, and
the evidence of it sealed to my soul but that the evidence may be more and more
increased.

Whether does this act of believing leave any frame, Quest.
or put any disposition into the soul.

First, Answ.
our justification, which we call forgiveness, finds nothing in us, or any
thing done by us, by which we come to be justified; when we are said to be
justified by faith, or are not said to be justified for faith, (that is popery)
but by faith we lay hold on Christ, by whose merits we are justified; as a man
is said to live by his hands, not that he eats them; but by the labor of his
hands he gets money, which buys his meat which nourishes him. So a man's sins
are not forgiven by virtue of believing, but only thus; because faith as an
hand lays hold on this; as a man gets a prey by his hand, so we get this prey
by the hand of faith; faith does not make a man just before God, for God might
condemn us for the imperfection and weakness of our faith, but it lays hold
on him who justifies.

Secondly, forgiveness or justification leaves no gracious frame upon the
soul, but it is only a legal and judicial forgiving of a man, a pronouncing of
the soul believing acquitted. As a man that is arrested, the surety paying all
the debt, the law is frustrate, and has nothing against that man; and he is
pronounced acquitted by the law; but this acquitting does not make a man any
honester. That of the Proverbs, He that justifies the wicked, and he that
condemns the righteous, they both are abomination to the Lord. Not to make a
man honester then he was, but to account him so, and justify him when he is
not. You see then, this leaves no stamp upon the soul, this cuts the throat of
many a man's comforts, here is the maine difference between justification and
sanctification; justification is not for any thing in a man's self, neither
leaves any stamp; but sanctification proceeds from some ability in the soul,
and leaves him holy.

Thirdly, though the act of believing does not put grace into the soul: yet
wherever this is there will be another work, and bring grace into the soul.

For we forgive others.
THis is made an argument to prevail with God, we beseech God to forgive us,
because we forgive others; as if we should say, if we forgive others, forgive
thou us; but we forgive others, therefore Lord forgive us: as though first we
could forgive others before God forgive us. Hence the question draws on;
namely,

Whether is the soul able to forgive trespasses to others before the Lord
forgives its trespases? Quest.


No, our forgiving others does not go before our own forgiveness; Answ.
God must first forgive us before we can forgive others, because it is a work
of grace to do this as God requires, and it comes from a gracious disposition
of soul which God must put into us before we can do it. But now sanctification
follows justification, as a man should say, a tree bringsforth fruit from the
sap in the root.

But this is used as a cause, Quest.
for we forgive others; because we forgive others, therefore forgive us, it
seems then to be a cause of our justification.

No, Answ.
it is a fruit and effect to make way for the conveyance of the assurance of
it; it makes us not to be just, but dedares us to be just. Every reason
propounded by the word because, does not imply a cause; as I prove fire is fire
thus. That which burns is fire, but that burns therefore it is fire; now
burning is not the cause of fire, but an effect of it; not a cause, for first
there must be fire before it can burn; so it is a tree because it has Apples;
now Apples are not the cause of the Tree, but the Tree of the Fruit.

What is it to forgive the trespasses of our fellow-brethren, and how far may
it be done?

In the trespasses of a brother three things are considerable.

First, the sin it self.

Secondly, the guilt of that sin.

Thirdly, the punishment due to that sin.

First, concerning the sin: In guilt we must know two things, wherein is the
Answer.

First, we must know, that to forgive properly we cannot; it cannot be done by
us: for who can forgive sins but God only? it is one of Gods prerogatives to
forgive sins, and that no creature can do.

Secondly, as the guilt has a respect to God, so it has a respect to us; for
as he is injured, so are we: when a man steals, it is not only a wrong to the
Law of God, but also a wrong to me: So far as the sin does respect God, he
pardons it; and as it concerns me, I forgive him. And this is done when the
heart is as willingly content to do all the good to a brother, as though he
had never sinned against him. We say we forgive him, but not forget him, this
is not to forgive; but between whom and me there is nothing to stop me, that is
to forgive him; only remember this that a man does sin in some kind; so
that the Lord does not require that a man should forgive him: As if a man that
flatters me to my face and back bites me, I am not bound to trust him again:
He that bears fire in one hand, and water in another, if he sin against me
once, God forgive him: but if he sin against me the second time, and I
forgive him, God forgive him and me. When a man cheates me I will never trust
him again till I see good; and yet I forgive him when I am as willing to do
him good, as though he had never offended me; and withal entreat the Lord to
pardon him, if he has a lot in Christ seek for the pardon of those sins
whereby he has done us wrong. This our Savior did, Father forgive them, they
know not what they do: So also Stephen, Acts 7.12. thus we should do so far
as it concerns us.

Whether is a man bound to forgive punishment to another? Quest.
as when one has stolen any thing from us, should we not follow the Law on
him? how far must a man go in this case in taking punishment on such an one
offending?

A man may, Answ.
nay it may be so that a man is bound not to forgive it, but to punish it, and
a man should sin deeply in the neglect of it. If one has murdered another,
a man is bound to follow the Law on him, and to give him the punishment due to
the fact.

How far may a man go in this case? Quest.


It appears in these particulars:

First, Answ.
when, all things considered, in all a man sees it may do good, then a man is
bound to give punishment. When there is nothing but a Bridewell will do a
servant good, give it him. When a child is stubborn, give him correction and
spare him not, it is as good as his meat: If a wretch belch out his malice; if
a man can reform him by punishment, give it him: for who knows but it may be
the best physic that ever he had? and to let him go unpunished in such a case
a man is guilty of his sin, because he might have reformed him by this
means.

Secondly, if this be a way and means to bind a man's hands, and to hinder him
from the practice of some sin: As if a persecutor intends to persecute
another, if a man have a suit of Law against him, he is bound to cast him into
prison, for it keeps him from persecuting the Saints of the LORD, and so from
sinning deeply. It is a work of mercy to take a knife from a mad man: so to
bind such a man's hands that does so. If God put forth an opportunity into a
man's hand, he is bound to take the Law, and it is mercy to him thus to do.

Thirdly, when a man cannot otherwise maintain his own honor, or life, or
some other particular good, for the taking off of his own wrong a man is bound
in justice to take punishment on such a one, as thus; If he shall raise a false
report on a man, it is not a work of tyranny but a work of mercy, he ought to
right his own wrong that is done unto him by punishment; when it cannot
otherwise be maintained we are bound to take this course; for why? mine own
honor, life and estate is to be preferred before others.

Fourthly, when this course being just will maintain the goodness of a man's
profession and Gods glory, this should be done: when a man's profession lies at
the stake, a man is not bound to be mealiemouthed, but to make those
black-mouthed wretches known to others, that they may not dare to bring a
scandal upon the glorious Gospel of Christ, nor on the professors thereof.
Thus a man must do, and yet forgive a man for all this, if his good or mine,
or the profession of the Gospel may be furthered hereby, this should be. And
thus a man may go to law in these cases, and the like.

Now we come to the force of the Argument.

How is this an Argument to prevail with GOD to forgive us, Quest.
because we forgive others? where lies the force of the Argument? what virtue
is there in this?

It lies in 3. particulars; and it is a special means to obtain mercy, Answ.
Lord I forgive others, therefore forgive thou me.

First, all the mercy I have, it is not firstly in my self, it is but a river
and spring coming from the Sea, but mercy is firstly in thy self, the
fountain and Sea of mercy is in thee: Now Lord if I have but some bowels of
mercy, and some drops of that Ocean of mercy, and yet can forgive others; much
more then thou the fountain of mercy can forgive me. When the two servants
fell out, the one pulled the other by the throat, and said, Pay me that thou
owe me; now when the Master of that servant heard of it, he said, Oh thou
wretch do thou deal thus with him, when I deal so favorably with thee; and
if a sinner must forgive his fellow brother seventy seven times, how much more
the Lord the God of mercy? if he that has but some mercy received from the
fountain, much more the Lord the fountain it self.

Secondly, as we have not from our selves, but from God; so also that we have
is mixed with a great deal of spleen. Though some compassion yet mingled with
a great deal of envy; though some mercy, yet mingled with a great deal of
cruelty; and a great deal of darkness with this little starre-light: but the
Lord has all love without any hatred; all mercy without any cruelty; there is
no hinderance in the Lord to hinder him. Now the soul says, Lord, if I that
have a great deal of malice can forgive my brethren, then how much more thou
that have all mercy and no spleen (if men humble their souls before thee) wilt
forgive?

Thirdly, that mercy that is in us it is but little, but it is infinite in the
Lord; what we can do is but the first fruit, a drop, a grain, a mustard seed,
but abundant in the Lord. Then the soul says, Lord, thou art boundless and
bottomless in mercy, how much more will thou forgive? True, LORD, the talents
and debt whereby we are engaged unto thee are many and great; but if we poor
creatures that have but from the Fountain, and that we have is mingled with a
great deal of malice, and that but a drop, and yet can forgive; how much more
thou that have all first from thy self, and purely without all mixture of
envy, and in an infinite abundance? how much more can thou forgive whom thou will? therefore LORD forgive us, for we forgive others.

How ought the soul to be framed in putting up this Petition? Quest.


It appears in four particulars: Answ.


First, the soul must see and acknowledge it self guilty of those sins that
appear in this life: we must see our selves stand in need of forgivenes: now
we cannot do this till we see our selves faulty. He that owes nothing, what
need he crave forgiveness? So forgiveness of sins implies that we are
guilty of sin and liable to the punishment due to sin, They that confess
sin and forsake it shall find mercy, pro. 28.14. first find out thy sins,
then find Gods mercy, 1 Cor. 11. If we would judge our selves, we should not be
judged. He that would have GOD forgive him, must not forgive himself; if we
judge our selves, GOD will not judge us. As a Malefactor that sticks to his
own innocence, and will not acknowledge any guilt, in vain he desires to
be forgiven: So a sinner or Malefactor before GODS Tribunal, if he will not
confess his sin, he shall never find mercy at the hand of the LORD.
Therefore I cannot see how a Papist can beg this, when as he thinks he can
satisfy GODS Justice himself.

Secondly, we must labor to have the heart see its own inabilitie to satisfy
for sin, or to bear Gods indictment he shall pass upon the soul that is
guilty. The soul acknowledges it self unable to answer one of a thousand;
Behold (says the Psalmist) Lord, if thou should enter into judgment, who
were able to abide it? but there is mercy with thee that thou may be feared.
We are Bankerupts, we cannot answer the debt, nor bear the suit; if the
debtor be able to answer the debt or pay the money, he cares for no kindness;
the sinner is the debtor, and, if he can satisfy Gods Justice, what need he
care? If I can abide it, what need I crave favor? but when it is come to this,
who can abide it; then the LORD will pardon whatsoever is amiss. Wherever
the sinner goes he cannot avoid the suit; he needs no pursevant to follow him,
conscience is arresting, the Devil accusing, therefore he falls down and cries
mercy, mercy to pardon the suit, the soul is not able to bear the suit. This
the Church complains of, Behold, our righteousness is as menstruous cloth;
and they, Ezekiel. 36.31. judge themselves worthy to be condemned. Now in that I
say forgive, I imply that I cannot satisfy for sin my self.

Thirdly, we should seek to the free mercy of GOD and of his Grace for what
we need; we should acknowledge his free mercy. When the soul sees there is
mercy in GOD for him, then it is fitted to pray this petition; for should I
conceive GOD were severe, holy, just, etc. though I renounce my sin, yet I
could not seek him; God is not extreme and rigorous, but he has mercy in
store for those that seek him in truth and sincerity: therefore we should
apprehend two things:

First, that God desires not to deal rigorously; we should persuade our
hearts, that God is desirous to welcome our prayers, Exodus 34. The Lord is
ready to succor our infirmities. If we be in misery, the Lord will abound in
mercy, the phrase is, multiplying mercy; therefore the Apostle calls him the
father of mercies, and the God of all compassions; we have new vexations, he
has new compassions; nay, God has more good then we can desire, he performs
more then he promises; he is abundant in truth, above all that he has
revealed himself to be in his Word, Isa. 55.7. Our God is merciful and
abundant in forgiveness. He multiplies pardons, he has pardons in store,
mercy to pardon any poor soul. But, (says the soul) what my sins committed
and continued in? mark what he adds, though you cannot comprehend it, yet he
can conceive it: his thoughts of mercy are larger in giving, then ours in
craving, Ephesians. 2. He is able to do above what we can think or ask. It was but a
cold comfort Isaac gave to Esau, he had but one blessing; so if Gods mercies
come to an end, it were but a poor comfort when the soul says, Lord give me,
and the Lord should say, all is drawn dry. But there is enough in God to do us
good. What availes it, if a father have a good heart to his child, if he has
not to give it what it asks, or stands in need of? but our heavenly Father
abounds in goodness.

Secondly, God, as he has abundance of good, so he is free and ready to bestow
it, Esa. 55.1. Ho, Every one that thirsts, let him buy milk, and milk
without money or price. We would be content to have wine, but we have no money
to buy it, therefore God adds, though you be not able to pay for it, yet take
it. Mich. 7.18. Who is a God like our God? who pardons sin, because mercy
pleases him. The pardoning of our sins is like the overthrowing of Pharaoh in
the sea. God does it not because we please him, but because his mercy pleases
him, he does it freely.

Fourthly, we must be content to wait for his mercy that we stand in need of;
we must both wait for it, and be confidently persuaded of it, else we cross
the tenure of forgiveness, Heb. 11. God gives mercy to none but those that
wait for it. In that we ask pardon, we are resolved to wait for it, for so
much is employed. A pardon in law is not authentical, until it be sealed; so
God says, he will pardon us, but this is not authentical, until we have set
to our seal; he says, he will give freely; we say, we will wait constantly;
Psalm. 37.5. Commit thy ways to God, and he will care for thee. He that thus
begs forgiveness, shall undoubtedly obtain it at the hand of the Lord,

And lead us not into temptation.
THis is of sanctification both begun here and ended in heaven; sanctification
frees from the power of sin, glorification frees from the presence of sin;
sanctification kills sin, glorification buries sin.

First, for the order; sanctification flows from justification. When sin is
pardoned, we have the Spirit of Christ, which conveys all to us; first
justified, then sanctified.

Secondly, for the sense of the words, and here are two things.

First, what God should not do, Lead us not into temptation.

Secondly, what he should do, deliver us from evil.

What is meant by temptation? Quest.


A trial, Answ.
or an assault, whereby a man's strength is tried: now they are double.

First, the deliverance from evil.

Secondly, to prove the soundness of grace.

The first is especially intended, and by it are understood all the assaults of
the soul, by sin, Satan, or the world, whereby our faith may be shaken, or we
withdrawn from God to evil; sometimes there are good temptations, of proving
or expressing our grace. These, in some sense, may have place in this Petition:
God tries us in this manner, and we pray him, that he would try us no more
then we are able to bear.

What is it to be led into temptation? Quest.


It appears in three things. Answ.


First, when temptations pursue us.

Secondly, when they do foil us in assaulting of us.

Thirdly, when temptation does totally vanquish us.

Now we pray in this Petition, that temptations may not pursue us; pursuing us,
that they may not foil us; and though we be foiled, yet that we may recover
our selves. We desire that God would not let them besiege us; if they do, yet
not foil us; and if they do, yet that we may recover our selves after our
foil.

Can God lead into temptation? Quest.


The Apostle explaines it, Answ.
Jam. 13. God cannot tempt to evil. He that is goodness it self cannot
provoke a man to sin. The Lord does not put malice into any man's heart, God
cannot properly be the cause of drawing a man into sin; there are trials of
proof: The Lord may try his, as he did Abraham, Genesis 22.1. A man does not hurt
his armor if it be good when as he proves it: So God intends no evil to a man
when he thus deals with him. Some add this word, suffer us not to be led; but
that is silly, since God tempts no man to sin.

What needs this Prayer? Quest.


God may do it: Answ.
sin and all other temptations have a double respect.

First, evils are totally and professedly opposite to the Law of God.

Secondly, sins go under the name of punishments, sometimes God punishes one
sin with another: now, as sin has reference to the Law of God, he is not the
cause of it; but so far as sin is a punishment, God may be the author of it: We
pray then, that God by a sinful distemper would not plague us.

In what manner does God lead us into temptation? Quest.


He does it three ways. Answ.


First, when the Lord withdraws not those nets that are laid for us; when God
removes not those stumbling blocks that are cast before us: Nay, God may put a
temptation before us: Thus a master may lay a bait for his servant, by laying
money in a corner to try his truth: Now it is lawful for a man thus to leave
his money, to discern whether his servant be faithful or no, he desires not
that he should steal, but that he may try his fidelity; so God justly
suggests occasions; there must be heresies for the trial of Gods servants; God
sends occasions of provocations, for their trial God raines snares, Psalm.
11.6. They that pitch their nets first let it fall, and then set it up. This is
to rain snares; the favor of God is but a bait to a wicked man; his
posperitie is but his ruin. It is not with God to deal so, because wicked men
desire it; so Judas would feign have gotten somewhat by the ointment; now it is
just with God to send the Pharisees to give him thirty pence, and ruin too;
now his mind is pleased, he has thirty pence, and damnation too.

Secondly, as God lays occasions, so he lets sin and Satan loose; a man's heart
would be hankering, now God gives him up; take him sin and Satan, let him have
field-roome, 1 King. 22.22. Ahab would feign go to war, it was a thing not
allowed, but he desired it; therefore God sends the Devil; God asks, who will
prevail over Ahab? the Devil says, I will go: Then God says, go and do it.
Judge. 9.23. Abimelech and the men of Sechen did very ill, then God sent an
evil spirit, that is, he he let loose the spirit of contention, and they
destroyed him, and he labored to destroy them: So God, Romans 1. is said to give
them up when they departed from the government of the truth. No, says God,
will you not be ruled by holiness? then take them uncleanness. Many a man
has a wrathful disposition; take him envy, says God; let him bring blood on
others, and so ruin to himself. Thus God took away his Spirit from Saul, and
gave him up to sinful distempers; of all plagues there is none like this.

Thirdly, GOD leaves a man to himself; and lends him not the assistance of his
grace; suffers him and Satan to grapple together. 2 Corinthians, 32.31. Thus
GOD dealt with Hezekiah; because he had a lease of his life, he began to be
proud, Therefore God left him to himself, to try what was in him. He though
himself a brave man, therefore GOD leaves him; as a father lets a child go
when he will not be held, so says GOD, see what thou can do, try thy own
strength. Now this leaving is in two passages.

First, GOD lets in the truth of his Word, not so much as may serve for
direction, but for provocation. That of the Romans is observable to this
purpose, There is no transgression where there is no Law; not that the Law
brings sin, but provokes a man's heart, Romans 7.5. the phrases are strange in
the fifth verse, The motions of sin which were by the Law: The Law moves a
man to sin by opposing of it; says the stubborn heart, I will do it
because you say so; many a man that has lived civilly, and as a good
neighbor, etc. and after the Law stirs him up to more exactness he is more
violent against good men. The Law meeting with a proud heart, he opposes it,
and would pluck the Law in pieces. All the while men join sides they are
loved; but if GOD pleases to humble them, then they fly out: There is nothing
there that comes in anew saving GODS grace; but that malice that was there
before, is now stirred; now there is no fault in a good man, that he is good:
but sin taking occasion by the command slew me, says the Apostle. Look as
an ague that is pretty well over-past, it lies in the bones, and if he that
has it drink cold water, it grows extreme and hot by force of opposition: So
that man that lay lurking before, the Word comes and it lays a man flat, and
it slayes him utterly. verse. 13. Sin by the command became out of measure
sinful. Look, as it is with a damme, the damme stops, and the stream swells
by force of opposition; so the Law stops the stream of sin and corruption,
and now it grows exceeding violent. Therefore they that have been under good
means, and break, are out of measure shameless in their sinful proceedings;
this damme that stops makes this sin greater; thus the Law of GOD is a Law to a
proud heart. The Law is not to blame, but the heart.

Secondly, the LORD will not suffer the soul to have the power and assistance
of the Spirit which formerly he has had; but lets sin and it grapple till he
break sin all to pieces. Many a time the LORD leaves the soul, and will not
let it have that power that formerlie it had.

What, can a soul fall? Quest.


No. GOD takes not away his hand, Answ.
but yet he shall not feel it; as a man, if he stir not the wheel it will
not go; his hand is on it all the while, but does not stir it, therefore it
goes not: So GOD leaves a man to himself, though for the while he does not
give him that force, whereby he may gainsay a temptation. This befell David,
LORD, Psalm. 57.
take not thy holy Spirit from me; that is, when God would not help David, but
let him make his part good with the temptations. I doubted not, but David had
grace enough, if GOD would have quickened it in him. Hezekiah had wisdom
enough, but GOD left him. Thus the LORD is said justly to lead a man into
temptation. Now we pray, that he would take away all snares, that he would not
suffer the Word to provoke us, but to direct us, that we may not be left to our
own strength, and that we may overcome all our spiritual enemies.

But deliver us from evil.
HEre observe, that though GOD would do nothing against us, yet we are not
able to deliver our selves from our own corrupt hearts.

What is meant by evil? Quest.


Not so much trouble, Answ.
or punishment, but sin. Now in sin are three things.

First, the breach of the Law.

Secondly, the guilt a man gets by this breach, and so is liable to this
punishment.

Thirdly, the vigor of sin, whereby it rules over the soul: Now the former
we pray against in the fifth Petition: because we stand guilty of the breach of
the Law, therefore we pray, that God would not enter into Judgment with us.
And thirdly we pray here against the power of sin, and that is in three
particulars; not only in regard of the guilt of it, but that the Lord would
keep us from the power of it.

First, sin would be a commander over the soul: It is the King, Satan is the
Jailer, it has a Kingly Sovereign Authority, and would rule over us; sin is
often compared to a King, his servants are they to whom they obey. Sin is a
Master, at least it would be; and is so in every natural soul, and it would
be so in the godly. The law of life (says the Apostle) has freed me from
the law of death, Romans 8.2. Sin gives Parliament-Lawes to the Soul and
Edicts, and as the Centurion bade one servant go and he went; and another
come, and he comes; so does sin say; Pride says, it is my pleasure you
should be proud; therefore I will have you proud and snappish, etc. Says
anger, I will have you spleniticke and rage: Says the soul, then I will, and
it shall be done. Thus sin sets up it self as a supreme Sovereign in the
soul. Hence a proud heart says, I will that I will, let GOD say what he
will; tell not me of Laws, it is my mind. It is your proud heart sets you
Laws, and you yield to them. Now we pray that GOD, however sin be in the
Soul, yet that he would snub and curb it, that it may be an underling in the
Soul, and daily subdued.

Secondly, as sin does, and desires to set up a master-like rule and a
supreme Sovereign Lord like dominion: So sin carries the soul, and
sometimes separates the soul from GOD; whereas the command of GOD should be a
guide to us, and take place in our hearts; this Rebel, it takes up Arms,
resists, stands in defiance against the rule of the Spirit. Hence come all
these phrases, they forsook God; resisted GOD, and turned their backs to his
commands. What? says pride, shall I be a slave, that the Word should awe me,
and snub me? I will never yield it while I live, I will dye first. This is a
Devil that draws you from GOD, and will carry you to Hell, Romans 7.23. that is
the meaning of this place; Sin carries a man captive, that when the soul
sees it self so ruled by him, a gracious heart would tear it self off if it
could; but a natural man is a slave to sin, sin gets head, and so the
soul dares not affect any good in another, nor labor for it in it self.

Thirdly, sin leaves a kind of blemish and stain upon the soul, after the
commission of it. There is a kind of jeering to the heart, and a cunning wrong
of the soul; hence the Scripture calls it the excrement of naughtiness, etc.
though the act of sin be gone, yet there is a blemish on the Soul. Peter,
after his denial of CHRIST was averted from CHRIST: So a man after sin shall
find himself dull to any good, and prone to any evil. This is the stain of
sin; when a man's arm is put out of joint, besides the fall there is a
bruise: So after a man has broken the Commandments of the LORD, the LORD
unjoynts him; he is more awake to any good then ever, Galath. 6. If any man
be unjoynted by sin: So that of the Romans, they wound their own souls:
This sin does; now these we pray against, partly against the power of sin,
partly against the authority of sin, partly against the stain of sin.

But deliver us from evil.

To deliver from evil implies three things:

First, we pray that the LORD would prevent all those occasions, and
struglings, and distempers of sin that trouble us; these we pray against, to
wit, that he would take off these distempers, whereby sin would lay siege
against the Soul; that he would remove those things that would remove us from
him. This is that wisdom promises, Prove. 6.21. She will keep and walk with
them that walk with her, and she will keep him from the way of the wicked
woman. Sin is like a Harlot, therefore the LORD is pleased to express it
after that manner. Now it is the mercy of the LORD that he will turn our eyes
from beholding of vanity; That there may not be in us the violence of sin
assaulting us: We pray also that we may not come into the Battle, if it be
possible; and that sin, or pollution, may not come in against us.

Secondly, that the LORD would assist us in the temptation, that the temptation
may not prevail.

It is a mercy not to be tempted; but if we must be, it is a great mercy
not to be overcome by temptation. If he will not wholly prevent us by his
Grace, yet that he will assist us graciously in it. It is a mercy not to be
assaulted, and though assaulted, yet that we may be assisted.

Now this assistance of GOD is twofold, either extraordinary, or mediate by
the means: we speak not so much of the first, though that be true, but we
crave both at the hand of the Lord.

First, sometimes we crave for the extraordinary help and assistance of the
LORD, to assist us either above means or in the means. We know the Lord in
the time of the Martyrs sufferings did help wonderfully, their temptations
were grievous, and afflictions great, and yet the Lord did help them
extraordiarily; God did let in abundance of sweetness. But we pass this, and
come to the other.

Secondly, we pray especially for such means as may help us; and that
appears in four particulars:

First, that the Lord would discover the enemy before he comes; that he
would make known unto us the engines, and wiles, and depth of Satan, and the
subtilty of our own corrupt hearts, which are ready on every hand to surprise
us; for to be surprised before we are aware is great danger; therefore we pray
that the Lord would give us the Spirit of Revelation, that we may take notice
of the engines of Satan, that he may be discovered to us; the discovery, we
know, of an evil is to prevent an evil: and, not foreseeing, we cannot
prevent. He that sees not an evil before it comes will be overthrown by it
when it comes. Many a man perishes by pride, and knows not what hurts him.
Thus corruption blows up the soul. This the Lord promises, Isay 30.21. Thou
shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way. That GOD may keep a
man from sin, he sends the Spirit of CHRIST to say, this is the way, walk
in it. The Text says, 2 Cor. 2. there, speaking of the incestuous man, We are
not ignorant of the methods of Satan to us, Mat. 20. When the great skirmish
was to come, our Savior forewarned Peter, and says, I will smite the
Shepherd, etc. and says, Watch and pray for the hour is come, etc. He gives
him this warning-peece. We pray then that God would make known to us the
engines of sin and Satan before they come. We know it is a great help in
war to know the quarters and orders of enemies, that so a man may order his
actions according thereunto. So we must know where the Devil and our
corruptions lie quartered, and what be the haunts of our wretched hearts, and
so to order the help God has put into our hands for the resisting of them.

Secondly, that the Lord, as it were, would entrench about us: If he will not
foretell us of the enemy, that, seeing sin, we may prevent it, yet that he
would lay some heavy impediment upon us, etc. and build some trench about us,
that we may not commit those evils we are tempted unto: That though he do
not reveal the policy of Satan, yet that he would lay some snares, that we
may not commit that sin which otherwise we would do. And this is a
mavelous mercy, Genesis 20.7. Abimelech took Sarah, as though she had been
Abraham's sister, as he himself told him; and, no question, he had a purpose
to take her to be his wife; but the Lord laid an impediment, the Lord kept
Abimelech from Sarah, he took off the edge of his desire, and laid a bar
between them: Hos. 2.6, 7. The Church was running after her abominations; now
how did the Lord prevent her? the Text says, I will hedge thy ways with
thorns, and build a wall about thee. The Lovers were corruptions, and the
following of them is the eager pursuit of them. Now he hedges the ways with
Thorns; that is, he lays desperate afflictions on them, that she had no
liberty to sin, so that she has enough to do to mind her own miseries.
Sometimes a man is addicted to base company, and then the Lord lays sickness
to imprison him, and to keep him from sin: This is mercy.

Thirdly, the Lord puts armor and weapons on them to fight against their
enemies that are opposite to his grace and children, Ephesians. 6. from the 10. to
the 19. Be ye strengthened in all might, putting on all spiritual abilities,
1 Cor. 2. to be strengthened in every good work. God says, he covers the
heads of his, 1 Pet. 1.5. God keeps them by the power of his grace; God gives
his the whole armor, the shield of faith, the breastplate of righteousness,
etc. to quench the fiery darts of Satan, and to resist him.

Fourthly, God gives a dominion over and conquest against all our enemies, and
over all our victorious corruptions he gives a happy issue and success: With
the fight he gives the issue with the victory, Revel. 1.6. He has made us
Kings, that is, he has given us a Kingly authority over all our corruptions;
Romans 6: 14. Sin shall not have dominion over you; Psalm. 119.133. so David
prays, Let no iniquity have dominion over me. Thus the Lord assists his in
trouble.

Thirdly, as we pray that the Lord would prevent the occasions of evil, and,
if they come, to assist us in them; so lastly, if we be foiled and brought
under by the temptations of Satan and our own corruptions, that the LORD would
rescue us from them that have had too much power over us, and too too much
prevailed against us. This we know was the request and desire of the Prophet
David, Psalm. 39. Restore me to my former health before I go away from hence
and be no more seen: As who should say, my base lusts are too strong for me;
these hands were stout, but now feeble; therefore LORD give me that former
strength. His sins were as sickness; David's case was as when a man has been
sick, and after comes to get up his crummes; as though he had said, I knew
the time when I had a broken heart for my sin, but now hardened; therefore, O
God, spare me a little while before I go hence, and be no more seen, that I
may recover my former courage, zeal, and strength before I go hence; Romans
8.2. The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ has made me free from the Law of
sin and death, Sin makes Laws: We then entreat the Lord, that he would
prevent corruption, that he would assist us in temptation ordinarily and
extraordinarily, that he would discover the enemy before he come; that he
would entrench about us, and give us Armor and weapons to resist. it; and give
us dominion over our enemies; and that, if we be overcome, he would rescue
and recover us out of them: This is the sum of this Petition.

Now we come to the frame of the heart that we should bring before God, Quest.
that so we may be fit to receive the good we sue for at the hand of God. Now
wherein does it appear?

The frame of heart and disposition of Soul, Answ.
that best be-seemes us in the putting up of this Petition, appears
principally in four things.

First, when we desire that the Lord would not let us be drawn aside, nor
led into temptation, we must labor to avoid all occasions as may be too
strong for us or like to prevail over us. In vain we desire to be delivered
from evil, when we rush into evil and into temptations. He that should take
pitch into his hand, and pray not to defiled; put fire into his bosom, and
pray not to be burnt; it is a sleighting of Gods mercy, and a provoking of God
to wrath, rather then a begging of mercy. We would count it a madness for a
man to cast himself into the Sea, and desire to be saved; to make our selves
sick that God may make us whole again. It is nothing else, but as we may say,
to make God work; so to run into evil, and to pray to the Lord to deliver
us from evil; it is provoking and mocking of the Lord: the wise man's rule is
here memorable, Prove. 23.23. If a man be given to his appetite, let him put his
knife to his throat. If thou love the wine, look not upon it; a man that is
given to his apetite, it is in vain to pray against it, and yet nourish it:
but thou must put thy knife to thy throat, abstain from that which may provoke
it; for if we please our appetite, it will be a temptation to us. Psalm. 30. The
promises and the providence of the Lord go together. He will succor us and
relieve us, but it must be in the way of providence; we must be in the way: He
that goes out of the way, and craves Gods assistance, shall never have it, but
hales on evil on himself, Matthew 10.18. our Savior speaking of offenses,
says, If thy hand cause thee to offend, cut it off: and if thine eye cause
thee to offend, pluck it out: That is, were thy sins as near to thee as thy
right hand in regard of profit, or thy right eye, in regard of pleasure, cut
them off, pluck them out, fling them away, rather then be foiled by them. In
vain we crave the assistance of the Lord, and in the mean time lay blocks
before us; it is presumption, therefore no marvel if many times the Lord
leaves a man in the lurch, because he does not that he prays for. It is enough
to cause the Lord to curse us, when we do not avoid occasions of evil: he that
will not fall into the pit, let him not come near the brinke of it; he that
will not be snared by evil, let him not come near the occasions of evil.

Secondly, if we be weak of our selves, and cannot prevent the occasions of
evil; yet be careful to seek all such means as may be succourable and
helpful to us; if we cannot help it, but that these will surprise us, let us
seek the means that may succor us in our need. The sick man that craves
succor of the Lord must use the means the Lord has appointed; happily thou
find temptations pressing on in thy calling, thou can not avoid it; the
more the occasions are, the more seek for the means that may fortify thee.
He that will be healed, let him seek the Physician; he that is out of the
way, and would be set in the right way, let him inquire it out, and not sit
still, and say, Lord have mercy upon me, etc. but seek unto God in the use of
the means. It was that which Joshuah did, chapter the seventh, he called upon
God, but yet the Lord did not help him, but said, Why do thou so? Israel
has sinned, look to that; in vain it is to pray, that the enemy may not
prevail, and labor not to get sin out of the camp; but do that, and then
the overthrow of the Enemies will be far enough from thee.

Thirdly, when we have found the means, labor to be content to be ordered
by all the means and helps that God has been pleased to ordain for our good.
It is a madness to crave, as Balaam, Oh that I might die the death of the
righteous, and not live their life; to see the way, and not to walk in it.
Jer. 42. they said to the Prophet, Inquire at the mouth of the Lord, and
whatsoever he commands, that we will do, but when they heard and knew it,
they would not. In vain it is to crave the pardon of sin, when we look not
to the promise; to desire sin to be subdued, and yet not to abide the means
that should do it: but if a man faith, he will not be counseled, but will
have his proud heart, and will walk in all his own ways, how can he say,
deliver me from this proud heart, when he will not have counsel take place?
When a man is in horror of heart, when conscience flies in his face, it is in
vain to whine then, and yet not to be ruled by the Word of God, but be as
vain as ever, as loose as ever, and as iddle as ever. Thou beggest one thing,
and desire another, and so long never put up this Petition.

Fourthly, we must rely upon the Lord for a blessing and success in all we
pray for, or do. We must so use the means, as if there were no promise to
help us; and yet so depend on God for all, as though the means could do
nothing. Observe all thy occasions, and say, counsel and advise is good, but
the Lord must set them on; man lives not by bread only, but by the blessing of
God in the means; go to the Spirit of the Lord, and see there a greater power
then in all means. 2 King. 2. If thou can see me taken up, then shall thou
have my Spirit double upon thee. The meaning is, if thou see the God that
takes me up, then he will give thee his Spirit; look to God above all means,
and he that is thus disposed prays aright to be delivered.

For thine is the Kingdom.
WE have done with the six Petitions: three concerning God, his Name,
Kingdom, Will: three concerning our selves, concerning things of this life,
and of a better; to wit, justification, sanctification; we come now to the
conclusion, and considerin it two things.

First, the thanksgiving.

Secondly, the conclusion of faith in the word Amen.

In the thanksgiving is included both a reason of the Petition; as also, a
form of thanksgiving, as who should say, we do not presume we can do any
thing, unless thou do work in us what thou requirest of us; For thine is
the Kingdom. It is not in our power to do what we should, or what thou
requirest of us; but the Kingdom is thine, all comes from thee, O Lord, and
let all the glory of all be returned to thee again. Do we hallow thy name, and
pray for thy Kingdom to come, and thy will be done? why? it is thou Lord, that
must give the power; we beg all from thee, and this is included in the word
power. For, as that we should say, we have no power to do any thing, do thou
all Lord, and take thou the glory of all; so that is the ground why we beg all
of him, and return all to him.

What is here meant by Kingdom? Quest.


First, the word Kingdom does discover the right and authority of God, to give
all things we want; Answ.
thou, Lord, have the disposing of all things; we have no authority, nor no
property that is in us, thine is the Kingdom, thou have all power to do what
thou will. The Master does what he will in his family, and the King rules in
his Realm; so does the Lord rule in the heart of his.

Secondly, the Lord has not only authority to do what he will, but full and
abundant sufficiency to dispose of all according to his will and pleasure.
Kings may want power to do what they would, and the sons of Zeruiah may be too
strong for David; but as the Lord has title to all, so his arm is long
enough, his ability sufficient enough to do all; there is much infirmity in us,
but none at all in thee.

And the glory.
THe glory of a thing, we know appears in two things.

First the excellency of it.

Secondly, in the beauty and splendour of its excellency: this sets forth the
glory of a thing, as who should say, if any beauty, excellency or glory be in
the creature, it is thine, oh Lord; for thine is the Kingdom, power, and the
glory.

Thine.

What does this word thine imply? Quest.


It implies three particulars. Answ.


First, that all authority, sufficiency, and excellency is firstly in God, all
is his by possession and propriety. Any thing that we have or enjoy, it is but
what we have of him, it is but a glimpse and reflection of that glory in God,
and it is all firstly in God, and he leases it out; it is my God and my
portion, God is the root of all we are or have, all power and sufficiency is
in him firstly.

Secondly, so all comes from him; whatever is in the creature, comes from him;
all are but tenants and leasures of that they have from the Lord, who is the
great possessour of Heaven and Earth.

Thirdly, it implies, that we should acknowledge all belonging to him, give
every man his due: whose is this honor and power? the Lords: let him have it
then; and this is to put off all ability and sufficiency from our selves, and
to acknowledge all to come from him: As thongh the soul should say, Is there
any thing in me, Lord? it is because thou give it: Thou give unto us all
our abilities and hearts to pray, and it is thou that hear us when we pray.
It is all free mercy, all abilities are from thee; therefore, Lord, take all;
for all is thine. Thus the soul disclaimes all self.

For ever and ever, etc.
THat is, everlasting power is in thee, which differs from all other power; all
man's power is from GOD; but the Kingdom of GOD, his power and his glory, it is
for ever and ever. We cannot pray always, our abilities fail and our hearts
faint, but thy power endures for ever; the good things of this life, meat,
drink, cloth, etc. some times are gone, but yet thy power endures for ever to
succor us. When our abilities fail, yet power is for ever and ever in thee to
renew them.

Amen.
THe word Amen implies three things:

First, the term of asseveration, and it discovers the truth of a thing.

Secondly, a wish, Oh, says the soul, that it might be.

Thirdly, the voice of a confident faith; It is so, it is done Lord: all these
three are employed: but this last mainly here intended. These things we have
prayed for, that according to thy will they are verily done: As also, there is
a secret looking after the Petition when it is put up, the soul follows the
Petition: Now, says the soul, they speed, the LDRD grants these petitions: as
a man that shoots an Arrow, he looks after it: So the soul says, Oh, that the
Lord would speed it. So when the Petitions are sent to heaven, the heart
follows the blow and looks after them, it sends his Amen; oh, that it might be
so, and then faith says, it is done undoubtedly: As true as the Lord is
faithful, so these must needs be done. The word Amen strikes the match through.
The soul wishes, Oh that it might be done, says says, it is done already.
Prayer is as the key; when a man wants provision, he goes to the Treasury and
fetches it: So prayer fetches comfort, peace, and assurance, etc. and Amen
turns the key; it is mine, says the Soul. Prayer is as a Golden Key.

FINIS.

