THE SAINTS DIGNITY, AND DUTY. TOGETHER WITH The Danger of IGNORANCE and
HARDNESS.

Delivered in Several SERMONS: By that Reverend Divine, THOMAS HOOKER, Late
Preacher in New England.

HEBR. 10.38. Now the just shall live by Faith; but if any man draw back, my
soul shall have no pleasure in him.

LONDON, Printed by G. D. for Francis Eglesfield, and are to be sold at the
Sign of the Marigold in Paul's Churchyard, 1651.

To the Reader.
Reader,
THou have here set forth to thy view the last memorial (for ought I know) in
this kind, of that Reverend Divine Mr. Thomas Hooker, Rev. 14.13.
who now rests from his labors, being dead in the Lord. And though this
present work be but small in quantity, yet it comprehends a great many divine
Truths: For thou shall in this, as in a glass, see thine own condition, be it
what it will: If thou be indeed a child of God, thou shall find him herein a
Barnabas, a son of Consolation to thee, in discovering what thy Privileges
are, and what thy practice is, or should be. But if thou be yet in thy
unregenerate estate, he will prove a Boanerges, a son of Thunder, in showing
the danger of Non-proficiencie under the means of grace and knowledge, and in
wilful hardness against admonition, and reproof. These Sermons are upon
several Texts of Scripture, which (I suppose) will prove the more delightful
for the variety, which is pleasing to all. And though there be no great
dependence of these Sermons each upon other, yet the whole without forcing, may
be reduced to these three Heads: Dignity. Duty. Danger.


In the three former Sermons is set forth the dignity or privileges of true
believers. The inestimable gift of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the redemption of
his people, is sweetly and fully explained in the First Sermon. In the Second
is showed, that Christ has not only given himself for believers, but to them,
and that he is in them, with the blessed Effects of his Inhabitation. In the
Third, thou shall find the happy condition of the people of God, being now
freed from the Law, and under Grace, the Privileges whereof are enlarged in
several Branches.

The duties of the Saints that enjoy these dignities, and privileges, are set
forth in the two next Sermons. In the Fourth, That they ought only to attend to
the voice of Christ, who is the wisdom of the Father, and to be obedient to
him. In the Fifth, is showed what kind of obedience is required of them, even
the obedience of Faith, which is set forth in the fruitfulness, and activitie
of it, in their Imitation of Abraham the Father of the faithful. And then in
the two last Sermons is laid down the danger of neglecting these Privileges
and Duties, either by remissness and ignorance under the means of knowledge,
and grace, which is the sum of the Sixth Sermon; or else, which is worse, by
hardening the heart against instruction and reproof, which is the Subject of the
last; that those that will not sweetly be drawn by the cords of love, shall be
violently surprised with the chains of wrath.

The Works of this worthy man already Extant, have proved (by Gods blessing)
profitable, and comfortable to many, and I make no question, but there is a
blessing reserved for this also: Therefore as the Wiseman says, Eccles. 11.6.
In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withold not thy hand, for
thou know not whether will prosper this, or that, or whether they shall be
alike good. In this confidence, it is commended to thy Prayers, and pains in
perusing it; and that it may prove a furtherance in thy progress toward
heaven, is the desire of

Thy Christian Friend, T. S.

THE GIFT OF GIFTS: OR, The END why CHRIST Gave Himself.

By that Reverend Divine, THOMAS HOOKER, Late Preacher in New England.

ROMANS 5.15, But not as the offense, so also is the free gift; for if through
the offense of one, many be dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by
grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many.

LONDON, Printed by G. D. for Francis Eglesfield, and are to be sold at the
Sign of the Marigold in Paul's Churchyard, 1651.

The Particular Titles, and Texts, of each SERMON.
SERMON. I. The Gift of Gifts, on Tit. 2.14. SERMON. II. The Blessed Inhabitant, on
Romans 8.10. SERMON. III. Grace magnified, on Romans 6.14. SERMON. IV. Wisdoms
Attendants, on Prove. 8.32. SERMON. V. The Activitie of Faith, on Romans 4.12. SERMON.
VI. Culpable Ignorance, on Isai. 27.11. SERMON. VII. Wilful Hardness, on Prove.
29.1.
The GIFT of GIFTS: OR, The End why Christ gave Himself.
SERMON I.
TIT. 2.14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.


THe Apostle in the beginning of this Chapter, had given several exhortations,
to several sorts of Persons. To the Aged men, verse. 2. To the Aged women,
verse. 3. To the younger women, and younger men, verse. 5, 6. And to Servants in
verse. 9, 10. Having thus exhorted these several sorts to several duties, he
subjoyneth an Argument that might serve to persuade them all to the practice of
the duties he had exhorted them unto, and that is laid down from the beginning
of the 11th verse to the end of the 14th. Wherein he describes the end of the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and of the grace of God revealed therein; which is,
That it should bring men to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
soberly and righteously in this present world, Verse. 12. Looking for that
blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ, Verse. 13. To bring people to this temper and disposition, is the
end and scope of all the Gospel. Now having spoken of Christ, in the end of
verse. 13. (Our Savior Jesus Christ) he comes also to describe Christ in ver.
14. by such things as may also serve as Arguments to persuade to the former
duties exhorted to.

The Lord Christ is described in this 14th Verse by an Act of his, Who gave
himself for us; and this same action of Christ it is illustrated; First, by the
Object for whom it was done, He gave himself for us: Secondly, By the end, Why
it was done, That he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

Thus you see the Coherence of these words, and the Scope of them, and also the
Parts of the Text; They are, the Action of Christ described, by the Object and
End of it.

We will first speak of the Action and Object, joining of them both together,
Who gave himself for us.

Give me leave to spend a little time in the opening of the Words. And first,
what is meant here by us? Who they are that are the object of this action of
Christ? Who they are for whom Christ gave himself?

In a word, the Persons for whom Christ gave himself, they are believers: In 1 Timothy 4.10. he is there said to be the Savior of all men, especially of those
that believe. You see in the Verse before my Text, he is called our Savior,
how he gave himself for them to whom he is a Savior, but (says the Apostle)
he is the Savior of all men, specially of those that believe. The meaning of
the place is this, Christ he saves all men with a common temporal salvation,
he saves them from many dangers, from many miseries, he is a general Savior
to all men; but a special Savior to save from Hell, from the wrath of God,
from the guilt and power of sin; thus specially the Lord Christ is a Savior
only to them that believe: So that by the Object of this Act, (included in the
word [Vs,] he gave himself for us) is meant believers, them that do believe in
him.

What this belief is, I think I shall not need now to declare unto you; I will
but only touch it in a few words.

To believe in Christ then, it is nothing else, but for a man to go out of
himself, and to receive the Lord Christ in all his Offices, to be to us in
particular, a King to govern us, a Prophet to teach us, and a Priest to save
us, and to make intercession for us: Thus Faith is described, John 1.12. To as
many as received him, that is, (as the latter part of the Verse has it) to as
many as believed in him, He gave power to be the sons of God. So that to
believe in Christ, is to receive Christ.

Now there is no receiving of Christ, but you must receive whole Christ, the
coat of Christ was never divided, much less is the person of Christ: if
Christ's coat and person was not divided, much less the Offices of Christ: So
that if to believe be to receive Christ, then to believe is to receive whole
Christ in all his Offices. You see then what this faith is, it is to go out of
ones self, and to entertain Christ, to be in particular for us our only King,
and Priest and Prophet; and therefore to give up our selves to Christ, as
subjects to be guided by him as by our Sovereign: and as Scholars in all
things to be taught by him as by our Master; and for to give up our selves to
him alone to expect atonement, and to expect favor from God through his
Priesthood. This is to believe.

The Properties of this Faith, the signs of it, by which you may know that you
are them for whom Christ gave himself, you shall find in Scripture to be these.

First of all, Faith it is said to purify the heart, Acts 15.9. There says
the Apostle, he put no difference between us and them, purifying of their
hearts by faith. There is one property of faith, It is a purifier of the
heart, that is, where there is faith, there is a principle in that heart,
whereby it comes to be purified and cleansed from the power and dominion of
all original corruption. Where ever there is faith, there is a pure principle
in that soul which endeavors nothing but the cleansing of the soul from all
corruption that is inbred by nature.

Faith it does not purify the heart perfectly, but only in part: It does not
purge out all corruption, but only some; but yet this it does, it establishes
in the soul a pure principle, whereby the soul is purged from the dominion of
all sin, from the love of all sin, from the habitual delighting in any sin;
and whereby the soul is made to be continually purging of it self from the
remainders of corruption: Whence is that speech you have in 1 Pet. 1. 22.
Seeing you have purified your souls by obeying the truth; faith it purifieth
the heart by planting in it a principle which makes the heart purify it self;
Thereupon is that you have in 1 John 3 3. Every man that has this hope,
purifieth himself as he is pure. Hope it is the daughter of faith; where there
is faith, there is hope brought forth; where there is hope, this hope makes a
man purify himself, even as God is pure. I pray observe it, Hope with faith
works in the soul, it looks upon God, and it does make a man strive to purify
himself, that he may come to be pure as God is: What ever impurity is discerned
in the soul, there is not that hope which is the daughter of faith; faith and
hope is continually laboring and striving to work out that impuritie: that is
the meaning of it, he purifieth himself even as God is pure, that even as a
Scholar that is willing to learn, he looks upon the Copy of his master, and
upon his own writing, and where ever he finds any default, he is continually
striving to mend that, and still laboring every time more and more to be more
conformable to his masters copy; even thus, where ever there is faith, it does
produce hope, which hope makes the soul continually aim to conform it self to
the purity of God, whom it hops fully to enjoy.

And that you may not be mistaken, consider thus much, that there will be
impuritie in the heart wherein there is faith, but yet where there is faith,
there is a continual purging out of impuritie, as it manifests it self. You
may conceive it by a similitude, if a pot be boiling upon the fire, there will
a scum arise, but yet they that are good house wives, and cleanly, and neat,
they watch it, and as the scum rises up, they take it off and throw it away,
happily more scum will arise, but still as it rises they scum it off. Thus it
is with the soul, impuritie will be in the heart wherein there is faith, and it
manifests it self, and rises up when the soul is in action, but yet the
heart that has faith in it, eyeth the soul, and as it discovers any
impuritie, though it be never so secret, or never so small, though it be never
so agreeing to his natural disposition, it scummeth it off, and it is his
continual work and desire to make riddance of any corruption which does appear.

Here is the first Property whereby you may know them that are the Persons for
whom Christ gave himself, they are believers, and faith purifieth the heart.

A second Property of faith is that you have in Gal. 5.6. Faith which works by
love. Where ever there is faith, it is working. Faith it is not an idle grace,
it is not a fancy or an opinion that Christ has died for us, and there is an
end, but it is a working grace, where ever there is faith, there is work, and
what work is it? it is a work of love.

There is a working of love, and a working by love, where ever there is faith.
First, there is a working of love; faith that believes in Christ, works a love
to Christ: Faith that believes the pardon of sin, it works a hatred of that
sin for whose pardon Christ blood was shed, faith it works a love to the Image
of Christ, to the honor of Christ, to the Gospel of Christ: In a word, what
ever is Christ's, to that faith does work a love where ever it is; so that
whosoever has faith, they have in them a love to Christ, and to all the things
of Christ: You may conceive it by this similitude; If a woman have with a
conjugall affection taken a man to be her husband, that same taking of him to
be her husband, makes her love him, and all that is his; she loves his name,
his honor and credit, his profit, his contentment, his ease, his safety, his
person, his friends: for that same conjugall affection which makes her to take
him to be her husband, works love in her in all these particulars. To believe
in the Lord Christ, is nothing but to take Christ (as I said before) to be our
husband: Now if we have taken him to be our husband, then we shall love him as
a wife loves her husband. There is the second thing.

Again thirdly, a third Property of Faith is that in the 1 These. 5.8. The
breastplate of faith and love, faith is a Breast Plate, there is the third
property of faith. What is the use of a brestplate? A brestplate it does fence
and secure the heart from all danger, from all stabbs, from all injuries. Where
there is faith, the soul is fenced as it were, with a brestplate, so that it is
neither drawn away from Christ, nor wounded with the fiery darts of Satan, or
temptations of sin. My brethren, I pray observe it, there is no faith, where
the heart is not in some measure fenced from the wounds of sin, and from the
insnarements of the world: Faith is a breast plate, there is the third.

Again, in the fourth and last place, the last property of faith that I will
name, is that in the 1 John 5.4. Whosoever is born of God overcommeth the
world, and this is our victory, even our faith. Observe that place, where
there is faith, there is a victory, and a victory over the world: where ever
there is faith, there is an overcomming of the world? To overcome the world, it
is not to be overcome of the world; it is to persist in setting our chiefest
affection upon the Lord Jesus Christ, notwithstanding all the devises and
attempts of the world, either by flattery or by frowns; either by favor, or by
blows; this is to overcome the world. Now then where ever there is faith,
there is a victory over the world: that soul which has faith in it, it has
overcome the world, the care of the world was wont to overcome it, but now it
overcommeth the care of the world; it is not so careful for the world, as it
is for Christ. The fears of the world were wont to overcome it, but now it
has overcome the fears of the world, it is not so afraid of all the worlds
injuries and threats, as it is of Christ's displeasure: The pleasures of the
world were wont to overcome it, the world runs after nothing so much as
after worldly pleasures, is delighted in nothing so much, as in some worldly
pleasure, either of contentment, or profit, or friends, of riches, or honors:
But now the soul that has faith in it, it delights in nothing so much as in
the comfort of the Spirit, in the communion of the Lord Jesus Christ. Thus (I
pray consider it, though I speak but briefly of these things, yet consider it)
where ever there is faith, there is a victory over the world, before there is
faith, there the soul is a slave to the world, but if once there be faith, he
is more then conqueror, he is not the worlds slave, but the world is his, the
world is trampled under his feet, and is a dead flower to him, that has
neither beauty nor sweetness in it.

Thus (my brethren) they that have these Properties, they whose hearts are
purified, they who work by love, they whose hearts are fenced with a brestplate
that they cannot be stolen from Christ, nor wounded with sin, they that are
conquerours over the world, they are believers. And so you see the first thing,
the Object of this Act of Christ, The persons for whom Christ gave himself:
viz. for them that have a faith purifying the heart, for them that have a faith
working by love, for them that have a faith that is as a brestplate to their
soul, for them that have a faith that overcomes the world, for these Christ
gave himself.

Now we come in the second place to open the second thing, that is the Act of
Christ, the thing that Christ did, he gave himself for these believers.

What is meant by giving of himself? to give a thing in the general, it is to
put a thing out of ones own use and power, and freely to bequeath it to the use
and power of another; this is in the general to give a thing. But here I
conceive giving is taken a little more strictly, and not so largely, viz. that
which we call giving a ransom: For if you compare with this Text, that which
you shall find in 1 Timothy 2.6. Who gave himself a ransom for all, that is, for
all sorts and conditions of people, so that here by giving himself, is meant a
giving himself as a ransom. Now what it is to give a thing as a ransom, you
are to know it is this; It is to dispose and order a thing so as that it may
redeem another out of that distress wherein he is: So then the meaning of
these words, he gave himself for us, is this, That the Lord Christ did so
dispose of himself, that by him there may come a redemption to all believers
from all that misery and distress they are in by nature. This is the meaning
of the words.

The words then thus explained, this Doctrine does arise;

Jesus Christ has given himself for all that believe.

I need not stand to prove it, it is so plain and evident in the Text, only
let me give you one place which is parallel to it, Ephesians. 5.25. Husbands love
your wives as Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it. By the Church
is meant nothing else but the company of believers, now he so loved the Church,
that is, the company of believers, that he gave himself for them to be their
ransom.

For the opening of the point, that you may see what this Action of Christ was,
I will show you the particular things to which Christ gave himself for
believers.

First, Christ gave himself to incarnation, to become a man for believers.

Secondly, Christ gave himself to a perfect obedience of the Law, to work all
righteousness for believers.

3. Christ gave himself to suffering; to passion, for believers.

These I will briefly open, and so make use of the Point.

The First thing to which the Lord Christ bequeathed himself for the sake of
believers, it was for to be a man. For the understanding of this you must know,
that Christ he was, as he is, God, he was not man, he was a spirit and not
flesh, he neither had blood nor bones, nor any body at all; but yet for
believers did Christ dispose of himself so that he might become a man; he that
was God, the second Person in Trinity, the maker of all flesh, he did so order
it, that he gave up himself to Incarnation, to become a man. This is that you
have excellently expressed, in Phil. 2. 6, 7. Who being in the form of God,
thought it not robbery to be equal with God, that is, who was God, Gods
equal, one and the same with God, therefore equal with God in majesty, in
power, in glory, in all perfection: Well, though he was God, yet he made
himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made
in the likeness of men. Here was the first thing Christ gave himself to, he
gave himself to become flesh, to become a man, and all this for believers. This
was a great act, for the Creator to become a creature, for him that was
eternal, invisible, immortal, incorporeall, spiritual, for him to be of the
seed of man that was mortal, that was corporeal, that was visible, and had
some proportion with the nature of beasts. Nay, not only did the Lord Christ
give himself to be a man, but he gave himself for believers to be of the lowest
rank of men, therefore the Text says, he took upon him the form of a
servant, and was made in the likeness of men. There are two things in those
words: First, he was made in the likeness of men, the meaning is not, that he
was like a man, and no man, as some heretics would have grounded upon this
Text, for the Scripture plainly enough shows that Christ was a man; but by
the likeness of men here is meant, a likeness to them in all infirmities, sin
only excepted; he was not only of the nature of man, but he gave himself to be
like men in this frail and infirm condition wherein they are; so that he was
subject to the like infirmities that men were, only without all sin: that is
meant by the likeness of men. Christ he might have been a man and have lived
without weariness, without faintness, without hunger and thirst, he might have
lived, without meat and drink, without sleep and rest, as he does now in
heaven where he is a man: but Christ as he gave himself to be a man for
believers, so he gave himself to be like men in all sinlesse infirmities for
believers. Thus he abased himself below man, below man as man's nature was in
innociencie, below that which was the nature of men, he even gave himself to
the meanest infirmities of men, without sin.

Another thing in these words is, In the form of a servant; he did not only
give himself to be a man, and to be subject as men are to all sinlesse
infirmities; but he gave himself to be in the lowest rank of men, even to be a
servant amongst men, He took upon him the form of a servant. The Lord Christ
might have been in the likeness of men, a man subject to all humane infirmities
without sin, and yet been a great man, a Commander, a Governor, a man of
place: But for believers, Christ gave himself to be of the lowest rank of men,
to be a servant, the Son of man came not to be ministered to, but to minister.
Here is the First thing to which Christ gave himself for believers, even to
become a man, subject to all sinlesse infirmities; to become of the meanest
rank of men, even a servant amongst men.

2. The Second thing to which Christ gave himself for believers, whereto he
disposed himself that he might be their ransom, it is, to the obedience of
this Law, to the fulfilling of all righteousness, This is that which the
Scripture plentifully expresses, you may take one place for all: Matthew. 3.13,
14, 15. Christ there comes to John to be baptized of him; Baptism was an
Ordinance of God, appointed to men by the Law of God; Christ he comes and
puts himself under the obedience of this Law in this particular: John
knowing what Christ was, that he was God, he refuses to baptize him, he knew
Christ had no need to obey the Law in this, or any other particular; the Law
was but the counterpain of that righteousness, which is in the nature of Christ
as he is God: therefore what need he come to put himself under the Law, that
was above the Law, of whose holiness and righteousness the Law was but a
Coppie? Now what is our Saviors Answer? Jesus said unto him, Suffer it to be
so, for thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness: As if he should have
said, John, indeed, I know it is true, if you look upon strict terms, there is
no need I should obey the Law, yet notwithstanding, though I need not, Let it
be so, for it becomes me to fulfill all righteousness: I have given up my
self to this work, to fulfill the Law for them that to the worlds end shall
believe in me.

Here then is the second thing; Christ gave himself to the obedience of the
Law, to the working of all righteousness: therefore it is that he is often
described in the Scripture to be that just one, that holy one of God, one in
whose mouth there is no guil, all which are but expressions of his obedience to
the Law. This Christ did in both his Natures, not only as he was man, but even
as he was God: for in all the actions of Christ, you must not separate the
Deity from the Humanity; (I pray observe it) there is no action of Christ
would be of efficacy and virtue sufficient for believers, if it were separated
from the concurrence of the Deity: Therefore Christ as he was the second
person in the Trinity, did give up himself to the obedience of the Law;
thereupon is that, that it is called the righteousness of God, Romans 3.21. But
now (says the Text) the righteousness of God without the Law is manifested by
the Law. What is meant by the righteousness of God? There is nothing meant but
the obedience of Christ to the Law: Christ his perfect obedience to the Law is
the righteousness of God. Why is it called the righteousness of God? not only
because God found it out, but because God wrought it, this white linen garment
of Christ's righteousness, it is woven by no other then by God himself; it was
the second Person in Trinity that wrought this righteousness, therefore it is
called the righteousness of God. Not that the second Person in Trinity in
himself obeys the Law of God, for that is impossible, but it is said to be
the righteousness of God, and so that God did obey the Law, because the second
Person in Trinity did fulfill all righteousness, and obey the Law; that
nature which was the nature of the second Person, wherein the second Person in
Trinity did subsist; that nature I say, obeying the Law, the second Person may
be said to do it; as the second Person is said to die, and God is said to
shed his blood, because that nature which obeyed the Law was the nature of God.
The second thing is a very great act, Christ thus as God and man gave himself
up to the obedience of the Law for believers; Oh consider and admire it! What a
wonderful thing is this, that he that was the Lawgiver, should put himself to
be under the Law for believers, and so become for them the Law-keeper.

Thirdly, and lastly, The last particular to which Christ gave himself for
believers was to suffering, Christ gave himself to death for believers. Here
for the understanding of this you must know, That there are two kinds of
sufferings, to which the Lord Christ gave up himself for believers. First,
sufferings in body. Secondly, sufferings in soul: First, the suffering of man's
wrath. Secondly, the suffering of Gods wrath: Christ for believers gave up
himself to both these.

First, Christ gave himself up to the sufferings in body, to the suffering of
the wrath of man for believers; you that are acquainted with the History of
the Gospel know the truth of this. How did Christ suffer himself to be
scorned, to be hated, to be reviled, and persecured by men? Christ he gave
himself up in his passion; First, to be arrained, attached by soldiers with
staves, and holberts as a malefactor: after that he gave himself up to be
reproached, his ears to be filled with blasphemies, and with mocks, his face to
be buffeted, to be spit upon, his head to be all wounded with thorns, his
hands and his feet to be pierced with nails, and his side with a spear. Thus
Christ gave up his body to the suffering of the wrath of man in bodily
tortures, for believers; and in the last place, he gave himself up to the
suffering of a dissolution of soul and body, that which we call death. This is
the first sort of suffering to which Christ gave up himself for believers, to
the suffering of bodily tortures, to the suffering of the wrath of men. There
is no kind of suffering that man is outwardly subject to, but Christ endured,
in every member of his body, and in his name; his ears with their mocking
speeches, and his eyes with their mocking gestures, when as they clothed him
with purple, and gave him a reed in his hand, and bowed to him, and mocked him,
calling him the King of the Jews by derision.

Again in the second place, Christ he gave himself up to the sufferings of
soul, to the sufferings of the wrath of God for believers, and this is a great
deal more. Christ he did not only suffer in body, but he also suffered in soul.
You may gather it from that in Mar. 14.32, 33, 34. He takes with him Peter,
James, and John, and began to be sore amazed, and to be very heavy, and says
unto them, my soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death; and afterward he goes
from them and prays three times, that if it were possible the cup might be
taken from him. If so be that Christ's suffering was only the wrath of men, and
bodily tortures, Christ had been very pusillanimous, and faint-hearted, that
would be so fearful at the apprehension of death. We have many men that can
expect death without any amazement or fainting of heart, therefore if there had
been no more then the bodily suffering, Christ had been weaker then men, who
was thus amazed, and affrighted, and prayed three times that the Cup might
pass from him.

And further, that Christ suffered in soul will appear by that in Luke 22.44.
there says the Text, Being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly, and his
sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling to the ground. If Christ had
only suffered in body, how had it been possible that the fear of death could
have made him sweat great drops of blood: Many through fear have sweat great
drops of water, but never any did sweat drops of blood, for never did any man
feel such a bloody wrath as Christ felt at this time.

And yet further, in that Mark. 14.34. our Savior says it himself in express
terms, My soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death; Here he says plainly that
his soul suffered. And likewise in Luke 22.43. it is said, That an Angel
appeared to him from heaven strengthening him: If Christ had nothing to do, but
suffer the death of his body, what need an Angel come to strengthen him? Men
are able to bear the apprehension of a bodily death, and shall we conceive
Christ could not bear it without the strengthening of an Angel?

These things plainly show, that Christ did not only give himself up to the
suffering of bodily wrath, but to the suffering of soul, the suffering of the
wrath of God; And it must be so, for if Christ had not suffered the wrath of
God, as well as the wrath of man, Christ had never done believers any good at
all, for the same nature that had sinned must suffer; and the soul of believers
sinned, as well as the body, therefore the soul of believers must suffer as
well as the body: The wrath of God is spiritual, and therefore reaches the
soul as well as the body, so that Christ could never have been a ransom to
believers from the wrath of God, nor a satisfaction to his justice, if the soul
of Christ had not suffered the wrath of God, as well as his body the wrath of
men.

Thus you see the second thing whereto Christ gave himself for believers, and
that was to the suffering both of man and of God, the tortures both of body and
soul. And to the end you may a little better conceive it; consider I beseech
you, what the tortures of soul and wrath of God is, that Christ gave himself up
to suffer.

It is (in brief) First, a loss in regard of sense of all the apprehension of
Gods love, and a sensible feeling of the immortal, and eternal, and infinite
wrath of God. The suffering of Gods wrath includes these two things: A
privation in regard of sense of all the of favor God; and an enduring in
regard of sense of all the anger of God: these two things did Christ endure:
First, he lost in regard of sense, all the apprehension of Gods favor; he had
not the least apprehension and sense of the love, and favor of God, but even
as the world is when the Sun is set, without all light; so was the soul of
Christ in regard of sense, without all love, without all favor, without all
presence of God at all, My God, my God, Why have thou forsaken me? In regard of
sense he suffered the loss of God, the loss of his love and favor, and this
was more to Christ then a thousand deaths. Indeed Christ had the favor and the
love of God, but all sense of it was perfectly withdrawn.

Secondly, Christ also suffered the full sense of the wrath of God; the arrows
of the divine displeasure were shot in the spirit and soul of Christ. To be
brief, this you must know, whatsoever believers should have suffered for their
sins, whether it be in the loss of the sense of Gods love, or in the sensible
feeling of the wrath and divine displeasure of Almighty God; all that Christ
suffered, so far as can be suffered without sin, and without the guilt of a
defiled conscience.

Now to all this did Christ give up himself for believers, to the end that
believers who have lost the love of God might have it; Christ gave up himself
in regard of sense, for a while to lose all sense of Gods love, to the end that
believers might not feel the insupportable burden of the infinite wrath of
God, Christ took it upon him and endured it; and all this Christ did willingly
and freely, and of his own accord, therefore the Phrase in the Text is
Emphaticall, Who gave himself, and Christ says of himself, I lay down my life.
Believers did with full consent sin, Christ must with full consent suffer, or
else Christ could not deliver believers from the wrath of God. This appears,
because that Christ when he knew that Judas should betray him, he goes to
that place where he was wont, and knew that Judas would come there. After that,
Judas and the Soldiers come out of seek Christ, Christ comes and offers
himself, Whom is it that you seek? says he, We seek Jesus of Nazareth; I am
he, says he, he offers and declares himself to them, puts himself into
their hands; and whereas he makes them to let all his Disciples escape, yet he
suffers them to take himself: Could Christ make them let the Disciples go,
and could he not have made them let himself go? Again, our Savior did but
speak, and they went backward, and fell to the ground, he that could throw them
down backward, could be not have killed them with his word if he pleased? Again
when Peter drew out his sword, and went about to defend him, Peter (says he)
put up thy sword, I can pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more
then twelve Legions of Angels. One Angel in one night slew in the camp of the
Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five thousand men, and what then could
twelve Legions of Angels have done? This Christ could have had for a word
speaking to his Father, but he did freely and willingly give up himself to all
these torments for believers; and he did not only suffer them as a man, but as
a God: For as I told you in his obedience, so I tell you in his passion, you
must not sever the Divinity of Christ from his humanity; For howsoever the
Godhead could not suffer, yet notwithstanding the Godhead did these things; it
was the nature of Christ that suffered: Whatsoever a man does with any part of
himself, though it be with his body, the whole man is said to do it, because
all actions are attributed to the person, it was that nature that subsisted in
the Divine Person that endured all these things, therefore it is said that God
shed his blood. Again, the Godhead did withdraw it self, and so had a hand in
the passion of Christ, the Godhead did withdraw it self from the revelation and
manifestation of it self to Christ.

Again, the Godhead did suffer it self to be eclipsed, to be veiled, to be
obscured, and so may have a hand in suffering. Again the Godhead of Christ did
support the humane nature, to bear the other ways insupportable wrath of God.
But in all these respects the Lord Christ as God, as well as man, gave up
himself to this for believers.

Hence is that Emphaticall speech, Zach. 13.7. Awake O sword against my
Shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow. Observe that speech, Awake O
sword, here God speaks to his wrath, to his divine vengeance, to fall upon the
man that is his fellow. Christ as Gods fellow did suffer the wrath of God, now
Christ is not Gods fellow but as Christ is God: Christ as Gods fellow suffered
the wrath of God, therefore Christ as God gave himself up even to suffer for
believers. And observe the Phrase, Awake O sword, against the man that is my
fellow, the very justice of God could not tell how to lay strokes upon this Son
of God til God bid it; it stood as it were in amazement for to strike the man
that was Gods own fellow: What, for God to strike his fellow, that man that was
God, how could justice do this? Nay, justice could not till God bad it, Awake
O sword.

Thus you have seen the Doctrine opened to you, what the things are to which
the Lord Christ freely disposes and bequeatheth himself for believers: To
Incarnation, he that was God became man: To the obedience of the Law, he that
was the Lawgiver, became the Law-keeper: To suffering, both in body and in
soul, both the wrath of man, and the wrath of God. This is the meaning of these
words, He gave himself for us.

Now as briefly as I can to make some Use of the Point, and so to pass on to
somewhat else.

First of all, this Doctrine serves to show us the wonderful love of Christ
to believers. Can there be greater love then for a man to give himself to one?
We count it the greatest love that can be between creatures, that of the man to
the wife, and the wife to the man, and why so? because there is a giving
themselves one to another, which no creature else does: This Christ has done,
he has given himself to believers, and he cannot show greater love, because he
cannot do a greater thing, and yet behold a greater than this, he has not only
given himself to them, but for them, and that is a little more. You may
conceive it by a similitude: If a man give himself to a woman to become her
husband, there is a great-matter in that; but if the man shall give himself for
the woman, when she is to die, to die for her, that is more; he that gives
himself to her does yet enjoy himself, but he that gives himself for her does
lose himself; he that gives himself to men has himself, but he that gives
himself for men has given away himself. Oh this, this is the love of Christ to
all believers, He has given himself for us, he that was God made himself of no
reputation, made himself nothing, for so the word is in the Original; he that
was above the Law, he has put himself under the Law; he that was a Sovereign,
is become a Subject; he that was the God of life, is become a man under the
power of death; he that was the Judge, stands as the person guilty, and
suffers the judgment: Here is his love, you that are believers, to the end
that you might enjoy Gods favor, he has given himself to lose Gods favor for
the sense of it; to the end that you might never go to hell, he has suffered
himself to endure the uttermost torments of hell: was there ever love like
this? Suppose that Christ had given himself to die ten thousand times over and
over again, a bodily death, it had not been in the least degree so much as is
one giving of himself some six hours to the enduring of the infinite wrath of
God. Here is the first Use, remember it, and admire it, and be overcome with
the love of Christ; Oh that God would shed abroad this love in our hearts,
would it not constrain us, as Saint Paul said of himself?

In the second place as it serves to show the love of Christ, so it serves
for a great matter and ground of assurance and consolation to you, that are
believers, of having all from Christ whatsoever you stand in need of, for he
has given himself for you, and will he not give you all things else? What is
it that your souls want? Do you desire Christ? you shall certainly have Christ,
he that has given himself for thee, will he not give himself to thee? If we
shall see a man giving of himself to death for a woman, shall we question
whether that man will give himself as a husband to the woman? No certainly. So
when thou see already that Christ has given himself for thee, do thou
think Christ will not give himself to thee? when he gave himself for thee, he
abased himself; when he gives himself to thee, he exalts himself: When he
gave himself for thee, he was below his condition, when he gives himself to
thee, he reserveth his condition; for he gives himself to be thy God and thy
King, to be above thee, to command thee, therefore he that has done the
greater, will certainly do the lesser. And if Christ will give himself to
thee, what else is there that thou want that Christ will not give thee? What
Saint Paul says in regard of God the Father, that may I speak in regard of God
the Son, Romans 8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us
all, how shall he not with him freely give us all things? So do I say, to all
you that are believers, he that spared not himself, but gave himself for you,
how much more shall he freely with himself give you all things? Do you want
the Spirit of Christ? He that has given himself for you, will much more give
his Spirit to you: It is more for Christ to give himself to you; then for
Christ to give his Spirit to you; the Spirit is the Spirit of Christ, and he
that has given himself must needs give whatsoever he has together with
himself: The Spirit is but one of his Privileges, and his Jewels, I mean the
sanctifying operations of the Spirit. If a man have given himself to a woman,
will he not give her his name, his honor, his wealth, will he not give her all
that he has? Even so consider it, and apply it for your comfort and assurance,
he that has given himself for you, will he not give you all that he has? He
that suffered the wrath of God to do you good, will he not sanctify your
souls to do you good? He that lost his own peace for you, will he not give
you that peace of conscience which passes all understanding. Thus it is a
notable ground of strong assurance confidently to persuade our hearts of this,
that there is nothing we want that is good for us, but Christ will give it us,
who has given himself for us.

Again thirdly, Let this be a motive strongly to persuade you to give up your
selves to Christ; he has given himself to you, will you not give up your
selves to him? It is that which the Scripture often speaks of, Rom 6.13. Give
up your selves as a reasonable sacrifice unto God. And again, Give up your
members weapons of righteousness unto God. Here now is an Argument above all
Arguments, why should you deny to give up your selves to him, who has not
denied to give himself to you? why should you not give up your understandings,
your natural parts, to do him service? why should you not give up your hearts
to be possessed by him? Why should you not give up all the members of your bodies
to be instruments of doing his will, of furthering his honor, whereas he has
given up himself for you? There is a great difference between Christ's giving
himself for us, and between our giving up our selves to him. When Christ gave
himself for us, he changed from the better to the worse, when we give up our
selves to Christ, we change from the worse to the better; for till we give up
our selves to Christ, we are the worlds, sins, and the Devils, we are slaves,
vassals, and drudges; then only come we to be Lords, and to be Freemen, and to
be happy, when we give up our selves to Christ. Now then if he have changed
from the better to the worser for your sakes, will not you change from the
worser to the better for his sake? Consider this seriously, there is no
argument in the world stronger to persuade the soul to give up it self to
Christ, then to consider this, that Christ has given himself to us. Become
Christ's altogether, be not any longer the worlds, nor your own, but the
Christ's, and Christ's altogether; give up your names for Christ, be content the
world should take away your name for the sake of the Gospel of Christ; give up
your goods for Christ; suffer even with joy the spoiling of your goods for the
sake of Christ, and of the Gospel; give up your liberties for Christ, be
content to be deprived of all your freedoms and contentments that you enjoy for
Christ; give up your lives for Christ, for he has given up his life for you.
And if all this, then much more give up your sins for Christ: What does Christ
require of thee, that art a profaner of his day, but to abandon that sin, to
crucify that sin? Oh do it! Christ has given himself for thee; thou have a
sin perhaps that is near and dear to thee; Christ calls for it, Oh give it up
to the sword of his word, to be mortified, and crucified, he gave up his
dearest life for thee. Thus me thinks, this same is a notable motive to
persuade us to mortification, to die to sin; and to vivification, to live to
Christ, to devote our selves in every thing to the Lord Jesus. Let us not, let
us not I beseech you, live any longer to our selves but to Christ, who has
loved us, so as to give himself for us.

And lastly, (to conclude this point) let me persuade all such of you as are
not yet believers, that you would labor above all things to become believers:
Oh my brethren, thrice happy are they of whom this may be said, Christ has
given himself for us: This is only the happiness of believers, they whose
hearts are purified, they that have a working love, they that have a brestplate
that secures their souls against all the wounds of the world and sin, they that
have an overcoming and victorious faith, they have this happiness: You
therefore that are not such, labor to be such, for if you are not believers,
you have no benefit by Christ; it shall be to you as if Christ had never dyed:
Is there any thing in the world that is able to interest you in this gift but
only faith? Suppose you had never so much honor, will this bring you to be in
the number of those for whom Christ is given? Suppose you had never so much
wealth, and good trading, health, and strength of body, and the confluence of
all other outward contentments, Will all this Interest you in the gift of
Christ? No, no, Christ has not given himself for worldlings, for those that
are laden with honors and carnal pleasures, and profits; he has given
himself for those that have faith, and only for them. As ever therefore you
desire to have an interest in this gift of Christ, labor to have in your souls
this grace of Faith. Would it not do any one good to be in the number of those
who are so dear unto Christ, that for their sakes he gave himself? There is no
way to be in their number but to be believers, Oh therefore above all mind
this, to get the grace of faith, it is that one thing necessary, for they that
are believers are the Persons for whom Christ has given himself.

Thus I have done with the two first Parts of the Text, the Action of Christ,
He gave himself: Together with the Object thereof, For us, that is, for
believers.

Come we now to the End why Christ gave himself for believers. And this is laid
down in the latter part of the Verse, That he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a pecu^iar people, zealous of good works.

Here are two ends of this action of Christ, the one is Particularly,
concerning them for whom he gave himself, concerning Believers, That he might
redeem them from all iniquity. The other is, concerning himself, that he might
purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. These are the two
ends of Christ's giving of himself, the one concerns the good of his people;
the other, the glory of himself: Here was the end of Christ's Incarnation, of
Christ's obedience to the Law, of Christ's suffering and passion, the glory of
himself, and the good of his people. This was the end of all that Christ did,
and these two are ever joined together in Christ, man's salvation, and Gods
honor.

First of all, we will begin with the first end, (which is all, I suppose, that
we shall go through with at this time) and that is that which concerns
believers, that he might redeem us, (that is, us that are believers) from all
iniquity.

For the opening of the words, We will show you first of all, what is meant by
iniquity; and then secondly, What is meant by redeeming from all iniquity.

For the first, What is meant by iniquity. The Word in the Original, it is
Transgression, That he might redeem us from all transgression: It is a going
beside the Law, a violating and breaking of the Law of God. It is well
translated iniquity, for it is an evil, for the Law of God is only good, and
therefore going beside the Law must be evil. It is injurious to God,
dishonorable to him, therefore it is called iniquity.

But yet this transgression of the Law, or iniquity, as it is here called, it
is to be taken largely, not only for the act of iniquity, the act of breaking
the Law, but for all the consequences, and for all the concomitants of it. The
transgression of the Law with all the Effects of it, is here meant by
iniquity. And therefore by iniquity here are three things meant.

1. The transgression of the Law of God, that which we commonly call sin, that
is meant by iniquity. Mat. 13.41. They shall gather out of his kingdom, all
things that offend, and them which do iniquity, that is, them that
transgress the Law of God. There is one thing which is here meant by
iniquity, the violation of Gods statutes, the transgression of Gods Law.

2. By iniquity is meant also, that which follows upon this, and that is
guilt, that same guilt which cleaves to the conscience of a man, upon every
transgression of Gods Law. This is also meant by iniquity, as you may gather
from that in Hebr. 8.12. I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and
their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more. What is here meant by
Iniquity? Not the transgression of the Law of God, for God cannot but remember
that ever, for all things past as well as to come, are present before him: But
by not remembering iniquity is meant this, I will not charge upon them the guilt
of their iniquity; I will acquit them from that judgment which by their
iniquity they are bound over to. So that here by iniquity is meant that guilt
which follows the transgression of Gods Law.

3. By Iniquity is further meant, all that wrath which is deserved by breaking
of Gods Law, that which they are bound over to, by the guilt: all that
judgment which justly follows the transgression of Gods Law, and that is
slaverie to Satan, and the vengeance of God here and hereafter. This is also
meant by Iniquity, all temporal, spiritual, and eternal wrath, that
righteously follows upon the breach of Gods Law. Thereupon it is that you
shall find in Act. 8.23. Peter there speaks to Simon Magus, I perceive (says
he) that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity.
Observe there, how they are joined together, Gall of bitterness, and bond of
iniquity; Why is the bond of iniquity called the gall of bitterness? Because
who ever is under iniquity, they are in a gall of bitterness, they are under
all the wrath which from God is due justly to sinners, horror of conscience,
slaverie to Satan, and temporal and eternal vengeance. Thus you see what is
meant in the Text by iniquity; These three things, the breaking of Gods Law,
the guilt which follows upon it, and all the judgments of God which
follows upon that; plagues both temporal, and eternal.

The Second thing is, What is meant by redeeming them from all iniquity: What
it is to redeem, you are well acquainted with; to redeem, it is by a ransom to
set a person free from that evil to which he is bound over, and so it is here
to be understood, Christ by paying a ransom sets free believers, from all
that misery to which they were bound by their Iniquity.

The words being thus explained, the Doctrine arising from them is this, That:

Christ gave himself for believers for this end, that by becoming aransome for
them, he might set them free from all transgression of the Law of God, from all
guilt that follows upon transgression, and from all punishment that is due to
the transgression of the Law,

The Doctrine you see is nothing else, but the very words of the Text
explained; For the proof of it, you may please to consider that name that is
given to Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15 47. The first man is of the earth, earthie;
The second man is the Lord from heaven. Christ here is called the second man,
what is the reason of it? Because there is a proportion between Christ and the
first Adam, only it is a proportion of unlikenesse, and contrariety, not a
proportion of likeness and agreement; Christ is just contrary to the first man,
how is that? The first man did bring all mankind under sin, and guilt and
punishment; Christ he does bring all believers, all mankind that do believe in
him, he brings them all from under sin, from under guilt, from under
punishment: Thus there is a likeness between Christ and Adam, only by way of
contrariety, Christ undoing what Adam did; Christ bringing our of all that
misery into which Adam brought us: therefore Christ is called the Second Man,
the first man undid us all, the Second has made us all that are believers; the
first man has run us into debt, the Second has redeemed us from all that
misery into which the first has plunged us.

And not to prove this only in general, you shall see it proved in all the
particulars, how that the Lord Christ has been a ransom, and sets free all
believers from all Iniquity.

First of all, The first thing that I told you is meant by Iniquity, it is the
breaking, the transgression of Gods Law: Now Christ he has set believers free
from this iniquity, he has delivered them from the transgression of Gods Law:
this is that you have in the 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Forasmuch as you know that you
were not redeemed with corruptible things, as filver and gold, from your vain
conversation, but with the precious blood of Christ: Observe, the precious
blood of Christ does redeem believers from their vain conversation, that is,
from the transgression of Gods Law, from a course of disobedience, and of
breaking Gods Commandments. I pray observe it, it is a thing that the world
thinks not of, Christ has redeemed believers from the very breaking of Gods
commandments from their vain conversation. It is true, believers are not yet
perfectly free from all transgression of Gods Law, yet notwithstanding they are
freed from a great deal which they were subject to before, which none do
obtain but they that do believe: for howsoever they cannot but sin, yet
notwithstanding sin does not reign in them: though they are not delivered from
the presence of sin, yet they are delivered from the power of sin, as you have
it in Romans 6. 14. Sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are not under
the Law but under Grace. Sin indeed it has a being in believers, but yet
notwithstanding, it cannot so act and command them as it did formerly; they do
not transgress the Law of God with resolution, with love, with delight; the
transgressions of the Law of God which they fall into, they are their burdens,
they are their shame, they are their grief, they are the things that they hate,
and would not do. Thus I say, in a great part, they are for the present
delivered from the first kind of iniquity, from the very violation of the Law
of God, and in due time they shall come perfectly to be delivered from all
transgressions of Gods Law. And there fore Saint Paul in Romans 7. 24. when he
cries our, Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? that is, from the power of sin that is in me, who shall deliver me
from that Original corruption whereby I am made to commit iniquity, and to
transgress Gods Law? He presendy subjoyneth, I thank God through jesus Christ
my Lord. As if he should say, I thank God, Jesus Christ has delivered me. We
have a title to perfect deliverance from all transgression, and we have the
beginnings of it, in that we are now delivered from the power, and reign, and
dominion of all sin. Thus you see the first thing proved, Christ has delivered
believers from the first kind of iniquity, that is, from the transgression of
the Law, so that corruption does not reign in them.

Secondly, Christ has also delivered them from the guilt of sin, as he has in
a great part delivered them from the acting of sin. This is that you have Ephesians.
1. 7. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our
sins: Where sin is forgiven, there all the guilt of sin is removed; by the
blood of Christ, believers have their sins forgiven, therefore the guilt of
their sins is taken away, so that there is no guilt of any sin committed by a
believer that lies upon him, but he is as perfectly free from the guilt of any
sin whatsoever he has committed, as a man is freed from debt by a discharge
from the Creditor.

Thirdly, Christ has also redeemed believers from the punishment of all
iniquity, so that there is no punishment of iniquity can fall upon any
believer: See this in Romans 8. 1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them
that are in Christ jesus, that is, to believers: Christ has redeemed them from
the curse of the Law, therefore from all punishment that belongs to the
breaking of the Law. This the Apostle excellently sets forth in Romans 5. 18.
Where as (says he) by the offense of one, (that is the first Adam) judgment
came upon all men to condemnation: So by the righteousness of one, (that is,
of Jesus Christ) the free gift came upon all men to justification of life.
Observe it: All that are in Christ they have a free gift of justification, they
are acquitted and discharged from all punishment of sin whatsoever. Indeed I
am not of their mind that say, That God never punishes his children for sin,
it is an abominable Doctrine, and contrary to the whole course of the
Scriptures. But yet this I desire you to observe, That though God punishes
believers for their sin, yet there is no believer that has the punishment of
sin; For you must know, that there is a punishment for sin, and a punishment of
sin; the punishment of sin, that begins in the wrath of God, and ends in
eternal damnation; now no believer has this punishment: Indeed for their sins
they are punished, but not with a punishment of sin, neither comes their
punishment from wrath, neither does it end in hell; but all the punishment they
have for sin is a fatherly correcton, it is sueh a punishment as whereby God
clears his justice to the world, and makes it appear, that he is no cockering
Fathe: It is such a punishment whereby they are trained, fitted, and educated,
for the Kingdom of heaven, to which Christ has redeemed them; so that though
God punishes them for sin, yet he never lays upon them the complete
punishment of sin, Christ has redeemed them from the fruit of iniquity.

Thus you see the Doctrine opened, That Christ has given himself as a ransom,
to redeem all believers from all iniquity, from the transgression of the Law,
from the guilt of sin, and so from the punishment of all sin.

For the further opening and unfolding of this excellent Point, consider with
me briefly these four particulars.

First, That all believers, they are by nature under all Iniquity, when the
Text says, That Christ gave himself to redeem them from all iniquity: This
implies that believers were under all iniquity, what need Christ give himself
to redeem them from that under which they were not? You shall find this
evidently declared, Romans 5. 12. By one man sin entered into the world, and death
by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. And Ephesians.
2. 1, 2. 3. the Apostle speaking of believers, he says of them, as well as of
others, that they were dead in trespasses and sins, and that they are by nature
the children of wrath as well as others, and that they were in time past, acted
by the Devil, and walked after the course of the world, according to the
Prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now works in the children of
disobedience; And again, Romans 3. 19. all the world is become guilty before
God; all men by nature, as well believers as unbeleevers are all under
iniquity: First, they are under the transgression of the Law, they break the
Commandments of God continually. Secondly, they are under the guilt of that
transgression, for he that has the sin must have the guilt. Thirdly, they are
under the punishment that belongs to the breakers of the Law, for he that
committeh sin, and has the guilt thereof, must needs be liable to the
punishment.

Here is the first thing considerable, Christ gave himself to redeem believers
from all Iniquity, therefore they are by nature under all iniquity.

The second thing to be considered is, How believers come to be under all
iniquity. To this I answer, that they are born under the power of iniquity.
Psalm 51. 5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, (says a believer, that is
David,) and in sin did my mother warm me; they were warmed in sin, and
conceived in iniquity; and the Apostle in the place before alleged, Ephesians. 2.
3. tells us that we that are believers, were all by nature the children of
wrath.

But you will say, Whence is it that believers come to be born under
iniquity, vassals to sin, slaves to Satan, and exposed to the wrath of God?
whence comes this?

I answer, (and that in a word only) it comes thus, by their first Father
Adam, for all mankind was in Adam, in his loins, and Adam in innocence
represented all mankind, he stood (as a Parliament man does for the whole
country) for all that should be born of him; so that look what Adam did, all
his posterity did: Now Adam broke the Commandment of God, eating that fruit God
had forbidden him to eat off; he breaking this Commandment, all his posterity
brake it, upon the breaking of the commandment there comes a guilt upon him,
the guilt that came upon him came upon all that were in him, and so upon all
mankind; upon the guilt, God lays a punishment for sin: What is that? to
withdraw that Image of holiness and righteousness wherein he was created, and
to leave him to a contrary Image of unholinesse, and unrighteousness; that was
the punishment that God laid upon Adam, and this punishment God lays upon all
the posterity of Adam, because they were as truly guilty of Adams sin; as he
was, whence it comes, that all that are born of Adam are guilty of eating
the forbidden fruit; being guilty of that, the punishment that is laid upon
that sin is laid upon them, that holiness and righteousness wherein they were
once (in Adam) created, is taken from them, and they are left to a contrary
Image of Satan, an image of unholinesse and unrighteousness: Whence it comes
to pass, that they are all born under the guilt of sin, under the power of
Original corruption, slaves to Satan, and the objects of divine wrath. Thus
you see the second thing, how it comes to pass that all believers are under
all iniquity.

The third thing is, How Christ comes to redeem believers from all this
iniquity; how Christ by giving of himself, could redeem believers from all
iniquity?

I beseech you observe it; Christ did it thus. Because that which brought
believers under iniquity, (as you have heard) was the breaking of Gods Law,
Christ he comes and fulfillleth the Law of God, and he suffers all that
which the justice of God thought due for the breach of his Law: And so Christ
doing that which believers should have done, namely, to keep the Law; and
suffering that which believers had deserved by their sins, Christ doing and
suffering this in the nature of believers, that is in man's nature, so that the
same nature that sinned, suffered; the same nature that was bound to keep the
Law, did keep the Law in Christ; hence it comes to pass, that Christ giving
God the full price for their ransom, he comes to redeem them from all
iniquity.

And that you may yet the better see that Christ by this act of his, giving
himself thus to be a man, to obey all the Law, and to suffer all the wrath of
God due to sin, that he did fully pay the price that might ransom all
believers, consider but in brief these things.

First, God and Christ made a compact, or a covenant together; God offers
Christ this (who was the second person in Trinity) that he would become man,
and in man's nature fulfill the Law, and suffer all that wrath of God that was
due for the breach of this Law; God promised Christ that he should acquit and
discharge all such as believed in him. Christ he agrees to this Covenant, and
undertakes it, after the Covenant was made, he came and performed it; he became
man and gave a perfect price, for the full payment of what ever was due, God
abated him not a farthing, the uttermost farthing of that which believers were
condemned to pay, he paid it, he perfectly kept the law, he perfectly suffered
the uttermost of all that wrath of God that was due to sin.

And all this was done by Christ who was God, all this was done by the Second
Person in Trinity; so that now the person obeying the Law of God was
infinitely better, then the persons breaking the Law of God, the person that
did suffer the wrath of God, was infinitely better then the persons that should
have suffered the wrath of God; for they were but men, but this was the very
Son of God: So that now God satisfies God, God paid the ransom to God,
therefore the ransom cannot but be complete. And thus comes Christ by giving
of himself fully paying a price to redeem from all iniquity, all them for whom
he paid it, that is, all that do believe in him. It is in this case, as if a
man were in prison for a great deal of money, and a friend of that man's should
agree with his creditor, that upon condition he would discharge the man, and
let him out of prison he would pay him the full debt; If the creditour accept
of this offer, and the party perform the condition, the poor man is acquitted
and discharged. Even thus it is, God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ
agreed, that upon Christ's paying of all that which was due to God from all
those for whom he paid it, they should be discharged, Christ he did it, and so
they are set free. Thus you see how it comes to pass, that Christ by giving
himself, has set free all believers from all iniquity.

Lastly, for the full clearing of this point, consider the reasons why Christ
should thus pay this price for believers, why Christ should give himself to
redeem believers from all iniquity. There are two reasons of it. The one in
respect of God, the other in respect of believers.

First, In respect of God: Christ's love to God made him do it. Believers they
are the elect and chosen of God, chosen by him to a kingdom. Now to the end
they might come to the kingdom to which God has chosen them, they must be
redeemed from Iniquity; they cannot redeem themselves, therefore they must lie
there: Christ out of love to God the Father, that he might bring to happiness,
those whom God has chosen to happiness, he offers himself and undertakes the
work. This is that you have in Hebr. 10. 5, 6, 7, 8. the Apostle there brings
in Christ speaking to God the Father, When he comes into the world, (that is,
when Christ was Incarnate,) he says, Sacrifice and offering thou would not,
but a body have thou prepared me; In burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin,
thou have no pleasure, Then said I, lo I come (in the volume of thy book, it is
written of me) to do thy will O God. God had appointed Christ to ransom
believers, Christ knowing it to be Gods will, out of his love to God, willingly
offers himself to do it, so that here is the first reason in obedence to
God, out of love to God, that he might deliver his elect, and bring them to
that happiness to which God has chosen them, he gives himself to redeem them
from all iniquity.

The second reason is, From Christ's love to believers. Believers as they were
the chosen of God, so they were the chosen of Christ. The Lord Christ had a
special affection to believers upon three grounds. First, Because they were
Gods chosen, and Christ loving God, could not choose but love them. Secondly,
because they were his own chosen, for he has chosen them as well as God the
Father. Thirdly, Because by God the Father they were given to him, as he
himself says, John 17.6. Thine they were, and thou gave them me. Upon these
three grounds Christ loves believers, now loving of them, Christ could not but
pity them in their misery, therefore having it in his power, he sets
himself to bring them out, and so gives himself a ransom to redeem them from
all iniquity; so you have it Ephesians. 5.25. Husbands love your wives, as Christ
loved his Church, and gave himself for it; by the Church is meant the company
of believers, his love to them is said to be the cause of his giving himself
for them. Thus by these things you have seen the Doctrine cleared and opened,
That Christ gave himself for that end, that he might become a ransom, and set
free believers from all iniquity, from the transgression of the Law, and from
the guilt of that transgression, and from the punshment that belonged to that
guilt.

To make now some Use of this Point, and so to conclude, This Doctrine my
brethren, is wonderful sweet and useful, and therefore I have been somewhat
the longer, in the proving and explaining thereof. It serves both for
Consolation, Exhortation, and Instruction.

First of all, here is wonderful sweet consolation to all you that are
believers, you that have a faith purifying your hearts, a faith working by
love, a faith as a brestplate, which preserves in you a conjugall affection to
Christ from all the aduldulteties of the world, flesh, and Devil; you that
have a faith overcomming the world, to you I speak, you are those happy ones
for whom Christ gave himself, to redeem you from all iniquity, to redeem you
from the power of sin, from the guilt of sin, from the punishment of sin. Be
therefore of good comfort, thou that art a believer, thou shall certainly be
delivered from all iniquity. Has Christ given himself for this end, and is
not attainable? It were folly in Christ to give himself for an end which is not
attainable; No my brethren, has Christ given himself for it, and shall it not
be done? If this be the end for which Christ gave himself, then either this end
is made good, or else Christ is disappointed of his end.

Is it possible (think thou) for Christ to redeem thee from all iniquity? Oh
yes, Christ has made the world, he has conquered hell, the Devil, and the
grave, therefore Christ can do this. If it be possible for Christ to do it,
then Christ will do it, for it was the very end why he gave himself. Do
thou think Christ has been at so much cost and pains, that he has coveted thy
redemption so strongly, that he has not spared himself, but given himself for
this end, to redeem thee from all iniquity, and will not Christ effect it? Oh
consider it, and be assured of it, seeing it is the very end for which Christ
gave himself, the thing shall be done.

Thou that art a believer, thou art already redeemed in a great measure from
all iniquity, thou art redeemed from the power and dominion of sin, thou art
no longer a servant of sin, thou art now a servant of righteousness: thou art
already redeemed from the guilt of all sin, there is no sin God will ever
charge upon thee to thy condemnation; thou art already delivered from the
punishment belonging to sin: Oh take comfort in that redemption thou already
have and rejoice under hope in that which is to come; the time is coming and
shall assuredly be, when thou shall be perfectly redeemed from all iniquity.
Thou art now freed from the power of sin, the time is coming in which thou
shall be freed from the presence of sin.

The Lord Christ he has now so ordered it, that God in his justice is tied to
deliver thee from all iniquity, for he has paid the price, therefore God must
set thee free. God covenanted with Christ that if he would pay the full price
for the redemption of believers they should be discharged? Christ has paid the
price, God must be unjust, or else he must set thee free from all iniquity.
Oh comfort thy self therefore with this. What Moses once said to the children
of Israel, I may speak to thee that art a believer, Exodus 14 13. Moses said to
the people, Fear not, stand still, see the salvation of the Lord, which he will
show you this day, What is that? For the Egyptians whom you have seen to day,
you shall see them again no more for ever. This was typical, this was a type
of Christ's redeeming thee that art a believer from all iniquity: I say
therefore to thee, stand still, and fear not, be not afraid of any thing; art
thou invirond round about with iniquities, as they were with the Egyptians,
fear not, stand still, be but patient a little, soon shall ^he time come
wherein thou shall see the salvation of the Lord; for thine Iniquities whom
thou now see, thou shall fee them again no more for ever. This is the very
end of Christ's dying, therefore this end shall be made good: Oh let us rejoice
together in the redemption of the Lord Jesus Christ.

How would it glad our soul, if we were vassalized to the Turk, or slaves to
the Moors to be redeemed from that vassalage and slaverie? If we were to be
imprisoned but all our life time for a debt which we could never pay, how would
it rejoice our soul, if a friend should come and pay our ransom, and discharge
our debt, and set us free? Behold here, my brethren, a greater redemption
wrought for thee by Christ; thou art redeemed from under all iniquity, not
with a temporary redemption; thou may be redeemed in thy body from a slave,
and taken captive again the next year; thou may be redeemed out of prison
for debt, and brought in again soon after; but the redemption thou have by
Christ, it is an eternal redemption, as it is called, Heb. 9.12. an universal
redemption, it is from all iniquity, and it is for ever. Here is the first
Use, Admirable consolation to all believers, you that are not sensible of this
comfort are not believers. Christ has given himself for this end to redeem us
from all iniquity, therefore assuredly his end shall be effected, all
believers shall be freed from all iniquity.

The Second Use is for Exhortation: Is this the end why Christ gave himself, to
redeem us from all iniquity; then let us that are believers, be exhorted to
these two things.

First of all, let us be afraid of coming under any Iniquity. The Lord Christ
did so much desire our redemption from all iniquity, That he gave himself for
that end; Oh then let us be afraid of being again brought under the power of
any iniquity. Has Christ so much desired our freedom from Iniquity, as that
he gave himself for that end, and shall not we have a care, that Christ may
have his desire, in keeping our selves free from iniquity? Suppose a Father
had been content to redeem his son out of prison (wherein he was perpetually to
lie for debt) to sell all that he had, and to strip himself of all his estate
to set his son free; should we not cry out of that son, that should after that
he was redeemed so costly by his father, again turn Prodigal? It is as gross
a thing (my brethren) for us that are redeemed by Christ with so costly a
Redemption, as is even the giving of himself, to rush again under the power of
that iniquity, from which to redeem us, Christ has given himself.

Suppose a father should so love a son, as that for the curing, and freeing of
him from a disease, he should shed his own hearts blood; should we not judge it
abominable for that son presently to run again into the infection of the same
disease, when as his father with so much love and cost, even his own life had
procured his freedom from the disease? I beseech you consider it, the Lord
Jesus Christ has therefore given himself to be a man, to obey the Law, to
suffer the wrath of God, and to die, that we might be redeemed from iniquity;
Oh therefore let us ever be fearful of coming under iniquity any more, let us
not suffer our selves to be defiled with that sin, from which to deliver us,
Christ has given himself. Certainly if any argument in the world would
persuade people not to given way to sin, but to deny ungodliness, and worldly
lusts, and to live soberly, and righteously in this present world, this will
do it.

When therefore thou art tempted to commit a sin, reason thus with thy self.
Now that I am tempted to sin, here is presented to me, pleasure, or honor, or
profit, or escape from trouble, and if I will commit the sin, I shall attain
many of these; but let me remember, that to the end I might be brought out of
sin, Christ gave himself: Is not Christ more worth than profit? more worth than
pleasure? of more worth then my life? why then to save my self from danger, or
to gain profit, or pleasure, or honors, should I rush into a sin, out of
which, Christ to pluck me, has given himself.

Consider of it, for this I assure you, that there are none whom Christ has
redeemed from Iniquity, but he does put into them such a spirit, that they
shall for ever after be careful to keep themselves from iniquity. The Lord
Christ would not be at so great cost to give himself for an end that should be
frustrate, he has bought our redemption with the price of himself, therefore
he will make it sure that it shall be effected. If therefore you find your
hearts bold to run into any sin, and ready to put your selves into all
iniquity, you are not those that are redeemed by Christ. Consider for the
proof of this, these places, James 1.27. Pure religion and undefiled before God
and the Father is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their
affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world. Observe it, where
there is a true Religion, there men keep themselves from the spots of the
world. And you shall find this also excellently and plainly laid down in 1
John 3. from the 6. verse to the 11. Whosoever abides in him (that is, in
Christ) sins not, whosoever sins has not seen him, neither known him;
Little children, let no man deceive you, he that does righteousness is
righteous, but in v. 8. He that commits sin, is of the devil. Observe these
Phrases of the Scripture: And in v. 9. Whosoever is born of God, does not
commit sin, for his seed remains in him, and be cannot sin, because he is
born of God: And in v. 10. In this the children of God are manifest, and the
children of the devil, whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God. In
few words, here is a plain trial who are Gods, and who are the Devils
children; whoever sins, whoever does not righteousness is of the Devil, is
not of God: Take notice of it, I beseech you, they are the very words of the
Spirit of God. And to this you may add that in the fifth Chapter of the same
Epistle of John v. 18. We know that whosoever is born of God sins not, but
he that is begotten of God, keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him
not. All these places plainly prove, That whosoever Christ has redeemed from
under iniquity, he so works with them, that they shall never return to
iniquity again; for Christ gave himself to free them from it, and he will
never buy a thing at so costly a rate but it shall be done. Not, but that they
that are redeemed, sin; but the meaning is, They never commit sin with a full
consent, they never again come under the power and reign of sin; sin they do,
but it is out of infirmity, it is not with purpose of heart, it is not with
deliberation, it is not with delight; when ever they sin they do that which
they hate, and they commit that which they hate, and they commit that which
they are ashamed of. This is the meaning of these Scriptures.

Therefore I say, be exhorted, seeing Christ has so dearly bought your
redemption from all iniquity; Oh in the name of Christ be exhorted, neither
for pleasure, nor for honor, nor for fear, neither to please your selves, nor
the world, nor your friends, never be brought under any iniquity, for Christ
gave himself for this end, to redeem us from all iniquity. This is the first
exhortation, to exhort us to take heed of coming under any iniquity, seeing to
redeem us from it, Christ gave himself.

The second Exhortation is, to exhort us to labor every day more and more to
get from under that iniquity under which we are. The former Exhortation
exhorted us to keep our selves from coming under that from which we are gotten;
this is to exhort us, to labor every day more and more to get from under that
iniquity, under which we are: For did Christ give himself for this end, Oh
then let us never give over till we are gotten from under all iniquity. What
end can we better aim at, then Christ aimed at, the redeeming us from all
iniquity? let us also aim at this, to redeem our selves from all iniquity.

Indeed it is true, in the point of satisfaction, and in the point of paying
the ransom, we can do nothing, Christ does all, but yet this I must tell you,
that in the point of deliverie of our selves from under iniquity, we must do
a great deal. Christ gives us right to come out from under all iniquity, but
Christ requires that we our selves should bring our selves from under
iniquity. It is true indeed, we cannot do it, but by Christ, it is the grace
of Christ, the power of Christ, the spirit of Christ that does help us to get
our selves from under iniquity; yet notwithstanding we must labor to get our
selves from under it, and Christ will help us. For this I might quote many
places, but for fear of being too long, I will content my self with that in 2
Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these promises, doarly beloved, let us cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear
of God. Observe the Phrase, the Apostle does not say be cleansed, but let us
cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit. But some might
say, we are cleansed already, Christ has cleansed us. Yea says the Apostle in
part, but we must perfect this holiness; Christ has brought us from under
iniquity in some measure, now Christ expects we should bring our selves from
under the remainders of iniquity.

It is in this case as it was with the people of Israel, it was the Lords power
and gift that gave them possession of the land of Canaan, it was the Almighty
arm of God that did it: Yet notwithstanding when they were in the land of
Canaan, they were fain to fight for it, before the Cananites were dispossessed:
that was but a Type of this: It is the Lords Almighty power that has possessed
us with this liberty and freedom from iniquity, but yet notwihstanding
before we can come to enjoy a full liberty from all iniquity, we must fight
for it, and wage the battles of the Lord. And truly (my brethren) Christians
are miserably guilty of being under the power of iniquity, much more then
they might, because they are lazy, and idle, and they do not labor to
deliver themselves from under the remainders of iniquity; but even as it was
with the Israelites, (which were but a type of believers) in Judge. 2.2. I said
unto you, you shall make no league with the inhabitants of this land, you shall
throw down their Altars, but you have not obeyed my voice. The Lord appointed
the people of Israel, that they should never leave till they had rooted out the
Canaanites, but they were lazy, and idle, and did not drive out so many as
they might. Even thus it is with most Christians, the Lord has possessed us of
liberty, and yet he requires that we should work out the remainders of
iniquity; we are generally lazy, and we make leagus with sin, and we have a
secret affection to this lust, or to that lust, and therefore we do not bestir
our selves laboriously to expel all iniquity. Here is the reason that the end
of Christ is no more made good unto us.

Oh be now exhorted I beseech you, to fulfill the desire of Christ, it was the
very end why he died, that thou should be redeemed from all iniquity; be thou
like Christ, do thou make corruption die, that thou may redeem thy self
from all iniquity. This is the very scope of the Apostle in this Text; he had
exhorted in the beginning of the Chapter, servants to their duties, masters to
theirs, old men and women to theirs; all to deny ungodliness and worldy lusts,
and to live soberly and righteously in this present world: Now to persuade them
to this, he brings in this of the Text, for (says he) Christ gave himself
for this end, to redeem us from all iniquity: As if he should say, will you
not make good the end of Christ? when Christ had so much desired to redeem you
from all iniquity, that to effect it, he has given himself: what will you not
bestir your selves to make good this end of Christ? Oh be exhorted to endeavor
the purging away the remainders of iniquity.

We have now finished the Uses of Exhortation, we are now lastly to come to
some Uses of Instruction, and so conclude.

This Doctrine (my brethren) That Christ gave himself for this end, to redeem
us from all iniquity, it serves for a threefold Instruction.

First of all, to teach us, that there is no need of any satisfaction on our
parts to appease the wrath of God, or deliver us from our iniquities, for
Christ has given himself to do it; therefore it is but a silly thing to
think that we can come after and do it. The very thing whereby men should
satisfy Gods wrath, Christ has given himself to do it. There is but two
ways men can satisfy the justice and wrath of God: The one is, by keeping the
Law: The other is, by suffering the wrath of God due for the breaking of the
Law. To do both these, the Lord Christ has given himself; and if Christ have
certainly done it, what need men come after to add any thing to it? The Church
of Rome has a Doctrine of Satisfaction, and it tells us, That men must
satisfy in this life, and after this life. All this is needless and
derogatorie to Jesus Christ, as if men should come after and add any thing to
what he has done, as if the redemption of Christ were not perfect, as if
Christ's giving of himself were not enough to redeem us from all iniquity.
Learn this therefore, that so you may abhor that Doctrine, and here is the
first instruction.

The Second is, to teach us the great bondage and slavery that iniquity
holds them in that are under it; for if so be that Christ gave himself to
fetch believers out of iniquity, then certainly it is a miserable thing to be
under iniquity. It were a silly thing that Christ should be at so much cost as
to give himself to free believers from iniquity, if it were not a miserable
thing for believers to be under iniquity, the very Phrase teaches us that it
is a bondage to be under sin, he gave himself to redeem us from iniquity,
therefore to be under iniquity is a bondage, for redemption supposes a
slaverie. Oh it is a bondage indeed, and a slaverie worse then that of the
Turks or Moors.

For first, the slaverie of the Turk is but of the body, but the slaverie to
sin is of the body and soul both. The slaverie to the Turk is but to men, the
slaverie to sin, is a slaverie to the Devil. The slaverie to the Turk is but
for a while, at the longest but for a man's life, but the slaverie to sin is for
ever. Again, the slaverie to the Turk, a man may be redeemed from it, by some
ordinary price, by a certain sum of Gold and Silver; but the slaverie to sin a
man can never be freed out of that, but by the precious blood of the Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 1.18. Ye were not redeemed from your vain conversation
(redemption from sins slaverie is not attainable) by silver and gold, and
corruptible things; but by the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without
blemish and without spot. Blood must be shed, before freedom from the slaverie
from sin can be attained, and the blood of one that is innocent, and the blood
of one that is the Son of God. Oh what a slaverie is this, our of which nothing
can redeem but blood, innocent blood, even the blood of the Son of God.
Certainly either it is an infinite misery to be under sins slaverie, or Christ
was very foolish to give such an infinite price to redeem us from it. For what
is it for Christ to give himself, but for Christ to give an infinite price? For
is not Christ God, whom the Angels worship, who made the world? Christ gave
himself to redeem people, therefore it is an infinite misery under which they
are, or he had been infinitely unwise, to give so great a price. Learn then,
That Christ gave himself to redeem from sin, therefore sin is an infinite
bondage and slaverie; give no reft therefore to your souls till you come out of
it.

Thirdly, and lastly, Has Christ given himself for this end? Oh then let all
that are believers know, that is their duty to love the Lord Jesus Christ. Now
I shall speak to all of you, for there is none of you but say you are
believers, there is none of you but think that Christ gave himself for you. Is
there any of you here present, that do not think Christ gave himself for you?
If you did not think so, you would despair presently. If you do think so,
see your duty, has Christ given himself to ransom you, oh then what a love
do you owe to Christ.

Consider but these particulars in Christ's giving of himself for your ransom.

First, he has given a great price, he has given himself for our ransom, it
is the most costly ransom, that ever friend gave to ransom a friend: Many men
have given money, but Christ has given himself to redeem you.

Secondly, It is a perfect ransom, he has redeemed you from all iniquity.

Thirdly, It is a perpetual ransom, he has for ever redeemed you.

Fourthly, It is an undeserved ransom. What did you deserve when Christ gave
himself to ransom you from sin? you were enemies to Christ, you hated him, you
persecuted him, you rejected him. There is no nation in the world so bitter an
enemy to our nation, as you were to Christ when he gave himself to ransom you.

On then behold a costly ransom, a perfect ransom, a perpetual ransom, an
underserved ransom! What does this deserve but wonderful love at your hands?
If there were a man that were to lie in prison all his life long for debt, and
one should come to him that he never knew, of whom he never deserved any
kindness; if this man should set him free, how would he love that man? and
truly, there were great cause that he should. Suppose a man were a slave to the
Turk, and there for ought he knew he was to spend all his days in that
drudgerie, and a man comes and pays an exceeding great ransom even as much
every farthing as is desired; would that man that is thus redeemed think it
too much to be a servant to him that set him free? No surely, I remember what
the men of Israel said once to Gideon, Judge. 8.22. Rule thou over us, both thou
and thy son, and thy sons son, for thou have delivered us out of the hand of
Midian. Because he had delivered them, they give their Crown and Scepter to
him, and to his posterity for diverse generations, and Gideon deserved it.
These persons shall rise up in judgment against you that will not love the
Lord Jesus Christ. Never did any Creditor, never did any redeemer that ransomed
a slave from drudgerie, never did this Gide on do half so much for them, as
Christ has done for you. They did not give themselves, Christ has given
himself, and that to redeem you from iniquity, therefore as the work is of
infinite worth, so your love should be abundant.

Oh love Christ therefore above all, above your sins, above the world, above
your friends, above your liberties, above your goods, above your lives, for he
has loved you above his life, he has given himself to redeem you from all
iniquity. let it be said of you as the Apostle speaks of those believers in 1
Pet. 1.8. Whom though ye see not, yet ye love, though you see not Jesus
Christ yet love him, for he has done these things for you.

But how shall you be assured that you are in the number of them for whom
Christ gave himself to redeem from all iniquity?

If you find your souls to love the Lord Christ above all things; but on the
other side, if you do not find your hearts loving Christ above all things, if
you cannot say of Christ as the Church in the Canticles, Oh thou whom my soul
loves, if you cannot say that Christ has more room in your affection, that
there is more enlargement of heart toward him, then to any thing else in the
world, then you are not yet in the number of them for whom Christ gave himself
to redeem them from all iniquity: Therefore, I beseech you, quicken up your
hearts toward Christ. Why does Iniquity so abound now, and the love of so
many wax cold? Surely, you have forgotten your selves, have not you forgotten
what Christ has done? how else could your affections be so little, so cold
toward him? Remember what I have opened now unto you, Christ gave himself to
be a man, to obey the Law, to suffer the wrath of God and man, and that for
this end, to redeem you from all iniquity, therefore love you the Lord Jesus,
according as he does deserve. And thus much shall serve for the first end, Why
Christ gave himself for believers: That end which concerns believers
themselves, Viz. That he might redeem them from all iniquity: The Second
remains, and that is that which concerns himself. But so much for this Time.
(*)

THE BLESSED INHABITANT: OR, The BENEFIT of CHRIST'S BEING In BELIEVERS.

By that Reverend Divine, THOMAS HOOKER, Late Preacher in New England.

EPHESIANS. 3.17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith.

LONDON, Printed by G. D. for Francis Eglesfield, and are to be sold at the
Sign of the Marigold In Paul's Churchyard, 1651.

The Blessed Inhabitant: OR, The Benefit of Christ's being in Believers.
SERMON II.
ROMANS 8.10. If Christ be in you, the body is dead, because of sin; but the
Spirit is life, because of righteousness.


THe Apostle Saint Paul having in the first verse of this present Chapter, in
the very first words of the Verse set down the blessed Privileges of all true
believers, such as are regenerated and are in Christ, he does afterward in
many Verses lay down the Signs and Trials, whereby he does discover who they
be that are in that blessed condition, and who they be that are not: And
amongst others (not to stand upon the Coherence, it not being necessary for the
understanding of this Verse) he does in the words of the Text, lay down certain
clear Signs and Trials, whereby people may know whether they are regenerated by
Christ, and so justified, yea or no; And that is the Scope and Sum of this
Verse, If Christ be in you, the body is dead, because of sin; but the Spirit is
life, because of righteousness.

In the Verse then you have these two things considerable:

First, the state and condition of all justified persons; Christ is in them: in
the first words, If Christ be in you.

Secondly, the Signs and Evidences whereby it may be known, whether Christ be
in people yea or no; in the rest of the Verse; the body is dead, because of
sin; but the spirit is life, because of righteousness.

I begin with the First, The state and condition of all persons that are
justified: They have Christ in them. If Christ be in you, says the Apostle,
supposing thus much, That the Lord Christ is in every justified person, in
every one that is exempted from condemnation. The Point is clear and evident in
the words of the Text, If Christ be in you:

The like to this you have John 14.20. I am in my Father (says our Savior to
his Disciples) and you in me, and I in you: They are in him, and he in them.
The like also you have John 17.21, -- 23. There our Savior prays, That they
may be one in us, I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in
one. Mark: I in them, and thou in me, Look as God the Father is in Christ, so
the Lord Christ also is in every believer. To this purpose also is that of the
Apostle, Col. 1.27. The riches of the glory of this mystery is, Christ in you
the hope of glory: CHRIST IN YOU. You see the Point is clear: Christ is in
every justified person.

For the further understanding hereof, I will let you know in a word or two
(for I purpose but to touch it) how the Lord Jesus Christ is in all justified
persons. First, he is in them, as the Householder or Master of the Family is in
his house: Therefore the Apostle says, Ephesians. 3.17. That he does dwell in our
hearts. Look as the Master of the Family dwells in his house, ruling,
commanding, and ordering all things there, even so is Christ in them that are
justified persons. Again, he is in them, as the food that we receive is in our
stomachs: Therefore he is often in the Scripture compared to meat and drink,
because as meat and drink are in us, after we have eaten and drunken; so is the
Lord Jesus Christ also in all them that are justified, for their refreshing,
nourishing, and strengthening, and preservation of life in them. Last of all, He
is in them as a man's life is in him; I live not, says the Apostle, Gal. 2.20.
but Christ lives in me. Christ is in the soul of a poor sinner that believes,
as our natural life is in our bodies; as our life does act and move us, being
the principle of all those motions that are in us, even so is Christ also in
all justified persons.

But you will ask, In what respect is it that the Lord Christ is said to be in
justified persons?

I answer, Amongst others, Christ is said to be in them in these two respects.

First, Because his Spirit is in them. By his Spirit I do not mean his humane
spirit, his soul, as he is a man, that is proper to himself, as every man's soul
is; but by his Spirit, I mean, the Spirit of God, the Holy Ghost, the third
Person in Trinity; which is the Spirit of Christ, both as he is the second
Person in Trinity; so the Holy Ghost proceeds from him together with the
Father, and also as he is the Mediator of his Church; so it is his Spirit
because he has merited, and as it were purchased it, to employ it, and to send
it about for the effecting of the salvation of the Elect. Now the Lord Christ
is in believers by virtue of his spirit, because his spirit is in them. This
the verse before the Text, and the verse after plainly prove, where the Apostle
makes mention of the Spirit of Christ dwelling in the faithful: If the Spirit
of God dwell in you, v. 9. And If the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from
the dead dwell in you, Verse 11. This is the first Reason why Christ is said to
be in justified persons; his Spirit is in them.

Another is, Because the virtue, efficacy, life, and operation of Christ is in
them, as the tree, or the root may be said to be in the branches; because the
life and sap of the tree is put forth in the branches: So my brethren, is
Christ said to be in the soul of every believer, because the virtue and
influence of Christ is working in them, as truly as it is in himself, only
differing in regard of degrees and perfection.

Now for the fuller illustration of the Point, give me leave in the last place
to show you the means whereby Christ is in all them that are justified: They
are these two.

First, the grace of Faith: For this in-being of Christ in all justified
persons, is the consequent of their union with him: Now by faith they are
joined to Christ, and Christ being joined to them, and they to him, Christ is
in them, as well as they in him. Therefore in that forenamed place, Ephesians. 3.17.
Christ is said to dwell in our hearts by faith.

Another means is, The abiding of Christ's word in us, John 15.7. If ye abide in
me, and my words abide in you: In the fourth Verse, our Savior had said thus,
Abide in me, and I in you, now repeating that again, he somewhat alters it,
and says, If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you: I conceive the ground
of the alteration is only this, because the abiding of Christ's word in people
is a means whereby Christ does abide in them. By the words of Christ, I take
it, is meant the Gospel of Christ, with all the commandments, instructions, and
promises, that are contained in it: Now when this Word of Christ does abide in
people, which it does when understood, remembered, practiced, and observed, by
this means Christ is said, and made to abide in them. The words of Christ are
as so many plants which he does ingraft into a poor soul, as we do ingraft
Cions into a stock; Therefore the Apostle calls it the ingrafted word which is
able to save your souls, Jam 1.21. Now look as the stock comes to have the
nature and to bear the fruit of the Cion, by having the Cion implanted and
ingrafted into it; even so by ingrafting the word of Christ into us, we come to
have the sap and life of the Spirit of Christ, and consequently Christ himself
to abide in us.

For the further understanding of the Point, you must in the last place know.
That however the Lord Christ is in all justified persons, yet he is not wholly
and completely in them; not so as to exclude sin and Satan out of them, Christ
is in them, and sin and Satan are in them also; so that Christ's dwelling in
them is but imperfect, yet notwithstanding it is perfecting, and in the end
shall be consummate, and then Christ shall only be in them, and sin and Satan
altogether shut out.

This serves, my brethren, to teach us all, which is the readiest and surest
way to become justified persons, and partakers of Christ and all his
privileges; to wit, to get Christ to be in us. In vain do thou hope for any
Christian privilege, in vain do thou endeavor after any thing that is
necessary to salvation, if by faith Christ is not brought to be in thee. People
do often trouble themselves many ways, but most are ignorant or negligent of
this way, whereas our hope of happiness, of the forgiveness of our sins, our
labors and endeavors after heaven are all in vain, if we do not labor by
believing to get the Lord Jesus Christ to be in us. Many conceit that Christ
will be for them, but he will be for none, but for them in whom he is. I mean
not now to dispute whether Christ be for us or in us first; but this is sure,
he will be for none, but such as he is in also. Therefore says the Apostle,
Col. 1.27. Christ in you the hope of glory; The Connection is to be observed,
Christ the hope of glory, but Christ in you implying, that as we must have no
hope but Christ (and therefore Christ is called our hope) so we can never have
Christ to be our hope, if we have not Christ to be in us. Learn this therefore,
I say, above all things, to labor to be joined to Christ by a lively faith,
that so you may come to have him in you, and then he shall be for you, and
never till then. Thus much for the first thing, The condition of all such as
are justified; They have Christ in them.

Now for the second, which is the main thing the Apostle aims at, the
Evidences or Signs whereby it may be known who have Christ in them; Ye have
them in the next words: The body is dead, because of sin, but the Spirit is
life, because of righteousness.

Give me leave first to open the words unto you. By Sin you know is meant the
transgression of Gods law, the going beside the rule of Gods Commandment,
either in neglecting what is enjoined, or in doing what is prohibited, this is
sin.

By Righteousness also must be meant the contrary to this. For howsoever
righteousness is sometime in the Scripture taken strictly, for the observation
of those duties that concern men, which the second Table injoyneth; yet
sometime it is taken largely, for the observation of the whole Law of God, and
all duties concerning God and us; and thus it is usually taken, when as it is
not joined with something else that does restrain it. Here it is opposed to
sin, and therefore as by sin is meant the going beside the Commandment of God;
so by righteousness is meant the observation or doing of the Commandment of
God. Thus you see what is meant by sin, and what by righteousness.

But it is more difficult to know what is meant by the body, and what by the
Spirit? The body is dead, because of sin; but the spirit is life, because of
righteousness. I take it, here by the body is meant the body of corruption,
the body of sin, that same Original corruption that is in all of us by nature.
It cannot be understood of the natural body, because of the opposition to
spirit; for by the spirit here cannot be understood our soul or our spirit, for
it cannot be said, that any man's spirit or soul is life to righteousness, it
may be said that it is enlivened to righteousness, but it cannot be said to be
life to righteousness: therefore seeeing by the spirit the soul of a man
cannot be meant, I think it is clear that by the the body, the body of man
cannot be meant. But by the body I conceive (as I said) is meant the body of
sin, for so Saint Paul calls it, Romans 6.6. That the body of sin might be
destroyed.

Now this Original corruption is called a body in these respects: 1. Because
that it comes to us by propagation, from the parents of our bodies. 2. To
express the baseness of it, for our bodies are but base and vile, as Saint
Paul calls them, Phil. 3.21. 3. To express the fadingness of it, for that is
our comfort, as our natural bodies are mortal, so the body of sin, original
corruption, is also mortal to all the Saints. Therefore it is called flesh,
because through the merit of Christ and the mercy of God it is transitory to
all believers. 4. Lastly, it is called a body, because as our bodies are made
up of many Integrals, and consist of several members, by which they act and
exercise several functions; so also original corruption is one thing
consisting of many particular sins, as so many integrall parts or several
members, whereby it puts forth it self in several operations. For these and
such like reasons Original corruption is called a body. Thus you see what is
here meant by body.


And now it is more easy to understand what is meant by the Spirit: The Spirit
is life, because of righteousness: For if by the body be meant original
corruption, then by the Spirit must be meant original righteousness, that
which is elsewhere in the Scripture called the divine nature, or the seed of
God, or grace, or holiness, or the like. Original holiness or righteousness is
that which (I take it) is here meant by the Spirit: It is so called John 3.6.
That which is born of the spirit is spirit; and so in many other places.

Now this same habit of holiness is called the Spirit: 1. To show the
excellency of it, That as a Spirit is an excellent thing, far above all bodily
substances; so is holiness the excellentest of Gods creatures, for grace is
also a creature as other things. 2. To show the durableness of it; though sin
shall die in the Saints, and be utterly destroyed; yet grace shall never be
destroyed, stroyed, nor cease in the Saints of God. 3. It is called the Spirit
in regard of the Objects of it, for the Objects of this grace are spiritual
things. 4. In regard of the Author of it. It is the holy Spirit of God, that
begets and works it in people; therefore as the child bears the name of the
Father, so does this of the Spirit.


Thus you see what is meant by sin, namely, the transgression of Gods Law,
either in omission or commission: What by righteousness; The observation of
Gods Law in the duties of the first and second Table: What by the body;
Original corruption; What by the spirit, the habit of holiness, or original
righteousness.

Now then the whole amounts to this; That if so be the Lord Christ be in
people, then there is a death of sin in them, and a life of righteousness:
Thus much is meant by the words, let them be taken any way, which way soever
Expositors can carry them, this must be the sense of them; and therefore we
need not spend further time in the Exposition; but will fall directly upon the
Doctrine, which is this:

In whomsoever Christ is, there is a death of sin, and a life of
righteousness.

The Point is very evident and express in the Text (being the main matter,
scope and drift thereof) as well as in other places of Scripture.

For the proving of it, (not to trouble you with many other Scriptures) you may
consider these things:

First, The ends and the offices of Christ, which the Apostle Paul expresses,
Tit. 2.14. Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.
The main end of Christ is the redemption of a people from all iniquity; which
implies not only the removal of the guilt of sin, but the destroying of the
body of sin. Therefore 1 John 3.8. it is said, That for this purpose the Son
of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil. Not only
the guilt of sin, but the power and dominion of sin is the work of the Devil;
now therefore ( for this purpose says the Text) the Son of God was manifested,
that he might free us from the guilt, yea and from the dominion, and life, and
power of sin. There is one end.

Another end of Christ's giving himself was, To purify us, therefore he must
put sin to death in us; for to purify is nothing else but to purge out
corruption, as the fire does work the dross out that is in the gold.

Again, To purify us that we might be a peculiar people, zealous of good
works. Where there is a zealousnesse of good works, there must be a life of
righteousness. So that by that place you plainly see, that the end of Christ
is the putting of sin to death, and bringing in the life of righteousness:
Moreover, Christ was to be the second Adam, and he is so called, 1 Cor. 15.45.
And to speak the truth, the first Adam was a Type of Christ, as it is Romans
5.14. Who is the Figure (or Type) of him that was to come: For not only the
Ceremonies amongst the Jews were Types of Christ, but even Adam in his fall,
in his undoing the world, in his overthrowing of mankind was a Type and Figure
of Christ also. Only other Types did figure out Christ by way of similitude,
but Adam by way of dissimilitude and contrariety: For look what Adam did, the
contrary to that Christ is to do. Now Adam did cause to all in whom he was as
the Parent is in the child, a death of righteousness, and a life of sin:
Therefore the contrary the Lord Jesus Christ must work in all those in whom he
is, a death of sin, and a life of righteousness.

Secondly, this Point is also plain from the consideration of those respects in
which Christ is said to be in people. Those are (as you heard before) First in
regard of his Spirit. Secondly, in regard of his Virtue, influence, and sap
that is in them. Now where ever these are, there must be a death of sin, and a
life of righteousness. For the former, even as fire does purge away dross and
rust; so the holy Ghost works out corruption, and puts sin to death where ever
he comes; and as light expels darkness, even so does he expel
unrighteousness and sin, because he is the holy Spirit. Again, for the virtue
and life of Christ, you know it was the life of righteousness, therefore
wherever this is, there must be a life of righteousness in that man.

Last of all, the truth of this will appear from the consideration of that
communion with Christ, and conformity to him, that all those must have which
are in Christ, and Christ in them: Wherein they must have a communion with, and
a conformity to Christ, Saint Paul shows Romans 6. from the third verse to the
twelfth. In the third Verse he lays down that Union by Faith which all
justified persons have with the Lord Jesus: and from this he infers a
communion with him, and a conformity unto him. But in what? In his death, and
in his resurrection: If we have been planted together (says he, v. 5.) in the
likeness of his death, (mark, not in the same death, but in the likeness
thereof) we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection. Where the
Apostle declares, that like as there was in Christ a bodily death, and a
bodily resurrection; so there is in all those, in whom Christ is, a death of
the body of sin, and a resurrection in regard of the life of righteousness.
This the Apostle plainly and largely proves in that place.

For the further opening of this Point, you must consider, that there are
diverse degrees both of the death of sin, and of the life of righteousness.
First, there is a perfect death of sin, when the whole body of sin is
altogether destroyed, and perfectly rooted out of a man: And there is an
imperfect death of sin, when the whole body of sin, and every particular of it,
is in part, and but in part, destroyed, and rooted out of a man. Again, on the
other side, there is a perfect life of righteousness, when the whole frame of
holiness is perfectly and completely set up in a man; and an imperfect life of
righteousness, when the same frame is in every particular of it, yet but
imperfectly set up. My brethren, that I chiefly desire you should mark is this;
That in the imperfect death of sin, and in the imperfect life of
righteousness, there is a kind of perfection, in regard of the particular
parts both of the body of sin, and of the frame of holiness. There is no part,
no member of the body of sin, that is not destroyed and suppressed, only it is
destroyed but in part, and not perfectly. Every member, I say, of the body of
sin does in part suffer death. Therefore the Scripture calls it the
destruction of the body, Romans 6. 6. Our old man (says the Apostle) is
crucified with Christ, that the body of sin might be destroyed. It cannot be
said that the old man is crucified, or the body of sin destroyed, if so be that
every part of the old man, and every member of the body of sin be not in some
measure destroyed. But although every part and particular of the body of sin be
destroyed, yet here is no part, no particular, but is still alive and
unsubdued, even in the people of God. Even in them that be in Christ there are
the seeds of all corruptions to be found, there are the relics of every kind
of sin, there are the lustings of every fruit of the flesh; and sometime one
part of the body of sin, sometime another part (according as God is pleased to
leave them for their trial) does break out and manifest it self in them.

So it is also in regard of the life of righteousness: That same imperfect
life of righteousness has in it every part of holiness, so that there is no
grace that is not in part quickened, no piece of the Image of God, that is not
in part stamped upon the soul. Thereupon it is said, That the godly have the
seed of God remaining in them, that they are partakers of that divine nature,
that they have the Law of God written in their hearts, that they bear the Image
of God, that they be the children of God, None of these things could be said of
them, if they had not every part and particular of grace and holiness in some
measure in them; yet notwithstanding there is no part, no particular of the
body, and frame of holiness perfectly in them, but only imperfectly, and in
degrees. Thus you see what is here meant by the death of sin, and the life of
righteousness; not that which is perfect, for that shall never be attained to
till after the death of the body; but that which is imperfect, and that is
infallibly in all in whomsoever Christ is. Yea, and not only one of these, but
jointly both of them are imperfectly in all these that are in Christ; and
therefore the Apostle in the Text joyneth them both together. For howsoever we
will not now stand to dispute, whether the life of righteousness be the cause
or spring of the death of sin, as the coming in of light is the cause of the
expulsion of darkness; yet this is sure, that they are always inseparable,
and go together; there is no life of righteousness where there is not a death
of sin; and there is no death of sin, where there is not a life of
righteousness: Now then my brethren, the sense and meaning of all this Point,
that I have thus opened and proved to you comes to thus much: That who-ever
have Christ in them, they have the whole body of sin in every part of it
weakened and destroyed, and the whole frame of holiness and righteousness in
every part of it begun in them, though both but in part.

Give me leave now as briefly as I can to make application.

First then, here you have a clear locking-glasse, wherein you may be able to
judge of the faces, of the state and temper of your souls. I beseech you
consider it well, and the Lord set it home upon your hearts; either you have
Christ in you, or you have him not in you: If Christ be in you, then you have
this imperfect death of sin, and life of righteousness; but if you have not
this, then Christ is not in you. Be exhorted therefore I beseech you to try
your selves by this touchstone.

But some will say, How shall I be able to know, whether I have this same death
of sin, and life of righteousness in me yea or no? This is shown already;
yet to help you more particularly, I will show you how you may judge of that
imperfect death of sin, and life of righteousness, which is to be found in us
in this world. And first for the death of sin, you must know that there is a
great deal of difference, between the restraint or the sleep of sin, and this
death of sin. Many people deceive themselves with taking the restraining or
sleep of sin, for the death of sin; And indeed many times a sin that is
restrained or asleep, may appear to others, and to a man's self, to be more dead
then a sin that is dead indeed. For this same death of sin, that is to be in
all those that have Christ in them, is not (as I said before) an utter
destruction, a plenary and full abolishment of sin; but it is only a weakening,
a lessening, and diminishing thereof. Now a sin that is only weakened, and yet
stirs, may be more manifest then a sin that is restrained or asleep, and
stirs not for the present. One that is shut up in a prison cannot do so much
in the street, as a weak and dying man that is in the streets: and one that is
asleep cannot do so much as a weak and dying man that is not asleep: Even thus
many times sin, so long as the sit of restraint, or sleep lasts, does not
manifest it self so much as when it is dead with this imperfect death, for then
it is only weakened and lessened in the strength of it. Therefore I say, it
concerns us much to know the difference: And I conceive you may know it by
the effects of the death of sin; which are these:

First of all, where the body of sin is lessened and weakened, there no sin can
command the whole soul: but howsoever it may command part of the man, yet there
is no part that will be wholly commanded by it. This Saint Paul expressly
shows Romans 7. from the 15. verse to the end of the Chapter. It is true,
(says he) with my flesh, that is, with my unregenerate part (for by flesh
there he does not mean his body, but the natural part both of soul and body)
I serve the law of sin, but with my mind (that is, with the regenerate part of
soul and body) I serve the Law of God. Wherever there is a death of sin,
there will be a part in every part of a man, that will not be subjected or
commanded by any sin. This I take to be the meaning of that 1 john 3. 9.
Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin; for his seed remains in him,
and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. That is, so far as he is born of
God, that same part in him, which is the seed of God, the offspring of God, it
cannot sin; sin cannot command that, though it command all the rest. Thereupon
it is called the divine nature, and the spirit, because as the Spirit and the
divine nature will not be masterd by corruption, so the regenerated part of a
man will not be commanded by any sin whatsoever.

Secondly, (which is indeed a fruit of the former, and a further expression of
it) where there is this death of sin, there sin is never committed with full
consent, delight, and purpose of heart. They that have sin alive in them, drink
down iniquity like water, and draw sin unto them as it were with cart-ropes.
And that I conceive the Psalmist means by departing wickedly from God, Psalm.
18. 21. They that have sin dead in them imperfectly may depart from God, but
they do not wickedly depart from him, not with full consent, content, delight,
and purpose of heart. And the Apostle says, Romans 8. 5. They that are after the
flesh, do mind the things of the flesh. A man that has sin dead in him, may
commit sin, but he does not mind sin. We may conceive what this minding is by
this similitude: When a woman that is with child strongly longs after
something, she does mind that thing: How? her mind is continually upon it, her
ele, her heart, her fancis, her thoughts, her whole self, as it were, is taken
up with it: Thus is it with those that have sin alive in them, their particular
corruptions are minded by them, they do with full gale post after the
satisfying their lusts. They are said to make provision for the slesh, to
fulfill the lusts thereof. Romans 13. 14. But now they that have sin dead in
them, do never commit sin with the full bent of their spirit, with the full
consent and delight of their will; but there is ever an antipathy to the sin, a
withdrawing from the corruption something that does lust against it, as well
as something that does lust after it.

Thirdly, he that has sin dead in him, is freed from many particular sins that
he did formerly commit: Romans 7. 5. When we were in the flesh, (that is, when
sin was alive in us) the mations of sins which were by the law, did work in our
members to bring forth fruit unto death. While sin is alive, it is perfectly
fruitful, but when it is dead, the fruitfulness thereof is much lessened. Such
(says the Apostle) were some of you, 1 Cor. 6. 11. implying, that now they
were not such, though formerly they had been. There is in the regenerate a
ceasing of many, though not of all the actions of sin: The power of sin in them
is weakened, therefore the fruitfulness of sin must needs be diminished. There
is a great alteration wrought in their wills and affections, in their thoughts,
words and actions, in their general and particular calling, in their duties
toward God and man: They do not bring forth so many fruits of sin as they were
wont, at least they do now, for the ordinary course of their lives, refrain
from bearing the fruit of such sins, as are gross or scandalous.

Fourthly, the godly in whom sin is dead, do not only cease bearing the
fruits of gross and scandalous sins, but oftentimes, though not perpetually,
are able to deny and forbear the committing of any particular sin, even those
that are most natural to them, most strong in them, that are wont to catch
them on a sudden, and to prevail over them, even those the godly have power
oftentimes to resist and overcome. A man that is in the flesh, that has sin
alive in him, is described, Ephesians. 2. 3. to be such a one as does fulfill the
desires of the flesh, and therein appears the life of sin, when the desires
of the flesh are always fulfilled. But now on the other side, the imperfect
death of sin appears in this, that not only some of the desires of the flesh
are never fulfilled, but even all the desires of the flesh, are always more or
less crossed, and not fulfilled. And this I take to be the meaning of that,
Gal. 5. 17. The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that you cannot do the
things that you would. I suppose, that latter clause, You cannot do the things
that you would, is not only meant of the Spirit, that by the flesh the Spirit
is disabled to do the things that it would; but it is also meant of the flesh,
that by reason of the Spirit, the flesh cannot do the things it would; that
look as sometimes the remnants of the flesh do hinder the Spirit, that it
cannot do as it would, so also the beginnings of the Spirit do hinder the
flesh, that in nothing it is able to do the things it would. This is a fourth
Effect whereby the weakening of corruption does appear; That sin is not able to
work in us that which it would, no not in any particular whatsoever; but in
those sins that are most natural many times, there is a denying of them, and a
forbearing to commit them, and to fulfill the desires of them.

Now to these you must in the last place, add that which is a property
accompanying all of them, and is the last particular, whereby the death of sin
appears; and that is, That this same weakening and lessening of corruption,
discovered in these Effects, that I have opened unto you, is both universal,
and also durable, and permanent. First it is universal; there is not only a
weakening and lessening of corruption in some parts, but in all. And herein it
differs from all counterfeit death of sin, in which there may be a weakening
of some sins, yet not of all, but though some happily be weaker then they were,
others are as strong as ever: But wherever this death of sin is indeed, there
sin is universally weakened, and this also will appear in all the particulars
and parts of it. Again, it is constant, not only for a time, but for ever; Yea
and there is a progress in it also, sin still grows weaker, and the strength
thereof daily more and more abateth. But where is not such progress, where
there is not a continuance in the deaths-wound of sin, there the deaths-wound
was never given to sin by the blessed spirit of Christ: For howsoever Christ
does not kill the old man presently, yet he kills it cortainly, and when once
the deaths-wound is given, it can never be recovered any more. Hereby you may
try whether there be a death of sin in you; however you may find in your
selves all the parts and kinds of sin and corruption, the several lusts and
inclinations of the flesh, rising and bubling up in you, however some times
particular corruptions may have a very strong hand, and put forth abundance of
might in you, to the mastering and captivating of you, so that you are for the
present sold under sin, as the A postle Paul speaks of himself, Romans 7. yet if
there be this lessening and weakening of corruption, and that universally and
constantly, it is most certain there is a death of sin in you.

Now on the other side let me show you, how you may know the life of
righteousness; and this will also help you the better to discover the death of
sin: For as ye have heard both go together, and the one helps to manifest the
other. Therefore I say, in the next place, let us consider the several effects
of the life of Righteousness, which are these.

First, where ever there is a life of righteousness, there is a seeking after
God, and after the things of God: Righteousness is of a divine nature, and
therefore it always carries the soul wherein it is, up to God, from whence it
came. As the fire being heavenly, does always move upward; so righteousness
because it is of God, does always raise up the soul of that person in whom it
is toward God. Hence it is that the righteous are described to be, a generation
of them that seek the Lord, Psalm. 24. and Psalm. 27. 8. the Psalmist professes
that he will seek the face of god. People that have no life of righteousness
are described Romans 7 to be such as do not seek after God. But wherever there
is a life of righteousness, there is a seeking after God, God in himself, God
for himself, God as he is accomplished with his holy excellencies, and
admirable Attributes and perfections; God as he is, take him altogether, is
always the aim and scope, end, and object of the desire of that soul that is
endued with the life of righteousness; so that when he prays, or receives the
Sacrament, or hears the word, or whatsoever he does, he seeks after God in all.
And as he seeks after God, so he seeks after the things of God, the favor and
mercy of God, the presence and fellowship of God, those glorious inheritances
which are Gods, and are called his, because they are with him; the things of
the kingdom of God, they are the things he seeks after, that has the life of
righteousness in him.

Secondly, where the life of righteousness is, there is a sutableness of the
spirit, and an agreement of the heart to the whole law of God. I beteech you
observe this, The body of righteousness is nothing else but as it were the
stamp of Gods Law, there is a proportion and conformity between the one and
the other; therefore in whomsoever the life of righteousness is in his spirit,
there is a sutableness of disposition to the whole Law of God; so that
howsoever there is much antipathie, and deformity, and unlikeness, and
disagreement from the Law of God, yet notwithstanding there is something within
that soul that is agreeable to the whole Law of God; so that there is no
particular branch nor part of the Commandment of God, but it does find a
principle to which it is suited and agreeable, in the heart of all them that
have the life of righteousness in them. And this I take it, is the meaning of
that of writing the Law of God in their hearts; that is, the very Law of God in
all the parts of it; it has a stamp and impression, and a resemblance in the
spirit of all them that have the life of righteousness. This the Apostle
largely expresses in that seventh of the Romans, from the 15. Verse and so
forward, I consent (says he) to the Law, that it is good, and that it is holy
and just. They that have the life of righteousness, they do not only find a
truth, and a justice in Gods Law, but they do find a goodness, a loveliness
in Gods Law; there is a sutableness and an agreement between their spirit and
the whole Law of God, not only in some, but in all particulars. Those branches
of Gods Law, which are most contrary to their customs and natural
dispositions and inclinations, they see them good, they behold them amiable,
they find a disposition in their souls suitable and agreeable thereunto: And
hence is that of David, Psalm. 119.6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have
respect to all thy Commandments. There is the second thing.

The third Effect of this life of righteousness, it is a discerning of the
evil of sin. The want of the life of righteousness, is the very cause why
people do not see the evil of sin: Many people do see the evil of the
consequences of sin; the plagues and judgments that come for sin, but they do
not see the evil of sin. Take sin in its own nature, as it is an unlikeness to
the nature of God, as it is a transgression, and a going beside, a swerving
from the Commandment of God, they do not see any evil in sin thus. But now
where ever there is the life of righteousness, there is an apprehension and
feeling of the evil of sin, as it is sin it self; and the reason of it is
clear, because that the life of righteousness is nothing but an impression of
the Law of God upon a man, therefore it must needs cause that soul in which it
is, to know and apprehend the Evil of the transgression of Gods Law.

In a word, they that have the life of righteousness in them, they do in
their hearts apprehend sin to be the greatest evil, and the most bitter thing
that is in the world, whether it be a great sin or a small sin, in regard of
the matter of it: whether it be a secret sin, or a public sin in regard of the
circumstance: however sin may differ, yet they apprehend the greatest evil and
bitterness to be in all sin; thereupon it is, that they are as truly, though
not as strongly, shy of the least sin as of the greatest; of the secretest sin,
as of the most public and scandalous sin. You have Saint Paul for this, Romans
7.24. Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? The remembrance of that Original corruption that was in his soul, and
could never be rooted out, this made him to cry out for deliverance.

Again Fourthly: Wheresoever there is the life of righteousness, there is a
discovering and discerning of the several Particulars of sin and of
unrighteousness. Light it does discover all things that are foul and are
amiss; and life does oftentimes discover weaknesses, and illness, and
straightness we know discovers crookedness; so where ever there is the life of
righteousness, there is a discerning of that inward contrariety of
unrighteousness that is in that heart. I know that no man can discern all the
evils that are in his soul, because the life of righteousness is not perfect,
but imperfect in this world; but yet notwithstanding he that has the life or
righteousness, he does in part discover every corruption in his soul; he does
see in himself the corruptions that are contrary to the whole frame of
righteousness, he does see in himself the iniquities that are the transgressions
of the whole Law of God. Hence it is that the children of God are so humbled;
for a child of God, one that has the life of righteousness in him, cannot be
proud, for he having a life of righteousness comes to see the death of sin in
him, and to disscern in himself an universal contrariety in part to the whole
Law of God. Hence it is also that they think worse of themselves then of any
other, because by the life of righteousness, they discern the remnants of an
universal contrariety that is in them to the whole Law of God.

Lastly, The fifth Effect of the life of righteousness it is this. Where ever
there is the life of righteousness, there are all the fruits of the Spirit in
some part, and in some measure begun in them. The life of righteousness it is
not the springing up of one grace, but it is the quickening of the whole body of
grace in us; the whole frame of holiness, it is begun in them that have the
life of righteousness; there are all the fruits of the Spirit to be found in
that soul. What they are you may read in Gal. 5.22. Love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, faith, meekness, temperance, etc. I say, there are
all the fruits of the Spirit begun in that soul; so that there is no grace that
the word of God calls for, that Christ has, that the Saints of God ever
showed forth, but he that has the life of righteousness can discern it in some
measure begun, or beginning in himself. Take the lowest and meanest Christian
of all others, if he have the life of righteousness, he can find in himself
(if he do not judge falsely) at least the buddings and blossomings of the
fruits of the Spirit of God, of that which God requires of his children. By
the beginnings and buddings of grace, I mean, First, a discerning of the wants
of grace; for usually the first work of grace is a discerning of the want of
grace: The first work of the grace of humility, is a discerning of the want of
humility; the first work of the grace of Faith, is a discerning of the want of
Faith, etc. So that there is, I say, a discerning of the want of such and such
graces, but that is not all; hypocrites may sometime see the want of grace, but
there is together with a discerning of the want of grace, an apprehension of
the excellency of grace, a hungring and thirsting after the getting of it, a
high valuing of those that have it, and a constant use of the Ordinances for
the obtaining of it.

And to all these Effects of the life of righteousness, (as to the former
Effects of the death of sin) you must add that Property, that it is lasting,
it is a never-dying life: When this life of righteousness is quickened and begun
in any, it increases and grows up, it never dies, and is finally
extinguished.

Thus I have as briefly as I can, showed you how you may try your selves,
whether you have this death of sin, and life of righteousness, that is in all
those in whom the Lord Jesus Christ is.

Now then (my brethren) be exhorted I beseech you in the fear of God, to put in
practice, and to make use of this Touchstone, and looking-glass. It is of use
to all of us, not only to you that are the people of God, but to you that are
not; not only to you that are not, but to you that are the people of God.
These touchstones of the Scripture, these scales and weights of the Sanctuary,
they are of use to all sorts of people.

First, To you that have the truth of grace in you, it is of great use to you
to try your selves by, for by often trial you come to be settled and assured
of the truth of your grace: And for want of this, you want the comfort of your
interest in the Lord Christ, the comfort of your justification, and of your
sanctification, and consequently of your salvation: You cannot but want
comfort, so long as you want assured Evidences of the truth of grace in you.

Again, you do not only want comfort, but you are disinabled to the service
of God, and growth in righteousness by discouragements. Discouragements are to
the people of God, as the cold wind, and frosts are to young buds; and whence
comes discouragements? Because people are not assured of the truth of their
grace.

And not only so, but lastly, you are not so careful and thankful to God as
you should, only because you are not rooted in the certainty of the goodness
of your estate. Therefore these trials are of use to you.

And much more to you that are not yet in the state of grace. What is the
reason that so many drop into hell, and are tumbled down into the pit of
destruction, notwithstanding they live under the Gospel, and the preaching of
it? It is because the Devil has begotten in them vain hopes, groundless
persuasions of their part in Christ, of the forgiveness of their sins, and
salvation of their souls; and so while they have vain and groundless hopes,
hence it is that they go to hell with a dream, and conceit that they go to
heaven. Could we but once convince people that they are not yet in a right
state, and that all their vain hopes and imaginary conceits are false, and
will prove deceitful, there were a great deal of likelihood that they would
obtain true grace, and so consequently come to be everlastingly saved.
Therefore I say, it is of use to all sorts. I beseech you therefore make use of
those signs that the Scripture gives you, whereby you may try your selves.
Do not think that it is an irregular way to put people upon signs and trials.
I confess there are some particular cases, wherein it is not safe for some
particular persons, at that time, and in that case, to put them to try
themselves by signs. But for the general it is necessary, and it is the duty
of all people to look to signs, and to try themselves by them. And if there
were nothing more, but this that is in the Text, me thinks it is an
unanswerable Argument, to confute them that cry out against Signs and
Evidences of the truth of grace. Does not the Apostle Paul as plain as any man
in the world can, put them upon the trial of themselves by Signs, telling
them, that if they have such and such things in them, they are in a good
estate, and if they have not, that they are in a dangerous and damnable
condition? Therefore I say, put it not off, but make conscience to practice
this duty, to view your souls in this, and the like looking-glasses.

Especially considering that which our Savior Christ has laid down for a
certain truth, That there are many called, but few chosen. There were four
sorts of grounds upon which the seed of Gods word was cast, and but one of
those four proved good. There were six hundred thousand of the people of Israel
that came out of Egypt, and went toward Canaan, and yet but two of them that
went into Canaan. There were twelve Tribes which the Lord had caused to make
them cleave to himself, as a girdle to a man's loins, and yet there were ten of
those Tribes at one clap that were all cast off from being the people of God,
and but two of twelve that did remain. You know how that the Apostle Paul
tells us in Rom 9.27. Though the number of the Children of Israel be as the
sand of the sea, a remnant shall be saved. The Lord will put up righteousness
in a short sum, I say, considering these things, that there are so many of
those, that do profess and hope to be saved, shall miscarry, how much does it
concern us all to try our selves? When as our Savior Christ had told his
twelve Discriples, that one of the twelve should betray him, every one began to
put himself upon the examination, and asked their master whether it were he?
Were they so careful every one to try himself, when Christ told them that one
of the twelve should betray him, and shall not we be careful to try our selves
when as the Scripture tells us, that scarce one of twelve shall be saved, and
that eleven of twelve Professors are like to perish and miscarry? Oh the heart
of man is exceeding deceitful; hypocrisy is very strong, and exceeding
cunning, hardly is a man able to find out the state of his own spirit when he
tries it with all his dilgence.

But above all (my brethren) let me press you to this duty, to try and examine
your selves, considering the times we live in. These are the times wherein the
Lord puts people upon the trial: trying times, even times like the times of
the Fullers, purging his cloth, and the Goldsmiths refining his metal: And
there are more trying times like to come. Have we not woeful experience of
diverse falling away, some falling scandalously, perhaps being the Saints of
God, David's, and Lots, and Noah's, and Peter's; for so it is possible that some
that are the children of God, may yet notwithstanding fall into scandalous and
offensive sins, through their want of watchfulness, and fear, and carefulness.
But a great many do fall, and fall scandalously, yea many give all cause of
fear that there never was the soundness and truth of grace in them, they went
out from us, because they were not of us. Now I say, considering that there are
those that do fall, such as take upon them the profession of religion, and are
eminent in the ways of Christ, and in the Gospel, and yet fall, and fall
desperately and damnably: Does it not concern us all to fear, and upon fearing
to try our selves? When the Apostle discoursed of the fall of the Jews, how
they were broken and cast off: What use did he teach the Gentiles to make of
this? Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. So say I; are
these such times that many fall away? then such of us as do stand, let us also
take heed that we do not fall. How shall we take heed of falling? Oh let us
look to our selves that we are sound; the ordinary cause of falling away is
rottenness and unsoundness, when people in hypocrisy take up the profession of
Religion.

Therefore let us not make that use of the falls of holy men, as the people of
the world do; if there be any that falls into any scandalous sin, and
manifests himself to be naught at the heart, what use does the world make of
it? To fly upon God, and upon religion, and upon all professors of piety, and
upon the Ministers and Preachers of the word: Oh say they, this is their
Religion, they are all but hypocrites, this will be the end of them all. These
kind of Uses does the world make of the falls of upright men: whereas alas,
there is nothing less use to be made of them than this: If so be that people
were not desperately malicious against God, and all goodness, and that they
were not shamefully ignorant, they would never make this Use of the falls and
scandalls of these men.

For first of all, how can it blemish God, or Religion, or good men, because
some that seemed to be good and were not good, do discover their rottenness,
and unsoundness by their falls? What kind of blemish was it to the holy
Apostles, and to the believers in the Primitive Church, that some that were
amongst them did go out from them? What kind of blemish was it to the twelve
Apostles, that one whom Christ kept familiar company with, and was conversant
with the Apostles as brethren, did prove a hypocrite? Was Judas his desperate
fall, a sign that the Religion and Preaching of Christ were naught, and the
other Disciples hypocrites? None dare say so; and if it were not, then why
should it now be a sign? They that do fall away, they do therefore fall away,
because they are not religious, and not because they are religious. They
therefore fall away, because they did not observe the rules of that religion
they professed, and not because they professed it.

And as it argues thus an ignorance in people, so further, if so be that the
world were acquainted with the Gospel, and works of God, they would know that
the Lord has decreed from all eternity, that in all ages of the Church, some
that have been eminent in profession should fall away. There must be offenses
and scandalls given, the Lord Jesus Christ himself lays down the rule, Matthew.
18.7. It must needs be that offenses come. The Lord has foretold it, and has
ever made it good in all ages and times of the Church, that there shall be
offenses and scandalls; and that for good ends. First, to the making of them
that are true hearted, to be more fearful, and watchful, and more diligently
to try their own estates, and to fear lest they fall; and by this kind of
painful and careful fear, the Lord does keep them that they shall never fall.
And another end is in regard of the wicked world, the world lies in
wickedness, and it is cursed and hated of God, and intended to damnation; and
there are a generation in the Church which the Lord hates and abhors, and
has appointed to wrath; and there are some that hate God, and Religion, and
are glad of any occasion whereby they may reproach God and Religion, and may
harden their hearts from the power and practice of Religion: Now in regard of
these desperate wretches, the Lord has appointed it, that in all ages some
professors shall fall scandalously; that they that have a mind to have their
hearts hardened against God and Religion, should have them hardened with a
vengeance; that even as a man that is running in a way, and another having a
mind to make him fall, casts some stone or block before him that may make
him stumble and fall: Even so, when the Lord sees men desperately cavilling
against Religion, studying how to harden their own hearts, and the hearts of
others, the Lord will make his own children sometimes to fall, though that it
is not so common, but ordinarily hypocrites to fall, and lie in their way as
stones, that they may stumble and fall, and perish for ever.

There is a woe to them that take scandals, all profane ones that will stumble
at Religion, and reproach professors and profession because of scandalls, there
is a woe to them, and what woe? Even this, that those scandalls are as so many
stones tumbled in the way to make them break their necks in the pit of
everlasting perdition. And, therefore thus you shall find, that usually where
the ministry of the Gospel has been any long time, and people have not been
wrought upon by the preaching of the Gospel, are not brought to a powerful
profession of religion, you shall usually find it, that the Lord does suffer
some professors or other in these places to fall scandalously; Is it not so in
many places in this City? And therefore I beseech (my brethren) think of it, as
you are afraid to be hardened, and to have a blackness upon you of Gods wrath,
take heed of making this use of the false and scandals of any to harden your
hearts against religion, or to tip your tongues with reproaches against the
Gospel and professors, and so to grow to a hatred of the truth and power of
godliness. But the use you are to make of it is this, Let him that stands
take heed least he fall: Is one fallen? take heed thou do not fall also; and
to the end thou do not fall, have a care to try and examine thy self:
Look to thy self, that thou have a sure standing. Therefore I beseech you
make use of this Looking-glass, take this text of Scripture, and by it try
your selves; if you be right, Christ is in you, if Christ be in you, there is a
death or sin, and a life of righteousness. Thus much for the first Use.

The second Use in a word, and that is for Comfort, and Terror. Is it so, that
those that have Christ in them have a death of sin and a life of
righteousness; then here is comfort to some of you, and terror to others of
you. Comfort to all such of you as find in your selves this death of sin,
and this life of righteousness. Do thou find, that there is this death of
sin in thee, this life of righteousness in thee? Oh then be comforted, for
thou have Christ in thee, and thou art certainly in Christ; God is reconciled
to thee, thy person is justified, thy sins are forgiven, and thy soul must
be everlastingly saved, therefore be thou comforted. It may be there is not so
great a death of sin in thee as there is in others, but there is a death of
sin in thee: It may be there is not so full a life of righteousness in thee
as there is in others, but there is a life of righteousness in thee: If there
be a death of sin and a life of righteousness, Christ is in thee, though
thou come short of that death and life that is in others: I pray is not the
soul of man as truly in an Infant in the womb, as in that child that is
borne and grown to some strength? Is not the soul of man as truly in a weak
and sickly man, as in a strong and lusty man? Is not the life and sap of a tree
in a plant that is truly ingrafted, though but newly, and stands in a manner
loose, and scarce buddeth or blossometh, is it not as truly in that graft, as
in a graft that is grown strong and has borne much fruit? Even so is it in
thee, and therefore be comforted. I desire to joy and glad your hearts that are
in Christ, and have Christ in you; and I could not tell what better subject to
pitch upon to bring you to comfort, because I know this is the maine ground of
all your discomfort, a doubt whether Christ be in you or not, therefore I
thought it fit to show you your faces in this Looking-glass. If then you find
in you a death of sin, and a life of righteousness, know that Christ is in
you. When as the Scriptures, and Ministers from the Scriptures, do open to you
clear signs and certain evidences of the goodness and truth of your
estates, if you put away comfort then, you put away comfort when God speaks to
you; you refuse to be comforted when the Lord will comfort you; you give the
lie to God and to his Word; therefore take heed what you do, if by these
signs, or any such which are clear and evident, grounded upon the word of
God, you find your estates to be good, know then, and assuredly believe them
to be good. It is true, I confess, the heart of man is so deceitful, that a
man cannot try his own heart, and therefore the heart of man is so deceitful,
that Ministers cannot try other men's hearts; none but the Lord Jesus Christ is
only able to know the heart; none but the King is able to discern the man
that had not on the wedding garment; you may pass the judgment of all the
Ministers and Servants of the King, and be let in to the feast: Yet
notwithstanding, though neither man himself nor Minister, is able to try the
heart, yet this I confidently believe, that a man himself, and a Minister also
may know and try the hearts of people, if so be they deal faithfully and
plainly with him. Though no man can discover the secret windings of the heart,
yet the word of God does: this word of God does not only lay down infallible
signs, whereby people may know whether they are in the truth of grace; but the
word of God does lay down signs, whereby we may know whether we have those
signs or no: therefore if people will in the humility of their souls, nakedly
(so far as they know their own hearts) openly, and plainly, and particularly
judge them by the Scriptures, and observe their hearts in the course of Gods
dealing with them, and their dealing with God, and accordingly apply the
touchstone of the Scriptures; I am confident, by the signs and evidences of
grace that are in the Scriptures, people may come to discern their own hearts,
not by any virtue or skill of their own, but by the virtue and skill of God,
whose power goes along with his Word. It is true, a Hypocrite may deceive the
quickest-eyed Minister in the world, if he will not openly lay his heart before
him: and therefore good Ministers oftentimes speak peace to them to whom no
peace belongs; yet they speak the truth according to those evidences that are
expressed to them. Were not the wise virgins deceived in the foolish? Was not
David deceived in Achitophell? Were not the Disciples deceived in Judas? Yet
notwithstanding, as I said, if people will sincerely deal with their fellow
brethren, and with their Minister, and when God calls upon them to try
themselves, if they will turn their inside outward, if they will nakedly lay
open the state of their own hearts, so clearly as they can discern, I doubt
not, but the Minister of God from the word of God may speak assured peace, and
give them certain evidences of the truth of grace. Were not these things thus,
it were not possible we should ever come to assurance: it were in vain that the
Lord has given us so many signs and tokens, if by observing and trying, we
might not come to discern the estate of our hearts. Therefore for such of you
as in truth find from time to time, by these and the like evidences, the truth
of grace in you, know you, that there is ground of comfort for your souls.

And as this is ground of comfort to you that have these things; so it is
ground of terror to those that want them. I know you are almost all frequenters
of the Word, speakers well of the practice of religion, happily you have some
reformation in you, happily you have some Ministers that speak peace to you,
happily there is no disturbance in your consciences, happily there is some kind
of joy and rejoicing in you in hearing the Word, etc. But my brethren, whatever
there is that can be in you, if this be not in you, if there be not a death of
sin, and a life of righteousness, be it known unto you, that Christ is not in
you, neither are you in the state of grace: You may go on and please your
selves with dreams of a happy estate, because of such and such appearances of
grace; yet this I assure you, if the death of sin be not in you, and the life
of righteousness, Christ is not in you, nor never will be for you.

Again therefore be amazed, and tremble, and fear, and cast away your vain
hopes, all you that have not found the death of sin, and life of
righteousness. Be assured of what the Lord Christ speaks in John 12. The words
that I speak shall judge you at the last day. Be assured of this that the Lord
Jesus Christ will judge your estates by these, and such like trials as these
are at the last day; and if you cannot be found meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, by the Ministers, and Ministry of the Word
faithfully dispensed from the Scriptures, you shall never be found meet to be
partakers of it in the judgment of God at the last day; for so as the Word
judges, God judges, and as the Minister judges while he keeps to the
Scriptures, the Lord Christ will judge at the last day.

So that you see here is Comfort for some, and Terror for others: Comfort for
such as have a death of sin, and a life of righteousness; though there be much
corruption, though there be much weakness of grace in you, yet here is comfort
for you, and terror for all others, whatever their moral virtues, and common
graces, or their restraining gifts, or outward profession is.

Well then, what now remains, but that in the last place, we be all exhorted
from the Lord, to labor to increase the death of sin, and life of
righteousness in us. They are but imperfect in the best of us, let us labor to
make them both more perfect, to perfect the death of sin, and the life of
righteousness.

Why so? Because that the death of sin and life of righteousness, they are the
Evidences of Christ's being in us, the evidences of the goodness of our estates;
therefore the more these are, the more are our Evidences of our part in Christ,
and the greater will our comfort be, and we shall make more sure our calling
and election. This is that which the Apostle Peter means, 2 Pet. 1. 5. Give
all diligence (says he) to make your valling and election sure. But how is
that done? by making sure those things in your selves that are the tokens, and
signs, and evidences of Gods Election. How shall this be done? says the Text
there, add one grace to another, to your faith virtue, to your virtue,
knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to
patience, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness, love: perfect your
grace, increase the life of righteousness, perfect in you the death of sin,
increase the ruin of the old man; the more you increase these things, the more
you increase your Evidences of your part in Christ.

What can you desire that is able to administer to you so much comfort, to
provide so good a help for you against those fears we have so long justly
feared; what can prepare you for those ensuing calamities that are approaching,
as your Evidences of a part in Christ? But nothing can give you so much
evidence of a part in Christ, as the death of sin, and life of righteousness.
Therefore I beseech you, study above all things, what ever else you neglect,
to increase and perfect in you the death of sin, and life of righteousness,
that so the Evidences of Christ being in you may be certain. And so much for
this time and Text.

FINIS.
GRACE MAGNIFIED: OR THE PRIVILEGES OF THOSE That are under Grace.

By that Reverend Divine, THOMAS HOOKER, Late Preacher in New England.

TIT. 2. 11. For the grace of God that brings salvation has appeared to all
men, etc.

LONDON, Printed by G. D. for Francis Eglesfield, and are to be sold at the
Sign of the Marigold in Paul's Churchyard, 1651.

GRACE Magnified: OR, The PRIVILED GES of those that are under Grace.
SERMON III.
Romans 6. 14. For sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are not under
the Law, but under Grace.


THe blessed Apostle Saint Paul, having in the two former Verses exhorted the
Romans to whom he wrote this Epistle, that they should not let sin reign in
their mortal body; nor yield their members as instruments of unrighteousness
unto sin. He comes in this Verse to prevent a discouragement, which of all
others is the greatest hinderer of our endeavors after holiness, and might
happily dis-hearten these Romans, from yielding obedience to this exhortation,
for they might think with themselves, that it was impossible for them to keep
sin from reigning in them, and therefore it was in vain for them to endeavor
to do what he had exhorted them unto. To prevent this discouragement, the
Apostle in this Verse that I have read unto you, annexeth a promise to that his
Exhortation, and in the name of God as^ureth them, that they shall attain to
that which he had commanded them to labor for. He had exhorted them that they
should not let sin reign in them, and here he promises that sin shall not
reign over them.

Before I come to speak of the words as they stand alone by themselves, let me
observe one thing briefly from the coherence of them with the words going
before, and that shall be only this, That

God commands his children to do nothing, but he promises to make them able
to perform it.

Whatsoever God has bid his people do; he has promised that his people shall
do it.

It is a Point clear and evident from the Text, the Lord here commands them
that they should not let sin reign in them, and here he also promises that sin
shall not reign over them.

It is as evident in other places of Scripture, I might give you diverse
instances thereof, but that I only purpose to touch this Point, and no more,
because you see I gather it from the Coherence; yet I will name you one or two,
for the fuller clearing thereof. God commands his people to fear his name, as
you have it often in the Scripture; and in Jer. 32.39. he promises to give
them a heart to fear him, I will give them (says he there) one heart that they
may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and their children after them. The
Lord commands his people to love him, to set their hearts upon him, My son,
give me thy heart, as you have it in the Proverbs. And the Lord promises, that
he will make them set their hearts upon him, Hosea 2.14 I will allure her, and
bring her into the wilderness, and speak comfortably to her; the word is, I
will speak to her heart, as it is in some of the Margents of your Bibles: It is
a metaphor alluding to the manner of a man, that having a desire to have the
conjugall affection of such a maid, does so set himself to allure her, and draw
her, as to bring her heart for to love him, so faith the Lord, as I have
commanded my people to give me their heart, I will allure them, and speak to
their heart, so as I will make them set their hearts upon me.

I need not give you any further instances, you see the point is clear, and
directly issues from the coherence of the Text with the foregoing words, and
by these places and the like, you may see the truth of the Doctrine, viz. Gods
gracious manner of dealing with his Children, that he pmiseth to make them able
to do whatsoever it is that he commands them to do.

And this (my brethren) is the difference between the Covenant of works and of
grace, between the Law and the Gospel. In the Law, (which is the Covenant of
works) the Lord commands many things, but promises to help them in
nothing; In the Covenant of grace which is the Gospel) the Lord commands
nothing, but he promises to make them able to do it.

If you ask me the ground, or reason of Gods dealing thus with his Children. I
answer, there is a double reason of it.

The first is, Because it is Gods purpose, that his children shall obey (in
some measure) all his Commandments. It is the purpose of God, he has decreed
it from all eternity, that his people shall obey his Law; not perfectly, for
that they have done only in Christ their Head, their Husband, their
Undertaker; not legally, for that is impossible, considering their infirmities,
but evangelically, in uprightness, though not in perfection; In truth, though
not in measure and degree. This the Lord has decreed from all eternity, that
his people shall keep his Commandments, as you see it promised in Ezekiel. 36.17.
They shall walk in my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do them. Now Gods
promises, they are nothing else but the expression of his eternal purpose to
his children: so that whatsoever God has promised to his children, that he
has from all eternity purposed to his children: God therefore having purposed
this, that his children shall keep his Commandments in an Evangelicall manner,
he must make them able to do it, for except God help them to perform what he
requires, it is not in their power to do it. In regard of obedience to Gods
Commandments, Gods children are as the world was before it was made, when it
was nothing; there was no power in the world to have a Sun, or Moon, to have
a Sea, or Firmament, to have men, or beasts, because the world was nothing. So
there is no power in Gods children to obey any Commandment, for in regard of
obedience to God, they are as nothing, they are dead in trespasses and sins:
therefore they are said to be created of God unto good works, implying, that
before they were nothing. If therefore God will have it done, God must give
them a power to do it. Indeed it is true, they ought to do it though they
cannot, for they had a power once in Adam, therefore God may justly require it
of them, yet they cannot do it, for they are nothing. Here is then the first
Reason, why God has promised to enable him to do all that he has commanded,
because he has purposed and resolved that they shall obey him, and without his
ability, they cannot obey him, for they are dead in sins and trespasses.

The second Reason is, Because God has (for diverse wise ends) decreed, that
all the obedience of his children shall come from Christ, and by Faith. This is
express in the Scripture, to the end that no man might glory in himself, but
that all glorying might be in Christ: God has decreed this, that no obedience
shall be wrought by any that is acceptable, but what shall come from Christ by
Faith. Now if it come from Christ by Faith, then it must come by a promise, for
there is nothing the object of faith but a promise, and a divine promise: To
the end therefore they may have a promise, God has promised to enable them to
all he commands, that so they by faith resting upon this promise, they might
come to this obedience by faith, and so may have nothing to glory in
themselves. Here are the two Reasons of the point: And so you see the
observation clear, that God commands his people nothing, but he promises to
make them able to perform it.

There is only this caution to be added, that howsoever God promises to
enable his people to do all he commands, yet this shuts not out their
endeavor. His promise of enabling them is upon this supposition, that they do
endeavor in the use of the means he shall appoint them. The Lord in promising
does not mean that they should be idle, and look that he should do all; but
his promising includes their endeavoring, and upon their endeavoring in the
use of the means that God has appointed, he has promised to enable them to
do what he has commanded. And this is very express in that same of the
Prophet, Ezekiel. 36. verse 27. and verse 37. laid together. In verse 27. there is
a promise to make them able to keep the Law of God; I will put my spirit within
you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and you shall keep my judgments,
and do them. But in verse 37. he comes in with this caution (which I desire
you to observe) Thus says the Lord, I will yet for this be inquired of by the
house of of Israel, to do it for them. As if he should say, it is true indeed,
I have promised to enable you to all things I have commanded you, but yet know,
though I have promised to do all, yet I will not do it without your
endeavor, you must use the means (whereof prayer is one) and upon your using
the means, I promise then to help you. If people he still and will not up and
be doing, God will not be with them: it was the speech of David to Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28. Up (says he) and be doing, and the Lord shall be with thee.
Implying thus much, that though God has promised, yet God will not be with us
to enable us to any performance, except we also be up and be doing. This
therefore is no encouragement to lazy Christians, that rest themselves upon
this, that when God would have them do it, he will enable them to do it, and
so do not to their uttermost endeavor themselves: these are such to whom God
will perform none of these promises.

Well now, this caution being added, let us come briefly to the Use of the
Point. And the first Use it is to show us the truth of that which the Apostle
tells us, 1 John 5.3. This is the love of God, that we keep his
Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous. Here is a Paradox, what,
the Commandments of God not grievous; this the world cannot believe; The
reason of the Apostles saying, they are not grievous, is because of our love to
God; for whom we love, none of his Commandments can be grievous to us. But
this Doctrine shows you the truth of it, upon another ground. Are any of Gods
Commandments grievous, when God commands us nothing, but what he promises
to make us able to do, so far as shall be needful for acceptance, so we
will endeavor our selves? Indeed I grant, that Gods Commandments are above
the power of nature to obey: nothing harder to corrupt infirm nature than Gods
Commands, but yet seeing that God has promised to enable us to yield obedience
to every Commandment, so we will do our endeavors, what grievousnesse, or
what unreasonablenesse is there in the Commandment? You may conceive it by
this similitude: A King comes to one of his Subjects, that it may be is not
worth a thousand pound, and gives him a commandment to pay ten thousand
pound, but withal gives him liberty to go to his Exchecquer, and take it. If
you look upon the greatness of the sum, and poverty of the man, it is a
grievous command; but if you consider this qualification, that the King has
promised to give him sufficient to pay it, there is no grievousnesse in it.
Thus is it in all the commands of God to his children, God commands us things
above the power of flesh and blood, bids us do what is above the ability
of nature, but withal, promises in the use of means, to make us able to do
them, therefore there is no grievousnesse in the Commands. God in this case
deals with his children, as Joab dealt with David, 2 Samuel 12.26, 27, 28. Joab
he beseiged Rabbah, and when he had in a manner taken it, he sends a
Messenger to David, to bid him come and take it, that he might have the glory.
Joab had run thorough the difficulties, he had in a manner done the work, but
to the end that the glory might be David's, when Joab had done the greatest, he
bids David come and do it. Even thus it is, between God and his people: it
is the Lord that works all our works for us; it is the Lord that enableth us
to obedience to all his Commandments, he makes it very easy, and yet
notwithstanding, to the end we may have the glory of our obedience, and the
reward thereof at the last day, when the Lord has prepared it for us, he
bids us come and do it, he puts the honor upon us, but the power that
does it is his own; there is no grievousnesse in any of Gods commands.

Oh (my brethren) believe this, that you may be encouraged to put your necks
into the yoke of Christ. Come unto me (says he in Mat. 11.28.) and take my
yoke upon you, for my yoke is easy, and my burden light. Is not this true,
that Gods yoke is easy, and his burden light, when he bids us do no more
then he gives us strength to do. Stand not out against the Lord Jesus Christ;
do not refuse to subject your selves to his Commandments, because the World,
the Flesh, and the Devil tells you they are a burden too great for you to
bear: I tell you, they are easy, there is no more commanded, then strength
shall be given to obey. Here is the first Use.

The Second Use of the Point is to show us, how exceeding unexcusable all the
defects and disobedience of Gods people are. For why? There is nothing
commanded them, but God has promised to make them able to do it: if therefore
they do not do it, is not the fault wholly their own? God has commanded his
children great things, but yet he has promised to help them to do it all; if
therefore Gods children do not do it, is not the fault theirs? and what can
they say for themselves? Thou art commanded to mortify thy lusts, thou art
commanded to deny thy self, thou art commanded to keep thy self unspotted of
the world, thou art commanded to have thy conversation in heaven, and abundance
of such commands; thou do none of these, what can thou plead for thy self?
What excuse have thou to make to excuse thee from the guilt of these sins? All
that thou caust say is this, I am flesh, and these Commandments are
spiritual; I am full of sin, and how can I obey the Commandments of God? they
are too great things for so sinful a creature as I am to do.

True, but yet notwithstanding are they to great for God to do: Is not God
able to make thee able to do them? Has not God promised to make thee able to
do them? Yes, where is the fault then? what is the reason thou do not do
them, but that thou walk in so many transgressions? where is the fault? what
can thou say for thy self? Is not God able, or is not God faithful? Yes, God
can do it, and God has promised to do it. Surely then the fault lies only
in thy self.

Consider it seriously, and you shall find one of these two things to be the
cause of all the sins you live in, that are the people of God: Either this,
that you are not willing to be made whole, you are not willing to be rid of
your sins; or else this, that you are not able to believe the truth of what God
has said. One of these two is the cause of all the sins of Gods people.

First, thou art not willing it may be to be made whole, thou art not willing
to obey Gods Commandments. Truth, God has commanded thee a great many things,
but thou art not willing to do them, and because thou art not willing,
therefore God does not make thee able. For (my brethren) this is a sure rule,
God never makes any able to obey, but they that first of all by God are made
willing to obey. In Joh. 5. When our Savior could cure that impotent man that
lay at the pool of Bethesda, he first asked him this question ( verse. 6.) Will thou be made whole? If so be he had not been willing, Christ would not have
healed him. Why did Christ ask him the Question? To stir up in him a desire of
being made whole, for God never gives till we desire.

Therefore look well, and it may be thou shall find thou art not willing to
obey Gods commands, thou art not willing to subdue every lust; a lust, that is
suitable to thy constitution; a lust, that is very sweet to thee through long
custom, a lust, that is dear unto thee by reason of the pleasure or profit
that it brings in, it may be thou art not willing to obey God in subduing this
lust: But even as it was with Jacob when he comes to let Benjamin go into
Egypt, he striveth against himself, he would let him go, and he would not;
necessity constrained him that he should go, but yet his affection made him
unwilling he should go. This kind of struggling there is in Gods people, when
they look upon the command they know they must obey, but yet considering the
dearness and sweetness of their sin, they are loath to obey: And this is the
reason God does not help thee in matter of obedience to his commands, because
thy heart is false, and thou art not willing to it. Oh what a shame is this,
when God requires no more but thy will, not to let him have thy will! for thee
still to be unwilling to obey, when Christ died for this end, that thou
should obey!

But if so be thou can clear thy self in this Point, and can say thou ant
willing to be made whole, look into thy self once more, and happily thou shall
find that thou art not able to believe that God will make thee whole. When the
father of the possessed child (in Mark. 9.) brought his son to Christ to be
cured, Lord, (says he, v. 22.) If thou can do any thing, have compassion on
us, and help us: If thou can do it? (says Christ). If thou can believe,
all things are possible to him that believes. So I say to such of you as are
willing to obey Gods commands in all things, are you able to believe this
Doctrine that I have this day preached, That God will make you able upon your
endeavors to do all he commands? if you could be believe this all obedience
were possible: But here is thy fault, (if it be not in the former) thou can
not believe God will give thee strength over every lust, a lust that is strong
in thee by constitution, is strong in thee by custom, by education, a lust
that has so great a rooting in thee, that has so often foiled thee; that God
will help thee against such a lust. Because thou can not believe, here is the
cause thou can not obey Gods commands. What a shame is this for thee not to
believe the God of truth; not to be able to take his word, when his word is
confirmed by his promise, when his promise is seconded with his Oath, when his
Oath is also accompanied with so many seals, as thou have had renewed every
time thou have received the Sacrament of the Supper; and yet notwithstanding
thou art not able to believe, what a shame is this!

Thus you see how that the sins of Gods people are altogether unexcusable;
unpardonable they are not, mercy there shall be, but yet notwithstanding they
are unexcusable. All your disobediences whatsoever they are, notwithstanding
all the frailty of your nature, they are without all excuse: For the ground of
your disobedience is either because you are not willing to obey, or else
because you are not able to believe the truth of what God has said. Therefore
learn (I beseech you) to be ashamed of your selves, and of those guilts and
disobediences that lie upon you; there is great sault in your selves; for
though you have no power in your selves, God having promised to make you able,
you should have been able, if you were not guilty, either in want of a will to
be cured, or in want of ability to believe what God has said. Here is the
Second Use.

Again the third use of this point is to teach us what is the only and ready
way to be able to obey Gods Commandments. This is a thing which all that are
truly godly desire much to know, and this point teaches us, The only way to
be able to obey Gods Commandments is to believe; It arises thus, God has
promised to make his people able to do all that he commands: if God has
promised it, then they have no power but from God: it were but a slight thing
for God to promise that, which they could do of themselves: God having
therefore promised it, it plainly appears they have no power of themselves to
do it: and God having promised to do it, they must have this power to do it,
by laying hold upon the promise, and that is by believing. So that the only
way to attain to any obedience, is by faith to lay hold upon the promise of
God; In a word, all strength to obey comes by promise, the promise is made
ours by believing, there is no way therefore to obey but by believing. Hence it
is, that in 1 John 5. 4. Faith is called, our victory, whereby we overcome the
world; by the world is meant all sin, faith is our victory, that is, the
instrument of our victory, as a sword is called the soldiers victory, because
it is the means whereby he gets the victory: Faith is the means whereby we
come to have victory over the world. Hence is that also in john 6. 29. They
had asked our Savior Christ this Question: What shall we do to work the works
of God? How shall we be able to do it? says Christ, This is the work of God,
that you believe on him whom he has sent. There is no way to come to work Gods
work, to obey Gods commands, but to believe in the promise of God, whereby he
has engaged himself, to make thee able to do whatsoever he commands.

Oh then, you that would fain better your obedience in these times wherein Gods
judgments be abroad, when God so much expects we should grow better; for I
persuade my self, there is never a child of God, but is much desirous to be
more obedient now than ever, now in these evil times; and I should much
suspect that soul yet to be under the power of Satan and sin, that by the
judgments of God that are abroad, is not provoked to a resolution, and
endeavor to better obedience. Now I say to such of you as desire to grow
better in obedience, learn the way. Observe what the Text says, Neh. 8. 10. Be
not sorry, for the joy of the Lord is your strength. Would you have strength to
obey Gods Commandments better then ever? Here is the way, do not give way to
sadness, and dumpishness, and discouragements. Godly sorrow is to be admitted,
and is a great help of bettering your obedience, but such a sorrow as does
afflict your souls, and keep them under discouragements, this is not to be
admitted; strength of obedience lies not in this slavish fear, but it is the
joy of the Lord, that is your strength: Get the joy of the Lord by believing
that God will make you able to obey whatsoever he bids, and that will make
you able to obey.

Here therefore is the way, search out the promises wherein God has engaged
himself to help you in any duty you would perform: When you have found out that
promise, labor to rest upon that promise, labor to believe that as God has
promised to make thee able to do it, so he will make thee able to do it in
the use of means. And I say unto thee, According to thy faith it shall be unto
thee: Here then is the third Use. God has graciously undertaken to enable his
children to do all he bids them to do, therefore the only way to do what
is commanded, is to get faith to rest upon the promises, wherein the Lord has
engaged himself to help us to do what he has commanded. First of all, find
out what is the will of God that thou should do. Secondly, work thy heart to
a willingness, and desire to do it. Thirdly, Bring thy self to trust upon God
in the use of his means for ability to do it; and then in the next place thou
shall be able to do it in such a measure as God will accept.

The fourth and last Use of this Doctrine is, for a singular encouragement and
consolation to all that are Gods children. Thou that art one of Christ's, here
is thy comfort: Whatsoever God in his word bids thee to do, he by his
promise has undertaken to make thee able to perform. Truth it is, the things
that God has commanded thee to do, they are wonderful hard, even impossible
to flesh and blood; but yet notwithstanding to thee easy and possible, because
God has undertaken to give thee strength to do them. So that thou have great
cause to be encouraged, considering the power of God: the power of God is with
thee, it is bound to be thine by his promise, and if God be able, thou shall
obey whatsoever he has commanded thee, so thou will believe this promise, and
use the means. Indeed I grant many of Gods children are not enabled to do what
God has commanded; but the reason is, (as I showed before) either because they
are not willing, and that is horrible baseness; or else they are not able to
believe this Doctrine, and that is horrible insidelitie. But if thou could
but believe all that God has said, thou should be enabled to do whatsoever
God requires of thee to do, in an Evangelicall manner.

Thus the Lord Christ incourageth and comfort his Disciples, in Mat. 19. 24.
I say unto you (says he) that it is easier for a Cammell to go through the eye
of a needle, then for a Rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Here was
a Doctrine that stumbled the very Disciples themselves, for when they heard it,
the Text says, They were exceedingly amazed, saying, who then can be saved?
Surely it is impossible for any to be saved if this be true, that the man,
whose heart cleaves to any of these temporal things, cannot be saved, (for
that is the meaning of the words, though Christ instanceth in a rich man only,
yet it is true of a voluptuous man, and of all those that have their hearts
cleave to any thing in the world) if this be true, it is impossible for any man
to be saved, for it is impossible for any man but to have his heart cleave to
something in this world, either friends, or honors, or riches, or pleasures.
How does Christ comfort them against this impossibility? In verse 26. says he,
With men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible: as if he
should say, It is true I grant, that it is impossible for any man to be saved,
if you look to the power of man, because it is unpossible for a man not to
idolize some outward thing; but yet notwithstanding with God it is possible.
God can make a man live in the world, and yet have his affections divorced from
all things in the world; and God will make you do this, because he has
promised to you, being his children, that whatsoever he bids you do, you
shall be enabled to do in such a measure as he will accept. Therefore as
Christ comforted his Disciples, so let us comfort our own souls; what God has
commanded, he will make us able to do, therefore let us up and be doing, and
believe the promises, and we shall prevail to an Evangelicall obedience. Thus
much for this first Doctrine, that the Lord does deal thus graciously with his
children, that whatsoever he bids them to do, he will enable them to do
it; he commanderh them, that sin should not reign in their mortal body, and
here he promises, that sin shall not have dominion over them.

Having observed this from the coherence of the words, let us now come to the
words themselves, sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are not under
the Law, but under grace.

You have here first a promise. Secondly, the ground and reason of the promise.

First of all a promise in the former part of the words, sin shall not have
dominion over you.

Secondly, the ground of the promise, in the latter part of the words, for you
are not under the Law, but under Grace.

Let me briefly open the words unto you; and I will begin with the first, sin
shall not have dominion over you. For the understanding of this, you must know,
there is a double dominion of sin, the one is, when sin reigns to
obedience; the other is, when sin reigns to death.

First, I say, there is a reign or dominion of sin to obedience: that is it
which is spoken of in the 12. verse of this Chapter, Let not sin reign in
you, that you should obey it in the lusts thereof: This dominion of sin, is
when as sin does sit in the soul, as a King sits upon his Throne, and
commands the heart of a man, and all the members of his body, as a lawful
Sovereign does command his Subjects.

The other reign of sin, which is a reign unto death, is that which is spoken
of in Romans 5. 21. there the text says, Sin has reigned unto death; and that
is nothing, but the power that sin has to damn all those whom it has lorded
it over. Now both these are meant in the Text, for both of them go together,
the reign of sin to obedience, and the reign of sin to death and damnation:
even as the light and heat of the Sun go together, so does the dominion of sin
to obedience and damnation go together. Wherever sin reigns to
obedience, that is, wherever sin is in the soul of a man as a King, making a
man to obey it in his commands, as a Subject does his Prince: there also will
that sin reign to the damnation of that man. Both of them are meant in the
words.

So then the meaning of the words comes to this effect, that sin shall
neither have dominion over you to obedience, nor to damnation: sin shall
neither reign over you, to make you obey it as a Subject his Sovereign, nor to
damn you for obedience of it. This is the meaning of the promise, and this is a
promise that is made to all believers, to all that are members of Jesus Christ.
And the observation that I note from thence is thus much, that

Sin shall never reign in the children of God, so as to make them obey it as
a Subject their King; nor so as to damn them for obeying of it.

The Point you s^e is no more than the words of the Text explained: sin may
dwell with a child of God; and sin may dwell in a child of God, Romans 7. 17.
It is no more I, but sin that dwells in me: But sin shall never reign
over a child of God, neither to make him obey it with full consent of will, as
a Servant does his Masters commands, or as a Subject does his Sovereigns laws,
nor yet to damn him for obeying of it: thus sin shall never reign over any
child of God, though it may be in him, and dwell with him, yet it shall never
reign over him.

The truth of this you may see in Romans 6. 18. Being then made free from sin,
you became the servants of righteousness. He is not made free from the
presence of sin, nor from the power of sin, for Saint Paul prosesseth of
himself, Romans 7. 23. I find a law in my members, that is sin, rebelling
against the law of my mind, that is the grace of God that is in me, and
bringing me into captivity to the law of sin. Therefore sin may be in a
man: A child of God is not free from the guilt of sin neither. But how then
is he free from sin? Thus, he is free from the dominion of sin; sin does
not reign in them as a Lord and King; sin does not reign in them so as to
damn them for it.

This is that also in Luke 1. 74. 75. That he would grant us, that we being
delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear, in
holiness, and righteousness, all the days of our life. Observe this Text;
Every one that is a child of God is delivered out of the hands of his enemies,
that is, out of the hands of his spiritual enemies, the world, and the flesh,
and the Devil; and he is delivered out of the hands of these enemies, that he
might serve God without fear in holiness and righteousness: But how can any
man be thus delivered from hell, and sin, and the Devil, to serve God without
fear in holiness, and righteousness, if he be not delivered from the reign and
dominion of sin, both as a King, and as a Judge to damn him.

So that you see the Doctrine is cleared, That all that are Gods people are
delivered from the reign of sin, sin neither reigns in them to Lord it over
them, nor to damn them.

I will briefly give you the grounds of the point, and so come to apply it.

The first Reason why all Gods children are delivered from the domnion of sin
is, because that all the reign of sin, both as a Lord and as a Judge, both to
damnation and to obedience, it all comes through the justice of God, which
has lest us thereto, to punish all sins in Adam: Now Jesus Christ he
satisfies the justice of God, he appeaseth the wrath of God, in all
particulars wherein we have provoked him: Gods justice being satisfied, he
takes off the punishment, and so delivers his people for whom Christ has
satisfied from the dominion of sin, both to obedience, and to damnation. This
then is the first Reason, Because Christ he has satisfied the justice of God,
and has delivered all his people from that curse, and that misery that lay
upon them by the Law. This is that you have in Gal. 4. 5. God sent his Son made
of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law. We are
under the Law in a twofold respect: First, we were under the accidental power
of the Law, whereby the Law through our corruption did multiply transgressions
in our souls, and beget sin upon us, as a man begets children. Secondly, We
were under the Law in respect of the curse of the Law, the Law cursing all that
broke it, and cursing of them to damnation: we were under the curse of the Law
in this respect. Now Christ has redeemed all his children from under the Law
in both these respects: First, in the first respect, he has redeemed all his
children from under that accidental power of the Law, where by the Law had
power through our corruption to multiply transgression upon occasion of every
Commandment it gave; for the Law of God commanding and forbidding, and our
corruption being strong in us, we broke every Commandment, and so the Law
occasioned a multiplication of transgression: Now the Lord Christ has
delivered us from under this accidental power of the Law in some measure; so
that how soever still through the remainder of corruption, the Law occasioneth
a great many sins in us, because it commands, and we do not obey; yet the
Law does not occasion any reigning sin, because there is nothing the Law
commands but we obey it in some measure, I pray observe it. They love the Law
of God, they strive to obey it, they grieve when they cannot obey it, now this
according to the Gospel is counted obedience. Thus Christ has delivered us
from the Law, as it did occasion sin to reign in us.

Again secondly, Christ has delivered us from the curse of the Law: for Christ
having satisfied the justice and wrath of God for our transgressing the Law,
the Law can have no force to curse us. Here is the first reason why sin cannot
have dominion over Gods people, Because Christ has satisfied God for the sins
of his people, redeeming them from under the Law.

Secondly, Because all that are Christ's people must be like unto Christ:
Thereupon it is that the children of God are said to put on Christ; they are
said to live the life of Christ, to be the members of Christ, to be the
brethren of Christ, the branches of Christ: All these Metaphors are to show us,
that there is a likeness between Christ and all that are his people. Now as
they are to be like Christ in other things, so in these two things. First, sin
had no dominion over Christ, it never Lorded over him to obedience. Secondly,
Death and damnation never had power over Christ: First, sin had no dominion, no
power over him; Christ indeed was often tempted to sin, but he never obeyed sin:
The world set it self to ensnare him, the Devil set himself to draw him into
sin, but neither world nor Devil, could never have any power over him to bring
him under sin. Indeed Christ was under the guilt of sin, for he bore our
transgressions, but Christ was never under the reign of sin, sin had never any
power over him to make him obey it. In this must all the people of God be like
unto Christ; that as sin had no power of Christ to make him obey it, so sin
must have no power over any of Gods people to make them obey it.

Now there is a double obedience. The one is, when as sin is obeyed at all; the
other is, when as sin is obeyed with full consent of the will. The first, when
sin is obeyed at all, though it be with grief and opposition, from this
obedience of sin shall the people of God be delivered in due time, in the world
to come, after death, then they shall be perfectly like Christ, when they shall
be perfectly freed from doing the commands of sin. But from that other
obedience of sin, to obey it with full consent of will, as a child does the
father, as a subject does the law and commands of his Sovereign; from this
obedience of sin, Christ delivers his people in this world, and so in part
they are made like unto him in this life, while they are freed from the reign
of sin, so that though sin captive them, yet sin does not Lord it over them,
neither do they obey sin fully with consent as a Subject his Sovereign.

Again, secondly, death had no power over Christ, Romans 6. 9. Christ being
raised from the dead, dies no more, death has no more dominion over him. The
Lord Christ indeed was once seized upon by death, he was once under the power
of a temporal death; but he being once raised from death; death now never can
reach Christ any more. In this also must all Gods people be like unto Christ:
Indeed it is true, once death and damnation had dominion over us, we were under
the guilt and sentence of condemnation, as Christ was once under death, but as
Christ once being delivered from death, death never after had dominion over
him; so all that are the people of God, being by Christ delivered from the
sentence of damnation, it shall never come to have dominion over them. Once
they were under the power of sin to damnation, but now by Christ they are
delivered from it, death has no more dominion over them; howsoever a bodily
death prevails so far as to part body and soul for a while, yet not so as to
expose them to damnation. To the end therefore that there may be a proportion
between the root, and the branches, between the head, and the members, between
the elder brother, and the rest of the brethren, between Christ and the people
of God, hence it comes of necessity, that sin must not have dominion over any
of Gods people.

To apply this Point now thus opened and cleared. It serves first for
Instruction, to teach us the falsenesse of that Position that is in the world,
That all men are sinners alike, that there is no difference between sinners in
the world. When any of Gods Children come to a wicked man, a drunkard, a
whoremaster, a swearer, etc. and tells him of his sin, says he presently, we
are all sinners alike, I have my vice, and you have your vice, one man has one
sin, and another man another, but sinners we are all alike. This is a damnable
opinion, and a mark and brand of a wretched person. But now this Doctrine
teaches us, that howsoever it is true, that Gods people and others are all
sinners, and alike by nature, yet there is a great deal of difference between
Gods people that are under sin, and the unregenerate man. Indeed Gods children
they are under sin, but (mark it) they are not under the dominion of sin; thou
art under the dominion of sin, but they are not under that: There is the
difference, we are all sinners, but we are not all alike sinners. We that are
the people of God are under the guilt and power of some sins, but yet we are
not under the dominion of any sin: Sin has neither dominion over us to rule us
as a Sovereign does his subjects, nor to damn us as it shall do them that are
not in Christ: But as for thee that art a carnal wretch, thou art under the
dominion of sin, thou do obey sin in the lusts thereof; if sin bid thee
do a thing thou do it, and do it withal thy heart: and so as thou art
under the reign of sin, so thou art under the damnation of sin, except by
faith and repentance thou comes out of this condition Therefore learn that
there is a difference between the people of God, and the men of the world: we
are all under sin, but not under the dominion of sin, as the world is.

Secondly, The second Use is, for Consolation: and it is a point of wonderful
comfort to all the people of God; I do not speak now to them that are
unregenerated, that are Aliens to the Commonwealth of Israel, strangers to the
Covenant of promise, that are without Christ and God in the world: this is
childrens bread, and it belongs not to such dogs as they are: But I speak
this to all that are in the Covenant, to all that are borne again: And that
you may know to whom I speak, take this one sign; such of you as are as truly
burdened with the presence of sin as with the guilt of sin: such of you as
are as truly offended with the filth of sin, as with the punishment of sin;
such of you as do desire as truly to be rid of sin it selse, as to escape
damnation for sin: in a word, such of you as are sensible of the corruption
of your nature, and groan under it, as under the greatest misery you can
possibly lie under: such of you as maintain an invincible opposition against
the sins of your nature, and make them your daily conflict, you are Gods
people, and to you I speak at this time. Here (my brethren) is comfort for you,
sin may be in thee, it may foil thee, it may have sometime a great power
over thee, yet notwithstanding be of good comfort, sin shall never have
dominion over thee, it shall never make thee his subject, it shall never damn
thee. I pray take notice of the speech of God to Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9.
The Apostle was troubled with his corruptions, and he prayed thrice to be rid
of it: (here is a sign of Gods child, though he have corruptions in him, yet
he is restless under them, and he never gives over praying, till God deliver
him from them; Paul prayed thrice) that is often, he could not be quiet till he
were free from it, it was as a thorn in his foot: what answer does God give? My
grace is sufficient for thee. As if he should say, Paul be of good comfort, art
thou annoyed with corruption, yet notwithstanding, My grace is sufficient for
thee; thy corruption shall never have dominion over thee; well may it dwell in
thee, never shall it reign over thee; well may it foil thee, never shall it
conquer thee; thou shall never come to be overcome with thy corruptions, so as
to give up thy self with full consent of will to obey thy sins: My grace is
sufficient to keep thy corruption from reigning over thee, though I will not
keep it from dwelling in thee: My grace is sufficient to keep sin from
damning of thee, though I will not yet keep it from molesting of thee. Here is
comfort for thy poor soul therefore, that art burdened and grieved with the
sense of thy corruptions: As the Lord resolved, that he would not for a time
drive out the Canaanites from among the people of Israel, but yet they should
be Tributaries to them, and acknowledge them for their Sovereign: so the Lord
has resolved, that sin shall dwell in thee, but yet it shall be a Tributary,
it shall never sway the Scepter, it shall never wear the Crown, it shall never
set on the Throne of thy soul; and not prevailing to reign over thee, it shall
never prevail to damn thee: Be of good comfort therefore, God will deliver
thee from all dominion of sin, yea, he has done it already. Oh how did Saint
Paul cry out, Romans 7. 24 Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
the body of this death? Here is a true sign of Gods child: they that have not
this are none of Gods; by reason of the remainders of corruption, which is as
death in him, (therefore the Apostle here calls it, the body of this death,
he means original corruption, but calls it, a body of death, because it is
a death to him, and he had rather suffer death then have it in him) by reason
of this he counts himself miserable and wretched, Oh miserable and wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death; he would give
all the world if he had it, but to be delivered from the presence of sin:
this is the state of Gods children, nothing in the world burtheneth them so
much as the presence of their corruptions; they are not pleased when they break
Gods Commands; they do not make it their trade to commit sin, it is the
greatest grief, and shame, and wound their soul has. Well, how does Saint
Paul comfort himself against the remainders of corruption in him? I thank God
(says he) through jesus Christ our Lord: As if he should say, why do I thus
dismay my self: sin is in me, but yet notwithstanding, sin shall not have
dominion over me, by Christ I am delivered from the reign of sin, Oh thanks
be to God, through jesus Christ.

Here is consolation, take it, and encourage your selves by it, against the
remainders of corruption that are in you. God has left sin in you, but why?
It is but to serve you, as the Canaanites that were left in Canaan; they shall
not reign over you, says God, they shall be Tributaries to you, to draw water,
and to hew wood for the service of the Sanctuary, to help you in offering up
Sacrifices, they shall be your servants. I speak this to your comforts only
that are the Lords, sin is left in you, not to reign over you, but to serve
you. You are Priests to God the Father, and you must have Sacrifices to offer
up unto God: of old God made his people offer up costly Sacrifices, Oxen, and
Sheep, and Calves: but now sin serves the turn; the sin that is in thee
serves thee for Sacrifice, every sin that thou mortify it is as pleasing a
Sacrifice to God, as if thou offerest up an O xe, or a Sheep: thus they are thy
servants, and they save thee cost, they serve in stead of Sacrifices, they
serve to draw water and cut wood: thy sins they do more further thygrace
then any thing else; they help thee to draw the water of godly sorrow, of true
repentance; they help thee to prize the mercies of the Lord Jesus Christ; they
help thee to humility, to meekness, to a spirit of compassion to others; in a
word, nothing does thee so much service, as the sin that is in thee. Be of
good comfort therefore, if thy sins be grieved for, striven against, labored
against, they further thy reward for all eternity. Here is the second Use.

The last Use is for Exhortation, in as much as you that are Gods people see
that sinve shall never have dominion over you, be exhorted therefore to fight
against your sins: you have a good cause, you are sure of victory, oh then
play the men. Soldiers that have a good cause, and have good hope of victory,
how manfully do they fight; and yet they are not sure of victory neither. But
thou that art one of Christ's, what cause can here be better then thine? the
cause of Christ against the Devil; what greater assurance can there be of
obtaining the victory, seeing God himself is engaged in the quarrel? the word
is gone cut of his mouth, he has said it, Sin shall not have dominion over
you. Oh then stand it out against sin, never yield the bucklers to thy
corruptions that make hard upon thee, make the battle fresh and strong against
thy lusts; though thou art foiled again and again, never give over conflicting,
for God has said it, and his words shall never fall to the ground, that sin
shall not have dominion over thee; he has engaged himself in the cause, and
if God be true and able to keep sin from reigning over thee, thou shall be
sure to have the victory in the end fall on thy side. Thus much for the first
part of the verse, the promise that the Apostle makes to the people of God,
Sin shall not have dominion over you.

Let us now come as briefly as we can to the second part of the verse, and that
is, the ground and reason of this promise, For you are not under the Law, but
under Grace.

Give me leave in a word, to observe something in the general, before we come
to the words themselves. The Apostle had expressed a great deal of sweet
encouragement to these Believers, in that he promises in the name of God, that
sin should not have dominion over them; the ground and reason of all this is,
because they were not under the Law, but under Grace. This teaches us thus
much, and I will note it in a word by the way. That

All the encouragement we have from God it is all of Grace.

It is not by works, for then it would come by the Law, but it is by Grace,
that is, of Gods free mercy, of his free gift.

This is it that the Papists, and the old Pelagians, and diverse other
Heretics will not give to God, that all that we have for matter of
encouragement is of Grace.

Again, we may also observe another thing: the ground of mercy, which the
Apostle here had expressed to the people of God, he makes it come by Grace, and
not by the Law. But how comes this grace to them? It comes by Christ, and
by the Gospel. The Lord Jesus Christ he is the meritorious cause of all this
grace: the Gospel, that is the Revealer, the Preacher of this grace, the
Instrument, whereby God does make known and communicate it to us. In as much
then as the Apostle makes the ground of all the mercy that believers have to be
by grace, and that grace comes by Christ and the Gospel, you may learn in the
next place in the general, this instruction also. That

All the privileges and mercies that we do enjoy, they all come to us by
Christ, and by his Gospel.

So much is here included in the word Grace; by Christ and by the Gospel come
we to enjoy, all the favor and mercy from God, that we do enjoy.

I will show you a little in brief, how that by Christ we come to enjoy all the
grace and favor we do enjoy. See first that place in Romans 5.18, 19, 20. there
the Text plainly shows, that as all our misery, and all the displeasure of
God came on us by one man, that is by Adam, so all the mercy and the favor of
God, with all the comforts and privileges that we do enjoy, they come to us
by the second man, that is, by Jesus Christ: you may read the place at your
leisure, you shall find it express in the Text.

This is it also you shall see as plainly expressed in the first Verse of that
Chapter; Being justified by faith we have peace with God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom also we have access by faith into the grace wherein we
stand: Observe, peace with God it comes by Christ; access to that grace with
God wherein we stand, is all by Jesus Christ.

And as it is thus for Christ, so it is also for the Gospel, whatsoever
privileges or favors from God we enjoy, they are all through the Gospel, 2
These. 2.14. Whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to the obtaining of the
glory of the Lord Jesus Christ. All our glory comes by Christ, all this glory
of Christ is partaked of us through the Gospel. And hence also is that in 2 Timothy 1.10. But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus
Christ, who has abolished death, and has brought life and immortality to
light, through the Gospel. Still you see the Gospel is made the means whereby
we come to enjoy those favors and privileges from God that we do enjoy.

But you may object, if so be all the grace and favor Gods people have had
with God come by Christ, and by his Gospel; then how came they to enjoy it that
lived before the coming of Christ, and the preaching of the Gospel, the
Patriarchs and Fathers from Adam to Christ?

To this I answer, that as they (so many of them as were believers) had the
same grace and favor with God that we have, so they also had the same Christ,
and the Gospel that we have. Christ and the Gospel was as well made known to
them as to us; and by Christ and the Gospel, they came to enjoy that grace with
God, which they had, as well as we do.

Hercupon it is that Christ professes that Moses and the writings of the
Prophets did bear witness of him as he speaks in Joh. 5.46. And the Apostle
Saint Paul speaking of the unbeleeving Jews, lays down the cause thereof, not
to be a want of the revelation of Christ, in the writings of Moses and the
Prophets; But (says he, 2 Cor. 3.14.) their minds were blinded, for until
this day remains the same vail untaken away in the reading of the Old
Testament, and even unto this day, when Moses is read, the vail is upon their
heart. Christ and the Gospel are revealed in the Old Testament as well as in
the New, only here is the difference, there was a vail put over their minds
that they could not see this Christ, and this Gospel that was revealed in the
Old Testament. And therefore the same Apostle in 1 Cor. 10.3. professes, that
the believing Jews of the Old Church did eat of the same spiritual meat, and
did all drink the same spiritual drink: For (says he) they drank of that
spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ. They were
partakers of the same Christ, and of the same Gospel that we are: The
difference is only this, They that were before the coming of Christ, they had
the Law in a greater plenty, and they had the Gospel in a greater scarcity
than we have: They had more of the Law, and less of the Gospel, we have less
of the Law, and more of Christ and the Gospel. They had not only the Moral
Law, but the Judicial Law, and the Ceremonial Law; whereas we are delivered
from the Judicial and Ceremonial Law, only so far as there was in any of them
a Moral Equity. And as they had more of the Law, so they had less of the
Gospel; Christ indeed was preached to them, but it was in Types and Figures,
but to us Christ is preached nakedly; the Gospel indeed was revealed to them
but very darkly, very obscurely; but now to us it is preached in an open and
full manner.

But you will say, what is the reason that God put this difference between the
people of God before Christ and since?

I answer, The Reason was this, Because that before Christ the Church was in
his infancy, in his childhood, therefore as great Heirs, so long as they are
under age are put to Tutors and Governors, and do not enjoy so noble a manner
of conversation, as they enjoy after they come to Age: so the Lord served the
Church, while the Church was in infancy, till the coming of Christ she was
under the Schoolmaster of the Law, of Shadows and Types, and of those Shadows
and Types, whereby she was nurtured and fitted up in a meaner and lower manner,
then she is now being of age. But now since the coming of Christ, the Church
is come of Age, and therefore now God does reveal himself in a more excellent
manner than before.

Why should God thus, while his Church was under age, keep it under Tutors and
Governors?

The reason was this, That he might prepare the Church to receive the Doctrine
of Christ and the Gospel; for the nature of man is so exceeding opposite to the
doctrine of Christ and the Gospel, that if it had not been long framed by the
tutoring of many hundred years by the Law, it had never been convinced of the
necessity of salvation by Christ, and the Gospel. All these things you have
laid down to us in Gal. 3. from Verse 19. to the 5th Verse of the fourth
Chapter, wherein the Apostle opens these things to us at large.

Thus briefly you have seen this Point also opened to us, That all the favor
and privileges that the people of God enjoy, it is all by grace, that is, by
Christ and by his Gospel.

I will only make a Use or two of this point in a few words, and so pass it
over.

First this Doctrine serves to check their unthankfulness, that do enjoy the
Gospel, and are not abundant in thanksgiving to God for it. Whatsoever thou
have, whatsoever boldness toward God, whatever access into his presence,
whatever hope of pardon, whatever victory over corruption, whatever change of
nature, whatsoever thou have that brings thee, or furthereth thee in grace
and favor with God, all is by Christ and the Gospel. Whence is it then that
thou art so unmindfull of Christ, and so unthankful for Christ and the Gospel?

There are three unthankfulnesses, and unmindfulnesses which the Scripture
marks. The first is that of the chief Butlers forgetting the kindness of
Joseph: The other is, that of the King of Egypts forgetting also the kindness
of Joseph. And the last is that of Joash, his forgetting the kindness of
Jehojada the high Priest. These are branded for their unmindfulness of the
great favors they had received. But all these put together, are not so deeply
to be charged with the guilt of unthankfulness, and unmindfulness, as we are
that live under the Gospel, and enjoy such great favors by Christ and the
Gospel, and yet are no more thankful for them than we are.

The other Use shall be for an Exhortation, to provoke you above all things to
prize Christ and the Gospel, as you prize life, liberty, pardon of sin, favor
of God, salvation of souls, so prize Christ and the Gospel, for by them you
have all these. Even our outward privileges (my brethren) come by the Gospel;
the Gospel of peace has brought a great deal of peace to this Land; temporal
honor, prosperity, renown, and plenty has come to us by the Gospel. But
those things that above all are prize-worthy, are the favor of God, the peace
of conscience, the victory over corruptions, etc. These things they are all
brought to us by Christ and the Gospel. Therefore let us prize these above our
lives or liberties. Great cause have we of this age to fear that Christ and his
Gospel are departing from us; we cannot but see that there are those things
among us, that usually cause Christ to depart, we have a great deal of
intemperancie, a world of profaneness and impiety, etc. These things are
usually forerunners of Christ's going away, and carrying his Gospel from a
Nation. Let us therefore more fear the loss of these, then the loss of our
own lives. We may lose our lives, and yet keep the favor of God; we may lose
our lives, and yet enjoy all the Privileges of the people of God; but if
Christ and the Gospel be taken away, so many of us as have not made a sure part
for our selves in Christ, and in the Gospel, we lose all favor with God, and
all the privileges of the new Covenant. Therefore let us bestir our selves
within the bounds of our callings; to the uttermost of our abilities, both by
praying, and every way that God has appointed (more then for our lives) to
preserve among us Christ and the Gospel.

Thus much briefly for those general Observations that lay in our way, which I
could not well pass over without a short touch. I come now to the particular
words themselves: You are not under the Law, but under Grace.

The Doctrine (to pass by other things) that the words particularly afford us,
it is thus much, That,

All they that are in Christ, they are not under the Law, but under Grace.

Says the Apostle, You are not under the Law, but under Grace; who are they?
In the beginning of this Chapter the third Verse; Know you not (says he) that
so many of us, as were baptized into Christ, were baptized into his death?
These are the persons of whom the Apostle speaks, You are not under the Law,
but under Grace. You that are baptized into Christ, you that are joined unto
Christ, you that are one with Christ, you are not under the Law, but under
grace. The Doctrine you see is the very express words of the Text, and it is
so clear and evident, that I suppose, I shall not need to spend time to prove
it.

For the opening of it, I will first show you what is meant by the Law, what is
meant by being under the Law, and then what is meant by grace, and by being
under grace, and so make some brief Uses and conclude.

First, What is meant by the Law?

By the Law is meant that same perfect rule of obedience which God has
prescribed man, by the works thereof to attain life everlasting. This Law is
that of which Moses was the Mediator, when it was delivered to man after his
fall, therefore it is called the Law of Moses. This Law is that which is called
the old Covenant, because it was made with us, before the fall with Adam in
Paradise. This Law is that which is called the Covenant of works, because it
promises salvation only on the condition of works. This is meant by the Law.

What is meant by being under the Law?

I answer, by being under the Law is meant a full subjection to the Law in all
its properties, and in all its qualities.

Now there are four properties of the Law: two of them are direct, and two of
them are accidental, and occasioned to the Law by our sins.

There are two properties of the Law, that are direct.

The first is this, that it accepts of nothing but perfect obedience; it
pardons no failings, no imperfections. This is that, do this and live: do
it; the Law it does not accept of endeavors and of desires; there is nothing
that stands with the Law but a perfect doing. Hence is that same, Gal. 3.10.
there says the Apostle, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things
that are written in the book of the Law to do them. Here is the first direct
property of the Law, it accepts of nothing but perfect obedience, it
pardons no failings, it will admit of no imperfections, but Cursed is every
one that continues not in all things, that are written in the book of the Law
to do them.

The second direct property of the Law is this, that it gives Commandments,
but it gives no power at all to obey the Commandments: it sets us a rule,
but it helps with no virtue, no strength to walk by the rule. In this
respect it is, that the Law is called the Letter, 2 Cor. 3.6. Who has made us
able Ministers of the new Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit. By
the Letter there is meant the Law, as by the spirit is meant the Covenant of
Grace: the Law is called the Letter, because as the writing of Letters does
direct us and show us a Copy, but administreth no kind of art, or skill to the
Scholar to follow the copy: so this is the property of the Law, it
prescribes a rule, but administreth no ability to walk by the rule. These are
the two direct properties of the Law. Now in respect of these two, man, so long
as he was in the state of innocence, before his fall, he was well enough: I it is
true, the Law would pardon no faylings, would accept of no imperfect obedience;
but man in that estate needed not to care, for he had power to keep the whole
Law, and to observe every tittle thereof, and to yield perfect obedience to
every thing contained in it. Again, the Law was a mere Letter, directing only
what should be done, but affording no help for the doing of what is required;
man had power in himself (God had given him it in his creation) to obey the
Law, to write exactly after that copy. But since man is come into a state of
sin, since the fall of man, the Law has by accident, and by occasion of man's
fall, two other properties.

First of all, that the Law does curse every man that is under it, even unto
Hell; this is that in the forenamed place, Gal. 3.13. As many as are under the
Law are cursed, for cursed is every one that does not all that is written in
the book of the Law. Hence it comes to pass, that the Law does inflict
damnation upon all them that are under it: Hence are these names given to the
Law, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 9. In the 6. verse, the Letter kills, that is, the Law
kills us. In the 7. verse, it is called, the ministration of death. In the 9.
verse, it is called, the ministration of condemnation: all these names are
given to the Law, because through man's fall there is occasioned a property to
the Law, to kill, and to destroy, and to condemn.

Again, another property that is occasioned to the Law by sin, and by the
fall of man, is this, that the Law does multiply transgressions in the hearts
and lives of people. This is a strange thing, therefore I pray observe the
opening of it. I say, the property of the Law it is, that it does multiply
transgression and sin in the hearts of people, for therefore it is, that the
Apostle says, Romans 5.10. The Law entered, that sin might abound; the Law does
cause the abounding of sin: there had never been so much sin in the world,
if it had not been by the Law: not directly, but by occasion does the Law
multiply transgressions in the hearts of people. The Apostle, in Romans 7.4, 5.
compares the Law to a Husband, the sinful heart to a Wife: that look as by
the Husband, the Wife comes to bring forth children, so by the Law, man's
corrupt heart comes to bring forth sins.

If you ask how this comes about?

It is thus. The Law it comes with Commandments, and with prohibitions: it
commands people to do these and these things, it commands people to leave
undone these and these things, now the Law meeting with the corruption of man's
heart, setting a rule to that heart that will not be ruled, it makes the heart
to rebel and transgress: if there were no Law, there would be no sin, if
the Law did not command, there were no sin in not doing, if the Law did not
forbid, there were no sin in doing: But now the Law coming to the corrupt
heart, bidding them do, corruption refusing to do, the Law causes corruption
to sin: The Law again coming to a corrupt heart, and bidding them refrain,
corruption refusing, causes corruption to sin: for if there were no rule,
there could be no erring besides the rule. Thus in these respects it is, that
by occasion the Law comes to have this property to be as a Father, and as a
Husband, multiplying transgressions in the hearts of people.

Gather up that which I have said, and lay them together, the two direct
properties of the Law, and the two accidental properties of the Law,
occasioned by corruption; and you see there are four properties of the Law: So
then, to be under the Law, it is nothing else, but to be under these four
properties of the Law, to be in such a state and condition, wherein we are
liable to all these four properties of the Law. Viz.

First, That nothing will serve our turn but perfect obedience, no sin to be
pardoned, no frailty to be past by, no imperfection to be covered.

Secondly, To be in such a state and condition, wherein there is a great deal
commanded, but no power, no strength communicated, to enable us to do any
thing that is commanded.

Thirdly, To be in such a state and condition, wherein we are under a curse and
condemnation, even to the pit of hell.

Lastly, To be in such a state and condition, wherein daily and hourly there
are sins multiplied, and brought forth in us through the corruption of our
nature. To be in a state that has these four miserable properties, is this, to
be under the Law.

Now let us show you what it is to be under Grace. And first, what Grace is:
and then what it is to be under Grace. I pray observe this also.

Grace, it is nothing else, but the free promise of Salvation, in, and by the
Lord Jesus Christ. This is Grace.

To be under grace, is to be under the four properties of grace. For as the Law
had four properties, so this grace has four properties contrary to the Law,
all of them direct and proper to Grace.

The first property of Grace is this: There shall be a pardon of sin; the sins
that are past shall be forgiven. That this is in grace you may see in Jer.
31.34. For I will forgive their iniquities, and remember their sins no more.
The Property of grace it is to pardon failings, to cover imperfections, to
accept of a desire, and of an endeavor, and of a weak performance: This is the
first property of grace; that this is so, you may see it in Noh. 13.22.
Remember me O my God, and spare me according to the greatness of thy mercy:
That is, remember my good deeds, and spare my imperfections, and pass by my
weaknesses, Neheminh could not have prayed it, if God had not promised it. So
also that in Mal. 3.17. They shall be mine, says the Lord, and I will spare
them as a man spares his own son that serves him. How does a man spare a son?
If a servant serve a man, he makes him do the uttermost, he will be content
with nothing but perfect obedience; but if a son come to serve the father, the
futher will wink at many failings, will take well an imperfect, service, so
the son desires and endeavors to do better: so says the Lord, I will
spare them, as a father spares his son that serves him. It is said of the
Lord-Christ in Man. 12.20. A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking (...)
shall he not quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory. There is more
promised in the words than is expressed. A bruised reed shall he not break but he
shall strengthen it; A smoking flax shall he not quench, but he shall increase
it; that is the meaning of it, he shall be so far from slighting desires, and
endeavors, and imperfect obedience, that he shall accept them, and strengthen
them, as appears in the next words, till he has brought forth judgment unto
victory; The work of sanctification is victory, Christ will strengthen
imperfect obedience, till he has made holiness and obedience victorious over
all corruption. This is the first property of Grace to pardon sin, to accept
imperfect obedience, to cover frailties.

The second Property of Grace is, that it gives strength and power to do
whatsoever it commands (this is that point we spoke of before) In that
forenamed place, 2 Cor. 3.6. there the Covenant of grace is called the Spirit,
not of the Letter (says the Apostle) but of the Spirit, for the Letter
kills, but the Spirit (that is the Covenant of grace) gives life. Grace,
whatsoever it commands gives power to do it, so far as shall be
sufficient for Gods acceptance.

The third property of grace is this, that grace delivers us from under the
curse, it fetches us out of condemnation. This is that which is expressed in
Gal. 4.5. To redeem them that were under the Law, (and so under the curse) that
we might receive the adoption of sons, and so the blessing of sons: therefore
is that in Romans 6.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,
etc.

Fourthly and lasty, The last property of grace is this, That grace, it does
hinder corruption from multiplying, from bringing forth fruit: grace does
destroy the Law, in regard of any power to multiply sin and corruption in us
as it did before; grace does subdue our iniquities, Micah 7.19. grace does
write the Law of God in our hearts; grace does give us dispositions inward,
answerable to the outward commands of the Law of God. So that by grace, when as
the Law of God comes with a command to do this; grace makes us able to do
it in some measure: when the command of God comes with a prohibition not to
do this; grace makes us able to abstain from it in some measure. Thus now
grace destroying corruption, and making us able in some measure to obey the
commands, it does destroy that accidental property of the Law, where by it
does multiply and streng then corruption in us. And thus Grace is directly
contrary to the Law, The Law came by Moses, but Grace and Truth through Jesus
Christ.

Now then to be under grace, is no more but to be in that condition, wherein we
enjoy this fourfould happy blessing.

1. To be in a condition, wherein all our sins are pardoned, our imperfect
obedience accepted, our frailties covered. 2. To be in a condition, wherein no
more shall be commanded, then strength given to obey. 3. To be in a condition,
wherein we are fetched from under the curse and condemnation of the Law, and
brought under the justification of children. 4. To be in a condition, wherein
we receive so much grace, as that we are able in some measure to obey the
commands of the Law, and that the Law cannot bring forth sin in us as it has
before.
By this you see now what, they that are in Christ, do enjoy, they are not
under the Law but under Grace.

I will briefly in three or four words conclude all with some Use of this
Doctrine. And first of all, this serves for great comfort to all those that
are in Christ (for indeed this whole Text is full of unspeakable consolation to
every poor soul that has any true evidence of his being in Christ) their
condition in which they stand is wonderful sweet: they are not under the Law,
but under Grace. Here is then a fountain opened of singular consolation for all
such. They are not in that state, wherein exact obedience shall be required,
and all infirmities charged upon them; but they are in that state, wherein
their desires, and endeavors, and beginings shall be accepted and perfected.
Thou that art in Christ, thou art not in that condition wherein thou art devoid
of all strength to obey the Commandments of God, but thou art in such a state,
wherein there is life, and power given thee to do what is commanded by God.
Thou art not under the curse and condemnation of the Law, but under the
blessing and justification of children. Let the people of God but run over
these particulars here laid down, and view all the several comforts that are
in that condition wherein they are, and there is a fountain and spring of
comfort for them.

The Second Use is, for a sharp reprehension to all such as are the people of
God, and are his children, that find themselves to be so by a testimony from
their own spirits and from Gods spirit, and yet notwithstanding lead lives
uncomfortable and lumpish. This Doctrine (my brethren) affords you a sharp
reprehension. Thou art in Christ, and yet art thou discouraged or disheartened
either with corruption, or with guilt? How unworthy do thou walk of that
condition wherein thou art? Thou art not under the Law, but under grace, why
then is it, that thou art as much dejected and discouraged, as if thou were
under the Law, and not under grace? What is it that makes thee disconsolate and
discouraged, but the condition wherein thou art may administer to thee much
more comfort? Art thou full of sin? yet notwithstanding thou art in a condition
wherein all sin shall be pardoned. Is thy obedience very imperfect? yet thou
art in a condition wherein imperfect obedience shall be accepted, and frailties
covered. Do thou find that God commands thee much, and thou do little?
but yet thou art in a condition wherein the Lord has promised, (so thou will
use the means, and trust upon him,) to make thee able in an acceptable manner
to do all that he bids thee do. Does the Law threaten, does the Law curse?
yet thou art in a condition wherein neither the threatening, nor curse of the
Law, shall ever reach thee to condemnation. Find thou mighty rebellions in
thy nature against the Law of God? yet thou art in a condition wherein is
promised a new nature, which shall be made conformable and subjected to the Law
of God.

What should make thee therefore hang down thy head? Sharply are such
Christians to be reproved, that being in Christ, lead lives as if they were out
of Christ. Do not thou make the world to think that that is false which
Christ says, That his yoke is easy, and his burden light? If Christ's yoke be
easy, and his burden light, why is it (says the world) that the servants of
Christ walk so disconsolately and complain of heavy burdens?

You shall find an exhortation of the Apostle in 2 Cor. 6.1. We beseech you
that you receive not the grace of God in vain. There is a double receiving of
Gods grace in vain. The one is, when as Gods grace is offered and preached to
people, and out of love to the world, and to their sins, they slight it, and
will not receive it. Another receiving the grace of God in vain, it is, when as
people have entertained the grace of God, and have entered into Covenant with
Christ, and yet notwithstanding do not take the comforts that the grace of God
affords them. This is also a receiving the grace of God in vain. This is thy
case whoever thou art that art a believer, and yet notwithstanding do not
make melody in thy heart, and triumph over thy enemies. What have the redeemed
of the Lord to do, but to praise the Lord? What have the members of Christ to
do, but to rejoice in Christ? Do you think when the Lord gives that
Commandment, Phil, 4. Rejoice always in the Lord, and again, I say rejoice,
(he does not bid them rejoice in riches, in friends, in honors, in pleasures,
etc. this is worldly, this is damuable, but he bids us rejoice in the Lord,
in the privileges we have by Christ through the New Covenant of Grace; he
bids us rejoice and always rejoice) Do you think, I say, when God gave you
that Commandment, he had forgotten the state in which he left you, that he had
left you under the power of many sins, subject to many failings, unable to
perfect obedience? Do you think (I say again) that God forgot the condition
wherein he left you? No, God knew well enough what state he left you in, that
you are as Israel mingled with the Canaanites, and yet he bids you to
rejoice; why so? There is ground enough for your rejoyceing, because you are
not under the Law, but under grace, and if under grace, surely there is ground
enough for your rejoicing, notwithstanding all your failings.

Consider therefore then my brethren, I beseech you; do not you receive the
grace of God in vain, do not you slight, as it were, and not make use of the
grace of God, which thus administreth matter of rejoicing in all conditions to
you that are in Christ, when as you walk so lumpishly because of sin formerly
committed, or because of corruptions that for the present lie upon you?

Indeed I deny not but it becomes Christians to mourn, and they that do not
mourn, shall never rejoice in the day of judgment, and the people of God are
mourners in Zion. Yet what kind of mourning? There is a double sorrow: A godly
sorrow, and a worldly sorrow: A godly sorrow is this, when as a soul melts
into tears upon the consideration of his sins and wants, because he believes
that God through Christ will accept him notwithstanding them all; this sorrow
the more of it the better, this sorrow melloweth the heart, softneth the heart,
makes it frameable to the impressions of the word of God. But now the other
sorrow, which is a worldly sorrow, when as a soul is beaten out of heart
because of sin formerly committed, because of mighty corruptions that do annoy
him, to mourn without hope and confidence of acceptance, this is worldly
sorrow, and causes death, this is altogether unbeseeming Christians. Receive
now this sharp reprehension, and be humbled for it, and labor to remember your
condition: You are not come to mount Sinai, but to mount Zion; You are not
under the Law, but under Grace. Therefore rejoice in the Lord always, and be
so cheerful, that the world may see, that the service of Christ is a sweet
service. Here is the second Use.

The third is for Instruction, to them that are not in Christ, to such of you
as remain yet in your natural estate.

The condition of them that are in Christ is this, they are not under the Law,
but under Grace. Thy condition who art not yet in Christ, is just the contrary;
thou art not under grace, but under the Law. There are none that do more
assume to themselves the privileges of grace, then they that are not under
grace. You shall have your profane Wretch, your painted Civillian, your formal
Hypocrite, men that are dead in trespasses and sins, that are servants to
sin, while with full consent they obey sin in the lusts thereof: yet you
shall have these challenge to themselves the privileges of the Covenant of
grace: you shall have one swear an Oath, and when he has done, say, God
forgive me: you shall have another say, I am a great sinner, but I hope God
will be merciful to me: Another, I cannot keep the Commandments, but I hope
God will accept me: thus these wretches, that are in the gall of bitterness,
and in the bond of iniquity, they claim the privileges of grace. But I would
have them know, so many of you as have no evidences that you are translated out
of the state of nature, and ingrafted into Christ by his holy Spirit, that you
are not under grace, but under the Law. What is that?

You are in such a condition, wherein nothing but perfect obedience shall stand
you in stead. If you pray as well as you can, yet if you do not pray as
perfectly as God commanded in the Law, you shall never be heard: If you keep
all the Commandments of God, and fail but in one, yet you shall be damned;
there is no accepting of imperfect obedience of you, because you are not under
Christ, but under the Law. And I tell thee this, the Saints of God shall commit
greater sins and go to Heaven, when thou lesser and go to Hell. Peter
forsweareth his Master with an Oath and Curse, and yet he is pardoned; thou
shall not swear and curse, or deny Christ, (for the ordinary matter) and shall
be damned. Saul yields God imperfect obedience, he obeys the command in
part, he fights against Amalek, slays the people and the cattle, and yet
notwithstanding cast out of his Kingdom, and kept from Heaven for ever. David
commits a greater sin for the matter of it, he commits adultery,
murthereth Vriah, lies in the sin almost a twelvemonth, and yet he is
pardoned. What is the reason: Saul was under the Law, therefore no acceptance
without perfect obedience. David indeed for the matter of his sin did worse,
but David was under grace; there is no sin so great but he had a pardon for
it, the least obedience, so in truth, was accepted. Oh remember this, you are
ready to bear out your selves with this conceit, because David, and Peter, and
other Saints sinned so, and are pardoned, therefore you may sin so, and be
pardoned. Indeed it is true, you shall be pardoned if you are in Christ, and
are under grace: but yet being unconverted, thou art therefore in the state of
nature, and so under the Law, and not under grace. Here is the third Use.

The fourth and last is for Exhortation, to exhort you all, that you would
endeavor, and be persuaded to get an interest in Christ, seeing there is so
much privilege coming to those that are in Christ. Whosoever is in Christ, is
not under the Law, but under Grace: as therefore thou desire not to be under
the Law, so labor thou to be found in Christ; above all things study this, how
to get a part in him.

My brethren; The Lord Jesus Christ is amongst you, he is daily offered to you;
oh do but receive him, and you shall receive this privilege, to be under
grace, and not under the Law.

Indeed there are a great many hard things to be done of them that will have a
part in Christ, they must deny themselves, they must take up the Cross and
follow him; there is a great many things to be lost, they must lose the love of
all their carnal friends, their sinful liberties, the applause and favor of
the world: yet notwithstanding all these difficulties, be you persuaded to
entertain Christ whatsoever it cost you; for if you will entertain Christ you
shall come to be in this state, not to be under the Law, but under Grace.
Therefore when God calls you, inviteth you, and offers his Son unto you,
oh in brace him, Open your everlasting doors, and let the King of glory come
in: When Christ is tendered upon these conditions, that you receive him to be
your King, your Priest, and Prophet, that you kiss that Son of God, and give
up your selves in all things unto him to let him reign over you, oh do it, for
by this you shall come to have this privilege, that you shall not be under the
Law, but under Grace. And what then shall hurt you? No sin, all shall be
pardoned. No defect, all shall be covered: No want of obedience, the least
shall be accepted. What can a poor soul desire more? Therefore when ever
Christ is offered to you, join your souls to him, that you may be in that
condition, not to be under the Law, but under Gree. Thus much for the ground
and reason of the former promise, why sin should not have domision over them,
because they are not under the Law, but under Grace. And so much for this time,
and this Text.

FINIS.
WISDOMS ATTENDANTS: OR THE Voice of Christ To be obeyed.

By that Reverend Divine, THOMAS HOOKER, Late Preacher in New England.

JOHN 10.27. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.

LONDON, Printed by G. D. for Francis Eglesfield, and are to be sold at the
Sign of the Marigold In Paul's Churchyard, 1651.

Wisdoms Attendants: OR, The Voice of Christ to be obeyed.
SERMON IV.
PROVE. 8.32. Now therefore hearken unto me, O ye children, for blessed are they
that keep my ways.


AFter the Wiseman had discovered the delusions of the adulterous woman in the
former Chapter: In this he brings in Wisdom as a holy and chaste matron,
propounding seasonable and comfortable counsel to all the sinful sons of men.
And in this speech of Wisdom, there are two parts or passages: First, the
Sermon it self, from the beginning of the Chapter to the words now read:
Secondly, the application thereof, from this verse to the end of the Chapter,
whereby wisdom labors to work the souls of those, to whom she had delivered
the former truth, and commended her self by many forcible arguments, to the
embracing of her blessed counsel: Now therefore, says she, hearken unto me;
As if she should say, If this be true that formerly has been delivered to you,
that happiness, and comfort, grace and glory, are propounded unto, and shall be
bestowed upon them that hearken and give attention to the words of wisdom:
What now remains, but that forsaking all other courses, both the devises and
delusions of the adulterous woman, and all the beguiling inticements of the
world and Satan, you come cheerfully, and hearken attentively to the counsel
that is propounded to you, and you shall not do this in vain, you shall not
labor for no benefit; but those that so hear as to keep my Ways, shall not
only be obedient to me, but receive a blessedness from me; for blessed are
they that keep my ways.

In the words themselves there are two passages to be observed: First the duty
that Wisdom calls for; Now therefore hearken unto me, O ye children:
Secondly the Argument whereby she labors to draw the hearts of those unto
whom she speaks, to give entertainment to that she requires, for blessed are
they that keep my ways.

In the duty it self, you have first the parties spoken to, Children. Secondly,
the duty that must be performed by these children. harkening; Hearken.
Thirdly, the party that they must hearken unto, to me, to Wisdom. Lastly,
the strength or force of reason from whence all this follows, implied in the
first words, Now therefore; considering what counsel has been administered to
you, considering all the sevarall reasons propounded to persuade you, Now
therefore, hearken unto me.

Concerning the first of these, The Parties to whom Wisdom speaks, I shall not
say any thing, because I would hasten to that I most principally intend, being
unwilling to be tedious, or hold you over long. Let us come therefore to the
second thing, the duty that is required, and that is harkening; and we will
join with this for the quicker dispatch, the third passage in the Text; the
Party to whom they must hearken, unto me; Hearken unto me. And first, let me
show you what is to be understood here by harkening.

By harkening, briefly you must understand these several particulars. The first
is, a hearing with the ear. The second is, a closing with the truth, by the
understanding of that we hear, for look as the ear receives the sound, so the
mind and understanding must apprehend the sense, and assent to the truth of
what is delivered. Thirdly, the memory must retain and hold, that which the
understanding has received. The last and principal thing is, the stooping of
the soul, and subjection of the heart, to that which is understood and
remembered. For then indeed according to the Phrase of the Spirit of God in
Scripture, a man is said to hearken, when the soul begineth to yield and
subject it self, and to take the impression of that truth, which God is pleased
to make known unto it, and that is the meaning of the Phrase, 1 Kings 12.15.
The Text says there of Rehoboam, that when the ancient men came to counsel
him, he hearkened not unto them; as if it should be said, he heard them well
enough, and he understood them well enough, and he retained their counsel in
his memory well enough, but his soul yielded not to it, his heart embraced not
that counsel, he did not subject himself thereunto, therefore the Text says,
He hearkened not to the counsel of the old men. The like Phrase we have
touching the sons of Eli, 1 Samuel 2.25 When their father spoke to them after a
cold fashion, the Text says, They hearkened not unto the voice of their father.
They heard his words well enough, and understood what he said, but their souls
stooped not, their hearts submitted not, they did not subject themselves, to
take in the impression of the truth upon them, and to be framed to the wisdom
of God revealed to them in the same. So that, my brethren, then a man is said
to hearken, when his ear hears the sound, his understanding closes with the
sense, and his memory retains it, and his heart comes under it, stoopeth to
it, yields up it self to the impression of the truths delivered, to be disposed
of thereafter. In brief therefore this is the meaning: A careful attention to
the word, that includes the three former; and obedience and subjection of heart
to the word thus attended to, comprised in the last.

Now for the party to be hearkened unto, that is, unto me. What is meant here by
the word me? If you have recourse to the beginning of this Chapter, you shall
see it is Wisdom: And by Wisdom here you are to understand the Lord Jesus
Christ, so far as he has pleased to reveal himself to us, either in the Word
of God, or work of his grace. For Christ is here especially meant, but not
Christ merely or barely as God, nor Christ in the second person; but so far as
the Lord Jesus Christ, the wisdom of his Father, is pleased by the work of his
grace, by the power of his Spirit, in the Ministory of the word, either written
or preached, to reveal himself to us. So far he is said to be Wisdom.

The words now are clear; you see what is to be understood by harkening, and
who the par^ie is to whom we must hearken. The Point then that arises from
these two parts of the Text, thus joined together in the Explication, is
evident, and it is to this effect, Namely, that

The voice of the Lord Jesus Christ ought only to be attended to, and must be
obeyed of all his faithful servants.

I say, Of all his faithful servants. The Lord Christ thinks (...) vain to
speak to others; therefore he addresseth himself only to his children. These
are they that must attend and obey his voice, whatsoever he shall be pleased to
reveal unto them, they must submit themselves unto it, and that before and
above all others in the world.

The Point is clear and evident. You see it is the main purpose and intent of
Christ in this place, and therefore he calls for audience, he desires to
gain acceptance at the hands of men: As if he should say in other terms, Lay by
all other advice, only hearken unto me my children; let corrupt counsel,
carnal advice, the sinful delusions of all ungodly persons in the world, let
them all pass, only hear and hearken unto me, entertain and unbrace my
counsel, submit your hearts to my instructions. And not only Christ requires
this of his children in this place, under the name of Wisdom; but it is the
injunction of God himself, and that from heaven; it is such a truth, and of so
great importance, that God himself from heaven makes it known, and gives it in
special charge to all the sons of men, Matthew. 17.5. When Christ was
transfigured in the Mount, There came a voice out of the cloud, which said,
This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him. Mark, there came
a voice out of the cloud; It is not only the voice of man that persuades you,
and enjoins you to give audience to the Lord Jesus, but God himself, and that
from heaven, and that in mediately with his own mouth, lays this upon us as a
duty that we are to perform, that we should hear his Son, that is, hear him
above all, more then all, nay, hear him only, and none but him. It is that
also which Christ himself calls for, Mat. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly in heart: As if he should say, There are many masters and teachers in
the world, but leave all the rest, and come hither, and learn of me, for I am
etc. Yea, it is not only the charge of God, and command of Christ, but it has
been, and is the general resolution of the Saints of God from day to day. Mic.
4.2. all the people joined hand in hand as it were, Come (say they) and let us
go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and he
will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for the Law shall go
forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. As if they should have
said, Because from Zion comes the Law, because at Jerusalem the word of God is
taught and revealed, therefore it is high time for us to go thither; come let
us go, let us wait upon God there, he will teach us of his ways, and what
remains? we will walk in his paths, we will stoop unto the truth delivered,
we will submit our selves to it, and conform our hearts and lives to the will
of God revealed to us from thence. And you shall observe the holy Prophet
David, as though there had been no Temple, no Priest, no Teacher besides, how
his good soul is still breathing upward in many passages of the 119. Psalm,
Lord teach me, Lord quicken me, Lord give understanding to thy servant, etc.
He repaireth ma^nly and chiefly to the Lord for guidance and direction. Enough
for the proof of the point.

But a man may ask, after what manner must I hearken? Harkening I told you
implies attention and obedience, therefore you may remember, that I put them
both together in the Doctrine, that it was our duty, both to attend to the
voice of Christ, and to yield obedience unto it. But how must I do this? For
the opening hereof give me leave to discover unto you three particulars, which
are specially to be considered, and are required of every soul that would make
conscience of discharging this duty.

First of all, we are then said to hearken to the voice of Christ as we should
do, when we first seek to him, and depend wholly and only upon him for
direction. I do not say, but we may use all good means and helps that God
shall please to put in our hands: But this I say, howsoever we may use other
means, yet we must depend upon no other but the Lord Jesus: first of all have
recourse unto him, and withal resolve, that he only shall cast the scale,
that his direction shall only stand with us, in whatsoever case it is we
desire counsel. And then the soul is said indeed to depend upon Christ for
direction, when it does acknowledge a kind of sovereignty in him, and also an
all sufficiency to direct a man: so that howsoever we sometimes hear the
counsel of others, and hearken to the voice of the Minister and of private
friends, yet we ever use them, but as means to bring us to Christ, and to
reveal his counsel unto us: and there being diversity of opinions, and
variety of judgments in many matters of Religion, and that amongst godly and
learned men, yet in all points, that which mainly casts the scales with us,
is not the learning or holiness of this, or that man, but the so veraignty and
authority of Christ, what he says, what his mind and his judgment is, and
what he would have us to do, This is the depending of the soul upon Christ.
You shall observe in the Old Testament, how this course was ever taken up by
the Saints in any matter of difficulty, how they had always recourse to the
counsel of God, and made their repair to his mouth. We may read how often
David did this, 1 Samuel 23. When the matter was in much question, and he in a
great straight, and every one gave in their several opinions, he went and
enquired of the Lord, saying, Shall I go and smite these Philistines? verse 2.
And when the Lord bad him go, and his followers were utterly against it, he
enquired yet again, verse 4. and in the conclusion the counsel of the Lord
bore the sway with him, though in the judgment of flesh and blood it seemed
the worse. So again, verse 11. Will the men of Keilah deliver me up into the
hands of Saul? will Saul come down? etc. So Psalm. 85. when he had long pleaded
with God, as it were, in the time of Extremity, see whither he had recourse at
the last, and upon what he settled himself: verse 8. he resolves upon this, I
will hear what God the Lord will speak; that is, I will not eye means, nor
look upon any men's opinions, but I will hear what the Lord will say. My
brethren, this is the course that every one of us must take, if ever we purpose
to hearken to the Lord in a right manner; we must upon all occasions, in all
doubts and questions, have recourse to him, and labor to captivate our
judgments to that truth, that shall be delivered to us from him, as knowing
all other directions are good, only so far as they are squared by that
standard. Look as men do in their Law matter; If one have a suit depending in
an inferior Court, and cannot meet with satisfaction there, according to the
state of his cause, he appealeth to a higher Court, and there stands at the
judgment of the chief Judge: so ought it to be with us in all spiritual
doubts and difficulties; we must appeal from the conceits and counsels of men
to the authority of Christ. This is a point that is grossly mistaken, and the
contrary professed, and maintained in popery: But I shall not meddle with that
at this time.

This is the first rule, so to repair to Christ, as wholly to depend upon him
for direction. But mark this; we must repair to him in the first place, and
not suffer our judgment to be forestalled with former counsels; but first,
while the mind lies equally and indifferently disposed, then set the word
step in, then let us repair to Christ for guidance in the cause. The contrary
is a great hinderance to the effectual passage of the Word of God into the
hearts and souls of men, and the world may easily observe it. For look what
points men have drunk in, or what customs they have entertained, they keep and
retain them, and there is no speaking against them; their hearts are
forestalled against the truth, and possessed with other principles or carnal
customs, and therefore the word of God takes no place in them.

The second thing, we are to take notice of, concerning the manner of our
harkening to the voice of Christ, is this; As the soul must first seek unto
Christ, and depend upon him for direction, so in the next place, the heart must
settle it self upon the truth revealed, and quiet it self in the
manifestation of that direction, that God has been pleased to make known unto
it. We must not listen and hearken to any of those delusions and silly devises,
wherewith Satan, by the ministry of his instruments, labors to draw us from
the truth; but our minds being enlightened, the counfell of God being made known
unto us, we ought to take up our rest and standing there, settle there; let
heaven and earth move, but stir not a foot from that truth God has made
known to us. It was great folly in that good Prophet, 1 Kings 13. to do
otherwise, and he suffered for it. He was sent on a message against Jeroboam,
and the Altar at Bethel, and was charged by the Word of the Lord; nor to eat
bread, nor drink water in that place, nor turn again by the same way that he
came: and accordingly he refused diverse offers, and withstood sundry
persuasions to the contrary. But at length there came an old Prophet to him, as
subtle as ancient, and he takes upon him to persuade him to return back to
eat, and drink, and to refresh himself: and he pleads; I am a Prophet as
well as thou, and an Angel spoke unto me by the word of the Lord, and charged
me to reveal to thee, that thou should come home with me, though with no body
else? Hereupon the young Prophet yielded to him, and went back with him, and
eat bread in his house, and drank water: wherefore the Lord flew him. My
brethren take heed of this: The Prophet had a plain charge, the will of the
Lord was openly revealed to him; he gave him an express command to denounce the
sentence against Jeroboams Altar at Bethel, and that he should not stay to eat
or drink in that place; when the word of the Lord is so clear, if an Angel
from heaven should come and teach otherwise, let him be accursed, says the
Apostle. So in ought to be with every Christian: when once the truth is clearly
revealed unto us, and our minds truly enlightened with the knowledge of Gods
will; we must resolve not to hearken to any persuasions to the contrary, though
they be backed with never so many shows of Religion or learning.

But a question here may be demanded; shall not a man be willing to hear
better counsel happily then his own? Must he hear nothing at all against such
an opinion, or practice, as he conceives to be grounded upon divine truth, and
which he has been taught by those teachers he has depended upon? Who knows
not that a man may easily be deceived, and mistake the sense of Gods Spirit in
the word; so as to embrace error instead of truth?

My brethren, by the cunning subtilty of the enemy, this conceit has crept
into the mind of all Heretics, that look what they once drink in, they must
ever retain it as a principle, and never think of removing, or unsetling from
it. This is an hook, whereby the Devil holds multitudes of men in falsehood
and error, and in wicked courses, They will hear nothing against that which
formerly they have embraced, and been persuaded unto by those they depend upon.
This policy the Devil uses in Popery, and amongst the Familists, and
Anabaptists, teaching them to resolve to hold whatsoever they have received,
either from themselves or others. And here, I say, it is sinful for a man to
resolve to hear no counsel at all against his opinion. But nevertheless,
this I say; When a man is persuaded, that the opinion, or course he takes up is
such, as God himself has been pleased to make known unto him out of his Word;
he is to receive nothing against this, but merely out of the Word: let nothing
unsettle our judgment in a plain and revealed truth, but only hold to that:
As I have been settled by the truth, so if ever I change my opinion, the truth
is that which shall reform me; all the counsel I take up, and all the opinions
I hold, shall be such as the Word of God shall reveal to me. And because my
mind may be weak, and my understanding frail, and not able to see the sense of
the spirit, therefore I will hear nothing against a good course, but only out
of the Word. If my opinion and my course be such as I am persuaded is the truth
revealed out of the word, howsoever I may be deluded, yet this I will attribute
to the Word of God; no opinion, no authority of any other shall carry the
truth from me; but the word shall reform me, as the word has perswadad me, and
as the word has revealed to me. This you shall observe to be the counsel of
God in several places of Scripture: Mark what the Apostle says to the
Philippians, Phil. 1.27. he desires this at their hands, that they would stand
fast in one spirit, with one mind, in the truth revealed; and to the
Colossians, Col. 1.23. Continue (says he) in the faith, grounded and settled,
and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, which you have heard, and
which was preached unto you: As if he should say, If you have received that
satisfaction from the word of God, that you are convinced that it is the word
of God, and that the course you take is grounded upon it, be not moved, but
stand fast in that truth received. This is the second thing.

The third and last thing, which concerns the manner of our harkening to the
voice of Christ, is this: When thus the soul is persuaded of the will of God
revealed, and when the heart setleth it self upon it, and hears nothing against
the good pleasure of the Lord thus manifested, then in the last place the soul
must yield obedience thereunto, not alone in doing the thing God commands, but
in doing the will of God in so doing. Mark, not alone, I say, performing what
God requires of us, but to be carried to the performance of the duty merely
because God requires it. For these you must observe are two distinct things
and of great difference. A man may do the thing which God commands, and yet
notwithstanding never do Gods will but his own. Many a man comes to Church
and there hears, and understands, and remembers, and does the things that God
would have him do, and yet in the mean time does not at all the will of God;
for he does not therefore go to Church because God requires it, but partly
either because custom, or shame, or the Law, or somewhat else forces him to
it. Here therefore is the main pitch of our obedience, not alone to perform
what is the good pleasure of God, but to let the will of God be the first mover
of our souls, in the discharging of that service he calls for at our hands,
to do what we do, because it is the will of God we should do it; to perform
what he requires in obedience to him, because he requires it. Our Savior
Christ puts these together in his prayer to his Father, Luke 22.42. If thou
be willing (says he) remove this Cup from me, nevertheless, not my will, but
thine be done. He says not that he will do the thing that God requires, but
he will do the will of God in it, the will of God should be the carrier and
mover of him to take upon him the great work of redemption. So should it be
with us in every thing we do: It is not my will that moves me, but the will
of God; it is not my pleasure that provokes me to this service, but the
pleasure of God. This is the third thing requisite in our manner of harkening
to the voice of Christ. And this may be sufficient for the explication of the
point.

Only let me add one thing more: Hence it follows clearly, That he that
does the will of God, because God requires it, will obey all the good pleasure
of the Lord: He will obey him in every thing, as well as in one thing, in the
hardest command, as well as in that which is more easy, in that which most
crosses his nature, as well as in that which is more suitable thereunto. This
indeed is that which makes a Christian constant in his walking with God,
notwithstanding all those difficulties and discouragements he meets withal;
when as others are fain to baulk many things which are required of them to
perform. For (my brethren) if a man only take up the practice of such matters
in Religion, as suit with his own humor, or ease, or profit, or the like; when
those fail, his performance of the (...) fails also: if there be no other
motive to carry him along in the service of God, but these outward and carnal
considerations, when they are gone, his service of God is gone also: And
therefore we find by experience, that many men can be content to give us the
hearing, they will come to Church, and attend to the word of God; but they will
take up no more, they will be tied to the performance of no duty, further then
it stands with their own occasions, and suteth with their own sinful
dispositions. But now he that is carried along in all his services by the will
of God, if that be the principal mover of him in all his performances; then
when ever that will is revealed, let it be what it will be, let it cross him
never so much, or be never so contrary to his disposition, yet he is the same
in every thing, that he is in one thing. This is that which is said Acts 3.22.
For Moses truly said unto the Fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise
up unto you like unto me, him shall you hear in all things whatsoever he shall
say unto you. Mark, him shall you hear in all things; that is, Whatsoever he
shall make known unto you to be the will of God, to that you shall yield
obedience. And this is a necessary consequent of the former: For if the will of
God be the first mover of the soul to every performance, then being at any time
revealed, it casts the balance, and commands the soul willingly to yield to
what God requires in every thing.

Thus much shall serve for the clearing of the Point. The substance of all that
I have said is thus much, namely, That the voice of the Lord Jesus Christ must
be so alone hearkened to and obeyed, that first of all we must seek to him, and
depend only and wholly upon him for direction: Secondly, that we must settle
our hearts and judgments upon that truth that is by him revealed unto us: And
lastly, that we must be moved to the performance of every duty, because God
requires it; and consequently, that our obedience be universal, that we hear
him in all things.

Now a Question may be here propounded, How shall a man hear the voice of
Christ? Indeed (happily may a carnal man say) if the Lord Christ would reveal
himself to us immediately, and his word were made known to us by himself, we
would presently yield obedience thereunto without any contradiction. How shall
a man therefore know when the voice of Christ is made known?

I answer briefly, the voice of the Lord Jesus Christ is made known to us two
ways: First, the word of God in the Scripture ever has the voice of Christ in
it: Whatsoever the word speaks, the Lord himself speaks. The Apostle Romans 3.2.
says, that unto the Jews were committed the Oracles of God. What were those
Oracles of God? Nothing but the Scriptures. So that this everlasting truth,
this word of God rightly understood, and truly conceived, always carries the
voice of Jesus Christ with it. And therefore Saint Peter speaking of the
Scriptures in general, 2 Pet. 1.21. says, that those holy men of God, that
were the Penmen thereof, spoke as they were moved or inspired by the Holy
Ghost; thereby intimating unto us, that the Scriptures are the very
inspirations of God, the very breath (as one may say) of the the Holy Ghost: So
that look whatsoever it is that the Scriptures make known to us, God from
heaven has spoken it, even as truly, and as really, as though he had spoken it
immediately; What the word says, God himself says.

Secondly, Whatsoever any faithful Minister shall speak out of the Word, that
is also the voice of Christ. The Texts are many that are to this purpose: Give
me leave to touch but one or two of them, 2 Cor. 1^.3. Ye seek a proof, says
the Apostle, of Christ speaking in me, which to you-wards is not weak, but is
mighty in you: Implying, that whatsoever is spoken out of the word of God,
what truth soever is delivered to us by the mouth of his Ministers, agreeable
to the word, Christ himself speaks in them. Therefore our Savior is plain,
Luke 10.16. He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you,
despises me; and he that despises me, despises him that sent me. That which
the Ministers of God speak, the God of Heaven himself speaks: and they that
despise their ministry, the God of Heaven will require it, even as if he
himself should speak from Heaven, and men should reject his words. The Apostle
Peter says, that the Lord Jesus, by the power of his Spirit, went and preached
in the time of Noah to the Spirits that are now in Hell, 1 Pet. 3.29. to those
people that were disobedient before the flood, to whom Noah preached partly by
his practice, and partly by his directions, Christ himself spoke, even by that
Spirit whereby he quickneth all things. So then the point is evident.

But what reason is there, that a man should stoop to the voice and command of
Christ?

In a word, first, He that alone has command over us, and right to require
service at our hands, him only we ought to obey: Now Christ alone is our Lord,
and we are his servants. Eli joyneth these together in his direction to Samuel,
1 Samuel 3 9. Thou shall say, says he, Speak Lord, for thy Servant hears. If
Christ alone therefore be our Lord, whom else should we hear? unto whom else
should we attend, and yield obedience?

Secondly, The direction of Christ is the surest and safest: look what counsel
the Lord Jesus gives, we may build upon it. As for others, some are ignorant,
and know not how to teach; some negligent and idle, and will not teach; some
corrupt in their judgment, and may infect us: But Christ, being Knowledge it
self, and Truth it self, neither can, nor will deceive us: Therefore
whatsoever the Lord Christ shall make known, we may rest upon it; and
whatsoever course we take up upon his directions, we may undoubtedly persuade
our selvts, that it shall go well with us in the issue. Our Savior joyneth
the same reason to his exhortation, Mat. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek and
lowly in heart: What then? And ye shall find rest unto your souls: as if he
should say, The counsels and directions that men give, they do not, they will
not, they cannot give a man any rest: but the counsel that I give, and those
directions that I reveal unto you out of my word, what ever soul imbraceth
them, what ever heart entertaineth them, shall find rest and comfort to it
self for ever. Let us persuade our selves, that whatsoever the Lord speaks
will not sail us; there is none that trusts upon him, that even shall be
ashamed: his counsel is seasonable, and will be profitable to us, if it be
blessed of God.

Thirdly, Christ only is able to teach us: Man may teach the care, but the
Lord only can frame the soul, and bring the heart to obedience. That place,
Luke 24.32.45. is worth the remembering: Verse 32. it is said, that the Lord
opened to the Disciples the Scriptures; and Verse 45. that he opened their
understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures. Men can only reveal
truths to us; but never a man in the world is able to persuade our hearts, and
put understanding into our minds: but the Lord not only opens the sense and
meaning of the Scriptures, but he gives us minds to know, and hearts to
embrace what we ought to do. Now let us gather these up together: The Lord
only has right to command us, therefore we ought to obey him; His rules and
directions are such as are most sure and safe, therefore most worthy to be
observed.

Lastly, He only can teach the inward man; men may teach the care, but have no
power to bow the soul, to buckle the heart, to give wisdom and understanding
to the simple, only the Lord that dwells in heaven is he that must do it.
Let us now see what Use we may make of this Doctrine.

First, it is as it were a bill of Indictment, falling marvellously heavy upon
the practice of many that live in the bosom of the Church: those I mean, that
will hear any thing, attend to any thing, but to the voice of Christ. Whom
they should hear, they neglect; and those they ought to neglect, they will
hear, whether the Lord will or no: The Drunkard hearkeneth to his companions;
they no sooner say, as those, Prove. 1.14. Cast in thy lot among us, let us all
have one purse; or (as the speech of our good fellows is) Comes let us go and
club it; but presently he gives his consent. The Adulterer stoopeth to the
glance of the Adulteress, and that prevails with him, he goes after her
straightways as an Ox goes to the slaughter, or as a Fool to the correction
of the stocks, Prove. 7.22. The truth is, if you mark the ordinary and common
course of the wicked and ungodly men of the world, you may easily see how every
thing is embraced, only the voice of Christ is refused. Nay, though Satan
whisper not, though occasions move not, yet mark how the soul of such men
yields to the inclinations of every sinful lust. If a lustful thought arise
in the heart, see how the soul sucks the sweetness of it by meditation, how
it is delighted in the contemplation of filthynesse: If a covetous thought, oh
how the man pursues it, he will never be at quiet till he have hatched some
sinful resolution within, and brought forth some ungodly practice abroad. It
is admirable to see in that one place. Acts 19. how the voice of gain sounded
so loud in the ears of those covetous Silversmiths, that the voice of Paul
could not be heard. Do but observe how Demetrius reasons the case with his
follow-craftesmen, Verse 25. Sirs (says he) you know that by this craft we
have our wealth, we get our living; Moreover, you see and hear, that not alone
at Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul has persuaded and turned
away much people, from entertaining and following this superstitious course,
saying, that they be no gods which are made with hands: So that this our craft
is in danger to be set at naught. When they heard these sayings, the Text
says, all men with one voice cried out about the space of two hours, Great is
Diana of the Ephesians. Truly so it is now in the world; there is such a noise
in men's minds and judgments, what the World will have, and what Profit will
have, and what Pleasure will have, that the Lord Christ may call till he be
hoarse, and yet no man will mind him, but all stop their cares, and refuse to
hear the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely, Psalm, 58.4, 5. It is
evident then, that these men are not the Scholars o Christ, and certainly
therefore the judgment of Christ shall be executed upon them hereafter. In the
mean time let me wish such to remember that place, 2 These. 2.11, 12. When men
will not receive the truth in the love of it, but have pleasure in ungodliness;
when they shut out the truth, and will not be persuaded to forsake their
ungodly courses, but suffer their sins, and sinful occasions to prevail with
them above the word of God, what befalls them? See what the Text says, and
the Lord fasten it upon your hearts: Read it over and over again, That they all
might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. Mark, I beseech you, this is the word of God; Who ever he is
that has pleasure in unrighteousness, and will not hear and receive the truth
in the love thereof, so as to yield obedience thereunto, and to frame his
course according to it, God has appointed that man to everlasting damnation.
So that when thy conscience calls thee to the discharge of such and such
duties, to forsake such and such courses, and the word of God shines full in
thy face, and is as clear to thee as the Sun at noonday; when the Lord has
revealed to thee his will, and yet thy soul can say within thee,
notwithstanding all this, Thou have loved those sins which God out of his word
has forbidden thee, thou have had pleasure in those courses which God in his
word has condemned, those proud and adulterous courses, those ungodly
practices; thou have harbored them in thy heart, and kept them in thy bosom,
and taken pleasure in the practice of them: Does thy own soul say this? Well
then my brethren, make the conclusion your selves: See I beseech you, does not
the Word of God say plainly, that the Lord has sealed such up to everlasting
damnation, because they had pleasure in unrighteousness?

A Second sort that are here justly to be reproved, are those that captivate
their own opinions and conceits to the judgment of men. There are a poor kind
of deluded creatures in the world, that have made themselves so far servants
unto men, that they have pinned their conceits and judgments to the opinions
and commands of those upon whom they depend, and from whom they expect either
profit or preferment; That look what their great masters say, whatsoever they
speak, that they account as Gospel; and whatsoever these have devised, they
must desend and maintain it, and their judgments must entertain nothing to the
contrary. These are marvellously estranged from the Lord, and are contrary to
this truth that has been taught from the words of this Text. For does not the
Text say, Hearken unto me? Therefore it plainly reproves those that can be
content to have the word of men to carry weight with them, and the commands of
men to cast the balance; that whatsoever they will have practiced must be
yielded unto, let the word of Christ say what it will; and they must be content
to give up themselves to perform it, let it be agreeable to the Scriptures or
not. This argues clearly that these are the servants of men, and that they
have men's persons in admiration for filthy lucres sake, because they think
that their profit, or pleasure, or preferment is gone, if their good will and
pleasure be not observed upon whom they depend. This is an ordinary and gross
fault: The wife she complains, and says, Indeed it is true, the course is
good that you wish me to, and I am persuaded that God requires it, but my
husband is against it, and I shall lose the love and respect, that I have
always had from him, if now I enter upon such a course. The husband he
complains, and says, A holy conversation is good, and such duties as you
call upon me to exercise in my family, cannot but be pleasing unto God, and
such as he requires; but if I should take up such a practice, my wife would be
continually besieging me with daily vexations, I should neglect my calling, and
incur the censure of my neighbors and friends, and be counted too too
precise. These and many others that I could instance in, are not hearkners to
Christ.

In the last place there come in also another sort to be reproved, and these
are such as can be content to give the Lord the hearing, but will doc nothing
when it should come to performance. Howsoever happily they will approve and
applaud that which the Minister delivers to them from God, yet in the
conclusion, if their ease, and honors, and liberties lie at hazard, they fail
in matter of practice; they will doc nothing, they dare doc nothing further
then they are advised unto by those Counselors that keep a kind of audit in
their hearts; and what sentence they deliver shall be yielded unto and no more.

To instance a little: The world knows that it is the will of God that every
man should deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow Christ, that a man
should hate father and mother, and wife, and children, and friends, and all,
for his sake, and the Gospels, that a man should renounce all those courses of
sin that carry with them the most appearance of profit and pleasure, that he
should pluck out his right eye, and cut off his right hand: These are truths
that are clearly discovered in the Word of God, and every soul that is rightly
informed yields unto them; and men in the world are acquainted with them,
hearing them pressed from day to day in the preaching of the Word: And so also
that it is the will of God that men should be pure as God is pure, and be holy
as he is holy in all manner of conversation; that they should abstain from all
appearance of evil: this the Lord requires, and this men commend and approve
of. But now come to matter of practice: If a duty be required that will cross
their ease, or their honors, or in the least measure diminish their outward
comforts: Mark what follows, then they are at ademurr; they will stay there,
and think twice of it before they will do any thing; they must first take
counsel, and be well advised of it. And what counsel doc they take? Not from
the Lord and his word, but from their pleasures and profits, and carnal
delights and contentments. The ambitious man asks his honor, Shall I be
sincere and zealous in the cause of God? The covetous man asks his wealth,
Shall I be exact in a Christian course? Shall I lose this gain or that
advantage, for the keeping of a good conscience? The voluptuous man asks his
pleasure, Shall I abstain from the appearance of evil? Shall I hate the garment
spotted with the flesh? Shall I enter upon the way that is called holy, and
walk therein with that preciseness and strictness that the word of God
requires? Then they all cry unto a man, as sometime Peter said unto Christ,
when he had told his Disciples, That he must suffer many things of the Elders
and Scribes and be killed, Be it far from thee, Lord, this shall not be unto
thee, Matthew. 16.22. and they hang about him, as once Paul's friends hung about
him, when they heard that he must be bound at Jerusalem, Acts 20.37, 38. and
21.12. No, says honor, if once you take that course, then I must be abased:
No, says profit, if once you walk that way, I must be neglected: No, says
pleasure, if you mean to walk so strictly and exactly before God and men, then
abandon all pleasure, you and I must bid farewell for ever. Now the poor soul
returns this answer to God, and to his Word and Minister; I have taken
counsel concerning that which you require of me, and am advised to the
contrary; my pleasure, and my profit, and my preferment tell me, that it will
be mavelous tedious, irksome, and grievous to take such courses. I find this
way every where spoken against, and therefore conceive it better to lie
quietly, and sleep in a whole skin, then to bring an old house upon my head.

Thus you see what the pleas of carnal men are. To all which I say but one
thing: Let them ask their own hearts but this one question: Is this to hear the
voice of Christ, or not? If it be not (as most certain it is not) then the case
is clear: He that does not hear the voice of Christ, is none of Christ's. It is
our Saviors own conclusion, John 8.47. He that is of God, hears Gods words;
ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God. That is, Whosoever they
be that will hear any counsel but the counsel of God, that will be content
to be ruled by any thing rather then by his word, God will not own them
hereafter, they are none of his, that is, they have no work of grace in them;
for so the Apostle expounds it, 2 Cor. 5.18. All things are of God, that is,
God is the worker and framer of saving grace in the soul of his servants. He
therefore that will not stoop and be obedient to the voice of Christ, has no
saving grace as yet wrought in his heart, and consequently is not of God. This
me thinks should awaken the souls of all such poor carnal creatures, as love
their pleasures, and profits, and preferments more then God: I beseech you
think of it, and know it for a certain, that while you hear these counselors,
you hear not God; and so long as you hear not God, he has no part in you,
neither will he hereafter, if you so continue, show mercy unto you.

I have one thing more to say before I conclude, and that is a word of reproof,
even for the Saints and people of God, who though they walk with God in truth
and sincerity, yet are often worthy to be blamed, in that they wrong the Lord,
and their own comforts, by their not harkening and stooping to the command of
Christ, by their not inquiring of him in the first place, and by their not
resting upon him when they have his will revealed to them. These are two main
weaknesses and infirmities in the godly themselves, and they ought to take
special notice of them. Many a Saint of God there is, that is daily vexing
himself by poring on his own weaknesses, by hearing whatsoever carnal reasons,
flesh and blood, and sense, can possibly raise against him, together with all
the false suggestions and persuasions of Satan; and at last when he has
wearied and tired himself, and knows not what to do, then he goes home to
God, and is contented to hear what he will say, whether he will speak comfort
to his soul or no; and then away with carnal reason, and delusions of Satan.
My brethren, ye should in the first place go to God, and advise with him, and
hear what his good pleasure is toward you, and never inquire of your own
carnal reason.

Again, there is often another great fault in the people of God, that as they go
not to Christ in the first place for advice and counsel, so in the second
place when they have it they rest not upon it. Many a one there is, who after
he has been convinced evidently and clearly, by the power of the word, rightly
and strongly applied, that his estate is good before God, and that his
conscience is sincere, his heart upright, and that the spirit of God has begun
an everlasting work of grace in him, yet notwithstanding oftentimes
relinquisheth that ground that God has given him to stand upon, and lets go
that hold that has been reached out from heaven for him to sustain himself by,
and returning home again to a view of his own weaknesses and infirmities, he
forsakes his own mercies and grows forgetful of his former comforts, the
consolations of the Almighty seem small unto him, he will not quiet himself
in that truth which God has made known, nor rest upon his word, as he
requires.

Yea, but the soul replieth, alas, should a man content himself with a blind
persuasion that his estate is good, and not try his title to heaven, or search
whether his interest in Christ be such as will not deceive him at the last?

I say, Yes, a man should look into himself, and examine himself whether he be
in the faith or no; but always let the Lord be Judge, let his word only pass
sentence upon thee: Never Judge thy self barely by what either Satan seems to
suggest, or thy own sinful weakness would persuade thee unto: but when the
Word of God is revealed, and his truth manifested unto thee; when the Minister
out of the Seripture has settled thy conscience, and declared thy case good, by
such assured Evidences, as thou may safely build upon, then hold there, and
believe nothing to the contrary; search your selves, but still do it by the
word of God. If this course were taken and well observed, where there are
thousands of complaints among Christians, there would be scarce one. For, my
brethren, the ground of all our feebleness, and distrust, and distemper lies
especially in this, that we neglect our grounds, and do not fix upon those
truths which God has revealed and made known unto us, either publicly or
privately. Hold this therefore for ever, as the best direction I can give thee:
If my soul shall be condemned, the word of God shall condemn it; If I must
judge my self to have no grace, the Word of God shall say it; If I must
conclude salvation as yet belongs not unto me, it shall be, because the Word
says so, and not because Satan, or my own imagination says so. This carries
thousands of poor souls into manifold distempers, because they settle not
themselves upon the truth of God, which always stands as mount Zion
unmovable, and would make them rest in abundance of peace, in the midst of all
those disquiets that are raised by Satan, and our own distrustful hearts.

Lastly, in a word, does the Lord himself call for and require this at our
hands, the Lord, I say, who only has right and authority to command us; Does
he enjoin us when he speaks to hear and obey? Oh now therefore, though an
unworthy Minister cannot persuade you to yield up your selves to the practice
of this duty, yet let the Lord himself prevail with you; and woe to that soul
that will not be persuaded by the Lord himself. Take notice of that place
before alleged, Acts 3.23. Every soul that will not hear that Prophet, shall
be destroyed from among the people. Let every one therefore now in the fear of
God observe that which Christ himself injoyneth, and so often calls for in
the second and and third Chapters of the Revelation, He that has an ear to
hear, let him hear. The Lord says the same now to every soul in this place,
Let every soul that has an ear to hear, hear what the Lord, says unto him,
not only now, but hereafter, whenever God shall be pleased to reveal any of
his counsel to him for his direction. Labor to bring your hearts to that
temper we read to have been in Cornelius, and those that he had gathered
together to be partakers of Saint Peter's Ministry, Acts 10.33. When the
Apostle was come, mark what Cornelus says to him, We are all here present
before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God. My brethren, the
same frame of spirit ought we to have, whatsoever it is that the Lord shall
speak unto us, we must hear him in all things (as I told you before) not only
in some easy kind of duty, such as every man is willing to embrace, but in
every thing, be it never so cross to carnal reason and corrupt nature; when
the Lord teaches, we must bring docile hearts, hearts enlarged to hear and
entertain his doctrine, hearts willing to be molded into that good word of God
that he shall reveal to us; neither must we think this duty tedious, we
should never be weary of it. Observe what Christ says, Luke 10.24. Many
Prophets and Kings have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not
seen them; and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them.
What things? Even those that are preached unto you, and made known from day to
day, the great things of the Gospel which are now published in open view; great
men, of great place and eminency have desired to see and hear them. The holy
Patriarchs and Prophets, whose spirits are now in heaven, looked long for
Christ's day: Abraham saw it afar off, his eyes dazeled in beholding of it. If
they rejoiced and delighted in these things, should not we much more? Nay, the
blessed Angels come down and delight to pore into these sacred mysteries that
are now revealed to the people of God; Which things (says the Apostle) the
Angels desire to pry into, 1 Pet. 1.12. Those blessed spirits that are the
subjects of joy and happiness, are so ravished with those glorious mysteries,
that they are contented to come to our Congregations, not a step or two, (as we
do, who as soon almost as we are out of our doors are in the Church) but a
great journey, even from heaven, and with a great deal of liking and
complacencie they behold the services of Gods people, and are glad to see a
poor soul converted, and report it again in heaven, rejoicing there together,
that a sinner is turned unto God. My brethren, think of it; Shall we now that
have most reason to attend these things (they being that upon which our
everlasting salvation depends) be utterly careless of them? Alas, the Angels
have the least part in the redemption of a sinner: We are the redeemed, and the
saved, and we are they that must be glorified; and shall we have no ears to
hear, no hearts to attend to, no desires to embrace the Word of Salvation? Oh
what a shame is it, that we, that have so much interest in mercy, should have
so great a neglect of mercy! What then remains but this, that we all provoke
one another to the performance of this duty here required of us? that we stop
our ears to all carnal counsel, to all delusions of Satan, that we hearken to
the Lord only as our Master, resolving to attend to no advice, to follow no
directions, to obey no commands, but what he shall give us?

Oh, but will some say, what is this which you teach us? May not a man hear his
carnal friends, may we not follow the advice that they give us? If we slight
their counsel we may be undome, their anger may be such against us, that we
shall not be able to bear it. To this Objection I will reply in a word. Will
carnal friends be troubled and offended because their words are neglected, and
will not the Lord Jesus Christ (think you) be horribly displeased, when his
commands are despised? Assure your selves, my brethren, either you must hear
the Lord Christ now as a Savior, or you shall hear him hereafter as a Judge;
either hear him now, so as to obey and do what he requires; or if you refuse
to hear his counsel, expect to hear an horrible sentence thundered against you,
when he shall sit as Judge at the last day, when all your carnal counselors
shall not be able to acquit you. You that are wives, and pretend that you must
please your husbands, by submitting to their commands and desires; you that are
husbands, and allege that you must give satisfaction to your wives; you that
are Apprentices, and plead, that if you observe not your masters wills, but
walk according to the rule of Gods word, you shall be thwarted by your masters,
and driven to some great inconvenience; You that stand upon the humoring of
your friends and acquaintance, consider it well; Will the persuasions, and
counsels, and desires, and commands of a Father, or friend, or husband, or
master, stand you in stead at the day of judgment? Will this be a
satisfactorie answer at that day, my husband entreated me, my friends
counseled me, my master commanded me? No, my brethren, as you are brethren in
iniquity, and causes of sin one to another, so you shall perish both together.
Therefore knowing the terror of the Lord, let that scare you more then the
anger and displeasure of all the friends in the world.

But the truth is (you will answer again) they are they that we receive all
from, and should we go contrary to them, and neglect their advice, we must
resolve to be poor, and base, and mean, all our days. What a silly imagination
is this! Put case these carnal friends bear some kinds of respect unto thee,
and promise thee fair, and seem able to do thee good: Can they do thee good,
unless the Lord Christ bless what they do? Is not he able to draw their
hearts from thee, or to move them toward thee? Cannot he bless the means, and
cannot he curse them also? Think of this my brethren, Whether is better for a
man, to be enriched, or glorified? To hear an earthly parent, that happily may
give him an earthly patrimony, or an heavenly father that assuredly will
receive him to mercy in the end of this life? Think of these things, and
withal know, that the means, and helps, and supports that we desire, are not
properly in the power of friends and acquaintance, but it is God that boweth
the hearts and inlargeth the spirits of men (whether friends or no) to do us
good. I have known many a carnal man, that having wicked friends, has been
enforced to bestow most upon those whose life and practice he most opposed and
hated. At leastwise believe for a truth what the Lord says by the Prophet, Isa
55.3. Incline your ear, and come unto me, hear, and your soul shall live. That
is enough me thinks to put to silence all such Objections as these: What ever
carnal friends shall persuade you to, nothing shall do you so much good, as
the hearing and obeying the voice of Christ.

But it may be some will reply and say, Alas, I have present need of such and
such, therefore I must either hear them counselling, or else they will not hear
me entreating. Oh my brethren, think of this; Has a man, or shall a man have
need of a friend, and shall he not also have need of the Lord Jesus Christ?
Must a friend be obeyed, because we have need of him, and shall not the Lord
Jesus Christ be much more observed, because we have much more need of him? Have
thou need of a father or master to bestow some favor upon thee, and have thou
not need also of a Savior that may deliver thee from sin here, and from
everlasting damnation hereafter. Know it, know it, that howsoever now you may
neglect the counsel and advice of the Lord Jesus Christ, and think that you
have no need of him, because happily for the present your friends smile upon
you, yet the time will come, when you shall find you have more need of Christ
then of all the world. When a man lies upon the bed of death, and his eyes
begin to grow dim, and his breath short, and his pulse weak, and he ready to
go the way of all flesh: Oh what good can friends do him then? all of them
together can neither restore health, nor preserve life in that hour. He that
now would be our Savior, hereafter will be our Judge, and will pass sentence
upon us one way or other, either of salvation or damnation; Shall we not stand
in need then of his mercy and saving health when that day comes? The soul will
then wish for a dram of mercy, more then for a whole world. Ask a man my
brethren, when he is going the way of all flesh, what then he most desires,
and what he would have at that time especially? Oh will he say, mercy, mercy!
Oh that the Lord would accept my person, and pardon my sins, and graciously
look upon me in the face of Christ! This is all that the poor soul then
craveth. But if you neglect now to hear the voice of Christ, how can you expect
that ever he will hear you in that day? It is just, it is just, my brethren,
that you should then have the same sentence that was past upon the foolish
Virgins, Matthew. 25.12. They came and knocked hard, and spoke loud, Lord, Lord,
open unto us; Away says Christ, I know you not, I know you not: You would not
hear me in the time of your pilgrimage upon the earth, when I sent all my
servants the Prophets, rising early, and sending them; therefore now I will not
hear you. But that is not all, I beseech you to hear it and tremble: The Lord
at that day will not only neglect a man that has neglected him, but he will
also rejoice at his destruction, and laugh when his fear comes: Mark what the
Text says, and remember it for ever, Prove. 1.24. Because I have called, and ye
refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded, but ye have set at
naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof; I also will laugh at your
calamity, I will mock when your fear comes. What a fearful thing is this,
that the God of heaven, the God of mercy should solace himself in the ruin of
all such rebellious wretches, as would not hear and embrace his blessed truth,
when he delivered, and manifested it to them! When Christ shall say, This is
that drunkard, that will not part with his cup for all my persuasions and
entreaties: This is that adulterer, that would not part with his lust,
notwithstanding all my calling upon him, and reproving of him: Here is a man
that loved his ease, his pleasure, his comforts, his worldly contentments more
then me: Here stands he that hearkened to the advice of his carnal friends, and
wicked companions, and set at naught all my counsels and admonitions! Oh my
brethren, then shall the just judgment of God sink these down to the
everlasting pit, where there is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth for
ever. I say no more, but I beseech you hear me now, that God may hear you at
that day. You will have need of a Savior, and of mercy then: The soul longs
for nothing in the day of death but pity and pardon. O make Christ your friend
now, hear him now, obey him now, receive him now, that it may go well with you
for ever.

If now the command of God cannot carry you, nor these Arguments which I have
used, draw you to yield obedience to this truth, yet remember that passage
Deuteronomy. 5.27, 29. with which I will conclude, and me thinks if you have any good
nature in you, it should work much upon you. When the people of Israel had said
unto Moses, after they had heard God speak unto them out of the midst of the
thunder, and lightning, Go thou near, and hear all that the Lord our God shall
say, and speak thou unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee,
and we will hear it, and do it: The Lord (says the Text) heard the voice of
their words, the Lord said, I have heard the voice of the words of this people
which they have spoken unto thee, they have well said all that they have
spoken: Oh that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and
keep all my Commandments always, that it might be well with them for ever.
Mark, my brethren, it is the Lords own request, that there may be an heart in
you to hear and obey, that so ye may live for ever. Oh therefore if a man
cannot prevail with you, yet let the Lord Jesus Christ beg so much of you. You
may think it strange that the Lord should desire this at your hands; but it is
true, he desires it heartily, and he will be exceedingly pleased if you
satisfy his desire. Well now, seeing it is the great request that the Lord by
me has made unto you; ask your own souls, commune with your own hearts, and
tell me what answer I shall return to the Lord; Shall I say you will not hear?
My brethren, it is a grievous and tedious thing for a poor Minister to give up
such an answer unto God; I would not willingly have this answer from you;
therefore I beseech you, answer again: Tell me, what shall I say? Speak
comfortably as they did, Whatsoever the Lord our God shall say, that will we
hear and do. If so, then let me conclude with the answer of God, O that there
were such a heart in you, and that you would fear the Lord, and keep his
Commandments, that it might be well with you for ever.

FINIS.
THE ACTIVITIE OF FAITH: OR, ABRAHAM'S IMITATORS.

By that Reverend Divine, THOMAS HOOKER, Late Preacher in New England.

JAM. 2.17. Even so faith, if it has not works, is dead, being alone.

LONDON, Printed by G. D. for Francis Eglesfield, and are to be sold at the
Sign of the Marigold in Paul's Churchyard, 1651.

The Activity of Faith, OR, Abraham's Imitators.
SERMON V.
ROMANS 4.12. And the Father of Circumcision to them who are not of circumcision
only, but also walk in the steps of that Faith of our father Abraham, which he
had, being yet uncircumcised.


THe blessed Apostle Saint Paul, from the 20. verse of the former Chapter, to
the end, disputes that great question of justification by the free grace of
God; and after many Arguments alleged to prove that it is by grace, and not by
works, he concludes in the 28. verse, Therefore we conclude, that a man is
justified by Faith with the works of the Law.

Having dispatched this, and settled his assertion by strength of argument in
this fourth Chapter, wherein my Text is, he labors to make the truth yet
more clearer and evident by way of example, and to the end he sets it forth
in the lively color of that faith of Abraham, giving us an instance of this
truth, in the example of him, who was the father of the faithful, a father,
not by natural generation, but by imitation; the Lord having appointed him to
be the copy to all the Believers of succeeding ages; that as he believed, and
by faith was saved, so they that do expect to receive salvation, must walk in
that way, if they purpose to partake of that end.

Now touching this example of Abraham, that I may not be long before I come to
that, which is the principal point I intend to deliver at this time; the
Apostle does two things; first, he lays down the pattern it self clearly,
both in Gods vouchsafing justification to Abraham, and also in Gods sealing
this by the seal of circumcision, and this he does in the 11. verse.

And as he has propounded it thus, both in Gods gift, and in Gods sealing
thereof; so in the words of the Text he makes an application of both, applying
it to all Abraham's children that shall live to the end of the world, whether
Jews or Gentiles; and in effect it is, as if he had said thus; Abraham, when
he was uncircumcised did believe, and so was justified, therefore they that are
uncircumcised may believe, and be also justified; Abraham when he did believe
was circumcised, and that hindered not, so those that are circumcised may
believe and be justified, that is, the Jews and the Gentiles have both liberty
to come into the Covenant of grace, and so also to be happy by that Covenant,
as Abraham was.

In the words therefore, you have an application of the former pattern, to the
particular use of every faithful servant of God, that look what good Abraham
had, and what he received by faith, they that believe as he did, may expect the
self same mercy that he had.

Now the faithful of God, and sons of Abraham are here described two ways:
I say, every faithful man that is the son of Abraham, that imitateth the
faith of Abraham, is discovered two ways.

First, Negatively, What will not suffice to make a man the son of Abraham.

Secondly, Affirmatively, What God specially looks for at the hands of those
that are to be the children of Abraham.

First, Negatively thus, Abraham is the father of circumcision, not only to
them who are of the circumcision; that is, not only theirs who have the
privileges of the Jews, the Word, and the Oracles of God, Circumcision, and
the Passover. It Is true; Abraham is their father, but not only theirs that
have no more but those privileges, but also theirs, that walk in the footsteps
of the faith of Abraham. So that by Circumcision you must here understand all
these prerogatives and privileges which the Jews had above any other Nation;
and consequently, that none of all those privileges then could, that none of
ours, as, to be in the Church, to be baptized, etc. now can make a man to be
the son of Abraham. Abraham is the father of the circumcision, not to them
who are of the circumcision only; but he is the father of the circumcision, if
they have faith. They that have bare circumcision only, may indeed applaud
themselves therein, but they shall never receive thereby, those things God has
promised. This is the Negative.

Secondly, The Affirmative part shows, who they be indeed that shall truly be
partakers of the comforts and graces of Abraham, namely, those that walk in the
footsteps of that faith of Abraham. If a man believe as he did, work as he did,
walk as he did, so only he may come to have title unto, and interest in the
promises God has vouchsafed in his Word. Thus much for the opening of the
words.

Come we now in the first place to speak of the negative part, in which the
Spirit of God is pleased to exclude all outward privileges and prerogatives,
and to say thus, Abraham is the father of circumcision, to them who are not of
the circumcision only; that is, if they enjoy only outward privileges, they
are not the children of Abraham. The point we learn hence is thus much;

That all outward privileges, as the hearing of the Word, the partaking of the
Sacraments, and the like, are not able to make a man a sound Saint of God.

The point is clear in the Text, That if a man had circumcision, that is, if he
had all those preferments that God vouchsafes to a people in the face and
bosom of his Church, this would not do him any good at all, he has no title
to the promises because of these, if he rest in them: Abraham is not the father
of those that are circumcised only: So that I say again, all outward
privileges are not able to make a man a true Saint of God. Our Savior Christ,
speaking of Capernaum, says, And thou Capernaum, which art exalted unto
heaven, shall be brought down to hell; for if the mighty works which have been
done in thee, had been done in Sodom, etc. Mat. 11.23. Capernaum was lifted up
to Heaven; how? In all those spiritual helps and excellent means that God
vouchsafed them above many others; they were highly advanced in the enjoyment
of heavenly privileges, they heard the Word of God, and they saw the Miracles
of Christ; and yet, Thou Capernaum, shall be deep in punishment; thou were
lifted up to Heaven, in regard of excellent privileges; but thou shall be cast
down to Hell, in regard of thy impenitency and stubbornness under them. The
Apostle Paul disputes the point, and makes the case clear, Romans 2.28, 29.
where he plucks away all these hopes and vain props, which men raise to
themselves from the having of outward privileges: He is not a Jew, says he,
that is one outwardly, that is, he is not therefore a true child of God, and a
faithful man, he has not therefore saving faith, because he is circumcised,
because he enjoys the liberties and privileges of the people of God, and
lives in the bosom of the Church; but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and
Circumciston is that of the heart, in the Spirit and not in the Letter, whose
praise is not of men but of God. You know, that it was an ancient Proverb in
Israel, Is Saul also amongst the Prophets? 1 Samuel 10.12. and 19.24. Yes, Saul
was amongst the Prophets, and he that was once amongst the Prophets, is now
amongst the Devils in Hell. Judas was highly promoted; he lived as an Apostle
amongst the Disciples, heard out Savior continually, sat at table with him,
and yet for all this, is now damned in hell for ever: These were high
privileges, and if these would have done the deed, Judas had never perished.
Ishamel was circumcised, and yet he was excommunicated out of Abraham's family,
the then Church of God, and was a castaway. Instances are many in the
Scriptures to this purpose, but I list not to dwell longer upon the proof of
the point; you see it is evident enough, that bare privileges, be they never
so high and excellent, are not able to make one indeed a faithful man before
the Lord, nor the son of Abraham.

I should have showed the Reasons. Alas! outward matters never work upon the
heart. That which makes a man a Saint must work upon the soul. Now the Word and
the Sacraments barely considered cannot work upon the spirit, unless the Lord
work a new frame inwardly by the infusion of Grace: Gal. 5.6. Circumcision and
uncircumcision profits nothing, but faith that works by love. These outward
things are too shallow to reach the inward man, too weak to work so powerfully
upon the soul of a Christian man, as to bring the heart to God. But I leave
the strengthening of the point by Reasons, and because I would not be prevented,
I come to the Uses.

The first Use I will hence raise is an Use of reproof. This Doctrine
confounds the carnal confidence of those Professors, that living in the
bosom of the Church, place all their hopes and assurance of being saved upon
this bottom: because they have been baptized, and come to Church, and hear the
Word, and receive the Sacrament, therefore of necessity (they presume) they
must be accepted of God. This was the old plea of the Jews in Jeremies time:
When the Prophet came to them to reprove them for their sins, and press them
to repentance, they began to quarrel with him, and to take up Bucklers against
him, and cried out, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these.
These are the Fig Leaves wherewith poor and ignorant. Christians think to hide
themselves at this day. Tell them of their saults, bid them walk humbly and
holily before God, reprove them for their strange practices against God and his
truth, in profaning his day, blaspheming his name, contemning his Word,
despising his Ministers, etc. and they presently cry out against us: What will
you make Pagans of us? What do you think we are Heathens? Have we not received
Christian Baptism? etc. This is a bottom that bears up many: But oh poor
silly creatures, this will not do it; be not deceived, you will shrink under
this shelter, you will fall notwithstanding these props, when you come to
trial; you may have all this, and yet perish, this will not make you Saints in
the sight of God. You that are Tradesmen, is it a good argument, that because
have good ware in your shops, therefore you have no refuse, no drug commodity?
or you that are husbandmen, because some good corn grows upon your ground, is
it therefore all good corn? Who knows not that there is Cockle amongst corn,
and bad wares even in your best shops. So it is true here, as there are many
hearers in hell, and many receivers in hell, so there are too many in the
bosom of the Church, enjoying the outward privileges of Gods people, that
shall never receive good by all that they partake of.

Therefore I beseech you be not deceived, trust not to these lying words, and
vain hopes, The Sacrament of the Lord, and the Church, and the Church; I say,
trust not to these lying vanities. A man may, as Judas, not only have the
Sacrament in his hand, but Christ in his mouth, and go to Hell
notwithstanding. Alas, at the day of judgment, if thou have nothing to say but
this, Lord, I was a hearer of thy Word, a receiver at thy Table, a frequenter
of thy house, thou can expect no other answer, but Depart from me, I know
thee not. He is not the Son of Abraham that has Circumcision only, but that
walks in the steps of the faith of Abraham.

In the second place, here is a word of Exhortation, and that is this; We ought
hereby to be instructed, and provoked to stir up our souls, and not to content
our selves with, or settle our selves in these outward shaddows, but to labor
to go further, and beyond all that these outward privileges barely, as outward
privileges, can make us; not only to enjoy these, but to strive to be
bettered by them; not only to have the Word, and the Sacraments, but to
improve them; to get more then the outward shell, to labor for the kernel,
for the comfort of them. Therefoee I would advise a Christian man that lives
in the bosom of the Church, where the Lord is pleased to continue helps and
means to him, as to esteem them great privileges (for so they are) so not to
content himself with the outward enjoyment of them, but to call upon himself,
and to look inward, to see what the heart says. Outward things will not do
the deed; look we therefore for somewhat more, that will stand us in stead when
the Lord comes with his fan in his hand, thoroughly to purge his floor, and to
make a division between the wheat and the chafe. Take notice of it therefore,
and understand for your spiritual good: When thou come to the house of God,
and bring thine hands to receive the Sacrament, and thine ears to listen to
the word; think with thy self, I have heard the Word, I have received the
Sacrament, but O heart what say thou? Have I embraced these promises? Have I
closed with those precepts that have been delivered? Have I eaten Christ in the
Sacrament? Has my faith pitched on him exhibited there, under the Elements of
Bread and Wine? How often have I already lived under the call of God, and yet
have rejected it? my soul is not yet humbled; I only come and hear, and return
without any benefit; therefore now I will go further, and dig deeper, that my
heart may be brought to the obedience of the truth. Mark what our Savior
Christ faith, Joh. 6 49 provoking the Jews to believe in him, and so to receive
mercy by him, he speaks on this manner, forcing them to go further then
outward things; Your fathers (says he) eat Manna in the Wilderness, and are
dead. Who are those Fathers? Those stubborn and rebellious Jews that fell in
the Wilderness: These entered not because of unbelief, says the Apostle to the
Hebrews: Now Christ says, Your Fathers eat Manna, and are dead; he means are
damned; for he says afterward, Verse. 51. If any man eat of this bread, he
shall live for ever; thereby showing a difference between the faithful, and
unbeleevers, though both die a natural death: I say, making a difference
between the rebellious Jews, that did not believe, and those that did believe:
Your Fathers eat Manna in the wilderness, a Type and a Sacrament indeed to
them, as St. Paul expresses it; but that would not do the deed, though the
Manna came from heaven, yet it could not bring them up to heaven, it could not
free them from eternal death; But here is the privilege of believing, and of
right receiving; He that does not only receive bread, but Christ, he that
eats this food, this bread, he shall never die any more, he cannot perish:
Labor therefore for this evermore: As when the woman of Samaria heard our
Savior speak of living water that would continue for ever, She cried out
presently, Oh Sir, give me of this water, that I thirst no more, Joh. 4.15. So
labor for this food above all: Labor to settle your souls, and to rest your
hearts still upon these resolutions; Oh what have I that a carnal man may not
have? What do I that that a carnal man cannot do? I would have a Christian
man, to go beyond all those that live in the bosom of the Church. I say
therefore, let this be the Question, and examine thine heart: What do I more
then the damned in hell have done I pray? The truth is, the foolish Virgins
knocked too: I preach, so did Judas: Do I reform many things, So did Herod:
Was I baptized? So was Simon Magnus? In a word, am I resolved to confess my
sins and to make satisfaction for them? Alas Judas did all this, and yet this
would not serve the turn; he sorrowed, and repented, and when he had done, he
went and hanged himself: It was not godly sorrow that caused repentance to
salvation, he repented only for the gall of sin, not for the soul of sin.
Labor we therefore, and let us every one provoke another to go further then
ever reprobates went; in praying, and hearing, and professing, labor for
something that will stand us in stead in the day of trial, When the heavens
shall be rolled together as a scrole, Isai. 34.4. that we may appear before
the Lord, and receive a reward from him in his appointed time and season. So
much for the Negative Part.

I proceed now to the Affirmative: Who those are, that may, and do indeed,
receive benefit as Abraham did? The Text says, They that walk in the steps of
that faith of Abraham: That man, that not only enjoys the Privileges of the
Church, but yields the obedience of faith, according to the Word of God
revealed, and walks in obedience, that man alone shall be blessed with
faithful Abraham.

Two points may be hence raised, but I shall hardly handle them both, therefore
I will pass over the first only with a touch, and that lies closely couched
in the Text,

That, Faith causes fruitfulness in the hearts and lives of those in whom it
is.

Mark what I say, A faithful man, is a fruitful man: Faith inableth a man to
be doing. Ask the Question, By what power was it whereby Abraham was enabled to
yield obedience to the Lord? The Text answers you, They that walk in the
footsteps not of Abraham, but in the footsteps of the faith of Abraham. A man
would have thought the Text should have run thus, They that walk in the
footsteps of Abraham, that is true too, but the Apostle had another end,
therefore he says, They that walk in the footsteps of the faith of Abraham,
implying, that it was the grace of faith that God bestowed on Abraham, that
quickened and enabled him to every duty that God required of him, and called him
to the performance of. So that I say, the Question being, Whence came it that
Abraham was so fruitful a Christian, what enabled him to do, and to suffer
what he did? Surely it was faith that was the cause that produced such Effects,
that helped him to perform such actions. The Point then you see is evident,
Faith is it that causoth fruit.

Hence it is, that of almost all the actions that a Christian haah to do,
faith is still said to be the worker. If a man pray as he should, it is the
prayer of faith, Jam. 5.15. If a man obey as he should it is the obedience of
faith, Romans 16.26. If a man war in the Church militant, it is the fight of
faith, 1 Timothy 6.12. 2 Timothy 4.7. If a man live as a Christian and holy man, he
lives by fasth, Gal. 2.20. Nay shall I say yet more, if he die as he ought, he
dies by faith, Heb. 11.13. These all died in faith. What is that? by the power
of faith that directed and ordered them in the course of their death, furnished
them with grounds and principles of aflurance of the love of God, made them
carry themselves patiently in death. I can say no more, but with the Apostle, 2
Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the faith. Why does not the
Apostle say, Examine whether faith be in you, but whether ye be in the faith?
His meaning is, that as a man is said, to be in drink, or to be in love, or to
be in passion, that is, under the command of drink, or love, or passion; so
the whole man must be under the command of faith: (as you shall see more
afterward) If he pray, faith must indite his prayer; If he obey, faith must
work; If he live, it is faith that must quicken him; and if he die, it is
faith that must order him in death: And wheresoever faith is, it will do
wonders in the soul of that man where it is, it cannot be idle, it will have
footsteps, it sets the whole man on work, it moves feet, and hands, and cies,
and all parts of the body. Mark how the Apostle disputes, 2 Cor 4.13. We
having the same spirit of faith, according as it is written, I believed, and
therefore have I spoken, we also believe, and therefore speak: The faith of the
Apostle which he had in his heart, set his tongue a going: If a man have faith
within, it will break forth at his mouth. This shall suffice for the proof of
the point; I thought to have pressed it further, but if I should, I see the
time would prevent me.

The Use therefore in a word is this: If this be so, then it falls soul, and
is a heavy Bill of Indictment against many that live in the bosom of the
Church. Go thy ways home, and read but this Text, and consider seriously but
this one thing in it; That whosoever is the son of Abraham, has faith, and
whosoever has faith, is a walker, is a worker; by the footsteps of faith you
may see where faith has been: Will not this then, I say, fall mavelous
heavy upon many souls that live in the bosom of the Church, who are
confident, and put it out of all Question, that they are true believers, and
make no doubt but that they have faith? But look to it, wheresoever faith is,
it is fruitful: If thou art fruitless, say what thou will, thou have no faith
at all. Alas these idle Drones; these idle Christians the Church is too too
full of them. Men are continually hearing, and yet remain fruitless and
unprofitable; whereas if there were more faith in the world, we should have
more work done in the world; faith would set feet, and hands, and eyes, and all
on work. Men go under the name of professors, but alas they are but Pictures,
they stir not a whit; Mark, Where you found them in the beginning of the year,
there you shall find them in the end of the year, as profane, as worldly, as
loose in their conversations, as formal in duty as ever: And is this faith?
Oh faith would work other matters, and provoke a soul to other passages then
these.

But you will say, May not a man have faith, and not that fruit you speak of?
May not a man have a good heart to Godward, although he cannot find that
ability in matter of fruitfulness?

My brethren, be not deceived, Such an opinion is a mere delusion of Satan;
wherever faith is, it brings Christ into the soul; Mark that, Whosoever
believes, Christ dwells in his heart by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. And, If Christ be
in you, says the Apostle, the body is dead, because of sin, but the spirit is
life, because of righteousness, Romans 8.10. If Christ be in you, that is,
Whosoever believes in the Lord Jesus, Christ dwells in such a man by faith; now
if Christ be in the soul, the body cannot be dead; but a man is alive, and
quick, and active to holy duties, ready, and willing, and cheerful in the
performance of whatsoever God requires; Christ is not a dead Savior, nor the
Spirit a dead Spirit; The second Adam is made a quickening spirit, 1 Cor. 15.45.
And wherever the Spirit is, it works Effects suitable to it The Spirit is a
Spirit of purity, a spirit of zeal, etc. and where it is, it makes pure and
zealous, etc. When a man will say he has faith, and in the mean time can be
content to be idle and unfruitful in the work of the Lord, can be content to
be a dead Christian, let him know, that his case is marvellously fearful: For
if faith were in him indeed, it would appear, ye cannot keep your good hearts
to your selves, where ever fire is, it will burn, and where ever faith is, it
cannot be kept secret: The heart will be enlarged, the soul quickened, and there
will be a change in the whole life and conversation, if ever faith take place
in a man. I will say no more of this, but proceed to the Second point, arising
out of the Affirmative part.

You will say, What fruit is it then? Or how shall a man know what is the true
fruit of faith indeed, whereby he may discern his own estate? I answer, The
Text will tell you: He that walks in the footsteps of that faith of Abraham:
By footsteps are meant the works, the actions, the holy endeavors of Abraham;
and where those footsteps are, there is the faith of Abraham. So that the point
of Instruction hence is thus much, (which indeed is the main drift of the
Apostle)

That, Every faithful man may, yea does imitate the actions of faithful
Abraham.

Mark what I say, I say again, This is to be the Son of Abraham, not because we
are begotten of him by natural generation; for so the Jews are the sons of
Abraham: but Abraham is our father, because he is the pattern for the
proceeding of our faith. Thy father was an Amorite, says the Scripture, Ezekiel.
16.3. that is, Thou followest the steps of the Amorites in thy conversation. So
is Abraham called the father of the faithful, because he is the copy of their
course, whom they must follow in those services that God calls for. So the
point is clear, Every faithful man may, yea, does, and must imitate the
actions of faithful Abraham. It is Christ's own plea, Joh. 8.39. and he
presses it as an undeniable truth upon the hearts of the Scribes and
Pharisees, that bragged very highly of their privileges and prerogatives, and
said, Abraham is our father: No, says Christ; If ye were Abraham's children,
ye would do the works of Abraham. To be like Abraham in constitution, to be
one of his blood, is not that which makes a man a son of Abraham, but to be
like him in holiness of affection, to have a heart framed, and a life disposed
answerably to his. The Apostle in like manner presses this point, Heb. 13.7.
when he would provoke the Hebrews, to whom he wrote, to follow the examples of
the Saints; Whose faith (says he) follow, considering the end of their
conversation. So the Apostle Peter presses the example of Sarah upon all good
women; Whose daughters ye are (says he) as long as ye do well, 1 Pet. 36.

For the opening of the point, and that ye may more clearly understand it. A
question here would be resolved, What were the footsteps of the faith of
Abraham? which way went he? This is a question, I say, worthy the scanning, and
therefore (leaving the further confirmation of the point, as being aleady
evident enough) I will come to it, that so you may know what to pitch and
settle your hearts upon.

I aniwer therefore, Six footsteps of Abraham's faith.
There are six footsteps of the faith of Abraham, which are the main things
wherein every faithful man must do as Abraham did, in the work of faith, I
mean, in his ordinary course: for if there be any thing extraordinary, no man
is bound to imitate him therein; but in the work of faith, I say, which
belongs to all men, every man must imitate Abraham in these six steps, and
then he is in the next door to happiness, the very next neighbor, as I may
say, to heaven.

The first step which Abraham took in the ways of grace and happiness, you
shall observe, Genesis 12.1. to be a yielding to the call of God. Mark what God
said to Abraham, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from
thy fathers house, unto a land that I will show thee: And Abraham departed,
says the Text, Verse 4. as the Lord had spoken unto him, even when he was an
Idolater: he is content to lay aside all, and let the command of God bear the
sway; neither friends, nor kindred, nor gods can keep him back, but he
presently stoopeth to the call of God. So it is, my brethren, with every
faithful man: This is his first step; He is contented to be under the rule and
power of Gods command. Let the Lord call for him, require any service of him,
his soul presently yields, and is content to be framed and fashioned to Gods
call, and returns an obedient answer thereto: he is content to come out of
his sins, and out of himself, and to receive the impressions of the Spirit.
This is that which God requires, not only of Abraham, but of all believers:
Whosoever will be my Disciple, says Christ, must forsake father, and mother,
and wife, and children, and houses, and lands; yea, and he must deny himself,
and take up his Cross, and follow me. This is the first step in Christianity,
to lay down our own honors, to trample upon our own respects, to submit our
necks to the block as it were, and whatsoever God commands, to be content that
his good pleasure should take place with us.

Nay, yet further, Abraham was not content only to leave his country, and
kindred, and fathers house, but he left his goods also: The Text says, Josh.
24.2. Your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time, even Terah
the father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor; and they served other Gods.
Abraham was an Idolater before God called him; but as soon as God called him he
left his gods behind him, and God only should be his God, to exercise rule and
authority over him in every particular.

And this is not all yet: My brethren, I beseech you observe it; Abraham did
not this as one constrained and forced thereunto; but so as he would not return
any more: and that is a passage very observable; Truly, says the Apostle, Heb.
11.15. if he had been mindful of the country from whence he came out, he might
have had opportunity to have returned. If he would have gone back again, he had
liberty enough; but he would have no more kindred, nor no more fathers house,
nor no other gods, because he knew the command of God was otherwise; therefore
he would not return though he might; intimating that he was not drawn from his
country by a kind of force, but he so voluntarily yielded up himself to the
command of God, and that so prevailed with him, that he would never return any
more. But the people of Israel, though they were brought out of Egypt, yet
they returned back thither in their hearts: So the Text speaks; They thought
of the Fish which they did eat there freely; the Cucumbers, and the Melons, and
the Leeks, and the Onions, and the Garlic, Numb. 11.5. and their minds ran
after the fleshpots of Egypt, Exodus 16. Many a time a carnal wretch comes
so far, as that when God knocks his fingers off his sins, he lets them go
for a time, but his heart is still bent after his former courses, and he
lingereth after them still: so was it not with Abraham: And this is the first
step of the faith of Abraham, that he was content to yield to the call, and to
be under the command of God, to let his good pleasure take place in his heart,
to leave all, kindred, country, fathers house, and never return any more. And
this is that first step that God looks every faithful man should take, that
he be willing, that the command of God take place in his heart, that God should
make room there for himself, that he should pluck away his dearest sins,
that are as near to him as his right hand, and as his right eye. If the
Adulterer were converted, he would be contented that God should take away his
lust, that is as dear to him as his very soul; nay, he would fain, and that
with all his heart, have God make way in his soul for his own Majesty, by
beating down all the holds of Satan, and tumbling that Dagon to the ground
which stands before him. This is the first step of faith.

The next step that Abraham, and so every faithful soul, sets forward, is
this; That when ever faith comes powerfully into the heart, the soul is not
content barely to yield to the command of God, but it breaths after his
mercy, longs for his grace, prizeth Christ and Salvation above all things in
the world, is satisfied and contented with nothing but with the Lord Christ:
and although it partake of many things below, and enjoy abundance of outward
comforts, yet it is not quieted till it rest and pitch it self upon the Lord,
and find and feel that evidence and assurance of his love, which he has
promised unto, and will bestow on those who love him: As for all things here
below, he has but a slight, and mean, and base esteem of them. This you shall
see apparent in Abraham: Genesis 15.1, 2. Fear not Abraham, (says God) I am thy
shield, and thy exceeding great reward. What could a man desire more? One would
think that the Lord makes a promise here large enough to Abraham; I will be thy
Buckler, and exceeding great reward: Is not Abraham contented with this? No;
mark how he pleads with God; Lord God (says he) what will thou give me,
seeing I go childlesse? His eye is upon the promise that God had made to him
of a son, of whom the Savior of the world should come. Oh Lord, what will thou give me? as if he had said, What will thou do for me? alas nothing will
do my soul good, unless I have a son, and in him a Savior. What will
become of me, so long as I go childlesse, and so saviourlesse, as I may so
speak? You see how Abraham's mouth was out of taste with all other things, how
he could relish nothing, enjoy nothing in comparison of the promise, though he
had otherwise what he would, or could desire. Thus must it be with every
faithful man. That soul never had, nor never shall have Christ, that does not
prize him above all things in the world: no certainly; a faithful soul
breaths after nothing so much as mercy in Christ, looks after, and longs
for nothing so much as the assurance of the love of God. Though all the
comforts of this world were afforded a faithful man, yet still he would plead
with the Lord, Oh Lord, what will become of me notwithstanding all this, so
long as my soul is comfortless? what avails it me to live here? Oh thy
Mercy! Oh thy Salvation! Oh the Lord Christ! these are the things my soul
breaths after. This, my brethren, is the nature of faith, if it be rightly
wrought in the soul, as you shall fee and find by ordinary experience. For take
a man that is truly awakened, and whose conscience is thoroughly touched, and
offer him crowns, and scepters, and honors, and all the delights of the sons
of men; alas, his soul will care nothing for them, but as Esau said, Genesis
25.32. Behold, I am at the point to die, and what profit shall this birthright
do to me? So will the poor soul say, What will it avail me, to be high in the
favor of men here, and to be a fiend of Hell hereafter? What are all these
profits and pleasures to me so long as I am not in the favor of God? What good
can these outward contentments afford me when I am without Christ? Oh Lord,
what will thou give me, unless I have my Savior, and mercy in him, and pardon
in him, and all in him, and through him? Still thus beats the pulse of a
faithful soul; and this is the nature of saving faith, the faith of Gods
elect. As for these things here below, these matters of the world, they are
little in the regard and esteem of a Christian man: If he have them, he sees
God in them; If he want them, he is never a whit the worse. The Apostle
speaking of believers, and the faithful people of God, Heb. 11. says, That
they let their hold go of all these things below; let the world take the world
if they would, let the dead bury their dead; but as for them, Having seen the
promises afar off, they were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and
confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth, even in that
country that God had promised them, Verse. 13.

The third step of Abraham's faith was this, He casts himself and flingeth
his soul (as I may say) upon the all-sufficient power and mercy of God for the
attainment of what he desires, he rolleth and tumbleth himself as it were upon
the all-sufficiencie of God. This you shall find Romans 4.18. there says the
Apostle speaking of Abrahyam, Who against hope, believed in hope; That is, when
there was no hope in the world, yet he believed in God even above hope, and so
made it possible; It was an object of his hope, that it might be in regard of
God, howsoever there was no possibility in regard of man. So the Text says,
He considered not his own body now dead, when he was about an hundred years
old, neither yet the deadness of Sarahs womb, but was strong in faith. He cast
himself wholly upon the precious promise and mercy of God.

This then is the third step of true justifying faith, That when the believer
is informed touching the excellency of the Lord Jesus, and that fullness that
is to be had in him, though he cannot find the sweetness of his mercy, though
he cannot, or dare not apprehend, and apply it to himself, though he find
nothing in himself, yet he is still resolved to rest upon the Lord, and to stay
himself on the God of his salvation, and to wait for his mercy till he find him
gracious to his poor soul. Excellent and famous is that example of the woman of
Canaan, Matthew. 15.22, 27. When Christ as it were beat her off, and took up arms
against her, was not pleased to reveal himself graciously to her for the
present; I am not sent (says he) but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel;
And, It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to dogs: Mark
how she replied, Truth, Lord, I confess all that; yet notwithstanding the dogs
eat of the crumbs that fall from their masters table. O the excellency, and
strength and work of her faith! She comes to Christ for mercy, he repelleth
her, reproacheth her, tells her she is a dog; she confesses her baseness, yet
is not discouraged for all that, but still rests upon the goodness and mercy
of Christ, and is mightily resolved to have mercy whatsoever befalls her.
Truth Lord, I confess I am as bad as thou can term me, yet I confess too
that there is no comfort but from thee, and though I am a dog, yet I would have
crumbes: Still she labors to catch after mercy, and to lean and bear her
self upon the favor of Christ, for the bestowing thereof upon her. So it must
be with every faithful Christian in this particular; he must roll himself upon
the power and faithfulness, and truth of God, and wait for his mercy: (I will
join them both together for brevities sake, though this latter be a fourth
step and degree of faith) I say, he must not only depend upon God, but he must
wait upon the holy one of Israel.

The Text says of Abraham, Heb. 6.15. That after he had patiently endured, he
obtained the promise; he received the performance after he had a little waited
for it. So the Prophet David, Psalm. 101.2. I will walk in the uprightness of
my heart till the Lord come to me: As if he should say, If the Lord will absent
himself from me, and not reveal himself to me, yet wait I will, and desire I
will, and still I will be hoping for the mercy of the Lord till he come to me.
So it was said of Simeon, that good old man, That he waited for the consolation
of Israel, Luke 2.25. Mine eyes (says David, Psalm. 119.123.) grow dim for the
looking for thy salvation. He that belceveth makes not haste, Isai. 28.16. he
makes have to obey, but makes not have to bring mercy from God.

The fifth step of Abraham's faith appeared in this; He counted nothing too
dear for the Lord, he was content to break through all impediments, to pass
through all difficulties, whatsoever God would have, he had of him. This is the
next step that Abraham went; and this you shall find Genesis 22. when God put him
upon the trial. The Text says there, That God did tempt Abraham, did try what
he would do for him, and he bade him, Go, take thy son, thy only son Isaac,
whom thou love, and stay him: And straight Abraham went and laid his son upon
an Altar, and took a knife to cut the throat of his son: So that Abraham did
not spare his Isaac, he did not spare for any cost, he did not dodge with God
in this case; if God would have any thing, he should have it whatsoever it
were, though it were his own life, for no question Isaac was dearer to him then
his own life. And this was not his case alone, but the faithful people of God
have ever walked the same course. The Apostle Paul was of the same spirit, Acts
20.22, 24. I know not (says he) the things that shall befall me, save that the
Holy Ghost witnesses in every City saying, That bonds and afflictions abide
me: but none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto my
self, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry which I
have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God. Oh
blessed spirit! here is the work of faith. Alas, when we come to part with any
thing for the cause of God, how hardly comes it from us? But I, says he, pass
not, no, nor is my life dear unto me. Here I say, is the work of faith indeed,
when a man is content to do any thing for God, and to say, If imprisonment,
loss of estate, liberty, life, come I pass not, it moves me nothing, so I
may finish my course with comfort. Hence it was that the Saints of God in those
Primitive times, Heb. 10.34. took joyfully the spoiling of their goods. Me
thinks I see the Saints there reaching after Christ with the arms of faith, and
how when any thing lay in their way, they were content to lose all, to part
with all, to have Christ. Therefore says Saint Paul, Acts 21.13. I am rerdy
not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord
Jesus. Mark, rather then he would leave his Savior, he would leave his life,
and though men would have hindered him, yet was resolved to have Christ
howsoever, though he lost his life for him: Oh let me have my Savior, and take
my life.

The last step of all is this, When the soul is thus resolved not to dodge with
God, but to part with any thing for him: then in the last place there follows
a readiness of heart to address a man's self to the performance of whatsoever
duty God requires at his hands; I say, this is the last step, when without
consulting with flesh and blood, without hammering upon it, as it were, without
aukwardnesse of heart, there follows a prestness to obey God, the soul is at
hand. When Abraham was called, Behold, says he, here I am, Genesis 22.1. And so
Samuel, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears, 1 Samuel 3.9. and so Ananias,
Behold, I am here Lord, Acts 9.10. The faithful soul is not to seek, as an
evil servant that is gone a roving after his companions, that is out of the
way when his master should use him, but is like a trusty servant that waits
upon his master, and is ever at hand to do his pleasure. So you shall see it
was with Abraham, Heb. 11. 8. When the Lord commanded him to go out of his
country, He obeyed, and went out, not knowing whither he went; he went
cheerfully and readily, though he knew not whither; as who should say, if the
Lord call, I will not question; if he command, I will perform what ever it be.
So it must be with every faithful soul: we must blind the eye of carnal
reason, resolve to obey, though heaven and earth seem to meet together in a
contradiction, care not what man, or what devil says in this case, but what
God will have done, do it: This is the courage and obedience of faith. See how
Saint Paul, in the place before named, Acts 21.12, 13. flung his ancient
friends from him, when they came to cross him in the work of his ministry:
They all came about him, and because they thought they should see his face no
more, they besought him not to go up to Jerusalem; Then Paul answered, What
mean ye to weep, and to break my heart? as who should say, it is a grief and
vexation to my soul, that ye would hinder me, that I cannot go with
readiness to perform the service that God requires at my hands. The like
Christian courage was in Luther, when his friends dissuaded him to go to
Worms; If all the Tiles in Worms were so many Devils, said he, yet would I
go thither in the name of my Lord Jesus. This is the last step.

Now gather up a little what I have delivered. He that is resolved to stoop to
the call of God; to prize the promises, and breath after them; to rest upon the
Lord, and to wait his time for bestowing mercy upon him; to break through all
impediments and difficulties, and to count nothing too dear for God; to be
content to perform ready and cheerful obedience; he that walks thus, and
treads in these steps; peace be upon him, Heaven is hard by, he is as sure of
salvation as the Angels are, it is as certain as the Lord lives, that he shall
be saved with faithful Abraham, for he walks in the steps of Araham, and
therefore he is sure to be where he is. The case you see is clear, and the
point evident, that every faithful man may, and must imitate faithful Abraham.

It may be here imagined, that we draw men up to too high a pitch: and
certainly, if this be the sense of the words, and the meaning of the Holy Ghost
in this place, what will become of many that live in the bosom of the Church?
Will you therefore see the point confirmed by reason? The ground of this
Doctrine stands thus; Every faithful man has the same faith, for nature and
for work, that Abraham had; therefore look what nature his faith was of, and
what power it had, of the same nature and power every true Believers faith is.
Briefly thus; The promises of God are the ground upon which all true faith
rests; the Spirit of God it is that works this faith in all believers; the
power of the spirit is that that puts forth it self in the hearts and lives
of all the faithful; gather these together; if all true believers have the
same promises for the ground of their faith, have one and the same spirit to
work it, have one and the same power to draw out the abilities of faith, then
certainly they cannot but have the very self same actions, having the very
self same ground of their actions. Every particular believer (as the Apostle
Peter says, 2 Pet. 1.1.) has obtained the like precious faith. Mark that:
There is a great deal of Copper-faith in the world, much counterfeit believing,
but the Saints do all partake of the like precious faith. As when a man has
but a Sixpence in silver, or a Crown in gold, those small pieces for the
nature, are as good as the greatest of the same metal; so it is with the faith
of Gods Elect. And look as it is in graffing; If there be many Scions of the
same kind grassed into one stock, they all partake alike of the virtue of the
stock; just so it is here: The Lord Jesus Christ is the stock, as it were, into
which all the faithful are grafted by the spirit of God and faith; therefore
whatsoever fruit one bears, another bears also: howsoever there may be
degrees of works, yet they are the same for nature. As a little Apple is the
same in taste with a great one of the same tree, even so every faithful man
has the same holiness of heart and life, because he has the same principle
of holiness. The fruit indeed that one Christian brings forth, may be but
poor and small in comparison of others, yet it is the same in kind: the course
of his life is not with so much power and fullness of grace, it may be, as
another, yet there is the same true grace, and the same practice in the kind
of it for truth, however in degree it differ.

Here by way of caution I will suggest too things to you. 1. That howsoever all
believers have the self same nature of faith, yet all must not look to have
the same measure of faith, and the same degree of works. 2. That faith does not
perform all its works at one time, but grows to a ripeness upon several
occasions. A Child is a perfect man in regard of parts, though not of degrees:
he is able to eat, and to see, though he cannot walk and talk; yet because he
has a reasonable soul as well as others, he will walk and talk like others in
due time: So howsoever many of the Saints of God have not attained to those
great actions of grace that others have, yet having the same spirit and
principle of grace within, they shall be enabled hereafter to a further
discharge of those holy services that God requires. Thus you see the point
confirmed by reason; if all the Saints of God are ingraffed into Christ
indifferently, if all have the same ground of faith, and the same spirit to
work it, and to make it work, they must needs have the same actions and fruits
of faith, because (I say) they have the self same causes of their faith.


Let us now come to see what benefit we may make to our selves of this point,
thus proved and confirmed: And certainly the Use of this Doctrine is of great
consequence. In the first place it is a just ground of Examination: For if it
be true (as it cannot be denied, the reasons being so strong, and arguments so
plain) that every son of Abraham follows the steps of Abraham, then here
you may clearly perceive who it is that has saving faith indeed, who they be
that are true Saints, and the sons of Abraham. By the light of this truth, by
the rule of this doctrine, if you would square your courses, and look into your
conversations, you cannot but discern whether you have faith or no. That man
whose faith she weth it self, and puts it self forth in its several
conditions agreeable to the faith of Abraham, that man that follows the
footsteps of the faith of Abraham, let him be esteemed a faithful man, let him
be reckoned for a true believer. But if any man's faith do not this, but be
contrary unto, or fall short of this in the truth (I say, not in the measure)
of it, certainly it is counterfeit, it is Copper-faith. O the world of
counterfeit faith then, that is in the Church at this day! It was the complaint
of our Savior Christ, that when he should come, he should scarce find faith
on the earth, Luke 18.8. as if he should say, It will be so little, and so
rare, that one shall hardly know where to find a faithful man. It was the
complaint of the Psalmist of old, and is most true of these times, that the
faithful fail from among the children of men, Psalm. 12.1. Many a man has a
name, that he is alive, and yet is dead, Rev. 3.1. Many have a fancy of faith,
yet upon the trial we shall find that there are but few, even of those that
are interested in the title of Christians, and live in the bosom of the
Church, that have any right or title to the Lord Jesus, and the promises of God
revealed in the Church. Let us try a few.

And first, this falls mavelous heavy upon, and casts out all ignorant
persons, that were never enlightened, never quickened, never had their minds
informed, touching Christ and the promises. Alas, they know not what faith
means, and what Christ means; and how can these walk in the footsteps of
the faith of Abraham, when they never saw the way of Abraham? But let them go;
my heart pittieth them; I rather choose to grapple with those that think
themselves in a better estate and condition.

And the first of this rank are profane persons, those that live and lie in
sin, in Sabbath-breaking, swearing, drunkenness, adultery, and the like. The
case of such is clear and evident; These are so far from treading in the
steps of Abraham, that they hate purity, and holiness, and goodness: And as
for these (if any such be here) let them not be deceived, but let me tell them
out of Gods Word, that as yet they have not faith, as yet they are not the
sons of Abraham: What they may be, I know not; I leave them to the Lord, and
wish them a sight and apprehension of their own condition, and that they may be
brought out of that gall of bitterness wherein they are: but as yet, I dare
say, they are not the sons of Abraham. Whose sons are they then? My
brethren, I am loath to speak it, and I will not; men will not bear these words
from us, but think that we go beyond our commission: for my own part, my soul
trembles to think of them, their case is so fearful: The Lord therefore shall
speak, and I will say nothing. Look into John 8. The Scribes and Pharisees came
to Christ, and began to quarrel with him, and to provoke him to say many
things, that they might catch him in his speech, opposing our Savior in the
course of his ministry, and laboring to suppress his Doctrine: mark how
Christ reasons there; I do (says he) the works of my Father; Ye do the
deeds of your father. But, say they, Abraham is our father; and again, We be
not born of fornication; we have one Father, even God; but mark our Saviors
answer, verse 44. Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your
father ye will do. Thus Christ speaks to the Scribes and Pharisees, great
men of place, and of great abilities; You, of your father Abraham? No, you are
of your father the Devil. My brethren, I will not say it; I beseech you be not
offended; it is the Lord that speaks, and I would fain know that man that date
contradict his Word; the case is clear, and the Lord will make it good upon his
soul in another world. His lusts (says Christ) you do: What are those? He is
an accuser of the brethren; so are these: He cries out against, and opposes
the purity of Religion; so do these men exclaim against the niceness and
preciseness of Christians, and blame those that are holy and sincere: The
Devil continued not in the truth; no more do these, they are not governed by
the truth, they stoop not to it, they yield not obedience to it: The Devil is
a liar, and speaks not the truth; so these men are contented to lie
shamefully of their brethren, to broach scandalous things of those that they
know to be holy and sincere: In a word, the Devil is malicious, and envious;
so are all these profane ones, desperate, unreasonable creatures, that cast off
Gods commands, that neglect the Ordinances, and wallow in the mire of their
sins, that hate the sincerity and power of Relgion, that envy and malign the
true professors of godliness: If the Devil himself were incarnate he could do
no more; and surely if there were ever a child like the father, these are like
him: I will say nothing, the Lord himself speak to your consciences.

Yea, but you will say, It is true, Christ knew who were the children of the
Devil; but can you discern them?

I say nothing, but I can tell you how you may discern them: A child of the
Devil does not go invisible, but may be known, and the Apostle tells you, 1 John 3.10. In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the
Devil: Mark that, Whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, neither he
that loves not his brother. I observe three things in this Text: 1. That there
are children of God, and children of the devil. 2. That a man may know them:
The Text says so plainly, they are not my own words; Consult I beseech you
with the place, In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of
the Devil. 3. How a man shall know a child of the Devil: He that works not
righteousness, and he that hates his brother, is of the devil.
He that works not righteousness; that is, he that is not willing and
contented, constantly to take up a Christian course, to walk according to the
rule of Gods word, to abstain from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, to
live in all holiness of life and conversation, to study and endeavor to keep
a good conscience in all things both toward God, and toward men: and he that
loves not his brother: That is, he that hates holiness where he sees it, that
hates a good man, and one that is sincere, whose color rises at such a one,
where ever he meets him; who can brook a drunkard, or a swearer, or an
adulterer; but cannot endure a righteous man, a holy man, one that makes
conscience of his ways: If there be any such in this Congregation, I desire to
speak a word to them in the name of the Lord; Let them consider that what I
speak is not my own, and I profesle that what I say is not out of passion, or a
desire to slander any; but the desire of my soul is, that they may come to the
knowledge of the truth, that they may be saved.

You therefore that are given to these sins, and are walking in this way of
death, consider and bethink your selves, and say to your selves; Oh Lord, how
nearly does this I have heard this day concern me! Alas, I thought not of this
before. I am one that never was a worker of righteousness in all my life, I am
one that have hated the servants of God, that have scorned and loathed the
purity of Religion, and now the Lord has said it, Christ has spoke it, his
word has spoke it, that I am the child of the Devil: Alas, it is too too
manifest to my self, that such a one I am, and God knows it much more: What
shall I do? Now I pray thee, go thy ways home, break off thy sins by
repentance, and labor to make thy peace with God forthwith, and of the son of
the Devil to be the Son of God; be mighty with God in prayer to make you his
child. And this is all I have to speak to these.

2. Let me go further, and you shall see more then these cut off from being the
sons of Abraham; And surely if Abraham should come down from heaven, he might
complain that there were very few of his sons to be found upon the earth. In
the next place therefore take a taste of the civilized professors, such as are
not as other men; no common swearers, no profaners of the Sabbath, no
drunkards, and the like: These men think that they go near indeed to the steps
of Abraham, yet give me leave to scan these a little, I pray, and to try them.

Abraham (you know) did not stick with God when he called him, but was content
to be under the command of God and to yield to him in every thing. Take now one
that has not the power of godliness in his heart; he keeps, it may be, his
fingers from filching and stealing, abstains from the gross acts of sin, and
from open profaneness; but what strength of grace is there in his soul? What
mortification shall you find of his secret lusts? What subduing of sin within?
Alas, ask him what rules him, at whose command he is, at whose call he
comes: I appeal to the souls and consciences of all such men; The command of
God calls, and covetousness calls, which of these is followed? The Lord
says to the worldling, come out of thy counting house, and go to prayer, come
and hear my word; the Lord calls to the Gentleman, forsake thy pleasures and
thy sports, and humble thy self in sackcloth and ashes; and the Lord calls
for these things, the times call for them, who is obeyed? Whose commands do
you stoop unto? Is there any command disobeyed but Gods? If a man presume on
any it is on the Lord: Profits, pleasures, worldly business must be attended,
whether the Lord be pleased or no, or whether the duties he requires be
performed or no. You that are Gentlemen and Tradesmen, I appeal to your souls,
whether the Lord and his cause is not the loser this way: Does not Prayer pay
for it? Does not the Word pay for it? Are not the Ordinances always losers,
when any thing of your own comes in competition? Is it not evident then, that
you are not under the command of the word? How do you tremble at the wrath and
threatenings of a mortal man? and yet when you hear the Lord thunder judgments
out of his Word, who is humbled? When he calls for fasting and weeping, and
mourning, who regards it? Abraham, my brethren, did not thus, these were none
of his steps; no, no, he went a hundred mile off of this course. The Lord no
sooner said to him, Forsake thy country, and thy kindred, and thy fathers
house, but he forsook all, neither friend, nor father, prevailed to detain him
from obedience, but he stooped willingly to Gods command.

Look again to the fifth note and step of Abraham's faith, and try your selves
a little by that. Are you content to run any hazard for the cause of God? To
spare nothing from him? As Abraham withheld not Isaac from God when he required
him, so are you contented likewise to with hold, no, not the dearest thing you
have when God calls for it. If the Lord put you to the trial, to undergo
trouble, loss of goods, imprisonment, banishment, are you content to stoop to
these things? to give way and to break through all impediments? Judge your
selves: If it be so, it is well. But let your consciences speak, nay, let your
lives and conversations speak; Do they not show the contrary? Does not the
very name of danger, the sight of it a afar off, the voice of some great man
dash all your forwardness out of countenance? Nay, if an Isaac come and
complain, that those and those things must be provided for, and cry out, Alas,
if you take this course, what will become of wife and children and family, all
must to ruin, you presently give over your profession. Did Abraham do thus?
No, he did not so: and I beseech you, think of it; if you were the children of
Abraham, you would not, you could not, you durst not do so.

There are yet a third sort that come short of being the sons of Abraham, and
they are the close-hearted Hypocrites. These are a generation that are of a
more refined kind then the last, but howsoever they carry the matter very
covertly, yea, and are exceeding cunning, yet the truth will make them known.
Many an hypocrite may come thus far, to be content to part with any thing, and
outwardly to suffer for the cause of God, to part with diverse pleasures and
lusts, and to perform many holy services: But here is the difference between
Abraham and these men: Abraham forsook his goods and all, but your
close-hearted Hypocrites have always some God or other that they do homage
to, their ease, or their wealth, or some secret lust, something or other they
have set up as an I doll within them, and so long as they may have, and enjoy
that, they will part with any thing else. But thou must know, that if thou be
one of Abraham's children, thou must come away from thy gods, thy god of pride,
of self-love, of vainglory, and leave worshipping of these, and be content to
be governed alone by God and his truth. This shall suffice for the first Use, I
cannot proceed further in the pressing thereof, because I would shut up all
with the time.

The second Use is a word of instruction, and it shall be but a word or two;
That it all the Saints of God must walk in the same way of life and salvation
that Abraham did, then there is no by-way to bring a man to happiness. Look
what way Abraham went, you must go; there is no more ways: the same course
that he took must be a copy for you to follow, a rule, as it were, for you to
square your whole conversation by: There is no way but one to come to life and
happiness. I speak it the rather, to dash that idle devise of many carnal
men, that think the Lord has a new invention to bring them to life, and that
they need not to go the ordinary way, but God has made a shorter cut for
them. Great men, and Gentlemen, think God will spare them; what, must they be
humbled, and fast, and pray? that is for poor men, and mean men: their places
and estates will not suffer it; therefore surely God has given a dispensation
to them. And the poor men, they think it is for Gentlemen, that have more
leisure and time: alas, they live by their labor, and they must take pains
for what they have, and the refore they cannot do what is required. But be not
deceived: if there be any way besides that which Abraham went, then will I deny
my self: but the case is clear, the Lord faith it, the Word faith it; the same
way, the same footsteps that Abraham took, we must take, if ever we will come
where Abraham is. You must not baulk in this kind, whoever you are; God
respects no man's person: if you would arrive at the same haven, you must
sail thorough the same sea; you must walk the same way of grace, if you would
come to the same kingdom of glory. It is a conceit that harbors in the
hearts of many men, nay, of most men in general, specially your great wise
men, and your great rich men, that have better places and estates in the world
then ordinary; What, think they, may not a man be saved without all this ado?
what needs all this? is there not another way besides this? Surely, my
brethren, you must teach our Savior Christ, and the Apostle Paul another way;
I am sure they never knew other: and he that dreameth of another way, must be
content to go beside. There is no such matter as the Devil would persuade
you: it is but his delusion to keep you under infidelity, and to shut you up to
destruction under false and vain conceits. The truth is, here is the way, and
the only way, and you must walk here if ever you come to life and happiness:
therefore be not deceived, suffer not your eyes to be blinded, but know, what
Abraham did, you must do the same, if not in action, yet in affection: If God
say, forsake all, thou must do it, at least in affection; thou must still wait
upon his power and providence, yield obedience to him in all things, be content
to submit thy self to his will. This is the way you must walk in, if you ever
come to heaven.

The last Use shall be a Use of Comfort to all the Saints and people of God,
whose consciences can witness that they have labored to walk in the
uprightness of their heart as Abraham did. I have two or three words to speak
to these.

Be persuaded out of the Word of God, that your course is good, and go on with
comfort, and the God of Heaven be with you; and be sure of it, that you that
walk with Abraham shall be at rest with Abraham, and it shall never repent you
of all the pains that you have taken. Happily it may seem painful and tedious
to you; yet, what Abigail, said to David, let me say to you: Oh, says she, let
not my Lord do this: when the Lord shall have done to my Lord according to all
the good that he has spoken concerning thee, and shall have appointed thee
Ruler over Israel, this shall be no grief unto thee, nor offense of heart,
that thou have shed blood causeless, or that my Lord has avenged himself, 1 Samuel 25.30, 31. My brethren, let me say so to you; You will find trouble and
inconveniences, and hard measure at the hands of the wicked in this world;
many Nabals and Chins will set themselves against you; but go on, and beat it
patiently; know it is a troublesome way, but a true way, it is grievous but yet
good, and the end will be happy; it will never repent you, when the Lord has
performed all the good that he has spoken concerning you. Oh! to see a man
drawing his breath low and short, after he has spent many hours and days in
prayer to the Lord, grapling with his corruptions, and striving to pull down
his base lusts, after he has waited upon the Lord in a constant course of
obedience; take but such a man, and ask him, now his conscience is opened,
whether the ways of holiness and sincerity be not irksome to him, whether he
be not grieved with himself for undergoing so much needless trouble (as the
world thinks it) and his soul will then clear this matter; it is true, he has
had a tedious course of it, but now his death will be blessed; he has striven
for a Crown, and now behold a Crown; now he is beyond the waves; all the
contempts, and imprisonments, and outrages of wicked men, are now too short to
reach him; he is so far from repenting, that he rejoices and triumphs in
reflecting back upon all the pains, and care, and labor of love, whereby he
has loved the Lord Jesus, in submitting his heart unto him. Take me another
man, that has lived here in pomp and jollity, has had many livings, great
preferments, much honor, abundance of pleasure, yet has been ever careless
of God and of his Word, profane in his course, loose in his conversation, and
ask him upon his deathbed, how it stands with him; Oh! woe the time, that
ever he spent it as he has done: now the soul begins to hate the man, and the
very sight of him, that has been the instrument with it in the committing of
sin: now nothing but gall and wormwood remains; now the sweetness of the
Adulterers lust is gone, and nothing but the sting of conscience remains; now
the covetous man must part with his goods, and the gall of Aspes must stick
behind; now the soul sinks within, and the heart is overwhelmed with sorrow.
Take but these two men, I say, and judge by their ends, whether ever it will
repent you that you have done well, that you have walked in the steps of the
faith of Abraham. My brethren, howsoever you have had many miseries, yet the
Lord has many mercies for you. God deals with his servants, as a father does
with his son, after he has sent him on a great journey to do some business,
and the weather falls foul, and the way proves dangerous, and many a storm,
and great difficulties are to be gone through; oh how the heart of that father
pittieth his son! how does he resolve to requite him, if he ever live to come
home again; what preparation does he make to entertain, and welcome him; and
how does he study to do good unto him! My brethren, so it is here; I beseech
you, think of it, you that are the Saints and people of God: You must find in
your way many troubles and greifes, (and we ought to find them) but be not
discouraged; the more misery, the greater mercy. God the father sees his
servants: and if they suffer and endure for a good conscience, as his eye sees
them, so his soul pittieth them, his heart bleeds within him for them, that is,
he has a tender compassion of them, and he says within himself, Well, I will
requite them if ever they come into my Kingdom; all their patience, and care,
and conscience in walking in my ways, I will requite, and they shall receive a
double reward from me, even a Crown of eternal glory. Think of those things
that are not seen; they are eternal: the things that are seen are temporal,
and they will deceive us: let our hearts be carried after the other, and rest
in them for ever.

FINIS.
CULPABLE IGNORANCE, OR THE Danger of Ignorance UNDER MEANS.

By that Reverend Divine, THOMAS HOOKER, Late Preacher in New England.

2 THESE. 1.7, 8. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty
Angels, In flaming fire taking vengeance of them that know not God, and which
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

LONDON, Printed by G. D. for Francis Eglesfield, and are to be sold at the
Sign of the Marigold in Paul's Churchyard, 1651.

Culpable Ignorance, OR, The danger of Ignorance under Means.
SERMON VI.
ISAI. 27.11. For it is a people of no understanding, therefore he that made
them, will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them, will show them no
favor.


IF you cast your eyes, my brethren, upon the beginning of this Chapter, you
shall observe, that when the Prophet had discovered the fierce dealing of God
with the enemies of his people, verse. 1. he does from the second verse to the
words of the Text, and so afterward make known Gods gracious affection toward
his own faithful servants, as also his dealing with those cursed Hypocrites,
that live in the bosom of the Church. In a word (that I may not be long before
I come to that which I desire to deliver to you) in the discovery of the Lords
dealing, first with his own people, and then with others that live in the
bosom of the Church, to whom he communicates his ordinances, there are three
things observable.

The first is Gods special care of, and his tender love and fatherly affection
to those that love and fear his Name, that labor to approve their hearts and
ways to him, that are called to the profession of his truth and walk
answerably thereunto; and that continues to the seventh verse, namely, That
the Lord will keep them, and water them every moment, that he will keep them
night and day, etc.

Secondly, As the Prophet expresses Gods special care of his servants, so
withal he manifests a secret kind of displeasure that was in God, even
toward those that belong unto him, because of the carelessness, and
fruitlesnesse that was among them, therefore he was pleased to lay his
correcting hand upon them, yet still in measure, with abundance of patience,
and in much compassion toward them; and all for their special good, not to
confound, but to humble and better them. And this we have from the 7th to the
end of the 9th verse, where the Prophet, shows, what is the fruit of
affliction to those that belong unto God By this therefore shall the iniquity
of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his sin: As if he
should say, Howsoever the Lord loves his vineyard, yet he will prune it, not
to destroy it, but to make it the more fruitful: He only will take away the
superfluous branches, those inordinate lusts that appear in the lives of his
servants. This is the main issue and special benefit of afflictions to the
godly, to subdue their corruptions, to purge them, to make them walk more
circumspectly before God.

Thirdly, the Prophet having thus declared Gods care of his own people, and his
fatherly chastisement of them, in the last place, from the 9th verse to the end
of the 11th, he declares his proceedings also against the cursed Hypocrites
that live in the bosom of the Church, against those that have a form of
godliness only, but deny the power thereof, that present themselves before
the Lord, and appear in his Sanctuary, as if they would do great matters for
him, yet their hearts are naught, and the Lord sees them, and threatens to
deal with them accordingly, and in conclusion denounces an utter overthrow, an
universal ruin, and confusion unto them, so as that their estates shall be
altogether helpless; for their defenced Cities shall be desolate, and their
habitations forsaken, and left like a Wilderness; Yea, so helpless shall they
be, that if a poor silly woman come by, she shall spoil them; The women come,
and set them on fire. Now if it be asked, Why the Lord does deal thus fiercely
with carnal sinful men, seeing though they have no strength of grace in their
hearts, yet they are his creatures; The Reason is rendered in the words of the
Text, For it is a people of no understanding, therefore he that made them will
not have mercy on them, and he that formed them, will show them no favor. As
if he should say, Do ye inquire the reason why the Lord is so deeply
displeased with Hypocrites that live in thee bosom of the Church, and why he
threatens to proceed so severely with them? Alas, it is no wonder, for they
are a people of no understanding, what show soever they make, though they enjoy
the Ordinances, yet they are no way fit for Gods spiritual building, they are
only fit for the fire of his wrath, though they are in the Church, yet they
are not of the Church; therefore he that made them will show them no mercy,
and he that formed them, will not vouchsafe to bestow any favor upon them.

In the words there are two things observable: First, the judgment of God
denounced against this people; Secondly, the cause of that judgment: Or thus,
First, the sin of this people; Secondly, The judgment of God because of that
sin. The sin of the people is, They have no understanding: The judgment of God
because of that sin, Therefore he that made them will not have mercy on them,
and he that formed them will show them no favor. First, you see the people
offending; they want sanctifying and saving knowledge, they are a people of no
understanding. You see again the Lord observing this, and proceeding severely
against them because of this; Therefore he that made them, will not have mercy
on them, and he that formed them, will show them no favor.

First of the former, touching the sin of the people. I will not stand long in
the opening of the words: Only thus much observe briefly, It is a people that
have no understanding: What kind of people was it? Even those that lived under
the means of grace, that enjoyed all the helps and encouragements that a people
could desire, that had an outward call, and were counted the people of God,
those were a people of no understanding. Howsoever the Lord was pleased to
enlarge himself toward them to bestow many outward Privileges upon them, to
suffer them to enjoy many singular helps, howsoever they were those to whom
were committed the Oracles of God, and means of life and salvation, yet they
remained unfruitful and unprofitable, they were a people of no understanding,
they had no depth of reach in spiritual things. The point observable from
hence is thus much, That,

People may enjoy the means of knowledge, of life and salvation, and yet not
withstanding in the mean time not profit by them, but remain void of the
knowledge of God.

What this knowledge is, and the nature of it, I will open unto you afterward,
only thus much take along with you for the present, That by knowledge here, I
mean saving knowledge. Knowledge, no doubt, this people had, and happily a
great measure of understanding, they might know many things that belonged to
grace and salvation; yet for the main, for the substance and truth of it, it
was not the knowledge of God, it was not saving knowledge. A people may be in
the bosom of the Church, live under the means of grace, and partake of the
Ordinances of God, and yet notwitstanding all this, be void of the saving
knowledge of God. This is a Point that arises clearly and evidently from the
Text: These people of whom the Prophet speaks, were in the Church of God, lived
under the Ordinances, and enjoyed all the outward privileges of the people of
God, yet, he says of them, they are a people of no understanding; they knew
nothing of God and salvation in a sanctifying and saving manner. It is easy to
confirm the truth of this Doctrine, by other places of Scripture. The Scribes
and Pharisees sat in Moses chair, and were the teachers of others, and
therefore (one would think) should have understanding themselves, yet our
Savior says, Matthew. 13.14. That in them was fulfilled the prophecy of
Isaiah, which says, By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand, and
seeing, ye shall see, and shall not perceive. It was not any want of means,
they could allege, or that they lacked the Ordinances; for they were always
hearing and hearing, they had all the light that could be afforded them to
guide their feet into the way of peace, and no question but they waited upon
those means, and yet they were not informed, yet they were not enlightened; to
know the things that concerned the glory of God, and their own peace in a
saving manner; they heard, but understood not; they saw, but perceived not. In
the like manner Isai. 42.19. the Lord complains of his own servants, those
that should have been near to him indeed, Who is blind, but my servant? or
deaf, as my messenger that I sent? Who is blind, as he that is perfect, and
blind, as the Lords servant: Seeing many things, but thou observest not;
opening the ears, but he hears not: It is generally conceived, that this is
spoken of those that drew near to God even in the Ministry and Priesthood, and
were brought up especially for this service; yet notwithstanding, who so blind
as they were? and who so ignorant as the Messengers he sent? It was also the
Apostles complaint of the Hebrews, that whereas for the time they might have
been teachers of others, they had need to be taught again which be the first
principles of the Oracles of God, Heb. 5.12. Having so long a while enjoyed the
means of grace and salvation, and under the light of the Gospel, and had so
many gracious instructions and reproofs, surely they might have been in the
highest Form in the School of Christ, they might have been guiders and teachers
of others: yet notwithstanding they had need themselves to be taught the very
first Rudiments, the very A, B, C. of Religion, they remained ignorant of the
first principles of the Oracles of God, and were fitter to be fed with milk,
than with strong meat. In the prophecy of Jeremy, the Lord sends the dull
and heavy hearted Jews as it were to school to the creatures; The Storke in
the heaven knows her appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the
Swallow, observe the time of their coming; but my people know not the judgment
of the Lord, Jer. 8.7. So Isai. 1.3. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass
his masters crib, but Israel does not know, my people does not consider. The
people of the Jews, Gods own people, enjoyed more means then ever any people
besides: They had line upon line, and precept upon precept, Isa. 28 10.13. From
the thirteenth year of Josiah, (says the Prophet Jeremie) even unto this day
(that is, the three and twentieth year) the word of the Lord has come unto me,
and I have spoken unto you, rising early, and speaking, but ye have not
hearkened. And the Lord has sent unto you all his servants the Prophets, rising
early and sending them, but ye have not hearkened nor inclined your ear to
hear, Jer. 25.3, 4. They had the means of grace you see, yet they were
unprofitable under the means; they had helps for knowledge, yet grew not in
knowledge. The point then is clear, That, The People may enjoy the means, and
yet remain void of the knowledge of God. No more therefore for the proof
thereof.

For the ground of the point a little. You will ask, Is it it possible that
there should be such senseless ignorance in the hearts of men that live in the
bosom of the Church, and that any who partake of the Ordinances, and the means
of salvation, should yet remain a people of no understanding?

Alas, my brethren, the truth is, it is too too evident. We can speak of great
matters, and (as the Apostle says) we think we know something, but this I am
sure of, that though we have lived long under the means, and have enjoyed
abundance of light, yet notwithstanding if a man should go from house to house,
even in this City where the means of knowledge are more then ordinary, he
should find a mavelous poor deal of sanctifying and saving knowledge, yea, I
do assure you, of any reasonable common knowledge in matters of Religion. If
you ask, What is the ground of all this? I will answer briefly in two or three
words.

The first cause why men get no more knowledge, notwithstanding they have the
means of knowledge, I take to be the blindness of their minds, the weakness
of their judgments, the ignorance that is in their understanding. Though they
have all the outward helps that any people have under heaven, yet having a
want in themselves, and a weakness in their own powers and natural
principles, it is impossible that ever they should receive any good by those
means. This is the very cause which the Apostle Paul alleges, Ephesians. 4.18.
why the Gentiles were estranged from the life of God, namely, because their
understandings were darkened, and because of the ignorance that was in their
minds, and the blindness of their heart. It skilleth not how bright and clear
the Sun shines, if in the mean time the visive faculty be wanting; if a man
have no eyes to see, he is never the better for the greatest light in the
world: So it is here; as long as men are full of blindness and ignorance in
their understandings, though the light of the Gospel shine in their very faces,
it is no mervail they benefit not thereby, for alas they have no eyes. The
fault is not in the Gospel; for that is light: but the fault is in their own
souls; their understanding is darkened, the scales of ignorance are grown over
the eyes of their mind, they want an inward principle of spiritual sight, and
so they are not able to reap any benefit by the most excellent means in the
world as they should do. That is the first Reason.

Add hereunto in the second place, that as they have blindness in their mind,
and ignorance in their judgment, so they are mere natural men: and no further
then God is pleased by a supernatural work of the spirit to go along with men
in the use of the means, is it possible that they should be effectual.
Naturally men are careless and negligent to attend and wait upon God with
faithful painfulnesse in the use of the means, and so they will continue,
till God put another spirit into them, and work that in them which will enable
them to do what nature never can do: And hence it comes to pass, that so
long as they continue meet natural men, they are not able to receive that
sweetness, nor reap that benefit, that otherwise they might from the Word of
God: they have no mind to it, they hear, it may be, but they are not whether
they hear or no. Job tells us, that wicked men say unto God, Depart from us,
for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, Job 21.14. It is a place worthy
some observation; They say unto God, Depart from us; How does a man say to the
Almighty, Depart from me? I do not conceive, that a company of men will be so
desperate, as openly to outface God in his Ordinances, and bid him depart from
them, or openly to profess it to all the world, that they desire not the
knowledge of God, nor of his ways: But they said it in their hearts, and
professed it in their lives, being careless of God, and regardlesse of the
means of life and salvation. When the Word came with counsel, with reproof,
with admonition, and the like, alas they flighted it, they made no regard of
it, they neglected it; and as they behaved themselves toward the counsels and
admonitions of the Word, so they are said to have behaved themselves toward
God. And, my brethren, it is all one, if hearing the Minister speak unto you
the word of God, and bring home to you the reproves, and admonitions, and
counsels thereof, you kick his Word from you, and happily take up arms against
him; it is all one (I say) as if you take up arms against God and despised
him: It is a plain case; our Savior himself has said it, He that despises
you, despises me; and he that despises me, despises him that sent me, Luke
10, 16. And so those men Job speaks of, because they manifested a careless
esteem of the ordinances, are said to bid God depart from them, and to
profess, they desired not the knowledge of his ways: as if they should say,
it is a tedious thing to us to be convinced out of the Word; we do not desire
to be persuaded to do this or that; we have no heart to hear such things as
these. This is a general fault among most that live in the bosom of the
Church, to manifest a want of desire of the knowledge of the ways of God. How
many several passages are continually extended to men in the preaching of the
Word, both counsels and reproves? some whereof it may be they receive: but
such as cross their dispositions, and thwart them in any pleasant or
profitable course of sin, oh how tedious are they to their hearts? how
unwilling are they to be informed of them? how willingly do they reject those
blessed means that God, would put into their hands to help them to salvation?
Famous it that place 2 Pet. 3.5. Those mockers there spoken of, that should
come in the last days, saying, Where is the promise of his coming? the
Apostle says of them, This they are willingly ignorant of, that the Heavens
were of old by the Word of God, etc. They are willingly ignorant; as if he
should say, they are ignorant because they will be ignorant; they do nto
desire to know that which might convince and reform them. Look how it is with
a truant Scholar; though the Master be never so careful in his teaching, and
take never so great pains with him, yet it is impossible that he should thrive
in his learning; for happily he comes one day to School, and withdraws
himself a week after, and loses more in two days then he can get in four:
And you that are Tradesmen know, that a runnagate Apprentise cannot possibly be
informed in his trade, so as to behave himself skilfully for his Masters
profit for the present, or his own benefit and comfort afterward: So the truth
is, if you ask me the cause, why so few men are savingly enlightened and
informed in the ways of life and salvation, notwithstanding the abundance of
means that they enjoy; Oh it is because we have so many truant Scholars in
Gods School, so many runnagate Apprentises from the means of salvation; this
is the cause that howsoever there be means and teaching enough, yet men are
not gainers by these good occasions and opportunities, which God is pleased to
put into their hands. This, I say, is the very reason. Let a Minister press a
man that is somewhat loose in his life, to the performance of good duties, urge
him to prayer with his family, to the sanctifying of the Lords day, to leave
his swearing, and his vain company, or the like, he will turn the deaf ear to
you, and though happily he will not presently fly in the face of the Minister,
yet he will slight all that he says; he for his part has other business in
hand: no wonder, my brethren, this man profits not by the Word, seeing his
heart is not set thereunto, seeing he intends it not, has no mind nor desire
of the knowledge of the ways of God.

The last and indeed the main reason why in this last age of the world, wherein
the light of the Gospel shines so bright, yet men sit in darkness, and in the
shadow of death, and remain stark blind in heavenly things, and though waters
are hard by us, yet we continue like a dry and thirsty wilderness, is, The
corruption of men's hearts, in which they are settled, and in which they are
resolved to continue, come what will to the contrary. A settled and secret
resolution that harbors in the souls of men, to maintain some private lust
or other, is I say, a special reason why the minds of men are no more
enlightened, nor themselves informed in the ways of life and happiness. Mark
it, I beseech you; It is a thing that we may easily find to be true in our own
experience: The retaining of any private lust, always hinders a man from
attaining to saving knowledge. Look how it is with the body of a man, if one
have a foul stomach, full of very bad and noisome humors, commonly it breeds
a rheumatick eye, and a sleepie and drowsy head; Just so it is also with the
soul; if a man's heart harbor any noisome lusts, if any sinful corruption
lodge there, the truth is, it always breeds a blear-eyed judgment, it sends
up such streams and mists into the understanding as quite dazeleth it, so that
it cannot discern the truths of God; and hence it comes to pass, that the
soul being settled on its dregs, speak as long as you will, persuade as much as
you can, yet there is no way to prevail, further then God is pleased by a
mighty hand, to break open the heart of a man, and to enlighten it, whether he
will or no, as a man may say. 2 Timothy 3 6, 7. this is observed to be the main
cause why men are ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth; They are very good Churchmen (as they say) often in the Church, always
hearing, and yet notwithstanding remain as poor, ignorant, silly sots in the
main things of life and salvation, as if they had lived all their days in the
West Indies. What is the reason and ground of this? The Apostle complains
there of a certain company of widows, that were ever learning, certainly then
you would think that they were good Scholars, no, that they were not. What
was the cause, what? always learning, up early, and down late, and yet never
come to the knowledge of the truth? What is the cause? The Apostle tells you
in the sixth verse, They are laden with sins, and led about with diverse lusts;
And verse. 8. They are of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith, or (as
it is in the Margent of your Bibles) of no judgment concerning the faith:
Mark, like unto these carnal hearted widows, there is a sort of men in the
Church of God, that carry the cloak of profession upon them, and will run to
every Lecture, and take hold of every occasion to hear a Sermon, and yet alas
know nothing, but are as silly and ignorant in the main grounds of Religion, as
blind in the things of God, as any in the world: Will you know the reason why
they thrive not? Observe it; They are laden with lusts, and led about with
diverse pleasures; their hearts cleave close to some corruption, they harbor
some bosom lust in their souls; they have a form of godliness, but they take
not up the power of Religion, because it would remove and dis-place those lusts
that they love so well. I beseech you observe that place, Isa. 6.9, 10. When
the Lord had a purpose to overthrow the people, and to bring a desolation upon
them for their obstinacy, he bids the Prophet go and preach to them; but to
what purpose? Not to do them any good, for he would not save them. Well, what
course then must the Prophet take? Go (says God) and tell this people, Hear
ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not. Make the
heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes;
least they see with their eyes, and hear with their cares, and understand with
their heart, and convert, and be healed. I beseech you observe this Text: If
they did see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand (...)
God would heal them: But God in his just judgment will not have them see, nor
hear, nor understand, that they might not convert, and be healed, and he will
accomplish this work by the Ministry of the Prophet, and therefore he sends
him to harden them by his preaching, and how? Make their hearts fat, and then
(as it follows) their ears will be heavy, and their eyes will be shut. Now
(observe) what makes an heart fat? First, continual glutting of ones self with
diet, with immoderate eating and drinking; and then secondly, continual
idenesse; these two make men fat: Just so it is with the soul of a sinner: When
as the heart of a man cleaves to a corruption, when as a man's affections are
glued unto it, so that he takes delight in it, let it be what lust so ever it
will be, you shall ever find him feeding upon it. The proud man continually
feeds himself upon his pride, his mind is ever taken up with the thoughts of
this or that fashion, with this or that way of attiring, and adorning himself;
The Adulterer is still feeding on the pleasures of his lust, always
contemplating on those cursed delights. The covetous man, meet him where you
will, as soon as he is up in a morning, presently he is talking of buying and
selling, of bargaining and match-making; So the drunkard and the rest of
sinners; the meat is never out of their mouths, their hearts are continually
set upon those sinful corruptions to which they are addicted. And withal
(mark) as there must be feeding, so there must be resting; for daily exercise
and labor spends a man; and therefore we know those that will feed any
creature fat, put it up. So when a man is resolved to contiune in that course
wherein he is, is settled on his lees, has set up his staff, he will go no
further, but there he will stay; such a man's heart is fat, and what follows?
his eyes will be blind: Whatsoever shall come from the Minister to thwart that
sinful disposition of his, to cross that lust which lies in his bosom, any
way to disease him, or stir him off his dregs, though it be never so clear and
plain, and delivered with never so much evidence and demonstration of the
Spirit of God it self, yet he cares not for it, he is resolved to do what he
pleases, and to take his own course, let them all say what they will. Hence it
comes to pass, that in these days of light, wherein the means of knowledge
run through the greatest part of the land, and abound as the rivers from the
sea, and yet men remain stark blind in the mysteries of salvation, and
altogether unreformed in their lives. Do but observe a little the temper of
men's spirits, and you shall find it generally to be this: Those truths out of
the word of God which they conceive to cross their quiet, and disturb their
peace, they will not endure: Their heart is resolved to be at peace, and at
liberty, come what come will; and therefore whatsoever truth it be that
causes any disquietness or disturbance in them, away with it; Oh (say they) I
will have none of that, I have done with that point. Surely it is no marvel
that such men are not informed, seeing they have shut their eyes, and will not
see: Oh (say they) I see no reason for this, I understand not why I may not doc
such and such a thing: Yea, you will not understand it, you will not be
informed, because it will trouble and disquiet your hearts. There is many a
man, my brethren, who if he might have his liberty in sinful courses allowed
him, and might enjoy his credit, and contentment, and ease in the world,
together with the Gospel, would take up many truths that are now despised by
him; but the main ground of his contempt lies here, he must have his sin, he
will take his liberty, he will enjoy himself what ever is said to the
contrary. And hence it is that God in his just judgment, seeing that such men
will not entertain the truth in the love thereof; that they might be saved;
they should be given up to strong delusions that they should believe a lie,
that they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. Their heart being resolved which way to walk, it is just I
say with the Lord to give them up to blindness of mind, to dullness of
spirit, to ignorance and error, that they may be hurried on in the ways of
destruction for ever; It is Gods own word, 2 These. 2.10. Because men received
not the truth (the whole truth of God) in the love thereof; M^^y are loath to
have some points to be true, as that a man should exactly observe the Sabbath;
it is just with God to give such up to a profane spirit, to deny the Sabbath;
Others are loath to have this true, that they must pray duly every morning and
evening in their family; it is just with God to give such up to a sottish and
stupefied course, that they can be contended to go to bed like beasts. The
like I may say of many other duties: The Lord calls for fasting and prayer,
and would have his people humble themselves and seek his face: now because the
duty is tedious, and happily the world crosses it, therefore many will fall
out with the Ordinance, reject it, have nothing to do with it; they will have
their ease and their quiet; their hearts are grown fat, and if any thing cross
their corruptions, they will not hear with that ear. It is fearful what the
Lord speaks against these, Romans 1. 28. and my heart trembles to think of the
hideous cur^e of God against such courses, and his severe indignation against
such persons: It is said there, that because the Heathen delighted not to
retain God in their knowledge God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do
those things which are not convenient. Mark; As they did not like to retain God
in their knowledge; as who should say, Must my mind be enlightened? must I be
convinced and persuaded, that I must lay aside my self, and be content in
uprightness of heart to embrace every truth of God, though it be with the
loss of ease, and credit, and estate, yea, and of life it self? must I do
this? well, I do not like it, I will not believe it, all the world shall never
persuade me to it. And why? Because you have taken a sleepy pillow beforehand,
you have been resolved to keep those things that these truths cross. It is
just with God, when men do not love and like to retain the truth he affords
them, to give them up to a reprobate mind, that is, to a mind void of
judgment, not knowing the truth, not approving the Word. And you shall see
these men in all their courses and opinions vanishy; Why? Because the Lord has
given them up to a reprobate mind, a mind not able to observe what he
reveals, and a heart not willing to entertain what he discovers to be good.

Gather up these things. This is the last and most special argument, why the
hearts of most men are estranged from God and his truth, because they harbor
many lusts in their souls; and cleave close to some or other corruptions. It
is a passage worthy observation, that is recorded Jer 43. The people that were
left behind in the land, when the King of Babylon had carried the rest away
captive, were resolved to go down into Egypt; but they would first go to the
Prophet, and take his advise, and he must go to the Lord, and whatsoever the
Lord should declare to them by the Prophet, that they would do, be it good, or
be it evil: Here was a very fair pretense. But their hearts were fully
resolved betore to go down into Egypt; and therefore when the Prophet brought
them the answer of God, that they should not go, but that they should remain
in the Land; Thou speak fatsly, say they unto him, the Lord our God has not
sent thee to say, Go not into Egypt to sojourn there; but Baruch the son of
Neriah sets thee on against us. So they obeyed not the voice of the Lord, to
dwell in the sand of Judah. As if they should have said, we had thought thou
would have persuaded us, that it was lawful for us to go down into Egypt,
and if thou had done so, we would have hearkened to thee; but because what
thou say is not as we would have it, because it does not fit us, nor stand
with that course we are resolved to take, we will not yield to it, whether it
be truth that thou speak or no. I wish this were not so amongst many of us,
I do not say, carnal and profane ones; the world is full of those, and their
spirits are too too manifest: but I say, I wish it were not a fault even
amongst many, that in some measure love and fear the Lord. We are grown sick of
our peace, and we must have our quiet, and ease, and contentment, therefore
though we should appear to be sincere before God in all things, and zealous for
the cause of the Lord of Hosts, we will shuffle in diverse practices, rather
then be disturbed and troubled in that course that we have set to our selves.
Now, I say, gather up these, and I think the point is clear: If it be so that
men are blind in their minds, and cannot know the Word, if so be they are
careless and do not attend to the Word, nay, if so be they be settled in their
sins and corruptions from which they will not part, it is no wonder, that
though they have means, yet they are not savingly informed in the truth of God,
answerably to those means which are bestowed upon them.

Let me add now but one thing for the full clearing of the Doctrine. You will
say, we see the quite contrary: For it is clear and evident, that there are
many that live in the bosom of the Church, that have a great measure of
understanding, yet are not such as God has wrought upon effectually; yea, the
Devil himself has knowledge enough, and many a man that is naught and
carnal, has an abundant measure of understanding, happily much more then some
godly and holy men can attain to.

To answer this in two or three words. It is true I confess, there is many a
cursed hypocrite that has a great measure of knowledge; and yet in very deed
has no true understanding at all. For the knowledge whereby such men are
enlightened, differs much from that information and understanding which the
Saints of God have. For look as there is wild thime and garden thime, both of
the same name, and both growing after the same manner, yet very different in
their nature and qualities: so it is with knowledge; there is a gracious and a
sanctifying knowledge, garden knowledge, as I may say; and there is a wild and
a common knowledge. I will open it a little, in two or three words. If you go
no further, but consider the understanding of both barely, you shall clearly
perceive a main difference, between a Saint of God and an Hypocrite.

1. An Hypocrite, and a carnal man, like Judas, may thus far have his
understanding enlightened, concerning all the truths of life and salvation, that
are either discovered or made known out of the Book of God, as to perceive the
sense of the words that are set down, and understandingly to discourse of the
meaning of the Scripture, and reason of the points therein contained, and that
more freely and abundantly in outward appearance, then many of the dear Saints
and Servants of God are able to do: and yet all this is but that which the
Apostle Paul calls a form of knowledge, Romans 2.20. Such an one has only got
religion by rote, as we use to say; like a child, that happily may be taught a
sillogisme, or some form of an argument, he may say it without book, but
understands it not: so hypocrites may have a form, and as it were, an outside
of knowledge, but there is something in the bottom concerning the savingnesse
and holiness of knowledge, which they can never attain unto. For certain it
is, there is never a carnal person under heaven, howsoever he can talk of God,
and of Christ, and of Faith, that either knows God in the works of his ways
toward him, or hmselfe in the works of his duty toward God. That is a strange
passage concerning Hazael, 2 Kings 8, When the Prophet Elisha settled his
countenance upon him, and wept, Hazael said, Why weepeth my Lord? And he
answered, Because I know the evil that thou will do unto the children of
Israel: their strong holds will thou set on fire, and their young men will thou
stay with the sword, and wilt dash their children, and rip up their women with
child: And Hazael said, But what, is thy servant a dog that he should do this
great thing? He thought that there was no such matter in himself, he perceived
not the corruption of his nature. And truth it is, that as it was with Hazael,
so it is with every wicked man under heaven, further then God is pleased to
awaken him, he neither knows what he is himself, nor what God is; talk of it
he may, but cannot apprehend it in truth; in the the general he may speak of
it, but in his own particular he cannot.

2. For the further proof of this point, That there is a main difference
between a child of God and an hypocrite, in their very knowledge: though I know
it is the judgment of many, and those holy and godly too, that wicked men, in
matters of knowledge, may go as far as any Saint under heaven, yet I take it
they are deceived: for no sanctifying work of the holy spirit of God is common
to those that are wicked and reprobates; but the work of saving understanding
and illumination, is a work of sanctification: and to prove that, go no
further but to the naked consideration of a man's bare understanding. When the
Lord is pleased to work effectually upon the soul, there is a sanctifying work
on the understanding as well as on the will. Now that work which is upon the
understanding of a servant of God, as truly differs from the inlightning of a
carnal hypocrite, as the heart of a Saint from the heart of a man not
sanctified: As the Spirit of God, I say, has a proper and peculiar work of
sanctification upon the will of Gods children, so also has he upon their mind
and understanding; therefore of necessity, wicked men having no work of
sanctification, the children of God must needs differ from them in this
particular of knowledge. Again, the Apostle is clear enough, 1 Cor. 2.14. The
natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, neither can he know
them, because they are spiritually discerned. Before a man can discern
spiritual objects, he must have spiritual light; therefore wicked men being
(as all hypocrites are) but bare nature, and wanting spiritual light, are not
able to perceive and discern the things of God. So you see there is a plain and
broad difference between the Saints of God, and carnal hypocrites in the point
of knowledge and understanding.

Now then for the point it self, That there is such a knowledge as is peculiar
to the Saints; take it, my brethren, thus: The godly do not only apprehend
the meaning of the words in the Scripture, and are able to discourse of the
reasons therein contained, but they discern also the spiritualnesse of the work
of grace, that is discovered in the same. Observe it: There being, first, the
Word of God set down in his book, and then reasons that go along with it, and
lastly, a spiritual work of grace, that God has made known in those reasons;
the Saints of God alone see the spiritualnesse of the work that is manifested
and communicated in that reason there set down. The secret of the Lord is with
them that fear him, Psalm. 25.14. wicked men may know repentance, but there is a
secret of repentance which the godly only have: Wicked men may pray, but there
is an inward spiritualnesse and closing with the Lord, a secret humbling of the
soul before the Lord, which the godly only have: wicked men, I say, can pray,
and hear, and discourse of repentance, and of faith, and the like, but there is
a secret in all these, and a spiritual work derived into the soul, thorough
the knowledge of all these, which the Saints only apprehend and understand.
Take but an Apple, there is never a man under heaven can tell what taste it is
of, whether sweet or sour, until he have tasted of it; he sees the color
and the quantity of it, but knows not the taste: so there is no man under
heaven discerns more of grace then he finds in himself. A carnal man may
talk of repentance, and faith, and obedience, yet notwithstanding, there is a
sappinesse, which I call the spiritualnesse in these blessed works, that no man
can tell and understand, but only those that indeed have found by experience
the work in themselves. We use to say, and we say truly, that no woman knows
the nature of a mother, before she has been a mother: So it is here; first, a
man must have the work of grace in himself, before he can rightly understand
the nature of it. No man knows what it is to be the child of God, or what it
is to have a child-like affection toward God, but so far forth as he finds
and feels this in some measure wrought in himself by the operation of the
Spirit. I will not dispute that text, Rev. 2.17. I will give him a white stone,
and in the stone a new name written, which no man knows, saving he that
receives it: but I take this to be the main thing intended there, which makes
for my present purpose: Name there signifies Adoption; and the white stone,
Absolution: the Lord will absolve and acquit him of all those sins that he is
guilty of, and withal, he will give him the name of a son. The Lord seals
to the soul of a Christian man, that he is God reconciled to him: Now when the
soul finds this, and the like, and withal has an inward work, which, though
happily he cannot discover the manner and order thereof, nor express it to
others, yet he knows more thereof then any man under heaven. Ask a child, How
do you know such a man is your father? Alas, he cannot tell you, yet he has a
strong affection toward him above all others, and feels in himself such a
leaning in his affection toward him, as another feels not. So the mother of
the child that was brought before Solomon, had no Argument in the world to
prove the child to be hers, but the yerning of her bowels, and relenting of her
spirit toward the child, proved it sufficiently. So there is in a Saint of God
an inward tenderness of affection, a leaning of his soul toward God, which no
man knows but he that has it.

If a curious workman after he has made a clock or a watch, show the frame
thereof to a man ignorant of that Art, and declare to him the manner of making
it, happily he will conceive his words, and his reasons, and perceive that he
says truth, but he cannot make such another, because he has not the Art it
self of clock-making: My brethren, so it is here, There is a curious frame in
the soul of a Christian, of grace, of faith, of repentance, of holiness, of
love, patience, and the like; a blessed disposition of heart, whereby the soul
runs right toward God and every holy duty, and strikes right (as I may say)
in all holy obedience to God; this is a frame reared up by the hand of the
Spirit of God alone, in the heart of a Christian. Now the Apostle Paul, who had
such a work as this wrought in him, can tell the nature of hope, and of faith,
and of repentance; but I that read what he has written of these things, being
a natural man, though happily I understand the sense, and apprehend the
meaning of the words, yet the true knowledge of the nature of repentance, or
faith, or hope, I cannot possibly attain to, so long as I remain a mere
natural man: Even as an ignorant man cannot conceive the Art of Watch-making,
in that manner as the Artist himself understands it; so cannot I discern the
nature of this spiritual frame in the heart, further then God is pleased to
teach me this skill by the work of his Spirit within my self. When I find my
own heart wrought upon, then I can best discover it to another, then do I know
that which before I never understood; though happily I could discourse
something concerning such things, and understand the outside as it were, yet
that was all, I never knew the bottom, as I do now. You see then the
difference between the knowledge of Hypocrites that live in the bosom of the
Church, and the knowledge of Gods Elect, or saving knowledge. Now for the Use
of all in a word or two.

If this be so, that men may live in the Church of God, and enjoy the means of
grace, and yet be a people of no understanding, have no saving knowledge, then
my brethren, here is a word of reproof to check all those conceits, and pull
down all those silly imaginations of poor, ignorant, carnal creatures, that
live here among us in the bosom of the Church, who because the Lord has been
pleased to put them into a place where the truth is plainly taught and
preached, presently persuade their own souls, that they have wise dome and
knowledge enough to bring them to life and salvation. If happily you come to
any of these men and tell them, that they ought to be enlarged in those duties
God requires of his children, that they should be able to catechize their
families, to pray with them, to instruct them, that they should be skillful in
the art of humbling their souls before God, in private conversing, and
spiritual communion with him; Alas, they will answer you, that for the
present, they are too weak and unable for such things as these: Well, but prove
them again afterward when they have continued a longer time under the means,
and demand of them how they have bettered themselves, what strength of grace
they have attained unto; By no means you must meddle with them: What, they have
not lived so long in a good Parish under a panfull Minister, and gone so often
to Church, but surely they have sufficient to bring them to heaven; and
although they cannot do so, and so, though they cannot give you a reason of
the hope that is in them, yet they make no question but to speed as well as the
best. Men think it enough to be good Churchmen, to have and enjoy the helps
God vouchsafes and bestows upon his people, to be often hearers of the Word
read and preached; and so rest themselves contented, and there set up their
staff, though in the mean time they remain as blind, and ignorant, and as
carnal as ever. My brethren, be not deceived, the Lord will not be mocked. It
is not sufficient to salvation, for a man to be an often hearer, to have his
heart now and then enlarged, to give assent to the truths delivered, to
conceive the grounds of them, or to be able happily to discourse of some points
of religion. Oh look further, he that has saving knowledge indeed, goes far
beyond all this. You that are tradesmen, or you that have children, will any
man say, my child is a good Scholar, for he has gone so long to school; or,
my Apprentise has good skill in his trade, because he has served me so many
years? It is true, he ought to be so: but it does not follow, that because he
has had such and such helps, and lived so long under them, that therefore he
is so. So it is here: there is no reason for any man to ground his assurance of
salvation on his enjoyment of the means, or to imagine that God has wrought
mercifully for him in the matter of knowledge, which accompanies life and
happiness, because of his long living under a good ministry: no, it is not
enough to have the preaching of the word among us, and to have the means and
helps of saving knowledge; you may have all these, and yet remain ignorant and
blind, and be a people of no understanding.

Secondly, this is a word of instruction to us. We are hence given to
understand the sinfulness of our nature, and the blindness of our minds,
seeing a man may have all the means under heaven, and yet all prove
unprofitable to him; may enjoy all the helps that God has set up in his
Church for the good of peoples souls, and yet receive no good by them. What a
strange heart is ours? Yet so it is even amongst many of us in this place, and
I wish it were not so with most that live in the Church at this day. I fear me,
that if a man should go from heart to heart, and observe every ones particular
temper, he should find this that I say, to be too too true. What is the reason
else you will not suffer a good Minister to follow you home, to search your
souls, but take pet at such a man presently? what is the cause of this? Surely
your ways are naught, your minds are blinded, your hearts are hardened under
the means. Men are loath to let others see what they are, because they are not
as they should be; they are like dull-headed Scholars, to whom it is death to
be posed. But I say, observe therefore the mervailous deadness and weakness,
the strange besotted dullness of our natures to good, that when we have all the
encouragements and means that may be, yet we get no benefit, we reap no profit
by them. If a man should have a tree in his garden, that all the dunging, and
pruning, and dressing that he can use, will do no good of, nor make it bring
forth any fruit, certainly he would think that tree to be of a strange temper:
so here, let us see, and wonder when we see, that the Lord has bestowed so
much cost upon us, made his judgments come home even to our very doors,
powered his mercies on us in abundance, yet we are not provoked, nor quickened,
nor enlarged in the ways of life; that though wind and tide be both with us,
yet we make no progress in goodness, but he that was ignorant is ignorant
still, and he that was filthy is filthy still. That we may therefore shame our
selves, humble our souls, and bemoan our estates before the Lord, consider, I
pray you, but these two things; The variety of helps that God vouchsafes us,
and the success those helps find in our hearts. When all the fire in the town
cannot warm a man, how cold is he? When all the persuasions under heaven cannot
work upon a man, oh how flinty is he! How graciously, my brethren, has the
Lord dealt with you that live in this place? How many helps has he put into
your hands? you have prayers, and sermons, and exhortations, and instructions,
and admonitions, and comforts, forts, and all things that are available to
bring a man to life and happiness: Now he that grows not under this means, he
that thriveth not with this food, he that is not heated by this fire, he that
is not quickened by this dew of heaven, let him take notice of the strange
distemper of his own heart, and the deadness of his spirit. I know not what to
say to you: Certainly, had the Devil himself but any hope of receiving mercy,
the sermons that are made in this City, were able even to melt his heart, (as
it were) and to bring him to consider, and repent of the sins he has
committed against Almighty God: but because he has no hope of mercy, he
remains in a forlorn and desperate condition. Yet the Apostle says, Jam.
2.19. The Devils also believe and tremble; that is, they know all things
contained in Gods Word are true, they believe them, and assent to them, and are
persuaded, that God will one day make all his threatenings good upon them, and
upon the hearts of all the damned for ever, and that they together shall be
wholly deprived of all those mercies that God has propounded in his Word, and
they tremble at it. Look now into your own hearts, and see what kind of temper
they are of; when notwithstanding the many judgments that have been threatened,
the many woes that have been denounced, yet, most either turn their back upon
the Church, or turn a deaf ear to what they hear, and cast the Commandments
of God behind them, and rather fleer in the face of the Minister, and contemn
what he says, then be any ways humbled for their sins, or tremble at the
Word of God, and the threatenings denounced out of it. My brethren, think of it
for the Lords sake, reason a little with your selves, and consider, and say,
Lord, what a wicked heart, and what a wretched disposition have I? the Sea is
troubled, the Mountains quake, and the earth sinketh, when the Lord speaks and
utters his voice, nay, the Devils believe and tremble: but oh! what terrors
and woes have I heard out of the Word, against my pride, my covetousness, my
swearing, my drunkenness, my profaning of the Sabbath, yet none of them stir
me one jot. I have had the fire full in my face, yet remain as ycie, and cold,
and frozen as ever: I have had many a heavenly dew upon me, many a silver drop,
yet continue a dry and barren Wilderness. Oh what a heart have I! Surely, my
brethren, such a case as this is very desperate and deplorable; think of it
betime; in vain it will be for you to put it off. You dream, and have conceits
of knowledge, and imagine that you have faith and repentance, whereas, alas!
you have little or none of these graces; I pray therefore consider it now, and
now hear and tremble, least you tremble afterward, when you are sunk down in
the pit for ever: When you are in hell, you shall feel another manner of
trembling then now is expected from you; for it shall be far greater, and
altogether without hope of remedy. Where now are all those professed enemies
and rebels against God? where is Nimrod? where is Pharaoh? where is
Sennacherib? are they not in hell, and there left to perish for ever? Reason
the case therefore seriously with your selves, to the end that now you may be
humbled, and brought to tremble at the Word of God, least hereafter you tremble
when all hope is past. To move you the more, consider how graciously the Lord
has been pleased to work upon others: They have heard the Word, and have lived
under the light of the Gospel, and they have received benefit by it, they have
attained to good measures of saving knowledge. Are there not some that live
near thee, of whom thou may say, such a man I know, and I thought my self
once to have had as much understanding in religion as he, I made account I had
as much ability to do God service as ever he had. But now the case is altered;
he is able to discourse savourly and feelingly of the things of God, to pray
sensibly and spiritually, to reason of the matters of salvation profitably,
far beyond that which I can do, and yet I have had as many helps, I have
heard as much, and understood as much as he. O Lord, what a case is my soul
in? what a sinful creature am I? Here is a drunkard converted, there is a
profane swearer and a Sabbath-breaker wrought upon; my next neighbor, that
happily was as bad as I, has his soul humbled; many a gain-sayer of the
Gospel, the Lord has made him come crying to him for the forgiveness of his
sins, begging pardon for such and such rebellions, especially for his
refusing of the offers of mercy made in Jesus Christ: and all this while I
stand it out! What a strange heart have I? That drunkard, that profane person,
that swearer, that covetous wretch is brought home by the Word, and yet my soul
is not enlightened to know God, and to understand the things of his kingdom!
Now the Lord of heaven open your eyes, and have mercy upon your poor souls,
and give you the knowledge of his truth, that you may be saved.

FINIS.
WILLFUL HARDNESS: OR THE MEANS OF Grace Abused.

By that Reverend Divine, THOMAS HOOKER, Late Preacher in New England.

HEBR. 3.15. While it is said to day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not
your hearts.

LONDON, Printed by G. D. for Francis Eglesfield, and are to be sold at the
Sign of the Marigold in Paul's Churchyard, 1651.

Willful Hardness: OR, The Means of Grace Abused.
SERMON VII.
PROVE. 29.1. He that being often reproved, hardneth his neck, shall suddenly
be destroyed, and that without remedy.


THis Book of the Proverbs, by the consent of the judgment of all that have
written upon it, is like an enclosed piece of ground; every particular sentence
carrying with it (as it were) a full and complete sense of it self, each Verse
being taken in, (as I may so say) from all the bordering parts of this
Scripture, either going before or coming after it, having neither coherence,
nor dependence upon any, but carrying in it self a full and entire sense; and
therefore I shall spare the making of any kind of entrance, by showing any
dependence of this Scripture, which I have now read, with that which goes
before it, but saving that labor we will come presently and particularly to
the words in hand.

In the Verse therefore there are two things offered to your consideration.

The First is, the Sin that is here committed: He that hardneth his neck, being
often reproved.

The Second is, The judgment that is threatened to be executed upon him,
agreeable to the nature of the sin, He shall be destroyed. (we shall have
occasion to open the words anon) He shall be shivered all to pieces; God will
overthrow him, and all that appertains to him. So I take the word is meant.

The Sin here is, hardening of the neck, and that is aggravated by the contrary
means which God affords, and the helps that God puts into his hands for
his good; being often reproved, or as the word carries it, being a man of
admonitions, one that has had admonition upon admonition.

The Judgment is set forth by several circumstances, discovering the quality
of it. First, He shall be destroyed: And then secondly, The manner of it,
Suddenly: God will not wait long, or vouchsafe so much long suffering and
patience toward him, when once he comes to that sin of hardening his neck,
under the Means of Grace. And then lastly, here is the irrecoverablenesse of
him in this his condition, He shall be destroyed without remedy, there is no
hope of redemption for him.

For the former, before I come to the Point, you must suffer me a little to
make way for my self, in the opening of two or three passages in the Text.

Two things there are therefore that we will briefly discuss.

1. What is meant here by hardening the neck? 2. What it is to be a man of
admonitions. We will not be long in either, only (as I said) a little to make
way for the evident discovery of the point, which we mean to treat of.
To harden the neck then, it is a similitude taken from Oxen that are to draw
in the yoke, that when they are to come and bow their necks to the yoke, they
begin to grow stubborn and stiff-necked, and refuse to come under the yoke as
the Master requires, and as he expects they should do, and as those that are
taught will do, whole nature it is to take the yoke willingly and kindly. To
harden the neck therefore is, to be stubborn and rebellious, not to come under
the Commandments of God, which in the Scripture are compared to a yoke, so
Christ speaks, Take my yoke upon you; That is, Submit your selves to the Laws
of God, to the Statutes and Commandments of God. Now we are said to harden our
necks, when as the Heifer in his kind, so our souls in their kind, withdraw
our shoulders (as it were) from the commands of God, that when the will of God
is revealed, we will not stoop, we will not yield and submit to the truths of
Christ, but take up arms against him, and become rebellious to the blessed word
of God. This is the stiffening of the neck; In a word, to be rebellious, to
resist, to gainsay the truth of God, the word of God, and whatsoever is
revealed to us, and ought to be done by us.

The second Phrase is, Being often reproved. The word in the Original
implies, (as I said before) a man of admonitions, he that has line upon line,
and precept upon precept, admonitions upon admonitions; and therefore our
English renders it well, A man often reproved, that is, one that has not
only been once counseled, and instructed, and reproved; but one upon whom the
Minister is daily calling in the public Ordinance, one that is from Sabbath to
Sabbath, at least, admonished, and persuaded, and entreated by the Minister of
God, that is, continually, again and again, warned of the wrath to come. If
such a man as this gainsay all these, and remain stubborn and rebellious, after
so many admonitions and reproofs, then the judgment of God is ripe for him,
and he is ripe for it, he shall be destroyed, says the Text, the God of heaven
will break him all in pieces (as the Psalmist speaks) and that suddenly,
without remedy.

So then the words being clear, the Point is thus much, viz.

That, Wicked men grow most rebellious under the best Means.

Mark this I beseech you, It is not I, but the Text that says as much. A man
that is often reproved, and hardneth his neck. What is it to harden the neck? I
told you, to grow stubborn and stout-hearted, and to gainsay the truth of God,
to oppose it. And what is it to be often admonished? One Means is here
specified, but all are understood, he that has many means, and that has many
helps, and many encouragements, that has counsel, and advice, and reproof,
and persuasions, and instructions; If he harden his neck: So then it is plain,
that he may harden his neck, and he does harden his neck, and grow stubborn and
rebellious, notwihstanding all those means, for that is presumed, and
necessarily employed in the Text.

The case then you see is clear, That wicked men that shall be destroyed, for
whom God has appointed sudden, and heavy desolation, and perdition, they grow
hard-hearted and rebellious under the best means.

The point is evident in the Text, we will show you what we have to do,
namely, to make good the thing in hand, which we will establish by several
witnesses, and discover the nature of it.

You shall observe this to be a usual thing in the course of the Scripture, 1
Pet. 3. 20. The Text says there, That the Lord went and preached, to the
spirits now in prison. What spirits were these? which once were disobedient,
when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah. Those spirits
and damned souls, those damned Ghosts now in hell, the spirits of wicked men
now in hell, what were they? they were those that were disobedient in the days
of Noah: Noah a preacher of righteousness, whose life was a continual
preaching, who daily called upon them, and was earnest with them to repent, and
there was much long-suffering and patience afforded them, God waited long for
their amendment, yet those souls were then rebellious under such great means,
and they are now cooped up in Hell.

A man would think it strange when he shall read the story of Cain, that he
(notwithstanding God himself came from heaven to teach him) should yet remain
obstinate and stout-hearted; and yet (you know the story, Genesis 4.) you see it
was so. Cain began to be dismayed, and his countenance fell because God regarded
not his sacrifice; Well, God came from heaven, and takes Cain to task; Cain,
what means all this stir? Why art thou wroth, and why is thy countenance
fallen? If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do ill,
sin lies at the door, and unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shall rule
over him. A man I say, would think that one should be instructed when God
himself teaches, yet notwithstanding after all this Instruction of God himself
(whith in reason would be thought as effectual as could be) Cain forsakes God,
and flies off from the commandment of God, stoopeth not, nor yields
obedience thereunto.

This is that which the Prophet I saiah has, Chap. 26. 10. Let favor be
showed to the wicked, yet he will not learn righteousness, in the land of
uprightness will he deal unjustly, and will not behold the majesty of the
Lord. Though there be many helps afforded to him, though he be planted in the
Church of God, where all things call and cry to him for amendment of life,
though the holiness, and mercy, and goodness of God compass him about,
though he have holy and religious neighbors about him, though he have a good
Minister in the Parish where he is, yet he will not learn righteousness, but
will deal unjustly, notwithstanding all the washing, he will remain black
still, notwithstanding all the means that God vouchsafes for his good, yet he
will be naught still.

One example you shall see of this in a passage of a Parable, Mark. 12. which
makes good the Point in hand. A certain man, says the Text, planted a
vineyard, and set a hedge about it, and dug a place for the wine fat, and
built a Tower; (here was much pains, and a great deal of cost bestowed) Well,
he let out this vineyard to husbandmen, and went into a far country, and at
the season he sent to the husbandmen, that he might receive of the fruit of the
Vineyard: Did he receive any fruit? No, they beat one, and stoned another, and
killed another, and all the messengers they sent away empty: At last, he sent
his son, his welbeloved, but they took him, and killed him, and cast him out of
the Vineyard. In a word, The Vineyard is the Church of God, and the Husbandmen
were the Scribes and Pharisees, they were those to whom God as it were, had let
out his Church: He sends his messengers, his servants the Prophets, rising
early and sending them, his Apostles and Disciples to call for fruit, for the
fruits of holiness, of faith and obedience, but they abused his servants, they
made him no return of fruit, but when he looked for grapes, behold they brought
forth wild grapes: At last the Lord sent his Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, he
came amongst them, he that spoke as never man did speak, so that even all the
world wondered at the gracious words which did proceed out of his mouth;
certainly, says God, they will reverence my Son, they will hear him, they will
be governed by his directions, they will stoop at his command. No, they were
then most outrageous and malicious against him, they all banded themselves
together, Come, say they, let us slay him, they joined heart and hand, and all
for his ruin.

I will not dwell longer upon the proof of it. See it in nature. The Physician
observes it of the stomach that is naught, that the best meat that a man
gives it, the more cordials, the better diet, the worse are the humors that
are bred by it. Even so it is with a naughty heart, and it is an argument of a
most wretched disposition, when the best Physic, the best Remedies, the best
diet (as I may say) that God can afford a man for his spiritual cure, shall
make the heart the worse: And truly when the heart is naught, it grows stark
naught under the best means. No men are so bad, as they that live where are the
best helps for amendment.

The thing you see is evident in the proof of it, we will a little further
discover the nature of such men as live under the means, and yet harden their
necks, and how that corruption that is in the heart, does discover it self
most, where the best means are. And you shall see it made good in these two
particulars; That wicked men, corrupt hearts are the worst under the best
means, though they have admonition after admonition, though they are often
reproved.

First of all, The hearts of those men grow usually most rebellious against the
Lord, and against that truth that comes with greatest power upon them, either
discoveriing sin to them, or working effectually upon the soul and conscience.
The disposition of men usually that are naught is so, that they manifest a
marvailous fierceness of soul, whereby they carry themselves violently against
the blessed truth and Word of God; and the more, because it is the more
powerful; we have a rule in reason, that contraries when they meet, the more
violent one is, the more the other will work against it, as we may see it in
fire and water: So it is here, the greater violence, and Spirit, and power, the
Word has in any place, the more violent the heart will show it self in
gainsaying the Ministry thereof: The more home the Word comes to the
conscience, and the more powerfully it is applied, either in the convincing of
sin, or persuasion to holiness of life, the greater risings and stirrings of
heart there is against it.

You shall observe this in a passage of the story of the men of Sodom, Genesis
19.9. When the cursed Sodomites came about the house, and would have taken the
Angels that came to Lot, Lot he came out to them, and spoke very lovingly to
them, but because that which he said, tended to cross them in their wicked and
unnatural courses, mark how they answered him: Stand back, say they, This one
fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a Judge, now will we deal worse
with thee than with them: and they pressed sore upon the man, even Lot, and
came near to break the door. And why was all this? because his arguments were
good and seasonable, by which he advised them against their wicked purpose,
because he opposed them in that wicked course of theirs, therefore they could
not now hold themselves, but burst out into a strange distemper of spirit, We
will now (say they) deal worse with thee, than with them.

And so in Acts 7. It is a very observable place, verse. 56. When Stephen had
made a long relation to the Jews of the rebellion and stubbornness of their
Fathers, they heard him all along without manifesting any virulencie of spirit,
but at last, when he came out with that, Ye stiffenecked, and uncircumcised in
heart and ears, you do always resist the Holy Ghost, as your Fathers did, so
do you; then when they heard these things, when Stephen made a powerful
application of what he had said to them in particular, and told them, that they
had been the betrayers and murderers of that just One, of whose coming the
Prophets before had showed, they were cut to the heart, and gnashed upon him
with their teeth, and they cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their ears,
and ran upon him with one accord These were the workings of their corrupt
hearts, the more forcible Stephen was in the power of the word, the more
violent they were in gainsaying that Word.

I need say no more, only that is observable in Romans 7. The Text says there,
That sin becomes out of measure sinful, because of the Commandment. How is
that? It is as if he had said: Sin is the greater, and the more notorious does
it manifest it self, by how much the more the Commandment of God is the more
openly published, sin becomes out of measure sinful, because that God in the
Commandment gainsayeth it, and the more the Commandment is pressed, the more
sin opposes it, and gainsaies it, and becomes the more violent, and so grows
out of measure sinful.

Briefly, look as it is with a stream and current or Rivolet, set but a little
dam there, and it will run over it easily of it self, but if the dam be strong
and high, the River grows deep, and comes to be great and large: Why so?
because it is stopped. So it is here, the Commandment of God is the dam (as I
may say) every natural man has a stream of corruption that is always issuing
forth in a continued current; if it be so now, that the Word of God stops
him at every turn, in every ungodly practice, admits of no vent, gives no
way to any sinful course, gainsays him in every carnal and sensual delight,
bars him of the sinful enjoyment of pleasures and worldly lusts; then the
heart of a sinner begins to rise up against God, and against his word, and
Commandment, and that only because the Word of God crosses him, and gainsayes
him. And therefore observe it, if there be but a sleepie-headed Magistrate, or
a careless Minister in a Congregation, that will lot a great deal of the water
go, give leave for the stream and current of corruption to pass, let men have
a vent for their lusts, all will be at great peace, and the stream will run as
calm as can be; that Magistrate shall never have an ill word, that Minister
that any way permits a vent to corruption, he and his Parish shall agree as
quietly as may be; but if a man be stout and courageous, either Magistrate or
Minister, he shall find violent opposition, and marvailous strivings and
workings of heart against him, and that word which he delivers, and the means
of grace, which God vouchsafes to a people.

Again, as this corruption discovers it self, in opposing the good word of God,
so in the second place observe another passage, wherein the wickedness and
rebellion of men's hearts appears, notwithstanding God affords them the most
excellent means of salvation. They cleave the closer, and cling the more
eagerly to their corruptions and sins, because they seem to be crossed in the
eager and violent pursuit of them. As you know it is the nature of stubborn
spirits, the more they are forbidden a thing, the more resolved they are to do
it. I have my self observed it in some stubborn servants, that have answered
their masters: Why, if you had not said any thing, I would never have done it,
but because you keep such ado, I will do it the more.

You shall see a proof of it Jer. 18.12. God there had sent his Prophet early
and late, to that people, to show them the good and ancient ways, how they
should walk with God, and so prevent those Judgments that were threatened and
hung over their heads. But mark the Spirit of this people, the more earnest and
violent the Prophet was, out of tender compassion to their poor souls to win
them to God, the more desperately did they resolve upon a course of sin, we
will walk (say they) after our own devices, and we will every one do the
imagination of his evil heart. As if they should have said, say what you will,
we are resolved what to do, we will have our sin, we will not forsake our
corruptions; nay, we will rather cleave the closer to them, because you labor
to pluck us from them. This is the nature of every man in the world: I appeal
to your own consciences, is it not so? Is it not in every son of Adam more or
less, in wicked men wholly, in the Saints partly; observe it in your own
experience, when that happily the truths of God come and lay siege close to
your consciences, that you cannot find a way and vent for your base and
sinful practices, but the Word of God crosses you; how do your hearts swell,
and repine at the Word! How weary are you of your Minister! How do your
spirits vex at him! And so sometime at the Magistrate, if he be more zealous to
reform abuses amongst men then ordinary. There is, I say, a secret indignation
of soul, that every man may find in himself against the word of God, and the
reproofs thereof.

Let us come now to see the reason why men should be so senseless and
unreasonable, to grow the worse because God is the better to them. What ground
is there for this? Great ground my brethren, The Reasons are double, and both
most evident and plain.

The first is taken from that inward, and intimate love the soul of a wicked
man has to his sin: This is an everlasting rule, there is never a natural man
in the world, but he loves his sin as he loves his soul; Nay, he makes his
sin his God. And my brethren, the case is evident, we need no proof of it, take
a trial of it in your own experience. Let the command of God be revealed, let
the word of God be never so clearly made manifest to the hearts of men, let it
shine never so bright even in their very faces; and let there be a beloved
corruption comein the way, and let any one judge, which of these is generally
more highly prized and esteemed: you shall find a man in such a case cast the
Law of God behind his back, break through all the bars of restraint, that the
command of God has laid upon men, and he will have his corruption, he will
enjoy this lust, though God and his Word never so much oppose it. What think
you does this man esteem of most, but his own corruption? The Point is evident
therefore.

It is also clear by the example of the young man in the Gospel. When Christ
propounded this to him, That he must sell all that he had, and give it to the
poor, and come and follow him, and expect riches and treasure in heaven: The
Text says, He went away sorrowful. The covetous heart of this young man did
so cling to the world, and to the things thereof, that he made the world his
God; and he was contented to part with eternal life, and salvation, and
Christ, and all, rather then with those outward comforts that the world
afforded him: The case is Evident then: A natural man makes his sin his God,
and upon that he bestows the greatest of his love and affection, and this
appears, because he will part with heaven, and happiness, and all, rather
then with it. Mark now what follows: This being a certain rule; then this
follows necessarily, that which a man loves most, and sets highest price
upon, when that seems to be taken from him, as it were, to be withdrawn from
his possession and enjoyment, he is then the most eager after it, and labors
most to detain it, and to keep it so much the faster: What a man loves most,
he will have the greatest care of, especially then, when it seems to be gone
away, or when any other shall attempt to deprive him of it. A man has a care
of his money, above all things, at all times, but if he see a cheater come to
put his hand in his pocket, he will be sure then to hold it with so much the
more violence, he will not suffer the cheater to take it away, or any thief to
deprive him of it. So it is here; the soul of a man sets a high price, and
puts a great esteem upon every corruption at all times, loves it
continually, makes much of it, hides it under his tongue; but when the Minister
of God comes to pluck away a man's corruptions, to pluck away the world from
the covetous, the strumpet from the adulterer, the cup from the drunkard,
sensual delights from the voluptuous; then he holds it fast, then he is
carried with so much the more violence against the Lord, and his truth, and his
messengers, then he hugs his sin in both his arms (as it were) because the
word would pluck it away from him.

It is in this case between a natural man and his sin, as it was between
Demetrius and his goddess Diana, Acts 19. you shall see here, when Saint Paul
began to preach against the gods that were made with hands, he said nothing
against Diana in particular, but lays down this for a general ground and
position, that they were no gods that were made with hands, Demetrius soon saw
the consequence of this doctrine, that then Diana would be no goddess at all;
see now how Demetrius pleads the case to his fellow crafts-men: The truth is,
says he, we all know, that by this craft we get our livings, and we are all
maintained by Diana, now if she fall to the ground, as one Paul preaches, and
labors earnestly to have her down, as being no goddess, if she prove to be
no deity, certainly we are all undone, all our trade will come to nothing,
therefore let us join hands together to defend her honor: upon this all the
City was in an uproar, and there arises a great cry amongst them, for the
space of two hours, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. What is the reason? Paul
would pull down Diana, therefore it is high time to maintain her honor, Paul
would throw down the gods made with silver and gold, therefore it was high time
for him to stand for those gods that he might also maintain those profits that
came to him by them. So it is, my brethren, with all the sinful courses of
wicked men in the world: All the while the Word of God is so taught, that men
observe no kind of crossnesse in it to their own corruptions, men will bear it
with much quietness, but if a man have a Diana in his heart, a sin that he
loves, a sin that brings him in pleasure or profit, a sin that by no means
he will lose, as the worldling, he must have his gold, and the adulterer must
have his queans, and the drunkard his cups, let the Word of God offer but to
pluck these away, and you shall have an uproar presently, and they will all cry
out, our trading will fail, our delights will be gone, and we shall never see
any more good days. My brethren, I know not how it is here, but this we find
by woeful experience, in the country, too often: Let us but thwrat young men in
their sports, we shall see them so much the more violently bent upon them, even
because the will of God is manifested to the contrary; And why? The truth is,
say they, if we give way to the Minister, and be ruled by him, and hearken to
what he preaches, then adue to all delights, and comforts, and pleasures, then
adue to all good fellowship, and farewell our company, and therefore they are
so much the more violent to practice those sins that are cried down in the
ministry of the Word, that they may maintain their own carnal liberties and
sinful pleasures, and they will be sure when the Minister speaks against
their sports, and pastimes, and revellings, to be the more eager in the pursuit
of them. And so likewise the elder sort, if happily a Minister preach, as
occasion offers it self, against ill orders in their families, it may be
against their tradings, their buyings and sellings on the Sabbath Day, they
will lay all their heads together, how to cross the Minister, and if it be
possible, to remove him out of his place, because they love those courses, and
have their gain by them. This is therefore the first ground, because they love
their corruptions, and what a man loves, he will be the more eager in the
keeping and holding of it.

We will now add the second reason: And that is taken from the pride of men's
hearts, from the haughtiness that harbors in the heart of wicked men, that
they are not able to bear the Commandment of the Lord: and therefore when the
Word of God, in the ministry thereof, seems any way to overpower them, and
to go beyond them, to master their hearts in any way, oh, they think it a
matter of disgrace, and a great disparagement for them to be so base, and such
silly simplicians, as to stoop to the lure of a poor Minister, to be at his
beck, and to stand at his command. Alas, my brethren, do you think we preach
our selves? Indeed in carnal reason, if a Minister should come in his own
name, and lay upon you his own commands, it were fitter for him to say nothing
then to go about such a work, in regard of the great distance there is between
the men of the world, and him, in outward respects. But we come in the name of
the Lord of heaven, and it is his word that we preach, and the Word of God is
powerful, and will make the sturdiest heart to bow or break under it, it is
mighty in operation, like a two-edged sword, dividing asunder between the
joints and the marrow, searching even into the very thoughts of the heart. Now
because the heart of a natural man is not able, nor indeed willing to stoop to
the authority and power of the word, loath to be at the beck of Gods command
(such natural pride, and arrogance of spirit there is in carnal men,) that in
stead of submitting and yielding thereunto, they take up arms the more against
it, by how much the more powerful the word it.

It is a pretty passage that we read of the Philistines, when the Israelites
brought the Ark into the field (now the Ark was a Type of Jesus Christ) mark
the Philistines resolution when they heard of it: Woe unto us, for here has
not been such a thing heretofore: Woe unto us, who shall delive: us out of the
hands of these mighty Gods? Be strong therefore, and quit your selves like men,
O ye Philistines, that you be not servants unto the Hebrews, etc. 1 Samuel 4. 8,
9. So it is here, when the word of God comes with a certain kind of
commanding power, (as it does when it is delivered in the evidence and
demonstration of the Spirit,) if a man indeed preach under the hatches (as I
may say) as he may easily do, and trouble no man, he shall meet with no
resistance: but if a man bring the Ark into the field, that is, set up the
power of Gods Ordinance, labor to advance the Throne and Scepter of the Lord
Christ in the hearts of men; then mark, to the end that men may not be brought
into subjection to the Ordinances of God, that they may not stoop and be
brought under the yoke of Gods Commandment, they join hand in hand, and side
one with another, and fight for their liberties, as it were counting it a
matter of basnesse, and pusillanimitie to be subject to the Word of God.

You have an example of this spirit that is in wicked men in Jer. 2.21. We are
lords, (say they there) we will ceme no more at thee. And it is observable in
that place I named before, Genesis 19.9. This fellow came to sojourn with us, and
shall he be a judge? there lay the pith of the Argument, and that which moved
their wicked spirits against Lot, if Lot had ruled them by his counsel, then
he should have been master over them, therefore say they, Shall he be a judge?
I could tell you woeful experience that we find of this: Wicked men, when they
are gainsaid, and when the word of God is with that Evidence and power of the
Spirit discovered to them, that it will either stoop them, or work upon their
galled hearts and consciences, they are not able to bear it, they cannot endure
to be under the government of it, therefore they will rebel against it, and
resolve, what, shall the Minister rule us? Does he think to bring us under his
girdle, to make us do what he will, and follow what course he will have us
take? Shall he be lord over us? It is the same also with Magistrates and with
private families: Any means that God uses, any admonition whatsoever, finds
such entertainment as this with wicked and carnal hearts.

Let this suffice for a second Argument and reason, why wicked men are so
marvailous opposite against the word of God, and the means of grace, even then
when it is most powerful in gainsaying them and their corruptions, because of
the pride of heart that is in all natural men, whereby they are not able to
stoop and submit to the yoke and rule thereof, but though they are often
admonished, yet they harden their necks.

We will now come to the Use. And to let all other Uses that might be made of
this truth, thus cleared and confirmed alone, I will only intimate two unto
you. What now can we gain from hence think you? The case you see is evident,
and every man must subscribe to this as an everlasting truth, That wicked men
are the worse, under the best means. You have seen the manner of it, and you
have seen the grounds of it. What gain can we get from this truth?

Briefly thus much. First, it is a Use of Examination. And next a Use of
Exhortation.

A man may hence clearly see his own soul as in a glass, and discern very
plainly what kind of person he is, what kind of course he leads, in what
state and condition he stands, whether he be a gracious man, or a graceless
man; whether a wicked man, or one that God has a part in yea or no. It
concerns us all, my brethren, very deeply to think of it: Consider well
therefore of what has been said. I would not have you conceive that all this
that we have spoken is merely to spend out the hour. No, my brethren, you must
labor to bring your souls to be under the power of the truths delivered: And
know this, that whatsoever the Lord says unto you out of his word, he will
require it of you, when you come to give up your accounts at that day. Every
Sermon a man hears, he is thereby nearer either to heaven or hell, either he
is made better or worse by it. All men's estates in this world are either holy,
or unholy; either they are in a state of grace and salvation, or in a state of
sin and condemnation. Hence therefore you may take a scantling of your
conditions, and plainly and clearly see how it is with you: Whether you be of
the number of those that have infallible Evidences of the work of Gods Spirit
in the Ministry of the word, tending to holiness and sanctification, or
whether you be yet in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity.
Whether you be as you came into the world, the children of wrath still, or
whether you be begotten again by the immortal seed of the Word, to a lively
hope, and to an inheritance with the Saints in light.

Observe what the frame and temper of thy soul is, and how it stands affected
to the word of God when it is revealed to thy conscience. If the word prevail
not over thee, and overpower thee, if thy heart submit not to the Scepter of
the Lord Christ, and yield to his commands, certainly thou art not right in the
sight of God. We say of good seed, if it be very good, it prospers in all
good grounds: if it thrive not in one, the ground, we say, is naught. If the
physic be good, and it work not kindly upon the body, the body, we say, is
naught, if it work not at all, we reckon that body to be desperately ill, and
in a dangerous estate. So it is here, the Word of God is this seed, it is this
physic: if when it is plainly and powerfully discovered in the evidence and
declaration of the Spirit of God, it work not upon us to the mortification and
purging out of the corruption of nature, if it take not root in the heart, and
grow there, and spring up to everlasting life, that heart is naught, and as yet
such a one is in a miserable condition, and never yet had any true experience
of the work of grace upon him, never yet found any found and saving operation
of the spirit in him: so long as the Word of God, in the ministry of it, proves
ineffectuall, so long does a man continue under the power of Satan, and a slave
to diverse lusts: If Christ in his Word get not the mastery of the heart,
certainly that heart is in the possession of the Devil.

It is a place of observable, Romans 8.7. The wisdom of the flesh (by flesh
there is meant the corruption of nature) is enmity against God, and (says the
Text) it is not subject to the Law of God, nor indeed can it be. It is an
undoubted argument of a corrupt and unregenerate heart, of an ungracious and
fleshly heart, that is not, nor cannot be subject to the power of the truth of
God. I do not say, but the power of the word in judgment, may oftentimes
awaken a man, and terrify the conscience, and yet the man remain still in the
state of nature and unconverted: but I say, it is an ill sign when the soul
of a man is not able to stoop to that purity, and holiness, and goodness,
that is revealed in the Word, when a man cannot say with the Apostle, The Law
is holy, and the Commandment holy, and just, and good, even then when it
gainsayes him in his most dearest sin, and directly crosses him in his wicked
courses. My brethren, God is holy, and his Word is holy, that heart therefore
that opposes the Word, and stands out against it, and refuses to give
entertainment to it, must needs be an unholy heart: where there is a likeness
and similitude, there is an agreement: it is impossible for the Word of God,
that is pure in it self, to find any place in an impure heart, he therefore
that withstandeth the Word in the powerful ministry thereof, has just cause,
not only to suspect, but to conclude of himself, that he is yet far from
the kingdom of God, and that there is as much difference between God and him,
as is between heaven and hell.

Mark for this end I beseech you: a passage or two in the Scripture, and suffer
not your selves to be deluded by Satan and your deceitful hearts. Howsoever a
man may make a tush of the truth of God now, and think to plead a pretended
hope of mercy whatsoever the Minister says, yet see what the Spirit of God
concludes of such men as withstand the power of the Word of God in the
faithful ministry thereof. Observe therefore that place in 2 Timothy 3 8. It is
the description of a naughty and wicked heart: As Jannes and Jambres resisted
Moses, so do these men: What are these men? Men of corrupt minds, and
reprobate concerning the faith. If there be a Jannes and Jambres resisting
Moses, standing out against the Word of God, opposing the Ministers thereof,
who have hearts rising up against the truth of God, when it is evidently and
plainly revealed by his Messengers: What are these in the judgment of God?
They are men of corrupt minds, and reprobate concerning the faith, That is,
they have minds not knowing, hearts not approving the good Word of God, and
this is the just judgment of God upon them, their minds are so besotted, and
their hearts so hardened, that they are fo far from doing what God requires,
that they desperately resist it, and take up arms against it.

You have another passage of the Apostle to this purpose, in Phil. 3. Many
(says he) are the enemies of the cross of Christ: but how shall we know them?
whose god is their belly, whose glory is their shame; who mind earthly things:
and what is the end of these men? whose end is destruction. It is a clear
place; suffer not Satan to blind your minds, my brethren; if this be the truth
of God (as it is most true that it is so) then certainly if any man find his
heart guilty of these sins, he must know himself to be in the state of
damnation.

I appeal to any man's heart here present. Is not the Word of God holy? Is it
not a gracious word? Is it not a heavenly truth? doubtless every heart will
yield to it, that it is a good Word of God. There are none so senseless, I
presume, that dare openly profess, that they care not for the Word of God, and
that there is not such holiness, and such goodness in it, as is said to be in
it. I dare not think, that there harbors such a thought scarce in the heart
of a man that lives in the bosom of the Church. It is true, my brethren, it
is a holy, and a good, and a heavenly Word. What then shall we think of that
soul, that opposes this holy and gracious Word? must we not conclude him to
be an unholy and graceless man? must not he that opposes this heavenly Word
of God, be a hellish man? Certainly it must be a marvailous profane and
devilish heart, that must go against that heavenly truth, whereby the souls
of the Saints are converted, and brought to heaven, and made capable of the
sight of the face of God, who is holiness it self.

Let men therefore be persuaded of this truth, and take this Word home with
you. I doubt not, but there be some in this Congregation, that are yet in their
natural condition, that are not subject to the Law of God, that if you pursue
them with the power of the Word, they will turn back and resist it, and gainsay
it, such swine as our Savior speaks of, that when Pearls are thrown before
them, will turn back and fly in the faces of those that dispense them, and all
to rend them. Consider of it, if thy heart therefore, when the Word of God
comes directly and powerfully home to thee, and laves hold upon thy
conscience, and tells thee, these and these sins thou have committed, such
and such hypocrisies were in thy duties and performances, such ways of
holiness and preciseness thou must walk in, and such courses of sin you
must forsake, if, I say, thy heart gainsay this truth, and thou art carried
violently against the Word. Alas poor soul! think of it, content not your
hearts with your conditions, but confess it, confess thou have a graceless
and naughty heart, this is the next way to be a Christian. It is a special
ornament of a Christian man, to be contented to be checked by the Word of God,
labor therefore to yield to the truth when it is revealed. And this is the
first Use, a word of Examination.

The second is a word of Exhortation, and so I will conclude. We are all to be
exhorted in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, to take notice of this evil
that is in our hearts. I say, all of us, for howsoever wicked men do
professedly oppose the truth of God, and his Word in the faithful ministry
thereof, yet the Saints of God themselves, so far as they are flesh, have
resistances in them; but with this difference, a godly man when he perceives
his heart stubborn and rebellious against God in his Word, he yet
notwithstanding joyneth and sideth with the Word, and labors to oppose that
corruption of the flesh; so it was with Saint Paul in the place before named. A
child of God that has a holy disposition wrought in him by the Spirit of God,
when he sees his heart unwilling to yield to Christ and his Word, he cries
shame upon himself, that after so much hearing, so many mercies received, so
many gracious promises revealed to him, the good Word of God so often laid home
to his conscience, that his heart should yet remain in any measure rebellious
against God; and therefore he rests not in this condition, but takes up arms
against this rebellion of heart, as well as against any corruption else
whatsoever. This, I say, is the disposition of a gracious heart. But with a
wicked man it is clean contrary.

So then I say, though it concerns all natural men in a special manner, to
suffer this word of exhortation, but seeing every man, even the Saints of God
themselves, so far as there is corruption in them, have in them this
rebellion of nature, it is therefore an exhortation to all to be persuaded, if
we tender our own good and comforts, not to content our selves to be bare
hearers, to enjoy the means of grace, and to live under the powerful preaching
of the Gospel, but to labor to bring our hearts to yield and submit to the
truths revealed, and to give way to the Word of God, to be contented to be
governed by the good Word of God. It is better never to have known the Word of
God, then to have it made known, and to gainsay, and stand out against it. Let
us therefore be careful to subject our selves, and to take up the yoke of the
Lord, to give way to every truth revealed, being willing and contented to yield
to whatsoever the Word of God shall make known, whether it declare what is
amiss, to take that away, or whether it reveals what is to be done, to
practice that. This is a blessed frame and disposition of spirit, and by this
we shall come to have comfort and benefit by all our hearing; this is the only
way to get that good, that God intends in all those helps and means that he
has appointed in his Church.

It is the commendation of Josiah, that his heart melted at the hearing of the
Law read, 2 Kings 22.19. And I know not a greater ornament to a Christian, then
to have such a heart; that look as it is with soft things, they will take any
impression that is put upon them, whatsoever the stamp or seal sets upon
them they will take it, print for print, be it of what nature or kind soever;
such ought to be the temper of every soul, to have a tender yielding, melting
heart, to be of a pliable, teachable disposition, to give way to whatever is
made known out of the Word.

I beseech you therefore take this home to your souls, and suffer the words of
exhortation, let the Word of God take place in your hearts; I would have every
Christian soul to look up to heaven when he comes into the Congregation, and
to say, speak Lord, thy servant is desirous to hear, and contented to hear and
obey whatsoever thou shall in this Sermon make known to me. And if the Lord
will have any thing, give it him, if he exact any thing from thee, yield to
him. This is a melting heart.

But you will say to me (I will conclude in a word or two) How shall a man come
to bow his neck, and take up the yoke of Christ? Here is all the labor, my
brethren, and if we could once obtain this, the business would be done. God is
not less merciful then he was, the Word is not less powerful then it was;
but these hearts of ours are stubborn and loath to yield to the truth. Labor
therefore for this, and have all. But what course shall we take to compass
this?

In a word, the means that I would suggest for the present are these.

First, labor to work upon thy own soul a kind of reasonable contentedness,
to part with that beloved corruption that lies in thy bosom. I do not say
thou can do it, but I say labor to bring thy heart to a reasonable kind of
contentedness this way. For my brethren, here is all the quarrel between you
and the Minister of God, it all lies here, the Lord says, thou must forsake
thy sins, or else I must damn thy soul. For we come for souls when we come to
preach, we do not come here only to spend an hour, and so an end of the
matter: No, but we see a poor company of creatures in the Congregation, and we
know that many among them are yet hardened and blinded, and going headlong to
perdition, it is now our labor and care to prevent your ruin, and therefore
many a prayer we put up, and many a tear we shed on your behalf. Oh suffer your
Minister therefore, because he desires and studieth your good, he sees you
walking in a way in which you must needs perish, and therefore he draws the
sword of the word of God against you; Oh stoop to the word of God revealed.
Here now I say is all the quarrel, the Minister says, you must leave your
sins, the soul says, I will not, I will have those fins, and I will practice
those courses, and therefore thou stomackst the Minister, and thy heart works
against the Word of God. Alas, Why do you contend against him, and murmr
against him, we seek not our selves but you, nor do we aim at our own ends,
but at the salvation of your precious souls, and notwithstanding all your
oppositions, here is the comfort of a Minister, that one converted soul is
better then a whole world, therefore well may he sweat his heart for it,
whatsoever you say. But I say, if the Minister labor thus with God, and with
thee for thy souls good, why is all this controversy? Why do thou not labor
with thy heart to part with thy sins? It is the desire of the Minister, that it
may go well with you, and yours for ever; Is not this reasonable? Oh, take
notice what Traitors there are in your bosoms, that persuade you to the
contrary, begin to think with thy self, of thy own folly, say with thy self,
Lord, What a beast am I: Is not the truth that is revealed to me a plain truth,
is it not the truth of God? Is it not for my good to yield unto it? Do not I
see the heart of the Minister earnest to save me? what does he say, but that
which is profitable for my soul? What is the reason that I stoop not to this so
reasonable a thing, why come not I under the power of this word, and submit to
the government thereof? Oh my corruptions say it is unreasonable, what (do
they say) will thou suffer thy sin which thou have loved, and dallyed withal
so long, thy sin that has been of such ancient acquaintance with thee, and
yielded thee so much pleasure and profit: Will thou suffer the Word now to
pluck it away from thee? My brethren, labor now to lay strong hands upon the
Traitor, and to grapple with that bosome-corruption, and work thy soul to a
contentedness to part with it.

And to bring thy heart to this contentedness (for all the quarrel is ended if
this be done) you must professedly come to this Point, whether it be better to
lose an eye, or a tooth, or a limb, and go to heaven lame or blind, or to
retain these, and go to hell, and lose your soul for ever. Bring I say thy
soul to a secrious consideration of this truth, either I must lose my sin or my
soul, there is no third thing to be done, howsoever carnal reason may suggest
other matters, yet it must come all to this at last: Therefore think of it
seriously, and tell your souls this in secret, if sin be had, condemnation must
be entertained by me also, choose now which you would have. Every man by nature
has this principle in him to desire to sleep in a whole skin; and therefore we
shall observe men in times of horror of conscience, the soul is content, for
its own safety, to fling off all for a while. Bring thy heart to it now, and
labor to keep it close to this point, either to renounce Christ or sin.

Look as it is with a man that has a gangrean in his hand or leg, or some
other venomous disease: when a man comes to him and he asks his counsel, and
he tells him, that the nature of the disease is such, that the part must be cut
off, or else all will be infected, this he likes not perhaps, but yet this is
not enough to work in him a resolution of being dismembered, and therefore he
sends for another, and another. But at last one comes and tells him
plainly, either you must lose your hand, or your life, oh then the heart is
brought to this, rather take my hand than my life. So it is here, bring thy
heart to this therefore, either leave all profaneness, leave all contemning of
God, and love of the world, or leave salvation, either your life, or your lust
must go, your sin, or your eternal happiness. Work this upon your souls
every time you come to hear the Word.

The second thing for a man to do, that he may come to give way to the Word of
God, and have a teachable soul, is this. Take heed of admitting any carnal
reasonings against the truth revealed, and the plain Word of God openly
manifested to you: no carnal shifts and evasions for the soul will be thereby
cozened. In Exodus 7. you shall see there, Moses comes to work upon the heart
of Pharaoh, and to persuade him to let Isruel go, and to work the more
effectually upon him, he does some miracles, when Pharaoh saw this, he sent for
the Magicians to do the like, and they did, it is true, Moses Rod eat up their
Rods, but in the mean time, Pharaohs heart was hardened. The thing is this, my
brethren, what Moses said to Pharaoh, the Lord says to every soul, let thy
soul go that it may serve me, let thy heart yield obedience to me, that thou
may be blessed for ever, there is no remedy, this must be done, thou must be
humbled for thy sin and forsake it, or else destruction on follows. This is
the charge which God sends by every faithful Minister: if now a man send for
some carnal reason (which is as the Magitians to Pharaoh) and that suggests,
what needs all this ado? what needs all this niceness and preciseness,
is not God merciful? and shall a man look to be saved for his works? why did
Christ die, if salvation were not for sinners? Oh, my brethren, this will undo
you, these are the delusions of Satan, and mere carnal imaginations, and so
the soul forsakes that repentance that God requires, and gainsayes that good
Word which God has revealed.

Your only course now, my brethren, is to admit of no carnal reasonings, when
the Word of God is plainly and powerfully discovered, when you see a miraculous
hand of God in making known your hidden and secret sins, and laying open your
estates, when God discovers your sins in their own fearful and ugly shape;
will you yield to fleshly imaginations, to think, alas, every thing is not
Gospel that the Minister speaks, many wise men, and great Scholars, and
Ministers too here are, that say the quite contrary. This is to hinder the
power and efficacy of the Word of God. Admit therefore of no carnal counsel,
send for no Magitians, when the Lords command is evident and plain, hear
nothing against the Word of God, but yield and captivate your minds to the
truths revealed.

The third Argument that will bring the heart to stoop to the Word of God, it
is this, to consider the excellency and sovereign superiority of the
Commandment of God.

My brethren, it is in vain to dally with the Word of God, you must know it is
his Word, the Scepter of his Kingdom, that Word by which you must be judged,
that Word which shall stand, though heaven and earth change and come to
nothing, that which shall be made good upon all men, either to their salvation
or damnation, Therefore be convinced of the majesty and authority of the Word
of God. Do not think that all the business is when you come here, only to
hear a man speak an hour, and so have done. No, that which you hear is the
Word of God, and that Word that is now revealed, it must rule you either here,
to bring your souls to a subjection thereunto, or else to domineer over you,
then when you cannot gainsay it.

Many are the shiftings and turnings that are in the heart of wicked men, to
put off the force and virtue of the Word of God; alas, say they, these words
are but wind, and they break no bones, and so men scoff at the threatenings of
God. Oh take heed of this, and know (and let your hearts be a wed with it)
howsoever it is true, you may gainsay the commands of the Word, yet you shall
never be able to fly the curse of the Word. A Minister may speak from God to
you, and labor with God for you, and all may be cast aside, but the Word it
self remains, and will have its effect one way or other, and that which you
now reject, shall have dominion over you. Alas, my brethren, the Word we preach
it is not our own, it is the Word of God, of the God of Heaven, and know this,
that that which will not now be obeyed in the precepts of it, will hereafter be
found in the curse of it.

I would fain hear the sinner that now takes up arms against God and his truth,
that makes nothing of the Commands he hears, and in effect says, that he will
not obey them, I would feign have such a one consider, what he will say at the
fearful day of Judgment. Now God bids thee repent, and believe, and obey the
Gospel, and thou will not: the Lord then shall say to thee, depart from me into
everlasting fire, I would feign hear a sinner say, Lord, I will not go down to
hell, and be in that pit for ever. My brethren, you are too weak to strive with
the Lord, his word may now be gainsaid, but then the Lord shall say, by this
Word that thou have disobeyed thou shall be condemned, and that Word shall send
thee down to the pit, when there will be found no resistance. Therefore I
beseech you be persuaded, rather choose the good, that your souls may live, and
know who you have to deal withal, it is the voice of God that speaks to you,
that voice that shook heaven and earth once, and will do it again. Therefore
let every soul be a wed at the mighty word of God, that being framed according
to the rules of it now, you may be blessed for ever by it.

Fourthly and lastly, Work thou when God works, and move thou when God moves.
There is a time when the Spirit of God moves upon the hearts of men in the
hearing of the word, when God leaves some impression behind him at a Sermon,
that a man may say, me thought this day I was almost persuaded, the thought it
was reason that the Minister spoke. On work now when God works, take that Word
home with thee, and go aside, and lift up thy hands to heaven, and beseech the
Lord to bless that good word, now that the heart has been stirred, and in
some measure persuaded, now entreat the Lord buckle and bow they soul in
perfect obedience to his Majesty. Think well of this counsel my brethren.
There is never a wicked man in the world, that slights the power of the word
now, but he shall be terrified under it, and feel the power of it whether he
will or no. If God therefore be pleased to stir up any thought in thee of this
kind, do not put it out of thy heart by going about other business, or into
wicked company, no, take home that stroke of God, make it work more
effectually upon thee, converse with that word every night, and labor to bring
thy heart to be affected with it still more and more. This is the next way to
be sure to work when God works. The Devil steals terror out of the hearts of
men, it should be our course therefore, that what ever powerful work God works
in any of us in any measure, that thou art almost a Christian, as Agrippa, make
one step further, join with God, go home and entreat the Lord to set it deeper
upon thy soul, that thou may not only be almost good, but altogether good,
and be ever constant in this course.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, These Books following are printed, and are to be sold by
Francis Eglesfield, at his Shop at the Marigold in Paul's Churchyard.
EXcellent Instructions for the keeping of Merchants Books, and Accounts by way
of Debtor and Creditor, after the Italian manner, by John Carpenter Gent. in
Folio. Aelians Tacticks, or the Art of Imbattelling an Army, in folio.
Animadversions of War, by Robert Ward Gentleman and Commander, in Folio. The
Works of John Tailor the Water-poet, collected into one Volume in Folio.
Heywood of Angels, in folio. Parcus on the Revelation in English, in folio.
Goulston in Rhetoricam Aristotelis gr. lat. in quarto. The Works of that famous
Mathematician, Edmund Gunter, sometime Professor of Astronomy in Gressam
College, London, in Quarto. The Works of Sir Richard Baker, Viz: Meditations
and Disquisitions on the Lords Prayer in 4to. On the First Psalm in 4to. On the
seven Penitential Psalms in 4to. On the seven Consolatorie Psalms in 4to. His
Cato Variegatus, or Cato's Moral Disticks translated into English Verse, 4to.
On the Creed in 12. Motives for prayer upon the seven days of the Week, in 12.
The Soliloquie of the Soul in 12. An Apology for Laymens writing in 12.
Decimall Arithmetic, or the use of Napiers bones, by William Barton in 8to.
Butlers History of Bees, in 4to. The Seamans Secrets, with the Tables new
calculated, very useful for young Seamen, in 4to, Commentaries on the first
Psalm, by Phinehas Fletcher, in 4to. The Purple Island, being Poetical
Miscelanies, in 4to. Joy in tribulation, or Consolations for afflicted
Consciences. The Golden Scepter, with the Churches marriage, and the Churches
carriage, in three Treatises, by that learned Divine Dr. Preston in 4to, His
five Sermons upon several occasions, preached at Court, The needles
Excellency, or a Book of Cut-works, in 4to. Light from Heaven by Dr. Sibbs in
4to. Lydias Conversion, or the Riches of Mercy, by Dr. Sibbs in 12. The whole
Works of that Eloquent Divine Thomas Playfer D. D. collected into one Volume
8to. The Handmaid to Arithmetic refined, by Nicholas Hunt. 8to. The Art of
Dialling by John Foster, in 4to. An Introduction to the right receiving of the
Sacrament, by W. Pemble, in 12. I he burden and unburthening of a laden
conscience, in 12. Spiritual food and Physic, being a large Catechism, by
John Mico, in 8to, Nichols Catechism, in 8to, Corpus Christi, together with
the demonstration of Antichrist, in 12. The History of Heliodorus in ten Books
turned into English by W. Lisle in Quarto. Aesops Fables in Prose and Verse
grammatically translated, illustrated with Pictures, together with the History
of his Life in 12. Divine Emblems and Hieroglyphics, by Francis Quarles, in
8to. The usefulness and excellency of Christ, by C. Jelinger, in 8to. The
Office and Duty of Constables, Churchwardens, and other Officers, excellently
set forth by Nicholas Layer, Counselor. A Collection of Speeches, by Sir
Edward Deering, in 4o. A Discourse of proper Sacrifice, by Sir Edward Deering,
in 4o. Posselii Syntaxis, 8o. Greek. Gods's Summons to a general repentance,
by Adam Harsuet in 12o. Juelli Apologia, in 8o. Greek and Latin. Diverse
Sermons upon several occasions, by John Bond Master of the Savoy, in 4o The
Doctrine of the Bible, in 8o. Gospel Conversion, by John Cotton of New England
in 8o. A Brief of the Bibles History in 12o. by Enoch Clapham. Occasional
Meditations, by Joseph Hall, in 12. A brief Exposition on the Epistle to the
Hebrews, by David Dixon, 8o. Shorthand writing, by Thomas Shelton, in 8o.
Wollebii Compendium Thelogiae, in 12o. Spare minutes, or Warwicks Meditations,
in 1^. The Map of England with the Kings. Shorthand writing, by Henry Dix.
Luchans Dialogues translated into English, in 4o. Holidaii Philosophia, in 4o.
Veneti Historia, in 4o. Deaths Deliverance, and Eliahs fiery Chariot, in two
Sermons, by Alexander Gross. A Manual of Controversies in English, by
Osiander, in 8o. Munition against man's misery, by R. Smith, 12. Wit and Mirth,
by John Tailor, in 8o Garden of spiritual Flowers, in 12. Bible Battles, by
Bernard, in 12. Monuments in the Saxon tongue, written 700. years ago, showing,
that both the Old and New Testament, Lords Prayer, and the Creed, were then
used in the Mother tongue, collected by William Lisle, 4o. The Excellency of a
gracious Spirit, together with Moses Self-denial, by Jeremiah Buroughs, 8o.
Formulae Oratoriae, in usum Scholarum concinnatae, by Io. Clark of Lincoln, in
12. Phraseologia puerilis, or selected Latin and English phrases, by Io.
Clark, in 12. The power of the Christian Magistrate in sacred things, by Lewis
du Moulin, History reader in Oxford in 8o. Brief notes upon the whole book of
Psalms, by George Abbot late published, in 4o. Amicus Reipublicae, the
Commonwealths friend, or an exact and speedy course to justice and right, and
for preventing and determining tedious Lawsuits, by Io. March of Grayes-Inne,
Barrister. The Souls preparation for Christ, by Thomas Hooker of New England,
in 12. The Souls possession of Christ, by Thomas Hooker of New England, in 12.
The CONTENTS of the several Sermons in the ensuing Work.
SERMON. I.
Doct. 1. JEsus Christ has given himself for all that believe. page 8. To what
Christ gave himself for believers page 9 Use 1. The love of Christ to believers
page 17 Use 2. Ground of consolation to believers page 18 Use 3. Motives to
give up our selves to Christ page 19 Use 4. Persuasions to believe in Christ
page 21 Doct. 2. Christ gave himself for believers to free them from guilt and
punishment page 24 The Point opened page 25 And further cleared in four
particulars page 27 Reas. 1. From Christ's love to God page 31 Reas. 2. From
Christ's love to believers ibid. Use 1. Consolation to believers page 32 Use 2.
Exhortation to two things page 34 Use 3. Instruction threefold: 1. That there
needs no satisfaction on our part page 39 2 The great bondage under iniquity
page 40 3 To love Christ that has given himself page 41
SERMON. II.
Doct. 1. Christ is in every justified person page 48 In what respect Christ is
in them page 49 The means whereby Christ is in them page 50 Use. The readiest
way to become justified page 51 Doctr. 2. In whomsoever Christ is, there is a
death of sin, and a life of righteousness page 54 Degrees of the death of sin,
and life of righteousness page 56 How to know the death of sin, and life of
righteousness page 58 Use 1. Exhortaion to the death of sin, and life of
righteousness page 66 The bad use that the world makes of the falls of others
page 70 Use 2. Comfort to those that die to sin page 72 Terror to those that
do not page 75
SERMON. III.
Doctr. 1. God commands his children to do nothing, but he promises to
enable them to perform it page 80 Reas. 1. It is Gods purpose they should obey
his Commandments page 81 Reas. 2. All their obedience shall come from Christ
page 82 Use 1. To show that Gods Commandments are not grievous page 83 Use 2.
How unexcusable defects o^ obedience are page 85 Use 3. The ready way to obey
Gods Commandments page 88 Use 4. Consolation to Gods children page 90 Doct. 2.
Sin shall not reign in Gods children to obey it as a King, nor so as to damn
them for obeying it page 93 Reas. 1. All reign of sin to damnation, from the
Justice of God page 94 Reas. 2. All Christ's people must be like Christ page 95
Use 1. The falsnesse of that position, that all are. sinners alike page 97 Use
2. Consolation to Gods children page 98 Use 3. Exhortation to fight against
sin page 101 Doct. 3. All the encouragement we have from God, is of grace
page 102 Doct. 4. All the privileges, and mercies we enjoy, come by Christ and
his Gospel Ibid. Use 1. To check their unthankfulness that enjoy the Gospel
page 105 Use 2. Exhortation to prize Christ and the Gospel page 106 Doct. 5.
All that are in Christ, are not under the Law, but under Grace page 107 What it
is to be under the Law Ibid. What it is to be under Grace page 111 Use 1.
Comfort to those that are in Christ page 113 Use 2. Reproof of uncomfortable
Christians page 114 Use 3. Instructions to those that are out of Christ page
116 Use 4. Exhortation to get interest in Christ page 118
SERMON. IV.
Doct. The voice of the Lord Christ is only to be attended to, and obeyed page
126 After what manner the voice of Christ must be hearkened to page 127 The
voice of Christ made known two ways page 135 Reas. 1. Christ alone has
command over us page 136 Reas. 2. The direction of Christ is surest Ibid. Reas.
3. Christ only is able to teach us page 137 Reas. 4. Christ only can teach
the inward man Ibid. Use 1. Reproof of several sorts, that hear any thing but
the voice of Christ Ibid. Use 2. Reproof of the Saints in several cases page
143
SERMON. V.
Doct. 1. All outward privileges are not able to make a sound Saint of God
page 157 Reas. Outward matters work not on the heart page 159 Use 1. Reproof of
those that trust to outward privileges Ibid. Use 2. Exhortation not to rest in
outward privileges page 160 Doct. 2. Faith causes fruitfulness page 163 Use
Reproof of those that are unfruitful page 164 Doct. 3. Every faithful man
does imitate the actions of Abraham page 166 Several steps of Abraham's
obedience page 167 Reas. The same promises, and spirit, in and to all believers
page 176 Use 1. To show who are true Saints page 177 Trials who be children of
Abraham page 178 Use 2. No by-way to bring to happiness page 184 Use 3. Comfort
to Gods people page 185
SERMON VI.
Doct. People may enjoy the means of knowledge, and yet not profit by them, but
remain void of the knowledge of God page 194 Reas. 1. From the blindness of
men's minds page 196 Reas. 2. Because men are merely natural page 197 Reas. 3.
Resolution to keep some lust page 200 Difference between knowledge of
Hypocrites, and Saints page 206 Use 1. Reproof of conceited ignorant persons
page 211 Use 2. Showing the sinfulness of nature, and blindness of mind page
212
SERMON. VII.
Doct. Wicked men grow most rebellious under the best means page 221 Wherein
this rebellion discovers it self page 225 Reas. 1. From the love to sin page
228 Reas. 2. From the pride of men's hearts page 231 Use 1, For Examination page
234 Use 2. For Exhortation page 238 Means to come to submit to Christ's yoke
page 240.

