THE FAITHFUL COVENANTER.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE LECTVRE IN DEDHAM IN ESSEX.

By that excellent servant of Jesus Christ, in the work of the Gospel, Mr. Tho.
Hooker, late of Chelmsford; now in New England.

Very useful in these times of Covenanting with God.

Psalm 78. verse. 9. The children of Ephraim being armed, and carrying Bows,
turned back in the day of Battle.

Ver. 10. They kept not the Covenant of God: and refused to walk in his Law.

Ver. 36. Nevertheless, they did flatter him with their mouth: and they lied
unto him with their tongues.

Verse. 37. For their heart was not right with him: neither were they steadfast
in his Covenant.

LONDON, Printed for CHRISTOPHER MEREDITH at the Crane in Paul's Churchyard.
1644.

A SERMON PREACHED AT DEDHAM Lecture in Essex.
DEUTERONOMY. 29.24, 25. Even all Nations shall say, Wherefore has the Lord done thus
unto this land? what means the heat of this great anger?

Then the men shall say, Because they have forsaken the Covenant of the Lord
God of their fathers, which he made with them when he brought them forth out of
the land of Egypt.


THe holy Prophet Moses, having in the foregoing Chapters, the 28. especially,
discovered unto the people as his last words almost which he spoke unto them,
the mavelous mercies of the Lord to those which walked with him, and were
obedient unto his Commandments which he had set before them, and the heavy
Judgments he had prepared for, and would execute on them that walked
stubbornly against him; and were disobedient and rebellious, notwithstanding
all means he used to reclaim them, and all the blessings that he bestowed
upon them, as the Commandments you may see in the foregoing Chapter. If you
will observe and do all that I command you this day: verse. 1. then verse. 3.
Blessed shall thou be in the City, and blessed shall thou be in the field:
verse. 4. Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground:
verse. 5. Blessed shall be thy basket and thy store, etc.

But if not, but they will be disobedient and rebel against him, he sends fire
after them presently, and says, verse. 16. Cursed shall thou be in the City,
and cursed shall thou be in the field. verse. 17. Cursed shall thou be in thy
basket, and in thy store, etc. Now having dealt with them both ways, he winds
up all, and deals with them by way of Prophecy, and tells them, what Israel
would do, and what the Lord would do, if their hearts turned away from him,
and from his Statutes, which he had set before them to walk in. He tells them
that the people after his death will go a whoring, O that this might not be,
says Moses, but yet if it be, the Lord will root you out of this good Land,
and will bring upon you all these curses that are written in this Book, to
plague you here, and will cause everlasting vengeance to seize upon you
hereafter.

Now after he had dealt with them by mercies and judgments, these not
prevailing, the Lord sends an enemy upon them that sweepes them away as
unprofitable 1 King 14.10. a King. 9 37. Psalm. 83.10. Ier. 8.2. and 9.22 and
16.4. and 25.33.
dung off the face of the earth. Now the Prophet brings in the Nations here
justifying the Lords dealing with them, and saying, verse. 24. Wherefore has
the Lord done thus unto this Land? What means this fierce wrath of the Lord?

As if a man should say, What was this goodly ENGLAND, the only Nation of all
the Earth, and yet now all laid waste in this fearful manner? Whence came
this heavy displeasure, and what does mean this fierce wrath of the Lord? Now
mark what follows, All men shall say, that is, even the wicked themselves,
all standers by shall give sentence on the Lords side, and justify his doings,
and say, Alas, can you blame the Lord for dealing thus fiercely against such a
stubborn rebellious people? What would you have had the Lord done more, he
gave them a Law, and Mercies, and Judgments, but they would not serve the
Lord, but brake the bands asunder, and cast the cords behind their backs.
Psalm. 2.3.
Therefore now they shall serve enemies. God is not to be blamed, What could he
have done, or what would you have had him do more then he did for them?
Threatenings from Mount Eball, and Blessings from Mount Gerizzim flue about from
this side, and on that side, and yet nothing would do them good: Why should
they live any longer then? what should the Lord do? they profited by nothing,
neither by his mercies, nor his judgments; and what was the cause, brethren?
Here was the cause, they were false hearted, they would not walk sincerely
with the Lord; and therefore the anger of the Lord was kindled against them,
and he rootetd them out of their Land in his wrath, and in great indignation.
Oh the fearful wrath of the Lord that came upon them!

In the words take notice of three particulars: Parts of the Text.
First, the Judgment of the Lord denounced, threatened Jerusalem? What,
Jerusalem the perfection of beauty, the joy of the whole Earth? As if one
should hereafter pass by and see all the Towns burnt up here in this Land,
(which God grant may never be) but if it should be so, and one should pass by
and see all the houses burnt up, and the Churches burnt; would he not be amazed
at it, and say, Why, what means this fierce wrath of the Lord? Would it not
make our hearts ache Brethren, to pass by these places, and see the houses of
God burnt down to the ground, and think with our selves; Oh the good
exhortations and admonitions we have heard here!

Verse. 25.
then men shall say, Because they have forsaken the Covenant of the Lord their
God. So brethren, if this should be our case, poor little ones would say then,
I remember my father said thus it would be, for the Land forsook the Covenant
of the Lord; and the Minister told us of this stubbornness and rebellion
against the Lord, that this would be the end of it.



And so people would do here if the Lord should do with us as he did with the
Jews. First, of the What means the fierce anger of the Lord? why, it was the
fierce anger of the enemies, was it not? Yes, But there is no enemy but is in
Gods hand, it is his wrath that they execute. The wicked of the world are but
the Lords instruments; the Sword is thine Lord, though thou usest them as the
hand to strike with. The Lord commanded destruction to come upon them; Doct. 1.
Hence observe God is the Author of all those punishments and judgments, that
ever come upon a nation or people, family or person. It is his will that is the
worker; He is the bringer of all sorrows, troubles, and judgments upon any. It
was not the Babylonians that overthrew them; It was not Nebuchadnezzar, it was
the fierce anger of the Lord that did it: you know what God himself says, Is
there any evil in the city, and I have not done it? Amos 3.6. And he hiss
for an enemy, Isa. 4 5.7.
all places are at his command, Isa. 7.18.
he commands deliverance for them, that serve and obey him, as it is in the
Psalm: and plagues and destruction for them that disobey him, and rebel
against him.

To make this then our own, brethren, by application, briefly, for I mean to
fasten upon nothing in this verse, but to pass on to the other wherein is
contained the maine point which I intend to stand upon, as thinking it in my
thoughts most fit for this congregation. If this be so, then here is a cooling
card for the wicked. Use.
All you that hear this word this day, whose consciences accuse you, that you
are enemies to God and goodness, hear and fear, and tremble for ever; If God
bring judgments, who shall feel them and find them? surely, his enemies be
them that shall feel them, Psalm. 10 16.
Psalm. 10.16. It is the collection that the Psalmist makes. The Lord is King
for ever, and what then? the heathen are destroyed, says he. If all judgments
be at his command, then his enemies shall be sure to feel them. You that have
wicked husbands or wives, fear every night when you go to bed, lest the
judgment of the Lord should come upon them, yet ere morning, and cut them off
and send them to destruction. Use.
And you that are careless of your ways, and go on in your wickedness,
understand the Lord has vengeance for you; He has rods enough, they are not
all burnt, he will bring them our against you, Psalm. 68.21.
and will wound the hairie scalpe of him that goes on in his sins. Mark what
the Apostle says, 1 Pet ^.18.
1 Pet. 4.18. If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and
the sinner appear. If the righteous (brethren) hardly get to heaven, but loses
an arm, an other a right eye as it were, and with many prayers, and sighs,
and graplings with God, and through many temptations hardly come to heaven in
the end, and a poor humble soul beg for power against his corruptions, as
if he would pluck mercy from the Lord by strong hand, and yet scarcely subdue
sin and obtain salvation; what then will become of a company that are
enemies to God and godliness, a company of unrighteous men, where shall they
appear; The day will come when they that stand against the gracious voice of
the Almighty now, shall hear the thundering voice of the Almighty, Luke
23.30.
and shall call and cry to the mountains and hills to fall upon them and cover
them, Rev. 6.16.
that they may be hid from the presence of the Judge.

Secondly, observe that the Text says, What means the fierce anger of the Lord
against this nation? Exodus 19 5. Tit. 2.14. 1 Pet. 2 9. Psalm. 60 5. and 108.6.
and 127.2. Romans 3.2.
What nation? why, the nation of the Jews, Gods own people, his * peculiar,
his first borne, Exodus 4.22. his beloved, Cant. 1.14, 15. and 5.1, 2. to whom
the oracles of God were committed, to whom the Prophets came in his name. That
nation that had all means of good, that had all mercies, privileges, and all
encouragements, the Lord showed his fierce wrath to them. Learn: Doct. 2.
No outward privileges in the world will free any nation under heaven from the
judgments of the Lord, if they sin against him, and be stubborn and
rebellious. If any people might have been exempted and freed, surely the Jews
might; They might have said, Why Lord will thou plague us? what, will thou
destroy us? why, we are thy people, we have thy sacrifices, and thy Prophets,
and thy Temple is amongst us. That is all one, what means the fierce anger of
the Lord against this nation? says the Text. Be the man what he will, the
means never so excellent, and the privileges never so great, if he sin, he
shall be sure to be plagued, Ier. 7.12. Brethren you may see there, that when
the Prophet threatened the judgments of the Lord against them; Jerusalem began
to brag of her privileges, and the mercies of God which he had bestowed on
them; Go to Shiloh, says the Lord to them, the place where I set my name at
first, and see what I did to it, for the wickedness of my people Israel. The
case is clear and plain, no privileges, though the word of God and his
ordinances, and the means of grace be there, will keep away judgments: If
people sin, God will proceed in wrath against them, Amos 3.2. You only have I
known (says the Lord) of all the families of the earth: what then? therefore
will I cocker and dandle you? no, but therefore will I visit you for all your
iniquities.

If this be so brethren, Use.
this teaches us this instruction; Not to depend upon our privileges, not to
boast of them, and rest in them, and go away, and say, What, the Spaniards come
into England! what, the enemy overcome England! We have the Gospel, the means
of Grace, no nation under heaven so many in it that fear the Lord as our
nation has. O trust not tolying vanities, Jonas 2.8.
saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, Jer. 7.4.
as the Jews did when the Babylonian^ came: what good did their Temple do
them? your outward profession will be your bane if you trust to it, Romans 2.9.
when time of trouble come; Tribulation and anguish shall be upon every soul
that sins, upon the Jew first, mark that brethren; The highest in preferment,
the first in punishment: you that have enjoyed great means, the Lord will
proceed more heavily against you, then against others, when he begins to
execute his wrath once; To have the name of outward profession is nothing, it
will leave us in the dust if we trust to it: Privileges are like to paper
walls, if a man rear up a paper wall against Cannon shot, will that defend,
him brethren? They are good in their place and kind, but if we put our
confidence in them, as if they should keep us out of trouble, it is like as if
a man should put on a cut Satin suit, or coat of silk to go in the wars
withal, will that preserve him against the Cannons, and the enemies? your
outward appearance of profession is just so brethren. A hypocritical, fine
smooth coat will not keep off the wrath of the Lord, but that will seize upon
the soul, which has no other defense but such.

Revelation 2. Revel. 2.2.
and the beginning Ephesus a Church that lived gloriously, and performed duties
comfortably, mark what the Lord says of them, Verse. 3.
I know thy works and thy labor, and how thou can not bear them which are
evil, verse. 4. Yet I have somewhat against thee, Verse. 4.
because thou have left thy first love. And what of that, might some say, I may
be an honest man I hope, and go to heaven too, though I have declined a
little, and be not so zealous and forward as I have been, as long as I am
sincere and upright-hearted. Aye, but what says the Lord, brethren; Verse. 5.
Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first works, or
else I will come unto thee quickly, and remove thy Candlestick out of his
place. Let no man trust in his own strength, depend upon his own privileges,
and shadow himself under the name of Religion, and Gospel. 1 Samuel 4 5, 6.
1 Samuel 4. When the Philistines came against Israel, and Israel was smitten
before them, the next time they came into the Camp, they sent for the Arc
that that might save them out of the hand of their enemies, and when the Arc
came into the Camp, Verse. 5.
all Israel shouted, so that the earth rang again. Verse. 7.
And the Philistines were afraid and said, Woe unto us, for the like was never
heard of before, the God of Israel is come into the Field. Who shall deliver us
out of the hands of these mighty Gods? Verse. 8.
these are the Gods that smote the Egyptians with all the plagues that came
upon them. Verse. 9.
Be strong and quit your selves like men, oh ye Philistines, that ye be not
servants unto the Hebrews. And the Philistines fought, Verse. 10.
and Israel was smitten. And the Ark of God was taken. Verse. 11.
They brought the Arc of the Covenant into the Camp, but the Arc would not
defend them, but was taken; Brethren, the Arc was a type of Christ, you bring
the name of Christians, and the outward profession of Religion into the field,
and you think that this will save you out of the hands of your enemies, but
you and that will sink under your enemies, if you put confidence in that: was
any nation greater then Babylon, or more glorious then Jerusalem? but what is
become of them brethren? has not the Lord brought desolation and destruction
upon them? Luke 21.5.
O say the Disciples (when they were at Jerusalem and saw the Temple) what
goodly buildings are here! Matthew. 24.1, 2.
verse. 2. Mark. 13.1, 2.
I tell you says our Savior, a stone shall not be left on a stone; It skils
not what we are, brethren, in outward profession, but what we are in
sincerity, and holiness. Depend not on the privileges which God has given
you, but pray for grace to answer him, according to the means which he has
bestowed upon you, and then this love may be continued, and there may be some
hope that you shall enjoy these blessed privileges still.

Now we come to the place where we would be, the 25. Verse. 25.
verse, wherein is the reason why God deals so with his own people.

The Text gives you to understand the ground of it was because they had
forsook the Covenant of their God. Meaning of the words.
This we will fasten upon. And first I will open the words, and then draw some
collections from them for our benefit.

First, I will show you what is meant by Covenant. Secondly, what is meant by
forsaking of the Covenant. Brethren, Covenant.
there is a double Covenant in the frame of Scripture. Joh. 3.15, 16. and 5.24.
and 11.25, 26.
First, a Covenant of being in God, which is called the Covenant of faith. He
that believes shall live. Secondly, a Covenant of walking before or with God,
when we have received mercy and grace through the goodness of God in
acceptance of our persons, in and through Christ, then the Lord requires that
we should walk in new obedience before him, answerable to that grace bestowed;
Brethren mark that; and this is the covenant of new obedience or of
thankfulness, which the Lord reveals, requires, and exacts of all that have
given their names unto him. I take it that the covenant of the second sense is
here meant; The other is supposed and included, but this is the maine, the
covenant of his Law, whereby we should be obedient unto him, that is the mind
of the holy man in this place, and the scope of the words.

Secondly, to forsake this covenant is this; when we keep not touch with God,
in sincere, exact, and holy obedience, answerable to the means and mercy he
bestows upon us, and the care and kindness of the Lord toward us. When we
fleeing away from the command of the Lord, break his bands, Psalm. 2.3.
and snap the cords a pieces, when we walk after our own ways, are not
governed by God, and content to be ruled by his holy word in all things, then
are we said to forsake his covenant. Nextly mark here, he says, they forsook
it, that is, the general frame of the nation. The general, not the naughty
packs only and some few, but they forsook it.

Now brethren having opened the words unto you, I will come unto the points of
instruction; and first in that he calls his Commandment, and Law his Covenant,
observe a maine point of great use and benefit, and that is this.

That the Commandments of the Lord, Doctrine.
are the Covenant of the Lord with his people, the Covenant of new obedience:
This is the Covenant that God makes with his people, Deuteronomy. 5.2.6.
not of life, but of thankfulness, Deuteronomy. 5.2.6. That one place will cast the
case clear enough. In the second verse. he says, The Lord our God made a
Covenant with us in ^oreh; then in the sixth verse. and so on, Verse 6.
there is the Covenant it self set down. I am the Lord thy God which brought
thee out of the Land of Egypt, Verse. 7.
out of the house of bondage. Thou shall have none other Gods before me. Famous
is that place, Psalm. 103.18. Psalm. 103.17, 18
There are two Phrases used which serve to one purpose, and the one explicates
the other, verse. 17. The goodness of the Lord indures for ever and ever; But
upon whom, Verse. 18.
brethren? upon those that keep his Commandments, and think upon his
Covenants to do them. So that his Covenants and Commandments are all one. As
in a Covenant there are Articles of agreement between party and party; so
between God and his people. Here are the Articles of agreement, the Ten words
which God spoke, the Ten Commandments: This Moses aims at here: Now brethren,
to set the truth upon his right ground, for the opening of the point take
notice of three things. Three things.
First, what are the terms required in the Covenant. Secondly, where in this
Covenant consists, or what is the substance of this Covenant. Thirdly, the
reason why the Commandment is called a Covenant.



and obtain life by this obedience. This is obedience according to the
strictness and rigor of the Law, wherein it will not abate an hair of what
God requires, but it must be fulfilled every jot, and that out of a man's own
personal holiness, and that in way of life: Thus it was a Covenant between
God and Adam only, Adam in his innocence, God gave him a good Law, by virtue
of which he should have lived if he had kept it, and by that holiness he had
by gift and creation he was able to keep every minime and tittle of the
precepts of the Lord, and to obtain life thereby. But this Covenant is not
continued with us, is not required at our hands, no man does or can perform
the Law out of his own holiness and goodness exactly, to obtain life
thereby, Romans 6.24. We are not under the Law, Rom 6.14.
but under Grace; that is, we are not bound to the strictness and rigor of
the Law, that a man should not live if he have in him any weakness and
failings, therein we are free from the rigor, and curse, and punishment of the
Law. Secondly, Evangelicall obedience:

The second ^art of the conveyance of the Covenant,

First, we have not power of ourselves to keep it: Secondly, we cannot
perfectly perform it by that power we have: Thirdly, when we walk in
obedience to it, we look not for life and salvation thereby. The scope of
Evangelicall obedience, is to glorify God, and to express the Covenant by
obedience in way of thankfulness, and to procure comfort to our souls. We are
saved by the Covenant of faith, Believe and live, Ioh. 3.15.16.36. not, do and
live. This Covenant whereof we entreat, and whereof the Text is to be
understood, is not the Covenant whereby we shall obtain justification, but an
evidence and sign, we are justified and accepted of God: Romans 8.3.4.
Romans 8.3.4. That which was impossible to the Law in that it was weak through
the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and
for sin, condemned sin in the flesh: That which was impossible to the Law,
etc. that can never bring any man to salvation, but only Christ redeemed us
fully, and satisfied for us; and he performed what God required, and by that we
stand just in the presence of God. But being justified and made acceptable, the
Lord requires, that we express the Covenant, and walk answerable unto it, and
express the virtues of him that has called us. Brethren, you must not trust
to your new obedience, to expect life from it, it is only an evidence that God
has showed mercy to you; it makes not you good, but shows that you are good.
Evangelicall obedience according to the measure of grace received, is all that
God looks for: Not that there is worth in this to purchase salvation: It is an
evidence to us, that the Lord graciously looks upon us in Christ Jesus; it is
the way that we must walk in to salvation.

It stands in three things: first, when in inward uprightness and singleness
of heart, we labor to be carried in virtue of Gods command, not to do what God
requires only, but because God requires it: many of you come to the Church not
because God commands it; then you would not lie, or be drunk, or have secret
base covetous humors, for God commands you should not do so, as well as he
commands you should come to the Church: If a command carry in any thing, it will
carry in every thing. But the frame of an Evangelicall heart is to the Covenant:
that is the spring of a man's practice, the first mover, the weight that makes
him strik in obedience to every Commandment, and approve inwardly of every
Commandment of God; have not a secret distaste of some, and a love of others:
he is covetous to be drunk, but will not be covetous, covetous to come to
Church, but will not humble his soul privately. Though many failings be in
him, and many rubs and hubs in the way, yet the bent of his soul is to Gods
Commandment. Cast a Bowl, though there be a rub here, and hub there in the
way which turn it out, yet it sals upon the Bias: so an upright heart, though
he meet with many hindrances within and without, yet the Bias of the soul,
the bent is to Godward still, to all his Commandments; laboring to express
the virtues of God which has called him.

Secondly, there must be an answerable expression and putting forth of this
inward disposition, and frame of heart outwardly in tongue and life: If you had
a good heart, you would have a good life, and a good tongue: If it be within,
it will break forth; you that are fretfull, proud, stubborn, peevish, stout,
froward, and nothing but fiddle faddle, and lament it not; and think your
heart is good, and you love the Commandments; you deceive your selves: If it
were so, you would have a good tongue too, and be meek and humble. I will not
give a Rush for that man, Religion that is not in some measure obedient this
way. James 1.26.
What says the Apostle? If any man seem to be relig^ous and r^fra^ne not his
tongue, that man's Religion is in vain. There must be an expression of the
inward goodness of the heart, by the outward convers^ion: a good sap in the
botome, good b^anches and fruit on the lop. Matthew. 12.3* 5.
A good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth good things.

If goodness be in the heart (brethren) it will be brought forth in life: If
such bad ware be in the shop, there is as bad in the Warehouse sure, if not
worse. This we call the inward and outward Covenant; mark this you that think
to smooth it over, and carry it away with fair looks; and speak well, and
do well outwardly, but have durty corners within: the heart is stubborn and
rebellious against God; proud, stout, malicious, covetous: These are in the
outward Covenant, as those whom the Lord complains of, Isa. 1.2.
Isa. 1.2. Hear, O Heavens, and give ear, O Earth: for the Lord has spoken,
I have nourished and brought up ch^ldren, and they have rebelled against me.
verse. 3. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters crib: but Israel
does not know, my people does not consider. The wicked are in Covenant with the
Lord outwardly, but not inwardly; the heart closes not with God, they are not
humble: The Jews were Gods people in outward Covenant, but were disobedient
and stubborn against the Lord.

Thirdly, there must be an answering the means Dedham Christian; that is for
those that have small encouragements, and a Sermon now and then, and that but
weak neither, and creep out once in a month to a Sermon, there is a fifty
pound rent, and a ten pound rent for such to pay; but you sit at an hundred
pound rent, keep touch, brethren, come off, come off currantly: Do you think
the Lord will lend his mercies for nothing? No, he prizes the life, liberty,
and pains of his servants; and their prayers at an exceeding high rate; an
hundred pound for a Prayer, and an hundred thousand for an Instruction: and do
you think with a prayer now and then, and with a sigh, and a wish, that you
could walk with the Lord, to poppe off the Lord so?

No, you sit at heavy rents, and the Lord will call for accounts accordingly at
the day of reckoning: brethren, this will break some of your necks, if it
break not your hearts now by repentance, for your being behind hand with the
Lord in his rent, and make you walk with the Lord better, and keep touch with
him for the time to come: But what is the reason that the Lord will call his
Laws and Commandments Covenants? Reason.
The reason is this, for I would have nothing untouched that you may be wise
and understanding Christians, because of the likeness between, and the
resemblance of a Covenant that is made between two parties, and the Law, which
is the Covenant which is given us of the Lord: In a Covenant, first there must
be conditions and Articles of agreement between the parties offered and
consented unto: and secondly, a binding one another to the performance thereof
by Bond, perhaps a pair of Indentures are drawn between them, wherein is
declared, that they mutually agree; he to make good the land and to pay thus
much rent: the other to let it him thus, and thus. It is just so here; Mark
the agreement between us and the Lord: Deuteronomy. 28. Levit. 26.
he propounds the Law, and says, That if we will keep the Law, he will bless
us abundantly in all things; house, and land, wife, children, at home, and
abroad; in every thing we put our hand unto. Then the people they agree, and
say, Content Lord, what ever thou say, we will do; Deuteronomy. 5.29.
the Law thou have given us, we will keep it, it is holy, just, and good.

But then for the binding of one another, you will say, How shall we know God
will perform his part, and how shall the Lord know that we will perform our
part to him, what Bond is there for it? The world is naught, and one cannot
tell who to trust, and therefore God must bind us (brethren) to keep our
Covenant; and we are not to think much that he should: And we have Bond of him
too because of our unbelief: now the Bond is a corporal Oath passed from the
one to the other. The Lord takes a corporal Oath, that if we will keep his
Commandments, he will not be God if he bless us not: And so (brethren) you
swear too, again on the other side to the Lord, and did when you were
baptized, every one of you, that you would be his people, and obey his Laws
and Commandments.

The Lords people take a corporal Oath, and a Curse upon themselves, if they
do not keep Covenant with the Lord. This belongs to us at this day, for we
entered into a Curse, and desired that all the plagues and curses written in the
Book of God, might light upon us if we keep not the Commandments of the
Lord, Deuteronomy. 29.10. When the Lord had propounded the Covenant, mark how he
deals with the people; Deuteronomy. 29.10.
You stand this day all of you before the Lord your God: your Captains of your
Tribes, your Elders, and your Officers, with all the men of Israel: verse. 11.
Your little ones, your wives, and the stranger that is in thy Camp, from the
hewer of thy wood, unto the drawer of thy water: verse. 12. Deuteronomy. 29.12.
That thou should enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his
Oath (mark that brethren, the Oath of the Lord) which the Lord thy God makes
with thee this day: (mark that,) with us from Abraham to this day, the Oath is
taken in our Baptism, we take the Oath of Allegiance, as it were, in this
kind; All you that have given your names to the Lord Jesus, and have received
grace from him, you all stand here this day before the Lord (and bring your
children before the Lord in the day of a Fast, else woe be to you) that we may
renew our Covenant with him. We are to enter into his Oath, the Oath of the
Covenant between the Lord and us; that the Lord may stablish us to day for a
People unto himself: and that we may curse our selves, if we do not walk
with God, both our selves and ours: and woe to him that has no care to keep
his Oath: no wonder he is a beggar; no wonder his debtors run from him, and
leave him in the lurch.

It is a wonder that the earth does not open her mouth and swallow him up,
Numb. 16.32.33.
as it did Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and all the plagues written from the
beginning of Genesis, to the end of the Revelation, Amen, fall not upon his
soul and body. Why, you have entered into a curse, man, and an Oath with the
Lord, Nehem. 10.29. Neh. 10.29.
See how the holy man continued this course, how they entered a Covenant there
with the Lord; as if they should have said, The Lord curse this tongue, if I
speak not graciously; the Lord curse this hand, if I do not yield obedience
to his will and command: look to it, the curse will dog thee, and follow thee,
if thou break Covenant, as it did the Jews, in Nehemiahs time: Now when he had
returned the people out of captivity, he brought them all before the Lord, to
enter into a Curse, and into an Oath, to walk in Gods Law. It was a sweet
course; every soul here stands bound to do as they did. They took a solemn
Oath, what ever they had been, they would now walk in Gods Law. Give me your
hand, brethren, or at least let me have your heart in the mean time, because
that cannot be. Are you the servants of God, entered into Covenant with the
Lord? then know you are bound to keep Covenant by virtue of that Oath; and
when you are in your Families, remember your Oath; you are bound hand and foot
to the Lord, and therefore when you are drawn by any thing to break Covenant
with the Lord, think thus with your selves: What, an honest man and lie, and
forswear my self? you have all sworn to the Lord, brethren, your little ones
and all. Cursed shall you be in all that you take in hand, if you do not walk
precisely, and exactly in his Law and Covenant Husbands, call upon your wives,
Husband and Wise.
and Parents, call upon your children, when you see them break Covenant; and
say, Wife, or children, What, shall we bring a Curse upon our selves? When you
begin to be careless of the Sabbath, and cold, and lukewarm, and dull; call
upon one another, and say, You know the plague was near at hand, husband at
such a time; but the Lord kept it from us. For Gods sake husband, let us take
heed that we do not bring the curse upon our Family: No marvel though one
run away with this from us, and an other with that; and the Lord lay this
sickness, and that affliction upon us: What, will thou be a perjured man? for
shame keep thy Oath; God will never trust thee else hereafter.

Now the Lord swears to us by himself, Heb. 6.13.
because he has no greater to swear by. It is a sweet thing that the Lord
has bound himself by Oath to us, to keep Covenant with us. If you have an
honest and an able man bound to you for a debt, you go away content, you have
enough: Why, we have the Lord in bonds, for the fulfilling his part of the
Covenant: He has taken a corporal Oath of it, that he will do it; and shall
we not take the Lords bond, and rest content with that? Let us now Heb. 13.22.
suffer the words of exhortation, with patience and meekness; O brethren, this
point concerns us nearly this day. Covenants go far, especially if they be
for weighty matters; when a man is in Covenant for more then he is worth.
Think of it seriously.

The first use shall be of Examination. Use 1.
If this be so, we may have a touchstone from the form of Doctrine delivered,
to discover to us, who is the sound professor indeed: There are a great many
formal professors, but few true ones indeed. A man can scarce tell who to
trust, you say, for trading; I say, for living; you say, for buying and
selling; I say, for professing: Would you know whether you are sound at root,
and not have a name only to live, and yet are dead, Rev. 3. verse. 1.
Revel. 3.1. Let him that keeps Covenant, that deals squarely, (you know what
that is brethren) that keeps touch with the Lord, let him be the sincere man,
he is worthy the name of a Christian.

There are many fadling patching Christians, that are off and on; here and
there; there is no hold of them; a man knows not where to have them; that will
say fair, and bid well, but do nothing in the end. Go you home to your
selves, see whether you keep touch with the Lord. You think you are bound to
keep covenant in nothing but in your money; Rich men think all honesty is in
paying of money.

I will not speak of the misery of them that must patch up and down in that
fashion, and hang on every bush; But (o says the rich man, that is careful to
give every man their due, and to keep his day) what times do we live in, a
man knows not where to lend to have it again at his time, there is no honest
dealing to be found; Mark the villainy of his heart, because he keep touch
with men, and is as good as his word; O says he, we live in very ill times,
and their is scarce a man to be found, that one may trust of his word, there is
such unhonest dealing in all places, that there is no hold of men's words: But
yet oppresses and grindes the face of the poor, and looks for his gain
altogether: where is your honesty? So some that are careful of the body, and
give it its due, but the soul whines within for mercy, mercy that it may have
something to refresh it withal, but that cannot be heard, that is starved, the
body is fat, but the poor soul is lean enough: where is your honesty? do
you not owe repentance, hearing, reading, and praying to your souls? your
poor soul cries, o remember me, let me have some mercy and forgiveness sought
for me at the hands of the Lord, let me have some time employed for my good;
But you cannot hear it; Is this honesty brethren? if a man sterve his servant,
so that he pine away, till he is scarce able to go, and at last come to the
grave, every one cries out shame of him; But o brethren, the poor soul that
is starved; but no man cries shame of that, when did the Lord hear of many of
you here present? Alas, never brethren, never; But when the soul said, now
pray for help against this corruption, and for mercy for such a sin, now awake
out of thy secret worldliness; you went away and would not hear that, you
have no leisure nor no time for that, but starve your poor soul, and the
devil he has one part of your time, and your lusts another; Is this honesty
brethren? This is the man God esteems as an honest man, not a Protestant at
large, that has a good purse, and is good in his kind, and will deal
honestly with men, and pay them their due, and at their day, but he that will
pay God and their soul their due too: Exodus 19.5.
Exodus 19.5. If you will obey my voice indeed and keep my covenant, then you
shall be a peculiar treasure unto me; If your debtors keep day with you, you
will trade with them rather then with any other man. Let it be so in your
dealings with men, but remember that you do it with God. Think not to put off
the Lord with fair speeches; Good words pay no debts, Brethren; we come here,
and give the Minister hearing, and God a glosing; but we walk not according to
Gods commandments. You give God good words, but you go home, and are as
unprofitable as vain, and frothy, and idle, as ever you were. If one owe you
money, and take this day, and that day, and promise it, and not pay it; you
would not think well of this dealing; what may the Lord think of your hearts,
when you have made so many promises to him, and had so many resolutions to
perform your part of the covenant to him, but have not yet kept promise with
him? Good words are good in their kind, God likes them well, as it is in Deuteronomy.
5.28, 29. This people have said well; Deuteronomy. 5.28.
but these are not sufficient, we have enough of this says the Lord; O that
there were such an heart in them, Verse. 19.
to do as they have said! There is the point Brethren. If we have a debtor
that comes often to us, and promises us payment, but keeps not day, we say, you
give me good words, but I cannot pay debts so, and keep my family so; Where is
my money? So Brethren, you come and hear cheerfully, and pretend that you
will do that you hear? Ah, but give God his money; O that there were such an
heart: Know what God calls for; Good money: will he be paid with counters and
shows? No, but current money of England, when the heart is changed, the soul
turned, and the affections moved to what God calls for, and that is good, equal
and righteous, and we desire with all our heart to perform it.

Brethren, when you are gotten home, call to mind what you have said this day,
and this covenant: which you have entered into with the Lord, and say, o Lord
that I had such an heart: good words are well, but o a heart, a heart Lord is
that which thou requirest, and I would have; And it must be always, and in all
things, you must not pick and choose, and say, I will not be a drunkard, yet be
covetous: I wonder that you will not game, and be drunk, and yet gripe the
poor; O that there were an heart to keep the commandments of God always; 1 Samuel 13.14. Act. 13.22.
This is an honest man with God, a man after Gods own heart, a man of Gods
mind as we may say. If ever there were a Saint, thou art: when the Lord says,
O that they had such an heart, the heart answers and says, O Lord that I had
such an heart; when the Lord says, O that thou would keep all my
commandments: O that I could, says the soul again. This is upright fair
dealing indeed, current money, your tongue and outward appearance is nothing,
that sturdy and peevish heart let it be humbled, and your untoward and
rebellious heart be brought into subjection: Tit. 2.9.
And you servants, not answer your masters again; And you little ones be not
sturdy against your parents, and disobedient unto their commands; Remember the
little ones that mocked Elisha. 2 King. 2. 23, 24.
O but you will say, we cannot do what we would. No, it is pity you should,
for then some of you would be without sin, which cannot be here. But do you
endeavor to do what you can, and are you humbled and grieved for that you
cannot do, and do you strive toward perfection, and say with David, Thou
have commanded that I should keep thy statutes; Psalm. 119.4.
O that I could Lord; Verse. 5.
O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes. And do labor to mend
thy pace, because thou have been slow, and art cast behind in the way to
happiness, and have lost thy time? This is all God requires of thee. If one
that is in debt to you, fall into decay, and come to you and say he is not able
to pay you your money, but he desires you to go to his house, and take
whatsoever is there, that is worth any thing, to satisfy you; I appeal to
your consciences, is he not an honest dealer? yes, you will not deny it, but
you will pity his case and say, the Lord may cross any man, and you will be
favorable unto him, because he shows an honest mind, in that he desires every
man should have his own to the utmost he can, either in money or in money
worth. So brethren, observe what the soul wants in obedience, that it may
pluck it out in repentance, that is the money worth, that when the poor
sinner finds a dead heart, a sluggish endeavor, weakness in performance, and
he cannot do as he should do, yet what he wants in obedience, he fetches out
in repentance, step but in at the entry door, or under the wall, or under the
window, and hear how he will break his heart, bewail his abominations, cry
out of himself and say, though much means and grace have been offered me, yet
good Lord this wretched world, that I should dote upon lying vanities, Jon. 2.8.
so as to forsake mine own mercies; Good Lord, subdue this earthly mindedness;
Good Lord take all away rather, then this should take my soul from thee and
from happiness.

O thus brethren, he labors to please the Lord, in sorrow and grief, and
mourning, for the short comings of his payment in obedience. He lays load upon
himself in this case. This is an honest heart; this is very good pay, it is
money or money worth, he is humbled, and ashamed, and confounded, because he
cannot do what he would; In this case he deals squarely, he is an honest
Christian; An honest man, if he be cast back in his estate, he will entreat
Liberty of his creditors, and resolve and promise them too, that if ever God
make him able his family shall not gain by it, but he will pay them to the
utmost farthing, so is it with an honest heart brethren.

I look not that a man should not have temptations, and corruptions, and that
sometime prevailing over him, but this thou must have, and thus thou beg
earnestly of the Lord, godly sorrow and grief of heart for thy failings, and
that he would recover thy Psalm. 39.13.
strength before thou go from hence and be no more: Though thou loose this
week, that thou may gather it up the next week, work so much the more, and
the harder. The Lord be merciful to us, where are those honest men to be found
brethren, that desire to do thus? Me think I hear you in your souls now
saying, good Lord what will become of our town, good Lord what will become of
our neighbors? they talk of honesty, and this is honesty; but alas, their
life agrees not to it. You complain of trading in the world, almost no trust
to be put in any, every man almost is turned banckrupt: I am sure brethren it
is true in Religion; He that was a forward Christian a while ago, is a
drunkard now, or a gamester now; And he that was a forward Professor, and
would go to a Sermon four or five mile in a morning, and come home again,
and to work hard to get up the time again; But now God has given him a
pretty estate in this world, he is turned a very muck-worme, become covetous,
or a loose one; Though I do not know you brethren, I am sure brethren, there
are a number such abroad in this land, and I doubt not but you can point at
such here in this congregation, and say, that is such a man, and that is such a
man, he still seeks to hold in with his Minister and would feign be counted a
Professor, but O there is no life, nor heart, nor power of godliness in him,
he is grown stark cold since I knew him, the world has a part of his heart,
his pleasure another, his profit another, idleness and ease another, he may
even lay the key under the threshold, for any found Religion and true grace
indeed, he is quite down the wind. But you will say, happily that I think too
hardly of you: I know you not, I hope brethren there are many of you godly; the
Lord increase your number and his graces that are in you: but I am sure if you
come to the balance, you shall find few that are sound and godly Christians
indeed that will hold weight.

Let us search a little; Why, you will say, I hope we are honest men the most
of us, we pay every man his due; It is well you do so, but I will bring in a
bill now brethren, which if you cannot prove to be cancelled, woe be to you.

This Doctrine casts out abundance in all places, Use.
at this door, and at that door, and packs them out, and will leave poor
thin congregations. We will scan the case a little brethren.

First, hence it is clear, that the poor ignorant creature is gone, he is
quite blown up if he so continue, he knows nothing in this kind, he knows not
how to count twenty shillings, how shall he satisfy a debt of twenty pound?
that is to say, brethren, they know not God, not understand the prayers that
they make, they say the Lords Prayer, Lords Prayer.
and it is good to be used in its time, but do you please God in so doing,
when you understand not what you say? one says, Hallowed be thy Name; when he
knows not what Gods name is, and what it is to hallow it. Another says, Thy
Kingdom come, when he knows not what it is to have his kingdom come; You
cannot count your money yet, you cannot discern a six pence from a groat, that
is to say brethren, you know not what it is to pray, and to hear the word, you
know not what it is to take the Name of God reverently into your mouths. And
so some will call God Father, but they know not how he is their Father, nor how
they come to be his children. These are gone, they are carnal, they have not
pay, therefore certainly cannot pay the Lord his due.

2. There is another generation worse then these, and those are profane ones,
that set themselves professedly to run to rerages with the Lord, scorn all
means God has appointed to bring in his debts by, they will be drunk, swear,
profane the Sabbath, scoff at such as refrain their foot from evil. Isa.
59.15.
Tell them God requires other things of them, and that they keep not touch with
him, and he expects other things at their hands, and that they run in rerages
with the Lord for his rent, and that he will arrest them, and confound them, if
they do not pay him his rent, for the time to come; They say they purpose no
other payment then he has already at their hands, but let God get his own as
he can, they will take their own course still; Is there any such here brethren?
There are too many such in the world, and I fear too, some among you, though
you pretend fair, and say not so openly, yet you say so by your deeds
brethren; for you will have this privy haunt, and that secret evil way, take
this and that wicked course, you resolve of it, and will do it, let the Lord
get his own if he can. So he will I warrant you, Look to it you that think to
brave it with the Lord, when you are among your cups and companions, and to
make your part good with him, to out-brave all judgments, and who shall arrest
you; the Lord will pluck the cup out of thy hands and arrest thee with death,
and a thousand devils shall lay hold on thee, and drag thee to hell to torment
thee for ever. God will have his rent one way or other. Think of it you that
set your mouths against heaven, and what has the Minister to do to speak
against you, you will out face God, and Minister and Gospel and all, and
think to go away scot-free. Look to it, God will get his own, he will have
it of thee, as he had it out of Julian the Apostate. I will all edge but one
place to you for this purpose, and that is Deuteronomy. 29.18. the Text says, Deuteronomy.
29.18.
That if there be any root of bitterness among them, verse. 19. Verse. 19.
That when he hears the curse of the Lord, shall yet bless himself in his
heart, saying, he shall escape and do well enough for all that; The Text
says, Verse. 20.
That the wrath of the Lord shall smoke against that man, and he shall blot
out his name from under heaven. Oh that this verse were imprinted upon the
palm of the hand of every drunkard, and every scoffer, and profane one, that
walks after the stubbornness of his own heart, and adds drunkenness to
thirst, and yet you think to go away with it, and so you may for a time, and
these words break no bones, and all this wind shakes no corn with you, you
hope to go to heaven as well as the best, you will drink and whore and yet it
shall go well with you in the end, and you are proud; and stout, and stubborn,
and stiff-necked against the Lord, and the voice of his word, and yet you
bless your selves, and promise to your selves peace.

Mark what the God of Heaven says, Verse. 20.
The anger of the Lord shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that
are written in this Book, shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his
name from under Heaven. verse. 21. Verse. 21.
And the Lord shall separate him unto evil out of all the Tribes of Israel:
All the vengeance of the Almighty that ever was made known, shall light upon
the head and heart of that drunkard, and that contemner of God, and the word of
his Grace. He will separate you from the Tribes of Israel. You think to run
away from your Country, and to fly from his Judgments, as some Bankerupts do
escape from men, to run to Amsterdam, and other places: No, the Lord will
separate that man from all the Tribes of Israel; where ever he be, in France,
Germany, Amsterdam, or where ever; he will separate him, and set the damned
spirits on the back of him, and say, Take hold of that man, and execute
vengeance on him.

Brethren, you may think I deal something harshly with you, but I deal for
the best for you: Is it not better to hear of this now in time, then
hereafter, when the Lord has arrested you, and you are locked up in close
prison for ever; you should think, Oh if such a denunciation had been told
me; if such an exhortation had been wrought upon me; if such a man had pressed
hard upon my conscience, with such and such things, I had never come here.
Consider this, God will have it out of you, as he had it out of Julian the
Apostate, that had blasphemed Christ before in the field, an arrow came from
God and smote him that he died; and then he said, Thou have overcome me, O thou
Galilean. You that are mates in this kind, go home to your fellow drunkards,
and to your fellow whoremasters, and scoffers, and those that side with you
against God and goodness and such as are godly, and tell them, God will have
his debt of them. Know it now to your humiliation, and amendment, lest you know
it to your cost, when there will be no prevailing with the Lord for mercy. The
Lord persuade your hearts that there is no way to escape, but by coming in and
acknowledging your debt, and craving pardon though you cannot pay.

Thirdly, the close hearted Hypocrite, Use 3.
he comes here to be discarded; he thinks his penny good silver, and the world
esteems of him as a sincere, honest, upright hearted man. Tell him that he
keeps not Covenant with the Lord, he takes it in great indignation. If any be
here (as this Age begets a world of close hypocrites) understand and know,
if you keep back some of the payment, have a secret haunt; do as Ananias and
Saphira did, Acts 5.2.
that laid down a part of the price, for which the possession was sold, and
said, Verse. 8.
It was all: Is here all, says Peter to them? Yes, all, says he; so when the
Lord says to you, Do thou pray? Yes, Lord: And do hate all sin? Yes
Lord, say you: Why do lie to the Almighty? Verse. 3.
Do you not know a company of secret haunts, and back-dores that you have, to
this lust, and that lust; and many secret corruptions you have; and yet come
into the presence of the Lord, as if you were upright with the Lord, and there
were no such matter. O ye hypocrites, why has Satan filled your hearts to lie
to the Lord? Verse. 3.
Do you not know what Elisha said to Gehazi, 2 King. 5.20.21.
when he ran after Naaman for a bribe, verse. 25. Where have thou been, Gehazi?
Thy servant has been no where: Verse. 25.
he thought to wash it away, and make it over so with a lie, verse. 26. Verse 26.
Went not mine heart with thee (says Elisha) when thou rannest after Naaman
for a bribe? If any close hypocrite be in the Congregation, let him know, the
Lord will find him out; and will say to him, Whither went thy heart all this
while? Where have been dodging? Was not my heart with thee, verse. 26. when
thou wentest after such a secret haunt, and such a close lust? O but you will
say, it is no such matter, you desire to be upright; I say, be so, brethren.
The Lord goes with thee wither so ever thou go, and he sees all thy
Dalilahs, and Herodiasses of pride, and self-love; he sees how thou seek
to him in the pride of thy heart; and how thou professest to get a name, and to
bold in with others. These are base abominations, cursed hypocrisy: this is
false-heartednesse before God, and shall be plagued by God at the day of
account. There is not an honest woman, that has but one other man besides her
husband. He is not an honest man that will not pay one bond of ten, or many.
A penny is due as well as a pound. My hand is on your heart, brethren, for I
fear many of you have some one backdore which you mean to keep; and you will
be proud or covetous a little; or unclean only, and all the rest of that
Covenant ye are content to keep: Is this honest, to scrape out what you
please, and leave what you please still? there is no honesty in this,
brethren; But you will say, Who can lay any thing to my charge? I say, thou art
a Covenant-breaker, and the Lord could never get his own of thee yet: Well,
yet thou will put it off, as Saul did, when Samuel came to meet him, as he
returned from slaying the Amalekites; 1 Samuel 15.13.
Come thou blessed of the Lord. But what said Samuel to him? Verse. 14.
Ah, says he, verse. 14. What means the bleating of the sheep, and the lowing
of the Oxen? So you say, you make conscience of all the Commandments of the
Lord; But what mean these secret corners and haunts? I mean those which
conscience and God hear of, not what I hear of; for I know nothing but by
them: What mean all these secret conveyances, that you have to make away, and
hide your lusts with, that you may live in them and not be known so to do?
What means your drunkenness in a corner; your adultery in a corner; your
hypocrisy, and covetousness; lukewarmenesse, and coldness; carelessness, and
earthly mindedness?

Yet men will not be out-faced, they will bear a man down still, that it is
so. Then I have no other way but this with you; look what a man does by a
debtor, that says the debt is paid, and will face him down that it is so; yet
the Book is not crossed: What will this Creditor do now? Why then, to your
Books he goes, and calls in the servant, that takes in the reckonings, and
says, Do you remember it? No, says the servant, you gave me good words
diverse times, when I called on you for it, but no money was paid: why then I
never had it. So brethren, you say, that you are holy; we will call for the
Books, and for Conscience, Gods Auditor, and the keeper of his accounts, and
ask that; Whether you make conscience of private prayer, and humbling your
soul in secret? Whether you make conscience of your stubbornness to your
husband; of your peevishness and untowardnesse? Whether you be a
Covenant-keeper, and whether you did ever perform that God has required of
you; he has required much of you, that you should pray, read, be sober,
humble, neeke, dutiful to your husband. But you have been right, froward,
undutifull, way-ward; why, did you pay this debt to the Lord then?

The conscience will say, No Lord; I urged him to it, and said, Now get alone
Isa, 26.16.
and power out a prayer to the Lord; now go and read, and meditate on the word
of God; and I told him, Lord, when he began to be so eager of the world, now
you will be covetous, and worldly; but he would not hear me; he promised me,
Lord, he would leave it, and would do so no more; and he would take up this
duty and that duty; and put me off this time, and another time, but he never
did it. Then you see the case clear, for you never kept day; you have a show
of godliness, 2 Timothy 3.5.
but where is the power of it? The power is to subdue inward lusts, secret
corruptions, base thoughts that rise in the mind. This is not to be found in
the most; therefore they are but Hypocrites and false hearted. At last when the
case is so clear by the Book of the servant, this bad debttor does confess
it, and says, It was a hard time, and it was but little, if you had had it, I
thought it could do you no great good, I hoped you would have borrowed it, if
you had had any great need of it. So many a crused hypocrite confesses the
conversation is good, and the course is holy which he should take, and which
God requires of him; but I feared the loss of my liberty, of my ease, or my
honor, and credit, if I had done it. I feared I should have suffered for it,
and it was but this, I hope it was not such a matter. Is this honesty, when
God and the Gospel, call for truth, and for sincerity, you put off and say,
This is no great matte, you hope; there are worse matters then so in the world.
Thou art no upright, God will have the utmost farthing; Mat. 5.26.
there is truth in a penny. He that will not suffer in one kind, I will never
believe he will suffer in another. But you will say, What if a man be covetous,
he hurts none; it is his own that he holds so fast; he is but close fisted a
little, I hope this is not such a matter? This is a great sin brethren, in
such a place as this is; what, not keep touch here? that man's sin that lives
under the Gospel, is the greatest sin of all; of more weight then the sins of
any besides: and therefore look to it brethren. If a man forfeit a Bond of
twenty pound, or forty pound, perhaps he may recover it; but if of forty
thousand pound, we say it will crush the greatest Merchant in the Land, and
break his back. An hypocrite, a false-hearted one in the place where the
Gospel is; it is a heinous foul sin, it will sink him deep: A drunkard
where the Gospel is not, and an adulterer where the Gospel is not, shall go to
hell; they shall all perish without repentance. But he that lives under the
means, ye is covetous, loose, proud, vain, oppressing, and griping of his
poor brethren; worldly, or the like; that Bond will break thy back, it is an
hundred thousand pound Bond. Take heed, brethren, a man that runs in arerages
with the Lord here, it will be heavy for him. Mat. 11.23.
And thou Capernaum, which were lifted up to heaven, shall be cast down to
hell. Some live at great rents. A Dedham man, God will not have him have a
stomach only to a good duty, and now and then to pray, or to read, or
confer; but he requires great debts of him: A Dedham drunkard, or hypocrite,
careless carnal Gospeller, or covetous one; the devils will rejoice for him;
when he comes to hell; they will make Bonefires, and make it holiday for him,
stand upon their tiptoes to look on him, and say, What, are you come hither
after all Prayers, and Sermons, and Sacraments, and Admonitions; and so many
labors of Gods servants, that have worn out their lives to keep you from
hence?

This Bond will break your back brethren, an hundred thousand millions worth
of exhortations you have had, and you owe the Lord for them all still; you have
paid him nothing for them yet; you are not one whit the better for them: What
shall become of you? the Lord will set a thousand devils to torment you, when
you drop into the pit: specially ancient men, woe to your souls, if once God
lay hold of you: If a man that is in debt, for I know not how many Bonds, be
arrested but upon one, it will cast him into prison; but then if after that
comes another, and another, in upon him, it will go very hard with him. He
played fast and loose, and fair, and far off all this while; but now one has
clapped a Writ upon his back, comes another and arrests him for an hundred pound
at such a man's suite; and another arrests him for an hundred pound at such a
man's suite. O think of this, your reckonings will be fearful when God casts
you on your sick bed, and death comes to fetch away your souls, and you are
going to the chains of darkness; then there will come in one Bond after
another, upon you; one indictment after another against you: Item, for the
sins of your youth; your disobedience and stubbornness to Parents, and
Governors, when a child: Item, for following your profits, and pleasures, and
minding nothing else, when you were a young man: Item, for your worldliness
since you were an old man. One Bond after another the Lord will lay upon you.
You would think such a man that has so many Bonds come upon him, in a hard
case; quite undone; and that there is no recovery for him out of prison, but
there he must lie till some part of him rot off, perhaps, and till he die in
the Jayle: O how you would pity such a man's case, and how you would be grieved
for him! But O brethren, you that are husbands, or wives, or parents, when you
see your children, or your husbands arrested by God; not to go to an earthly
Jayle, but to go to hell for ever! O how should it grieve your souls for such
a one! how should you pity such, and desire the Lord, while there is help and
hope, to show mercy upon them!

Thus you see these three sorts are cashiered for not being sound; and the Lord
be merciful unto us, Use 1.
what a few are there besides these? Think of this, carry it home with you, and
examining your selves, know the Lord will have sincerity from you.

Secondly, it is a word of consolation; Use 2.
this is a mavelous comfort to those that love and fear the Lord: all you
whose hearts answer, It is thus with you, lift up your heads with joy, for this
will uphold you, and make you Luke 21.28.
lift up your heads with comfort in all your troubles, and in the day of the
Lord, When your redemption draws nigh, Isa. 3.10.
Isa. 3.10. say, It shall go well with the godly. I say to that man, what ever
come, it shall go well with him. We use to say, without doubt, without danger.
A man that owes nothing, he cares not for any Pursevant, or Sergeant, or Baily;
he fears them not, for he knows they have nothing to do with him: This is a
mavelous comfort to him; so it ought to be to a sincere heart, that has paid
his debt to God, when trouble seises upon him: you know what Hezekiah said, 2
King. 20.3.
Good Lord remember, how I have walked before thee with an upright heart. Isa.
38.3.
If a man be arrested upon a false ground, the Law will bail him; there is no
Law against him: Think of that brethren, Gal. 5.21.
Galat. 5.22. The fruits of the Spirit are love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, Verse. 23.
meekness, temperance; against such there is no Law. There is no Law to
punish or condemn them, or accuse them. Therefore blessed are your souls,
that are sincere and upright in heart and conversation always, to all Gods
Commandments; in public, in private; in ordinary times, and extraordinary;
there is no law against you: whatsoever Satan, or the world say against you,
there is no law in the Book of God to condemn you. Psalm. 119.6.
Psalm. 119.6. Then shall I not be confounded when I have respect to all thy
Commandments. In the times of all dangers, and of all miseries, which are like
to seize upon us soon, if the Land should be overrun, and friends and means
fail, here is comfort to every faithful soul, Psalm. 103.15. All flesh is
grass, Psalm. 103.15.
the wind passes over it, Verse. 16.
and it is gone. Verse. 17.
ver. 17. but the loving kindness of the Lord endures for ever, and ever. Upon
whom, brethren? Upon them that fear him, and think upon his covenants, to do
them. Mark how he sustaines himself, life go, friends go, means go; all
flesh is grass, Verse. 15.
the wind passes over it, and it is gone; means are gone, how then,
brethren? verse. 17. Verse. 17.
But the goodness of the Lord endures for ever and ever. Though Liberty be
gone, the Spirit of the Lord endures; though means be gone, the mercy of God
endures; Psalm. 136. all.
though friends be gone, the favor of the Lord endures: The loving kindness
of the Lord endures for ever; Upon whom? upon them that fear him, and think
upon his Covenants to do them. Though a poor soul fare meanly, and live
hardly; all helps gone, the Wind has passed over them; and liberty is gone;
honor is gone; life is going; nothing endures: yet lift up thy soul in
sickness, and say, My health is gone; my strength is gone; my life is going;
but the loving kindness of the Lord endures for ever, Verse. 18.
upon every soul that keeps his Commandments, and thinks upon his Covenants
to do them.

Lastly, for a word of exhortation; Use 4.
Is the Commandment of God his Covenant; and is the keeping of that, the way
to obtain mercy and happiness here, and for ever? then go away if you will,
and be dishonest still, and break Covenant with the Lord. The very name of
dishonestie, me thinks, should move you, brethren, to be faithful in your
Covenant, and to set on speedily, and to be exceeding watchful, and careful;
and to perform what you have promised to the Lord. Reason should move you;
What, not keep Covenant, especially with the Lord? What, shall we make
promises to the Lord, and enter into Covenant with him, and not keep it? Let it
for shame never be said of us, brethren. Mark what David says, Psalm. 119 11.
I have hid thy Commandments in my heart, that I might not sin against thee.
His mind ran of them, and his tongue talked of them continually. Amongst men,
brethren, you would not have your credit cracked for any thing; and you do
honestly. A good name is a Jewel. But do thus with the Lord, brethren; Has
not the Lord kept touch with you, in all his promises? Did you ever beg any
thing of him, and he not hear you? Why do you not keep touch with the Lord?
Shame your selves for this, I beseech you. Men in the world, if they break in
their estates, they have this love and humanity in them, that if any lose,
then it shall be they that did deal most hardly with them; and that got most
by them when they were in trading; but this kind friend, that was kind to
him, and lent him money sometime in his need, he shall not lose a penny by him:
O, says he, I had a friend of him, I could never come to him, but he would
receive me. This is honesty, and fair, and equal: O consider of this,
brethren; we have hard bargains at the hands of the world, and of the devil,
and sin; many knocks of soul, and girds of conscience with them: But the
Lord has been ever gracious, merciful, loving, and kind to us: resolve
therefore that the Lord shall never lose by you; let the world lose if it will;
and let carnal friends, and sin, and Satan lose if they will: Let not the
Lord lose; but resolve, what ever becomes of it; I will pray constantly, and
read in my family morning and evening; and upon every occasion, and reform my
ways. It is not needful that I should be rich; it is that I be sincere, and
faithful to the Lord: I will labor for a good conscience, and endeavor to
walk with God.

FINIS.
Imprimatur: Ja. Cranford.


