Zion's Birth-Register UNFOLDED IN A SERMON TO THE NATIVE-CITIZENS OF LONDON.

In their Solemn Assembly at PAVLS on Thursday the VIII. of May, A.D. M.DC.LVI.

By THOMAS HORTON D.D.

PSALM. 22.9,10. But Thou art He that took me out of the womb; thou made me to
hope, when I was upon my Mothers breasts.

I was cast upon Thee from the womb; Thou art my God from my Mothers belly.

ACT. 18.9,10. Then spoke the Lord to Paul; I have much people in this City.

LONDON, Printed for John Clark, and are to be sold at the Entrance into
Mercers-Chappel, at the lower end of Cheapside, M.DC.LVI.

To all the SONS of ZION; especially which were Born within the Liberties of
the City of LONDON; and of late more solemnly Assembled for the acknowledgment
of that Providence to them.
Much honored and beloved in Christ,
I Know not to whom the inscription of this Sermon could more justly belong,
then indeed to your selves, who are the proper subjects of it, movers for it,
and Auditors to whom it was delivered. To You therefore I tender it (not
without your own invitation) yet not limited to any particulars, but rather in
common and at large; that so whilst that All have an equal interest in the
occasion, they might equally share in the remembrances and publications of it.

The scope of this Discourse before you is to improve the present opportunity
to the best spiritual advantage; which is (or should be) the end of all such
solemn Assemblies and performances as these are; Gods Ordinances being too
good, and instituted to better purpose then merely to serve men's Fancies, and
Formalities, and Complemental devices, which yet the generality of the world
for the most part makes them to do.

I know not how it comes to pass, but your late meeting has not obtained that
effect, which I know you desired and designed in the first appointment of it;
from whence you will find some passages in the close of the Sermon to be a
great deal truer in the event then I wist they would be when I uttered them.
And yet I cannot very well tell where to lay the blame. I am apt to persuade my
self (and would have the World so persuaded too) that it proceeded not from
want of Affection, but rather of Contrivance. This is most certain and
undeniable, That there were diverse persons at that time amongst you which came
together with large intentions, and some with great preparations to very noble
and honorable achievements; only they had not a channel so readily cut out
unto them wherein their Charity might stream it self. You wanted not liquor,
but vent; not matter, but method; not conception, but obstetrication. The
children were come to the birth, but there was not strength to bring forth.
Isa. 37.3.


It will therefore very nearly concern you, both in point of conscience and
honor, to resume the work again, and to find out some way or other for the
more successful accomplishment of it; which you had better never undertaken,
then not bring to some perfection. Think not to smoother it in silence, and
that time will wear it out, for that it will not. God knows your thoughts a
far off. And your Resolutions with him are Subscriptions, as your Subscriptions
due Debts. Remember Ananias and Sapphira who kept back part of the price, Act.
5.2.
what was said, and what was done to them. And consider what Solomon says of
those that boast themselves of a false gift; that they are like clouds and wind
without rain. Prove. 25.14.
But I will not so far suspect you, as to press too hard upon you in a
business whereunto I suppose you are of your selves so readily inclined. The
Lord make us all faithful and serious in our dealings with him. You will so
much the more affectionately resent this seasonable suggestion, as it proceeds
from the hearty desires (seconded with prayers) of

Your Countryman and fellow servants in the advancement of the common good.
Thomas Horton.
From my Study in Gresham-Colledge Jun. 3. 1656.
A SERMON PREACHED TO The Native-Citizens of LONDON, The VIII. of May, M.DC.LVI.
PSALM. LXXXVII. Verse. 4, 5, 6. -- THIS MAN WAS BORN THERE.

And of Zion it shall be said, This and that man was born in her; And the
HIGHEST HIMSELF shall establish her.

The Lord shall count when he writes up the people, That this man was born
there. Selah.


THere is so much excellency considerable in our Being and the communications
of humane subsistence, as that every thing is so far estimable and accountable
with us, as it bears the greatest share and part in it, and proportion and
affinity to it. Therefore it is that we give so much respect to old age,
because it is life and being both in the first and soonest beginnings of it; as
also in the longest continuance. And accordingly as we esteem of Being, so in
like measure we esteem of Birth, which is as it were the first conveyance and
irradiation and peeping out of this our being unto us. And again, as we esteem
of that simply considered, so we esteem of it likewise in the circumstances and
appendances of it. Because it is so noble and excellent a thing to be born;
therefore we esteem of the Time, and count it the greater excellency as we are
born Then. And again, because it is so noble and excellent a thing to be Born;
therefore we esteem of the Place, and count it the greater excellency as we are
born There. And this is that, which to the glory of God and our own greater
rejoicing, WE, who have sometime been born and brought forth in this famous
City of London, are met together to acknowledge this day; That we were born
here; as such a passage and piece of providence, which is not to be easily
neglected or past over by us; and for which purpose I have made choice of this
Scripture now before us.

In the reading whereof unto you, you may perhaps ask the Question which the
Eunuch of Ethiopia sometimes put to Philip the Deacon (upon the like occasion,
namely, concerning ones birth and generation) Act. 8.34. I pray thee of whom
speaks the Prophet this? OF HIMSELF, or of some OTHER MAN? The Reason of it
is this, Because it is delivered to us in such uncertain and ambiguous
Expressions. Here Is every thing almost indefinite and undetermined. Here Is
this, and that, and there; but who, and what, and where, it is hardly
signified. Therefore it is that Interpreters are at so much strife with
themselves about it, which I will not now trouble you withal, lest thereby I
should prevent my self of that which is more material. I take it at large and
in the general as a full and ample description to us of the privileges and
preheminences of the Church, with the members of it, in a mutual reference to
each other.

The Division.
And so in the Text it self, there are two general parts considerable.

First, The Privilege mentioned. Secondly, The celebration of this Privilege.
The Privilege mentioned, that ye have in those words, This man was born there.

The celebration of this privilege, that is twofold.

1. On Man's part by way of Report in the 5. verse. And of Zion it shall be said.
2. On Gods part by way of Record in the 6. The Lord shall count when he writes
up the people that, etc.
We begin with the First, viz. The Privilege it self, which is here presented
to us with all the advantage that may be.

First, In its threefold Repetition in one verse after another. Repetitions in
Scripture are for the most part very significant, and do import some very great
matter in the things themselves which they are applied unto. And so as to this
particular passage amongst the rest; it is not vainly or without very good
cause thrice repeated here in the Text. This man was born there. This man was
born there. This man was born there. In the 4. verse. In the 5. And in the 6.

Secondly, In the word of Attention which is annexed unto it, Selah. Which if
according to some it be a mere Musical note to provoke an elevation of the
voice; yet according to others more probably is a note of special
Animadversion to intimate the excellency of the matter; and the one grounded
upon the other, the more excellent matter, requiring a more excellent note to
be put upon it.

To which I may add a third according to some readings of the Text; and that is
the Particle of excitement prefixed unto it, Behold. Lo, there was he born.

A double Emphasis
The passage itself according to a different Accent or Emphasis which may be
laid upon the words, has a different notion with it. upon There. This.

For it may be laid either upon There, or upon This. If ye lay the force upon
There, then it is an advancement of the person taken from the place, This man
was born THERE. If ye lay the force upon This, then it is an advancement of the
place taken from the person, THIS MAN was born there. We may take it (if we
please) according to either of these Notions, and we shall consider it at this
time in both, as which will best agree with our purpose, and suit to the
present occasion which we have now in hand.

1. Upon There.
And first, In the former, viz. The advancement of the person taken from the
place. This man was born there. There! Where was that? I told you before that
it was delivered a little obscurely. But we must resolve it by consulting with
the Context, both in the words preceding and following, and that will show it
plainly to be Zion all along. It is here declared as a very great privilege
for this man, who ever he be, to be born there. Now that it may really appear
to be so indeed, it is requisite for us to enquire, what this Zion was, where
this man was born? The Scripture exhibits it to us under a double
Representation: Zion twofold.
Either as the City of David, or as the City of God. If we take it as the City
of David, so to be born in it does denote a temporal privilege. If as the City
of God, a spiritual.

1. The City of David.
First, Take it as the City of David. We shall find Zion thus to be called, 1
King. 8.1. The City of David which is Zion. And so it is by a Synecdoche put
for Jerusalem, which was the Metropolis or Mother-City of the Kingdom. The same
is LONDON to us; not only (...) a City of Habitation, i. e. a populous City,
Psalm. 107.7. But also (...) The City of our Solemnities, i. e. a stately and
magnificent City, Isa. 30.20. And to be born in it, as so considered, it was
not without its honor and dignity as belonging unto it: No more but that. There
is a Civil respect which does adhere to men in regard of their births, which
are not merely casual, but have a special hand of providence which is operative
in them. As to their Parents, so to the places of their Nativity; and as that
they are born thus, so that they are borne there. There in opposition to a
meaner place and more obscure. That it is there and not there, there is
somewhat which is considerable in it; and accordingly has been so esteemed of
by intelligent men. It was such as the Apostle himself made very much of as he
had occasion for it, Act. 21.39. But Paul said, I am a man which am a Jew, of
Tarsus a City in Cilicia; A citizen of no mean City, (...), And Act. 22,28. He
mentions it as a special privilege wherein he excelled the Chief-Captain in
his Roman freedom; that whereas the other got it by purchase, With a great sum
obtained I this freedom; he had it by birth, But I was free born; namely in
Tarsus which was a Colonie to Rome, and so according to custom had that
privilege annexed unto it, as pertained to those Cities. This (I say) simply
considered, has its advantages in it.

Therefore let us learn to bless God for such providence as these are, where
we partake of them; which though they are but of ordinary and inferior
consideration, yet are such as deserve to be observed and taken notice of by
us. It is true, they are nothing to speak of, as we shall hear more afterward,
if we lay them with better things; but yet in themselves they are somewhat
worth. They are nothing comparatively, but they are somewhat absolutely. They
are nothing as to matter of Pride; but they are somewhat as to matter of
Thankfulness and due acknowledgement; as many other things besides of the same
nature with them, Riches, and Honors, and Parentage, and Dignity, and
Authority, and the like; they are poor matters for any one to set his heart
upon them, or to be puffed or lifted up with them; but yet they are such as a
gracious heart will be thankful for, and learn to understand Gods dealings in
his dispensing of them to him. Proud and envious spirits where they see any
others to excel in any thing above themselves, they are apt there to throw
some contempt and disparagement upon it, and upon those which are partakers of
it; but yet for all that it is never the worse for the parties themselves; who
notwithstanding all such carriages are themselves to be affected with them, yea
and to bless and praise God for them. If God casts outward privileges upon us
we, are not to despise them, but to enjoy them with humility and fruitfulness,
though they are not the things which we are to value or measure our selves by.
The Apostle Paul was a man of as great and many external accommodations as any
man else besides, ( If any have confidence in the flesh, I more, Phil. 3.4.)
but he knew both when to stand upon them, and when to neglect them. And so
should we do with him. When any of these things came once in competition with
the Gospel of Christ, then he scorns them and throws them away. What things
were gain unto me, those I counted loss for Christ, yea doubtless and I count
all things to be but loss, etc. But when others despised him for want of them,
or did not sufficiently prize him in them, then he resumes them and takes them
up again with greater authority; Then, wheresoever any is bold, I speak
foolishly, I am bold also. Are they Hebrews? so am I. Are they Israelites? so
am I. Are they the seed of Abraham? so am I; and so he goes on. To teach us
that these were such things which in their due rank and place might be
mentioned with some kind of acknowledgment; and so they may. But so much may be
spoken of Zion according to its first representation, as it is taken for the
City of David; and so to be born there, as denoting a temporal privilege,
which is not altogether to be neglected by us.

2. The City of God.
The second is for the City of God. So it is sometimes taken and called in
sundry places of Scripture. Thus Psalm. 48.1. The City of our God; The mountain
of Holiness: he speaks it of Zion, as the next verse. expresses it. And so
verse. 8. The City of the Lord of Hosts, the City of our God. And so in the
third verse. of this very Psalm which we have now in hand; Glorious things are
spoken of thee, O thou City of God. Having spoken in the verse. before of the
Gates of Zion. Thus now it signifies the Church, and so to born in it a
spiritual privilege. But then again even thus considered it has a double
notion in it. Zion Local. Mystical.

For it may be taken either locally or mystically. If we take it locally; so to
be born in Zion is to be born in such a place where the Church and people of
God does reside. To be born in some visible Church. If we take it mystically,
so to be born in Zion is to be regenerate and born again. To be a member of the
Church which is invisible. Either of these is a very great privilege, but
especially the latter of them. And the former in reference to the latter; with
which former we will now begin.

1. Local.
First, Take Zion locally, for the place of the Churches residence, the visible
Church. This man was born there. It is intimated as a privilege this to that
man whosoever he be; and so it is. It is a great mercy to be cast upon such
places and times, and to be brought forth in such Nations and Countries wherein
the Ordinances and means of grace are dispenst. This is to be born under a
right Planet and Constellation indeed, as none else besides.

And that especially from Gods presence, which is here especially manifested,
and who takes special delight therein. The Lord loves the gates of Zion more
then all the dwellings of Jacob, in the 2 verse. of this Psalm. Why the gates of
Zion more then any other gates else? Namely, because of the Ordinances and
Performances which are there in use. Where any are gathered together in his
name, there is He present amongst them. Here are excellent truths revealed, and
excellent duties performed, and excellent privileges enjoyed, as pertaining
hereunto; and all these likewise tending and conducing to an excellent end,
which is consequent and following hereupon, through Gods blessing upon them;
even conversion and regeneration here, and salvation and glory hereafter; which
we are put into a capacity of, and into a way unto, by such opportunities as
these are.

The improvement.
This is that therefore which we have cause much to acknowledge and to be
affected withal. We of this Nation in general, and We of this City in
particular. The great goodness and mercy of God to us in this respect, That we
have been born here. Not in Egypt, but in Goshen; Not in Babylon, but in Zion;
Not in the valley of darkness, but in the valley of vision, and under the
beams of light it self.

1. By the Nation in general.
First, We of this Nation, that we have been born here. And here in the right
Reflection, and reduplication of it; not in Paganism, but in Christianity; not
in Popery, but in the true Religion. For we must know and consider that there
has been a double hand of conversion and Reformation which has past upon us
here in this Island. A Conversion from Heathenism and Infidelity; as we were
sometimes a barbarous Nation, as wild and savage as any other in all the
world; which once we were. And a Conversion from Antichristianism and
Superstition, as we were sometime a Popish Nation, and overgrown with the
corruptions of Rome; which once also we were. We are to own our deliverance
from both in regard of the Nation, and our birth as partaking of that
deliverance in regard of our selves; as born in such a Time and Age, which
(through Gods goodness) was freed from either. This is that which is the great
privilege and advantage indeed unto us. It is this that makes it there. To be
born in such an Air, under such a Climate, within such a compass of ground
and earth; It is not that which is any great matter. Our Forefathers that
lived in Darkness, and Ignorance, and Blindness, and Superstition, they were
in this sense born here as well as we. No, but to be born in days of knowledge
and light, under the preaching of the Gospel, and the Dispensation of the
Ordinances, and the enjoyment of the truth; this is our glory, and joy, and
Crown of rejoicing above any thing else besides: and those which are born thus,
are born there. Thus we of this Land and Nation in general.

2. By the City in special.
But then secondly, We of this City and place in particular; we have cause to
acknowledge it more especially. And we are come to acknowledge it this Day. It
is a main end of of our meeting and assembling together at this thime, if we
know what it is which we are met and assembled for, To praise God for this
happy providence which has been afforded unto us. That we should be born not
only in Jury, but also in Sion; and that not in the literal sense neither, but
in the spiritual; not in the legal Sion, but in the evangelical. That God
should cast and dispose our beginnings in such a place, as wherein we might
suck in Religion with the air in which we breath, according to the various
opportunities which are here administered to us. For so there are, as no place
under heaven the like. This is that which calls for our acknowledgment. The
Psalmist when he would advance Sion, and set forth the glory of it; how does he
do it? in Psalm. 48.1, etc. he does it from hence, in that it is the City of God
and the mountain of holiness. Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole
earth is mount Sion, on the sides of the north, the City of the great King. God
is known in her palaces for a refuge. Yea there was the glory of Sion, that God
was known in her. And so Jerusalem, he expresses this of it as the great
ornament to it; That thither the tribes went up, the tribes of the Lord to the
testimony of Israel: And that the house of the Lord was in it, Psalm. 122.4,
etc. And that which was the glory of Sion, the same is the glory of London;
without this, London were no more then Ligorne or Constantinople, or any other
City besides in the whole world. This is that which puts an honor upon it, the
dispensations and means of grace which are vouchsafed unto it; and which
accordingly they have the benefit and advantage of, which are brought forth and
brought up in it.

3. By all together.
This it is not only matter of dignity, and to be looked upon by us so, but
likewise (as all other mercies and privileges besides are) it is matter of
duty too, and obliges us to answerable behaviors. Beloved, We are accountable
to God for our births, and the places of our breeding and bringing up, in which
it has been. There are some which have been born not only in Sion at large in
regard of the common opportunities, but also in Sion more particularly, in
regard of the special advantages which they have been partakers of. Not only
born in a City of Religion, but moreover in religious families, of godly and
religious Parents, which have been godlily and religiously educated and
nurtured in the fear of the Lord. There are many which have lived under
faithful Ministers, and faithful Masters, and Governors, etc. Now what an
engagement does from hence lie upon them to be that which they should be? How
much better should they be then other men? Oh it is a fearful thing to sin
against good education, and the instillation of gracious principles! God will
one day call to reckoning for it. The Lord will count when he writes up the
people; That this man was born there. He was born in such a Nation, in such a
Country, in such a City, in such a Family, etc. God observes and takes notice
of it, and how far he is the betber for it, or how far he is not. That which is
in it self a mercy, in the misimprovement of it is a judgment; and we had
better been absolutely without it, if we be not the better for it. That so we
may not glory in these privileges merely for themselves, but rather take care
how we manage them and make use of them. And so much of Sion in the first
notion, as taken locally; and to be born in it, i. e. born in the visible
Church.

2. Mystical.
The second is as taken Mystically. To be born in Sion, i. e. To be regenerate
and born again; to be a member of the Church which is invisible. This is a
great privilege indeed, and the highest of all. All are not Israel which are
of Israel. Nor all born in Sion according to the Spirit, which are born in it
according to the flesh. But yet this spiritual birth is that which is
principally to be regarded, and to be looked after above any besides. In Romans
2.28,29. He is not a Jew which is one outwardly; neither is that circumcision
which is outward in the flesh. But he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and
circumcision is that of the heart, whose praise is not of men, but of God. To
be born indeed, is to be newborn; That is the main birth of all. And they are
to purpose born there which are born thus. S. Paul salutes Andronicus and
Junia, especially upon this account, as in Christ before him. (...), Romans 16.7.
He is born first who is first born anew; and he is the ancientest Man, that is
the ancientest Christian. My little children of whom I travel in birth again
till Christ be formed in you, says the Apostle Paul to the Galatians, in Gal.
4.19. What ever birth comes short of this, it is in a sort but monstrous and
imperfect, though it be otherwise adorned with never so many accomplishments
and qualifications besides.

Our Natural condition.
For this purpose it is very pertinent to consider what we are in our natural
condition, we are all by Nature the children of wrath, as the Apostle expresses
it, Ephesians. 2.3. Our Birth and our Nativity of the land of Canaan; our Father an
Amorite, our Mother an Hittite, Ezekiel. 16.3. We were shapen in iniquity, and in
sin did our Mothers conceive us; in Psalm. 51.5. Every imagination or frame of
our Hearts and the thoughts of them, were only evil continually. Now certainly
there must be some change therefore wrought, if ever we be that, which we
should be. Our birth and nativity of Canaan, it will not serve the turn; No,
But we must be born in Sion: And this is that which we have now before us, as
commended unto us: this spiritual and supernatural Birth. That we be
Regenerated and new principled. Except a man be born again, he cannot see the
Kingdom of God, (Joh. 3.3.) Born again, that is, as the word properly
signifies, born from above (...). He must fetch his Birth and pedigree from
thence, or else he is but in a poor condition. There is no man is born to
Heaven, except he be born from it, and has principles answerable to it. In 1
Pet. 1.3. Who has begotten us again to a lively hope by the resurrection of
Jesus Christ from the dead, that is, by such a spiritual power which is
conformable to this Resurrection, and is the fountain of Regeneration in us.

A word of Examination.
Therefore we should especially look to this, to find it in our selves. That we
are in this sense born in Sion. And that Jerusalem, which is above, and is
free, be the Mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. That our (...) our Citizenship be in
Heaven, Phil. 3.20. without which all civil Privileges or natural will be of
little worth to us. This is that which we are called to in the Gospel and the
ministry of it: it is ordained for such an End as this; and this especially.
Thus the Apostle to the believing Hebrews; Heb. 12.22. Ye are come unto Mount
Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem. Come! How
so? as by the Gospel ye have been called; and as by Faith you have been
received into the Communion of the Christian Church, which was figured by
Jerusalem and by Mount Sion; That Is the coming there meant. And we never come
to purpose till we come thus: till not only we partake of the Gospel as
communicated to our outward Ears; but as digested and wrought into our Hearts.
This is true Religion indeed; and this is to be truly Religious, to be thus
affected in our selves. Religion is not a thing taken up, as some custom and
fashion, or the like; No, but it is somewhat imbred in us; It is incorporated
and molded into us, and we into it: Imbred, not by the first Nature, but by
the second: we are created in Christ Jesus to good works; and so his
workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10. And if any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature.
And nothing which is less then this will be sufficient for us. This may be
discovered in us, and to us; according to the several workings of this new
Creature in us. If we be born in Sion, we shall understand the language of
Sion; we shall speak the phrase of it, we shall agree with the diet of it; as
new born babes we shall desire the sincere milk of the word, that we may grow
therely. Ex eisdem principiis nutrimur, e quibus constamus: those Truths which
are most spiritual in this case will be most acceptable unto us.

A twofold Discovery.
There are two senses in Nature, which we call senses of Necessity, as such
which are absolutely required to the Being of a living Creature. And there are
the same proportionably in Grace, and required to the Being of a Christian:
Tactus and Custus: A spiritual Touch, and a spiritual Taste; a tenderness of
spirit, and a savourinesse of spirit: what we feel, and what we relish. And
accordingly may we from hence judge of the work of Regeneration in us.

1. By a spiritual Touch.
First, by our spiritual Touch, in that tenderness of conscience which is in
us. Where there is life, there will be sense; and so here. A twofold Tenderness.
There Is a double tenderness; antecedent and consequent: antecedent to keep us
from evil; and consequent, to check us for it. And both these necessary to a
Christian.

1. Antecedent.
First, for that which is Antecedent: a Christian has a tenderness here, to
restrain him and keep him in, from whence he cannot do every thing, which
another can do; or which his Nature inclines him to? And that upon principles
of Judgment and right information: A scrupulous Conscience, is not always a
tender Conscience, nor a tender Conscience a scrupulous. The one oftentimes
proceeds from weakness of Judgment. The other from strength of Grace, and the
principles of spiritual life in us, which therefore we cannot be without, and
in the mean time be true Christians. Those which have a wide swallow, and can
down with any thing indefinitely without any chawing, they have cause to
suspect themselves, as that all is not right with them, as to the work of Grace
in them.

2. Consequent.
Secondly, There Is a Consequent or Subsequent Tenderness; from whence
Conscience checks for evil; this is also a very good character: when the soul
that is guilty of sin is presently troubled for it, and troubled with it: and
that though never so small, nor never so secret, and that not only from natural
conscience, but from a work of the spirit. This is that which we may observe
oftentimes in diverse of the Saints in Scripture: As David for example, he was a
man of a tender spirit, and his Heart it presently smote him, for any thing
which was amiss in him; so will ours do likewise if we be of the same spirit
with him. There will be in us upon any miscarriage which is discerned by us,
Singultus Cordis, an upbraiding or rising of Heart, as it is termed by Abigail
in 2 Samuel 25.31. And the more Gracious, still the more quick and apprehensive
in this particular. Look as it is in the Body; the finest constitutions are
most sensible of a distemper: so in the soul; are the most spiritual Christians
most sensible of an infirmity in themselves.

2. A spiritual Taste.
But secondly, As there is a discovery of us from our spiritual Touch, so
likewise from our spiritual Taste; we may see what we are by this. Creatures
which have life, they have a relish, to distinguish of what is good for them,
from what is hurtful and offensive; and so it is in the new creature. A double
Taste.
A true Christian, he has his palate rightly qualified in him; and that to a
double purpose. First, to distinguish Truth from Error: and secondly, to
distinguish solid meat from Trash.

1. Of Truth from Error.
First, Truth from Error: A gracious heart will distinguish this, especially
such truths as are material and of the substance of Religion; the more there is
of true Grace, there will be a closing with true Doctrine; If any man do the
will of him that sent me, he shall know of the Doctrine which I teach, whether
it be of God or no, says our blessed Savior, Joh. 7.17. There are principles
in the Conscience answerable to Doctrines in the word, and these agree one with
the other like two Indentures; and disagree there where they are contrary.
Those which are for all kind of Tenants, are commonly for all kind of
practices; and a latitude of judgment, has a latitude of conversation with it.

2. Of solid meat from trash.
Secondly, There Is a discerning likewise of solid meat from trash: Kickshawes
and slight provisions will not satisfy hungry stomachs; no more will fancies
and speculations and wordings and quirks of wit, hungry souls; Those which have
the true spiritual appetite and taste in them, they will relish as nothing but
truth, so nothing neither but substantial food; The words of Faith and good
Doctrine, which they are nourisht up in, 1 Timothy 4.6. And the words of Truth and
soberness, Act. 26.25. These and the like accomplishments with them are the
discoveries of this spiritual life and birth whereof we now speak.

The Exhortation renewed.
And therefore (to renew the Exhortation) let us consider how far we do indeed
partake of them. There are many which are exceedingly mistaken in this
business, who take Civility for Christianity, and Morality for true Piety; and
some common work of the Spirit, for the work of saving Grace and spiritual
Regeneration; which are but half converted Christians: Not far from the
Kingdom of God; and yet likely never to come thither, according to the state
and condition in which at present they are; But Embryoes and Abortives in
Religion: nay scarce so much as that: as Agrippa almost persuaded (...). This
is a miserable thing, and so much the more miserable, as for the most part they
please themselves in it. We bewail Molas and false conceptions in Nature: and
what is it then to have them in Grace and in Spirituals, as many men have?

Grounds of self-deceit.
There are diverse Grounds and occasions of this self-deceit; Some there are that
judge of themselves according as others judge of them. Because they are well
thought of abroad, and are cried up in the world, have the opinion and good
esteem of such and such godly Christians, and of such and such godly Ministers,
which are willing to make the best of a little, and to encourage some small
appearances of good in them, that so they may draw them on to more: therefore
they think the work of Grace is complete and finished in them. It may be they
are in such a form and way of profession, attend upon such a Ministry, and are
accustomed to such and such company; therefore they must needs be as good as
those which they are acquainted withal. But alas! what poor things are these
to hold by, and to build ones hope upon? Oh Beloved, these will serve in a day
of peace, but they will not serve in a day of trouble; as long as men are in
health and prosperity, and out of the reach of Temptation, such weak things as
these may suffice them, and satisfy their minds: but in sickness, and death,
and the hour of trial, these things, they will not serve. Then they will be ready
to cry out with him; Alia sunt Judicia hominum; alia sunt Judicia Dei. The
opinions of men are one thing, and the opinion of God is another; whose
Judgment is according to Truth, and so most of all to be regarded by us: that
so we may have rejoicing in our selves alone, and not in another, having
approved our work to him, as it is Gal. 6.4.

We find in ordinary experience, that those which have most of the Cry, have
least of the Wool. (It is so in every thing almost we can name;) which do (...)
make a fair show in the flesh; and that is enough for them they think; and God
in judgment suffers it to be so; that whiles men are taken with applause, and
esteem of themselves accordingly, they may have their reward, and it may be all
which is eminent in them.

Others there are that judge of themselves by some abilities which they are
endued withal, or performances which come from them which reckon of Grace by
Gifts, and by duties which they are conversant in; Because perhaps they have
such a measure and degree of knowledge, obtained by education and converse, or
such a measure and degree of utterance, and discourse, and facility of
expression, as a natural qualification in them, therefore their case is good
with them, whereas (alas!) all this may be, and the heart the mean while rem
in unchanged. And so for performances; because they abound in them; which
though good and to be abounded in, yet are no demonstration.

Much less (which too many uphold by) their plenty and prosperity in the
world. These are all far from the mark, and do not come up to this work of the
new Creature which is here exhibited to us.

Let us therefore all labor to be upon surer terms in a business of so great
concernment; and whereupon all our hope and comfort does especially depend, as
indeed it does. If we be not the children of Sion, we are the children of
Satan: and if we be not in this sense born there, we are born to very little
purpose.

Therefore let us make this good to our selves upon infallible grounds. Errors
in the first foundation, they are for the most part irrecoverable: I am sure
it is so here; if we be not right as to the fundamental work and beginnings of
Godliness in us, all our following profession, and conversation, it comes to
nothing. As we see again it is in Nature, and in the state of the Body, if a
man be not well-born, that is, of a sound and healthful constitution; but have
some notorious defect of Nature in him, with which he came into the world; he
will never be right all his life, though ye physic him and patch him up as
much as ye can; because there is a flaw in his principles. Even so is it also
here in Grace, and as to the state of the Soul. If a man have not the right
work of conversion and regeneration in him, he will never be a good and sound
Christian as long as he lives: he may be patcht up a little with duties, and
good society, and such things as these; which are things which I do not slight,
(there are too many in the world that do in these present days) but if he has
nothing else besides, he will be but a Skeleton; nay a Monster in Religion, and
of no account.

To press home this point so much the more: of indevouring for this work which
we speak of, let us take in this consideration with us: that namely, this will
make us so much the more constant and steadfast in Religion. Those that take up
Religion upon trust or upon custom, because others do so, they are very
uncertain in the profession of it; because their principles are uncertain on
which they stand. But now those who are Religious from the principles of the
new Creature, they will be firm and abiding in it. There Is nothing which is so
convincing as Sense, and the Demonstrations which are made to that: now thus it
is here in this present business; there is a spiritual sense, as well as a
natural, and the former full as satisfactory as the latter; for that
proportion, in which it is in us. Look as a man in Nature, he has these and
these natural workings in him, which he is sure of and cannot be beaten from:
so in Grace are there the l^ke workings of Spirit which cannot be gainsayed.
There are the Experiences of Christians as Christians, which all Christians are
acquainted withal. And this was the Apostles meaning in that expression of his
to the Philippians, in Phil. 1.9,10. And this I pray, that your love may abound
yet more in all knowledge, and in all judgment: or as it is in the margent, in
all sense: for so the word properly signifies: (...), which seems to answer
that of David, Psalm. 119.66. Give me good judgment and knowledge. (...) Good
Taste and knowledge. There Is a taste in Grace as well as there is in Nature;
and that I say as firm as the other, and which Believers partaking of, they
from hence become more settled and resolved then other men are; the Truths which
another man knows and believes only from discourse, a Christian knows from
experience. As for Instance, in two or three particulars: Another man, he
believes there is a God, for such and such natural reasons, which persuade him
to it; a Christian, because he has acquaintance, and converse, and communion
with him. Another man acknowledges the Scriptures from the Testimony and
authority of the Church, which has transmitted them to him; A believer from the
power, and efficacy, and autopisty in the Scriptures themselves, and that
agreement and correspondency which they have with his own heart and conscience,
so far forth as renewed. Another man believes there is an Heaven, and a blessed
estate and condition of Gods people in another world, because it is a point
which is received by all that mention Christianity: a regenerate person and
child of God, who is born in Sion, from the first fruits of the Spirit, and
the anticipations and beginnings of Heaven in his own soul; Knowing in your
selves, that ye have in heaven a better and more enduring substance, as the
Apostle argues to the believing Hebrews, Heb. 10.34. and so of the rest: Ye
have an Unction from the holy one, and ye know all things, says the Apostle
John, 1 John 2.29. And again, the anointing which ye have received of him
teaches you etc. and it is Truth and is no lie: what is this Unction and
Anointing? Even Regeneration, and the sanctifying work of the Spirit; the work
of the new creature in them; this abiding in them, it taught them, etc.

And this by the way gives us an account of the contrary Errors and false
Doctrines and opinions which are abroad in the world; why there are so many
strange Tenants and conclusions which are broached and divulged, not only in
lighter matters, and such as are of smaller concernment (wherein every one has
liberty to abound in his own sense, so he disturbs not the common peace of the
Church) but in the very substantials and fundamentals of Religion, the truth of
it plainly is this, because there is so great a defect as to the work of Grace.
Therefore we have so many Heretics, because we have so many Hypocrites; if men
had better hearts, they would have better heads; and if they were better
Christians, they would be better Divines: But because they fail in the one,
therefore they prove defective in the other. That man that has a gracious
spirit, he cannot easily have a corrupt Judgment in those things which are of
the Essence of godliness, because his experience will set him right, and
prevent such corruptions in him; Indeed, it does not hold reciprocally, and e
converso. A man may be orthodox in his judgment, and yet but barren in his
heart, as not receiving the Truth in the love of it. But he cannot be savoury
in his spirit, and rotten and unfound in his Judgment in a spiritual Truth, at
least so, as long to abide and continue in it, what ever he may for a fit, and
in a Temptation be subject unto, as in any vice or enormity of practice; yet to
abide in it, that he will not, no more then he will in the other. No, if he be
right in Affection, he will accordingly be right in Opinion; and if he be not,
he will not; but then he will recover himself again. These distempers, they lie
not in the Brain so much, as in the Heart; in the Heart originally, and in the
Brain only symptomatically. By sympathy and complication, you know, as
concerns the workings of the soul in a natural way, there may be sometimes
strange fancies and conceits arising from some lighter melancholy and distemper
of body; But where there are contradictions of reason and common sense, it
argues laesa principia, some distraction or phrenetical humor. Even so here,
in these spiritual improvements, men may perchance err in lighter matters,
through ignorance or non-attendency; but to err in fundamentals, is an
argument of some substantial defect as to the work of Grace it self.

There are two Reasons especially, why those which are of false hearts, should
be of false judgments in Religion. The one is direct and immediate from the
nature of the thing it self, as the effect flowing from its proper and
univocall cause. And the other occasional and consequential, as proceeding from
the just Judgment of God, who because they receive not the love of the Truth
that they might be saved, therefore sends them strong delusions that they should
believe lies. And thus ye see (as an improvement of this point) what great
cause we every one have to make this work sure to our selves; That we are
indeed such persons, as in this sense are born in Sion.

Now further, where we prove to be so, we have great cause likewise to
acknowledge it, and to bless and praise God for it and the opportunities of
it; as who has pleased to deal so graciously with us, as herein he has done.
When all is done, this is the great mercy of all, and there is none like unto it.
It is the original and fundamental Mercy, and which lays the ground for all
the rest. Look as it is in the world, all the consequent comforts of it, they
depend upon our Birth into it. If we be stifled in the Birth, there is a period
to all our worldly expectations, or the hopes of our Parents for us. Even so it
is also in Religion; as to the comforts and accommodations of that; If we be
not regenerate and born again, there is no hope for us at all; If we be so, we
are then made for ever. This Regeneration it brings in many other comforts with
it; Ability to serve God, Benefit of the Ordinances, improvement of all
passages of Providence, the peace of conscience and joy of the Holy Ghost, and
Heaven and salvation at last. If we have any of these consequent privileges
belonging to us as Christians, it does depend upon this primitive mercy, that
we are the children of God, adopted and regenerated by Him. Therefore let us
bless God for this above any thing else; and for all the means which have been
tending and conducing to this gracious work in us. Let us think our selves so
far born in Sion; not only as we are born in it locally, within the pales of
the visible Church, (which I spoke of before) but also as we are born in it
mystically, that is, as Members of the Church which is invisible; and have the
true and genuine work of saving Grace wrought in our hearts. This is to be born
in Sion, and this is to be born in London, indeed to be born in it thus: They
are not only born in London, which are born within the Walls, and Suburbs, and
Liberties; within the Freedom and compass of the City, and here breath their
first natural Breath; No, but which being born abroad though in remote and
foreign Countries and Nations, are here partakers of the Efficacy of the
Ordinances, and of the Power of the Gospel upon their hearts. And they have
cause for ever to bless God for such a mercy vouchsafed unto them; these are
the privileges of the City indeed more then any thing else. Whosoever he be
that God has been pleased to make this City in which we now are, to be an
occasion of his Regeneration and Conversion to himself; This City is the true
place of his Nativity; though the place of his Birth into the world were
perhaps many hundred miles off, though in Italy, in Turkey, in India, though in
the farthest and remotest places of all the earth. I will make mention of Rahab
and Babylon, among them that know me. They which were born at the lands end,
they were born in the very Heart of the City, if it was thus with them. This to
the praise of Gods grace, and to their own everlasting comfort, is, and still
will be the condition of many an one at this time, and in this very place.
There Is many a poor youth which comes up hither to the City from the furthest
parts of the Nation, and from the blindest corners of the Land. All that he
thinks of (or it may be his friends for him) is only to get him a Trade, to
provide him a Master, to set him in some way of livelihood against another day.
Oh but a gracious God has a further design upon him; not only to gain his
Trade, but gain his Soul; not only to teach him some Art or Mystery here in the
world, but to teach him the Trade of Piety, the Art of Christianity, the
Mystery of godliness and Religion; not only to make him a Man, but to make him
a Christian, of the household of God, of the company of Angels, a fellow Citizen
of the Saints, an Inhabitant of the new Jerusalem, a free Denizen of Heaven it
self. This Man now he is born here, Here he is born. Let the place of his first
coming into the world be where it will be. So that now (Beloved) upon this
reckoning, we have a great many more Countrymen then we made account of. And
likewise again on the other side not so many, as we could desire. If Birth be
to be judged of by Grace and according to the first beginnings of Religion,
there are many which owe very much to this City, the City of London of all
other places, as wherein they first received such impressions as these upon
their hearts.

And accordingly, it becomes them to acknowledge it, and to be thankful for it.
There are many unkind, and unnatural, and ungrateful people in the world,
which in this respect make but ill returns to those places and persons which
have been the means and instruments of doing them this spiritual good; Unchurch
those Churches wherein they first received heavenly instruction: Un-minister
those Ministers, who first acquainted them with the ways of God. Now what an
unseemly, and unworthy a thing is this! How ill becoming of those who have been
partakers of so great a benefit and blessing as this indeed is! Yea, how ill
does it agree with that state and condition of Christianity, whereunto they
pretend! Certainly if they have any thing at all in Religion, here they had it:
and if they be newborn at all, they were born here. Here was the womb that
conceived them, the paps that sucked them, the immortal seed from whence they
were born again, the spiritual Fathers which begat them in Christ Jesus by the
Gospel. All which they have, it was here, that so here they may acknowledge the
mercy, and return the praise. But so much may suffice to have spoken of the
first Emphasis in this passage before us, as it may be laid upon the particle
THERE. And so as an advancement of the person taken from the PLACE.

The Emphasis upon THIS.
The second is by laying it upon THIS; and so it is an advancement of the place
taken from the person. It is made the Honor and Dignity of Sion, that is, of
the true Church of God; To have such and such born in it. This and that Man was
born in her. There are two things signified in this expression, as Branches of
this Honor; The one is the Quality of the persons; and the other is the Number
of them. For the Quality of them, This. For the Number of them, This and That.
To have both of these born in Sion. Persons of note and eminency. And a
multitude and plurality of such persons. This is a part of that Dignity and
Renown which belongs unto it. And it is so to Sion in each consideration of it,
whether we take it Mystically or Locally. For the Church in General, or for
this Church and City in Particular.

First, Take it for Sion Mystically, i. e. the Church in General; As it is an
honor to it to bring forth, not to be absolutely barren, or destitute of
children; but to have persons to be born in it: so it is first of all an honor
to have born in it persons of note, such persons as are eminent in the most
desirable Qualifications. This is one thing which is remarkable about it. This
man was born in Her: there is an Emphasis both in the Pronoun and in the Noun;
in this, and in this Man; and that as enlarging the Dignity of it.

First for the Pronoun, This; this indefinite Expression is of a different
signification: sometimes it is used reproachfully, and by way of disdain; they
that abhor the person, do commonly abhor the name with it. Thus the Jews when
they speak of Christ, not name him, but in scorn, That Man. (...) And so in the
Gospel, (...), where is He? as if he were not worthy to be named. Sometimes
demonstratively and by way of supposition. As the Spouse in the Canticles to
the watchmen; Saw ye him whom my soul loves? as supposing they must needs know
whom she looked for. And so Mary to Christ, supposing him to be the Gardener,
Sir, if thou have taken him away hence, etc. Joh. 20.15. Him, as taking it for
granted, that the person she spoke of was understood. Sometimes again
respectfully, and by way of eminency, so Cant. 1.2. And so here in the Text.
This, that is, this eminent person.

And so for the Noun, Man: The Hebrew word (...) which is here used for a man,
except qualified by some other word as joined with it, signifies a man of
worth, not a common or ordinary person. The Church it brings forth such as
these, (...) Men of Renown, famous and eminent men; and that in all kind of
perfections, whether natural, or civil, or spiritual, men of parts, or men of
power, or men of piety. There are those in all these excellencies, which have
been and still are born in Her.

1 This learned Man.
First, Take it either for Natural or Acquired abilities, Men of parts, and
knowledge, and wisdom, and improved understandings; the Church is not without
these. This Man, i. e. This learned Man, or this wise Man was born in Sion; All
are not Idiots which are Christians: No, but there are some of very rare and
admirable accomplishments in all kinds and pieces of learning, and secular
knowledge, which are graciously qualified. There Is Paul with his Parchments, as
well as Peter with his Fishers Net. Indeed there are many vain persons, who
think that wisdom must dye with them; and adjudge all to Duncery, which make
any pretense to Religion; As others all to profaneness which make any
profession of Learning; think that men cannot be godly and learned, or wise
both at once; but this is a mere Fancy and conceit, and mistake of their own.
These two they are not inconsistent, but may very well hit and hold together,
yea, and do: though they often miss and do otherwise. It is not. Not, any wise
men; but, not many after the flesh are called, 1 Cor. 1.26. There Is the
Counselor and the Orator, Esai. 3.3.

2. This Potent man.
So also, secondly, Take it for civil or secular Qualifications: Men of Dignity,
and Power, and Estate, This Man, i. e. This honorable Man. (...) Eminent in
Countenance, as he is called Esai. 3.2. He is likewise born in Sion; The mighty
Man, and the Man of War. The Syriack Interpreter was so far sensible of this,
as that he expresses it in the very Text: and therefore in stead of saying,
This man was born there, he says, A Potent man was born there, (...) and he
has established it, whereby (as I conceive) he takes in the word Highest, which
follows afterward in the verse, and refers it here to this place; and so the
Scripture sets it in other places besides: Kings shall see and arise, Princes
also shall worship, etc. Esai. 49.7. And again, The Kings of Tarshish and of
the Isles shall bring presents: the Kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifis,
Psalm. 72.10. And again, the Chaldee Paraphrast in the Text, This King was born
there, understanding thereby Solomon, as most conceive and apprehend it. Indeed
these great and potent men have not the greatest name for Religion for the most
part. Not many mighty, not many noble are called. But yet some there are, and
through Gods goodness instances of it, such as these born in Sion; Men of
power, and place, and authority and nobility, and the like. This man was born
there.

3. This Godly man.
Thirdly, Take it for spirituals, and for these accomplishments especially; This
Man, i. e. This godly Man, this is that which is most proper and essential to
Sion, and to the being born in it: yea, it is that which makes Sion it self, in
the sense we now take it. It is the highest perfection of it, and the greatest
commendation to it of any thing else. This is the great honor of the Church,
that it forms men to such qualities and dispositions as those are, which no
other place does besides. It is not all the Schools of the Philosophers; The
Stoa, or Academy, or Lycaeum (though they also have their use and seasonable
improvement) which are able to send forth such a man as Sion does; so qual
fied, and adorned, and beautified, especially in his inward parts. As for other
places, and such as those which I now mentioned; they may perhaps now and then
reach to some other principles; and those likewise very glorious in the eyes of
the world, morality, and civility, and ingenuity, and smoothness of behavior:
The School of Nature and common reason, may sometimes come up to these, and
that in a very great measure: yea, but now go a little higher, to brokenednesse
of heart, to self-denial, to love of enemies, to closing with Christ, the frame
and spirit of the Gospel; this is to be found no where but only in Sion. And
here it is. THIS MAN was born THERE.

This in the Amplification.
Now this will further take an advancement and amplification of it: not only by
considering this man, what he is now, but what he was once, which is also
intimated in the Text: Behold Philistia, and Tire, and Ethiopia; This man was
born there. Here Is the excellency of the Ordinances, and that Power and Energie
which is stirring in the Church of Christ; that it is able to work such a
miraculous alteration as this: to bring men from darkness to light, from Satan
to God, from a state of sin and corruption and unregeneracy, to a state of
Grace, and Holiness, and Regeneration: yea, from the lowest degree of the one,
to the highest degree of the other. That Philistia should turn into Palestina;
Tire into Jerusalem; Ethiopia into Judaea; here is the wonder of all. The
reconciling of these two opposite terms thus both together. That Princes
should come out of Egypt, and that Ethiopia should stretch out her hands to
God, as it is Psalm. 68.31. That the Blackmore should change his skin, and that
the Leopard should change his spots. And that this Ethiopian should become this
Christian; that he which was born there, should be born here.

There are some which have understood this place here in the Text concerning
the Ethiopian Eunuch (mentioned in the 8. of the Acts, and whom I mentioned in
the beginning of the Sermon) as if this passage here before us were spoken
Prophetically of him. But I conceive that to be a little too narrow an
Interpretation, and a little too much forced. I rather take it more general and
at large, as relating to all kind of sinners whosoever they be; yea the worst
that are, as reduced by the power of the Gospel, and the mediation of the
Ordinances of the Church, as sometimes through the goodness of God it happens
to be. And that is the first thing here considerable in the children of Sion; to
wit, the quality of the persons expressed in this man.

2. The Dignity of number.
The second is the Number or plurality. This and that man etc. And there are
three things again here. For this man only to be born there, there had been no
great matter in that; one Swallow does not make a Summer; and there is not the
plainest or meanest place that is, but may chance to have one eminent man to be
born in it. In this, First, Variety. Secondly, Indifferency. And thirdly,
Succession. 1. Variety, This and that man, i. e. That man with this. 2.
Indifferency, This and that man, i. e. That man as well as this. 3. Succession,
This and that man, i. e. That man after this; the one following and succeeding
to the other.

1. Variety.
First, Variety. (...) A man and a man, i. e. many men: Repetition, it does
denote multitude in the ordinary signification of it. And so here. The Church
is a fruitful Mother, and has the honor of many eminent children to be born of
her: Many, in the Multitude of persons, both men and women; and many in the
multitude of Nations, both Jews and Gentiles: There Is a Plurality and a
Variety of both: And so the Scripture declares unto us at large in sundry
places of it: in Act. 2.41. we find how at one Sermon of Peter's, there were
three thousand which were born at once; and Act 5.14. After that Peter and the
rest had been restrained, it is said, That Believers were the more added to the
Lord; even multitudes both of Men and Women: This for the Multitude of the
persons. And so for the multitude of the Nations, Sion Mystical is enlarged
beyond Sion Local; And it is not only a multitude of Jews, but also of
Gentiles, which is here intended, as also elsewhere expressed: in Esai. 2.2. The
Mountain of the Lords House shall be established etc. And all Nations shall
flow unto it; yea and these too in great multitudes: as we may see further in
Esai. 60.4,5,6,7. Lift up thine eyes round about and see; All they gather
themselves together etc. And, then thou shall see and flow together, and thine
heart shall fear, and be enlarged, because the abundance of the Sea shall be
converted unto thee, and the forces or riches of the Gentiles shall come unto
thee: And so Esai. 54.1,2,3. Sing O barren, thou that did not bear; break
forth into singing and cry aloud, thou that did not travel with child; for
more are the children of the desolate, then the children of the married wife,
says the Lord, Enlarge the place of thy Tents, and let them stretch forth the
curtains of thine habitations: spare not etc. Thus now Elijahs fear is at an
end, of being left alone in the service of God; as sometimes he thought he was.
There Is no danger of that at all; though indeed there be not such multitudes
and flocks as there are of the other party of those which are wicked and
impious: yet great multitudes and varieties there are for our comfort and
encouragement: as we have it expressed by the Angel, in Revel. 7.9. And after
this I beheld, and lo a great Multitude, which no man could number, of all
Nations and kindreds, and people, and tongues stood before the Throne, and
before the Lamb, clothed with white robes and palms in their hands: that is the
first intimation; Variety, This and that etc.

2. Indifferency.
The second is Indifferency, This and that Man, i. e. That man as well as this;
taking it promiscuously. There Is no condition either of person or nation which
excludes from Grace; but it is very well agreeable to all; to high and low,
rich and poor, learned and unlearned; as we which are Ministers are debtors to
all; to the Greeks and to the Barbarians, to the wise and to the un-wise; so is
our Ministry belonging to all, for the comfort and efficacy of it; to all
particular conditions, though not to all Individual persons: There Is no rank or
order of men whatsoever which in it self is incapable of salvation: nay even
that which in the eyes of the world seems to be farthest from it, is indeed
nearest to it: The meaner that any are in outward respects, the likelier they
are in spirituals, and the respects of Religion. To the poor the Gospel is
preached. And God has chosen the poor in this world, rich in Faith, and heirs
of the Kingdom; that so we may learn not to despise the meanest Christians. If
we be such as are born of God: the poorest Saints are our Brethren, as well as
the richest; And if we be such as are born in Sion the meanest Christians are
our Countrymen, as well as the Greatest. This and that man, that is, This man
as well as that. That Is the second thing, Indifferency.

3. Succession.
The third thing here intimated, is Succession. This and that man, i. e. That
man after this. The children of Sion, they are not only for one Generation, but
likewise for many following one upon another. This is that which God has
ordined for his Church, that it shall have an Holy seed, and posterity, and
continuance to the worlds end; As long as the world lasts, the Church shall
last; because the world does last but for the Church. If this and that man were
but born, that is, the Jews called, and the fullness of the Gentiles come in,
and the number of the Elect accomplished; the world might then shift for it
self, and the date and period of it would then soon be expired. All Gods care
is for his people, and for his Elect to preserve them, that none of them might
perish but that they might all come to repentance; by being made partakers of
the means of Grace, as the Apostle Peter intimates; 2 Pet. 3.9.
for which cause he keeps up the world, yea and will keep it up still, till
this be effected. The fullness of the Church, it is the fullness of Christ
Himself, who fills all in all; as the Apostle Paul also signifies in Ephesians.
1.23. And God will be sure to look to that; that Christ may be a complete Head,
with all his Members united unto him. Now Succession it makes for this, which
accordingly is here exhibited to us, in this present expression: as it is also
in some other Scriptures, Their seed shall be known among the Gentiles and
their offspring, etc. Esai. 62.9. Now in order hereunto, does God proportion
every thing else. As,

1. The Gifts of the Ministers.
First, In the Gifts of his Ministers, and his gracious assistance of them from
time to time; Lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the world, says
Christ to his Disciples, when he was now going away from them; This could not
be understood of their persons; it must be understood of their Office, and
Work, and Ministry; I am now with your selves by my presence, so long as I
continue with you; and will be with you also by my Spirit so long as you your
selves shall continue; and when you are once gone out of the world, I will not
then leave or forsake my Church, but I will be with you in those that come
after you, and that stand up in your room: so Ephesians. 4.12. for the perfecting
of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of
Christ.

2. Continuation of Ordinances.
Secondly, In the continuation of the Ordinances, and the means of Grace
themselves: There shall be Successively some born in Sion; because there shall
be from time to time a Dispensation of the Word and Sacraments for the
furtherance of this spiritual birth in us. The Word of God, it must have effect
in some consciences or other, and shall not return to him in vain, as the
Prophet Esaias speaks, Esai. 55.10,11. Though to some it be no more then as the
savor of death unto death; yet to others it shall prove really the savor of
life unto life. And there shall some good or other be wrought by it, some
converted and brought home unto God. Look as whiles the earth remains,
seed-time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and
night shall not cease: as was promised by God to Noah, Genesis 8.22. The same
shall be observed likewise proportionably as to spirituals and the seasons of
Grace; there shall be no failing or intermission of them in any Time or Age of
the world.

3. Perpetuity of Graces.
Thirdly, This Succession is further made up from the continued gracious
influences of the Spirit of Christ: not only in his common gifts of the
Ministry, (which we spoke of before) but also in his saving and sanctifying
Graces, which he does daily pour forth in his Church for the enlargement and
increase of it: thus Ephesians. 4.7. Unto every one of us is given Grace: according
to the measure of the Gift of Christ. And Joh. 1.16. Of his fullness have we
all received; and Grace for Grace; Answerable to the Grace in Christ himself is
there dispensed Grace to all his Elect.

Use. 1. Comfort.
These things thus laid together make much for our comfort and encouragement.
To consider that the Church is not confined to a few persons or number of
years; but does abide to all succeeding Generations. Which if we have any
spiritual sense or feeling in us, we cannot but be very much pleased and
affected withal: yea, and it will make us likewise to endeavor it for our own
particulars; not only to take care that we may make up so many parts of Sion,
whiles we live our selves; but that those which come after us, may do so too
for our sakes, and by our procurement. Our children, and our childrens children
and their children, in the succession of Ages. Et nati natorum, and qui
nascuntur ab illis, As Paul to Timothy, 2. Tim. 1.5.
The Faith which dwelt first in thy Grandmother Lois, and in thy Mother Eunice,
and I am persuaded that in thee also. It is a business worthy our undertaking.
2. Excitement.
And accordingly we should be persuaded to it, and heartned in it, according to
the several opportunittes which God in his providence affords unto us;
Ministers in the Instruction of our people; Parents and Masters of our
Families; Christian friends and acquaintance in the mutual excitement one of
another, to be so many blessed Instruments of begetting others to God, and
thereby propagating of his Church from time to time, as every one has received
the Gift, so ministering the same to one another; as good Stewards of the
manifold Grace of God, 1 Pet 4.10.

1 In General.
Alas! We are here but for a while, even the longest-lived amongst us: And the
Church as considered in our Age, is but of short and small continuance; Oh what
a comfort will it then be to us to think, that when we are dead and gone and in
our graves, there shall be those standing up in our steads which shall continue
Religion after us; and so much the rather upon our account! it will be
comfortable in death; and it will be comfortable after death likewise, when we
come to Heaven it self. Not only to meet with a glorious Church there, in its
perfection and accomplishment: but likewise to think that there is a gracious
Church also here, in the beginnings and inchoations of it; and especially that
we our selves have any thing contributed to it.

1. In our particular relations.
More particularly; we should endeavor it in the cities and places in which we
live; and the bounds of our particular habitations; as in England, so
especially in London in a peculiar manner. Let it never be said for shame, that
Religion failed in our time, or that we were the first corrupters or betrayers
of it; No, but let us earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered
to the Saints; and that blessed Doctrine of Truth which has been transmitted to
us by our Ancestors, and sealed by the blood of the Martyrs, and improved by
the holy lives of those godly persons which have conformed unto it, let the
same be handed down still by us to succeeding posterity. We see how careful we
are in other matters to provide for after times; in building of houses, in
setting of plants; in preparing of works and contrivances; and how much rather
should we then be thus careful in spiritual things! That such holy men as are
gone before us, may never die whiles we live; And that we our selves may never
die so long as such and such live whom we have labored to season with those
principles which we are partakers of our selves. What a blemish and stain will
that be to us to all generations, if either we shall degenerate from the good
examples which others have set us; or else set such examples to others, as
whence they also shall degenerate from the holy lives of both their and our
progenitors and predecessors! Let us therefore be watchful in this particular.
That Is the second branch of honor whence the Church is here commended to us in
regard of her children, and the people which are born in her. As from their
condition and quality, This Man; so from their number and plurality, This and
That; In variety, in indifferency, in succession; and thus taking it of Sion
Mystically, is it a dignity and honor to it, to have this and that man born in
it.

2. Locally.
Secondly, Take it Locally, for this particular Church or City. For Sion in the
Restriction. And it is an honor to it so likewise; Virtuous and eminent
persons they are a singular credit and ornament to those places in which they
were born: This and that Man was born in Sion; it is spoken of her in a way of
commendation, and to advance the Dignity of her, in the notion of such a place
as that was. Thus it has always been esteemed, and that even sometimes amongst
the Heathen themselves. Their Worthies have been an honor to their Countries;
Thus was Solon to Athens, and Pindarus to Thebes, and Tully to Rome. Homer, he
had seven Cities which contended for him as the places of of his Nativity: And
Scotus the great Schoolman, had three Nations, which all strove for his Birth:
England, Scotland, and Ireland: so great a matter is it to have men of note and
eminency to be born in such and such a Country. What do I speak of these? This
was that which made Bethlehem, which was the least, yet not to be the least
among the Princes of Judah; the Prophet Micah calls it the least; the Evangelist
Matthew calls it not the least how do these two agree? The Reconciliation is
easy; Least in it self; not least in regard of the Person which was born in
it, and that was Christ himself, which some also apply here to our Sion, and
understand by this indefinite expression here in the Text: This Man was born
there, that is, our Blessed Lord and Savior, even Jesus Christ; he according
to them is this Man, which is here spoken of. And that by way of Dignity to
Sion, as the greatest part of the renown of it. Now as it is with Christ
Himself, so is it with all those which are Christ's; Gracious and holy persons,
they reflect honorably upon their Relations, whether of Persons or Places: of
Persons, the womb that bare them: of Places, the Countries that brought them
forth; each of which do receive some respect and advancement from them.

Application.
This is that (which to come home to our selves) may be very well observed by us
to Gods glory and our own encouragement, even in this our Sion, wherein we now
are. I might easily (if need were) give you a very large Catalogue of many
famous and eminent persons in all kind of ways and professions, which this
place and city has brought forth, and show how This and that man was born in
her; But that perhaps might carry some appearance of vanity with it. Besides
that in mentioning of some, I should cast some prejudice upon the rest which I
did not mention: Therefore while I cannot in probability name all, nor with
discretion leave out any, I will now at this time name none.

But rather only in stead of it persuade that we our selves may make up the
number, and tread in their stops, by endeavoring all we can to adorn this place
of our Original and beginning in the world. I know not how it comes about, but
there are strange jealousies and suspicions sometimes upon us. The world is apt
to think, that those who are born in the City, are not so happy in their after
improvements as others are. (Perhaps there may be more in it then we are aware
of.) It will concern us really to confute them, to frustrate and falsify such a
conceit as that is; which we shall do not only by such an appearance as this is,
which we now make for a day: but by the constant and continued frame and tenor
of our whole conversation. We should labor to be all of us in our times,
blessings to this City whiles we live, by our persons, and by our prayers, and
by our interests, and by our exemplary conversations; and ornaments to it when
we die, by leaving a sweet memorial behind us to succeeding generations. And
let us adorn it in the best perfections, in virtue, and wisdom, and skill, and
piety, and Religion, and such things as these. They are not the only credit to
the City, which get great Estates in the City, and grow great and rich men in
it (though I hope they are no discredit to it neither) but which are eminent in
goodness and real worth. This is that which we should labor to be; and that
according to our several opportunities. Magistrates which are born in the City,
they should be especially careful of it, and watchful over it, and solicitous
for it, tender of the honor of it, and tender of the safety of it, and tender
of the peace of it. And Ministers which are born in the City, the souls of the
people in it should be so much the more precious with them, and dear unto them.
And Soldiers to whom the City is the place of their Birth, it should have a
share in their chiefest affection; and so of the like. It is still observed in
those which are good; that the better they are themselves, the better are others
for them, and in reference to them; Laban for Jacob; and Potiphar for Joseph;
and Zoar for Lot; Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, we know what an influence they had
upon their following posterity. And the remembrance of David, we know how it
prevailed with God for the safeguard of Jerusalem; I will defend this city to
save it for my servant David's sake, Esai. 37.35. It is recorded to the honor
of Mordecai, Esth. 10.3. That being next unto King Ahasuerus, and great among
the Jews, and accepted of the multitude of his brethren, He sought the wealth
of his people, and spoke peace to all his seed. We should all consider with our
selves what advantages God has furnished us withal in our several capacities,
whether of wisdom, or knowledge, or power, or favor, or interest, or estates,
or the like; and study to lay them all out to the good and welfare of the
places in which we live, where we were born, and whereunto we belong, that they
may be so much the better, and more flourishing for our sakes: and so far
causes in a manner of their own happiness, as they have bred and brought forth
us, and sent us out of themselves.

The contrary hereunto is observable in many persons; There are a great many
people in the world; which as it had been better for themselves, that they had
never been born at all; so it had been better for the places in which they were
born, that they had never been born there; which like Vipers eat out the bowels
of their own parents; which are so many plagues and pests, and calamities to
the Cities, and Countries, and Nations which they relate unto. And this, if not
always intentionally, yet effectively and in the event at least. By their
wicked practices, by their scandalous examples, by their ungodly and unfruitful
conversations. Scornful men they bring a City into a snare, or they set a City
on fire: as the word (...) also signifies, Prove. 29.8. They are very burdens to
the place that bears them, (...), which is even ready for the offensivenesse of
them to expel them, and cast them out, and to call for vengeance from Heaven
upon them.

But I am persuaded better things of you (Dear Christians and Countrymen) and
things that accompany salvation, though I thus speak. I told you before of a
Catalogue of many worthy and eminent Men, who had their Rise and Beginning in
this City, which it were easy for me to produce, to the honor and renown of
it in all particulars. But what need I to do that? Mine eyes behold this Day
amongst yourselves, This and that man to be born in her; which I hope will be
careful to answer this passage and expression in the Text; And as to receive
honor from Sion, that they were born there; So again to return honor to Sion;
that there they were born. And so I have done with the first general part of
the Text, viz. The Privilege mentioned.

The second. General.
The SECOND is the Celebration of this Privilege; The Celebration twofold.
And that (as I told you in the beginning) twofold. 1 The Humane Celebration.
First, on Man's part, by way of discourse, in the 5. verse, It shall be said. 2.
The Report.
Secondly, on Gods part, by way of Record, in the 6. The Lord shall count when
etc. We begin with the first in the 6. verse, The Celebration on Man's part, by
way of Discourse, wherein again two branches more: First, the Report of it; and
secondly, the Success of it. The Report of it, It shall be said etc. The
Success of it, And the Highest himself shall establish it. First, For the
Report, It shall be said; said by two sorts of persons. First, By the Members
of it in a way of exultation: Secondly, By the strangers of it, in a way of
Admiration.

By the Members, first, Exultingly, Sion shall rejoice in the multitude of her
own Converts, and speak Triumphantly of them. 1. By themselves.
They themselves which were born in Sion, shall say, that This man was born in
her; whether ye take it for Sion in the Civil sense, or in the Spiritual; In
the Mystical, or in the Local; for the City of God, or for the City of David.
It shall be said, upon either account or occasion. Excellency is not enough in
it self, unless it be observed and taken notice of. Now this is that which
shall be done here as concerning the Natives of Sion, and the qualities and
varieties of them. It is a thing which shall be spoken of and divulged all
abroad; and that first by themselves, when it is said here: It shall be said;
we must take it in its full latitude, and with all the advantage that may be;
It shall be said solemnly; it shall be said publicly; it shall be said
constantly; it shall be said joyfully. And that with all the circumstances and
appurtenances belonging unto it of a most glorious commemoration; with clapping
of Hands, with sounding of Trumpets, with ringing of Bells, with feastings and
sending portions to one another, and gifts to the poor, as it was sometimes
amongst the Jews, Esth. 9.22. They shall joy before thee according to the joy
in harvest, and as men rejoice when they divide the spoil, That this man was
born there; it is spoken of Christ, Esai. 9.3. And it is applyable likewise to
his Members; when any are by the goodness of God born thus, they have as great
cause of exulting and rejoicing, as any men else in all the world. It is the
joy of the Angels, which they celebrate; and therefore which the parties
themselves are more especially interested in.

In the Civil Sense.
But that is not all, in the spiritual sense of it, it may be carried also to the
civil. Of those which were born in Sion, considered as the City of David, and
as determined to this particular place, and this particular Country, so
there is matter of ^on in it also. And so it comes home more particularly to the
occasion of our present meeting at this present time: we see here a warrant for
the practice of this days solemnity in the commemoration of those which have
been born amongst us here in this City; Indeed, these observations of Births
have sometimes been called in question, whether lawful in regard of the Time
(and it holds proportionably of the place) Some of the Ancients were very much
against it, as Origin, and Jerome, etc. but their grounds are very weak and
superstitious. It seems they were born too soon to understand the Truth of this
point. For we which are born after them must take leave to be of another
opinion, and to dissent from them in it. If there be any comfort in being, in
life, in preservation, whether of parent or children, certainly Birth is to be
acknowledged and to be remembered, as a very great Blessing; and that not for
time only but place. It is that which we do this day; and may do with these due
cautions and limitations which are considerable in it.

The manner of celebration.
1. With Modesty.
First, with Modesty and Schriety, That we make it not a piece of Pageantry; an
occasion of showing our selves to the world; a numbering of the people; an
affectation only of conformity to other Countries; as who (we think) would not
be inferior to them; but with all meekness, and humility, and self-denial; It
is made as a great disparagement to the observation of Birth-daies; That there
were none in all the Scripture that kept them, but only Pharaoh and Herod; two
wicked and ungodly men: Et celebrabant convivium quia ignorabant mysterium. And
they observed the solemnity because they understood not the mystery; to wit, of
original sin: This is that which we for our particulars are not to be ignorant
of nor yet forgetful, but to understand our selves in this particular.

2. Thankfulness.
Secondly, with thankfulness and due acknowledgement, for Gods goodness to us
in our Births with all the circumstances of them: not only, that we are born
there, but born thus, with other privileges attending hereupon: Not only born
in the City, but preserved in it; and so prevented from those sad calamities
which many others have fallen into, before our eyes, in these late heavy
troubles and distractions, which have been upon the Land; not driven from our
houses, not disturbed in our employments; not separated from our nearest
friends and greatest comforts; others, like so many exiles banished from their
particular Countries; we have all this while been even at home, without any
disturbance or interruption. Oh blessed be God, who has shown us such
mavelous kindness in a strong City. (Psalm. 31.21.)

3. Improvement.
Thirdly, With improvement, and to edification; That must be the main business
of our coming together at this time; that we may come together for the better,
and not for the worse, for the mutual increase of love, and the seeking
occasions and opportunities for the doing of good. That we which are Born in
Sion may promote the welfare of Sion; and that in either Accept on, both in the
civil sense, and in the spiritual: In the Civil, the welfare of the City; and
in the spiritual, the welfare of the Church; and in each have a respect to
those which are born in either; The Scripture points out both, as the proper
regulations of Charity. Both (...), And (...). Those which are godly and good
Christians; and so of the Household of Faith. And those which are Natives and
and Born Citizens; and so of your Household, that ye may show piety, or
kindness at home. 1. Tim. 5.4.
(...). Thus to celebrate such memorials as these is very noble and honorable;
and thus it may be done by us. This report concerning Sion, it shall be first
made by the children of Sion; It shall be said by them themselves.

2. By others.
Secondly, it shall be said also by others, and those which are strangers to it.
It shall be said likewise by them: so the Ethiopick Translation carries it in
the very Text it self, and reads the words thus. Forrainers have said this of
thee; This and that man was etc. In Esai. 61.9. the place before cited. Their
seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their offspring amongst the
people; all that see them shall acknowledge them, that they are people whom the
Lord has blessed. They shall point at them, as it were with their fingers, as
they go along the streets and that not in a way of scorn and reproach; but in a
way of honor and high respect; Lo, This and that man etc. The meaning of it
is this; That it shall be no shame to be of such a Relation, or such an
Extraction: There are some kind of Countries in the world; which those that
are the Natives of them, are sometimes ashamed to own them, in regard of some
infamous mark or character, which lies upon them; But Sion is none of these.
There is so much true Dignity and Renown which belongs to this, as that every
one shall be ready to speak for it; and every one shall be ready to own it etc.
That Is the first Branch considerable of us in this Popular Celebration; The
Report, It shall be said.

2. The Success.
The second Branch, is the Success or glorious effect; and The Highest himself
shall establish it; Here Is a gracious and comfortable intimation concerning the
Church. It may be taken either as a prayer, or as a promise: as a Prayer, Let
the Highest etc. Or as a Promise, The Highest shall, or will; it is a very good
sense either of them. But I rather incline to the latter, as it is here rendered
in our own Translation. Where again two things more: First, The Blessing
signified, and that is the stability of Sion. Secondly, The Author of this
Blessing, and that is the Lord Himself.

1 The Churches stability.
First, The Blessing it self promised: And that is the stability of Sion, Sion
shall be established. This is a point which the Scripture is very full and
pregnant in, as none more, Esai. 33.20. Look upon Sion, etc. A Tabernacle that
shall not be taken down; nor one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed.
So Psalm. 125.2. They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Sion, which
cannot be removed, but abides for ever. Mat. 16.16. It is said, That the Gates
of Hell shall not prevail against the Church. And Heb. 12.28. It is called
(...), a Kingdom that cannot be shaken.

The Ground of it.
The Ground of it is the strong Foundation, whereupon it is built. Her
foundation is in the holy Mountains, verse. 1. of this Psalm, according to some
Translations of it. And Esai. 14.32. The Lord has founded Sion, and the poor
of his people shall trust in it, or betake themselves to it. What is it founded
upon? Upon the Attributes of God; upon the Word of God; upon the Son of God; It
is founded upon a Rock: On this Rock will I build my Church; in the place
before alleged.

2. The Author.
This brings in the second with it, and that is the Author or Bestower of this
Blessing. They do well being joined together; and indeed they cannot well be
severed. This is here expressed in the Text to be the HIGHEST HIMSELF. (...) It
is He that establishes Sion and every member of it. He that establishes us with
you in Christ, and has anointed us is God. And so S. Peter, 1 Pet. 5.10.
(...). The God of all Grace who has called us etc. make you perfect, stablish,
strengthen, settle you; see there are four words at once for the expression of
this unto us, (...). Set you in joint, consolidate, corroborate, give you a
good foundation. And all from God himself; who gives the Grace at first; He
that calls must also keep; He that begins, must perfect; He that is the author
of converting Grace, must be the giver also of establishing; we stand not by
our own Habituals, but by his Auxiliaries and Assistances, etc. And so here the
most High.

There are inferior Highnesses even below here in the world, which the
Preacher tells us of, Eccles. 5.8. Subordinate establishers of Sion.
All men are not of the same stature or size; nor is it fitting they should be.
There are some Higher then others by the Head and Shoulders. (...). And the
establishment of Sion does in a great measure depend upon them; it is their
work to do it; and it is their duty to do it; and it is their glory to do it;
not only to pull down Babylon, but to establish Sion. To establish it in the
Graces of it; and to establish it in the Doctrines of it; and to establish it
in the Ordinances of it. They cannot better establish themselves, then by
establishing that. It is the Highest Honor which God puts upon them, when he
does not only give them abilities and opportunities for it; but likewise
withal, hearts and affections to it. But yet the strength of the work it lies
not so much in them as in Him. That He which is higher then the highest regards
it as there be higher then They.

The Coherence.
Therefore it is worth our observation, how these words are here brought in in
the Text: namely in a way of prolepsis and anticipation: He had said in the
words before, That this and that man, that is, (as I have already explained it)
this variety of eminent persons was born in Sion; now from hence some might be
ready to conclude, that then certainly it should be sure to stand; if it has
such excellent Supporters, as those famous Men which were born in it, then
there is no fear that it should ever decay. They Will take care to keep it up
themselves. Oh but says the Spirit of God, That Is not that which Sion must
trust to. It is an advantage indeed to Her, to have such persons of note and
quality to be born in Her; yea, but that is not the Basis whereupon she must
rest her self. No, no, but the Goodness, and Power, and Providence of an
Almighty God; God will not trust his Church with the Best man alive; No, He
will establish it Himself, He will establish it Himself, as a work peculiar to
Him. Where men shall neglect to do it, there He will do it Himself by supplying
their defects, that He may not be beholding to them; Where men shall undertake
to do it, there He will do it Himself, by strengthening their undertakings,
that so they may be beholding to Him. So it is still Himself which does it, and
upon the point Himself alone. There Is none which have Bowels for it like Him;
there is none which have Power for it like Him. And therefore it must needs be
He: and so it is, I the LORD do keep it, Esai. 27.3. And here, The Highest
Himself shall establish it.

A word of comfor^
This is a Point of admirable Comfort and consolation, in both the Branches of
it; whether we consider the work it self, Sions establishment: or whether we we
consider the Author of this work, the Lord Himself: yea, in both taken together
it is very sweet and satisfactory. Every one naturally desires the
establishment of their own party, and the establishment of their own Country,
that that may be sure to stand what ever becomes of any thing else, This is the
privilege and advantage now of Sion, i. e. the Church of God. The Lord Himself
has undertaken to establish it. And that for ever as the Arabic Interpreter
reads it in the Text (...) He has founded it for ever. Because He ever lives
that establishes it, therefore it shall for ever be established. As for Men they
are mortal, and their establishing is no longer then for their lives (although
they may lay a ground and foundation of establishment for future Ages.) But now
the Highest Himself is for ever. The ETERNAL God is thy Refuge, and underneath
are the everlasting Arms, Deuteronomy. 33.27. Therefore thou shall be an eternal
excellency, and a Joy of many generations, Esai. 60.15.

Use.
Where then are those that are ill-willers to Sion, and that think to pull down
that! 1 Confusion to Sions Adversaries.
How do they befool themselves, and labor in vain, which All the Powers in
Earth or Hell, are never able to prevail against! This Altissimus; He is out of
their reach, and besides can overreach them. This City which is built upon a
rock, it will out-stand all floods whatsoever.

2. Comfort to particular Christians.
This is comfortable not only in the behalf of the whole Church, but also of
every particular person, and member of it which stands upon the same bottom.
Every private Christian is upon the same terms in point of stability, with
Sion it self. They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Sion. And they not
only collectively taken, but likewise distributively.

When it is said here, that God will establish Sion, we are to understand it
especially of Sion Mystically, rather then of Sion Locally. Particular Churches
may fail, but not the Church in General. And again general Churches may fail,
but not particular Christians: yea, the whole world may fail, when yet a
Believer stands impregnable; Cadit mundus, stat Christianus quia non codit
Christus. Augustine.
There is not the poorest Christian that is, but he is upon surer terms with
God then any one visible Church; Gods Covenant is but temporary with a Nation,
but it is perpetual with a Person, as being founded in Christ Himself, whom he
is rooted into. As here in the City, such a Company or Corporation may fail,
when as the particular Members or Brethren of it may subsist and hold up their
Heads. We see those famous Churches of Asia, which are made mention of in the
Revelation, how they are all now come to nothing. And other Churches have no
better an hold then they had: Quam diu been se gesserint, and durante been
placito. That so we may not be high-minded, but fear.

Indeed it should be All our Cares and endeavors, that God would establish not
only that, but this; not only Sion in general, but also our Sion in particular;
not only Christendom, but England; nor only England, but London; and we are
answerably to demean our selves in order and reference hereunto; which may be
very much obtained, and procured by our behavior: we should every one so
deport our selves: as that God may delight still to dwell amongst us; and not
remove the Candlestick from us. We which are set watchmen upon the walls, we
should never hold our peace day nor night. And we which make mention of the
Lord, or are the Lords Remembrancers, we should not keep silence till he has
established and made our Jerusalem even a praise in all the Earth. Esai. 62.6,7.
So much for that. And so I have done with this celebration of the Privilege
on Man's part, by way of Report, in the 5. verse. And of Sion it shall be said
etc. The second is on Gods part, by way of Record: The Lord shall count etc.
verse. 6.

2. The Divine Celebration.
This has a double pre-eminence both of the Person, and of the Conveyance. First
of the person, that it is God. As for men to take notice of such a business;
there is it may be no such matter in it; They may be carried perhaps by
fondness, and partiality, and self-love, have some respect to themselves in
it. Yea but for the honor of the Natives of Sion, the Lord Himself shall take
an account of them, and observe who they are.

Secondly, For the Conveyance. That other, it is only of Report. Of Sion it
shall be said: that is but a transient observation, Vox audita perit. But this
here, it is by way of Record; The Lord when he writes up the people, etc.
Litera scripta manet. This is more abiding and permanent. And here again two
things more. First, somewhat Employed; And secondly, somewhat Expressed. That
which is employed is this: That God does write up the people. That which is
expressed is this: that when God does write up the people, he shall count in this
with it, That this Man was born there.

1. That which is employed.
First, For the thing employed; it is this: That God does write up the people; He
does conscribere Populos; It is a Metaphor taken from the affairs of this
present life and the offices of it. From a shepherd taking account of his
sheep; From a Commander numbering of his Soldiers: From a Magistrate or
Chamberlain of a City, registring and inrolling those which are made free of
such a City and Corporation. Thus does the Lord do in his Church, in Ezekiel.
13.9. we read of Kethab Beth Iisrael, The writing of the house of Israel. And
Exodus 30.12. of Rosh Been Iisrael, The sum of the children of Israel. And Numb.
11.26. Of Eldad and Medad, that they were (...) among them that were written.
In Mal. 3.17. There Is Sepher Zikkaron, A Book of Remembrance, which was written
for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his Name. And God has
diverse Books of this nature: First, The book of Election and Predestination,
which is called in Scripture language, The Book of Life, (...). Phil. 4.3. whose
names are in the Book of Life; that is, the Heavenly Roll. Luke 10.22. Rejoice
in this; because your names are written in Heaven. Secondly, The Book of
Scriptures, wherein there are the Records of all the famous and eminent Saints
both of the Old and New Testament, and in them vertually of all the rest. In
Scriptura populorum; so Hierom renders it, In the Scripture of the people; and
he gives this reason for it; ut quae ab omni populo legatur: which may be read
of all people indifferently. The third is, The Book of Providence and
preservation, which Moses understands by Thy Book, Exodus 32.32. When as rather
then Israel should be utterly destroyed, he makes this Petition to God: Blot me
(I pray thee) out of thy Book which thou have written: i. e. Not out of the
Book of Election, as it is commonly and ordinarily taken; but out of the Book
of Providence. According to that also in Esai. 4.3. Every one that is written
amongst the living in Jerusalem: or appointed and designed to life and
preservation: (...) Take it which way you will. There is a Register and record
which is made, God writes up the people; and the foundation of the Lord
stands sure, having this seal, THE LORD KNOWS THEM THAT ARE HIS, 2 Timothy
2.19. That Is that which is here implied.

2. That which is Expressed.
The second is that which is Expressed. And that is this: That when God does write
up the people, He shall count in this with it, That this man was born there.
God takes a special notice of such and such particular persons, which were born
in such and such places; and how they are qualified. He does not only Censum
agere, make a Taxation of the people (which I noted before) but he does also
Censuram agere, set his mark of Remembrance upon them, and gives his verdict
and judgment of them. He takes notice not only of persons, but of conditions.
Thus and thus Able; Thus and thus Useful; Thus and thus Serviceable; And he
esteems of his Church so much the better, as such as these are Members of it,
and born in it.

Use.
This is much for the honor and comfort of the servants of God, and may serve
as an encouragement to us in the service of Him; That however men may esteem of
us, we shall be reckoned and esteemed of by Him; which is more then if all the
world besides had us in estimation. The Lord, He viewes and looks ever the
whole City: takes notice of every Company, Congregation, Family, Person in it;
and he pleases Himself in the thoughts of them, as they are any thing more
serviceable to Him: There Is such an one mourning and weeping in secret, for the
public abominations; I Will set my mark upon him. There Is such an one active and
zealous for the truth and the cause of Religion; I Will set my seal upon him.
There Is such an one full of bounty and liberality to my poor Saints; I know
where to find out him, as I have occasion to make use of him: Look as some
Prince or Magistrate, that has occasion for the supplies of money, he knows
all the rich Men in the City, and for a shift can single them out one by one;
there lives such an one worth so many thousands; and there lives another worth
as many, and so of the rest. Even so it is with God here as concerning his
people: He does mark them, and set them out to himself, and makes account of
them; and reckons of his Church as so much the richer and better for them.

A double Adjunct.
And he does it with a double adjunct or concomitancy which is here considerable
in it: first, of Expectation from them. And secondly, of Resolution for them.
Of Expectation from them, This man was born there: therefore I look for so much
service and duty at his hands. Of Resolution for them, This man was born there;
therefore accordingly I Will be the more tender and regardful of him.

1. Expectation.
First, of Expectation from them. The better any are, or may be; the more does
God look for from them: according to their Abilities, and according to their
opportunities. And so here, That man which was born in Sion; he has had more
Grace bestowed upon him, whereby he might be enabled to Good; and he has had
more Mercy shown unto him, from whence he might be encouraged to Good; and
therefore is so much the greater good expected to be done by him.

2. Resolution.
Secondly, There Is here also considerable in this Account betwixt God and his
people; His Resolution for them; and that singular Affection which he seems to
bear unto them. The Lord shall count, when he writes up the people, that this
man was born there, Selah; Therefore I must make another reckoning of him, then
of some ordinary person: There are distinguishing Mercies and Privileges,
which God reserves for his children and servants, which every one is not
partaker of, and that upon this account; even because they are his children: as
in Mal. 3.17. There was this followed upon the Book of Remembrance; And they
shall be Mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that Day, when I shall make up my
Jewels: Mine, not only as to interest, as having relation to me, but mine also
as to success, and as receiving protection from me; as it follows afterward
in the verse. And I will spare them as a man spaneth his own son that serves
him: God counts Himself in a manner concerned to do somewhat more for his
people, then for the ordinary rank and rout of the world; for those which are
born in Sion, at least in the Mystical acception, which are regenerate and born
again, above those which are born in any other place besides. And accordingly
may those which are so, expect it from him; He does not altogether neglect
them: for he writes up the people; He does not forget them; for when he writes
up the rest of the people, he takes notice of them more especially; nor he does
not suffer others to forget them neither; but does register them and put them
upon record to all Generations; and as he establishes Sion it self; so
establishes likewise the memorial of all such as are born in it. The Lord will
count when he writes up the people; That this Man was born there. That Is the
second Branch of this second General; to wit, the Celebration of the
privilege, on Gods part, by way of Record; and so I have done with the whole
Text it self.

The Application of the Text to the occasion.
BUt yet I have not done with You which are my proper Hearers this Day. I have
a word or two farther to you, and so I have done; To you which were born within
the limits of this honorable City. The blessed Apostle St. Paul wished himself
sometime to be Anathema, Rom 9.3.
i. e. Accursed, or separate from Christ for his Countrymen, whom he calls his
Brethren and kinsmen according to the Flesh. Indeed that was a very high strain
of affection; and such as it is more then every one is able to reach, so
perhaps more then every one is bound to perform. I will not therefore presume
to promise so much for my self. But this I will be bold to say in his words in
another place in the following chapt. Brethren, it is my hearts desire, and
prayer to God Romans 10.1.
for LONDON, that they might be saved: and I should count it a great favor
from God to me, if I might let fall any thing at this time tending and
conducing thereunto.

I must confess I may seem to be under a common disadvantage in this regard, as
our blessed Savior was before me, who complains He could do no great good
amongst his own people: (He came to his own, and his own received him not) Joh.
1.11.
and so lays down a General observation to this purpose. That a Prophet is not
without honor, saving in his own Country, and in his Fathers House. Mat.
13.57,58.
It is the great unhappiness oftentimes of us, which are Ministers, to have
least acceptance there where we have most cause to expect it; and to have
greatest discouragement there, where we have least cause to receive it. But you
have taken this off from me at this present time (as I may say) by the contrary
extreme, in your call and invitation to this work, especially having so much
better choice, as you elsewhere had amongst so many of my Reverend Brethren.
But then hereby as you have put me in hope of doing some good amongst you, so
you have likewise engaged your selves to attend to what is spoken by me. I
shall reduce it to two Heads, even the two parts of the Text, viz. The
Privilege, and Celebration of it.

First, As to the Privilege; that ye be careful to look to this, and to see
that you are interested in it, that is, born in Sion according to the sense now
explained. Not only Professors and Protestants at large; but regenerate and
true Believers, who have the seed of God remaining in you, and are made
partakers of his sanctifying Spirit.

1. Real Christians.
This is one thing, and the first which we here in this City have cause to be
admonisht of; To be sure that we be real Christians, (...), Israelites indeed,
Joh. 1.47. And (...), Disciples indeed, Joh. 8.31. That we be not spiritual
Bastards, but legitimate Children; That we be not spiritual Monsters, but
entire and perfect Men; which have all the parts and dimensions of the children
of Zion in us. I can assure you there are abundance of counterfeits and false
Births in the world; it will concern us to look to it that we be none of the
number of them; that we be the true and genuine offspring of Christ, who have
his Image and character upon us. There are many which go far in profession and
an outward form of godliness, which they have got and scraped up to themselves
from education, and custom, and employment, who yet deny the power of it; and
whose Hearts God has never yet touched with any saving work upon them; who
because they live fairly, and civilly, and plausibly, as to the view of the
world, are therefore too good, as one would think, to go to Hell: and yet
(believe it) not good enough to go to a better place.

2. Solid.
Secondly, We must be solid Christians. Not only such as have the truth and
reality of Grace in us; but which have it in a substantial manner: there is the
truth of Religion, and there is the strength of it. As a child may have all the
parts of a Man, but they are but weak and feeble; and a grown Man may have all
proportions in him, but yet be sickly and infirm. 1 Timothy 6.4.
Thus it is with many Christians: as children tossed to and fro with every wind
of doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14. And doting or sick about questions, (...), as it is
in the Text, 1 Timothy 6.4. This is that which is observable in very many, yea for
some, it is all which is in them. There are a great many of people in the
world, that the first news we hear of them in Religion, is either in an Error,
or in a Notion. Either in some corrupt and Heterodox opinion, orelse in some
empty and airy speculation. Those which never looked after any goodness all
their life time, they think they are then forsooth become very eminent in it,
when they appear in such an habit as this. Some there are which fall into
gross and palpable errors; and I must confess it is a very easy conversion
from Ignorance to false Doctrine, and from no Religion to a bad one. Others
there are that please themselves in fine fancies and witty conceits; and if
they get any of these by the end, then they applaud themselves, and think that
others should do so too. This is our great mistake, that we place Religion in
many things where it is not, and neglect it where it is: and so on both hands
deceive our selves.

3. Spiritual.
Thirdly, We should be spiritual Christians, i. e. Christians raised to an
higher and more excellent frame and temper in Religion. Gal. 6.1. Ye which are
spiritual. There Is an emphasis laid upon that; it was that which Paul wanted in
his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3.1. I could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but
as unto carnal, even as unto babes in CHRIST. Where carnal is not to be taken
privative, for such as were absolutely unregenerate, and in the state of
Nature; as Jude verse. 19. Sensual, not having the spirit (for such these
Corinthians were not) but gradualiter: for such as were in a lower way of
Religion, as the words afterward signify, Babes in Christ, and walking
according to Man. It was not a carnality of condition, but of conversation: An
un-spiritual Christian is next to one that is absolutely carnal; and by
affinity has his name put upon him: which we should therefore be mindful of.

Spirituality wherein it consists.
This spirituality of Religion whereof we now speak, it consists in a more close
and exact walking with God; and and un-interrupted fellowship and communion
with Him; In a daily observation of him in all his dealings with us; in
self-denial, and cautious restraint of some things which are absolutely lawful,
though in such circumstances not so convenient. From whence there are likewise
gracious Returns from God upon the soul again; In exciting to duty; in
assisting in it; in the assurance of favor and acceptance in the Blood of
Christ; The witness and seal of the Spirit; the Hints of Providence; the
Answer of Prayers; the hidden Manna; the white Stone; the New Name, as it is
called Rev. 2.17. Such things as these there are in Religion, and that
altogether different from fancy, and conceit, and imagination; such things as
have an undoubted certainty and reality in them: and it will be both our
wisdom and happiness to be acquainted with them.

Apollos was an Eloquent man (and questionless a good man too) and mighty in
the Scriptures; But yet Aquila and Priscilla exercised and experienced
Christians took him unto them, and expounded to him, the way of God more
perfectly. Act. 18.26. (...). They did not expound unto him the way of God
simply. He was instructed in that already, as it is said in the verse before:
but they revealed to him some practical secrets, and Mysteries belonging to
this way, as to the Doctrine of Christ, which as yet he was not acquainted
withal; being that which many others besides may sometimes have some need of,
who for the main have a work of Grace upon their hearts. There are the
Criticisms in Christianity, besides the plain Rules; and as there are the
Depths of Satan, so likewise the Mysteries of Christ; and these learned by
accurate Christians. There Is Spirituality added to Sincerity, which is like
Beauty added to Health.

Studying of Christ.
For the furthering of this in us, it will concern us so much the more to study
the Truths of Christ which begin very much now a days to disrelish in the
world. We have Christianos sine Christo; men that would go for Christians, and
yet have but very little of the Doctrine or Spirit of Christ in them; or if
some rude and general notions of it, yet which they do but very little use, or
improve; so as to frame their hearts accordingly. These are (...). Hucksters of
Christ, rather then true Chistians, as Ignatius calls them: and they do
frustrate and deprive themselves of the greatest comforts and benefits that are
by him. Joh. 6.27.
For it is He whom God the Father has sealed, as the conveyance of all true
happiness and blessedness to us. In Him we are Elected; Ephesians. 1.4.
In Him we are Redeemed; Col. 1.14.
In Him we are Justified; Romans 3.24.
In Him we are Sanctified; Joh. 17.19.
In Him we are Saved. Romans 5.10.
He has raised us up together, and made us sit together with Him. Yea, He has
blessed us with all spiritual Blessings in heavenly places in CHRIST. Ephesians. 1.3.
Gods children through Faith in Him. Gal. 3.26.


This is the great comfort of Believers: That to us a Child is Born, to us a
Son is Given, Esai. 9.6. That this man was born there; to speak in the words of
the Text. If it were not for, this we were all but in a sad condition. There
are many which talk of Gods Philanthropy and good Nature, and love to mankind;
yea, that was in the giving of Christ at first; but now after that He is once
given, there is no love to us out of Him, which we can rest or secure our selves
in: and the more we bottom upon this Truth, the better Christians shall we be,
and the more spiritual in Christianity.

Jam. 1.18.
Romans 4.11.
Improvement of Word and Sacraments.
We should again further improve the Ordinances and means of Grace, which are
vouchsafed unto us. The Word and the Sacraments. The Word for the begetting of
us again. And the Sacraments as the Seals of Grace to us. And (because I have
named the Sacraments) that Sacrament which is most proper to this purpose;
Especially of Baptism.
the Sacrament of Baptism, which is the Pledge of our Entrance and Admission
into the Church of Christ, the Seal of our new Birth and Regeneration, as we
are born in Sion. Let us bring our children to it, and count it a great
privilege, that they may be made partakers of it, from whence they have a
right and interest in all the prayers which are at any time made for the Church
of God, as themselves belonging unto it.

Beloved, We must know that God observes what respect we give to his Ordinance,
and what we do not: He keeps a Register of Christenings, as well as of Births;
not only of who are Born here, but who are Baptized. Yea, and in what fashion
and manner too, and with what regard to his own Institution. Slubber'd and
slighted Baptism is little better then none at all; and in some respects worse.
God abhors it, and will one day call us to a reckoning for it, and our
profanations in it; making it but a matter of custom, and formality, and
complement, and bravery, and the like; beginning with Religion, as we mean to
hold out in it, and our posterity after us.

As for the other Sacrament, we seem to be now and then sensible of some
respect due to that, and we have cause to be so. Now is not the one as great as
the other in its own nature? Do they not come from the same Author? Do they not
refer to the same end? Do they not seal the same Covenant, and Graces, and
Benefits, and Privileges, for substance both of them the same, though
different in modification? I beseech ye think seriously of these things; I
could not but give a touch of them, as lying in my way, and as pertinent to
this present occasion. And thus much may be spoken to you in reference to the
Privilege it self.

Care of our Meeting.
Now a word to you further in order to the celebration of it; and so in
reference to your Meeting and assembling together at this time: That we be
careful how we order this Matter. For (believe it) this will be said, and
recorded too, as well as the other. Therefore it concerns (...) to look to it;
both first to the principles that act us, and that carry us to it. And
secondly, to the Thing it self, and the Behavior of our selves in it.

1. For the Principles.
First, For the principles that act us, and the grounds that we are carried
upon; These must mainly be looked at by us. 1. The End.
As the form is in Naturals, so is the end likewise in Morals, which does
essentiate and specificate the Action; now therefore we must have a care of
this, that it be right in us; not for mere credit, and vainglory, and pomp,
and applause; in a frollick and a bravado, to be talked of, as I in part hinted
before. For (I must tell you) we are very subject oftentimes to such things as
these. An Humor here in the City will go further with us many times, then a
better principle; and we will do that upon fancy which we will hardly do upon duty,
or a more rational consideration. Therefore let us take heed of it; see we do
it for Gods glory, the expression of our own thankfulness, mutual love, and,
respect, etc.

The Manner.
And for the Manner, look to that also: That we carry on the whole Business
with prudence, and discretion, and meekness, and Christian affection. Take
heed we make not that to be a Matter of division which is a Project of union.
It is that which our corrupt Natures and Satan's malice joining with them
exposes us to; if we be not the more watchful over our selves. As we see in
that great Feast of all, the Feast of the Lords Supper, that spiritual and
Evangelical entertainment; It was intended for a feast of love in its first
Institution. And yet what has caused more division and breaches of love then
that has done as to the managing of it? A very Meribah, and Apple of
contention; and so remains still to this day. It will likewise be so with us in
such feasts of love as these are, if we look not better to it. For the Devil is
not only contented to disappoint us of our principal End, unless he withal
carry us to an end quite different from it, yea, opposite and contrary to it.

2. For the Thing it self.
Secondly, As for the Thing it self; we should be careful to express the
forenamed Affections in some suitable matter; There are two great Concernments
in the world, Godliness, and Righteousness; piety in reference to God, and
charity in reference to Men. And these are the two Channels in which our zeal
must convey it self.

For particulars, I leave them to your selves for the determination of them, as
you shall judge most meet and convenient: ye cannot want occasions; nay ye have
crowds and throngs of them, only I beseech you take heed, that one does not
crowd out another; that whiles ye are uncertain what to do, ye do at last
nothing at all; which is commonly the end of such uncertainties as these are.
And so come to a Parturiunt Montes etc. in your Birth-solemnity.

As for the persons entrusted, ye shall not need to doubt of them, being men of
so much faithfulness and integrity, and known sufficiency in all particulars,
as that Envy it self cannot cavil or except against them. So that here is
nothing now desirable of you, but a closing with the happy opportunity which is
presented to you.

To make us more intent, let us consider; That unless we do somewhat which is
singular in this our meeting, we shall not be able to approve our selves in it;
there being (otherwise) no cause whereby we may give an account of this
concourse: as the Town Clerk said at Ephesus, Act. 19.40. It will not only be
unacceptable to God, but un-accountable to Men, and we shall suffer in our
reputations for it. As for those of other Countries which are forain and more
remote, there may be somewhat said for the Natives of them, to meet one with
another, upon some other considerations, which cannot be said for you; But for
Londoners to meet in London! except you have very good Ends and aims for it
indeed (as I hope you have) and do some special good in your meeting (as I
desire you may) it will not only be fruitless, but ridiculous, and carry a
great deal of scorn and ignominy with it.

Besides; That ye have raised expectation by so much mention of it, and
preparation for it, and talk and discourse of it aforehand, as some of you have
in many men's ears; these are arguments and engagements to you, to consider what
you do.

Add to this last of all; that it is the first of all in this kind: This
place in which we now are (as old as it is) I believe never held such an
Assembly as this is, upon this occasion; which should be the more effectual
with us to improve it to the better purpose. We use to say, that Primum in
unoquoque Genere est perfectissimum, and exemplar reliquorum: The first in
every kind is the perfectest and a pattern to all the rest. Thus should this
of your meeting be as near as ye can make it, that so others that follow you
may take aim and example from you; and writing after your copy may more fairly
write themselves, in so full and large a character, as may be known and read of
all men.

Thus, as we shall have comfort in our Birth and Nativity it self, so we shall
have comfort and joy likewise in the Memorials and Celebrations of it; And as
for the privilege it self; This man was born there; so of LONDON it shall be
said, THIS and THAT Man was born in Her, and the HIGHEST HIMSELF shall
establish her: The LORD shall count when he writes up the people; That THIS MAN
WAS BORN THERE, Selah.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books printed for and sold by John Clark at the Entrance
into Mercer^-Chappel at the lower end of Cheapside.
THe Works of that famous Chirugeon Ambrose Parey, whereunto are added large
additions with figures out of Adrianus Spigelius. Fol. The description of the
body of man, together with the controversies and figures thereto belonging;
Collected out of all the best Authors of Anatomy: by Helkiah Crook, Dr. in
Physic. Fol. The History of the World, the Second part, in Six Books; being a
continuation of the famous History of Sir Walter Raleigh, beginning where he
left and continued to the year 1640. With a large Chronology of those times: by
Alex. Ross. The true Copy whereof is distinguished by the Authors own picture
fixed in the frontispiece, by his own order, from any other however colored
with hawks and hounds in their title page, or lying pretenses in other places.
Fol. Ancient Funeral Monuments: composed by the Travels and study of John
Weaver. Fol. The Country Justice enlarged with many Presidents and Resolutions
of the Queries contained in the former Impressions by Michael Dalton. Whereunto
is added by way of Appendix under their proper heads all such Acts and
Ordiances necessary to be know and put in execution by the Justices of the
Peace, made and published before the year 1655. Fol. Prototypes, or the Primary
Presidents out of the Book of Genesis; the good and bad things they did and had
practically applied to our information and reformation: by William Whately late
Pastor of Banbury. Fol. Dr. Sibbs upon the 4, 5, 6. Chap. of the Canticles. 4.
The Works of that famous Physician, Dr. Alexander Read. The Harmony, Chronicle,
and Order of the old Testament; together with the Harmony of the four
Evangelists; by Dr. Lightfoot 4. The Wo^k^es of that Reverend, Judicious and
Learned Divine, Mr. Joseph Me^de late fellow of Christ's College in Ghambridge,
Two Vol. in 4. 29 Lectures of the Church; very necessary for the consolation
and support of Gods Church, especially in these times: by that learned and
faithful Peacher Mr. John Randall. 4. Parthenia, or, the Maidenhead of the
first Music that ever was invented for the Virginals: by Will. Bird, Dr. John
Bull, and Orlando Gibbons Gentlemen of his Majesty's Chapel. Fol. The English
Gusman. 4. The Presumptuous man's Mirror, a Watchbell to rouse up a secure
sinner out of his security. 12. The Change or the blind eye opened; a double
discourse on Ephesians. 5.8. by Tho. Du Guard. 12. The Saints Privilege: in 12. by
Dr. Sibbs. Mr. Hookers farewell Sermon. 4. Mr. Barnes needful helps. 4. --
Wise man's forecast in evil times. 4. Janua Linguarun 14 Centuries; to which is
newly annexed, Nomenclatura brevis Anglo-Latino Graeca: by Fr. Gr. large 8.
Janua Linguae Latinae; The gate of the Latin tongue unlocked, exhibiting in a
natural order the structure of things and of the Latin tongue, according to
the rules of the newest method: by Comenius. With an Etymological Index
gathered out of the Januall, Lexicon, Varro, Isidore, Martinus and other
Classical Authors, and Alphabetically disposed: by William Du Guard. 8. Arcana
Microcosmi, or, The hid secrets of man's body discovered. Also the strange and
mavelous diseases, symptoms and accidents: by Alexander Ross. 8. Colloquia
Plautina viginti opera Alexandri Rossaei. 8. Mr. Whatelys oil of gladness or
comfort for dejected finners. -- His Poor man's Advocate. 12. A Testament of a
large Roman print, with reading and singing Psalms. 8. The fullness and
freeness of Gods grace in Christ declared in a uniforme body of Divinity: in
two parts: by Mr. Duke. Mr. Primrose Sermons in 4. The Christians pattern, or
the imitation of Christ. 24. The Pillar and Pattern of Englands deliverances,
presented in a Sermon at Paul's, November. 5. 1654 by Dr. Horton.
FINIS.

