SIR William Wroth his Speech in Parliament, the 10. of Januarie, 1641.
Concerning a Letter sent from his Majesty to the House of Commons, and read
in the same that day.
Mr. Speaker,
THis Letter, or Declaration now read from His Sacred Majesty, expressing His
Princely Care, and tender Affection toward the Parliament, and all His
Majesty's Loyal and Dutiful Subjects is now to be taken into our
consideration: And I verily believe there is none here present, but has as
tender care and dutiful affection toward his royal Majesty and the
preservation of His Honor and Dignity, the Laws and Religions established in
His Majesty's Dominions, Parliaments, and their just rights and privileges as
any Subjects to any Prince in the whole Christian world.

No man Mr. Speaker, I think, doubted, or had the least thought of jealousy,
that are true Protestants and loyal subjects of his Majesty's sincerity and
integrity toward his Liege people: for we have sensibly felt and understood
His clear intentions, and gracious meaning to us all, not only these, but his
Princely impressions in this his gracious Letter and Declaration, but also by
former Speeches, Proclamations and Protestations both public and private, his
willing and cheerful granting us from time to time our just desires and
requests, and his cheerful passing of many wholesome Acts, and Laws for the
good of this Kingdom, and the redressing of many grievances and opressions
which his good Subjects did suffer by groaning under the burden of them, and
his willing complying with his Parliament for the appeasing of the great
differences that was between this kingdom and Scotland, and the settling of
peace and unity amongst our selves: These have been sufficient testimonies of
his Princely and tender care over his people, and enough to endeare our hearts
and affections to his Royal Majesty, and his posterity for ever.

Mr. Speaker, These propositions recommended by his Majesty, to the
consideration of the House, consists of these Heads.

1. The upholding and maintaining of His Majesty's just and Regal authority,
and settling of his Revenue. 2. The establishing of the liberties of the Subject
in the free and quiet enjoying of their estates and fortunes, the liberties of
their persons, the security of true Religion now professed in the Church of
England, and the settling of Ceremonies in such a manner as may take away all
just offense.
1. For the first of these, it has been our principal care and endeavors
hitherto, as far as the present distempers and distractions in the State
would give us leave, to maintain the just Prerogative, and Regal power of his
Majesty, and to settle his revenue: But being necessitated to consult and
consider of the greater and weightier affairs of this State, being so
perplexed and distracted through the malice and pernicious endeavors of wicked
and disaffected persons, to the peace and tranquillity both of his Majesty, and
his Kingdoms, thereby forced to lay aside the determination of his Majesty's
demand, till his Majesty's Kingdoms be secured and preserved from fatal
destruction; which by the malignant adversaries thereof, daily sought and
practiced: But not leaving the same either as negligent, or forgetful of his
Majesty's just demand, or in any undutifulnesse, but that in due time, upon the
first opportunity to take the same again into consideration, and proceed
therein to the final Conclusion thereof; desiring this House, that His Majesty
may be informed of our real intentions therein.

2. For the other proposition by his Majesty we cannot but in dutiful
obedience return our thankfulness to his Majesty in the name of the whole
Parliament for his Princely care of our Liberties and Privileges and pious
resolution to establish our Religion; in its truth and purity, and his
indifferency in the use and exercise of Ceremonies, concerning which we have
received many Petitions from diverse Counties and parts of this Kingdom Signed
with many thousand hands for the utter abolishment of the same, showing
likewise the inconvenience in the use and exercise of the same, the great
damage and many evils that have succeeded upon the tolleration thereof
hitherto; which with the continuance of the use thereof is also like to
continue the evils, and daily increase more and more dangerous, upon which it
has been thought fit by this Honorable House to extinguish and abolish the
same form being joined with the worship of God in the exerciso of Religion by
the general vote of the House, and diverse orders have issued through the
Kingdom for leaving of, and laying by the further use thereof; These things
being thus far proceeded in by joint consent of Parliaments, I humbly desire
his Majesty may be moved by Petition of both Houses for his royal assent
thereunto.

And for the settling of Religion and good Discipline in the Church. We have
been much opposed and interrupted in our proceedings therein, when we had the
same in consultation and in consideration, by the Prelates and prelatical
faction in the Lords House; having been a great part of our business to remove
such impediments as have hindered our proceedings not only in that, but other
the great affairs of State. and to appease the present distractions and
distempers in the Kingdom, to supply with aid and assistance all our
afflicted brethren in Ireland, and to preserve and secure our own persons from
the malice and wicked designs of our malicious and malignant adversaries,
enemies to our peace and safety, and enemies to the prosperity and tranquillity
of his Majesty and his good Subjects, with lets and hindrances which have
caused these stops, in our proceedings in the settling of Religion, I likewise
desire may be represented to his Majesty.

And thus much concerning his Majesty's propositions, which I desire may be
taken into present consideration, and answer reformed to his Majesty concerning
the same.

FINIS.

