A Learned SPEECH Made by the Right Worshipful Sir John Hotham, A Member of
the House of Commons, At a meeting of several Knights and Gentlemen in the
said County, on the 33. of May. 1642.

Wherein is manifested the manifold Reasons why the Subject being commanded by
the Parliament; ought not to disobey, but to venture life and estate in the
maintenance and performance thereof, With a Remarkable Passage concerning the
Lord Littleton, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and many other
persons of Note.

LONDON, Pri^^^^ (...)

A Learned Speech made by that much honored and renowned Gentleman, Sir John
Hotham, a Member of the honorable House of Commons.
ON the 23 day of this instant month, Sir John Hotham su^moned some particular
Knights and Gentlemen to Hull, to advise with him concerning the present estate
of the Town in regard his Majesty was so highly incensed against him, likewise
the Major, Aldermen, and all other men of good Rank and Quality were at that
time assembled to whom Sir John Hotham (after an affable salutation to all)
began to address himself to speak, which being observed a general silence
covered all the place, each man with attentive admiration caught every syllable
as soon as it uttered, fearing the air delight with that Candor should snatch
them up and rob them or their only happiness, since it was a comfort to all
Loyal Subjects to hear and learn their duties from him that had given an
ample Testimony, how well he knew his own.

The substance of his Oration as near as could be gathered, is set down in
this ensuing Treatise.

My Loving Friends,
You may perhaps expect that I intend to make a large Narration with intent to
clear your doubts and make my Actions to His Majesty seem (as they are)
fair, Legal and Loyal.

But it is not my intention, nor will J wast so much time in that business,
but leave it to the end, not doubting but when my Actions shall define their
wished event, that the end shall crown the bad that is past with a more full
renown. The Scope of my words at this time shall be confined to these two
heads, which indeed are twins not to be separated.

The first is an encouragement to gain perfect Honor from your Sovereign.

Let Loyalty be the rule of all your actions, if you intend to be truly
Honorable, for honor no grounded on Loyalty, is like Friendship without Love,
lost in a moment, and often times grows the greatest Enemy, so the greatest
Title, the vastest Wealth the greatest Wisdom, if not guided by Virtue, and so
employed, proves ruin to the inioyer; Next, let your Loyalty take its limit
from Law, otherwise, in doing things seemingly good, the end may prove
dangerous, and your Loyalty prove worse then disloyalty; Therefore the next
thing that J insist upon, is Obedience to the Parliament, that pious and
Judicious Council whom you in particular, and all the Kingdom in general,
have chosen as fit men to discuss and examine all causes that have dependency
on his Majesty's safety, and the Kingdoms security: Now to disallow of what is
by them thought covenient both for his Majesty and the Kingdoms security, is
to condemn your selves of folly, that you have chosen men in whom you cannot
confide, but I presume (though there be many that these words may and do
concern in this Kingdom) that there is no one here that would not lay down
his life for the defense of his Majesty and the Parliament, neither are there
any, I suppose, that need this motive to Obedience to the Honorable Houses of
Parliament, their own safeties depending on the happy issue of their religious
Councels.

Only my aim is to give you one general reason and apparent Testimony, why
the Subject being Commanded by the Parliament ought not to disobey their
Commands, though by the King commanded the Contrary.

Because the Parliament being called and established by the Authority of the
King and consent of the Kingdom, has power to Command and effect all things
that are agreeable to Law, tending to the preservation of his Majesty's Peace
and welfare, and the general good of the Subject, they being by King and
People, entrusted with that weighty and great charge, and if they should
foresee an imminent danger threaten his Majesty's Person, or the general
good, and should not take speedy care to prevent it, they should make a
violation of that Faith and Trust reposed in them, so on the contrary part, if
they, foreseeing a darger, by their Councels and Commands endeavor to prevent
it, and the Persons by them commanded falsify their trust, they are traitors
both to their Roy^ll Sovereign, and destroyers of the Kingdom, This is the
truth, and this is my glory, that God has so far enabled me to undergo so
great a task, and this is my hope that all of you will manifest your Loyalties
to his Majesty and Obedience to the Parliament.

Many other matters J have to tell you concerning an Information of the Lord
Keepers having le^t the Parliament.

FINIS.

