SIR John Hothams RESOLVTION Presented to the Kings most excellent Majesty, at
Beverley in the County of Yorkshire, on Tuesday the 12. of July, 1642.

Wherein is manifested his earnest desire both to express himself a Loyal
Subject to his Majesty, and a faithful Servant to the Parliament.

Whereunto is Annexed Joyful News from NEW CASTLE.

Wherein is declared how the Colliers resisted the Earl of Newcastle, and the
Cavaleeres, pulled down the Fort which the said Earl had built, and beat him
and his followers out of the County.

Ordered that this be Printed, and published.

John Brown, Cler. Parl.



London Printed, For I. Horton, July 16. 1642.

Exceeding Joyful News from HULL
THere was a Letter read in the House of Commons, which came from Sir John
Hotham, importing that a half Moon being raising peer the Town (as conceived
by his Majesty's direction) which would have much annoyed and hindered all
provision that should have come by Sea; that he sent Sir John Meldram out with
500 men, to hinder the Proceedings therein; Upon the ne^re approach of whom the
Pioners and Work men ran all away, leaving the said work unperfected, which he
has demolished, and therein they took toe Lord Faulconbridge, 4. pieces of
Brass Ordnance, and 20* Cavaleers, desiring the Houses pleasure to be known
therein, whether they should be sent up ^o London or no, which took the houses
up some ^ime in consideration thereof, of what most expe^ienst to be done.

Sir John Hothams Resolution, presented to his Majesty at Beverley in
Yorkshire, on Tuesday, July the 12. 1642.
SIr John Hotham, seeing his Majesty's anger did so far extend, that nothing
would satisfy but his Life, withal considering the great misery that the
Town of Hull, and all the Kingdom should suffer, if this War begun,
should continue, to prevent which he resolved to become a sacrafice and to
loose his own Life to secure the Kingdom, but this resolution was at ended
with a second determination, for calling to mind the great trust committed to
him by the great Couo^ell of the Kingdom, on the faithful performance of the
which, the safety of the King and Kingdom solely consists, the peaceable
enjoyment of our conscience and Religion, the propriety of the Subject, and all
that happy Liberty which is either wished or hoped for, all which things being
seriously weighed in the balance of consideration, created innumerable
cogitations, and doubtful determinations, scarce knowing in this doubtful
design how to bear himself, at last he set down his resolution, as follows.

1. That as he had always bin, so he vowed during life to continnue a
faithful and obedient Subject to his Sacred Majesty.

And whereas his Majesty was pleased to declare him Traitor, he not feared but
that in a short time, however misconstruction might cause his Majesty to
censure of him, that he should stand right in his Majesty's sight, since that
what he has done, his Majestias Honor, the Kingdoms safety, and his own
conscience did bind him to the performance of the said Service.

2. That he resolved as he had begun, so to make oood that charge committed to
his trust, with the hazard of his Life and Fortunes.

Withal intimating the great misery that was like to fall upon his Majesty,
and his posterity, by the prosecution of this native War, manifested in these
particular reasons.

1. That this War levied by his Majesty against his loving Subjects, will be
a means to withdraw the Loyal affections of his Majesty's yet truly loving
Subjects, when they shall see the cruelty is used against this Town of Hall,
where the endeavors of the malignant party has so far prevailed against us,
that all means of succor is taken from us, or any possible power or ability
to obtain our liberty, but by imbraceing that liberty, which cannot be demed
us. a noble death, since it is much better to embrace a grave in a just cause,
then to live under the displeasure of an incensed Prince, subject to all that
malice which all our Enemies can throw upon us, nor would I be slack in
embracing such a destiny, did not the common good demand a further Service,
which since it has pleased the high Court of Parliament to commit this charge
to me, my conscience bearing me witness that I have no private end, nor
design, but the advancement of your Majesty's Honor, the maintenance of
Religion, the future establishment of a blessed and fruitful peace. and the
general welfare both of your Majesty and People, I am resolved to bury my
self within these walls and to loose my life in the defense of your Majesty
and Parliament, desiring God so to bless and prosper me in my Actions as my
intentions are Honorable.

2. That this domestique dissension would be a great weakening to the Kingdom,
and to give advantage to Foreign Nations, which watch all advantages to get a
footing in this Kingdom.

3. That the beginning of a civil War, is the first step to dissolution.

These things truly and seriously considered, I doubt not but that you will
draw near to your Parliament, and confide in them, in whom only resides your
Majesty's safety, and your Kingdoms security.

This is the resolution of that worthy Gentleman, Sir John Hotham, who is now
in Hull besieged by his Majesty, whose Life the malignant party wholly aims
at, because he stands for the defense of the Gospel, the preservation of his
Majesty's Honor, and the just Privileges of Parliament.

Exceeding true News from Newcastle.
THe Earl of Newcastle, having Authority from his Majesty to plant a Garrison
in the said City, for his Majesty's service, likewise by the same authority he
endeavored to build a Fort at the mouth of Tine, and wanting workmen, he and
some other Cavaleers forced the pore Colliers to work while they stood over
them, using them very rigorusly, thus they continued till they had finished
their work, then discharged them with little or no satisfaction, the Colliers
being vexed that they were so abused, gathered themselves together, and in the
night surprised the Cavaleers, bear down the Fort, and made the said Earl
with his valiant followers, post from Newcastle, to York, there to tell news
of their pitiful usage.

FINIS

