The honest CRIER OF LONDON.
O Yes, O yes, O yes; Any man or woman, in City or Country, that has taken up
the Oath of Allegiance (in the days of old) and would be absolved from it, (if
he be not already) let him repair to Westminster, upon any day of the Week, and
he shall receive absolution from his Oath, upon his bare paorl, have Gods
blessing, and be well rewarded for his good service.

O yes, O yes, O yes; Any man or woman, in City or Country, that has taken up
a Protestation, marked in the mouth with IAB, do in the presence of Almighty
God, Promise, Vow, and Protest, to maintain and defend, etc. which was lost in
the year 1641, let them bring word to the Crier and they shall be well
rewarded, and have Gods blessing.

O yes, etc. Any man or woman, in City or Country, that has lost their
Religion, and knows not what to do for another, let them repair to Westminster,
and there they may have their choice, to be of what Religion they please,
provided if be not Popery or Prelacye, and Gods blessing on their heart.

O yes, etc. Any man or woman, City or Country, that has lost a thing, called
a Good Conscience, which was wrapped up with fair Pretenses, seeming promises,
self-denyals; which was lost between Heaven and Hell, near Westminster, about
the year 1641, and could never since be found or heard off, let them bring in
word to the Crier, and they shall be well rewarded and have Gods blessing.

O yes, etc. Any man or woman, in City or Country, Presenter or Ind pendent,
that has lost a thing, called a dumb Directory, brought from Geneva into
Scotland, and so conveyed into England in January 1644. and is gone direct awry:
if any can bring Tale or Tidings of him, let him bring word to the Synod of
dissembling Divines, and they shall be well rewarded and have Gods blessing for
ever.

O yes, etc. If there be any man or woman, in City or Country, that has taken
up the solemn League and Covenant for preservation of our Lives and Liberties,
marked with Parliament marks; but lost in the year 1641. except it be in some
few Churches, where it stands for a Testimony of our perfidiousness, let them
bring word to the Crier that they have done their endeavor to perform it, or
those that never took it, they shall be well rewarded and have a good blessing.

O yes, etc. If any man or woman that has taken up any Kings, Queens, Bishops,
or Deans and Chapters Lndas, and would gladly return them back to the true
owners of them, because it troubles their Consciences (if they have any) let
them bring word to the Crier, they shall have good thanks for their pains, be
well rewarded, and have Gods blessing.

O yes, etc. If there be any man or woman, in city or country, that has lost a
good and honest PARLIAMENT, consisting of a King, House of Lords, and a House
of Commons; and would without fraud enjoy such another again; let them be true
of heart together, pursue the work with diligence and speed, and pay their
dues; let them bring word to the Crier, they shall have it again and Gods
blessing.

O yes, O yes, O yes; If any man or woman, in city or country, that has taken
up Liberty of Conscience, at any time since the year 1648. and is fallen into
any of the Sects of Anabaptists, Independents, Quakers, Ranters, Adamits, and
such like, and will not be reclaimed from their errors, let them bring word to
the Crier, that he may deliver them to the Chief Magistrate, that they may be
soundly punished for their errors until they recant, and then paradventure
they may escape Damnation, and have Gods blessing.

O yes, etc. If there be any man or woman in city or country ( as I believe
there are thousands) that have lost a Good Governor about 11 years ago, which
through the want of One all things have been the worse, and We made miserable
ever since, let them send for the True LANDLORD of Whitehal, and let him have a
Lease of it and the Three Nations for his life, and bring word to the Crier of
their true affections, they shall be well rewarded and be sure of Gods blessing.

O yes, etc. Any man or woman, in city or country, that has lost any manner of
Silver Plate, from the Thimble to the vast Goblet, in Guildhal, London, in the
year 1643. and since, and has nothing but the Public Faith in a piece of
Paper for their Security, let them bring word to the Crier, tell their marks
upon it, and he will tell them they were very fools for their labor, and shall
have no reward for it, nor yet Gods blessing.

O yes, etc. Any man or woman, in city or country, that can tell any Tale or
Tidings of any new Knight, Knighted since 1650. who has lost his Knighthood,
and instead of being called Sir Thomas, Sir John, or Sir Richard; is now called
Sir Reverence, let him not think much of it, because Sir Reverence is an
Aldermans fellow; but let them bring word to the Jakes Farmers of the City, he
shall be made a T -- higher, and be well rewarded, and have a good blessing.

O yes, etc. If any man or woman, in city or country, that can bring Tale or
Tidings of certain Gentlemen, called by the name of his Excellency, or Lord, or
Knight, or Colonel, or Captain, who went astray about the latter end of the
last year, let them bring word to Westminster, Whitehal, or Walingfordhouse,
and they shall have the like Titles bestowed upon them, if they can keep them,
be well rewarded and have Gods blessing.

O yes, etc. If any man or woman, in city or country, that can tell Tale or
Tidings whether there be any wise men in the City of London, who have kept
their Fingers out of the Estates of other distressed men, and have not been of
the High Court of Justice in 1648. let them bring word to the Crier, and he
shall be looked upon as an Honest man, a Wise man, and a good Commonwealths
man, and be well rewarded, and be sure of Gods blessing.

O yes, O yes, O yes; If there be any man or woman, in city or country, that
can tell Tale or Tidings of a City-Riden-Ass, that went astray from his Keeper,
marked thus: Led by the Bridle by a Mace-bearer, with a Head filled three parts
full of a Parliament, with two long Ears, like Clerks Pens, with a Cross upon
his Shoulders that parts the City from Westminster (or Fools from Knaves) with
a MAYOR riding upon his Back, a Sheriff on each side, and Four and Twenty
Aldermen on his Buttocks, and his Belly full of Common-council-men, and upon
his RUMP two Files of Musketeers, and on his Tail a Colonel, and under his
Tail, Acts, Orders, Ordenances, and Votes of PARLIAMENT, to undeceive the Good
People of the Land. If any can bring News where his abode is, and can tell Us
how long we shall be Plagued with him hereafter, let them bring word to
Guildhal, and they shall have their charges paid them for detaining him, a
great reward, and a goodly blessing.

O yes, etc. If there be any man or woman, in city or country, that can bring
Tale or Tidings of a City Declaration (marked with A --) for a Free Parliament,
the latter end of December last year, and is now ever since gone astray for
want of good Execution and pursuance of the same: And if any man can tell when
this will be set forward again and prosecuted (as it was intended) let them
bring word to the Militia of London, when it is in the Cities hands again, and
they shall be well rewarded and have Gods blessing.

O yes, O yes, O yes; If there be any man or woman, in city or country, that
can bring Tale or Tidings, when thy Good, Long, and Old PARLIAMENT will be
totally Dissolved, when We shall have a New FREE PARLIAMENT chosen without
exceptions, consisting of a House of Lords and Commons; When We shall have a
Monarchchal Government, Pious Bishops, and a Godly Ministry, who We shall have
a True Hearted Nobility and a Faithful Centrey, when London will be a loyal
City, when a Lord Mayor will do righteous things, when Sheriffs will be honest,
and Aldermen will not dissemble when Common Council men will be of one mind,
and the Commonalty obedientye when Soldiers shall be Disbanded, and Peace
settled; when Excise and Taxes shall be abolished, and envy banished; when true
love shall abound, every one enjoy, his own again, and Errors, Sects, Schisms
shall be rooted out; when Trading shall flourish, let them bring word to the
Crier, and they shall be well rewarded and have Gods blessing to

THE END.
Printed for George Thompson, 1660.


