THE RIGHTEOUS MAN'S HOPE IN HIS DEATH: IN A SERMON AT THE Funeral of Mr
WILLIAM CONYE of Walpoole, Justice of Peace, and Captain over the Trained Band
in Marshland.

PREACHED By JOHN HORN Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ at Soushlyn in
Norfolk 2do May 1648.

2 SAMUEL 14.14. For we must needs die, and are as water spilt on the ground
which cannot be gathered up again: neither does God respect any person, yet
does he devise means that his banished be not expelled from him.

ISAIAH 57.1, 2. The righteous is taken away from the evil to come.
He shall enter into peace: they shall rest in their beds, each one walking in
his uprightness.
Cum constet deresurrectione mortuorum, vacat dolor mortis, vacat and
impatientia doloris. Tertul. de Patientia. Quinto major fides, tanto morsest
imbecillior. Luth. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Underhill. 1649.

To the Author of the Sermon.
IN Achor's vale, Thou op'st a Door of Hope,
The Heart enlarged may well behold Thy scope.
The strong Devourer is (by Thee) made sweet,
We see the Eater is become man's meat.
The Faithful die; their fear of death is past,
In hope they live: These dead thou lead'st to rest.
J.A.

On the death of William Conye Esquire Justice of the Peace, and Captain at Wars.
Who being dead yet speaks, Heb. 11.4.
OH living man! would by death gain?
Learn Christ, who did thy death sustain.
That so when Death Thy Life shall end,
Thou may in Life, with Christ, Ascend.
Thy loss of friends becomes thy gain,
When God thy friend thou do obtain.
Then Pattern-like, Be taught of me,
Let Christ thy life, yet living, be.
By sin came death: yet lives he,
Who conquered death to succor thee.
J.A.

Or Thus.
The Bush on fire, is still preserved,
Man's life in death, is yet conserved.
The Angels food, Man's bread Christ is;
This Captain slew our death by his.
His bonds, makes free: his death brings life;
Our shame through Christ, works glory rife.
Christ's Grace gains Faith: Man hopes glory;
Sure's Gods word, mystery and stlory.
Vain man I Why fear death in vain?
Christ is risen: Believe and reign.
J.A.

The CONTENTS.
Doctrines, 1. That Righteous men die. 1. The leverall kinds of death. 1.
Eternal; which is a perishing from the presence of the Lord, The second death.
2. Spiritual; Dead in sins, strangers from the life of God, Taken in an ill
sease. Dead to the Law, to a man's self. Thus taken in a good sense.
3. Temporal see sin, Inchoate: In deaths often, The shadow of death.
Censummate: An utter sepatation of the soul from the body.

2. The reasons of the Righteous man's dying 1 From the frail and mortal nature
about them. 2 From Satan and this world, haters of them. 3. From sin, that
cleaves so fall to them. 4. From the Ordinance of God upon them, That all men
must die. 5. For right ends to them. 1. To humble the righteous by death, 2. To
make them seek salvation out of death through Christ. 3. That the glory of
Christ in raising them out of death, may appear. 4. That death may put an end
to all their evils. 5. That dying, the righteous may enter into life and glory.


2. That the Righteous has hope in his death.
And therein consider, 1. The difference of the Righteous man's hope, from other
men's, hopeless of life; or senseless of death. 2. Who is the Righteous man.
3. Diverse sorts of Righteousness 1. Of a man's own, and of works, Moral.
Legal.
2. Of God: Of says.
4. Gods goodness done for man, and his truth said to man calls for man's trust
and hope toward God. 5. What is this hope of a Righteous man, 1. The several
objects of his hope, Christ, And other things through Christ.
2. The grounds of his hope, 1. Christ's sufferings for man, the ground of man's
righteousness with God. 2. Christ's resurrection out of death, the ground of
man's hope of life.
3. The efficacy of his hope, the Righteous man's hope dies not: It lives in his
death,
6. The blessed memory of this deceased Righteous man, and of his hope in his
death.
Application, 1. The Righteousness of God is to be taken notice of, and not to
be slighted. 2. All men ought to fellow this righteousness of God, and not
faint for sufferings. 3. These followers are to go on in the way of
righteousness. The righteous, not to die in their affections for death it
self, but to have hope in their death.

THE RIGHTEOUS MAN'S HOPE IN HIS DEATH.
The Text.
PROVE. 14.32. The Righteous has hope in his death.
NOt to spend time in unnecessary prefacing, because we shall find matter
enough in the words to take up all this little time allotted us: There are two
Propositions couched in the Text, to which I shall desire as briefly, and yet
as clearly as I may to speak, viz. 1. That even Righteous men also are liable
to death. 2. That the Righteous have hope in their death.


The truth of the former of these is not only a matter of faith, but is evident
to sense also, as the Scriptures tell us, Heb 9.17.
It Is appointed to man once to die: So we see the wise and the foolish, the
righteous and the wicked, both are subject thereto, and in that regard all
things come alike to all. The most famous for righteousness have yielded unto
death. Abraham is ^^nd, and the Prophets are dead, yea Christ himself yielded
up the Ghost and died; so that we shall not spend time about the proof of that
point, only I shall desire to unfold the several acceptions of the word death,
and see in which of them this is found true, that the righteous comes unto
death, and so see the latitude in which this Text may be taken, and then show
whence and upon what grounds it comes to pass that the righteous also die, and
so proceed to the next particular.

The word death is diversely used in Scripture: As

We read of a second death, Rev. 20 6. (...) These 17.8, 9 M^^^. 25 4^.
a perishing from the presence of the Lord and the glory of his power, a being
thrown into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his Angels: But of this
death the text is not to be understood; for this is none of the righteous man's
death, it is not appointed for him, nor he for it, nor shall he come into it,
nor is it a death in which any hope may be had; this is indeed the righteous
man's hope, that he shall not see this death, but be preserved and kept from it,
as it is said, Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection,
for on such the second death shall have no power, Rev. 20.6. And of this, that
saying of our Savior is to be understood, that he that believes in him shall
not taste death, Joh 8* 52.

2. Death is sometimes taken for a more spiritual death, or a death in the
spirit of a man only, not in the body, as when men are said, while alive, Ephesians.
4.18. and 2.1.
to be dead, in an evil sense, void of the life of God, dead in sins and
trespasses, but of this, this place cannot be understood neither, they that are
so dead are not righteous men, but as yet unrighteous and ungodly: But

3. Death is sometime taken in a good sense, for a spiritual death, not in
sin, but to a man's self and sin, as when the Apostle says, Gal. 2.20. I am
crucified with Christ, yet I live, etc. Romans 6.4. We are planted with him into
the similitude of his death. And 7.9. When the law came, sin revived and I
died: That is, When a man formerly alive to his wisdom, parts, privileges,
righteousness after the Law, etc. comes to be taken off from all life in them,
confidence springing from them, expectation of favor from God because of them,
finds no support, comfort or encouragement from them, sees them all to be
nothing in the account of God, and so looses and departs with them all in that
regard to enjoy the full grace of God in Christ. Unrighteous men often times
find life in their own hands, power and works, endeavors, parts, etc. but the
man that does righteousness dies to all, that he may live to God, and Christ
may be his life: And so he dies also to the world, riches, glo^^ pleasures,
treasures of it, and whatsoever is therein, so as not to love, cleave to, and
have his life therein, or suck his soul sweetness and satisfaction therefrom:
It is crucified to him and he to it, as Gal. 6.14. He is condemned and cast out
by it, and he again condemns and reproves it, and finds no goodness or life
in the customs, approbation or excellencies of it, So Paul says of himself, he
died daily, 1 Cor. 15. and says to the Colossians, chap. 3.3. Ye are dead, and
your life is hid with Christ in God. And this death in these several
particulars the righteous man dies to, and in these dyings also he has hope;
so that this acceptance of the word death, we may understand to he included in
this expression in the Text.

4. The word death signifies also dangers of death to the body, heavy
afflictions and distresses, such as bring into eminent dangers of the
dissolution of the body and soul each from other, as when Paul said, that God
delivered him from so great a death, 2 Cor. 8.9. and that he was in deaths
often, 2 Cor. 11.23.

Fifthly and lastly, It is used most ordinarily to signify the death of the
body, the separation made between it and the soul, the laying down of this
earthly tabernacle, so Christ was put to death in the flesh, and Abraham and
the Prophets died, etc. And in this and the next foregoing sense joined with
it, shall I here especially eye and speak to it, It being a clear truth, that
the righteous come into many tribulations and deaths or dangers, and at last
also lay down their earthly tabernacles, and die in the flesh, 2 Cor. 5.1. and
4.12. Let us now view some reason of this, why they are subjected to, or how
they come to yield up to such deaths.

The question is, Quest.
Why and whence it is that the righteous come into dangers and into death?

The answer is, Answ.
That though they are in their conditions and spirits above death, yet their
bodies are subject thereto, from sundry causes; as, If we look upon secundary
causes, It is because,

1. They have the same frail natures and infirm constitutions as other men
have, they have and carry about them the seeds and principles of mortality,
righteousness leads to peace in them, and to hopes under them, but does not
keep death from them: Yea

2. They have more cause then other men, inasmuch as they have more enemies,
Satan stirring up instruments against them, yea and (if God permit) working
upon the principles of mortality in them more forceably and violently (as in
Job) if by any means he might destroy them, he stirs up the world to hate,
reproach and persecute them, so that considering the worlds hating of them and
plots against them, it is a greater wonder and more to be admired that they die
no sooner, then that they die at all, that they meet not with many more deaths,
then that they meet with so many.

If we look upon the first and higher causes, then we find,

1. Sin in them as well as in others, and that exposes to death; the body
being corrupted with sin, must die that it may be made new and incorrupt, and
that springs from an higher cause yet.

2. The appointment of God, It Is an ordinance of his making that mankind
should be subject to death, It Is appointed to men once to die, Heb. 9.27. And
this ordinance includes and reaches to believers as well as others, they being
men also, and God would have it so for diverse good ends and purposes, as to
instance

1. That they might have something to humble them and keep them low in
themselves, while they are minded of their sin and sinfulness that let in
death, and experiment themselves in mortality, frailty and weakness like other
men, and so are led also to see that they as well as any other have daily need
of help from above, that they need a Savior out of death.

2. That they seeing their own nothingnesse and need of a Savior might be more
earnestly stirred up to accept thankfully, and diligently seek after and have
recourse unto, and exercise faith in the Savior that God has freely given to
remedy and help them: Deuteronomy. 32.29. Psalm. 9^ 11.
for the consideration of their later end, and the right numbering of their
days; is a means to make them apply their hearts more heedfully to wisdom, in
minding the grace of God and comforting themselves therein against their
straits and sufferings, and breathing after the experiments of the power of God
in supporting and bearing them up in deaths, and in due season delivering them
out of them: Were we not subjected to death and misery in ourselves, we should
never so much prize and look out after salvation and help given us in another.

3. That God in Christ might be the more abundantly glorified in supporting and
carrying them through deaths and sufferings, and raising them out of them, for
his strength is perfected in weakness, and his power in infirmities; 2 Cor. 12.
as thereby it is most eminently put forth: so therethrough also it is most
fully and clearly seen and known, and being seen is most acknowledged, as
Christ said of Lazarus his death, Joh. 1^. so we may say of the death of all
his people, it is that the son of man might be glorified, for it is greater
glory to uphold in deaths, and raise dry bones out of death, then to preserve
from it: As the resurrection of the dead when men's bodies are wasted, consumed,
and the relics thereof scattered and dispersed, does more appose reason, and
seems more absurd to man's conception then other things, so will it be a
brighter demonstration of the wisdom and power of God, and that in which he
shall be more admired then in other things. When I have opened your graves and
brought you out from them, and put the spirit of life into you (that looked
upon your selves as dry ones, past all hope of life, says God to the house of
Israel, Ezekiel. 7.11, 12, then shall you know that I am the Lord, then
emphatically, then more fully and clearly, so as to acknowledge and to admire
it and give glory to me, etc.

4. That they might not be always under evil, he orders this for their good,
as well as for his own glory; for his glory in their good and great mercy and
goodness it is to them to be taken away from the face of evil, as the phrase
is in Isa. 57.1, 2. Mipna baragna^. 2 Pet. 2.7.
(...) a facie mali: here they live amongst an evil generation of wicked men
that vex and disquiet their righteous souls, as the Sodomites did righteous
Lot, men that oppose and blaspheme God in his way, truth, spirit, etc. and
daily plot and conspire the ruin of the just, and these evil men make the
times evil and dangerous, partly by corrupting the truth of God, and bringing
in dangerous errors, and partly by their oppressions, cruelties, malice,
fraud, and other enormities which provoke God to send plagues, pestilences,
famine and sword, and such like sore judgments: for such things the godly
mourn and sigh, and their lives are full of bitterness: now though God see it
good to try and exercise his people with these things as in a furnace, yet
these are not his peoples portion, out of very love and faithfulness
therefore he will take them from the face of these evils, either before
judgments come, that they may not see and be perplexed with them, as he
intimates unto Hezekiah, 2 King. 2.28 2
when he threatened sore judgments upon the people, he would first take him
away, and he should have peace in his days: or else out of them that they be
not overburthened with them; here they are tossed too and fro with troubles,
hated, reproached, persecuted, wearied out almost with labors and sorrows in
and for the Gospel and name of Christ, and for their just conversations with
men, and therefore God out of compassion will take them away by death in due
season, and give them rest, as it follows, they shall enter into peace, Isa.
57.^.
they shall rest in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness. Should
any man be here always continued his life, would be a very unsupportable
burden to him, how much more the righteous who have usually a deeper share in
troubles here then other men?

5. He orders death to them, that putting off this earthly mashy tabernacle,
they might be brought to a more full enjoyment of Jesus Christ, and so of
himself in him: here their enjoyments of God are lower and more intermixed, they
are let by this bodily grossness from seeing or receiving so much of him
as their spirits in more spiritual bodies are capable of, no man can see God
and live, and yet the happiness of the soul stands in the sight and fruition
of God, which that they might have more fully, he takes them out of these
bodies to his Son, 2 Cor. 5.6.
while we sojourn in the body, we are absent from the Lord, we are here as
strangers in a foreign country, where we have no city to continue in: Heb.
13.14. 2 Cor. 5.8.
but when we are taken out of the body, we shall be at home, we shall be nearer
to Christ, and have a greater enjoyment of him, whence death is great
advantage, to the righteous, and Paul desired it rather then life, I desire
(says he) to be dissolved and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.21, 23.
for that is far better for me, etc. For these and such like good and gracious
ends, God has ordered death to the righteous, which I have but briefly spoken
to, desiring to pass to the main thing in the text, the second thing observed,
which is indeed the full expression of the text it self, viz.

That the righteous has hope in his death. Propos. 2.


That is, he sinks not under it, but lives in death, his spirit lives when his
body dies, he is saved from the terror of death, by the hope he has of a
better life, and so not only sees not the second death, or comes not into it,
but misseth also the sting and bitterness that many through ignorance and
unbelief meet with in the first death: he feels a spiritual life in the midst
of a spiritual, and in the midst of a corporal death too. When his spirit
dies to himself and to the world, so that it finds nothing in the one, nor in
the other to support, comfort or cheer him, but sees all in himself polluted
and sinful, his very works of righteousness too short, and scanty to cover
him from wrath and vengeance, and all in the world vain, yea vanity it self,
and full of bitterness and vexation, in both nothing but death, yet even then
in Christ he finds sweetness, life, and satisfaction, he finds him living
bread, and feeds upon him as the most ample glorious witness and manifestation
of Gods love, and in feeding there he lives. I am crucified with Christ, says
the Apostle, that is, to himself and to his own best endeavors though after
Law, and to the world with all its excellencies, and yet says he, I live, and
yet that was passively he, not actively, but Christ lives in me, and the life
that I live in the flesh, is by the says of the Son of God, etc. As for other
men, take away their comforts in the world, and confidence they have in
themselves, and you undo them, they die, despair and perish, but the just
shall live by faith, and so it is with him in the midst of dangers and of
bodily death, he has such a hope as saves, supports him, and bears him up in
the worst times and conditions, he has hope in death, and in that he has hope
he differs from two sorts of people (as in the nature and quality of his hope
he differs from others) from these two.

1. From those that are driven away in their wickedness with wrath, Pro. 14.3^.
as in the former part of the verse, such as the guilt of sin in their
consciences, and sense of vengeance hurries away to desperation, and makes them
like the chaff driven away with the wind, Psalm. 1.4.
so that they cannot stand in death, when they apprehend Gods hand lifted up
against them, but sink down into hell, unbelief and terror.

2. From those that though they are not so hurried away in a tempest as being
past hope, yet when they die, they are like stones, as was Nabal, or as it is to
be ferred some do that the people use to say die like lambs, they die without
any hope, like senseless and reasonlesse creatures, that know little more then
the beasts, and so have scarce any more either hope or fear in what happens to
them, but as they fear not hell or vengeance, so they hope not in God, for
heaven or blessedness: perhaps they say they hope well, because they are
senseless of any thing they should fear, and so hope (they say) they shall
meet with no evil, being sensual like bruit beasts, they see none to be
feared or avoided by them: from both these the righteous differ in their death,
they have hope in it. But that we might the better understand and make use of
what the holy Ghost here propounds to us, I shall proceed in this order to
speak to it; I shall 1. Explain the terms. 2. Confirm the truth of the
Proposition, and 3. Apply it. 1. In the explication, two things would be spoken
to, viz. 1. What or who is this righteous man, and 2. What is the hope he has
in his death. 1. Who is the righteous man here spoken of, Quest.
and what is that which will put a man into the righteous estate here mentioned
that is accompanied with hope in death.


A man is denominated righteous from righteousness, Answ.
of which the Scripture mentions diverse kinds, as

1. A moral righteousness which stands in a just dealing between man and man,
so Abimelech asks if God will destroy a righteous nation, Genesis 20.4. he meant a
people that had done no wrong to Abraham wittingly, but as God after answers
him, verse. 6. walked in that matter in integrity, doing but what in conscience
they thought might be done, etc. and so David appeals to God to judge him
according to his righteousness, that is his blameless carriage toward Saul,
Psalm. 7.8. and so many Gentiles have been righteous, that is, just in their
carriages toward men, in what they judged to be their duty, but this is not
the righteousness, nor these the righteous men here spoken of, because this
may be consistent with ignorance and enmity against God, it being but a mere
humane righteousness.

2. A legal righteousness or a righteousness according to the law of God,
and that the Scripture mentions two ways, viz. 1. Either that that is so
indeed, which stands in a full and perfect personal conformity to the law at
all times, and in all things never, no, not so much as in lust transgressing
it, for such righteousness the law requires, in that it curses every man that
continues not in all things that are contained in the book of the law to do
them, Gal. 3.10. and in this sense it is that the Scripture says, Romans 3.10,
11. Eccles 7.20.
there is none righteous, none that does good and sins not, etc. 2. Or that
that is judged and deemed (of men) to be such, whenas they do but endeavor
after the law, and in many things transgress it, yea, sin against the very end
of it, in that they go about to make themselves righteous in and by that which
was given them to convince of them sin, and let them see their need of
righteousness, freely given them of God in the promised seed, This is that
Paul calls a righteousness of a man's own, which while men seek to maintain they
submit not to the righteousness of God, (which is in Christ) Romans 10.3. and
which he himself would not be found in, Phil. 3.8, 9.
but in that which is of the faith of Christ: a righteousness of works in
which men from their zeal, blamelessenesse, endeavors after and performance of
duties, do trust in themselves that they are and judge themselves to be
righteous, as the Pharisee in Luke 18.10, 11. that trusted in himself that he
was righteous, because he did not as the looser sort, was no Publicane, no
extortioner, etc. and because he was strickt for paying tiths and keeping
fasting days, etc. he says not that he trusted to make himself righteous by
so doing, but that he was already righteous, else he should not have so done,
this is a seeming righteousness, and many that have but this are pure in their
own eyes, although they were never washed in and by the appearance of of the
grace and and love of God, Rev. 1.5.
from their sinfullnesse, never brought into Christ and justified through faith
in his blood, and yet these I confess may have hope, and walk on confidently
expecting happiness, and thinking this their righteousness advangious all
their life time, yea, to their death, but yet in death in the very pinch it
will fail them, and it will fare with them as with those that they speak of,
Job. 8.13, 14. and 11.20. their hope will perish, and be like the giving up of
the Ghost, it will die with them, and so deceive them, when it should stand
them in greatest stead, because it was not well bottomed, nor sprung from
living lasting principles, their righteousness from which it sprung, and on
which they leaned, was but a conceit of righteousness, an appearing and not a
real righteousness approved of by God, and therefore the hope grounded
thereupon, will shrink with it, when God comes to touch it: we may say of this
righteousness, and of them that are righteous in it, Rom 2.28.
as the Apostle of the circumcision and Jew, that are but such in the outside,
that is not righteousness that is outward in the appearance, nor he a
righteous man that is one outwardly: therefore we must go yet a little further
to a righteousness exceeding this as much as Christ would have his disciples
to exceed the Scribes and Pharisees, or else no admission into heaven for them:
a righteousness indeed which has Gods acceptance, of which we come to take
view in the next place, viz. 3. A righteousness of faith which is called Gods
righteousness, an evangelicall righteousness, which the Gospel sets forth and
declares, and God freely gives, of which the Apostle Paul speaks very
frequently, as in Romans 3.21, 22. But now the righteousness of God without the
law is manifested, being witnessed both by the Law and Prophets, even the
righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all
that believe: and so in Romans 1.17. In the Gospel the righteousness of God is
revealed from faith to faith, as it is written, the just shall live by faith,
or the just by faith shall live, (...).

But what is the righteousness of God that he gives us? Quest.


It Is Jesus Christ himself the Son of God, Answ.
in whom God gives us justification and a righteous estate, Romans 10.4. Jer.
25.5.
He is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believes. Hence
the Prophets called him The Lord our righteousness; and the Apostle Paul tells
the believers, that as of God they were in Christ Jesus, so of God Christ was
made to them wisdom, righteousness, etc. Every one that has him and is in him
(not every one that talks of him and professes him and calls him Lord, Lord,
but he that is found in him) is imputed of God and accounted righteous by him
and in him: A righteousness this is that will as well rule him righteously
that receives it, as present him unto God righteous. Now the way of receiving
it, is believing; and for that cause partly it is called The righteousness of
faith, as also because it works righteousness or causes us so to work
through faith, Romans 10.6.
which believing, in its actings toward Christ and God in him, and in its
acting from God and Christ toward man, by Gods love acting it, Gal 5.6.
is called (as I understand) our working righteousness or doing
righteousness, in 1 John 2.29. Every one that does righteousness is born of
him: which answers to chap. 5.1. Every one that believes that Jesus is the
Christ, is born of God, and so in 1 John 5.7. He that does righteousness is
righteous, as he is righteous: Which agrees with that in Col. 1.22, 23. To
present you holy and unblamable and unreprovable in his sight, if ye continue
in the faith, grounded and settled etc. That I say is our righteous doing
especially as it works toward God, or receiving Christ rests in God through
him, in which respect it is said also to be imputed to us for righteousness,
(...)
or unto righteousness, Rom 4.5. Not for any inward merit in our acting it,
for indeed it is rather acted in us, but such is the love of God to his Son,
that he accepts our believing on him, and takes it in as good part as if we had
never sinned against him, imputing it unto righteousness, that is out of his
mere grace and gracious determination so approving it that he looks on us now
through Christ, whom we therein believe on, and reckons us after Christ who is
his righteousness. It is true, that it is a righteous thing in it self that we
should believe the word of God, Istis duobus ^ Christiana, file que gloriam
tribu^^ Deo, and imputatione De^ sides enim firma est (...) oportet
imputationtia Dei accedere. Luth, in Gal 3 6.
and there-through believe in Christ, set forth therein, and so in God through
him, but yet this righteous thing of it self as acted by us or in us, is too
weak and low to denominate us righteous with God, or entitle us to Christ his
righteousness, and make him ours, did not God graciously so reckon of it as to
accept it unto righteousness or to the intailing Christ upon us to be our
righteousness. But however that is our righteous-doing to give credit to God
and believe on Christ, and the not doing so is great unrighteousness, that
great sin which the holy Ghost will convince the world of, Joh. 16.8, 9, 11.
That that makes it a righteous thing to believe God, is because he is true and
all his words are pure and upright, there is no fraud or perverseness in him or
his sayings, none ever trasted to them and were deceived by them, and thence it
is too that unbelief is so great a sin and so unrighteous a thing, because it
gives God (who is truth it self) the lie, and makes a liar of him, 1 John 5.10.
And so again it is but a righteous just thing for men to believe on God in
Christ, and the contrary is unrighteousness and sin; and why? because he is
good and loving, yea love it self, and does good to men: so as that they have
good ground of committing themselves to him, and staying on him, and this in
Christ, because he has in him testified his love to poor fallen mankind, and
Christ has so wonderfully deserved well of them, for he came from his Father
into the world on purpose to take our nature, and therein bear our sin, and die
the death that was due to us, which he also out of pity and good will toward
us has done; and being risen again and ascended up to his father, he is with
him the propitiation for our sins, and having received of him all authority and
power, yea being filled with all the fullness of God, he holds forth himself as
a Savior to men as a Captain and leader ready and able to save them to the
uttermost, who ever submit to him and follow him. Now God having done so much
for us, and upon these grounds requiring us to hope in him through Christ and
cast our selves upon Christ, its but a most just and equal thing to believe on
him: and not to trust to one that has prevented us with so much love and done
so much for us, is horrible ingratitude and injustice. But by the way some may
cast in this doubt concerning themselves,

Whether it can be made out that it is just and righteous that they in
particular should believe in him? Doubt.
For there are some so much bewilded in pooring upon themselves, that they
think it rather presumption and sin for them to hope in God and believe in
Christ, then any ways right and just for them, and therefore if their hearts
any time begin in consideration of this mercy and goodness a little to look
toward him and conceive hope in him, they are ready to start back again and
say, alas I am such a sinner, I am not so well qualified, I fear it is
presumption in me to harbor any such thoughts of mercy in him for such a one
as I: Such a one I say might here object and ask me how I can make it good that
it is a just thing for him to believe in God, and that God has done so much for
him, as does challenge his hoping and trusting in him?

To which I say, S^lu.
Not that thou may know this by thy so doing or believing for that would be
fallacious, and as to thee dangerous, it being the want of such frames that
make thee in this temper, besides that, thou nor any man can througly believe
in God or be rightly framed toward him, till he believes that God has done so
much for him and is so graciously affected toward him that there is good
warrant for believing in him, and this too from divine testimony, not humane
conjectures, for faith that is right, comes by hearing, Rom 10.14.
and that hearing by which it comes is of the word of God: To answer positively
then out of the word of God, It Is evident by Gods own testimony there, that
there is good ground for thee to believe on him, It Is but that that his grace
and good will testified toward thee does require of thee, for all that good
will that I spoke of before as a good ground for faith, is testified in the
Scripture to appertain to thee: for mind what the Scripture says in this
particular, and thou shall see it clearly, Joh. 3.16
for it is said that he so loved the world as to give his son (yea for the
unjust, 1 Timothy 1.6. Heb 1.9. 2 John 2 2.
ungodly, sinners and enemies, 1 Pet. 3.18. Romans 3 6, 8, 10.) that whosoever
believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting lift; that the Son of
God gave himself a ransom for all, and tasted death by the grace of God for
every one, is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also
for the sins of the whole world. Well then, if thou beleevest the testimony of
God by his Apostles (and surely that is to be credited before what men say)
then may thou see that this appertains to thee: if thou be a man or one
of the world, then God gave his Son for thee, and the Son of God came down from
his Father into the world to be a Savior for thee, and died and gave himself a
ransom for thee, and is the propitiation for thy sins, this is (thou feast)
the language of the Scripture and of the testimony that God has given of his
Son, that he died for sinners, for men, for all, and there is none but will
confess that it is meet that we should believe Gods saying, as that which is in
it self undoubtedly true. Why then it is meet that thou believe him in this
particular too, else thou dealest unrighteously with him and give him the
lie? and if thou faiest, ah! but thou would have some sign or token of the
truth of this as concerning thee from him in something to be done by him to thy
soul before thou can or wilt give credit to it and judge it true, then do
thou, M^t^h. 12.33.
as that adulterous generation which Christ reproves seeking signs and
tokens, when God himself witnessed in his word concerning him, and if thou
should persist in that way, thou may be given up to delusion to believe a
lie, and to be drawn from the truth asserted in the word, by lying signs and
wonders, such as God sometimes orders to those that receive not the love of his
truth that they might be preserved and saved by it; 2 Th^s. 1. (...) (...)
Parath in R^n. 9.
If thou will not believe Gods word, thou art in a dangerous way of
miscarrying. It Is a good counsel (that Erasmus gives) in such cases, Desine
disceptare, incipe credere, ita citius intelliges, Leave off disputing and
questioning about Gods word and opposing thy vain reason against it, offer up
thy reason (as Hoc est juge illud sacrificti vesper^^ ii and matu^^um Novi
Testament^. Vespertinum mortificare ratione^^ matutin^^, glorificare Deu^ lu^h
in Gal 3.6.
Luther advises) as an evening sacrifice, let that be mortified in whatsoever
it sets it self against the word of God, and instead thereof do thou begin to
believe and give credit to what God says, and so thou shall soonest come to
understand: which counsel I the rather commend, because it suits with the word
of God it self, it agrees with that of James 1.19. Be swift to hear, slow to
speak slow to wrath; ready to listen what God says in his word of truth, but
slow to be putting in thy glosses and corrections upon it, and slow to wrangle
with it or to be offended at what is said therein, and so in Isa. 7.9. (...)
which Tertullian renders thus, I^ ^o taami^^ K^ lo reamenu. Tertul advers.
Marciod 4 c 32
Nisicredideritis non intelligetis, unless ye believe ye shall not understand,
God would have us take his word, and then he will let us see the truth and
faithfulness of his word, Man is apt to look the wrong way, in first desiring
to have his reason satisfied before he will believe, but if thou would prove
and experiment the truth and certainty of his word to thy soul, and have the
profitable understanding of it, do thou first receive it and close with it,
holding it for true and certain, and then believing it to be true, thou will
judge it but a meet and righteous thing to commit thy soul to him, and betrust
thy self with him that has prevented thee with so much goodness, and declared
such love to thee beforehand that thou might be persuaded to believe in
him, and that it is thy great sin and evil that thou art so diffident and
distrustful of him, yea, in closing with that word of his grace, in which he
has testified such love toward thee in Christ, Isa. 50.2.
thou shall in due season find and feel the power of God put forth to save
thee from distrusting him, and so enabling thee with thy heart to believe on
him, so as it shall be imputed unto thee for righteousness, Christ himself
shall be made thy righteousness, and thou accounted and accepted as righteous
in him. And now to bring thee again to the business where Christ is so
received by faith as that the soul depends upon him, and he becomes it is
righteousness and presents him righteous to his father, thence he will be
operative in the soul too by his Spirit teaching the soul to walk righteously
and act forth righteousness, both to God and man. For the faith that so
receives Christ is not a bare dead notionall apprehension of a proposition
sloating in the brain, but such a cordial closing of the heart with the word
of God, as that it closes with, loves, prizeth and leans on Christ held
forth therein, and ascends up to God by him, loving, admiring, panting after
and cleaving to God in him, the Spirit of life that is in Christ Jesus, working
effectually in the soul, and filling it with divine and heavenly virtues and
operations, as to devote it self to God for his great love toward it, to
expect further good from him, to submit unto him, etc. and so be filled with
peace and joy in the manifestation of Gods accepting it and witness thereof
bearing to it, with love and charity to men, inward desires of their good, and
readiness really to endeavor it as opportunity is offered, as knowing that God
would have them to be saved, and that what Christ has in his death and
sufferings procured into himself, it is free for any to come to him for,
whosoever will may take freely of the waters of life, as also that it is
acceptable to God that they should so walk toward others, as he has walked
toward them, and indeed faith as it gives a sight to the soul of the glorious
grace of God, so is it a means of the souls being transformed through that
glory seen, into his similitude, to love as he has loved, pity where he shows
pity, and to delight in that which he delights, it teaches us to deny all
ungodlines and worldly lusts, and to live godly, righteously and soberly in
this present world, to hold forth the word of life, and work the works that are
acceptable to God, and profitable to men, not in any thing to injure or wrong
them, but in all things to seek their commodity as occasion is presented to
them, that they might glorify God in the day of their visitation, and be
turned unto God, and every one that so believes the testimony of God
concerning Christ in his heart, that he therein receives Christ for his
wisdom, righteousness, holiness and redemption, and is brought to rely upon
him and God in him for pardon, peace, life, spirit, and whatsoever may concern
his happiness, and therewithal is framed to the mind of Christ, to live to
him and to God in him, as has been shown: he is the truly righteous man here
to be understood in the text, one whom God approves and holds for righteous:
Every through, cordial and sincere believer, he is the righteous man here
spoken of, and that is the first thing propounded for explication, who is this
righteous man, in opening which I have been the larger, because that is of most
weight, and men are aptest therein to be deceived, resting either in moral or
Pharisaicall conceited righteousness, in stead of the true righteousness,
which is according to God, or else to rest in a form and carcasle of faith,
that receives nothing but propositions of truth into the head, but receives
not Christ into the heart to be it is righteousness, from all which the
righteousness of God does greatly differ, and beyond all which kind of
righteous men the man that is truly righteous, does very much go, as is
declared: having cleared that, let us now come to the second thing propounded
to be explained and opened, Quest. 2.
viz. What the hope is that such a righteous man has in his death?

In opening that I shall consider this his hope, both in it is object, and
ground.


This hope may be considered according to it is object, and that first Objectum
in quo, The object unto which the heart is led and carried, and in which it
has it is expectation, and that is not any vain, empty creature, either it
self, or any other thing in the whole world, for the righteous man is crucified
to them with Christ, and knows there is nothing to be met with from them, that
can help or satisfy, and that God has pronounced a curse upon him that
trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, Jer. 17.5. His hope therefore is set
upon God in Christ, from him is all his expectation, according to that of
David, Psa. 62.1, 2. Truly my soul waits upon God, from him comes my
salvation, and that in Lam. 3.24. The Lord is my portion, says my soul,
therefore in him will I hope: God as he has discovered himself to the soul in
Christ, so he himself is the object in which it hops, and from whom it
expects what it hops for. 2. The Objectum propter quod, the object for
which it hops, it hopes for something as well as in something, as to
instance, he hopes for support and preservation through death: Though I walk in
the valley of the shadow of death, yet will I fear none ill, for thou art with
me, thy rod and thy staff does comfort me, or support me, Psa. 23.4. Psa. 37.25.

2. The enjoyment of Christ and God in Christ more fully in his Spirit, after
the dissolution of the body, thence Paul Phil. 1. I desire to be dissolved, and
to be with Christ, 2 Cor. 5.6, 8. knowing that when we are at home in the body,
we are absent from the Lord, walking by faith and not by fight, we desire to be
rather absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord, the righteous man
hopes for a more full enjoyment of Christ then here he was capable of.

3. He hopes that God will yet take care of his people and preserve his Church,
and carry on his work in the world for the glory of his name, and will not be
wanting to his posterity, if he leave any behind him, Deuteronomy. 33.26, 29.

4. His resurrection out of death, and the full possession of eternal glory,
which Jesus Christ in the reunion of the soul and body as is at large declared
in 1 Cor. 15. and in 1 These. 4.16, 17. etc. He that raised up the body of the
Lord Jesus Christ, shall also raise up the believer, and give him acrown of
life and glory that shall never fade, where there shall be no mixture of grief
or misery with his joy or happiness, but he shall be fully and for ever
satisfied with the glorious enjoyment of God in Christ Jesus, This is the hope
that a righteous man has in his death, the object hoped for. 2. This hope may
be considered too in the ground or motive of it whence it springs, or what
that is that gives a man encouragement and boldness to hope in God and Christ
for such happiness, yea, even in death when God seems to be about co cut him
off for ever, and that is properly the Lord Jesus Christ, as he is the gift of
God, the manifestation of the Fathers love and grace, the Mediator and Savior
of the soul, declared to the soul in the Gospel, and received by faith, whence
the Apostle styles him, our hope, Paul an Apostle by the commandment of the
Lord Jesus Christ our hope, 1 Timothy 1.1. and again, Christ in you the hope of
glory, Col. 1.28. for it is in the gift of him for and to the soul, that it
apprehends the love of God to be such toward it, as that it has good cause
for ever to hope in him, and thus to reason concerning him, If when we were
enemies we were reconciled unto God by the death of his Son, how much more
being reconciled shall we be saved by his life? Romans 5.10. Now because it is
this love of God shed abroad into the heart by the holy Ghost, that springs up
this hope in God, as Romans 5.5, 6. therefore the Apostle calls it good hope
through grace, that is, sprung up through the apprehension and appearance of
the grace or favor of God toward us (as in another respect, viz. because this
grace is declared in the Gospel, and therethrough discerned by us, it is called
also the hope of the Gospel, Col. 1.23. 2 These. 2.16. a lively hope, that puts
lively cheerful thoughts into the soul, and makes it live in the midst of
death in expectation of a crown, and inheritance incorruptible and immortal
etc, 1 Pet. 2.3. and that grounded upon the resurrection of Christ from the
dead) thence it is also a good hope not only because it does good to the soul,
in saving, preserving and supporting it in trials and afflictions, so as that
it saints not nor turns away from God, 1 John 3.3.
but is kept in dependence on him, or in that it also purifies the soul, or
leads the man to purge himself through the grace of God, believed, that he may
be meet for such a hope or glory hoped for, in the view of which it also gives
the soul strong consolation, making it in death to trample upon death, and
rejoice over death, because of the glory to be revealed and enjoyed after it,
but also it is good, because of the foundation whence it rightly fetches in all
this good to the soul, the ground of it being of that pretiousnesse in it self,
and acceptablenesse with God, as does cause these fruits to spring from it, and
put an everlastingnesse into them, the virtue and goodness of the
righteousness of man's hope in God, springs from the goodness of the spring
and rise of it. The Pharisee hoped for great things from God, Luke 18.9, 10. as
that God would accept him and account him righteous, and deal with him as a
righteous man, ah! but his hope was naught, because it sprung from a wrong
foundation, it sprung from his own goodness and good performances, which he
conceived to be the effects of Gods love toward him; he knew nothing of love
to him in God, before his good performances to spring them up in him, but he
concludes now that God did love him from his good performances, God I thank
thee that I am not as other men are; he thought that he could not have been so
good as he was, if God had not had special and eternal love and favor
toward him. But the righteous man's hope grows upon another root: he first
heard of and was perswased of Gods love toward him in the promised seed, the
gift of Jesus Christ for him while a sinner and ungody, and the belief of this
Gods love in him brings him in to believe in him and hope in him; he therefore
hopes and expects that God will support and carry him through death, and
bring him to such glorious enjoyment of eternal life as has been mentioned,
yea to greater glory then can be mentioned, because he sees and believes that
he has already in Christ prevented him with his love, in whom death is
abolished, life and immortality brought to light, sin satisfied for, law
fulfilled, eternal redemption obtained, God well pleased that man should have
eternal life, and to that end has put it in his Son, and put it upon his Son
to bestow and give it to every one that leans upon his grace and submits to
believe on him for it; to which end also he sees in the Gospel, and in his
heart believes that God has given his Son infinite glory, power and authority
to subdue whatever in the Believer or without him would hinder him of his
glory, appointed him judge of quick and dead, to forgive and pardon all sins to
all that by his goodness are brought to him; to give them his good Spirit,
preserve them in trials, come again and raise them out of death, and make their
vile bodies like his own glorious body, and in the issue possess them with
himself and of his own glory, for the effecting all which in and for him the
righteous man judges and believes him both able and faithful, in which hope he
is confirmed by the experiments of the divine grace calling and quickening him;
and from this free grace in Christ which brings the soul to do righteousness
in believing on him, and so leads it to the enjoyment of Christ for
righteousness with God, springs up (in his most dying condition) this hope of
the glory and further grace before expressed. And so we have done with the
explication of those two things propounded, and so with the explicatory work
about the proposition, It remains that we come next to the confirmation of it.

For confirmation of this point I shall only do these two things.

1. Show that it has been so with righteous men in former ages, such as the
Scripture mentions, and

2. Show that this our deceased Friend and Brother (as others of this place
before him) found it so.

1. Scripture instances of the cloud of witnesses produced therein prove this
to be true, That the righteous has hope in his death. It mentions a large
catalogue of Worthies that lived and died in faith, though they received not
the promises. I never see the righteous (faith David) forsaken, Psa. 37.25. Why
then? not in death neither, God has given them hope in that too: How sweetly
sung old Jacob when he breaths forth this confession in the midst of his
blessings, Gen 49.18.
I have waited, O Lord, for thy salvation. So David when in great danger of
death, many conspiring to take away his life, see how his heart then hoped in
God, I said, O Lord, thou art my hope, my times are in thine hand, Psalm.
31.15.19. And a little before his giving up of the Ghost, how sweet are his
expressions, 2 Samuel 23.3, 4, 5. These are the last words of David, David the
son of Jesse said, the man that was raised up on high. The anointed of the God
of Jacob, and the sweet Psalmist of Israel said, the spirit of the Lord spoke
by me, and his word was in my tongue, the God of Israel said, the Rock of
Israel spoke to me, He that rules over men must be just, ruling in fear of
God, and he shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun rises, a morning
without cloud, as the tender grass springing out of the earth, by clear
shining after rain: Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with
me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things and sure, for this is all my
salvation and all my desire, although he make it not to grow. Sweet expressions
of assured confidence flowing from Gods love in his covenant with him, whereof
Christ is the Mediator, if not rather the sum and contents of it, and yet
these were the expressions of a dying righteous man. Act. 13.3 4. Job 19.25,
26, 27.
What should I mention Job whose voice it was in the midst of distress, I know
that my redeemer lives, and he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth,
and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see
God: Whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another,
though my reins be consumed within me; A glorious triumph over death in the
midst of deaths. 2 Timothy 4.8.
I shall add no more from Scripture but that of Paul, Henceforth is laid up for
me a crown of life, which God the righteous Judge shall give me. All which
instances are evident witnesses of this truth, That the righteous has hope in
his death: To which I might also have added the constant confessions and sweet
hopeful expressions of many Martyrs, but I pass them over for brevity, and so
come

2. To this our Friend and Brother decased; he was another instance of, and
witness to this truth, as all that were eye and ear witnesses of his carriage
in his sickness will affirm: For though he was known and noted to be a man
naturally of a timorous and fearful disposition, afraid of dangers, yet such
the more abundant operation of the grace of God in him, in his sickness and at
his death, he was nothing at all afraid of death, though the king of terror,
nay so far was he from fearing it that it was his desire to be dissolved and to
be with his Lord Jesus, which he longed for far above life, even from the
beginning of his sickness, so that some being desirous to pray for him, he
would by no means that they should pray to preserve his life here any longer,
but that he might go to his Lord Jesus, and be taken from that state of
estrangement and absence from him that he was in while in this body, to be at
home with him, that he might in his spirit more fully see and enjoy him whom he
had seen by faith, or whom not seeing, yet he believed in and loved, for that
good report of his love in the Gospel declared to him, as he had wrought
righteousness or done righteously in his life, in receiving the testimony of
the Gospel the record of God concerning Jesus Christ, and was not ashamed of it
though spoken against and rejected by men, nor of those that brought it, though
weak, and vilified by most, so went he not without the fruit of it in his
death, the word of God wrought effectually in him both in life and death: In
his life time it wrought in him to desire the true and lasting riches, although
he was blessed here with a good and large portion of these outward riches,
which often prove such snares and intanglements to men's hearts, that they
cannot attend to God for the true; yea and whereas commonly rich men are high
minded (as it is intimated in that charge given them, not to be high minded, 1 Timothy 6.21.) and prove great hindrances of men's entering the strait gate
(because men are apt to swell in their minds up to the largeness, yea and
often far beyond the largeness of their estates, and to despise so low and
contemptible a way as the Gospel is) It was not so with him, the goodness of
God so wrought in him, as for the enjoiment of Christ, he condescended to them
of low degree to bear the reproach of Christ with them, and to profess the
despised Gospel amongst them: A rare thing to find a rich estate and a poor
humble spirit together, riches and pride and loftines usually accompany each
other, and so choking all motions or desires of goodness, that they come not
out to perfection, In all this he did righteously, but above all in that he
received not only the sound, but the substance of the Gospel, the truth into
his heart, so as to set his hope in God therethrough, and to expect his
salvation (as also his brother had done before him, however opposite at first
as many others yet are) which accompanied him to his death as has been
expressed, which hope also suited with the hope of the righteous man in this,
that it was founded upon the love of God in Christ to mankind and so to him.
The death, resurrection, ascension, mediation of the Son of God for him
according to the Gospel declaration, as appears by this ensuing confession of
his faith which he penned with his own hand when he first began to grow sick
and weak, and caused to inserted into the preface of his Will, whence also as I
was requested I copied it out word for word to publish it to you as here
follows.

I bequeath my soul into the hands of God as into the hands of a faithful
Creator, who has made heaven and earth and all things therein, and to Jesus
Christ the second person in the Trinity, God blessed for ever, who has
redeemed me and all mankind, for the Scripture that I do faithfully believe
says, That he by the grace of God tasted death for every man, and St John
says, That God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life. And the
same John says in his Epistle, He is the propitiation for our sins, and not
for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world, and other such like
Scriptures which I here forbear to insert: And this I do declare because so
many do deny the truth of these Scriptures, and some others deny all
Scriptures, and many now in our days deny the Lord Jesus Christ to be the
second Person in Trinity, and so account the written Scriptures as a History,
and the mystery in their hearts they give for Scripture: But I do faithfully
believe as it is recorded in the word of God, that that Jesus who died for all
men, is risen free and acquit of all that was against them, for to this end he
both died and rose again that he might be Lord of all, and is ascended up on
high and has received gifts Or, In the man.
for men, to send forth even to the rebellious that the Lord God might dwell
amongst them, and that they might come to the knowledge of the truth and be
saved, such provision has God made for all in and through his Son, that be
invites all to come, and says all things are ready, his trible is furnished,
and he bids them eat of his bread and drink of his wine that he has mingled.
Thus far is the love of God in his Son set forth to all, and more fully, and of
his fullness have we all received and grace for grace: And further it is said,
To so many as received him, to them he gave power to become the Sons of God, to
them which believe in his Name: Which makes it plain that whosoever is found to
receive and accept what is declared in the Scriptures of what Jesus has done
for all, it is as much as to say they receive him, that is, to own God for
their father in the righteousness of his Son, so that he that is Gods
righteousness is their righteousness who presents them in himself unto the
Father, and for them be has a further business with the father, as in 1 John
2.1. is declared, We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, making good our cause, and not suffering our evils to come up before
him; and it is through what he has done by dying, rising and ascending, and
continual advocating, that I have all my hope, that when I depart this life I
shall live with him, according to that Scripture which says, Because I live ye
shall live also, etc. Thus he expressed himself: In the last expression of which,
you have the confession of his hope to agree with what I said before of the
righteous man's, that it sprung from a good bottom, the death, resurrection and
advocation of Jesus Christ, as with that of the Apostle Peter, who says, God
has begotten them to a lively hope through the resurrection of Christ from the
dead: 1 Pet, 1.3.
So that as this our Brother did righteously, to believe the Gospel of the
grace of God, and therethrough to believe in God, so had he a good hope in his
death, a hope for good and glorious things, and a hope well grounded, And thus
we have seen the explication and confirmation; Come we now to the third
particular, viz. Application, with which we shall conclude.

You hear, friends, what the Scripture says, Application.
and you have heard several instances of the truth of it; mind well what ye
have heard, mind the Scriptures and mind the end of the just ones, even such
as you have had amongst you: The first tells you, That the righteous has hope
in his death; the other has experimented and proved it, and rejoiced in
affliction and death for the hope of the glory which they expected further to
be revealed on them. Both Scriptures and their experience commend to us these
following instructions.

1. Take notice of the excellency of righteousness, and of the condition of a
righteous man, how good it is to receive by faith the righteousness of God,
and how well it goes with them that so do: What is there in all the World to be
compared to righteousness: We may say of it, as Solomon of wisdom, and indeed
it is a high point of wisdom to do righteously in believing; Prove. 3, 14, 15,
16, etc.
The ^^^ch and so thereof is better then the merchandise of silver, and the
gain thereof better then of sine gold: She is more precious then rubies, y^^
all that thou can desire is not to be compared to her. She is a tree of lift
to all that take hold of her, etc. Alas! How empty are the riches and honors
and pleasures of this world, in comparison of righteousness! they may make a
man frolic outwardly in this life (and yet not that neither, except God give
health and power to enjoy them) but often times in the midst of that jollity
and bravery the heart is sad, the conscience torn and broken, and alas when
death comes, and judgment appears at the back of it, then what trembling!
then, except the conscience be hardened, seared and grown utterly careless,
what terrors and pangs of despair torment it! All these things that the world
so much prize, are but bread that perishes: They may perhaps make us a little
glorious to the world, but cannot give us peace with, nor hope in God. Riches
deliver not in the day of wrath, but righteousness (this righteousness of
faith which is accepted with God for righteousness, and so Christ received and
believed on) delivers from death, Prove. 11.4. That will give a man boldness in
the day of judgment, while he knows his Judge is his righteousness, and will
protect him from wrath and vengeance. Oh that men did see the worth of
righteousness, the righteousness of God, surely then they would not trifle so
much time and strength and talents away, about empty lying vanities, they would
not so swell with conceits of themselves, and look so big for a few muddy
riches, for a little fading, appearing worldly glory, they would not be so
cheated into a contentedness with some painted shows of righteousness,
formal devotions, so much religion as may serve them to live in credit with
men, and lull their consciences asleep, till they satisfy their earnall
earthly desires, no certainly they would count all things but loss and dung
that they might win Christ and enjoy him for their righteousness: Well
friends, however you may pursue after other things, and bless your selves in
your enjoyments, possessions, ease, pleasures, vanities now, yet there will
come a day in which all these appearing deceitful, you will wish for
righteousness, you will see then what has been now showed you, and what the
wise man says, viz. That the righteous man is more excellent then his
neighbor; Prove. 12.26.
as he is more excellent in his life, because exalted in Christ and enriched
with him and his privileges, as also because of his spirit in him, conforming
him to Christ, and putting something of heaven and heavenly virtues into him,
so will he be found more excellent in his death, when his heart shall have hope
and rejoicing in God, while other men's sink within them or die like stones,
being without God, and without hope to God. Oh that now therefore you would
take notice of the excellency of righteousness above all things in the world,
that you may not slight it, and so want its sweet and satisfactory usefulness
when you have most need of it.

2. Be we exhorted to follow after righteousness, Use 2.
to embrace the righteousness of faith, to receive the Lord Jesus Christ, the
bread of life, and the true righteousness that God gives us: Know and believe
friends, that God does give you righteousness in Christ, he has sent him into
the world for you to be your Savior, has laid the sin of the world upon him,
and he has born it and suffered death for it, this he has done for all,
therefore believe and know it is true for you, and that God having raised him
from the dead, has given him in the humane nature all fullness of power and
authority, so that he is able to the uttermost to save you, to forgive you your
sins, he having died for them, for otherwise, according to the order of Gods
proceeding, he should not be able to forgive you, if he had not shed blood for
your sins, Heb 9.22.
for without bloudshedding there is no remission. But know that he, I say, is
able to forgive and save you, With him there is forgiveness that he might be
feared: Col. 1.14.
And if the knowledge and belief of it work so with you, as to turn you in to
fear him, you shall have that forgiveness with and in you, it shall pass upon
you, yea he is ready to receive and forgive you, he calls you to him that he
might confer this grace upon you: Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts, and return to the Lord, for he will have mercy,
etc. and to our God for he will abundantly pardon, Isa. 55.7. Yea he sent his
Son to turn every one of you from, your iniquities, Act. 3 Only he would have
you to look to him for it and be saved by him, Isa. 45.22. Now, oh be persuaded
to do righteousness, seeing righteousness is so excellent a thing, and has
so great recompense of reward: Receive the word and grace of God, give credit
to the record that God bears of his Son, that he has given us eternal life,
and this lift is in his Son: He that has the Son has life, etc. That God has
sent him forth to be the Savior of the world, and he has given himself
arausome for all, and so died and is risen for thee, and has life is himself
for thee to look after and to receive in looking to him, that God in him has
thewed forth exceeding grace toward thee, and be not of a gainsaying heart and
spirit wrangling against the word and patting it from thee; Let the unrighteous
man forsake his own is righteousness, wrong, unbeleeving thoughts, and lay
down all the suspicions and contradictions of his own reason against Gods
truth, and turn to the Lord to mind, receive, believe and close with his
sayings, that they being entertained, Christ himself to whom they bear
witness, and whom they set forth may be believed on, come to and received into
the heart, he may be entertained into the fouls affection, desire, delight,
confidence, etc. that so he that is Gods righteousness provided for us, and
given unto us, being received and entertained, thou mai'st in him be presented
righteous to God, and filled with the fruits of righteousness both toward God
and men, that so thou having of the spirit of Christ within thee, it may lead,
teach, support and comfort thee, and in the midst of dangers, yea and of death
it self, fill thee with a lively hope of life and glory: Friends, do
righteously in believing the word of God, and looking to Christ by faith, be
not enemies to your selves by heeding lying vanites, put not away from you your
own mercies, run not desperately through a spirit of envy or malice, or through
worldliness, pride, presumption, Atheism, looseness, into your own
destruction. What good will you get to your selves in the issue by being
wicked, by being envious against the Gospel and grace of God, by quarrelling
against and resisting the truth? by scorning, contemning, hating and
reproaching them that out of love and good will preach and hold it forth to
you, by rejecting the testimony of God, and closing with every vain fantasy
by which you think your selves strengthened against it? whom do you fight
against in opposing the word of God? is it not against God himself? and is it
not against your own good? Do you not endeavor thereby to pervert your own
ways? to make his grace and goodness questionable as concerning your selves,
and so put your selves from having the word of God the ground of your faith, to
fetch the ground of it from some blind conjectures and good conceits of your
selves? Oh stand not in your own light, neglect not so great salvation as is
set before you, nor rest in such a notion all profession of truth as leaves the
soul destitute of the power of truth, such a consent to it and profession of
it, as yet leaves the soul unrighteous, brings it not into Christ, nor receives
not the power and Spirit of Christ into it. Let not love of the world and
worldly vanities keep you out either from attending to and receiving truth, nor
from submitting to and walking out in the power of truth, perhaps you are rich
(some of you) and enjoy much in the world; you can fill and satiate your selves
with the profits, advantages and delights of it, you find a great deal of
satisfaction in your own ways, some in coveteousnes, others in pride, and
others in voluptuousnes, etc. But oh! consider the emptiness and vanity of all
these satisfactions, will the world and the things thereof last for ever? is
not God even now pouring out whole vials of his wrath upon it? and is he not
staining the pride of all glory, and bringing to contempt all that is honorable
in the earth? Is he not marring the form of it, and casting bitterness into
all the comforts of the earth? and what will your riches profit you, if God
come to plead with you, with sword, famine, and his sore judgments? do you
think to bribe his wrath, or make an agreement with hell and death? do you
think that his hand will not find you out? or do you think your riches,
honors, pleasures, accomodations in the world, will then fill your souls with
hope? O no, beloved, these things will then prove more empty vanties, you may
live as richly and sumptuously and in as great pleasure as the rich man in the
Gospel, Luke 16. yea, and perhaps to have as honorable a burial, and yet the
next news may be (that that was his unhappy portion) that you are in hell
tormented: what then will all these things you here set your hearts upon
advantage you? what will it profit you, could you get and enjoy the whole
world, and to lose your souls in the getting it? die like stocks or blocks
without God and without Christ, and without hope, or to die howling out with
vexation and despair? Alas! what good would all his riches and places, or great
funeral, etc. have done this gentleman, if he had died without faith in God,
and without the hope of his glory, and so before his body had been interred,
his soul had been in hell. Be you willing to follow his steps in owning the
truth of God, and the grace of God therein declared, and in so laying down your
selves to the Cross of Christ, and cordially desiring the knowledge and
enjoyment of Christ, that so your end may be as hopeful as his, you may not be
afraid of death and faint under it: but hope in it and rejoice over it, for the
righteous man is he that has hope in his death.

3. To conclude, let me speak one word to you that do follow after
righteousness, even the righteousness of God, you that have received the
record of God concerning his Son, believed his love, and therethrough are
brought to appreach unto him, to have good thoughts of him, and have cast your
souls upon him, and set your hope in him, what has been said may be useful
unto you for your encouragement and consolation, I shall say this to you, my
brethren, hold fast your integrity, follow on yet after righteousness, Rev.
22.11.
be not weary of well doing, nor saint in the way, he that is righteous, let
him be righteous still, and be that is holy, let him be holy still: let him
continue and increase in holiness and righteousness, serving God in them all
the days of his life: abide in Christ and in his way, attending to the grace
of God, and submitting thereto to be acted and led thereby, to deny all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, Tit. 2.11, 12. Heb. 13.1^, 16
and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world: looking
diligently that none fail of the grace of God, that none be profane as Esau to
sell the hope set before him, the birthright given you, for a mess of pottage,
for any worldly, carnal, transitory vanities, take heed of consulting with
flesh and blood, lest you be turned aside from the word of God to other
doctrines, or to be corrupted to worldly ways and evils, take heed that the
cares of this life, and the deceitfullnesse of riches or love of other things
in this world, do not by little and little steal in upon your spirits, to cheak
the good seed of the word of God, and so to make you content your selves with a
barren profession of Christ without power and fruitfullnesse: Hold fast your
hope and confidence in Christ, Heb. 10.35.
and hold fast your good conversation according to Christ, knowing that your
confidence has a great recompense of reward, 1 Cor. 15* 18. Gal. 6, 7.
and your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, in due time ye shall reap,
if ye faint not: you have great encouragement in the consideration of what has
been said, to persevere to the death, and not shrink back because of
persecutions, reproaches, threatenings, or the fear of death: It is true indeed,
you are exposed to the wrath and malice of men, there are many especially at
this time, that conspire and plot against us, we may see and hear how they band
themselves together, and strengthen themselves in mischief, to root out from
the earth, if it were possible, those that fear God and desire to walk with
him, it is at such their aim is most, and their envy and all their plots and
designs are most against such, persecutions of the tongue you meet with, and
should do of the hand too if they might have their will, they thirst after our
blood, and perhaps the sight of this might almost strike a damp into some
spirits that have begun to look to God, and make them begin to think of going
back again from him: but O my friends, let it not be so with you, you have no
cause for all these things to be affrighted: for your lives are not in their
hands that are your enemies, they may talk great things, this they will do, and
that they will do, cut our throats, knock us on the head, be our deaths, but we
see God permits them not to do so; they did so conspire against David, but he
comforted himself in this, my times are in thine hand, Psalm. 31.11.
O Lord, and so may we till our times be come, they can do no hurt, as it is
said of Christ when they lay in wait for him, and sought to kill him, they were
many a time frustrated, and put by, because his hour was not yet come: though
they may have opportunities to harm us, yet God ties their hands, and strikes a
fear into their hearts, not a hair of our heads shall they pluck from off us,
Mat. 10 30.
till God give them permission, Therefore fear not for the threats of men, nor
for the wickedness of those, that in stead of receiving the grace of God
preached by us, seek to reward our good will with mischieving us, Luke 21.18.
plot to destroy us: in doing righteousness we have God on our sides who will
faithfully protect us, we have seen him many a time befooling them, and
sometimes taking them in their own snares, blowing them up when they had
subtly undermined us, and thought to have destroyed us. How many times have
they thought themselves sure of our downfall! when they themselves have fallen,
we have risen and stood upright: though we have been so imperfect in righteous
doing, that for our unbelief and follies God might most justly have given us up
to their rage, yet such has been his goodness and faithfulness to us, that
to break us off from our ways more, and to encourage us to righteousness, he
has known us in our adversities, and evermore stood by us to defend us, and we
have cause to hope in him yet, that whatsoever their hopes and expectations
are, however great their power, and however subtle their policies, however
strong their confederacies and combinations to do wickedness, God will yet
defeat them and preserve us. Well, but suppose he should leave us to their
hands, as there may be an hour for the power of darkness over us, Luke 22 53.
Rev. 11 7, 8.
as well as there was to Christ, yet what of that? shall we turn from our
righteousness? sure there would be no cause for that, for what can they do
unto us? They can but kill the body, and the body must die; Eccles. 8.8.
And though for righteousness sake it do not die so soon as probably it might:
yet such have all died who (to avoid death) have turned from righteousness;
Neither shall wickedness deliver those that are given to it. And truly, friends,
to die in and for righteous doing, is far better then to die in denying it and
without it: you see righteousness gives hope in death, and delivers from the
sting and poison that some meet with in it: Alas! if you turn from
righteousness you turn from God, and from Christ, and from hope of eternal
life: Ezekiel. 33.12.
and what is then to be met with but guilt and horror of conscience, in death
despair, and after death eternal vengeance? what advantage is it to live a
little longer in this world, and in the mean time to have the soul dead to
hope, and dead to God? Therefore hold fast your righteousness, be not ashamed
of God and Christ, and of his name and truth, while you cleave to
righteousness God will be sure to cleave to you and support you, so that death
shall be but as a dream to you: the hope your souls meet with in and from God,
shall render death little or nothing fearful or dreadful to you, yea, in him
your souls shall find joy in death, God whom ye believe on and confess, will
be your God and guide unto death, and his grace embraced by you will fill you
with joy and gladness, with peace and quietness in the midst of death, you
shall experiment with this our brother, and all the Saints of God that have
abidden in faith, and held fast their confidence, the truth of what you have
now heard, that the righteous has hope in his death: For that hopes sake, go
on courageously in the path of righteousness, and fear not what persecutions
and death can do unto you; Consider what has been said, and the Lord give us
all understanding in all things.

Laus Deo.

