A SERMON, PREACHED Before the Right Honorable, Thomas Foot, Lord Mayor, and
the Right Worshipful the Aldermen, Sheriffs, and several Companies of the
City of LONDON.

Upon the General day of Thanksgiving, October the 8. 1650. at Christ-Church,
London.

By Doctor NATHANAEL HOMES, Teacher of the Church at Mary Staynings, London.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Roycroft, and are to be sold by William Raybould, at
the Unicorne, near the little North door in Paul's Churchyard, 1650.

To the Right honorable, Thomas Foot, Lord Mayor of LONDON, the right
worshipful the Aldermen; together with the Worshipful Company of the Grocers
of the said City.
Right Honorable, and highly Respected;
ACcording to your desires, I have Printed this Sermon; which for your desert
(much obliging me) I present to you, as in special yours. Not to be accepted
by all men, is common to al. If some dislike, my comfort and recompense is, all
do not; you are witnesses. If others be displeased with what is common to man
((...).*) they forget they are men. If with the substance and its relation to
the solemnity; they may review, and remember, And the Prophetin a passion (say
the Learned) spoke incongruous Hebrew. Romans (...).
I speak against sin, not men; I advance in my judgment and conscience (which
they so plead) the very truth of God: And REGARDED THAT DAY TO THE LORD, as
they observing it not, say, To the Lord they regarded it not. And of common
equity they owe me this freedom, that I may be as zealous for mine own Nation,
as they are for another. They have their liberty in what is essential to it
(if they please so to keep it) without cost or labor. We purchase ours (next
under God, sought by prayer) at a great rate in necessitated wars. We are not
willing to disturb their enjoyment, whiles quietly they aquiesce there. If they
do ours, whence theirs does spring, they wrong themselves, as well as us.
'Twere happy so as to end these dividings, if we did enquire into their causes.
Whether they be not insufficient, and rather to be removed from our minds then
our minds to be moved by them? As whether it be not want of practice of what
we profess; Viz. to be Saints, and love Saints, because we be such, and they
be such? Or whether it be not a supposed ty to a part of an obligation, that is
now non-ens; or to us impossible which is much at one (voluntas non fertur ad
impossibilia?) The remainder: ACCORDING TO THE WORD OF GOD (put first, as the
Basis of all) we may still endeavor to the utmost, and welcome. Or whether it
be not an unwillingnesse to promise what all Christians do, and would in
foreine Nations of Turks, Papists, etc. to submitt quietly to the present
civil Government? Or whether it be not an hoped content in desired future
Governors and Government (of which we have no good experience) rather then in
the present; preserved and approved of God by the testimony of many glorious
wonders? Or whether it be not such an Interest of some men as is inconsistent
with the Government of the State, and is a Partition Wall between Christian
Brethren? Or it be not a great mistake; supposing a violence hindering some
Members going to sit in Council should null the session of the rest that are
the quorum, contrary to the course of all inferior Courts? Or lastly, it be
not our Non-consideration of the Prophesies and Promises of the great change of
things God is now about to make in our times, and downward, to the advancement
of Christ's Interest and Kingdom, whiles we expect things to be as they were?
Put in vain; as this ensuing Treatise hints; and may perhaps be seconded in
other larger Treatises, if God permit. The mean whiles, be pleased to weigh
this well; and the Lord bless it to your Honor, and Worships, and to all
candid Men, who had never seen it but for your sakes, whose humble Servant in
Christ Jesus, is,

Nath: Homes.
From my Study at Mary Staynings, London, October. 21. 1650.
Psalm. 149. the last Verse, the later part of the Verse. This honor have all
his Saints. Praise ye the Lord.

Nearer the Hebrew, thus: This comely honor to, or for all his gracious holy
ones, HALLELU-JAH.


THIS day, and this Text (I trust) are well met: They both intend praise. They
both reciprocally congratulate one another in that thing: The day (I doubt not)
welcomes the Text, and the Text will, surely, serve the day, in several
weighty considerations. You see it is in one of the Psalms, called in Hebrew
(...) Tehillim, PRAISES. Of which, this is a singular one. The first word it
speaks, is, Praise ye the Lord; and the last breath it breaths is, Praise ye
the Lord: Both, both the first and the last is in the Hebrew, HALLELU-JAH. Just
the praisefull language of Gods holy people, throughout the Revelation, Viz.
HALLELU-JAH, HALLELU-JAH, etc. and relating to OUR times, and downward to
Christ's restoring all things. Act. 1.6. Act. 3.21.
For then are Gods words fulfilled, when they appear in deeds. THEN is
fulfilled the Prophetical part of this Psalm; namely, That God will beautify
the meek, (...) with safety as well as Salvation ( Verse. 4.) and will give a
special honor to all his Saints, or holy ones ( Verse of the Text) WHEN (
Verse. 6.) he puts the high praises of God in their mouth, or deeper (...) in
their throats, whiles a TWO-EDGED SWORD is in their HAND, to execute ( Verse.
7.) vengeance on (the Heathen says your Translation) the Nations, says the
Hebrew, (...) be they what peoples they will be, that hate the Saints, as it
follows ( Verse. 7.) and to execute punishments, (...) on the PEOPLES (in the
Plural Number) and ( Verse. 8.) to bind their Kings with Chains, and the
Princes with Fetters of Iron, and to execute the judgment that is written.
THEN I say, so much of the prophetical part of this Psalm is fulfilled, as
much as that is done; be it now much, or more hereafter; and therefore now to
praise with the Holy ones in the Revelation, saying, HALLELU-JAH. For into
those times we are thus far run, as to be at least under the sixth Seal,
sixth Trumpet of that Seal, and under the end of the fourth Vial of that
Trumpet, if not further; namely under the beginning of the fifth Vial. For
according to Revel. Chap. 16. Verse. 8, 9, 10, 11. A Vial has been poured out
upon the Sun; that is, Sore afflictions of War, etc. upon the most splendid
body (for Gospel light) of the Christian World, as Low Countries, Germany,
England, Wales, Ireland; and since that, power has been given to this Sun, to
scorch men; that is, To afflict them sorely, that poured the Vial of wrath upon
this Sun, till, in stead of repentance for afflicting the Sun, they blaspheme.
And moreover there has been some droppings of the fifth Vial upon the Throne
of the Beast, Turk and Pope (for they are in many respects one, as we have
elsewhere demonstrated, though different parts of the whole, the Pope being the
Original head, from whom the Turk as a master limb, derived, partly his
blood, partly his Religion, and partly his Territories, pulling three horns
from the ten) I say upon the Throne of the Beast, in Candia, Brazil, Portugal,
Spain, France, etc. For the throne of the Beast here (which few observe) does
not signify the individual City and place where the Beast sits, either in
material, or spiritual Babylon; for presently it is expounded to be his
Kingdom, and was only filled with darkness, not with utter ruin. The ruin
of the great City Babylon is not till the seventh Vial ( Verse. 19.) For this
the people of that time are typified and propesied to praise with Hallehu-jah;
for incontinently and continuedly the judgment of the Beast is threatened (
Chap. 17.) described ( Chap. 18.) and executed ( Verse. 19.) where in the
Preface you have five times over Hallelu-jah: And here the people are commanded
to praise with Hallelu-jah. Which Hallelu-jah is two distinct words,
signifying, Praise ye JAH, which JAH is an usual Hebrew contract of JEHOVAH,
who is the Objectum quod, the HE, or person that is to be praised; namely, the
Great God; according to which name of Jehovah, he most makes himself known,
and most loves to be owned in working wonders of deliverance, which are the
Signal of Jehovah. Ex. 6.2 etc. I am Jehovah (so in Heb.) I appeared to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob by the name of God Almighty, but by the name Jehovah
was I not known unto them; wherefore say unto the children of Israel, I am
Jehovah (so in the Hebrew) and I will bring you out from under the burdens of
the Egyptians, etc. A wonderful undertaking, in the condition the Israelites
were now in. But this is the design, to interpret and demonstrate God as a
Jehovah. For it signifies God most true, powerful, and faithful, in being,
saying, and doing: The which is sealed to be so when God works exployts of
Victory for the delivery of his people, which is made more plain by that,
Exodus 3.14. And God said unto Moses, I am that I am; and he said, Thou shall
say unto the children of Israel, I AM has sent me unto you (being an allusion
and derivation of the name Jehovah) to assure you he will do this strange thing
of delivering you out of Egypt, how unlikely soever it seems, as is the effect
of the Chapter following.

But who must praise; according to the shrill emphasis on YE, Praise YE the
Lord? The Subjectum (as I may say) qui, Viz. They that must praise, are those
to whom this Ye relates, named before in the Psalm under several titles. Who
in the general are expressed by HIS, that is, Such as are Gods own, godly
persons, Gods peculiar: Others cannot if they will, or will not if they can. In
particular, in the fourth Verse, they are called His people; in the Text, his
Saints, or Ho'y ones: both materially are the same. All his people are Saints,
and all his Saints are his people: But formally and precisely, they are two
distinct notions, full of sense and emphasis, to the intent of the prophecy of
this Psalm, and to the event of that prophecy as it now appears begun to be
fulfilled. Saints precisely taken, is their spiritual notion, antethetically
distinguishing them from Nations and Peoples, on whom these Saints must execute
vengeance and punishment, Verse. 17. And people as precisely distinguished, is
their civil notion putting them in full contra-distinction, and flat
opposition over against Kings and Nobles, who are to be bound and fettered by
this holy people, as people, Verse. 8. For though we insist not upon the
supposition of some, that this Psalm was penned whiles the Jews were in some
Captivity, or bondage, into which condition they were once and again
precipitated by the ill rule of their Kings; this is clear in the Psalm, that
they are here prophesied and prescribed to be joyful in God their King, Verse.
2. (a Monarch that never degenerates) and in stead of being bound to Kings and
Nobles, and be judged by them, to bind Kings with chains, and Nobles with
Fetters of Iron, and execute judgment on them, Verse. 8.

But for what must they praise? Answ. The Objectum quo. the thing, in, by, and
for which, they shall praise in the general matter, is, Honor: In the
specificating forms (expressed with great emphasis) is Such Honor; namely,
That the Holy people of the Lord shall execute vengeance upon all Nations, and
peoples that are Enemies to them, as such, and bind their Kings and Nobles,
though never so much cried up by those peoples and Nations. For those Princes
and Peoples, Nobles and Nations, shall fall together before the holy people,
who shall execute upon them the judgment THAT IS WRITTEN; that is, Written in
the Prophesies of the Old Testament; as Deuteronomy. 7.1, 2. Dan. 7.26, 27. And this
Honor is (...) to and for all his Saints successively, mediately or
immediately, one way or another, having an hand in that subduing of Kings and
Peoples, etc. Either by Authority of Councils, or power of Armies, or
provisions for both, or prayers for all. For this subduing is not here meant to
be merely spiritual, but mainely corporal. For first, if those Kings,
Nobles, and Nations, be unconvinced spiritually, then they are not subdued, or
overcome, but do overcome, and with contempt of the Holy people. If they be so
convinced, then they are of the Freedom, and partake of the Honor of the Holy
people, to bind and punish the Kings, Nobles, and Nations, that are obstinate.
Secondly, It Is not said, a Two-edged Sword in their MOUTH, as to signify the
Sword of the spirit; but it is said, A two-edged sword in their HAND. Thirdly,
Nor is it said only, A two-edged sword in their hand, but also it is intimated
that they have Chains, yea Fetters of Iron in their hands, wherewith to bind,
etc. Fourthly, That that is said to be in their Mouth, is the exaltations of
God (as it is in the Hebrew) that is, The Word, and prayer, and praises, etc.
Whereby they spiritually extol God, and labor to convince and convert the
opposite peoples, and Princes, who standing out, the sword, and Fetters, and
chains, must take place. For though in acurate consideration, Promotio
adjumenti, the precise immediate means to set up the Kingdom of Christ, be
spiritual; yet Remotio impedimenti, the removal of impediments, the overthrow
of the obstinate enemies that despise the Word, must be by the Sword. And in
this also the spiritual means, mediately must have an hand; teaching and
encouraging the Conquerours to their duty. Of which the Text is not silent,
whiles it puts the Sword into the hands of an holy people, 2 Cor. 13.^.
that can do nothing against the Word, but for the Word. Fifthly, To be
converted or convinced by spiritual means to comply with the Holy people, is
not a judgment, punishment, or vengeance, according to the language of the
Text; but an high mercy. Sixthly, Add to all, that God has already, not only
of late, but anciently fulfilled this Text literally, to make his Holy people
subdue Kings, Nobles, and Nations; 1 Chronicles. 16.21. Psalm. 105. with many
instances in the Old Testament; and promises, yea Prophesies, he will do
likewise for future; of which the Revelation is full, as we shall hint by and
by.

From all, with all care, thus explained, this Doctrinall observation naturally
springs up.

Doct. The Lord Jehovah performing his promise of honoring his Holy people to
be isntrumental in the overthrow of Kings, Nobles, and Nations, their enemies;
commands those his holy people reciprocally to praise him. For illation and
inference, it is so eeven to the Text, that he that sees the one, sees the other.
And agreeably to the Text, the Doctrine sounds of a holy people armed, as well
as the Text. For confirmation, you cannot but see by this time that the
Doctrine is the absolute quintessence of the Text, and the inmost mind of the
very soul thereof; and that the Psalm it self, if looked on but Narratively
is in the head and heel thereof, the Saints duty of praise; and in the middle,
the heart and liver that minister good blood and life spirits, to nourish that
praise, is, The dignities of victories, and vengeance and judgments of equity
on opposing princes and peoples, that the Saints shall attain unto. But if this
Psalm be looked upon prophetically, according to the proper nature, idiom, and
very mind thereof, we shall find it to have a long prospect; terminated with
nothing but the full salvation and settlement of Jews and Gentiles, into a most
glorious Church. So that if in part it be fulfilled in any eminent
achievements before that, they are but types, one greater then another, of some
greatest thing to come at last. They are but as panelia, several Images of the
Sun, formed in the upper elements, the weaker or dimmer next us, whereby we
look to the next which is brighter, and so at last to the Sun it self. They
are but several marches of the Holy Army of the Lord of Hosts; several
Forlorn Hopes, and Parties, skirmishing and conquering, before the whole Field
be won in a set Battalio.

Therefore Israel, new delivered from Pharaoh in Egypt; now marching in the
Wilderness toward Canaan, praying and fighting against Amaleck (assaulting
them) utterly overthrowing Amaleck in a pitched Battle ( Exodus 17.) it is
written in tables ( Exodus 20.) I am the Lord thy God that brought thee out of
the Land of AEgipt; which they carried with them as their Motto in a Standard,
to presignifie to them, what God would in future do for them, and by them,
against the Kings and Nations, in their way toward, and in Canaan; and
therefore they should obey his Commandments. Accordingly God again appearing
for them, inabling them to conquer several Kings and their Nations, as they
marched on toward Canaan; to wit, Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og the King
of Bashan ( Numb. 21.) as after, the Kings and Nations in Canaan (as we have it
in the Book of Joshuah) it is put upon record, and turned into a Divine Act, or
Law (still in force, unrepealed, Psalm. 136.) to command all Saints in the
present Tense, in their several generations, then in present being, three
times together in the beginning of that Psalm, Hodu, Hodu, Hodu, that is, O
now give thanks, O now give thanks, O now give thanks unto the Lord, etc.
descanting the wherefore, the causes, Viz. the Victories aforesaid, in parts;
to wit, Verse. 18. etc. O give thanks to him which smote great Kings, for his
mercy endures for ever: And slew famous Kings, for his mercy endures for ever
(which conveniently comprehend the Kings in Canaan, having spoken of the
overthrow of Pharaoh King of Egypt before, Verse. 15. And then names the Kings
whom Israel overthrew before they came into Canaan) He slew Sihon the King of
the Amorites, for his mercy endures for ever; And Og the King of Bashan, for
his mercy endures for ever. And gave their Land for an heritage, for his mercy
endures for ever. Even an heritage to Israel, for his mercy endures for ever.
Who remembered us in our Low estate, for his mercy endures for ever. And has
Redeemed us from our Enemies, for his mercy endures for ever. As if the
Psalmist should say, These performances are pledges that Gods mercy endures
for ever, to make his people do the like exploytes in future Ages. Which very
thing of the Israelites Conquests, unto the attaining of Canaan, the Apostle
extends (as the true intent thereof) down to all Ages, till the Saints, or
Holy people attain the Great rest of all; Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. 4.
Verse. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Where evidently, the Apostles design is to prove, that
to that day, wherein he wrote to the Hebrews, there remained yet a Rest for
them, etc. that were the people of God. How does the Apostle prove it? With
what premises? Mark, he lays down two: First, because God instituted a rest
for his people from the creation; But that was but weekly, Viz. the seventh
day: Verse. 4. For he spoke in a certain place of the seventh day on this
wise, and God did rest the seventh day from all his works. Secondly, Because
God did give them a certain rest in Canaan for some hundreds of years, by
Joshua, v. 8. by Jesus, that is, Joshua; so in your margin in your Bibles: But
that rest also was but for a time: and since all this, God speaks of another
rest, says the Apostle, v. 5, 6, 7. namely, by David, in Psalm. 95. that people
should not harden their hearts, to hinder them from entering into his rest.
From all which premises, the Apostle solemnly concludes, v. 9. THERE REMAINS
THEREFORE A REST TO THE PEOPLE OF GOD. As if the Apostle should have said (for
they that have their eyes open and acute, can make no less of it) that the
former RESTS, and in particular, that in Ganaan, were but types of a greater
Rest on earth. (...)
For the Apostle cannot mean by Rest or SABBATISM (as he calls it in the Greek)
the state of supernal glory, as we have demonstrated in another Treatise; but
(to add one word now) he calling this Rest THE WORLD TO COME, names it in the
Greek with great emphasis, Heb. 2.5 (...)
That INHABITED WORLD that is to come. (I speak short in this, because I have
been large in another Treatise, which I hope the world shall see ere long.) And
this name of the world, when the Apostle speaks of the world to come, is the
name used to signify the world when it is said all the world was to be taxed,
Luke 2.1. (...)
So that it is the same world wherein the holy people shall have a better rest
then ever they had; only it is, says the Apostle, a world to come; as if the
world did newly begin, by the destruction of the old world of all the obstinate
enemies against the Saints, which the holy people shall subdue or destroy: just
as we say the old world before the Flood. And Melchizedek (that is, H. b. 7.3.
Son the son of Noah) is said to be without beginning of days and end of life,
because he lived many years in both worlds, that is, in the old before the
slood, and in the new after the flood. If we cannot yet see (and that were
strange if we cannot) that every great deliverance of the Holy people is a type
of a future greater; and in particular, that Joshua and his holy Army were a
Type of greater Victories yet to come since the Apostles, to wit, more general
and effectual; then consult with Josh. 1.5. compared with Hebr. 13.5, 6. In
that of Joshua, the words are to Joshua, and in relation to his Wars against
the Kings and Nations of Canaan. There shall not any man be able to stand
before thee, all the days of thy life: as I was with Moses, so will I be with
thee. (See how there also is an intimation of one mercy to be a type and pledge
of another. But the last words I aim at, viz.) I will not fail thee, nor
forsake thee. These last words, to confirm the former in the business of
conquest in War to and by Joshua, are applied, in Heb. 13.5, 6. to all the holy
people, in all their wars, and wants, and difficulties whatsoever, with a
non-such or unparalleled vehemence of speech, in five Negatives, (in the
Greek) Let your conversation be without greediness after silver, (...).
and be content, etc. for he has said, I will NEVER LEAVE THEE, NOR FORSAKE
THEE: so that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear
what man shall do unto me. Which last words, sound of help in Wars; and
oppositions of men; as the former, of all other supplies. And then presently
gives us an experiment how well God has dealt with his people of godly
conversation in all ages. And then adds a demonstration of all; namely,
because Christ is yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever; viz.
unchangeable, to deal in the same gracious way with all his people in all ages.
Thus you see how in the Old Testament former victories and deliverances were
types and pledges of future.

The same also will plainly appear in the New Testament, by S. John in the
Revelation, the peculiar Prophet and Prophesies for our times; who carries on
the meaning of the holy Peoples exploits in the Old Testament, in all their
warlike victories, to be Typical and praemitial, patterns and pledges of future
greater things that the holy people shall do and attain in our times and
downward. For the manner of the Israelites lying in Camp in expeditions of War,
was, the Ark in the middle; the four and twenty Orders of their Priests and
Levites round that; and the whole body of the Army round them, in four
Brigades, three Tribes to a Brigade or Post, toward the four Quarters of
heaven. And the first Tribe of each Brigade or Squadron, consisting (I say) of
three, did bear the Standard for all three. And the four Standards or Colors
of the four Brigades, were, A Lion, an Ox or Calf, the Face of a man, and a
Flying eagle (as appears both by Scripture Ezekiel. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, etc. Compare
M. Mede on Rev. 4. now translated in English.
, and Jewish Antiquities*, which I cannot now stay to discuss.) And thus, just,
does S. John in the Revelation bring in the holy people in the like posture,
conquering and praising, in our times, and downwards. So in Level. 4.8.9, 10.
the Throne, answerable to the Ark, is in the middle. And the four Beasts
(Greek, Animals) that is, the whole Camp of the holy people, or Host of God,
signified by four Beasts or Animals that anciently was in the Israelites
Standards or Colors, rest not praising, saying, Holy, holy, holy Lord God
Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. Mark how the praise refers to Gods
Power, and holiness, and unchangeableness, to hate the unholy, and so from time
to time to empower, his holy people to conquer the unholy, their enemies. And
when the four Animals, the Camp of the people of God, once begin their Anthem
in the Chore, then presently the four and twenty Elders, the Godly Ministry
see cause, and solemnly sing or praise. And when those Beasts give glory, and
honor, and thanks to him that sat on the throne, who lives FOR EVER AND
EVER, (observe still how Gods power and unchangeableness is minded) the four
and twenty Elders fall down before him that sat upon the Throne, and worship
him that lives for ever, etc. You see yet still the praise has a special eye
to Gods power, keeping the throne, and his immutability, living for ever;
intimating, God would still be the same to his holy people, and more and more
to make them subdue all their enemies. Which is so often repeated, because it is
the main proposition of the whole book of the Revelation, and design of Christ
for his people. Revel. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. (Study it well.) Which, and our
particular in hand, is again represented to us in Rev. 7. where the holy
people, the Host of the Lord of Hosts is mustered one hundred forty and four
thousand, and Auxiliaries without number, with palms in their hands, (signals
of Victory) praising, saying, Salvation to our God who sits on the Throne, and
to the Lamb. And all the Angels stood round about the Throne, and about the
ELDERS, and the four Beasts, etc. and worshipped, saying, Amen: blessing, and
glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and MIGHT, be unto
our God for EVER and EVER. Amers. (Still Gods power and authority is minded.)
And in what garb and posture do these praise: Answ. In the foresaid manner of
four Animals, representing the Camp of Gods holy people, with their Ministers,
signified in the four and twenty Elders, v. 11.

If you say these places are dim for the thing urged, and that light that is in
them glimmers rather of spiritual wars and victories, then corporal; we will
give you some plainer places, and for the literal sense of corporal victories
as well as spiritual. The first place shall be in the fifth Chapter of the
Revelation, conveniently placed between the fourth and seventh before alleged,
the better to expound them. Rev. 5.1. God is brought in on the Throne, suitable
to the Ark in the middle of the ^amp of Israel, and to signify his authority,
and power, and presence with his holy people; and Christ at his right hand, to
tell us his mind, and to prevail with him for our assistance. For which
(typified in the opening of a book) the four Beasts or Animals, and the four
and twenty Elders, (whose signification you have heard already) fall down in
prayer-wise, verse. 8, etc. singing a new song (that is, for new mercies, as v.
1. before my Text) saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and open the
seals: for thou wast slain, and have redcemed us to God by thy blood, etc.
(there is our spiritual victories) and have made us to our God Kings and
Priests, and we shall reign on the EARTH. On the earth, (...) is more then
(...) See also the Sir. and Arai, Bio. Gall.
not only in the earth. The Syrtack and Arabian Translation is over the earth.
Here plainly is the holy peoples corporal victories. We will pin this yet
faster with that in Rev. 11.11, etc. The Witnesses rose and stood on their
feet, and great fear fell on them that saw them. The seventh Angel sounds, and
then the Kingdoms of THIS WORLD are become the Kingdom of our Lord, and of his
Christ. And the four and twenty elders praised, saying, We give thee thanks, O
Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast, and art to come, that thou have taken
to thee thy great power, and have reigned: and the Nations were ANGRY. All
which cannot be compatible and consistent with supernal glory, or the ultimate
Judgment, but with a state on earth before. We will trouble you but with the
naming of two places more, Rev. 14. verse. 1. to 9. The Camp of Gods holy
people, to the number of one hundred forty and four thousand, marked in the
forehead (not without allusion to the ancient marking of soldiers So the Romans
Antiqu.
) and under the notion of four and twenty elders, and the four Animals, sing a
new song of praise to God for the fall of BABYLON; which cannot possibly be
meant but of material places and perdition on earth. In the nineteenth Chapter
of the Revelation, in the first six verses, we have five times HALLELU-JAH, and
once PRAISE, to the Lord God omnipotent. By whom? Answ. By the Host or Camp of
the four animals and four and twenty elders, called several times much people.
For what? Answer, For judging the Whore, and avenging the blood of the Saints
on her. How? Answer, By casting the Beast and the false prophet into the lake
of fire; and destroying their Army by the sword, so that the Fowls were filled
with their flesh.

All which how it can be understood of mere Spiritualls, let them devise that
are contrary minded; for I and others of greater learning cannot. Mede, etc.


I need say no more for confirmation of the Doctrine. For Explication, I have
already something anticipated my self before; viz. That Gods special honoring
the Saints with victories over their enemies, and the Saints reciprocally
honoring God with praise for the same, relate mainly to our times and
downward. For my part, I have delivered to you not any new notion, as new to
me, as if formed by late successes, but that I have been settled in for these
eight years last past, at least; and did not for bear to give a little notice
of it in public, when there was no great safety for one to utter such things.
I have for about so long foreseen by the Word of God, that 1650. or
thereabouts, would be a time full of great and glorious wonders.

Post Mill and sexcentos quirquagesimus annus
Omnibus elapsis dignior annus erit.
That which guided me to this expectation, were three places of scripture. The
first Scripture, Dan. 12. Daniel hearing of the wonderful times of Michaels
beginning to deliver his people, ver. 1, 2, 3. wherein, after great
difficulties, the Saints shall begin to be so glorious upon the earth, (for
that in the second verse cannot be meant of the last general resurrection,
because it mentions only the rising of SOME, and also of Converting men, the
question is put, v. 6. How long should it be to the end of those wonders? The
answer is, ver. 7. for a time, and times, and half a time; that is, for three
ages and an half, that is, 100. 200. and 50. in all, 350. Which computed
according to the most learned, with the time that the Turk became the greatest
pest and misery to the Jews, in or about the year 1300. the end of the
reckoning falls upon 1650.

The second Scripture is in the 11. ver. of that 12 of Dan. where Daniel not
satisfied with the former answer, asks a further explanation, ver. 9. The
answer is given, ver. 11. From the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken
away, there shall be one thousand two hundred and ninety days (that is years
Ezekiel. 4.4, 5, 6. where 390 and 40 days signify so many years. I have
appointed thee each day for a year.
, as is the common phrase of the Prophets; otherwise nothing can be made of it,
to comfort Daniel, or the people of God, either Jews or Gentiles.) Now the
ceasing of the Jewish daily sacrifice was accomplished with so many visible
footstsps and degrees, and with such eminent note in the most famous Histories,
as the thing cannot possibly be hid from our eyes. First, Upon some rising of
the Jews against the Roman Empire, Titus son to Vespatian, Emperor, came and
destroyed their Temple, about seventy years after Christ, according to Christ's
Prophecy, Matthew. 24.1, 2. Then the in daily sacrifices ceased in the Temple:
so that the Jews, yet zealous of their sacrifices, after that sacrificed in the
City, likely as ne^r the remaining ruins of the Temple as they could. But upon
some revolt of the Jews from the Roman Empire, Adrian the Roman Emperor came
in his time, and about the year 134 after Christ, demolished the City; whereby
the daily sacrifice was also taken away from the City; and by the Jews was
carried away to Mamre, where of old God appeared unto Abraham: There they build
an Altar and sacrifice, and force Merchants also to sacrifice, or else
inhibited their trade. Which Christian Constantine the great, coming to the
Empire with conquest of his heathen Colleagues, about the year 313, being not
able to endure beat down their Altar, and built there a public place or
Church (as the common phrase is) for Christians to worship God in. Then the
Jews, driven to their last shist, return to reedifie Jerusalem. By this time
Inlian is Emperor, and had ere long obtained his other name of Apostata, for
revolting from the Christian Religion, which a while he had professed; who in
defiance of Christ and the Christian religion, encouraged the Jews to rebuild
their Temple, etc. But fire and tempest from Heaven destroying their work,
burning their tools, and hurting and terlifying the workmen, the Jews never
sacrificed more. Now all know, that know any thing of History or Chronology,
that Inlian came to be Emperor near about three hundred and sixty years after
Christ; and soon after, so encouraged the Jews to that their ruin. Add now
three hundred and sixty to one thousand two hundred and ninety, and there is
made up one thousand six hundred and fifty.

The third Scripture is in Revel. 13.5. To the Beast was given to DO and to
ACT, (so in the Greek. See also the Margin of your Bible, and Brightman) I say,
to DO and ACT, that is, to some purpose, for forty two Months, (that is,
solary months, thirty days to a month) that is, one thousand two hundred and
sixty days; for so one thousand two hundred and sixty days, and forty two
months, are, and so are reckoned as all one, Rivel. 11.2, 3. Which one thousand
two hundred and sixty days, are so many years, accorcording to Prophetical
manner of speech; as we may see by the effects, viz. the woman fleeing into the
wilderness so long, and the Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth so long, Chap.
11. and Chap. 12. Now the first appearance of Antichrist to be past a child,
Vide Eliam Reusnerum Isug. Hist. in infant. Antich.
and to begin to work and act vigorously, was about the year 390 after Christ,
wicked Arrianism, denying the Godhead of Christ, then about increasing, with
many other symptoms of Antichrist. Add now 1260 to 390, and thence arises
1650.

If any do object, they do not yet see in this year 1650, the events to answer
to the time: I shall only say this, which I did at the beginning, that then
about I expected great things. And whether then about, already, has not been
done great things, the binding of a King, and some Nobles; the change of
Kingdoms into Commonwealths, the beating of Ireland and Scotland over and
over; our Fleet, a terror to other Nations, etc. besides Foreign transactions;
I leave wise men to consider. And what may be by the end of 1650, who can now
foretell? But if no more should come to pass, Exactly, within the compass of
this year 1650, remember these three things. First, That the learned
Chronologers, and Astronomers, do know, that by reason there is but one day
Odds, between the end of one year, and the beginning of the next; and that
there are certain odd hours every year, beside the three hundred sixty and
five; that it is a small matter to miscount a year or two, in Chronologicall
computations. Secondly, That Inlians fact in common account, was something
after three hundred and sixty, viz. in three hundred sixty and three. And
others reckon, that forty two months, or one thousand two hundred and sixty
days, did not begin, till (...)2 These. 2.6.) was removed, about the year 400.
Thirdly, That it is told us in Daniel, chapter 12. v. 12. That though great things
may be done about the year 1650, or a year or two over: Yet the blessed time of
all on earth, is not till 1335 after the daily sacrifice; which is forty five
years beyond 1650. Others upon another account, make it about ten years
shorter; viz. the ruin of all the open obstinate enemies of God, to be down by
1685. Be patient and pious the while: Be sure to be on Christ's side, and of the
Holy People.

You see in the Doctrine, Use.
Gods goodness; and the Doctrine made good: now let us put it to good Use, to
move us to praise God. Praise is a Spiritual duty. Necessity may make Carnal
men More suo, after their fashion, to pray; but only spirituality, by the
Spirit, makes men to praise. So far as men by grace are made angelical and
seraphical, so far they are complexioned to praise. If we be spiritual in
truth, if we be Gods holy people indeed, and sincerity, though never so weakly,
here is much in this Doctrine, to direct, and erect, and raise our spirits to
praise God, like the day, and like our selves. For the whole Doctrine is as a
Divine Constellation, a spiritual Pleiades, strongly radiated upon by the sun
of the Text and Context: That is, every word in the Doctrine, is a several
Star, that has his several beams and influences; giving life as well as light,
to quicken us in this days design of praise. And they are in number seven, in
nature considerable.

1 Word is, God commands. 2 His Saints or HOLY PEOPLE; 3 To praise; 4 For his
performance; 5 According to his promise; 6 Of honoring them; 7 With such
honor.
And this seventh comes seasonably last, in the rere, as the entrance to our
REST or SABBATISM, as the Apostle calls it, Heb. 4.9. So the Greek, as we
showed before. Selah so often in the Psalms, signifies to list up.
.

All these, that we may sing them with SELAH, that is, heighten our echoes of
praise sutably to the joyful sound of this day, would be considered, 1.
Typically (if I may so speak;) I mean, in a general REPRESENTATION of the
systeme and platform of holy praise. 2. Antitypically, in a special
answetablenesse of our CONDITION; set, tuned, and fitted, to the highest KEY of
such a Platform.


1. TYPICALLY.

1. God Commands. And who may more, and better Command then He? He gives all to
us, and us to all 1 Pet. 1 4, 5. Genesis 1.1 omnibus p^tentia irresistentiae.
; and has only our praise for all. He Commands in the Old Creation, and all
things obey: What men then, (...), of the New can disobey. It Is not a Case of
Conscience, whether we may praise; but Gods Command to Conscience, In every
thing to give thanks, 1 These. 5.18. Intimaring, that in every thing, there is
something, that is a just reason of praise. And our righteous Master that bids
us make Bricks, finds us Straw. No Precept is without a Promise. He has said,
he will give, and pour out his spirit of grace and prayer into our hearts;
that enables us to pray and praise, Zech. 12. Romans 8 Yea, Gods very Command is
vigorious, under the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3. 2. Cor. 4.6. It does not only drive,
but draw. God will concur with his own Command, Mat. 28.19. Go, and I am with
you, etc. And so in other things, as Saints experience can testify; who find
that in praising, they rise in praise. As Luther said, Prayer is the best
preparation to prayer. When we are warm in our Spiritual GEERES, we draw
strongest. Pleasure (says the profound Philosopher) the more it is acted, the
more it is increased. Grace is the most active created thing under Heaven; and
Praise in a gracious heart, the most suddennest thing to take fire. If David
begin a Psalm of praise in Gammut, he usually ends in Ela. He mainly thrives in
that, and ascends above himself.

2. His Holy-people, or Saints, or Holy-ones. This word is a word Of
Distinction, Of Obligation, Of Notion, or formal Consideration.

1. Of Distinction. Holy-people are the proper persons for praise. These are
the Spiritual Choristers. The Apostle conjoynes these, as inseparable,
unthankful, unholy. Therefore on the contrary, 2 Timothy 3.2.
these are inseparable; Holy ones, are thankful ones. The Heathen saw so much
of this, as to say, Ingratum dixeris, and omnia diexris: Say a man is
unthankful, and say he is any thing. It Is a paunch of vices. Therefore by the
Canon of contraries, Thankfullness is comprehensive of many Virtues. The best
Spirits, are most praysefull; praise being the common work of Angels, Luke 2.
and the acclamations of the Seraphims, Isai. 5. To whose pattrn we are to
conform, as is hinted to us in the Lords prayer. Mat. 6.10. Thy will be done on
earth as it is in Heaven.
David the Saint that above all others, has the style of being a man after
Gods own heart, 1 Samuel 13.14. is called the sweet Psalmist of Israel, 2 Samuel
23.1. And was the maine Author of the book of Psalms; which in the Hebrew, as
we said, are called Praises. And therefore men cannot (I should think) refuse
to praise out of much Conscience, but by reason of a defect in Conscience. 1.
As if the Conscience be either a dark Conscience, which seeks light only of
the Hemisphere of Night-starrs, and of the same elevation and magnitude with it
self; not of morning-starrs, which promise more light in the case that is put.
2. Or a made Conscience; not native and genuine, but formed by borrowed
debates, agreement, and example of others. 3. Or an engaged Conscience; praise
not consisting with its interest and design. 4. Or an ill principled
Conscience;
that disownes the Commanders as well as the Command of praise: and therefore
cannot speak the language of praise in Scottish, or Irish. Surely with much
sorrow we may speak it, that if it be possible that some Saints cannot see the
least cause to praise, in great deliverances, they are Saints under great
temptations, and not with a little offense given to the generality of Saints.
The tongue of a holy man is called his Glory, Psalm. 16.9.
because as it is the glory of members, so more in the mouths of Saints, and
most, in the act of praise. A Non-praysing Saint, to ordinary Divine reason,
are (...) a contradiction in the adject, whiles such. For Saint, or Holy
people, is,

2. A word of Obligation. Saints or Holy-people signifies that such are bound
over by grace, to the duty of praise, Psalm. 30.4. Psalm. 52.9. Psalm. 89.5.132.
9, 16. Psalm. 145.10. Psalm. 33.1. Psalm 118.1, 2, 3.
because holy. Therefore the Psalmist often sets them this ditty and song; Sing
unto the Lord, O YE SAINTS OF HIS. Praise is good before thy SAINTS. Thy
faithfulness shall be praised in the Congregation of SAINTS. Let thy SAINTS
shout for joy. Saints shall shout aloud for joy. Thy SAINTS shall bless thee.
Praise is comely for the UPRIGHT. Praise the Lord, O YE SERVANTS of the Lord. O
give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endures for ever.
Let ISRAEL now say, that his mercy endures for ever. Let the house of AARON
now say, that his mercy endures for ever. Let them that FEAR the Lord say,
that his mercy endures for ever. If Gods people praise, the holy Ministry must
not be divided from them in that duty. We heard before, that when the four
Brigades of the Camp of God (in Revel.) praised, the four and twenty Elders did
also. Saints have, as more divine reason wherefore, so more wherewith to
praise. Holiness implies that Saints are partakers of a holy God, in and
through an holy Christ, by holy grace; and so are partakers of all, and of him
that is more then all, Romans 8.32.1 Cor. 3. the three last verses. So that all,
yea all adverse things, work together for their good, Romans 8. well therefore
might the Apostle say, 1 Thessalonians. 5. In EVERY thing give thanks. But if two
Armies meet in the field, upon the Case of National wrongs, the wrongdoer
refuses to make satisfaction when desired; they are both resolved to try it
out by the sword; to Conquer, or be Conquered, (no middle of participation
between:) the wronged party is set upon by the wrong-doer, once, again, and a
third time; the wronged party still beating them, to at last a total rout, and
full victory; can any gracious heart choose but see the the righteous hand of
God in this against the wrongdoer? Can any English man, having any true English
blood running in his Veins, choose but praise God for this delivernnce of the
Nation? Surely the case thus put truly, as 'twas by the two Armies then
resolved, to win all or loose all, we must either say, it was a mercy that
England conquered, or else it had been a mercy if Scotland had conquered. And
if any were of that monstrous mind, they might have considered, that they
might have bequeathed good will and kindness to the Scots at a cheaper rate,
then to set their own houses on fire, to roast their neighbors eggs; that is,
to loose the English nation, to pleasure the Scottish. But of this more anon;
though I even faint to think on some among us, not the worst of men; Quibus non
suaseris, etiamsi persuaseris; who though they are convicted, yet will not be
converted in their opinions and judgment touching this thing. Saint, Redeas ad
teipsum, return to thy self, and to thy duty. If thou art a Saint, thou have
all matter, and mercies of praise. Yea, all things to thee are mercies; upon
every thing thou have, it is written, as upon a deveut man's house in every
corner, Ergo lands, therefore praise. If Saints have personal mercies, none
so injoys them as he. A Stranger (says Solomon) intermeddles not with his joy.
And his name (says S. John) in his white stone, none knows but he. If
Oeconomicall mercies; The fire-stickes and fuel of comfort is laid closer
together, to set his joy on flame, then others. If National, none shares in
such mereies, so much as the Saints. The preservation of this nation, is the
preservation of their choice delights, namely, piety and liberty; which the
Almost-Christians and Semi-religious slavish spirits deem not. Therefore if
some men's spirits be discomposed to praise, shall the generality of Saints be
uncomposed? If miscomplexioned minds, not prizing the Donation, praise not the
Donor, shall not the Common Chore of Holy people sing, and say, Hallelujah,
praised be Jehovah, the Army is safe, and the Parliament sits, our Nation is in
peace, this City in prosperity, Religion is preserved, and our Liberty secure?
Psalm. 107.1, 2. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy
endures for ever: Let the redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he has REDEEMED
from the HAND of the enemy.

The Case of Deborahs praising, when other Tribes would not.
Deborah and her Army of holy people, namely, the Tribes of Ephraim, of
Benjamin, of Zebulon, of Naphthali, and Issachar, will fight; and conquering,
will praise, ( Judge. 5.) though the Tribe of Reuben be divided in his spirit
and practice, abiding among the sheepfolds; Gilead is beyond Jordan, Dan is in
ships, Asher is on the seashore. See, here is wicked tyrannical Jabin and
Sisera, as bad enemies to Israel, as the Irish rebels to us; yet the last-named
Tribes will neither fight nor praise. Therefore in this Chapter, where their
part should come in, there is (as we say in Music) a Large-Rest: They sing
not; keep not tune nor time. Yea, their part is smeared with a blot upon
record, by God himself, to disgrace their evil deed to this day. The Case of
David, mourning over that Victory of which others were glad.


But there is a greater wonder then this, of David, 2 Samuel 18, etc. that when
the danger was near, even in the bowels of the Kingdom of David, and the
foundation of the Insurrection was laid in the hearts of the most of his own
Subjects, headed by his own lewd son, likely to pull the Crown from his fathers
head, who now with his petty Army is fain to flee from his own Throne; yet upon
the obtaining of a glorious Victory against that Arch-rebel and Rebellion,
David is so far distempered in spirit, that he mourns over the matter and means
of his deliverance; and, not unlike some others, would comply See 2 Samuel 19.2.
(as the manner is) with a King or at least frown upon them that wrought the
deliverance. But Joab and his Army were glad; as they had good cause. You will
say, Can ye blame David? Absalom, that was slain, was his son. And some of
David's BRETHREN fell in Battle with him. Was he? The Rebellion was the more
horrid, the danger far the greater, if Absalom had prevailed: and therefore the
merciful deliverance was of the same size; and should have been the measure of
David's joy. And to our business, the Objection is our advantage. Absalom was
his son, and that was nearer kin to David, then any King to us. And they that
were beaten in Battle, were Brethren; and therefore nearer allied to David
Joab, and to the conquering army, in Notion and Nation, in form of Worship,
union of Policy, Blood, Territories, and Temple, then the Scots are to us: yet
for all this, 'twas David's failing, his great failing, to mourn over Absaloms
death, See D. Har. in Absal. funeral.
and his armies downfall.. So learned and godly Divines urge the story, for the
proof of Saints weaknesses: and unto that form and shape the divine story most
emphatically limbs it out to the life. And Joabs wise carriage on the contrary
part (Chap. 19.) is as singularly pourtrayed, his honor emblazoned, and he
commendatorily described, for rounding the King to purpose for his
indiscretion. 2 Samuel 19.5, etc.
Thou have (says Ioab to David) shamed the faces of all thy servants this day,
which this day have saved thy LIFE, and the lives of thy sons, and of thy
daughters, and the lives of thy wives, etc. in that thou LOVES thine ENENIES,
and HATE thy FRIENDS: for thou have declared this day, that thou regardest
neither Princes, nor servants: for this day I perceive that if. Absalom had
lived, and all we had died this day, then it bad pleased thee well. Now
therefore arise go forth, and speak comfortably (Heb. to the heart) to thy
servants, etc. (A notable speech, and looks keenly, with a piercing eye, on
some that now mourn for our Victory, and worse then David, who did it in his
private chamber, but they in their public prayers.) With this ^ouzing, home,
and just Oration, David is convinced of his folly: he arises, yea, and goes
and sits in the gate; to encourage and comfort the people, for winning that
victory. Now therefore, was it not well done of Joab, and his Army, to rejoice
in the victory; though the King was the head and chief of them, that would
have turned it into a day of mourning? But is there no regard to be had, to the
slaughter of Brethren, and shedding of blood; for which Israel mourned in the
Case of Benjamin, Judge. 21? Mark it, once for all, we rejoice not at all, in
the shedding of blood, precisely considered as shedding of blood; much less in
the shedding of the blood of Brethren. But that the wronged English party, (as
the several Declarations of the Parliament have demonstrated) do rather
Conquer, then are Conquered; therein we justly rejoice, and praise God for it,
though (because it could not be avoided) it cost blood, and the blood of
Brethren; Benjamins Case discussed, touching the Israelites mourning after
their overthrow. So in Hamilions invasion, and in the relations of it in print,
and from other good testimonies to the Author.
as in the Case of Absalom.

For the Case of Benjamin; we will refer our Case to that, to be tried. It
sures to our condition, and is exceeding much for us. The story is in the 19,
20, 21, Chapters of Judges, I need not relate it but only apply it. The cause
of the other Tribes of Israel warring against that of Benjamin, was far less
then ours against the Scots. Ours was, their pub-like invasion of our Country,
with a mighty Army; (by authority of the Parliament of Scotland) wasting a part
of our Nation; killing some of our men, occasioning the death of others; taking
away our children captives, making their parents to redeem their own children
with money, and some more then once; undoing many families with intolerable
taxes; plundering men of their goods, and cattle; calling our land Scotland, as
they further invaded us; threatening death to them that contradicted them
therein. And since that, they have proclaimed a King, over this Nation of
England, contrary to the Declaration of our Parliament. And for all this, have
refused to give in any satisfaction. But the cause of the Israelites war
against Benjamin, was but personal, some vile fellows of Gibea ravishing the
Levites Concubine to death; that town and the rest of the Tribe of Benjamin
refusing to give satisfaction, in delivering up the malefactors, though Israel
were warned, and wo^ed thereunto; that so guilt might not lie upon the land.
Yet for this cause, (inferior to ours) the Israelites make war upon the
Benjamites; far nearer brethren to them, then the Scots to us. Therefore thus
far, no cause of sorrow to Israel, or us; a good cause, is no cause of
sorrow. In prosecution whereof, Israel asked counsel of God, several times (as
did we): they were bid by Oracle several times to go, as we were by many clear
impressions upon our Spirits, upon solemn days of Humiliation, So it was
impressed upon the hearts of the Army, and of the Churches in London; as they
gave in their accounts, after the days of Humiliation.
kept for that end, to know the mind of God. So that nor yet, was there any
cause of sorrow, to us or them. The ultimate event of the total overthrow of
the Army of the Benjamites, sealed it to the Israelites, that God was with
them; as the same seal was given to us, in the total rout of the Scottish Army.
And in this also, precisely considered, as Gods answer of prayer, his
performance of his own Counsel, the manifestation of his presence with the
innocent, with punishment upon the wrong-doer; there is found no cause of
sorrow for either of us. But in the middle transactions did Israel fall in
battle twice (for some secret sin, as they did at Ai) we (ever blessed be
Jehovah) fell not at all before the Scots. Therefore the Israelites might well
mourn more, and have less cause of rejoicing then we. But mark by the way, for
all the Notion of Brethren, the Benjamites mourn not for the fall of the
Israelites that we read of. It Is just as if now, the contrary minded among us,
should mourn for the overthrow of the Scots, because (as they cry) they are
their Brethren: but they never mourn for them few that were killed of us, or
for our distresses by weather, or want of provision, for the whole army, or for
the distresses and wounds of many of us; as if we were not Brethren to them.
Benjamin will not mourn for Israel, though in two battles they kill of Israel
forty thousand men. Judge. 20.
If Israel will, they may at last mourn gratis, for Benjamin, and the mean
while for themselves, for their twice falling before Benjamin, Benjamin regards
it not: whence I observe, that if the Israelites had conquered the Benjamites
at those times, the Israelites would have saved their mourning, and would have
been glad of conquest: For they are in the case, immediate contraries. It Is
true, that afterward that the most part of the Tribe of Benjamin were cut off,
and the whole Tribe even extinct, the Israelites mourn. But the formal
consideration, and precise reason would be weighed, and heeded; especially by
men, that most pretend to most reason. The Israelites cannot mourn for standing
up for a most righteous cause; nor for Conquering the Benjamites; to which God
encouraged them by three several answers, bidding them go. What then? It Is
upon another account. 1. A Tribe was cut off. The distinction of Tribes being
then much preserved, to distinguish the coming of the Messiah of the Tribe of
Judah, as was fore-prophesied. Now this consideration of Tribes, contributs
nothing to our case, to cause us to mourn, or hinder our joy for our victory
over the Socts. 2. And mainly, the Israelites mourned for their Rash COVENANT.
Which they choseing rather, to break then keep, they were pacified Judge. 21.

But the Israelites were so far from mourning, for the slaughter of the
Benjamites, that now after all, they send twelve thousand men against
Iabesh-Gilead to destroy it, and in it all, both man and woman, that had layn
with man, for that they came not up to help them to conquer Benjamin Judge. 21.
. If possibly men may be convinced, this would, if weighed, conconvince them.

Obj. But there was no solemn thanker for these victories against Brethren.
Answer, Those that make this Objection, can tell us if they please, that
extraordinary duties, and days, as of Fasting and Feasting, or Praying and
Praising, are to be taken up by the people of God, e^renata, occasionally, as
some extraordinary cause is offered by divine Providence. So that we are not
tied to rules or example, when to set such times apart, but as God acts for,
and makes impressions upon, the hearts of his people. But if this answer will
not serve their turns, we add; that though David blubbred for the overthrow
of Absalom, as we heard before. 2 Samuel 18. yet after, he was not only
Convinced, Chap. 19. as has been declared, but in the 22 Chap. has a solemn
psalm of praise, for his deliverance from all his enemies; (in which Absalom
must needs be included) from the first opposition of Saul, down to that day, as
the Title of the Psalm (Canonical Scripture as well as the rest) has it. And
is twice upon record, v. z. there, and the 18. Psalm. left for all Israel to
sing, and praise God.

But to leave disputes, the truth is, the greatest Core and cause of
non-praising God, is, the corruption of man's heart; if the heart be out of
tune, it will not praise, be the cause (almost) what it will; 1 Thessalonians. 5.18.
though the Holy people are bound, and obey, In every thing to give thanks;
much more in greater mercies. We have a renowned instance of both, in Ezra 3.
ver. 10. to the end of the Chapter. One could not but think (had not the event
showed the contrary) that all the Jews would have praised God at the laying of
the foundati on of their second Temple, The Case of the compound of sorrow and
joy, at the laying of the foundation of the Temple.
after their return from the Babylont an Captivity; and with an height of joy,
answerable to the depth of sorrow they had been in, for the ruin of the first,
and their long inslavement there But lo, in stead thereof, a many Mal-contents,
howl and mourn, while others joy. A confusion to be wondered at; which will
more appear, and serve this day, if we do but show you barely the roots of ten
remarkable observations, natively growing there; which transplanted, by your
selves into your own hearts, will spring up to a great talness, by a little
meditation. discrimination, of the complexions of men's Spirits. In this Third
of Ezra, 10. etc. upon the said occasion, Jew is distinguished from Jew. They
are not all of one mind, some take content, some discontent, in, and about the
same thing. They are all firebrarnds, but newly taken out of the fire; some
flame with joy, but others quenched and hiss with tears of sorrow. In such
times of reforming, will arise actings, contrary transactions. For the
self-same thing, some here sing and praise, others weep with a loud voice. In
the like times, the afflicted endeavor to o'retop, well-affected, with their
peremptory counter-actings; the cryings of the lamenters, almost overcome, and
confound the shoutings of the rejoycers. Of those that are so ill-affected
there, are Ministers, Professors: (Neither learning nor experience, without the
help of grace, are able to act graciously) and they are the men (chiefly) that
conterpoise against the well-effected, both of Ministers, and Professors, in
the solemnity of that days praise. For the Text is express; And when the
builders laid the foundation of the Temple of the Lord, they set the PRIESTS in
their apparel with Trumpets, and the LEVITES the sons of Asaph with Cymhals,
to PRAISE the LORD, after the ordinance of David, King of Israel. And they sang
by course, in praising and giving thanks unto the Lord, because he IS GOOD: FOR
HIS MERCY ENDURES FOR EVER. See with what manner of solemnity, and high
observation of the day, the Sweetly-composed Ministers and People praise God.
And observe with a judicious eye, what is the matter of their song and praise;
even part of the 136 Psalm. as now further fulfilled, as before it was fulfilled
in part, in their deliverance from Egypt, and their Conquests in the
wilderness, etc. and in Canaan; as before we disputed, touching the typicalness
of deliverances, and the successive performance of promises. But how stands
affected the other Ministers and ancient Professors? The Text tells you plainly.
But MANY of the PRIESTS and LEVITES, and chief of the FATHERS who were ANCIENT
MEN, that had seen the first house; when the foundation of this house was laid
before their eyes, WEPT WITH A reason for their mourning, some semblance of
affection, and Zeal to the common good; namely, because it did seem by the
platform laid, their condition as in regard of magnificence, was like to be
carnally looked upon the outside of things, and not to what spiritual glory God
might cast upon this second (though lesser) Temple, by sending the Messiah to
preach in it. This Hag. chap. 2. v. 3. etc. does intimate. And further,
imprudently judged the utmost events of their present mercies, by the small
beginnings of things. Because the foundation of their Temple was less,
therefore they conclude, all things should be, from time to time diminished and
lessened; a most false ground of right judging, and determinations. These
Mal-contents doubt not but that presently and publicly prudently enough
declare their discontent upon the public and solemn day of joy and praise. By
which disjuncture Ezra: The Priests, and Levites, and chief of the fathers
(that wept) wept with aloud voice, and many shouted aloud for joy; so that the
people could not discern the noise of the shout of joy, from the noise of the
weeping of the PEOPLE. But, notwithstanding EZra, and Hag. 1.2. encouraged and
commended, and the non-praisers disgraced there upon record. We see by this,
that whiles men are mistaken in their judgments, and distempered in their
spirits, a great matter will not make them praise. But as it runs in the Head
we are upon, the duty lies upon the HOLY PEOPLE. Which is not only a word of
distinction, and obligation, as we have heard, but,

3. A word of Notion, or Formal consideration; under which the Saints must
praise: Namely,

1. Spiritually considered as Holy. No distinction of Sects (as good men are
often reproached;) no variety of judgments in non-Fundamentals; no differences
of forms of Discipline, that are not opposite to the Word of God; no
discriminations of Presbyteries and Congregations, so as they be all Saints,
holy persons, should, much less shall (for future) come into consideration, to
hinder praise. All that are holy, do, must, shall, and will praise God for
mercies. All that own Saintship, must own their God, own their mercies; and
both in a day of praise, lest they forfeit their recognizance of Saintship.

2. Civilly considered as people; in opposite distinction to Kings: Monarchy
being turned into Democracie; Kingdoms into Commonweals. My heart trembles to
think of a popular parity; a levilling Anarchie, to which these times, to my
terror, much incline among the multitude Histories, and ancient examples, warn
us of such, as an immediate precipitation to ruin. But a regular Democracie
assisted with an occasional Aristocracie in Trust, is most safe; as some
experience may be seen, in SwitZerland, Venice, Low Countries, and New England;
and most anciently among the Jews, in the time of the Judges; or something
before, Moses being but a Prophet to direct what was the mind and Laws of God:
and Joshua, but their General, in case of War, as were after their Judges.
Under which notion only were Kings chosen, whiles kept to their proper duty.
Of degenerated Kings, of which, Justin speaks, Arbitrium principis erat pro
Legibus, the Will of the Prince was the Law; Nimrod was the first, we read of;
whom the Scripture brands with the disgraceful title of a Mighty-Hunter, that
is, a Man-Hunter, a Tyrant, Genesis 10.8. The next were the nine Heathen Kings,
Genesis 14. whiles the holy people kept their Government within the bounds of
Families, Ibid. in the same 14 Chapter of Genesis. And next to them, the Kings
of wicked Edom, that is, Esau, Genesis 36. The Israelites, after desiring of a
King, in the time of Samuel the Prophet, God is displeased at it, (1 Samuel 8.5,
6, 7, 8.) and gave them a king in his wrath Hosea, 13.11.
, who proved a great plague to them, as God fotetold them (1 Samuel 8.) And
after, how did most of the Kings of Israel and Judah prove bad! and since
Christ till now, what has the generality of them done for Christ? but much
against Christ, and true Christians: yea, and have been the grand oppressors of
the world, dashing millions of men to pieces in bloody wars, to satiate the
thirst of their own ambition, and enlargement of Dominions. No wonder therefore
if the world in many ages have declined from Monarchy (as in the time of the
Maechabees, and the Roman State) and inclined to a Democracie, as among the
Athenians of old, and Helvetians of late, etc. Look narrowly unto it, and we
shall find that the lowest foundation of the Government of England; and some
monuments of its superstructure, testify in the behalf of a Democracie amongst
us. What mean else, our Iuries in most Courts; our determining things by Vote,
in other Courts, or assemblies of suffrage; our Representatives in Parliament;
our choice of Burgesses of Towns, and Knights of the Shire, to sit in
Parliament; our consent asked at the Coronation of our former Kings, Will you
have this man to be your King? our receiving of him, with condition to rule
according to our Laws; our swearing him to that; our requiring him to pass in
Parliament all the Laws quas populus eligeret, that should be agreed by our
Representatives in Parliament? Yea, before the Conquest, our Chronicles make
mention of several Kings deposed by the people of England, judicially; Stowes
Chron. of Archigallo, Merianus, etc.
some for drunkenness, and wickedness of life; others for laying too heavy
Taxes on the Nation. And there is a Divine reason, above all, that Nations
should incline to a Democratical Government; because God did not only create
us people, (not Kings) but also he has settled his Decree against Monarchy,
Dan. 2. where the Image of four metals of Monarchy ('it is not said of
Antichrist) shall be broken to pieces. Three are gone; the Assyrio-Chaldean,
the Medo-Persian, and the Grecian; the feet, legs, and toes of Iron and of Clay
of the Roman, to be crumbled; and now comes on the tragical stage to that end.
And all this to be done, to make way for Christ's visible kingdom on earth, Dan.
7.14. compared with our Text, and the Revelations thorowout. Monarchy has
been extolled by Book-polititians, for Majesty, and likeness to the rule of
God: But it has so long degenerated into Arrogancy and Tyranny, that it is
now disgracing it self out of the world. Democracie has been sometimes
despised, where and while it has been eclipsed by the seeming-splendor of
Lord-ensnaring and people-vassal ging Royalty. But what it wants in Majesty, is
richly made up in true Liberty, and secure Safety. The people loving the
Governmen of the People (as before described) love themselves. But Kings loving
themselves, and their Court-creatures, they drained and sucked out the life,
and blood, and spirits of the State. The Peoples misery and poverty (as was
their Maxim) was their security to do what they list. The time is now at hand,
to dethrone Monarchy, and to raise Democracie, according to our Text of the
Honor to be given to the Holy-people, compared with Dan. 7.27. Read it wisely.
The KINGDOM and DOMINION, and the GREATNESS of the Kingdom UNDER the WHOLE
HEAVEN, shall be given to the PEOPLE of the SAINTS. You see then, our Text, and
that of Daniel, speaks fairly for a Democracie, that is holy; and our Times,
begin to ecchoe distinctly to it, as we shall see more after, in the
Antitypicall consideration of the terms of our Doctrine, and Text.

3 Word is, Praise ye the Lord; or, as it is in the Hebrew, HALLELU-JAH, which
is (as I may say) the Heavenly prick-song of the times signified in the
Revelation, to our present time, and downward. When had we cause more to praise
Jah or Jehovah, then now? When did he more manifest himself, as such, then now,
by that time we have reckoned up the many things of this days memorial? And
the duty is like the desert. It does not only sound of what we must do, but
savours of much sweetness in the doing; and so a motive as well as a Command to
praise. For, Praise is a preparation to prayer. He that is not in tune to pray,
let him first play the praludium of praise, he shall soon find his heart,
before bed-ridden sick spiritually, to come to his life and strength. So it
appears by David's Psalms often. For praise is a great heart-melter, a
Convincer Jacob; Lord, I am less then the least of all thy mercies. For,
Praise is an owning of the returns of our prayers. We know our prayers again,
when we see them acted and effected; and make us Echo to God acts as David;
Away from me ye workers of iniquity, the Lord has heard me. (Psalm. 6) What
shall I render to the Lord (Psalm. 116) for all his benefit? Therefore praise
also, is a quieter of discontent, a composer of our spirits, an allayer of the
mutinies of the affections, Psalm. 73. Psalm. 77. It is the intent and event of
Gods deliverances, and the acceptable glorifying Psalm. 50. v. 15. v. 23. And
it is a great tryer of the actions; that is in judgment and Conscience well done,
for which a Saint can cordially give praise. Therefore praise we for the thing
done; for eyes to see cause of praise; and for hearts willing to give thanks;
And whiles we praise, we loose no time to procure at the Throne of Grace.
Praise is as potencie and prevayling to get, as a pledge, we have received. As
well a Petition, as an accquittance. So in the story of Iehosaphat, who whiles
he praised, 2 Chronicles. 20.22, etc.
obtained the victory of an Army of enemies. Therefore doubt not but that this
days praise, shall have the fruit of Petitions. Therefore to all these seven,
let the foot of the song be, Therefore praise, therefore praise, etc.

4 Word is Performance, Psalm. 136.3, etc. O give thanks unto the Lord of
HOSTS, who alone does GREAT WONDERS: for his mercy indures for ever, etc. Who
remembered us in our LOW ESTATE: for his mercy indureth for ever. And REDEEMED
us from our ENEMIES: for his mercy indureth for ever. Need I speak to this
Text? The day is a plain and complete commentary.

5 Word is, according to his Promise. Not only great things are done for us,
but with the great seal of Gods truth; that he hears, when we do pray; and
does as he speaks. So that in what we have heard, and seen, and enjoy, being
the issue of promises, all is not done, till THIS world be done. Gods Promises
are of an unknown worth, a rich improvement, and of endless incomes of
Reversions. Promises are like the sun, that casts its beams at first rising,
from East to West. Yea they are like to fountainous streams, the further they
run, the more they are augmented, till they disburded themselves into the
Ocean. This is a great mystery. I had the first hint of it many years since
from learned and religious Calvin. Promises have never an end of all in them,
till Saints attain the perfect end of all. So that as all the promises and
performances of the Old Testament did first devolve themselves on the great
period of Christ's incarnation; so next they reach to, and rest upon Christ's
exaltation of his Kingdom on earth among his Holy-people, as they are anewly
promised or commented upon, in the New. Men may not yet say of the grand
promises of the general good of the Holy-people, Now such a promise is
fullfilled, and now such a promise is fullfilled; unless they mean fullfilled
so as not yet fully fullfilled. What ever is done, till the full perfection of
all things come, is but an Epoch, Intervall, or Stage of the progress of
promises; and their several Gesses. Promises in their effectual movings, are
like the movings of the Sea, the latter wave is the greater, and the outwarder
circle the wider. We now wonder at the greatness of mercies present. But he is
immense that acts. Now, are but dawnings to the sun hereafter rising, 2 Pet.
1.19. The Holy-people are now honored; But shall be more, and more; So it
follows in the two words behind, namely Honor, and such honor; with
addition to ALL his Saints.

6 Word is honor. God will honor them, whom the world all along till now,
have most vilified. He will make them glorious before men, whom (as Paul faith)
men have made the off-scowring of all things. Now, it is not only a matter of
conscience toward God, but of credit among men, to be a Saint. And shall not
such praise? Yea, they must, they do, they will. Rev. 5.9, etc, The four Beasts
and the four and twenty Elders fell down before the Lamb, etc. And they sung a
NEW song, saying, Thou art worthy, etc. for thou wast stain, and have redeemed
us, etc: out of every nation, and have made us unto our God Kings and Priests,
and we shall REIGN on the EARTH. And I beheld, and heard the voice of many
angels round about the throne, and the beasts, and the elders; and the number
of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands, saying
with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive POWER, and
glory, etc. And every CREATURE in heaven, and ON THE EARTH, etc. heard I,
saying, Blessing, honor, glory, and power, etc. Surely, if God will honor his
people by glorious performances, they shall honor him with praise, Psalm. 50.
Psalm. 113.

7 And last word is, SUCH honor, namely, to subdue Kings, and Nobles, and
Nations. If (as it is twice spoken, and almost together, Rev. 21. to wit, verse.
24. and v. 26.) The Kings and Nations shall so love the light and glory of
Jerusalem, (that is, of the holy people) to WALK in it, and bring their honor
and glory to it, well: If not, they all fall before and under my Text; The Holy
people shall execute vengeance upon the Nations, and punishments upon the
people: To bind their Kings with chains, and their Nobles with fetters of
iron: THIS HONOR HAVE ALL HIS SAINTS. And for that, the Saints shall praise,
as it is in the Text. HALLELU-JAH, Praise ye the Lord; as the 19 of Revel sings
concent and consort to it, Hallelu-Iah, Hallelu-Iah, Hallelu-Iah, Hallelu-Iah,
Hallelu-Iah, Praise ye the Lord, (so often is the repetition in the first six
verses) because the Lord judges the whore, and the beast, and the false
prophet; and kills their army with the edge of the sword; as is the close of
the Chapter. Then shall the Saints begin to have a Rest upon earth, Satan being
bound, ( Revel. 20.) according to the type of the Israelites rest in Canaan,
after their subduing those Kings and Nations, as we have a clear hint, Heb. 4.
touched before. To this things will come, be sure of it.

Thus of all the seven words of the Doctrine according to the terms of the
Text, The Antitypicall consideration of the Doctrine and Terms of the Text.
considered typically: Next, a word of all joyncly, considered anti-typically,
and I have done.

We do (blessed be God) bless the Lord this day, with Gospel-celebrations of
singing, praying, preaching, praising; as the Jews did in this Psalm, with
religious music and dancings. And why praise we? Because on this day, in a
most eminent manner and measure, this text is fulfilled in our cars. Bear
witness, and wonder. Have not the Holy people had SUCH honor as to bind a
King and some Nobles, and to execute judgment upon them? Have not the Holy
people (as this days mercies tell us) taken Nobles prisoners of War (named in
our Narrative) and executed vengeance upon the Nations, now of the Scots, as
before of the Irish and English enemies to Godliness? They all ('it is plain now
at last) drove on the same design, and therefore I justly put them together
this day; as the sword of the Lord and of Gideon (blessed be Jehovah) has put
them together into the same mortal incapacitie to hurt us any more. The mere
name Scots, pleads but little persuasive Oratorie in mine ears, to put the
generality of them in any higher predicament, then the English or Irish enemies
before named. Of these we have had sure intelliligence; partly by letters, and
partly by them that have seen and beard the mannerof these things, and partly
by the carriage of their commissionministers here.
The High-landers are Heathens. Their Common People (as they confess) are
Vassals to their Lords; and we know they are to great vices. The best of their
Ministers, for the generality, swear at least petty oaths. Their discipline
of their Stool of repentance, and their iron hoop (which they call Christ's
yoke) put upon them that will not ascend that stool to a verbal recantation,
are but ridicles. Their Classes are Claves, keys to shut men's mouths, that
nothing may be debated out of the Scriptures beyond their stinted common road.
A woeful hinderance to the increase of the light of the Gospel. I will not
trouble my self to set forth the treacherous and hypocritical dealings of
their Parliament, with ours, because our Parliament has limbed them out to the
life, in their several Declarations, and Editions of the Scottish Letters and
papers; and our armies swords are now convincing them; whom words would never
convince. And these things has God adjourned (enquire the cause) until now.
Whiles the generality of the Parliaments were not Holy people, little was done.
Whiles the Army in general was not so Holy a people, little was won. And whiles
Non-Saints, were the Non-such in places of Trust, there was little hope of any
thing to be done. God, you see, reserved this honor to the generality of the
Holy-people in all those ranks. They that have eyes to see, let them see,
least they stumble, and tumble, and utterly fall before they open their eyes.
For they that uphold the upholders of Antichrist, are opposite to Christ, and
Christians, and must therefore fall. But they that uphold the present Kings of
the earth, uphold the upholders of Antichrist (call experience to testify);
therefore those that uphold such upholders, must fall. Call experience again to
testify this. Nor English, either Bishops, or Barons, or Bores, that took part
with the late king; nor after them the Irish; nor last of all the Scots; and
Scottish and Scotified adherents do stand. From the Declarations, Letters, and
Sermons, (of this third and last party named) partly to be seen in print, the
late proceedings against the King, had their first maine rise. Since they have
changed their cause, God has changed their success; but they will not see it.
Therefore that of Isai. 26.11. and chap. 10.6. threatens them. Lord, when thy
hand is lifted up, they will not see; but they shall see, and be ashamed, for
their envy at the people. I will send the rod of anger against an hypocritical
nation. The hypocritical Pharisees are by Christ accounted worse then
Publicans and Harlots. Lay all together, and the result soon appears, the more
the holy people (in place) increase, and the hypocrisy of the enemies break
forth, to the prejudice of Christ's interest, Mat. 21.17.
the sooner they fall before the Holy people. Is it not yet possible for men to
see that all that will not join with the Holy people, of the Parliament,
Council, Army, Fleet, Magistrates and Ministers, fall under them, and fall a
maine?

God suffered a long time the World to domineer over the Holy people; But now
God no longer trusts his Holy people in the hands of the World, but makes the
World to trust themselves in the hands of the Holy people. And the world work
themselves amain (if men can see) into this condition. If Military men will
not manifest themselves meet to guard the peace of the state, Regiments of the
Holy people must. If the great Dons will not be fit for place of Magistrates, a
choice from among the Holy people must. If Kings will not rule the Holy people
well, the Holy people shall rule them well. If the Irish Nation murderously
rebel, and the Scottish Nation unrighteously invade, neither submitting to
Equity, though tendered to them; they fall, they surely fall, they fully fall
before the authority, power and prayers of the holy people of Parliament, Army,
magistrates, ministers, Churches, and all saints. And with great reproach, as
well as ruin to them that fall.

In Ireland about Dublin, near 19000. fall and fly before about 4000. of ours.
In England, in the North, near 31000. Scotts invading us, under Hamilton, fall
and fly before about 8000. of ours. In Scotland (as this day remembers) 11000.
of ours encounter with 22000. of the Scots (some of themselves since, confess
they were more) and 6000. of ours (thereabout) do the work to give that
numerous Host of Scotts the total Rout.

Many glorious circumstances there are, of this last overthrow: but because I
have been long, and would not prevent my reverend Brother that is to follow, I
will speak but of one maine one, and that in the way of a case of conscience
as the nature of it requires.

The Scottish enemy (we cannot but say) merited this their overthrow, by
invading us, and that without warning of us, A case of Conscience, whether the
overthrow of the Scots be the return of prayers, and declaration of Gods mind
against their unrighteous dealing, or only a casual event?
refusing also to give us any satisfaction; though both these were desired.
They used the means to bring it upon themselves, by several fierce on-sets
upon us, they strikeing the first blow. They yet further pursue and seek after
their ruin by a furious march after us netreating, many miles (I name not
particulars because so excellently set down in the Narrative before the Act for
this days praise) And last of all (we must say) they prayed for this their
ruin implicitly and interpretatively as the event proves. For they invoked God
in prayer, making therein their appeal to God to determine between them and us;
as we did (we confess) make the like appeal to him. Behold then (and lay all
together) according to their sin foregoing, (in wronging our Nation;
according to their following ohstinacy in their sin, in refusing to give
satisfaction; and according to their prayers in the concluding, that God would
take part with the right and oppose the wrong doer, has God dealt with them,
and answered them, by their ruin. But now siince they say (in their letters
from Edenborough Castle to our General) it is but an event of casual happ; no
declaration of the mind of God against them. But mark now in answer to that but
these 5. things.

First, Their and their parties (the Scotified in England) opinion, of
providence following upon prayer, made in relation to those providence.
First, when the Scots Kirk party prayed that Hamilton might not prosper (it
seems now it was only because he came against us not with their consent, as
Leven did this last time) and Hamilton did not prosper, they cried it up
mightily, with many iterations that his overthrow was the return of prayer,
and of their prayers; we are sure it was of ours, who then prayed and were
heard; which with other the like instances of our praying and Gods answering
(above far, what human means could effect) as in this last overthrow of the
Scots, makes us with confidence of faith plead divine custom, that providence
ushered in by prayer (pardon the phrase) are Gods gracious returns of such
prayers. Yea, and we have learned (we truly speak our experience of our selves)
that when God does not answer our prayers so as we are apt to choose, we look
upon the ensuing providence of God as a distinct return of our prayers, that
then that, and that only and no more, is good for us. Secondly when the Scots
immediately before their first onset upon us about Mussleborough had had a day
of prayer; they did ere they close, undertake, as it were, to prophecy (so
confident were they of the return of their prayers) that their men should go
forth and only stand still and we should fall before them, and to further
encourage them diverse of their Ministers came with them to the fight, of which
we had most certain intelligence, by spies, or prisoners taken in that fight or
otherwise. Thirdly, when we were another time retreated on this side
Mussleborough a party of them coming thither, and finding us gone, they then
made great bost in their prayers and of their prayers that had sent the
Sectaries packing; as our men returning thither upon them near found them at
it: to a great terror on them to a sudden flight; but could not so quickly
and cleanly carry away al, but that our men knew this passage I now mention,
and wrote it up to us. Fourthly, when they made their long march after us
retreating to Haddinton, and thence to Dunbarre; then in many expressions
openly to our Scouts as they met, they did infinitely boast of their hoped
successes, as the return (no doubt) of their prayers: the Kirk party contrary
to the opinion of the old soldiery Jehu-like putting on to fight, concluding,
as they said, that now they had us in a Cornish pound. And last of all let us
not forget the voice of some of our neighbors Scottified ministers at home,
which is but the echo to the Scotts; who upon our retreat to Dunbarr, gave
thanks publikly as the return of their prayers and the Scots prayers, that our
Army was brought to this pass of retreat, to that effect or intent. Which
will be further expounded by one of the hearers of those morning excercises,
saying to a very godly Friend thus, Lo you now, Mr. you see now what it is for
your Army to go against the prayers of Gods people, you prospered indeed
against the enemy at home, and in Ireland because Gods peoples prayers were
not against you. But in going against the Scotts you go against Godly men's
prayers, and therefore you see what it comes to. To that effect he.

2. This Case in the substance of the Appeal (I intend it and extend it not
further as to debauch Persons or performances) is the same with the case of
Elijah and Baals Priests, appealing to God in a way of Prayer (which usually
was conjoined with Sacrifice, Luke 1.) The difference only is but in the degree
of the sign of Answer; that was a Miracle above Nature; and our deliverance
was in a marvel many ways above Nature: (as we shall see presently.) Baal
Priests were convinced, God had determined against them: So that we read not
of any apology they could make for themselves, when they were put to death for
their imposture, 1. Kings 18. And truly if Heathens had looked on us, and the
Scots, thus solemnly appealing, and God thus manifestly answering, and yet we
not agreeing, that it was a manifest determination of the mind of God: those
Heathens doubtless, would either conclude that our God were no God, or else
that we had no Religion in us. This will be plainer in the next particular.

3. It Is mightily considerable to our Case in hand, that God has a singular
regard to any of his Ordinances, when men in them make solemn addresses to him,
how many failings soever there be in the men, and their manner of personnance
of them. Yea, and we all generally do think so; as in the matter of swearing
men that have no grace for Witness, (which is an ordinance of appeal to God.)
We acquiesce in their Testimony, Jonah Chap. 1.
as being assured such men fear to swear falsely, least their implied
imprecation should fall upon them. And we see often wretched men that dare
speak falsely, dare not swear falsely. Now mark in the Story of Jonah his
Sea-voyage. Prayer, and casting of lots, are both Ordinances of solemn
addresses and appeal to God. The Heathen Mariners use both, they cried every
one to his God, and roused up sleepy Jonah also to call upon his God; and by
common consent also cast lots to find who was the malefactor in the ship, that
caused this tempest. These Prayers thus made by these Heathens, and this lot so
cast by the same hand, are answered by a most just determination upon Jonah.
They all acquiesce in it as just; Jonah submits, and is content to be thrown
into the Sea, rather then the ship and all the men should perish. Why should I
enlarge upon that which you can easily make out your selves? And what can you
make less of it, but that the Scots and We are in this, worse then these
Heathens, if after so many days of Fastings and Prayers by both of us
appealing to God, God answering in a work of wonder, we should not own it as
his Answer?

4. Furthermore, God is not in vain called THE LORD OF HOSTS, (and which is not
inconsiderable to the Point in hand, It was our word, the day of Battle, when
the hand that had been lift up in Prayer, was now lift up in fight, to make
experiment what would be the mind of God in answer to those Prayers:) By which
Lord of Hosts in the day of our Victory against the Scots, there were so many
great things done above all humane Power, as cannot without impiety be
ascribed to any, but to the Lord of Hosts. I shall rehearse but some of those
Particulars we had first from the Council of State, and after from the
Parliament.

First, That 22000. all fully ready for fight, and before hand with us, and had
all advantages of the ground, did not stand against 6000. of Us. Secondly, not
an hour. Thirdly, Upon this odds at least 4000. of the Scots slain upon the
place, and in pursuit. Fourthly, above twice as many taken Prisoners. And that
fifthly, when our men many of them were sickly, many of them wearied with wants,
foul weather, and some of them (as I know by Letters under their hands) much
fainting in their spirits, The Enemy much heightened before the fight, with our
long retreat. Sixthly, Not 40. of our men killed. Who would not, who could not
say, Behold Digitus Dei; here is the very Finger of God appears in this?

5. Lastly, the Parliament and all their Friends have deep impressions on
their hearts, in Prayer, Praise, public Edicts, etc. that herein was the
manifest determination of the mind of God against the unrighteousness of the
Scots dealing with us. And such impressions as are on Godly men's hearts
generally, and in solemn addresses to God the Searcher of the heart, 1. John 5.
and in public Professions before the whole World, are not to be slieghted as
nothing.

There is, Romans 8.16.
says the Apostle, the Testimony of a Saints own Spirit, beside the Spirit
of God to be considered in his Confidence or Diffidence. So that though the
Scots and Scottish, own not this Divine Determination, as from God; but some
of them (if singular Testimony fail me not) in a manner ascribe it to the
Devil, alleging Our Army used some enchantment, to know, or do; and the
best of them think it to be matter of Faith, (as their letters out of
Edenborough Castle intimate) to believe this Victory was but as a Contingencie,
and so harden themselves (I fear) as Pharaoh did, by means of the Enchanters,
etc. perhaps to their further destruction as he did; yet we cannot but own it
as Gods Determination, and own it with Admiration, and with the more, the more
we think of it. Because the contrary minded are only afflicted in their
minds by this cross to their vain hopes; We are delivered from our rational
fears and real dangers to our Lives, our Estates, our Liberties, Civil and
Evangelicall. For they had (as appears by the Writings in the Chancellours
purse, that was taken in wars brought in the accused thing. And had the
report of Our retreat lasted but four days longer, I am assured by them that
know, the Word had been given to England (according to Levens speech at their
Council of War, before the fight) and the thousands of Scotified and
Royalized in the several Counties and Cities in England listed for this
purpose (whereof I am full sure) had risen to welcome in the Scots, with their
accursed thing. But now they may keep it, and without repentance perish with
it.

O ye Parliament, People, Magistrates, Ministers, that will be owned of Christ
in the glorious times approaching, praise ye the Lord, all your days. And
when you would meditate on our deliverance. Read Psalm. 16. Judge. 5.1. Sam. 2.
and the Narrative of the Act for this Day of Thankesgiving, and at the end of
every Period, say, as in Psalm. 136. For his mercy endures for ever. And then
close with the Text, This honor have all his Saints, Praise ye the Lord, Amen.

FINIS.
This Auther has latly Published a small Treatise entitled, The mischeife of
mixed Communions, fully discussed; Wherein all Arguments on both sides are fully
handled: sold by William Raybould, at the Unicorn in Paul's Churchyard.


