Plain Dealing, OR THE CAUSE and CVRE OF THE Present Evils of the Times.

Wherein you have set forth, 1 The dreadful descension of the Devil. 2 His
direful Wrath. 3 The woeful Woe to the wicked world. 4 The Mystery of all. 5
The History and Computation of Times devolving all upon this Age, and downward.
6 The Art of resisting Temptations, in this hour of Temptation.


In a Sermon before John Kendrick Lord Mayor of London, upon the Lords Day
after the Great Eclipse (as the Astrologers would have had it.) Upon occasion
whereof, something was spoken touching Astrology.

By Dr. NATH. HOMES.

London, Printed for R. I. and are to be sold by Anthony Williamson at the
Queens Arms in Pauls-Church-yard, near the West End 1652.

To the Right Honorable JOHN KENDRICK, Lord Mayor of London, and the Right
Worshipful the Aldermen, Recorder, and Sheriffs thereof.
Right Honorable, and highly respected.
THis Piece is yours by a double right, I As Agents occasioning the discourse;
2 As Patients, Co-suffering in the cause. If I have not pleased all men, I have
escaped a Luke 6.26. Woe unto you when all men speak well of you for so did
their fathers to the false Prophets.
Woe. If truth has offended any, it is their woe, they are not sons of truth.
It is my Idiom and Genius to be downright, and in the public place to fear
no man on earth. If I have thereby the fewer Patrons, yet have I the more
peace. The world may say, I am therein less a Politician, but the Word Jer.
9.3. Valiant for the truth.
says I am less a Coward, and the more a Christian. The present tempers of
men (I confess) can hardly bear freedom of Eo ven^^ est ut nec vitia pati
possumus nec remedit Live.
speech. And I am justly quits with them, for I cannot bear with their sins.
For it is my RIGHT, if England be a Free-Commonwealth, for me a public member
thereof, freely to speak against the Common-evils, in behalf of the
Common-good: There is need enough. For, being an age of War, we would learn
one posture, AS YE WERE. I know of no sins in the old Edition of the
Kingdom, but are in the New, of the Commonwealth, and Before men sinned by
frailty in practice, Now by impiety of principles. The foolish Virgins had no
oil in their vessels, that is, they had lost their principles.
bolder; with this Addition (to make us grow old in vice) a confused decrying
of Legalities, that should bind us, Magistracies that should force us, and
Ministryes that should persuade us to be better. I confess there may be
emendations in all, but their indistinctnesse of speech, and their reproaching
the whole, make me fear they aim not so well. And when all the fence is
down, then the Commonweal may soon become a Common of all confusion. They
are sick of any thing that hinders them from turning any thing, only of their
own faults they are not sick. They pretend humility to make others low but it
is that they might seem great; And plead, it is against their consciences to
pay duties to whom due, but it is, that they might be rich for nothing, whiles
their Preservers become poor for their labors.

But you, Noble Senators, of this goodly famous City, notwithstanding these
discouragements, whiles ye are in being, up and be doing what is your duty to
do. Act within your spheres to the utmost Sinatura, multo magis gratia agit ad
extremum virium.
of your power, for God and the common good, so you shall have your share. And
at the worst, it shall be more honor and comfort to you to perish by doing your
duties, then to perish for the neglect of them. Hold your own right, whiles
yours, and look to the maintenance of the Ministers, your friends, in this
City, who may plead with God and men for you (for that should seem is left to
you, while others take care of the Country.) Part with what you will of your
own, and let your Ministers be impoverished from their places, and from you:
ye shall have never the more thanks, from them that love to keep it in their
own pockets. They will still, suppose gain to be godliness Tim 6.5 Perverse
disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that
gain, is godliness.
and to be their piety in that way, to save their profit, till they be really
taught that modesty, not to run before the Supreme Authority; and that
prudence, not to shift off an old garment, till a new one be provided.

But seeing they would seem to be so conscientions, let them give me leave to
put one case of Conscience to them, Whether the Maintenance of Magistracy and
Ministry be any private man's own, by the Laws of God, or man? If not, whether
they can be in any show, just and righteous dealing men, that withhold it as
their own? Surely it is no more their own, then the common air and water is
their own. For nor they, nor their forefathers ever bough it, or their
Predecessors sold it. God from the beginning settled Tribute to the Magistrate;
and in the New Testament, paid and commanded to be paid by Christ himself. And
the Apostle Romans 13.6. gives a reason. And the Tenth was called Gods own, to
maintain the Table of the Lord, That is public charges for public worship,
and necessaries about it.
the Table of the Minister, and the Table of the poor. Therefore were the
Deacons chosen to look to those Tables (in the plural) Act. 6.2, 3. These of
Tribute and Tenth have been seconded with positive humane Laws in all ages.
And the Civil Law says, (that the Advowsion of a Ministers Maintenance, is in
Nubibus, to express it is not any private man's right to withold it. And
semel dicatum Deo non est ad humanos usus transferendum. So that in all
bargains of sale, or purchase of Lands, there was but about eight parts, or
eight and half really bought and sold, the rest being exempted, as not
saleable, but must be paid to the uses aforesaid, whosoever possesses the
estate.

I plead not for Tithes to the Minister, much less for Tithes in kind, that
great inconvenience in a State. But I say, and all godly men that are learned
men indeed, do know, that I assert the grand, divine equitable Truth, that the
Tenth is due to God, for the Tables aforesaid. It were better if men were so
good, to maintain Ministers by voluntary conscientious contributions. But
whiles the Corinthians neglect Paul in that way, he presses upon them the
Divine Law, as still a Gospel equity, 1 Cor. 9. And for us (that I may not seem
impertinent) the Generality is divided into two parts. The one, make it a piece
of conscience to pay nothing to the Minister. The other, will rather give money
they may have no Minister. Instances there are at hand, and at hand, plain
enough, and near enough.

Therefore if it be useful for a State (to speak in the lowest key) that the
Gospel be preached, whereby men may be preached into their duties in that
state, that it be not swallowed of Barbarism, then its Equity a
State-maintenance should be settled for that end, which may not depend upon the
humors of uncertain men: Till that be, the people either make the Minister
nothing, annihilating him out of his duty; or makes him all things they would
have him to be; muzzeled, that he declare not the whole truth; or a flatterer
in doctrine; or a prophaner of the Seals, prostituting them to men of a lewd
life

And there is the same reason in the other predicament of power. In making
Magistracy not only a heavy labor, a continual watching, a weighty trust, an
object of many affronts, and the hazard of many damages and dangers; but
besides all, a vast charge (impar homini, impari oneri) too much for that man;
Ye cause the goodly fruitful Vines and Olive trees, (men of parts and piety)
necessitatedly to refuse the office, or purchase that the office refuse them,
and the Bramble to take it, a spreading thriving bush, but a Bramble. He is
Briareus, he has hands, power enough, but he is not Argus, he has not eyes
enough, or not good enough. And therefore in this also, is as equal an Equity,
that there should be a State-pay for a State service. If so, in the higher
Region, of Lord Keeper, Lord chief Justices, etc. and in the lower, of
Captains, Lieutenants, and Sergeants then in the median of Cities, and
Corporations. So you shall make good men great, and may expect great good to be
done by them.

But I fear, by this time I weary you. Pardon me; it is my use to make my
Epistles of things useful, not of complements, which former I believe are more
acceptable to you that are men of business, and reaalities. However, I may
sooner weary my self, and the obsequious Reader, then wean this age from their
own ways. Therefore I shall close with a request to our God, The Lord, that is
the All-wise, All-powerful, and All-merciful Governor of all things,
in-courage, direct, and protect you, and your friends, his faithful Ministers,
is the prayer

of your faithful Servant in the Lord Christ, Nath. Homes.
From my Study at Mary Staynings London Ap 29. 1652
THE Cause and Cure of the present Evils of the Times.
CHAP. I. The Devil is come down on earth in great wrath. A woe upon it. What
that woe. To whom that woe. And why now.
Ut Medicina corporalis duae sunt parts, quarum prior a git de morbis, alterz
vero de remediis; ita admodum conveniens mihi videtur, spiritualem etiam
Medicina^ partiri in Doctrinam de spiritualibus hominis morbis, and doctrinam
de spiritualium morborum remediis, and sicut prior pars Medicinae corporalis
vocatur (...), posterior (...), ita Theologiae quoque, etc. Keckerm. Syst.
Theol. l. 2. c. 1.
THE just parts of a Physician, whether Corporal or Spiritual, are,
Disease-discovering, and Diseasecuring. Having in other Treatises limbned forth
the particular evils of times, and the distinct times of those evils, I could
not but in justice think it suitable and seasonable to lay forth their
general Cause, and Cure.

The 12. of Rev. v. 12. holds forth, that the woe to the world, in the age,
with which this place does synchronise, is from a particular special
permission, if not a Commission the Devil has from above, to act among the
Terrae filios, the sons of the world below: Woe to the inhabitants of the
Earth, and of the Sea, for the Devil is come down unto you, having great
wrath, because he knows that he has but a short time. It Is not express what
this w^e is here; But it is enough to say, the Devil is come down in great
wrath. A Devil permitted, will play the Devil to the utmost he can, to make
men sin, and so to bring them to ruin.

But why is the Devil come down NOW to the inhabitants of the earth? Because
there was no place found any more for him in Heaven, but was cast cut into the
earth, v. 8, 9. He was cast out of Heaven in the beginning of the world, once
for all, for his first transgression. Jude v. 6. The Angels which kept not
their first estate, but left their own habitation, the Lord has reserved in
everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day, 2
Pet. 2.4. God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to Hell,
and delivered them into chains of darkness to be reserved unto judgment.

Out of both which places observe, that first the devils (...) voluntarily
sinned in Heaven. A deep it is to conceive how sin came first into Angels.
That one great Angel (now Beelzebub) did first fall, and then drew after him
the rest, is like enough. But the question yet remains how the first sin came
into that Angel, seeing there was no defect within, nor any without: I must
first say, That sin is a privation, or obliquity; No effect, but a defect,
and therefore we are not to trouble our selves to inquire after any proper and
efficient cause. God cannot be a deficient cause, because there can be no defect
in him. And therefore the defect must be in the Angel, who without motion from
within, or any temptation from without, fell from his estate, and Job. 8.44.
abode not in the truth, The phrase is (in that of Jude v. 6.) he left his
habitation, voluntarily and maliciously left, it because he would leave it.
Cap^l of Tentat. part. 1. Chap. 1.
They kept not their estate at the beginning, ( Gr. (...)) but wilfully left
their own habitation) Gr. (...).

2 That puniotorily and compulsively by the Lords justice, they were put into
chains of darkness, not of utter restraint. For by permission the Devil was
a liar and murderer from the beginning, Joh. 8.44. spoken in allusion to his
acting upon Eve, and Cain. And ever since he goes about, more or less, like a
roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. But there are some
special lettings loose of Satan (in opposition, no doubt to some more
restraint with which God sometimes narrowlier limits him) as to try a righteous
Job; to seduce a wicked obstinate Ahab; and to deceive the Nations, Gog and
Magog into a battle to their own ruin, Rev. 16.13, 14. etc. Rev. 20.7, 8.
Just so in this 12. of Rev. v. 12. is signified some more particular
permission, mission, and commission granted by Divine justice to the Devil, to
assault the inhabitants of the Earth and Sea.

And why NOW WOE to those Inhabitants, more then at all other times, wherein
the Devil was abroad in the world doing mischief? but because now upon the
said grant he should do more execution upon the wilful, unwary wicked, and
the willingly, easily deceived hypocrites!

And why NOW has the Devil GREAT WRATH, seeing he was never less angry, then
as a Devil, nor mildlier wroth, then with the sinning against the Holy Ghost,
which is the proper sin of the Devil; but to signify that now having more
liberty to work, he would more wreake his wrath, and effect his fury to cause
evil doubly, in this short time remaining, ere he be cut short!

Which, with a smooth current carries us into a second search, viz. when this
NOW is; to what time after John's time (for this is a branch of future things,
Rev. 4.1.) it does relate. The Devil was always since he was first outed out
of Heaven, a Devil, and always angry and wroth, since he was a Devil; and
since both, always abroad in the world, more or less, to vent his wrath, as
we have heard. But now he is come down, and he has great wrath because he
has but a short time; His time was not always short. In Christ's time, and
after that, when there should precede, as Prognostics of his next coming, That
many should come in his name, saying they are Christ, deceiving many, That
there should be Wars, and rumors of Wars; yet though all those things come
to pass, the END IS NOT YET, Matthew. 24.3, 4, 5, 6. And the rising of Nation
against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom; together with famines,
pestilences, and earthquakes in diverse places, all those things are but the
BEGINNING of sorrow, verse. 7, 8. And in Paul's time, it is averred by him, that
the day of Christ was not then at hand, though some would shake them in their
minds so to think, partly by a pretended Spirit of Prophecy, partly by a
Traditional Word, and partly by fictitious Epistles under the name of some
Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.2, 3. The Church universally, and separately considered as
an Idea, is a Mother, but considered in relation to the several persons
begotten in her, she has an Offspring, with which she is said to travel, and
bring forth to God, Ezekiel 16. to v. 21. and Chap. 23. v. 4. Esa. 54. Hos. 2. v.
4, 5. The Allegory therefore in this part is not to be wrested, to separate the
mother from her offspring, which yet otherwise may grow together into one and
the same Church. Kimchi on Hos. 2. v. 2, 3. These (...) pangs of Travel are
sore persecution. Esa. 66.7. Chald on the place. Jer. 30 6, 7. Matthew 24.8, 9.
Mar. 13.8. The seven headed, ten horned Dragon, is the Roman heathen Empire,
bu^^d on seven hills, ruled by seven sorts of Governments over ten Kingdoms,
which should arise in the time of the last head, to which they grew, as the
Angel interprets it, Rev. 17. The Man-child is Mystical Christ, that is
Christ formed in his Members; the Son, not of Mary, but of the Church, Gal.
9.19. So that this is not Christ verily, but as suitable to typical
expressions, Christ Analogically, who was to rule the Nations with an iron
Scepter; That is, authority being obtained by the sword of war over them, that
are not Citizens but enemies, Psalm. 2.9. out of which, that in Rev. 19. v. 15.
compare carefully Rev. 2.16. The- catching up the child unto God, and to his
Throne, by the figure Ev (...) intend, That the child was catched up into the
Throne of God; that is, up to the Roman Empire, where he should rule the
Nations with Authority. This interpretation is plain by Romans 13.1. Psalm. 82.
v. 1. and v. 6. even as they are said to sit in Moses chair, who teach the
Doctrine of Moses, so are they said to be in the Throne of God, who are his
Vicegerents in Rule upon earth. So that when it is said, the child of the
Apostolic Church was caught up to God, or received up into the Throne of God,
it is all one as to be lifted up to that Excellency, as HE may sit, as it were
with God, which I say is meant of Regal advancement. And this was then
fulfilled, when as Christians bare the sway under Constantine the Great, and
his successors, the Dragon of Roman Heathenish Emperialty being thrown down.
That the Womna in travel with her child were safe, and escaped the Dragons
lying in wait, it was by the help and succor of Michael, who sought,
conquered, and cast down the Dragon from Heaven into the earth, whereby the
Woman's Son was not only safe, but was lifted up to that Throne, and she her
self departed into the wilderness. This Michael was not, I suppose, Christ
himself, but (as in Dan. Chap. 10. v. 13.) the chiefest of the chief Princes
or seven Angels, who is said, ( Dan 12.1.) to stand for the children of God,
according to the office of Angels, Heb. 1.14. But Michael fought not alone, but
took with him partly the Martyrs, overcoming Heathenisme, and advancing
Christianity above it by courageous suffering, as is plain in v. 11. partly
the Professors and Confessors of Christianity, either convincing their
persecutors, or adhering to Christian Constantius the Emperor (father of
Constantine the great) in whose Court they were cherished and animated in their
Profession, and thereby prepared in their spirits to join with Constantine the
Great his son (anon succeding Constantius deceasing) and to fight down the
wicked Colleague-Emperors, though the Devils stood with those Tyrants as much,
as they could. For the Dragon and his Angels were the Devil, and the Roman
Tyrants, and their Ministers which worshipped them, who were cast out, when
they were thrown down from the top of their Divinity (the Romans admiring
their Diabolical worship, adoring and worshipping the Devil instead of
worshipping of God) and prostrate to the very bottom of execration and
contempt. Parallel to Exodus, 12.12. Number. 33.4. where God executed judgment upon
the gods of the Egyptians. So here the Devil the Dragon, and his Angels that
deceived the whole world, that is, persuaded them to Idolatty, and hitherto
possessed the Roman Empire, were cast out into the earth. For which a song of
praise verse. 10, 11. But woe to the earth and the sea, for now in special the
Devil is resident with the inhabitants thereof, and with great wrath, verse.
12.13. For the Roman Eagle (being the Ensign of that Empire) with his two
great Wings, his two Cealars of that Empire, parted into the East and West,
carrying the Woman into her eremitical middle condition in the wilderness
(like that of the Israelites wandering in the wilderness from their departure
out of Egypt into Canean, safe indeed from the fury of that red Dragon, as of
Pharaoh, but not yet come to that glory, as it were, the possession of Canaan,
and so in a better state then the servitude of that Ethnicke Roman Tyranny,
like that of Egypt; having now by the leave of Christian Princes, liberty to
worship Christ freely, as the Israelites had in the wilderness; but no less
unhappy by manifold Apostasies, then Israel in the wilderness by the Calfe:
Baal-peor, Korah, Balaam, in their two and forty mansions (Number. 33) answering
to two and forty mouths here) I say the two Wings of the Eagle carrying the
Woman into the wilderness, The Dragon or Serpent cast out of his mouth water,
as a flood, to carry her away, verse. 14, 15. that is, wicked opinions and
blasphemies, as Arianisme, which had almost drowned the Christian Church; For
this Exposition of water out of the mouth, see Prove. 18.4. Psalm. 78.2. Matthew.
13.35. Prove. 15.28. And the Eccles. H^st. of the time here meant. Med. and Alii.
The truth is, that we are distinctly brought down by the synopsis and survey
of things in this 12. Chap. of Revelat. to the special time of Satan's coming
down, of his great Wrath, and of the Woe thereby. The Woman, verse. 1. is
mystically the Christian Church. The Son or Man-child, verse. 5. is Mystical
Christ, formed in the succession of his particular members meet to rule in his
stead, or as his Deputies, the earth with a rod of iron, being caught up to
God, and to his Throne, that is as (Magistraticall) Gods, into the Throne of
Gods power, deputed unto Magistrates, instead of Heathen and Antichristian
Emperors, Kings, and Princes. The Woman's Travel for this, with great pain to
be delivered, for that end, verse. 2. was in the times of the ten persecutions,
at which time the great red Dragon, Pharaoh the second (as the Prophet calls
the first Pharach, for his persecuting the children of Israel) I say, Pharach
the second, the bloody persecuting Empire of Rome, sought to devour that birth
of that Woman for the space of the ten Persecutions, which continued, for above
three hundred years after Christ. Her flying into the wilderness, verse. 6.
after that she had brought forth her said Son, and nursed him up, and
educated him to the time of ripe age, that he was caught up into that Throne of
God, signifies a middle state of the Church, viz. that as the Church was not
yet settled in the Canon of the Great restoration (yet to come) so neither was
it in an Egypt of Heathen Romish savage persecution, for the space of one
thousand two hundred and sixty years.

These one thousand two hundred and sixty years may be computed several
ways according to several rises, yet still perioding with some notable event,
preparing for the great revolution (as instances have been given in other
Treatises, and more might be laid to the heap, since the subduing of Scotland,
and Ireland, and the Achievements in France, An. Dom. 1651. which differs but
a day, as Chronologers speak from 1650) but the Grant Account here must be,
Anno post Christum 410. Roma vietrix and Domina orbis, ab Alarico Gothorum rege
capta and direpta ( Socrat. l. 7. c. 10.) A quo tempore authoritate ejus
plurimum imminuta, ipsa exposita est pari deinceps praedae, atque direptioni,
Vandalis, Herulis, Longobardis, aliisque Germaniae Gentibus, quae in Italia,
Gallia, Hispania, and Britannia excitarunt diversa regna. Ab hac imperii Romani
inclinatione, sublaio jam e medio (...), Paulus Apostolus 2 Thessalonians. 2. oidiendum
esse innuit tempas filii perditionis, Recte. ergo hic initium figitur 42.
Mensium Angelicorum regni Bestiae Septicipitis (Apocal. 13.) and decemcornis,
porestatem maguam a Draco ne mutuantis, and horribiles contra Deum blasphemias
eructantis, hoc est papatus Romani, etc. Eli Reus Leorin, Isagog Histo de
Insant Autich. Ad An. 410.
as some great learned men compute, from the time that the seven-headed,
ten-horned Beast ( Rev. 13.1, 2.3, 4, 5.) insinuated himself into that Throne
of God before mentioned sitting there as God (2 Thessalonians. 2.4.) showing himself
that he is God. There sitting in that aforesaid Throne, as pretendedly assuming
to himself that Sonship (above named) but indeed an Hermaphroditian Bastard; I
mean a Mungrill compound of Imperial and Papal power, basely begotten by
Arrogance and Hypocrisy upon the superstitious slavish multitude, when the
true father was bed-ridden; I mean the Roman Emperialty was exceeding low,
which was about an hundred years after that Trueborne Man-child (spoken of
before) was first caught up into the said Throne of God. For about three hundred
and twelve, Constantine the Great sat on one part of that Throne, after that
on the whole, and after him his successors (professing Christianity) in great
splendour, till about four hundred and ten. At which time the Roman Emperialty
being first brought very low by the Alaricus King of the Goths, and by and by
lower by the Vandals, etc. the Papal power began to endeavor to sit in that
Throne; for it is express, Rev. 13.5. that to the Seven-headed, Ten-horned
Beast, was given power to continue or do, two and forty months, which two and
forty months solarie, are all one with one thousand two hundred and sixty
days, which is the time of the Woman's being in the wilderness.

Now after the Woman was in the wilderness, the Dragons wrath extended
thitherto, and when he could not prevail by War (verf. 6, and 7.) He cast
out of his mouth water, as a flood after her, that he might cause her to be
carried away of the flood, (verf. 14. and 15.) That is, the waters of corrupt
words, opinions, and blasphemies, as formerly in Arianisme, etc. most filthily
corrupting men's manners, and pudling their conversation, so now in
Socinianisme, etc. Which state of things in the wilderness two and forty
months, or one thousand two hundred and sixty days ( i.e. years) period at
the beginning of the Great restoration. Then is Satan's time cut short off;
Then he is bound, Revel. 20.2, 3. Then he is restrained from DECEIVING the
Nations, in the same verse. 3. By all which it appears that toward the latter
end of those one thousand two hundred and sixty years, a little before Satan's
binding, even when he himself knew his time was short, was it, that he had
such great wrath, and that because he knew his time was short; even as Peter
tells, 2 Pet. 3.3, 4. (...) in the last of days; he says not, as other
Apostles; of things farther off, the end, in the last days, but in the LAST OF
DAYS shall men rise to that height of wicked walking after their own lusts,
as to scoff at God and the Scriptures, saying, Where is the promise of his
coming, etc. So that now, at this present time, and downward till the
restoration radiate a dawning, is this Woe, this coming down of the Devil,
with his great wrath, as these unparallelled impious times do too much give
testimony. Even as Jude verse. 14. to 20. applies it out of Enochs and the
Apostles Prophesies, that when the Lord is about to come with ten thousands of
his Saints to execute judgment, the sons of men shall be murmurers,
complainers, walking after their own lusts, speaking great swellings, mockers,
walking after their own ungodly lusts, pretending to be severed from other
men, as under some notion of I know not what kind of Spirit, and of having the
Spirit, but are most abominably sensual, whiles they walk after their own
UNGODLY lusts.

But the next inquiry is, to whom this Woe belongs? what is meant by the
Inhabitants of the earth and sea? For all men, good and bad inhabit there, and
Beasts and Fishes are not the object of Satan's wrath.

Answ. This is spoken by way of distinction from the state of mystical Heaven,
the holy Church, the sincere Believers, for they are bid to rejoice in this
very same verse, Rev. 12.12. Rejoice ye Heavens, and ye that DWELL in them.
The impieties and calamities of the earth may obliquely glance a darkness upon
some particular Comforts of the Heavenly holy ones; but it hastens their
general joy and felicity. When the sins of the Inhabitants of the earth,
that is, of the grosser wicked, openly profane, dirty Imps, Earthly wretches,
whether named Christians or not; And of the Inhabitants of the sea, that is, of
cunningly counterfeiting hypocrites, under a vizard of a kind of Religious
profession, and of both these, whether they be the Secular men of earthly Civil
employments, or are Ecclesiastical, having to do with Doctrines, and Church
administrations (often signified by waters, as Churches like Islands are, or
should be severed from the gross world) Pareus out of Brightman, has it
thus, Consentit Brightmannus Incolas terrae esse quosvis improbos,
Christianismum ficte profitentes, regui Antichristiani incolas. Maris vero
incolas facit Ecclesiasticos qui turbidam, salsuginosam, and amtram doctrinam
suis fucatis Christianis propinant, quae quidem ad hypocrisin eos efformat, sed
viscera tandem Corrodit, animosque perdit. So Pareus. And Brightman himself
says thus. From hence may this metaphorical signification of these words be
confirmed, that if earth should be taken properly, the Devil should be alike
troublesome to all the Saints, who dwell in common together with the wicked.
Besides, who are the Inhabitants of the Sea, but men? For the D evil does not
spit out his spightfull poison upon Whales, and great Seas. Good men also, and
bad dwell together in common in the Isles, as well as in the firm land. Thus
then distinguish them, That the Inhabitants of the earth, are very wicked
company, either of Heathen, or Christians, who have only a painted show of
Religion; but the inhabitants of the sea, are the Clergymen, as they call
them, who set abroach gross, troubled, brackish, and sourish doctrine, to
their counterfeit Christians, which does rather bring barrenness of godliness
to the hearers, and gnaw their entrals, then quench their thirst, or yield any
other good fruit. The Devil being now stripped of his power of hurting the true
Saints, should toss these men up and down, with all manner of whirling
tempests.
I say, when these men's sins are ripe, then Gods judgments are ripe, and the
ruin of them is the raising of the Church. When Dagon falls before the Arc,
the Arc is delivered. When the Amorites sins are full, Israel is possessed
of Canaan. But the mean while, there is a great spring of wickedness, more
darkness then light generally: For the Prince of darkness is here, and casts
out of his mouth much water, which (if it drownes not the Woman) makes the
wild trees, and weedy plants to fructify amain.

CHAP. II. The mystery of Satan's wrathful passion now against the world; and of
Gods just permission of him and it.
SUrely after all this unfolding, we cannot but perceive that the core of the
cause of the cursed corruptions of the present times, and of like further woe
to the world for future, is Satan's powerful presence by special permission,
toact great wickednesses in, and upon it, according to his great wrath in that
short time yet remaining for him to prevail here.

For why is it said, he has great wrath? and why is a woe pronounced, if he
will not, or cannot work according to that wrath?

If you will have it shortlier, then thus. The world is now extreme loose,
because Satan is extraordinarily let loose. The Prince of the world (Joh.
12.31.) now in special rules the world of worldly men: The Spirit, Prince of
the air ( Ephesians. 2.2.) now more powerfully poisons the spirits of men.

But why (you will say) is Satan thus angry with man, and more NOW in this age,
and downward, whiles his time lasts? Surely the defection of Beelzebub in
Heaven at first, with his faction of Angels was, because man was so far
exalted above him. MAN was a body, and yet having a soul, as an Angelical
spirit (a double capacity above Angels to partake of all bliss) was so formed
of both into one person, as that he is said to be made in the image and
likeness of God, Genesis 1.27. (which was never said of Angels) and in the image
and likeness of God in the triplicity of modalities and dispensations of
himself, as Father, son, and Holy Ghost. Let us, says God in that first of
Genesis 26. make man in OUR Image, after OUR Likeness, having said before, God
(Elehim) in the plural, Created (Bara) in the singular, Genesis 1.1. and
mentioning distinctly in the second and third verses, etc. God the Father, and
the Holy Ghost, saying, the Spirit of God moved upon the waters; and God said,
Let there be light, etc. which had in the sound of words an hint of making man
not only the Son of God (in some sense) as Luke 3. last Adam is called, but
of making him like the only Son of God, as after Christ took the nature of
Man, and not of Angels, Heb. 2. Angels being termed Gods Ministers, that is
servants, Heb. 1.7. yea, whiles man is made Lord of all, Genesis 1.26. the Angels
were to be servants unto man, Heb. Heb. 1.14. as they saw by their employment
from the beginning of the world.

Besides, Adam in all his glory, must have a wife, a second-selfe, formed out
of himself, as a propagatrix of Mankind, as a good, without which it was not
good for man, then all-happy man, to be, Genesis 2. Angels being stinted in their
own number, and comforts too, and in their own single persons, which Conjugals
and Propagative became an opportunity of a Prophecy (Genesis 3.) and a
performance of the birth of Christ out of man's loins, and in opposition to the
Devil to overthrow him, Genesis 3.

And as a Seal to all this, he had the Tree of life (a type of Christ) to be
continually in his eye. All which might well make the most sagacious Angel
(especially before his fall) suspect, that man's nature in time should be united
to the Godhead, in the person of Christ, and so man at last to become far
above him in complete happiness, and thereby cause him in wrath against God,
as neglecting him, to revolt from God in heaven. And to be revenged on man
(whom he so direfully emulated) he effectually tempted him to fall also. Since
when, hearing articulatly in the word, Genesis 3. etc. to the end of the
Revelation, that all those should be, and saw all save the last come to pass,
has ever since been wroth, opposing all he could, upon all opportunities man's
welfare (as we heard before.)

But now the time being near that the last also must be fulfilled, man must be
restored to his Adamship, his pristine perfection, and original happiness in
a larger and better Paradise, on Earth, and in Heaven (as may be seen in
another Treatise.) SATAN has (says that twelfth of Revel. 12.) great wrath,
and the rather, because the time is short, ere it be done, and so his time is
short to bestirre him to endeavor it be undone. So his anger is now doubled;
First, That man through Christ must be completely happy. Secondly, That he
has so little time to hinder it, ere he himself be complete in Torment; his
sin being the sin, not of Atheism, the Devil is no Atheist, Jam. 2.19.
But of the sin against the Holy Ghost, malicing Gods goodness, Christ's
Mediatorship, the truth of the Word, and the salvation of man, of which he
has been fully convinced (and by him partly confessed in the Gospel) touching
their truth and excellency, and hinted in that 12. of Revel. 12. That HE KNEW
his time was short, and therefore knew the rest, ( why, and wherein it was
short) I say, fully convinced by the Holy Ghost in the Word, though the Holy
Ghost in its effects was never in him savingly infused or inherent, even as it
was not in those men that sinned that sin, Mat. 12.24. to 33.

CHAP. III.
BUt why(may some ask) seeing Satan is so maliciously wroth, as has been
said, would God permit him to come down among the Inhabitants of the world,
and especially NOW toward the approaching of the great restitution of all
things, as has been showed?

1. He does it in justice upon wicked men, whether open, or hypocrites, even as
he did upon Ahab and Saul, and that with a double justice, one on the soul,
the other on the body also. That as they loved not the truth in the mouths of
the truth, were therefore justly left to be seduced in soul by Satan, and
their persons to go, and to be slain in war, because they would not receive
warning by that truth; so the Lord in justice deals with the wicked of the
world in this interval of Satan's coming down upon the earth.

Paul tells us, as relating to this space of time, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10, 11, 12.
That that wicked one, the son of perdition shall come after, or according to
the WORKING of SATAN, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with
all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness in them that perish, because they
received not the love of the truth that they might be saved. And for this cause
God shall SEND them strong DELUSION, that they should believe a lie, that they
all might be damned, who believe not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness.

To which St. John adds that in Revel. 16.13.14. with Chap. 19. v. 19.20, 21.
To complete the Narrative of the destruction of soul and body of such wicked
ones. And I saw three unclean spirits, like frogs, come out of the Dragon, and
the Beast, and the false Prophet, for they are the spirits of Devils, working
miracles, which go forth unto the Kings of the earth, and of the whole world,
to gather them to the battle to the great day of God Almighty. And I saw the
Beast, and the Kings of the earth, and their Armies gathered together, to make
war against him, that sat on the Horse, and against his Army; and the Beast
was taken, and with him the false Prophet, and cast into the lake of fire, etc.
and the remnant were slain with the sword. So that the justice of God is most
righteously executed upon the said wicked, both on soul and body; as Pareus
well coucheth the matter together in a few words, on that sentence. The Devil
has descended unto you, says he, Nunquam quidem non grassatus est in mundo
Satan, etc. i.e. There was never a time indeed, wherein the Devil did not
assault, rob, and spoil the world, being once thrust down from Heaven. But
this commination is Prophetical concerning his imminent machinations, with
which, sometime after, he should bring to destruction all the inhabitants of
the world, that had been by Antichrist made mad with superstition.

Which words will comprehend the state of the said time, if we take the word
Antichrist, as signifying all against Christ, and Superstition, to signify all
that is not according to the pure truth of the Word. For our times, the
Interpreter of that Rev. 12.12. shows that great and various are the horrid
defections, Apostasies, and Abominations, that should be the dreadful effects
of the Devils, coming down all that time.

2 God permits Satan to come down, out of mercy (you will wonder) to the
Godly. For the beginning of the Verse does sufficiently testify that the Lord
in his direful providence to the earth of the ungodly, had not the least
intent to prejudice the Heaven of the Church of true Saints; for it is
express, Rejoice ye Heavens, and ye that dwell therein, which cannot be
meant of the Empyrean Heaven above the stars; for the rest of the Song, or
Anthem of praise in two former verses is, NOW is come SALVATION, and strength,
and the Kingdom of our GOD, and the POWER of his CHRIST, and the Saints
overcame the Devil by the BLOOD of the LAMB, and by the WORD. Where it is
manifest that Christ at this time has a Power, or Kingdom on Earth.

The mercy of God to the Saints on Earth in this unlikely looking providence
is; 1 The manifestation of his might, power, and prudence to preserve, as in a
Goshen, his true Israelites whiles the Egyptian world round about is filled
with plagues. Herein his Providence exceeds his Creation, that he maintains a
glory amidst hellish oppositions, and keeps alive sparks in the midst of a
Sea. 2. That the Saints might have their desires, faith and hope, etc. after a
blessed trial, gloriously fulfilled. For Satan with this his great wrath, does
but pull down the old house of the wicked world about his own ears, breaking
the parts thereof all to pieces; whereupon God the great Landlord removes the
rubbish, burns the rotten timber, and begins to build New Jerusalem.


CHAP. IV. Men must not be mistaken, as if there were no such thing, as the
Devils coming now down upon the earth, by special permission.
THe first Coro'dary upon the Premises is, that the Prophecy (before opened)
clearly and mainly relating to these times, our first prudence can be no less
then to perceive the performance. If Satan be now come down, then legite
vestigia, read his footsteps, and be afraid to tread in them toward his den,
as the creatures were of that of the Lion, giving this reason, -- Quia me
vestigia terrent, Omnia te adversum spectantia, nulla retrorsum. -- That is, I
dare not trach other beasts that have come near thee, because the print of
their feet make met afraid, for all their footsteps are toward thee, I see no
sign of any returning. An apt Simile to the thing in hand; Of many closing
with Satan, few return. Therefore if Satan be now greatly wroth, oblerve what
it works. If a present Woe among the inhabitants of continent, and ISLANDS
(the Sea cannot guard from Devil and sin) discern how it seizes on the
unsound. See all these, as they come to pass on others, before ye feel them
fall upon your selves. Happy (says the Proverb) are they, whom other men's
harms make to beware -- Paries cum proximus ardet, Tunc tua res agitur -- When
thy neighbors house is on fire, it is time for thee to look to thine. Satan's
coming down in wrath, is the cause of Temptations; but our yielding is the
cause of Transgressing, and transgression (unrepented of) the cause of
destruction, viz. in the crowd of the conquered, we are confounded to give the
Saints the victory and vicissitude, in our places at the great and glorious
RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS, as it is called Act. 3.21. making our condition,
like the man at the siege of Samaria, who for his unbeleefe, and blaspheming
against Gods deliverance, was trampled under foot to death, and lived not to
enjoy the mercy. Or like the rebellious Israelites, that lived to come near
Caenaan, but entered not in. Foreseeing, is fore-warning, forewarning,
fore-arming. Christ by his Angel unto John, gave us this prediction, not to
prejudice our diligence, but to put us upon prevention of these evils, as to
our selves, (as we shall hear more after.) And therefore our duty is with
both eyes, widely opened, to see this coming down, this Woe, this great wrath
of the Devil, in the Efficacies thereof, of which in the next Chapter.

CHAP. V. The EFFICACIES (as they are called in the Greek 2 Thessalonians. 2.) of
Satan's COMING DOWN, (...) 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 11.
) WOE, and WRATH, gathered from the System of the Chapter, viz. Rev. 12. V. 12.
To down with Christian MAGISTRACY, and to dim Gospel MINISTRY.
THe Efficacies of Satan's Coming, Woe, and Wrath, in this age, may be found out
Partly By the System of that Chapter. Partly By the Synchronisme of things in
times.


The System or method of this 12. Chap. of the Revelation, holds forth two
dangerous evils, with which our present age is much infected, and likely
(unless prevented) to be much infested, viz. a design To lay low Christian
Magistracy, and Gospel Ministry.


The endeavoring of which two are, the Mystery; (For all Antichristianisme is
a mystery, 2 These. 2.) Of Church and State levelling, I mean the levelling of
Church and State. And indeed as these two go hand in hand in doing (whiles
they stand, and stand in stead) that Ministry laying the foundation of
Magistracy in the consciences of men ( Romans 13.1. etc.) And this Magistracy
being as walls about the Ministry (as their duty is hinted, 1 Timothy 2.2. (So also
in suffering. These joynt-doers, shall be sure to be Co-sufferers (as the Woe
of the two GENTIL WITNESSES, Rev. 11.) These two being impediments to the
Devils Kingdom, and the pleasing lusts of his vassals (the Magistrate in the
conversation of men, the Minister in the consciences of men, they fall under
the extreme hate of that King of the bottomless pit, and his Vassals, walking
in his depths. And therefore it is in their hearts (no matter what their words
are) to bring into contempt all religious Regiment, lest it cast down their
licentious liberty, cried up by them as a God, but is indeed a kind of Devil.

These two Sinne-leading evils, are more then hinted, in this 12. of Revel.

The first touching pulling down Christian Magistracy, in Verse. 5. When the
woman had brought forth a man-child to rule the Nations with a ROD of IRON,
who for that end was accordingly taken up into the THRONE of GOD. The Woman
thereupon v. 6. flies into the wilderness, and the Dragon, verse 7. with his
Angels war against Michael and his Angels (as was before expounded.) This same
thing in v. 13. is repeated, and enlarged, viz. When the Dragon saw that he was
cast out to the earth (the man-child being in the Throne) he persecuted the
Woman THAT, meaning, FOR THAT, she brought forth that Man-child to that
effect, and issue, as is above expressed and explained.

2 Touching dimming and darkning Gospel Ministry, it is sufficiently plain,
verse 15. viz. That after the Dragon was cast out, and that the Woman had wings
given her to fly away, and a place provided for her to rest in, then the
Serpent cast out WATERS out of his mouth as a flood, after the Woman, to cause
her to be carried away of the flood. Which Waters and Flood, was above
demonstrated to signify the wicked opinions, blasphemies, and reproachful
speeches that are vomited out against the Truth, and the Propagators thereof.
Which at first began, anon after Constantinus M. his death, and ever since
succeeded and flowed along the earth, ascending to a great deep, not without
some torrent of persecution more or less all along.

1 In Arianisme, denying the Diety of Christ. 2 Pelagianisme, and
Semipelagianisme, denying the freeness and power of Christ's grace. 3 Papisme,
against the Headship and Kingly office of Christ, as well as against his
Prophetical and Priestly, advancing Humane Traditions, Legends, etc. and
justification by works.
Lastly, in these days, Socinianisme (worse then Arianisme) Familisme denying
the Humanity of Christ, Arianisme affirms Christ to be created in the
beginning. Socinianisme, That Christ in no respect is ancienter then from his
birth by the Virgin Mary.
and his real Passion, and Resurrection; Atheism, against the Being of God;
Turkish and Jewish Antichristianisme, against the whole notion of Christ, as a
Savior. Antiscripturianisme, against all the Divine word of God; And
Levellisme (if I may so speak) opposing the Functions and Offices of Ministers,
as Pastors, Teachers, etc. and their peculiar right to administer seals;
laying all level and common, that every gifted brother may administer them.
And consequently these kind of men fill their eyes with envy, and their
mouths with obloquies, and reproaches against the learned, pious, orthodox,
able Ministers of the Gospel, calling them in scorn, Priests, Parsons,
Black-coats, or any thing that may render them odious in the opinions of men.
He that does not acknowledge these things to be fulfilled in these days, has
no acquaintance with books or men, and to be as without eyes, ears, and common
reason.

Ob. But say some of these underground Pioneers, and open Engineers, that are
not yet past all shame, they level not against the things, but against the
Ceremonialities of them, as against the Pomp, Dignity, and Majesty of
Magistracy, and the Formality, Solemnity, and Superiority of the Ministry,
above the people.

Sol. 1. To this cunning Objection three Answers will be little enough.

1 If these forenamed Objects of their (confessed) opposition were altogether
Tares, yet it seems evident to a piercing eye, that intentionally, or
consequentially, in pulling up the Tares, they will endanger the Wheat also.
The stalk of the ear of Corn is preserved in several gay-green wrappers,
and the kernel is wrapped in diverse shining mantles; as the Tree is kept alive
with comely bark; and without the glory of blossoms, nor fruits, nor seeds
are propagated. Strip the stalk and ear; bark the Tree, beat off the
blossoms, and farewell life and profit. The Chieftaines of Magistracy in Israel
rode upon stately beasts in that Judge. 5.10. The Governors of Midian rode with
glorious Chains, Judge. 8.26. All Nations, Jews, Heathens, Turks, Christians,
(as if by a law of nature) did put some signs or ensigns of preeminence on
their Rulers and Governors (to which the Scriptures do frequently allude)
thereby to dignifie as well as distinguish them, well knowing that the
popularity (for the general) know not to reverence any thing more then what
they see. And for the dignity of the Ministry, God has in all Ages amply
conferred it upon them. Upon the Aaronical, a most sumptuous glory. Upon the
Apostolical a world-amazing- miracle-working honor and power. Upon the
Teaching Ministry to succeed them to the end of this present world (as Paul
calls it) Double honor, I Tim. 5.17. Sol. 2. Again, we Answer, That it is the
character of the hypocrisy of these last times, to pretend to piety, and
severing from the branne of the gross wicked, and to some spirituality, Jud.
verse. 4. v. 19. Yet to speak evil of DIGNITIES, and despise DOMINION; mark
it wishly, that these two are joined together that they speaking against (...)
Dignities, or Glories, they despise (...) Lordship, Government, or Dominion.
Corah and his Crew, allowed Moses and Aaron to be of the Tribe of Levi, but in
their eminencies to be Magistrate and Minister, conferred upon them by God
himself, they cry out, They took too much upon them.

I am absolutely against Arbitraries Arrogancies, vain idle Ceremonies in
Magistracies or Ministries. But nor I, nor Scripture, nor nature, (from which
also Paul argues for order, and in spirituals, 1 Cor. 11.14.) are against a
sinne-daunting dress, garb, or port, and a reverentiall splendour of Dignities
(appointed by Scripture) in use in all Ages amongst the civillest of men.
Nature it self does cloth and crown some Plants, Birds, and Animals with a
glory, as well as a power above the rest, whence by wise and learned men they
are called the Royal, Princely, etc. of Plants, Birds, and Beasts.

Sol. 3. Lastly, I answer, that it has been always the Devils Artifice in
all his Scenes, to bring up the same evils, under several shapes, foul
matters, under fair pretenses and vizards (2 Cor. 11. v. 3. v. 13.) They say,
notwithstanding al they heave and lift against both, that they are not against
Magistracy and Ministry. The truth is, they do not know at first their own
minds. They perceive not of what spirit they are. When men take a running
down the Hill, they cannot assure themselves where to stop their carriere ad
punctum.

First, they cried out against the Ministers Gowns; when they off; then next
against their black clothes; when most had altered them; then they decry
humane learning, as they call it, and Art in preaching; And now at last,
against the function and office of a Minister. So in all likelihood, would they
do with Magistracy. First, take away their Majesty, and reverential splendour,
and then the Office will be little or nothing in the eyes of men. They will
not know their Commander.

It was a Divine providence (you will all confess) that cut off the head of
Grand Tyranny, and Superstitious Ceremony (at which time if the ordinary
Magistracy had not been upheld in their Honor and Dignity, where had we
been?) But since that, there has been oft-times, much a do (I need not
number instances to you the lookers on to your danger) to make millions of men
willing to have a Magistracy and Ministry that may stand the common safety
instead. If at present they do not openly and professedly strive to pull down
these Twins of safety; yet clearly, they cunningly act to wither and starve the
splendour, life, and vigor of both. Suppose they lop not the maine limbs, nor
cleave the body, yet if they dig away the mold, and cut from the roots the
feeders, the Tree soon withers, and dies.

If you would have the maine mystery of their machination, then thus: They
would make Magistracy languish by Opposition, viz. against the splendour and
verdure thereof, and so make it a Stock-Magistracie, like that King Logge, on
which the Frogs leapt, for its contemptiblenesse. And they would null the
Ministry, by Apposition, setting up a Mock-Ministry, somewhat of kin to that
Wever-Miller-dumb Ministry in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's days. I say
somewhat of kin to them; Because as they could teach no error, being able
only to read, as the Bible and books of Homilies; so these are like to teach
little truth, because they know little truth, especially in these times,
wherein these kinds of men would have all heresies permitted. By such an
omnegatherum of all men of elocution (unapproved) to become Preachers, we shall
have the true Ancyle of Gospel Ministers (the Divine Palladium and preservation
of our Nations from Divine vengeance) lost among these false Ancylia. These
Antimagistratical, and Antiministerial men are like Rats and Mice, that gnaw
the timber, and walls, and covering of the house, till it fall on their heads,
or destroy the place of their own succor.

CHAP. VI. The Efficacies of Satan's coming down upon the earth, discovered
from the Synchronising of things in times, viz. Invincible obstinacy, and lying
hypocrisy.
THus of the Efficacies of Satan since his coming down upon the earth,
discovered from the System of the Chapter.

1 Demonologie. 2 A Sermon before Thom. Andrews then Lord Mayor. 3 A Sermon
before Thom. Andrews then Lord Mayor. 4 Church Cases cleared.

Next of those that may be discovered from the Synchronisme, and concurrence of
times.

Having set forth so much in other Discourses (now public) touching the matter
of the sins of these times; I shall now only touch upon the manner and
complexion plexion of spirit in the sinners of the times; in these two, viz.
Invincible obstinacy, and Lying hypocrisy,
In the Process of their evils; Both a spawne suitable to the nature of the
Devil.

1 Invincible obstinacy, is seen in 1 Timothy 4.1.2. Now the Spirit speaks
expressly that in the LATER times (mark the Synchronisme, or concurrence of
times with our Age. And observe that the Gr. is, (...); the later OPRORTUNITIES
described, Rev. 22.10, 11. The time is at hand that he that is unjust, let him
be unjust still, and he that is filthy, let him be filthy still, etc. The doors
of salvation to let in any more, as Hierom speaks, are about to be shut, as
Matthew. 25. The foolish Virgins came when the doors were shut.) And what of
these later opportunities? why the Apostle in that 1 Timothy 4.2. says, Men shall
have their consciences seared with an hot iron. Add that in 2 Timothy 3.1, 4.
This know that in the LAST DAYS (mark still the concurrence of things in
time) Men shall be incontinent, sierce, heady, etc. put both these together,
and then you may easily spel this a Prophecy of these times, that now in our
age, men are fitted with an head and heart, with a kind of science, and
conscience, to make them sin obstinately like the Devil. In the head they are
(among other words of obstinacy) (...) that is, headstrong, unbridleable,
stiff-necked, (as the Scripture speaks) as a stubborn horse, catching the
bit between his teeth, runs desperately on into dangers, dirt, water, mud,
quagmires, without control. These kind of men catching an opinion, be it
never so great an Heresy, or Blasphemy, no bit, or bridle, no reins, or
streinings of Scripture, reason, examples, persuasions, or their own
preingagements in Religion, shall check them in to conversion, or conviction
from their evil way. And for their hearts, and consciences, they are so
cauterized, and seared, that they cannot feel any remorse for sin, from
arguments drawn from promises, or threats, from mercies, or judgments, from
Heaven or Hell, from life or death, or any thing else that may be named: But
rather more harden themselves by making a mock, fable, or chimera of all those
things. So that by these two, being thus headed and hearted, they are by the
efficacy of error, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. given up to believe lies, both in opinion,
and practice, and thereby are rivered in their sins, and chained in their
iniquities: For you may as soon convince a mad man with reason, or make a dead
man feel your strokes, as reduce these from their wicked ways, or opinions,
to verity and honesty. How far this is fulfilled on this generation, I
appeal to the experience of all Christians, especially of them that have had
their turns to argue with these men of Belial. The truth is, the Seal of the
evil times in the last of days before the great Restoration is upon them,
Rev. 22. 10, 11. mentioned before, That as they are unjust, so they are like to
be unjust still, and as they are filthy, so they are like to be filthy still.
They love not the Lord Jesus, nor his truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. 1 Cor. 16.22. and
therefore in all probability, Anathema Maranatha is fallen upon them, that is,
They are accursed till the Lordcome.

2 Lying hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4.2. In the later times (opened before pointing at
our times) Men shall speak lies in hypocrisy. And Rev. 21.27. and Chap.
22.15. relating to the last times, men shall be makers and lovers of lies. Add
2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4. In the last days, men shall be lovers of themselves,
boasters, without natural affection, promise-breakers, false-accusers,
treacherous. Run through the predicaments and ranks of many both men and
matters, and you shall find lying hypocrisy to be predominant in this Age.

1 The character of great men (for the generality) is that they are a LIE,
Psalm. 62.9. because a little goodness in them seems great, and their great
Court-ship seems to promise much; both which as to a suitable product, too often
end in nothing. And

2 Profession of Religion in these evil times, for the most a LIE, 2 Timothy
4.1.5. In the last days men shall have the form of godliness denying the
power thereof. And that is the meaning in Rev. 21. and Chap. 22. (before quoted)
of making a LIE; That is, men's profession of Religion is a LIE. Hypocrisy
being a very LIE. The abounding of which in these days, has been attested by
thousands of Apostasies.

3 The Art that many profess, and multitudes believe and run after (some to
their ruin) viz. Judiciary Astrology, heeded more of late with us then ever
was (to our shame let it be spoken) in any Christian Commonwealth since the
Creation, is a very arrant LIE, Esa. 44.24, 25. See the Geneva Notes on the
place. Whence the Doctrine is, Judiciary Astrology is a LIE.

This last Eclipse, March 29. 1652. is the proof, which not prooving to be so
dark, gloomy, and terrible, as they predicted, it has so eclipsed their
credit, that I hope you will for ever take them for Liars, if they prove not by
consequence worse.

For their telling men and women they shall be adulterers, selfe-murtherers,
etc. or this, or that year shall be a time of such, is the Devils way to cause
melancholy, or perplexed spirits to make themselves such. (So our learned
Casuists concerning Temptations.) For whiles the Astrologers say, they see
these things predicted, or fore-shewne in the Stars, they make poor
creatures of a blind slavish spirit, conclude there is an irresistible fate
past upon them, that they must, no help for it, be such wretches, as the
Astrologers predict that year shall bring forth.

Mark I pray, whether since the reign of Astrology, there have not more
successively every week destroyed themselves, then in a year (year after year)
for many Ages past. But I needed not say much to this brood, seeing I and my
Second are engaged in Print against them, to whom they never gave that, which
may be truly called an Answer, that is, to speak reason, strength,
demonstration, as becomes true Mathematicians, who have the advantage of all
humane Arts to demonstrate, if they deliver any truth of nature. But in stead
of giving an Answer, touching the thing, they rail at the persons of men;
wherefore let all men of learning now save their labors to encounter with such
impertinent fellows, in a way of Treatises, and leave them to Mercurius
Phreneticus, Lillies-Ape whipped, Bug-beare Black-Moonday, Black-Moonday turned
white, Confidence dismounted, etc. to be confuted by these WITS, POETS,
DIURNALISTS, BALAD-MAKERS, as the fittest men to deal with them, that neither
understand to take an argument, nor to make an argument in their own matters,
which they pretend most to understand. Godly learned Ministers may do well, as
they have of late very prudently begun, to undeceive the people, and bring them
back to God and his Word, and leave their testimony with the world against the
cheat of Astrology, that if the Astrologers have got their moneys, yet they may
not cheat them of their wits. But for a solemn Confutation by writing to them,
it is but vain to them that are given up to believe lies.

4 Multitudes of men in their way of dealing in these evil times, are a LIE.
It was once the speech of a grave Citizen, a Chieftaine of his Company, That
every man in his own Trade is a kind of a Thief. How far his meaning
extended, or wherein the maine sense is fixed, I will not undertake to
interpret (I am assured men may be honest in lawful Callings if they will:)
But this is apparent in these worst of times, that there is in multitudes of
men's dealings, though a kind of Professors, especially of them that are the
fishers in the late turns of times, more mineing and undermining, more cutting
and cousening, more reaching and overreaching, and going beyond their brother,
or circumventing (as the Apostle speaks) then has been known in many years
bypast. And truly I fear that many so deal by wicked principles, as if it
were no sin to lurch any man, that is not just of their stamp. For if there
be a wicked principle received of men, as not wicked, that Adultery,
Fornication, etc. is no sin, I should mightily suspect that such kind of men
should take up this wicked principle also, that cousenage to them is no sin.
There has been (we know) a principle, and pretended too as a Religious one,
near of kin to this, Fides non est servanda cum Haereticis, faith or promise
is not to be kept with Heretics. And truly now it is common for many men to
account all others as Heretics, that do not ascend, or descend Arithmetically
(to a grain) unto their opinions.

5. The Crowd of Complementers, are a mere Complemental Lie, a Constant Lie.
They greet you at every turn and turning, with, Your servant Sir; Sir, your
humble servant. But if you put them to the test, in matters not great, to act
for you, they prove a very vanity, a nothing, or worse then nothing, you shall
find them neither your servant, nor humble: but far prouder of their
complement, then conscionable of their engagement. Yea, though in converse with
you, they abound with civilities, and speak as if they would be to you,
Petty-gods, or Tutelar angels, yet if ye stand in their way, or of their
allies, they no sooner turn their backs, but with an old Court-trick (as
formerly with the name Puritan) they blast you with one bold Calumniation, or
traditional lie or other, that you shall never hardly rise more. Likely when
time was, they made you their stirrup, or footstool for them to get up, but now
they are mounted, never so much as lend you a finger to pull you up from the
dirt, where you kneeled for their sakes.

6 The former Complainers of want of reformation are (multitudes of them)
become a very Lie.

1 They would, not long since declaime against Non-residencies by reason of
Pluralities, and men's serving their places by Deputies and underling hirelings.
They would with a seeming zeal sigh forth complaints, as if these were great
grievances, and scandals; and therefore did put on to have a Law against them.
But now it is no grief to them themselves, nor scandal to others, (they hope)
to have each of them three, or four or five great places, whiles other
faithful friends of the State want sufficiency.

2 These men likewise thought it exceeding incongruous, that Ministers should
meddle with worldly affairs, and thereby be hindered from their studies, and
were glad to see it put into a Law, to take them off from wordly cumbrances.
But since I have read men's practices, I suspect that Ministers were then to be
taken off of the world, only so far as they did intermeddle with some Diana,
and to be given to the world again, to serve a design, or permitted to work
for their livings for want of a Gospel maintenance, and to admit every Boy and
Artificer of a voluble tongue (unapproved) into the Pulpit, which has made me
to wonder at the Geometry and Divinity of these times, who (should seem) do
count that the stride from the world to the Pulpit, is not so wide, as from the
Pulpit to the world. Learned men, said they, must wholly give themselves to
study, to preach, (and good reason, say I; for Paul exhorts Timothy in diverse
expressions, to study, and cries out, Who is sufficient for these things?) but
illiterate men may follow a Trade all the week, and yet be sufficiently able to
preach upon the Lords day. But to help this, they cry up these worldly
laboring men's preaching to be the preaching by the Spirit. As if the Spirit
did help Bezaleel and Aholiab in their Trades, but does not help godly
learned Ministers in their Divine studies, or that the Spirit assists in
extemporaries, but not in meditationall preparations.

3. And lastly (if there be any lastly to be put to these things) the
Complainers were wont to tell you terrible stories of Court-pride,
covetousness, self-interest, projects, designs, and indeed this complaint was
just. But now me thinks, it is but mutato nomine, and As you were: Only there
is this difference, then those things were but in Retaile, now in wholesale:
Then were they in one corner, now overspread the Land. I pray God England
proves not like Jehu, that zealously (as he thought) destroyed the house of
Ahab, and his Priests of Baal, and false Prophets, but departed not from the
sins of Jeroboam, that made Israel to sin. It is suitable to Satan to make us
change the names and forms of things, but not reform the matter, and so
transform us into a LIE.

CHAP. VII. Men truly godly are not to be dismayed at these times. They must
sigh to God in prayer, but not sink in their faith and hope.
THe second Corollary upon the Position is, that notwithstanding all these
things, the Elect of God, true believers, holy-hearted souls, be not dismayed.
Let them sigh and groan to God in prayer for these abominations of the times,
and to prevent them in themselves, but not to sink in their faith and hope.
Let them, as the WOMAN, take their wings, their wings of prayer, and fly out
of the Egypt of the abominations, into the Wilderness of retired holy life (as
far as they may not neglect their public duty) but not to fear the floods of
the ungodly; for they have a sweet, and sure Promise, Psalm. 32.5, 6. I prayed
(says David) and the Lord heard. For this shall every one, that is godly, pray
unto thee in a time when thou may be found. Surely in the floods of great
waters they shall not come nigh unto him. The Woman the Church, is still in a
sense in Travel, till the Man-child be yet more totally and higher in the
Throne, at the appearance of the Head, as well as of the body, which will be
shortly, as you may perceive by the preceding computations. And therefore ye
Saints of his, walking in purity, be not dismayed: Say not, how shall we choose
but be dismayed, at all these dreadful things! But consider,

1 That our God, that best knows the intent, and event of things, says in the
same Verse, as it were with the same breath; Rejoice O Heavens, and you that
dwell in them. And mark it, he first says so, to his people to comfort them,
before he comes with his WOE, as in Matthew. 25. Christ first says to the sheep,
Come ye blessed, and sets them on his right hand, that they may be out of
doubt what should become of them; before he says to the Goats, Go ye cursed.
So here, he first secures the comfort of his own people; Rejoice, O Heavens,
and ye that dwell in them, meaning the godly of the Heaven of the Church on
earth, as we have given you an account and reason for it before. If the Lord
says to us that believe, Rejoice, let us not fear: Though Hymeneus and
Philetus fall off, yet the foundation of God stands sure, to them that call
upon the name of the Lord, and depart from iniquity, as the seal that they are
Gods Elect, 2 Timothy 2.19. God has a care both of the measure of his peoples
Temptations, and of the means of escape. 1 Cor. 10.13. The Lord has some
spiritual Goshen, or Gospel-supply against the Devil himself, 2 Cor. 12.
which Peter prooves by many instances, 2 Pet. 2. viz. That the Lord knows how
to deliver the godly out of Temptation.

2 Christ gives us this prediction, that when the things come to pass, they
might not prejudice us. He has forewarned us that so shall be the times, that
we might be fore-arme d^ not to be like the times. Just as he did, Matthew.
24.4.13. He gives a prediction, and then a premonition, a prediction, and a
premonition. It is not possible, says he there, to seduce the Elect. But also
that it might be probable to their hope that they might not be seduced, he
premonisheth to use the means, Verse. 24, 25, 26. The words are, There shall
come false Christ's, and if it were possible, shall seduce the very Elect.
Wherefore I have told you before. If they say he is here, or there, go not
forth, etc. It proceeds from faith in Gods promises to use means: And the
using of means strengthens faith, because we are then in Gods way. Yea, the
fore warnings of these, will make pious, prudent men chary what places they go
into, and with what persons they converse in these times of common contagion on
souls.

3 God has spoken distinctly, that the Woe shall be to the Inhabitants of the
Earth and Sea, viz. The grosser wicked, and the sinerspun hypocrite. God has
set a mark upon the rest, sealed the residue for preservation, Ezekiel. 9. Rev.
7. The plagues fall on the Egyptians, not upon the Israelites. Corah and his
Company are swallowed up, not they that separated themselves from them. The old
world was drowned, but not Noah, etc. And this distinctive care of God toward
his people, is more absolutely fulfilled in spirituals, then temporals.

4 The worst times are Gods usual Preface to better times. The Evening in the
Creation was before the Morning, which is spiritually applied, Psalm. 30.5. Romans
13.12.2 Pet. 2.19. Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the
morning. If the night be far spent the day is at hand. If there be but the
light of night stars to shine in the dark, the day star ere long will
arise. The corrupt estate of the old world, preceded the springing of the
Church from Abraham by the propagation of the Gospel, and the Covenant to him
and his. The state of Israel in Egypt, went before that in Canaan. They were in
Babylon, before they re-builded the Temple. When Christ came, he found the
Sects, and swarms of Pharisees, Sadducees, Herodians, Esseans, etc. And the
ten Persecutions, ushered in the glory of the Church under Constantine the
Great. God will yet, notwithstanding all these, make the end of the world
glorious, as he did the beginning. That dominion of man in innocence, Genesis
1.26. is made by David, long after the Fall, a point of faith and hope that yet
man should be restored to that, Psalm. 8. which Paul likewise looking upon, as a
Prophecy yet to be fulfilled, now after Christ is ascended, repeats in Heb. 2.
that eight Psalm, and says it shall come to pass in the Inhabited world to
come, with great emphasis on the phrase. Eye the Margin, (...). compar. Heb. 1.
v. 6. and Luke 2.1
compare Rev. 20.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

5 This great Woe on these times, from the Devils great wrath is but short. So
the words of the voice to John; The Devil has great wrath, but his time is but
short. His great wrath is checked with the smalnesse of the time. The Devil
knows his time is short, and we know it: He knows it, and is angry: Therefore
by the rule of contraries, we knowing it is short, should be glad, We can
(says the Heathen) bear sharp things, if short. Can we not (says Christ)
Watch with him one hour? A little faith was greatly accepted of Christ, in
times of great opposition at his first coming into the world. See an instance
in his weak eleven Disciples. And a little strength is commended by Christ in
the Church of Philadelphia, Revel. 3. in apostatizing times. God will much
approve us, if we hold right in the maine in these evil times. God will try
Israel to purpose in the wilderness, before they enter Canaan. God will prove
the Levites eminently, whether they be on his side, before he advances them,
Exodus 32.26, 27, 28, etc. O that we might hold out sincere and sound, but this
little time before Christ's appearing, so we shall be in a sweet posture with joy
to bid him we ^.

CHAP. VIII. Of ^s devices, and our giving (...) ^dvantages.
THE third Corollary is, If this be a time of Satan's special emission, with
large permission, that he is come down in great wrath, to work great woe to
the world, and has begun already, then let us not be mislead. It is time for
the unregenerate world to be awakened, for it is said to them with great
emphasis, Woe to the inhabitants of the Earth and Sea, for the Devil is come
down unto YOU. And godly men must not be asleep, lest the envious man sow
tares in their field. The Devil being a spirit, and experienced by five
thousand years practice in all manner of subtilties, he has many devices, and
therefore all the sons of men had need (...) heed of handing to him ^ tages,
2 Cor. 2.11.

The Devices of Satan in the general are 3, 1 Possession, 2 Obsession, 3
Suggestion,


1 Possession, when he is permitted to enter into a man, and is there
powerfully predominant over his soul and body, wracking him inwardly with
horrors, and strengthening him with untameable violencies, as we see examples
in the stories of the Gospel. The Advantage men give to Satan thus to prevail
is, when they do, as it were, sell themselves (as Ahab, Balaam, and Saul) that
is, wholly give up themselves to work all wickedness with greediness (as the
Scripture speaks.) That is, as the Rhetorician may expound, Quicquid libet,
licet, quicquid licet, audent; quicquid audent, faciunt; quicquid faciunt, eos
non molestant; That is, What they list is lawful, what is lawful they dare;
what they dare, they do; what they do, is not grievous to them. Thus in these
days crowds of wicked wretches, blasphemers, inhumane imps, impious by horrid
principles, ascend their increment and gradation of ungodliness, till they
appear to us no otherwise then as possessed.

2 Device is Obsession, when the Devil by permission has power over a man's
body only, clasping and grasping him in the arms of his power, carrying him
from place to place at his pleasure (as for a while he had power over our
Saviors body, Matthew. 4.) and bowing a man's limbs together in a miserable
manner (as that woman's Luke 13.) assisting men sometimes, Luke 13.11.16 And
behold there was a woman which had a SPIRIT of infirmity eighteen years, and
was bowed together, and could in no wise lift up her self. And Jesus said unto
her, Woman thou art loosed from thine infirmity, and he laid his hands on her,
and immediately she was made straight; and the Ruler of the Synagogue said
with indignation, Are there not six days in which men ought to work in them?
therefore come, and be healed, and nor on the Sabbath. The Lord then answered,
Thou hypocrite, does not each of you on the Sabbath lose his Ox, etc? and
ought not this woman, being a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has bound, lo
these eighteen years, be loosed?
when the temptation prevails on them, in a wonderful manner to make away
themselves. The Advantage men yield to Satan to prevail thus upon them is,
when men, though they have not departed from divine principles, yet do act all
manner of wickedness in their bodies, with which they ought to have honored
God, as well as with their souls. Some instances also of this are in these
days.

3 Device is Suggestion, or Temptation, whereby he does trouble the senses, and
puzle the fantasy, and conveyes to the mind his sinful phantasmes,
representations, and species, or spirital Images of evil things. The Advantage
he has from men to do this is, when they make not conscience of their evil
thoughts, as to repent of, and pray against them; when they are secure, keeping
no watch over their own hearts, to examine what thoughts come in, before the
justice of the Word; Or are swollen with pride, in opinion that they have more
goodness then they have; As that they have the spirit in an extraordinary
manner, and measure above others.

CHAP. IX. The Art of shunning Temptations.
THis last of Suggestion, or, as you call it, Temptation, (though Temptation is
of a larger signification; for man also may tempt man, and a man may tempt
himself) is the commoner course of Satan, and that in these days of his
special emission, and therefore I shall speak most to this:

Our work divides it self into two

Generals 1 Not to assist Satan in tempting one another. 2 Not to accept of his
temptations assaulting us.


1 Not to assist Satan in tempting one another

Touching Power Opinion, Practice.


1 Touching Power. Beware, that one rank of men do not endeavor the
devesting of another rank, of that just power, relation, and honor that God
has given them, as most needful for the common good. For if one sort will
unjustly pull down, or diminish another: Another will endeavor to do as much
for them, as we have seen in many instances in History, Scripture, and
Experience. I speak not of a Tyrannical or Superstitious power, or of a
noxious use of any other power.

In particular, let not the Magistracy tempt the Ministry, or the Ministry the
Magistracy, whiles there is such mighty levelling and designing against both.
In the reign of Antichristian Papacy, proud Episcopacy, and Scottish
Presbytery, the Ministry incroached on the Magistracy. Since the Erastians
sprang up, the Magistracy is cried up as all in all. The mean while the
Levellers find a fair opportunity to pull down both.

But the common welfare cannot be without both. And they themselves must like
Hippocrate's twins, live, or dye together. When there was only the Priests
to rule in Israel, whether in the time of the Macabees, or at other times, the
public safety is but in ill case. On the other side, they that altogether cry
up Magistracy and down the Ministry, let them not forget that the state of the
Church under the great Restoration, Rev. 21. shall be in form of a Church
with the Angels, viz. the Ministers to keep out all unclean, Kings bringing
their glory and honor into it. Therefore let not, mean while, the Magistrate
neglect the Minister, to give him his double honor of countenance and
maintenance, 1 Timothy 5.17. Nor the Minister neglect the Magistrate to charge the
consciences of men to be subject to their power.

2 Not to assist Satan in tempting one another touching Opinions. Beware how we
communicate Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, impious principles, so much as
Historically, or Narratively, Hof. 2.16, 17. At that day says the Lord thou
shall call me ISHI, and thou shall call me no more BAALI (though both signify
the same thing, viz. my Husband, or my Lord; only because as Hierom notes,
Baali was the Idolaters style, etc.) For I will take away the NAMES of Baalim
out of her mouth, and they shall be no more REMEMBERED by their NAME. Ephesians.
5.3. But fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be
once NAMED amongst you. For, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.33. Evil
communications, (...)
or conferences, corrupt good manners. The reason is strong. The very having of
evils in our ears, by reason of a party they have within us by original sin
(the seed of all sins) does more or less pollute or prejudice the soul. The
discourses of evil is as common liquors, poured upon light colors, they leave
a stain, though they alter not the Dye. Alas! for us, our imperfect graces
have yet but lightly dyed our natures with holiness: We had need to take heed
of every drop, and dust of sin.

3 Not to assist Satan in tempting one another in matters of practice. To
beware that neither our words, nor carriage, nor examples infect others, in
these contagious and spiritual-disease catching times. If we do but any how
intimate to others in expressions, or gestures, or conversation, that we are
loosened in the socket of our pious principles, we presently more or less in
these apostatising times weaken, if not overturne, the steadfastness of others.

2 Not to accept or receive the motions of temptations from Satan, or
else-whence whatsoever.

1 The grand general rule is this. That whereas at this day many pretend a
special dictating, and direction of the Spirit. Note that that motion alone is
a word from the Spirit, that is, according to the word of the Spirit, that is,
according to the Scriptures spoken and penned by the inspiration of the holy
Spirit in an extraordinary way, 2 Pet. 1. last. Therefore though the Prophets
of the Old Testament had the Spirit in an extraordinary manner and measure, yet
their rule is (in opposition to false pretended spirits) that if any spoke not
according to the Word of the Law and Testimony, they had no LIGHT in them, Esa.
8.20. So likewise the Apostles were extraordinarily endued with the Spirit,
both for Doctrine and Miracles; Paul the Apostle had it, and a Revelation to
boot (2 Cor. 12.) yet he Gal. 1.8, 9. pronounces an Anathema, a curse twice
over, upon any man or Angel that shall deliver any other Doctrine then what is
according to the Gospel. John the Apostle also had the Spirit in an
extraordinary degree for Doctrine and Miracles, and had a large Revelation, (
viz. the book of the Revelation) besides; yet he bids us try the Spirits,
whether they are of God, by this, He that knows God HEARS us, he that is
not of God, HEARS not us. Hereby we know the Spirit of truth, and the spirit
of error, 1 John 4.1.6.

But because Enthusiasts, Heretics, etc. make the Word of God a Nose of wax,
to turn it, which way they list, even as they fantasy it to be like the eye
of a picture, as that it still looks toward them, in favor of their opinion,
which way soever they turn; therefore add this, that as the constant Tenor of
the Scriptures is to promote Christ, and to press holiness, so the Spirit
(that dictated that word) does both those; it advances Christ, 1 John 4.1.2.
and 1 Cor. 12.3. And it works holiness, Romans 1.4. Romans 8.9, 10.11.

2. The particular rules touching temptations are these.

1 Lay load of Gospel-contrition on that original sin, concupiscence, which
is a natural pravity in our natures, inclining us to evil, and to pour out
spiritual sighs and groans of prayer unto Christ, and applications of Christ,
as batteries against it. So did David, Psalm. 51. as his Penitence for
past-times, and a prevention of future. James. in Chap. 1. v. 14. makes
original sin or concupiscence the first drawing of the heart aside (as a
pillar of an house off of his Center.) Paul, Romans 7.19. makes it that Tyrant,
that made him do that evil he would not; whereupon he makes an outcry to
Christ, and is comforted, Romans 7.24, 25.

Indeed here is the foundation laid, and a strong Bulwark built against all
Temptations, viz. by continual applications of Christ, and supplications to
Christ to have a pure heart in a constant exercise of purity, Act. 15.16. Act.
24.16. An heart purified by faith. And herein, says Paul, I do exercise my
self to have always a conscience void of offense, etc. Then are Satan's darts
shot as against a wall of marble, that pierce not, and his temptations are but
as dirt thrown upon Cristall, but neither stain, not stick long. See an
example in Christ; yea, in Paul, 2 Cor. 12. and so proportionably in all that
partake of Christ.

2 Quick-sightednesse to discern, and suddenly and seasonably to despise the
overtures and pretensive persuasions of a sinful object, confederating with
our concupiscence to draw us to a consent to sin, Heb. 5. last v. Christians
of full age by reason of use, have their senses exercised to discern both good
and evil. St. James tells us, that after that drawing aside by concupiscence
(before mentioned) follows an Enticing by some object (suitable to that
drawing) to bring us to consent. By the object a man is baited for, as a Fish
is baited for, with an amiable bait upon an hook; Gr. (...). Jam. 1.14.
The bait seems lovely to the eye, and pleasant to the taste, whiles the hook
is not perceived; So original corruption opens its eyes, and beholds, and shows
us the honor, pleasure, profit, or other carnal sweetness of the object, not
considering the snare under it. So that the object presenting it self,
concupiscence is that which plays the bait before the mouth of the will and
affections, to cause them eagerly to catch and swallow it. the Object is as the
Woor, Concupiscence is as the Spokesman. To cure all this, (...).
the Apostle calls upon us, 2 Cor. 10.4. to consider the Gospel weapons, or
Armory, whereby to throw down these pretended reasons, and rational thoughts
(as we dream) to consent to sin (for a show of reason to a rational
creature, that he may sin, is a powerful temptation, which the Apostle
therefore there calls strongholds) that is, the word of the Gospel, which we
must ding in the face of all persuasive seeming reasons to sin.

Inest peccatum cum delecteris, regnat si consenseris. Austin.
It Is too much misery to be disposed toward sin by Concupiscence, but it is
a slavery to be drawn to consent. There is (says one) A sin if thou art
delighted with evil, but it reigns, if thou consent. But if we keep our
consent chaste, from the Harlot sin, (as it is typically termed in the first
nine Chapters of the Proverbs) we may comfortably say, as the Apostle, Romans
7.16, 17. If then I do that which I would not, I consent to the Law that it is
good. Now then it is no more I that do it, but sin that direlleth in me.

3 Satan often strikes in with both these, viz. this Object, and that
Concupiscence (for those are his materials he works upon, and his Topics, or
Places whence he draws his arguments of temptation) thrusting in his
suggestions, and incitations, to add fresh impressions (for that is a mystery
both in Divinity and Philosophy that Satan can make our fantasies to lay aside
our own phantasmes, and heed his; to cause our imagination, to lay down the
images of things presented by our inward senses, and to take up into
consideration those his suggestion brings in.) Which adventitious, additional
power of Satan in the temptation may be (in part) discerned, by the
suddenness, unseasonablenesse, and violent importunatenesse; perhaps when the
object, or its luster is something withdrawn, or concupiscence begun to be in a
slumber. Therefore the third rule mounted of purpose for this particular is,
that of Jam. 4.7. Resist the Devil, and he will fly from you.

Resist, may the tempted say, Is it no more but resist? That is true, If I
could resist, the work were done: Resist? if I can: But how shall I resist?

Answ. Why mark the mystery of the Rule, that is, the meaning, resist whiles
thou have, at least, a little strength to resist. Resist before thou art
inveagled, before thou art engaged, enchanted, and captivated beyond retreat.
Bid defiance to the temptation at first sight. Make an outcry against the first
motion: And remember this, and be positive, and peremptory in the use of it;
That it is thy sin, and thou will in danger thy self to sin further, if
thou parie with the Devils suggestions, and lend thine care to his arguments,
as we have a woeful example in Eve. Mind that thou have other and better
words, namely the Word of God to hearken to, and better motions, the blessed
suggestions of the Spirit according to that Word to busy thy thoughts withal.
And therefore we must follow Christ's example ( Matthew. 4.) to ding and dash a
pat, plain, powerful Scripture in the mouth of every Temptation, with a It Is
written. Not encounter with our phantasied spirit, but with the written Word of
the holy Spirit.

Diseases (say the Physicians) are at first hardlier discerned, but if
discerned, easilier cured: At last easilier discerned, but hardlier cured.

We have a notable distinct and piercing holy Word of God to discover sin,
intus and in cute, inside, and outside ( Heb. 4.12.) Therefore as soon as a
Temptation dares show its face, say to your Temptations, as David to the sons
of Zerviah (2 Samuel 16.10.) What have I to do with you? you will be too hard
for me. Say to your temptations, as Ephraim, (Hos. 14) to his Idols, What have
I to do any more with you? Say as Nehemiah, Shall such a man as I am fly?
Shall I, a Christian, a Believer, the redeemed of the Lord, be tempted away
from him? If a woman will not speak with an unsuitable Suitor, or meeting him
perchance, will not hear him speak, she will never be won.

Add, that if in this thy opposing at first the rise of temptation, Satan will
be clamouring in the ears of thy soul with his reiterated persuasions, then
fill thy heart with groans, and rather then not out-noise him, thy mouth with
cries of prayer in some secret place, to drown the voice of Satan's
temptations. For ofttimes (when the place is convenient) vocal expression
helps to keep up the inward intention of the heart in prayer.

Yet sourthly, take this Rule, in the next place, That it is a Temptation, and
may prove a great preparation to many Temptations, to lay all our Temptations,
and the all of every Temptation upon Satan, as if we had not the maine hand in
every of them. For as Sartan cannot tempt without Gods leave (as we see in Joh)
so we cannot be effectually tempted without our own leave (as it appears in
Eve.) It is true, that it is seldom but Satan (if permitted) does first, or
last, more, or less concur with out temptations. But this is as true, that
since our fall by the first grand Temptation of Eve, we might tempt our selves,
by beholding the enticing object, and hearing the persuasions of Concupiscence,
if there were no Devil in being. For as there is an object for every sin, so
in original sin is a seed of every sin. So that original sin is
potentially (as the Schoolmen speak) and vertually every sin. It is the
Seminary of all sorts and sizes of sin, Matthew. 15.19. etc. Out of the heart
(says Christ) proceed evil THOUGHTS, MURDERS, ADULTERIES, FORNICATIONS,
THEFTS, and BLASPHEMIES. Evil thoughts comprehend all the evil of all our
thoughts. And what is worse then those three, Murder, Adultery, and Blasphemy?
(the first being against the life of others; the second, against our own
bodies; the third, against the Essence and Excellency of God;) And all in the
plural. So that by this account in original sin is the seed of the sin
against Holy Ghost; that is, there is in us by nature, that, out of which (if
God should leave us) to form the actual sin against the Holy Ghost. And
therefore the fourth Rule about temptations is (as before to eye and eject
Satan, so now) to mistrust our own hearts enough. For as we all equally sinned
in Adam, having all of us, one and the same will in him; And all of us equally
descended from his loins; so we all partooke of original sin equally. And
you heard before what a spawne original sin is, and the plentiful product
thereof. Some men may indeed more awaken, and strengthen their own share of
original sin, in the degree, but all equally share in the kind, and so have
equally the seeds of all sins in them. So that by the shining glory of an
enticing object, upon the putrid matter of original sin, may be ingendered
innumerable sins, without the Devil; I say may be. It is said, The heart is
deceitful above all things, Jer. 17.9. Therefore a greater deceiver (as to
prevailment upon us) then Satan. And therefore, though Satan cannot (nor will
he, if he can have his own will) be quit from continual tempting us, yet let
us not put off the matter from our selves.

Unregenerate Eve (whiles such) will in the face of God, put all her
temptations upon the Devil, and God does therefore pronounce a punishment upon
the very body he did use, yet not acquitting Eve, but punishing her also. But
godly men do contrariwise; namely, that though Satan had an hand, and perhaps
a great hand in their sins, yet they are ready to take all upon themselves.
In 1 Chronicles 21.1. it is said, SATAN stood up against Israel, and PROVOKED David
to number Israel; And yet in verse 17. good David takes all upon himself, and
with great emphasis and iteration, says to the Lord, IS IT NOT I, that
commanded the people to be numbered? EVEN I IT IS that have sinned, and done
evil indeed, It is true, when others, as Christ or his Apostles speak of the
temptations of believers, they (to preserve believers from despair) put much
of their temptations upon the account of the Devil, as Matthew. 16.23. Christ
says to Peter, Get thee behind me Satan. The meaning of Christ is, that Satan
had a great hand in tempting Peter to dissuade Christ from his Passion. And
Luke 22.31. Simon, Simon, Satan has desired to sift thee as wheat; meaning
Satan's tempting Peter to deny Christ (mentioned presently v. 34. and acted v.
44.) So Paul often puts the sins of believers upon the Devils account, 2 Cor.
2.11. Lest SATAN should get and advantage. And 2 Cor. 11. v. 3. I fear lest as
the SERPENT beguiled Eve, your minds should be corrupted. And v. 14. Satan
himself is transformed into an Angel of light, and therefore it is no great
thing, if his Ministers be also transformed, etc. And 1 Cor. 7.5. Lest Satan
tempt you for your incontinency. But Christians themselves, to show their full
acquaintance with their own hearts, and the sincerity of their repentance, do
lay the load of the temptation upon their own corruption, Psalm. 51.

Therefore to close this Rule. Be watchful enough over your own spirits; the
evil spirit cannot prevail without the consent of yours. Observe your hearts
wishly, especially, when they are gazing, and bring them much into Gods
presence and company. In the Kings presence no rapes, or robberies or violences
are committed.

Fifth Rule. Be not secure that any man of what quality or condition soever, is
free from the assault of temptations. All the best of Saints have been
tempted, as Adam, Eve, Job, David, Peter, Paul, Christ, with intimations of the
rest, 1 Cor. 10.13. Temptation common to MAN, 2 Pet. 3. chap. verse. 9. The Lord
knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations; proved by several
instances in the preceding part of the Chapter. Therefore all the sons of the
first Adam must address themselves to the second Adam against temptations as
Paul, Romans 7.25. And must look on Christ distinctly under that consideration,
and habitude, as in special fitted to compassionate and comfort us in our
temptations, Matthew. 4. Heb. 2.18. For that he himself suffered being tempted,
he is able to succor them that are TEMPTED, Heb. 4.15, 16. For we have not an
High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but
was in all points TEMPTED, like as we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore
come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy in the time of
NEED.

Sixth Rule, It will soon turn into a temptation, if any man presume that
there is any one sin, to which he cannot be tempted, as confiding upon his
Complexion of nature, Condition by calling, etc. as if sufficient Baracadoes to
fence it out. You heard but now, that as all the sons of men have equally
original sin, and original sin has (without exception) in it the seeds
of all sins: Therefore the nature of all men is as Tinder or Gunpowder, to
all sparks of all Temptations, though some tinder or powder, catches
something sooner then other. And for Satan, though he has not in him formally
all sorts of sin, as he cannot be an Atheist (Jam. 2.19.) nor can he
immediately commit corporal sins; yet he has Tantamount, viz. Malice
against God, and all good, and a love to all sin, which are equivalent to
original sin in us comprehending and causing all sin, where permitted.

Now these two, original sin, and Satan, with their devices, under the
painted cloth of sinne-alluring objects, are efficient enough to put us upon
the trial of a temptation to any sin; As they are grand Enemies to faith,
that should lead us to Christ for rescue. And therefore godly souls have been
assaulted and attempted, to doubt of all the Articles of Faith, and
consequently to disobedience to all the Commandments whereby they should
testify their faith. And in special to the sin we least fear, or suspect,
for these two reasons:

1 To punish our vain confidence and carnal security, that we could never
be inclined to such, or such a sin, as thinking our hearts are better then
they are. And therefore by an attempting us to that sin, God will awaken us
to see more of our own hearts, if we will see: Because Peter. and Thomas were
so confident that they could not sin the sin of unbeleefe, or of fear to
confess Christ, therefore are they left more to doubt and deny Christ then the
rest of the eleven Disciples, Luke 22.33, 34. Joh. 11.16. compare Joh. 20.25.

2 Because men are not humbled as they ought, for some sins that are more
suitable and sweet to their corrupt nature: therefore God in justice, yea, in
mercy (if improved) does permit them to be tempted to other sins which their
nature in a sort abhorres, and for shame they cannot abide.

Seventh Rule, we must not be over confident that mere grace, or freedom
from sin, can free us from the assaults of Temptations. The Angels. seduced
by Beelzebub in Heaven, had, before that, no sin. Adam and Eve had, before
they were tempted, no sin. Christ had all fullness of grace, when yet he was
assaulted with temptation. It is the establishment of us in a state of grace,
with the concurrence of Gods power with our graces, that must uphold us, that
temptations prevail not Angels, Adam, and Eve, fell by temptations, because
they were under a legab perfection of nature, but not under a Gospel
establishment of grace. Christ stood, because he had both an establishment in
Gospelgrace, and the extraordinary concurrence of Gods power (by union) with
his graces. So must we be kept from falls by temptations, upon the same
adcounts. So the Scriptures evidently and emphatically, Romans 6.14. Sin shall
not have dominion over you, for (mark the establishment) ye are not under the
Law, but under grace. And 2 Corinthians. 12.9.1 Pet. 1.5. Joh. 10. observe the
concurrence of Gods power with our graces) My grace is sufficient for thee, for
MY STRENGTH is made perfect in weakness. We are kept by the POWER of God
through FAITH. None shall pluck them out of mine, or my Fathers hand.

Eight, and last Rule. However we fare, or fall by temptations, yet beware of
that which usually is the last and worst of Temptations; That Temptation of
Temptations, that rivets many that they never return: That is, that if they
fall by Temptation, they think that there is no mercy, no pardon for them, no
hope of Salvation. And so they make a bad matter worse then ever God made it.
Remember,

First, It is the Devils method, not the mind of God (for the contrary is in
his word) that after Satan has tempted MEN to sin, then next he tempts them
to despair.

Secondly, Mind that the sin of Unbeleese is the great sin above all other
sins, because against the truth of God and so against the Being of God, and
against his offer of mercy and pardon. Therefore is that mighty emphasis put
upon Unbeleefe in John 3.

Thirdly, Consider that God has pardoned all sins, and all sorts of sins
whatsoever, of which men have repented, 1 Cor. 6.9. yea, the sin of putting
Christ to death, Act. 2. Therefore all sins may consist with election and
salvation, of which men do repent; as Peter speaks to those Christ killing
Murderers; Repent (says he) and be baptized, and ye shall receive the Holy
Ghost.

And though Satan's last game is to persuade men they have sinned the sin
against the Holy Ghost, that shall not be forgiven; yet know this for a sure
rule, That that cannot be the sin against the Holy Ghost, for which a man
can be sorrowful.

Close all with this,

Above all things, keep, and keep up thy faith and confidence in God, through
Christ (as the Gospel most abounds with encouragements to faith) for faith is
the grace that cleares thee before God for all lapses by past temptations, and
preserves thee from future.

FINIS.

