THE HONOR OF THE English Soldiery, Illustrated by way of Parallel, betwixt
Them, and those of other NATIONS, in point of Discipline and Behavior;
Especially of FRANCE.

Occasioned by several Relations, sent over, touching the Barbarous Tyranny of
the FRENCH Soldiery, and their FOREIGN AUXILIARIES.

Set forth as a warning to ENGLAND, against admitting the Scots, or any other
Foreiners under any pretense whatsoever.

Barbarus has Segetes?

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, 1651:

The Honor of the English Soldiery, Illustrated by way of Parallel, betwixt
them, and those of other Nations, in point of Discipline and Behavior;
especially of FRANCE.
AS often as I contemplate the good Order and Discipline of the old Roman
Militia (whereby that Queen of Cities became Lady of the world) comparing it
with ours, it seems to me as if the famous Manlii, the Fabii, and the Scipio's,
were revived again among the gallant Commanders and Captains of the English
Nation; For, without controversy, those ancient Heroes may here find their
Parallels in every Punctilio of true valor and honor, not any whit inferior in
Civil or moral Indowments: But if to the accomplishments of nature, we add
those also that are Spiritual; by how much Grace excels Nature, Christian piety
morality, so far we may conclude, that as the present persons and Actions
take their rise from mor Noble Principles and designs, so they must needs
transcend the highest examples of old Rome, and appear much more excellent,
every way, than all the Monuments and Triumphs of the Roman virtue. How great
then is the happiness of this Nation (even in the midst of misery) that
notwithstanding, through the continued Plots and malice of her Enemies, she be
constrained still to keep a Militia on foot for her necessary defense, yet the
matter is carried, through the care and severity of those which Command, that
so good Order is observed among the Soldiery, as it equals, if not exceeds the
strictest Pattern of the Roman Discipline! Time was (you may remember) not long
since, when the poor people were wont to tremble at the very name of
approaching Soldiery; Let the North consider how it was harassed by the
insulting Cavalier, and far worse afterward by the pernicious and most
merciless Scot, who like the Locust, devoured what the Palmerworm had left,
utterly drained them of their wealth and provisions, cleared both man and beast
(driving all away) to the impoverishing and starving of many Thousands, in the
Northern Counties; nor did they abate one tittle of the like inhumanity, all
along the Country, in that their memorable march (to no purpose) to the siege
of Hereford. Let the West likewise remember, what it suffered by that wretched
crew under Goring and Grenviel; neither let it be forgotten by the whole Land,
how much every part did groan under the cruelty of Rupert, and his implacable
pack of Foreiners and Plunderers; whose rapacious lusts knew no measure, nor
their eyes any pity, wheresoever they came. Nor is it possible; that the
Mid-land Counties and Frontiers should forget the devastations, burnings
free-quarters, and plunders, made by the incursions of both the Parties, as
well Parliamentary, as Royal; For in those days, little better was the
constitution of many even of the Parliaments Forces, who were too much infected
with the High-Boys, Dammees and Ranters; so that the poor people in all parts,
were ground to powder (like Corn in the mill) betwixt two disagreeing Parties,
who both seemed to agree in the same point of inhumanity, to inhance the
miseries and sorrows of an afflicted Kingdom.

But in process of time, it seeming good to the wisdom of Parliament, to alter
the Commander in Chief, and establish a new model of the Militia (as it now
stands to this day) especial care was taken in the first place to put such
only in place of Command, as were men of known principles of integrity and
Piety; and the whole mass of the Soldiery (especially the Cavalry) was made up
for the most part, of men of the same temper; such as engaged upon internal
respects of Conscience and duty, not out of Mercenary, or any other inferior
considerations; by which means it came to pass, that the Army was soon freed
from all the inconveniences and extravagancies of the former establishment. The
noble and serious behavior of the good, wrought a shame in the bad; and as for
those whom good example and their own ingenuity could not amend, the Laws and
Ordinances of War were put in quick execution to restrain them; so that either
for fear or shame, there followed an universal change in the behavior of the
Soldiery Military Discipline was soon revived after the strictest examples of
ancient Severity; Quarters were discharged, Plunder and Oppression avoided;
drunkenness, swearing, lasiviousness, and all kinds of Luxury, were cashired;
the work of God was better minded and carried on for the works sake; Religious
exercises and Conventions frequented, Godliness advanced, and the power of
godliness made the only rise of preferment: In the Intervalls of Action they
lived like Saints, and at the point of Action, behaved themselves like Lions,
being resolved to triumph, even in death, as an Army of Martyrs. In which
posture and resolution they continue to this very day.

Whose houses have they at any time causlesly burnt, in a vain humor of revenge
and oftentation? whose wives, or daughters have they ravished? What Towns do
they ransack? What Villuges do they spoil and abuse? Whose exen, whose sheep,
whose provisions have they taken, and not paid for them, or made restitution?
If any Nation in the world may glory in a Soldiery, sure, none more than
England; yea, none so much: For, it can be no Hyperbole to use this expression
after a Noble Person; that since the days of the Israelits, under the conduct
of Moses and Joshua, not any age, Commonweal, or Kingdom, is able to produce
one Instance (in all points equal) of so noble a Military Discipline and
Institution.

And if no former age, certainly much less the present; the whole race of
mankind being degenerated from the pure Principles of Martial and Moral
honesty, and the reins let loose to all sorts of luxury; But above all others,
among the Soldiery, as you may see in the Nations round about us, where the
people are made miserable examples of their cruelty and Tyranny. In Poland the
Villagers are quite eaten up betwixt their own Countrymen and the Cossacks. How
sad is the condition of poor Germany, groaning still under the variou s
Pressures of the Swedish, Spanish, and Imperial Forces! Even as miserable as
the State of Flanders and the Frontiers, under the cruel exactions of the
Spaniard on the one side, and the plundring Lorainer on the other. And though,
out of all these Countries, we might furnish you with such Relations, as would
move stones to pity; yet in regard we have many fresh Instances brought to
hand, by Letters of a late date from our neighbors of France, it is much more
convenient to publish them, as timely warning-pieces to us in England, to
beware of admitting Scots or others into this Land, considering the present
miserable state of that delicious Kingdom, under the intolerable Tyranny of
their own, and those Foreign Auxiliaries, who pretended they came in there for
their assistance.

A true Relation of what happened about the City of Rheims since May 20. 1651.
And the pitiful estate of the Country.
Out of several Letters written from the said City of Rheims, May 27. 1651.
WE are here fallen into a despair, by the disorder committed in the Country by
the Soldiery. The Regiments of Estampes and of Palluau the Forreiner, have heen
here, and have received the Estape, and yet have committed such excesses as
will make one tremble to think on. The Regiment of Palluau have burnt part of
the Suburbs of Espernay, have ravished women and maids in the Country, and
carried away all the horses of the poor Ploughmen, wheresoever they have
passed, they have plundered the Gentlemen's houses, and have taken from one
alone 200 sheep, with all his horses and cattle: They have killed or wounded
to death several persons, and they do hunt the poor Ploughmen, as one should
hunt a hare in Champagne: nothing dare appear before them: The Cattle of the
Villages of Chenay and St. Thierry, have been wholly carrried away by them: In
a word, it is no worse a desolation then if an Army of hungry Barbarians had
marched through the Province. I should give you too much sorrow, if I should
enlarge more upon the miseries of this forsaken Country.

Another of the said 27. of May.
The misery is such here, that I think it cannot be helped by the hands of men,
be their minds never so much affected to the remedy of it: God must touch the
hearts of the Grandees, and make them have a feeling knowledge of the public
desolations, and give them an efficacious will to remedy them: I know they hear
enough of them, by the frequent recitals they have of them, but what comes into
their ears, does not come to their hearts, as it would do should they see it.

The last day of May.
I could add to the Relation I have formerly sent you of our miseries, but the
little while you are resolved to stay, keeps me from telling you any thing
more, but that it is impossible to hinder the ravishings, rapts, burnings,
murders, and plundrings which are continued here with as much liberty, as if
they were not forbidden. Three days since a Captain killed with his own hands
and in cold blood, within a musket shot of our Gates, a poor Country man who
was coming hither with his wife and a child of six years old he led by the
hand, the Country man not having so much as said a word to him. I do mention
that murder, not that it is alone, but because it seems more odious. The
greatest misery is, that there is no Justice done, and that the Officers and
Soldiers are assured of the impunity, of what crime soever they may commit. The
greatest hurt done to them, is to restore what is in esse, when they pass
through some City where they are not the stronger: it is to be feared lest
those who are to prevent those disorders, and do not use the authority they
have in hand, do fall into the disgrace, which ordinarily attends the injustice
of those who want care or courage to repress the crimes. Things are grown to
such a height, that there is no excuse now for such as are to stop the public
violences. I dare say no more, but that I wish those who have in their hands
the protection of the people, be as willing to help them, as they are knowing
their oppressions.

Of the third of June.
You ought to expect nothing from me but complaints of our miseries, for
although in my former Letters I have acquainted you with the chiefest
circumstances, yet the evil is carrried to the extremity, and time producing
every moment, some new subjects of disgrace. I am forced to tell you that the
Soldiers have lately killed the Curat of Baconne, and a Country man of the
same place, who remained alone in the Village, whom they wounded with three
shot of a firelock in the head. They have plundered the Village of Nauroy, which
is in the Dominion of l'Hospital, where they left nothing, and killed two
Inhabitants and wounded all the rest, one only excepted who is fled. They have
forced the house called du Nuyseman belonging to Madame de St. Piere, have
plundered it, killed Nicholas du Pont her farmor, and carried away all her
horses and cattle. No body dares appear abroad in the Country, where
Robberyes, murders, burnings, ravishings and randsomings are more frequent and
more free then in the enemies Country. Two or three things are the causes of
that. 1. The impunity that reigns absolutely every where. 2. The want of
paying the Soldiers: 3. the necessity which is in the Province, were no bread
being to be found the Soldiers take the liberty to run and to plunder
whatsoever they meet withal.

The Ministers of State may be assured of two things: first that the Province
is wholly ruinated without restource, and that shortly it will be more desolate
then ever Lorrain has been; 2. That before the Kings army be in a body it will
be ruinated by the famine and want, nothing absolutely being to be found here
for its substsience either of men or horses. I think that all the remainder of
the people here are going to resort to Paris to beg their bread, which cannot
but bring an infections air there and such diseases as the necessity has
produced among them.

Of the 5. of June.
I told you in my last part of the disorders committed here by the Soldiery,
but as every day begets some new violence; so you shall have no Letter of me,
but it will tell you some new misery we are at present so much surrounded on al
parts, and the advenues so much possessed, that it is impossible either to come
in or to go out without danger both of life and of the goods; all Soldiers
without exception running as so many hungry wolfes upon the way, and not
sparing the lives nor the goods of such as fall into their hands: They do
unteame the horses from the Ploughs and do carry them away. And Saturday last
they took within sight of the Town the horses of the Carriers who were
bringing Victuals, wood and necessarys for the Inhabitants, and left their
wagons upon the way: in two or three hours they took away above 100. horses
and misused those who offered to resist. I think that if over the despair
has been excusable; such as in this unhappy age shall be forced to a defense,
will have a lawful excuse. The 3 Instant one of our villages was assaulted in
the night by 200. Men of Pallnau, who forced it, killed one of the Inhabitants
and wounded all the rest, one only excepted, they took a way all the horses
and Cowes, stripped a Gentleman who is a Gens d'arme to the King, having very
scurvily used him before: His complaint having been adressed to me here, I have
arrested three Officers until the Commander has given satisfaction. The same
day Mr. de Fremont's house, whom you know was forced and plundered, and the
soldiers having undermined the Dongeon, he and his son in Law Mr. de
Maisieres was forced to run away through the Soldiers with their Pistols cockt
in their hands. Yesternight the Village of Bourgoigne was plundered and the
women striped stark naked. Never France saw such extremityes. The last year
though full of misery was nothing near comparable to this. I esteem that now
the only hand of God is able to help us, since the earthly powers if they can,
they will not. I cannot but grief you by the rehearsal of these calamitys,
but you must be partaker of the miserys of the Province, though you be absent.

Of the 7. of June.
I would end here the recital of our miserys, should I not be confident you
will stay til the arivall of my Lord Bishop of Chaalons, who goes to witness
the desolation of the Province, not being able to see any longer the violence
and oppression, without giving warning to those who have the remedy in their
hands. I have told in my last how the Gentlemen's houses have lost the
privileges and the respect, which covered them from the insolency of the
Soldiery; they were not long since a shelter to some of our Citizens, who
enjoyed the protection which the birth of the Nobles gave them hitherto, but
now they are no more, regarded then others, and their houses look no otherwise
now then so many storehouses, where the Country people has gathered the
remainder of their wrack, that it might be so much the more easily carried
away. They are not content to plunder the Noblemen's houses; but themselves are
ignominiously stripped, and their Wives and Daughters are not free from that
dishonor. Many in their presence have bin stripped to their very smocks, and
we could not keep our tears, when we saw persons of that condition, who have
several times ventured their lives and estate for the service of the King and
Kingdom, run away to us in rags they had borrowed of some poor Countrymen
to hide their nakedness. I dare not exagerate theevill, lest the readers of
these fruitless Storys, and those who will not remedy them, as they are bound
by their authority, think it is rather an amplificated discourse then a true
Story. Yet I think my self obliged to tell you again that the disorder is
infinitely above what I can tell or write. The King's Subjects are no less
molested, then if they were in the hands of the Barbarians their enemies, for
their blood, their goods, their quietness, their honor are no way spared. A
Maid some two days since flying (to save her honor) from the hands of some
unhappy Soldiers who pursued her very narrowly, her zeal to the preservation
of her chastity caused her death; these madd fellows not able to overtake her
before she came into the Village of Sillery, where she intended to have saved
her self, shot at her, so that she fell down dead and her corpse was thrown by
these Villains into a fen. Yesternight the Mills of Tinqueux, of the Abbess
and of the Archbishop, and the Folleries, have been forced and plundered, and
what soever was found in carried away, which causes here a great heat, because
abundance of Merchants interessed in the taking of the Marchandises, which have
been valued, have kept such quarter, that Mr de Bezancon, has been forced to
get on horseback and repair to the place where the Regiment does quarter, to
take an order about it. Thus much for the Soldiery.

Of the same 7. of June.
Mr. de Bezancon is come back from Pevy, where was the regiment of Languedoc,
who have made terrible disorders in these parts: the said Mr. de Bezancon has
been forced to go thither in person, to make use of the King's authority, and
cause such things as remain in esse of their plunderings and robbery to be
restored. The evil does daily increase: You heard of the death of the Curate
of Baconne, as he was treating for the randsome of that poor village. Mr. de
Neuville has been plundered at Nauroy; Mess. de Fremont and de Maisieres have
had the like fortune; but he that has had the hardest measure is Mr. de
Vilette, dwelling upon the Parish of Pevy, whose house was totally plundered
Sunday last at night, he, his Wife and four children turned out and stripped
to their shirts: I saw him on Monday night, and he struck horror into me by the
recital of the hard usage he had received, the poor rags of Canvas that were
given him out of charity to cover his nakedness, drew my tears, specially
hearing him grieve for the misfortune of his wife, and of three of his
Children, whom he knew not what was become of. The Regiment who has made that
disorder is that of Languedoc, who fired Pevy the 5. instant, and burnt some
houses: I should never have done, if I should undertake to tell you all the
horrible and sad storys, that are acted here. It is easy to judge, we are
forsaken by the protection of men, that the ruin of this poor Country is
indubitable, and that in our pressing misery God alone is to be our hope and
consolation.

Of the 10. of June:
Since this Letter is to find you still in Paris, I think my self bound in
duty to tell you that this night the Village of Isle has been plundered by
the Regiment of Chacq, and four Inhabitants killed on the Holy Sacrament's
day. The Baron du Tour's house was fired by 260. Polonois commanded by the
Sergens of that Regiment: The house has been totally plundered, with loss of
4000. Livers. The same Polonois have plundered Chamery, Sermier, and Nogent;
the plundering continues in the Country without remedy; for what we do in
arresting the Officers, when by chance they come to Town, does with great
pains, produce but little good: An express order of the King to some man of
authority, is necessary to arrest and punish the Commanders, and compel them
to redress the disorders of their Soldiers Mr. de Bougy, who commands the army
in the absence of the Duke de Chaune, came hither yesterday, and goes this day
to the quarters of the army, which they are removing a little, but four
regiments are left, one company whereof in the licenciousnesse of the time, is
able to ruinate an whole Province.

Of the same day.
The Castle du Cosson, which last Summer had kept free against the endeavors,
of a whole Army, was yesterday the prey of the Poland regiment quartered at
Villersalerand: they have taken and plundered all; 260. Soldiers did the work,
but the whole regiment of 1200. men was not far off. The Soldiers want bread,
and have no Commissarys of the Victuals to provide any, so that they do
pillage all the places round about the said Village where they are quartered.
Chamery, Sermiers, Villaneuds, Champflery, and others have felt the effects of
their hostility.

Of the 11. of June.
One of our Regiments having carried away all the Cattle of the village of
Isle, and the Inhabitants going to have them again, were very ill used; 4.
having been killed out right and two deadly wounded. The same Regiment, those
of Bougy and Navarre did plunder on the 9. instant Avaux Sur-Aisne, where they
committed great excesses both upon the men and the women and maids, part of
whom were ravished, with all Kind of imaginable brutality.

Of the 12. of June.
I have much entertianed you with our misfortunes, and I could wish the end of
them should put an end to my Letters: but since they do continue and that
every day begets a particular disgrace, I must speak as long as my voice can
hold, that I might not incur into the reproach of having concealed the evil
from them, who are to stop it. I think I have told you how the Regiment of the
Poloneis, had on the day of the Holy Sacrament, forced the Castle du Cosson,
broken open the Gates with Axes, and plundered the house, out of which they
carried for the value of about 4000. Livers. My Lord Bishop of Puy, has the
Process verbal of the same in his hand. They have further forced and
plundered the Curate's house at Chamery, and carried away his goods whilst he
was saying Mass. They have also pillaged the village of Sermier, as you shall
see by the Process verbal I do send you. I complained of it to Mr. de
Bezancon, and as I was pressing for Justice, the commander of that Regiment
came, who engaged his word to see the same redressed, and offered presently to
take horse and repair to the Regiment for that purpose, leaving an officer as
an ostage; but as his intention was not right, and that he thought that being
gone himself, he would find one way or another to free his ostage, he has
endeavored what he could to compass it; but as the business was worth a
particular observation, I appointed some guards upon the said Officer by the
advice of Mr. de Bezancon; so that the Regiment being out of hope to rescue
their officer without repairing the damages, Yesterday about 4. a clock in the
evening, the officers of that Regiment seized on 6. Inhabitants hard by the
Town, whom they have carried away with them; one is the Son of Mr. le
Tresorier Doulet, two are the Sons of Mr. l' Espagnol one of our Sheriffs, two
others are the Sons of the late deceased Eleu Cordier, and the last is Mr.
Josseteau Batchelour in Divinity Curate of Gueux, who gave out to take the
air. I need not to tell you the consequence of that attempt; which once
suffered they may come and pull the Magistrates out of their places, when in
performance of the King's command they shall go about to repress the public
violences in the Country and Towns; you may judge whether this be not a
trampling under foot of the Royal authority and a forceing by arms the
Justice. Mr de Bezancon is gone out in person to moderate such a high
insolency, for I dare not hope a punishment, not for want of zeal in him, but
because licenciousnesse has settled an impunity, and that it seems now it be
feared lest the Justices should ruinate the armies, when as the contrary would
happen, should it be practiced. Our City is in such rumor because of that
disorder, that should not the respect and the love due to the King be deeply
ingraved in the hearts of our Inhabitants, we should expect some tumult within
our Walls, because this violence does give us no more liberty to go out, then
if we were besieged by the enemy. Last friday a Regiment having sent a party
of twelve here to go and carry away the Cattle of Isle, the Inhabitants come
out to hinder them but presently the whole Regiment fell upon them, killed 4:
of them and wounded two more who are a dying, drove away all the Cattle, and
took all the Inhabitants prisoners, whom they have sent back, having kept them
and misused them 24. hours: As for the Cows they have kept 11. and restored
the rest, for they have a pistol a piece. If such disorders are committed with
so much liberty because of the impunity, judge you if upon the high ways and in
the Country any thing can be sure, and whether all things are not fallen into a
confusion, the particulars whereof I do forbear; else I should write every
Post an history and not a private Letter. Pray let My Lord Bishop du Puy see
this, that he might obtain of the Queen's bounty some remedy to these
mischiefs, which are leading us into a despair. The wound is great and
pressing which requires a speedy and powerful awe; the said forces are going
from us, and if once they get into the body of the army, hardly Justice is to
be looked for.

Of the 14. of June.
This word will be the close of all the circumstances of the impietys and
disorders mentioned in my former Letters; and as it is one of the greatest
inhumanitys that might fall into the apprehension of a man, it comes very fitly
the last, that being added to an infinite number of others you have represented
to those in authority for a remedy, it might work finally upon their spirit
for the obtaining of what divine Justice requires of men, and which they should
have done upon their first notice of these crying sines, which earth does not
punish. Some Soldiers of the Regiment of Navarre came lately into the Village
of Beaumont, under the conduct of a Sergeant to look for women or maidens to
full their brutality. Some of them, moved by noise, ran away and escaped by
some byways. Those villains who have less humanity, then the Devils
themselves cames, into a house in this Village, where they found a poor woman
looking to her daughter sick to death, and near her end: at first they fell
upon that poor dying creature, who had no strength to defend her self. The
mother being wild to see such an abominable spectacle, did what she could to
hinder them, and because she disturbed them, they forceably turned her out of
the room, and with words which I dare not foul a Letter with, they forceably
did shut her out, until those among them who had inhumanity enough to ravish
her daughter, had done. Then they leaving her for dead they went away and gave
liberty to the mother to come to her daughter again: but the same day they
returned to make an end of an action which will make the earth guilty before
God, and will make the Land liable to a public Plague, if such an horrible
crime be not revenged: They offered to ravish the Mother, but she being
stronger, they forced her to run away from the room, and having shut her out
again they continued their cruelty upon the daughter, and made her dye in the
endeavors of a brutality, which the Devil would not do, had he a body: This
goes beyond human belief, and truly now adays those that profess to bear
arms, have nothing of man but the face.

That same Regiment have plundered three days since the Village of Avaux
belonging to Mr. le President de Mesmes, carried away all the Cows, Horses, and
goods, leaving nothing.

I cannot imagine that France can subsist long in that disorder; and I am
persuaded that either it draws to her end, or that those, who can stop that
confusion, will speedily look to the remedy. Mr. de Besancon with much ado got
away the 6 Inhabitants they had carried away, and has been promised by the
Officers some satisfaction out of their pay for the damages done to the Castle
of Cosson. Yesterday the Company of the Duke de Valois quartered without order
in Cormonstrevil, and upon their march carried away all the horses of the
Villages where they came; I dare say no more, I have so many complaints in my
hands, that one makes me forget another.

One of June 17.
Since my Letters in this miserable time cannot be but a sad History of our
misfortunes, give me leave to tell you two things, which take away from me all
hopes of redress. The first, That although our disasters be well enough known,
and that those who are to remedy them, have their eyes opened, yet no order is
taken for it, by want of will; for it goes against the common sense of all men,
to say that a Sovereign King, who can do whatsoever he pleases, wants power to
do what he ought to will. Therefore no marvel if in stead of diminishing, the
said disorders are increasing daily, even to producing such implieties, as hell
it self is not capable of. The second is, That having given us some hope of
breathing, by the orders sent for the removing of such Forces as were upon us,
new ones are presently sent to take their place; which makes us believe that
our ruin is unavoidable, and that in vain we have complained, since the end of
our miseries, is the beginning of greater ones. I might say much thereupon, but
I choose rather to make it short, telling you only what happened yesterday
hereabouts by the violence of the Regiment of Harcourt, who assaulted a Convoy
of 10 Carts full of Corn coming from Chaalon hither for the relief of our
extreme necessity, wounded two of the Cartmen to death, and all the rest less
dangerously, took 7 horses, 22 sacks of corn, and a cart full of Oats. I know
not the tenth part of the disorders that happen hereabouts; Judge by the
pattern what may be the pieces.

I durst not rehears any particulars of the Sacriledges and horrible
profanations of the holy things, and of the holy of the holys, which we know,
for fear the continual recital of these abominations, and the exposing of these
horrors to the public view, do force at last heaven to cause the earth to
gape, or send down his thunderbotls and his fire to consume whatsoever might
keep the memory of the high impunity of those crimes and execrable impieties.
Every one knows the plundering and pillaging of all our Churches last year,
both by the enemies Forces, and by our own, to the full knowledge of the
Officers and Commanders, and of such as were appointed to do Justice, yet no
punishment made, nor even an intent to do it, so that nothing was left in the
Churches for their Ministry, nor even the little metal used in the Baptistery.
The rigours and violences committed by the Soldiers upon the Curats and
Church Officers, by the plundring of whatsoever was necessary for their
subsistence, and the excesses practiced upon their persons, which forced the
poor Shepherds to forsake their Flocks and leave them without any help and
assistance upon their death bed, which is not denied even to the greatest
Criminals condemned to death, are also very well known.

The Kings Declaration of the 27 of January last, verified in Parliament the 24
of April bears the truth of the report of these Sacrileges and execrable
attempts upon the sacred person of the Son of God, and the punishment ordered:
but that Declaration has been without execution; with shame we can say that
this year our Churches have not been otherwise plundered, but by losing and
carrying away such ornaments as had been begged and given by way of alms in
Paris during the last winter, for the restablishing of the exercises of
Religion in most of our said Churches, which was wholly ceased, had it not been
for that suyply, and which will cease hereafter, notwithstanding our ancient
possession which we do justify since the establishment of this State.

An extract of some Informations of the violences and disorders committed by
General Roze's Forces in the Land of Tierasche in the Dioces of Laon, where
they were quartered the last winter, and have wholly ruinated and made desolate
the said Country.
Of the 30. and last day of April 1651. and the days following.
THe Village du Hoquet has been wholly ruinated by the pillaging of the said
Roze's Forces, who murdered 16. Inhabitants there, wounded 10. took and
carried away all the Ornaments of the Church, the rest of the Inhabitants for
the most part having been starved.

The Village of Morguy is also ruinated by the said Forces, the Ploughmen dead
or fled, after they had lost their goods by the plundring of Castle St.
Clement, and in the woods of Val St. Piere, where they are gone for refuge.

At Plomion the Church has been broken in several places, all the glasses
broken, and the Ornaments taken away, part of the covert ruinated; Mr. du
Beltoy Governor of Bergue's house plundered, notwithstanding the resistance made
by the guards there, wherein were all the remainders of the goods and
household stuff of the Inhabitants remaining at the said Plomion: Mr. Flander
the Curat has been stripped, abused and beaten with shedding of blood, and in
danger of his life.

At St. Geneviefue and d'Olignon all the buildings have been ruinated and
demolished, and the Church brought into a very bad posture, having been
plundered by the said forces, who have broken, burnt, or carried away whatsoever
was in it.

At Chery lez Buchy, they made use of the Church for a Corpse of guards for a
long while.

Rozoy, Romeroy, Aspermont, Ralimon, Malincau, Hulturque and St. George, have
been wholly ruinated, the houses demolished, and the timber either burnt or
carried away for the most part, the said Moligneau and St. George burnt down to
the ground, the inhabitants dead, or brought to an extreme necessity.

The Chapel of Ease to the said Parish made use of during two months as a
storehouse for the General Rose, so that Mr. Stephen Laureau Priest and Canon
of Rozoy, could not obtain leave of the said General to say Mass therein; no
not upon the Easter day, nor to celebrate there the divine Service in any wise,
during his abode there; though the inhabitants of those places were hindered by
the Soldiers to go to the Church of the said Rozoy.

At Noircourt most part of the inhabitants have been killed, and there remain
but 3 or 4. of 60. Above 300 men women and children have been starved, the
Church and the ornaments thereof wholly plundered by the said Forces, who have
killed Clement Bugny in the Church, have ravished the women and the maids, and
have stripped off their very smocks. Madam de Hautels her house has been wholly
plundered, and the cattle taken and carried away.

All the inhabitants of Berlise except two or three, have perished by famine or
misery; the Church has been plundered, the holy Sacrament trampled under foot,
the women ravished and stripped stark naked with all imaginable cruelty.

At Grand Bieux the Church has been wholly plundered, the holy Sacrament
trampled under foot, and no ornaments left, the village partly burnt down, and
the inhabitants ruinated and brought to an extreme misery.

At Resigny, Planche, Tyran, and Petit Havy, most part of the houses have been
ruinated and burnt, the Church plundered, the holy Sacrament trampled under
foot, all the ornaments taken and carried away, and the inhabitants fled, or
forced to beg.

At Fondevall, Hovy, Lonnaire, Ropre and Archon, of fifty turning Plowes there
is not one left, the houses demolished everywhere, and the inhabitants brought
to an extreme misery: after they have been beaten, stripped, abused and wounded
several ways; A maid of about twelve or thirteen years has been ravished in
the presence of Mr Francis Jumelet Curate of the said Fondevall, and several
others. It is impossible to write all the cruelties and tyrannies they have
practiced in this Country. The Church of Archon has been plundered and
ruinated, the ornaments taken, and the persons fled therein put to ransom. The
Soldiers have seized on three women, whom they have kept a day and one night,
and have violated two of them as it is supposed.

At Dolie most of the buildings have been burnt, the Church plundered, and
whatsoever belonging to the Inhabitants, for their last subsistence taken from
them, part of the said Inhabitants imprisoned and put to ransom.

At Yvier the Village has been plundered and pillaged; the women killed, the
Church plundered and profaned, and all the Ornaments and things necessary for
the divine service carried away.

At Ivier the Church wholly plundered and most part demolished, all the
Inhabitants brought to extreme misery, the houses, mills and buildings partly
burnt. They have cut the ears of two particular men, Massin Minu and Nicolas
Gerard, and then to have a ransom of the said Gerard, they warmed his feet,
burnt his shoes and stocking upon his legs; hanged some by the Chin, and
practiced several other cruelties. The houses of two Gentlewomen of that place
having been wholly plundered, their Mills burnt, and they brought to beg.

At Landouzy laville the Inhabitants have been plundered and wholly ruinated,
after they had contributed six weeks some money to the Forces quartered in the
Abbey of Foigny, where the corn of the said Inhabitants was hidden, which was
taken and whatsoever was therein, even to the very dishes and trenchers
wherewith the Friars had feasted that same day the General Roze.

At Janses the Church plundered, the holy Sacrament trampled under foot; having
gotten it by force out of the Curats hands, who defended it with the hazard of
his life; all the Ornaments taken away, Mr. James Noel Curat of that place
stripped to his Shirt, and so carried from house to house, to show the places
where his Parishoners did hide the goods, with threatening to Pistol him every
foot, notwithstanding his sickness of a continual Fever he had ever since a
seven night before, and would have died of cold, had not a Cavalier given him
at last an old sack to put on his shoulders, and an old draibe to cover his
nakedness.

The Women and the Maidens have been violated in the presence of the Curate,
and of his mother, who was above 80 years old, and was stripped, beaten and
abused before the great Altar: so that it is impossible to tell all the
inhumanities and cruelties of those Barbarians.

At Nancelle the Church plundered, and all the ornaments, the Chalice and the
vessel of the holy Oil taken and carried away, with all the household stuff
of the inhabitants, of whom 16 named in the informations, have been killed,
others have been starved, and others are brought into an extreme misery. The
Curate Mr. Anthony de Migneau stripped and abused: one Neselet killed in cold
blood, having promised to give 50. Rixdalers for his ransom, not being able to
give 100. which was demanded by the Soldiers for his ransom, he begging
several times his life upon his knees.

At Harrigny the Church wholly plundered and broken with the Cannon in three
places, the holy Host taken in the Ciboire carried away, the Chalices and
Ornaments burnt, part of the houses burnt likewise, eight inhabitants killed,
two deadly wounded, the others imprisoned and put to ransom of two thousand
five hundred Livers; and one Petrave having been stripped and laid down upon
the ground, being demanded whether he were well so, was presently killed in
cold blood with two Pistols shot by the Soldiers; who likewise did cut off the
ears of a poor woman, widow of Nicholas Bohoin, and then cut her head in two
pieces with a broad sword. Not half the houses in Harrigny are up. Chironsar's
house of the same parish, where was Mr. de Magincourt, was plundered, he and
his wife stripped stark naked, the woman having thrown herself out at a window
to save herself with great hazard of her life, and the said Mr. de Magincourt
tied to a horses tail, and so drawn to Plomion: the Women and the Maidens that
were fled there, ravished, three men killed, and five or six wounded.

What inhabitants are left in this poor and desolate Country, would have been
starved and perished of misery, without the assistance of the extraordinary
alms of Paris, which have been increased six Weeks since by 1600 Livers every
month, because of the news coming daily of the extreme misery of those
wretches.

Now behold here (as in a Map) the miseries of poor France under an irregular
and insulting Soldiery, from whose hands they could not have had more hard
measure, if things had been wrapped up in a sudden confusion under the Conduct of
some Foreign Invader. Had Attila and Totila, with the old Goths and Vandals,
been revived again to overrun France (as they formerly did Italy and Spain)
with a new Inundation, greater breaches could not have bin made upon the
Peoples Propriety, nor more barbarous and bloody attempts against their lives
and safety. But that which adds to the misfortunes of that Nation more then
all, is, that those whose power and pity are concerned in a redress, have so
little regard of any remedy; but riding in pompous equipage over the heads of
the people, promise themselves that they shall see no sorrow, but seem to
sport, and laugh at the many cries and groans that fly to heaven for vengeance;
And therefore, without question, it will suddenly come, when the sins of the
Amorites are at the full; The time of the deliverance is at hand, and God will
cut it short in righteousness; For, the decree of Liberty is gone forth from
the holy one, to speak Peace and Freedom to all the afflicted of the earth,
even to the Nations that are oppressed round about us: So that if any credit
may be given to the (...)^cted of the earth, even to the Nations that are
oppressed round about us: So that if any credit may be given to the Saws of old
Seers which come by Tradition, we may well say, after them, In England is begun
a dance,
Shall pass through Italy, Spain, and France.


And truly, if we consider the now condition of France, the present motions of
Superior and inferior Bodies (though but with an oblique aspect upon Liberty)
in that great constellation of Parliaments, there is some hope that the day of
their redemption is drawing nigh; which hope would be much advanced, could we
but see them begin to lift up their heads with resolution; but alas, the great
obstacles are their Inconstancy, and Luxury, which are the two prime Qualities
or Ingredients which constitute the Temper of that Nation, whereby the Major
part of them are in a manner disabled from the persuit of so noble a design,
which must be the work of a more sober and serious Generation.

In the mean time, behold the many exactions and oppressions under which they
labor, to serve the lusts of their Lordly Tyrants; and from thence let us take
measure of our own Felicity; For, whereas we pay one penny, they pay ten, yea
very often the utmost farthing: And to what end is all the Tribute, but to
uphold the pride and Tyranny of their Taskmasters? whereas in England the
Contributions required, are such as arise only out of present necessity, for
preventing the return of that Tyranny which was driven out of the Nation, with
the expense of so much Blood and Treasure: Now, what man can be so stupid as
not to dispose part of his estate to so noble an end, rather than permit the
re-inthroning of an Hereditary Tyrant (a Tyrant both by nature and Interest) to
sweep all away with your lives and Fortunes? A Tyrant that sucked in his Fathers
Principles with his Mothers Milk; that was nursed up with the Blood and Butchery
of a Kingdom; one that is undoubted heir of all the Curses of his Family,
besides those smaller Curses that attend him; A Tyra^t, who, if he return, will
bring an innumerable Train of Tyrants at his heels: There is the
Tyrant-Cavalier, the Tyrant Scot, and what other Tyrannick Foreiners, God
knows. These are they that will tax ye, and toll ye, and tell ye, what a
madness it is to mutter at a few Temporary Taxes, when too late ye may chance
to find how much it concerns the State to raise them, to preserve you from the
hellish miseries that must of necessity overflow all, upon the Return of an
enraged Enemy.

Regnabit Sauguine multo
Ad Regnum quisquis venit ab exilio.
His reign will be most cruel and bloody that comes from Banishment to a
Kingdom. His declared interest is revenge for the death of his Father, which
(might his fury take way) would reach to the whole Nation; and what his fury
cannot assault, his Scottish crew of Foreiners will overthrow, whose cruelty
will spare neither Friend nor Foe, their quarrel being now at the very name
and nation of English; And assure your selves the bottomless pit of their
avarice will swallow all in gross, without making any nice distinction or
difference betwixt Presbyter and Independent. Take heed then; you see here what
horrid disasters have befallen France by admitting Foreiners into their
Country; learn by those sad spectacles there, to avoid the like here among our
selves. Remember what the Scot did in times past, how merciless he was when a
friend in Covenant; what will he then not do when he comes in with his unjust
and hypocritical pretenses, as an Avenger of the Covenant? We know well enough
what they hope, what they dream of, and what will be the Word throughout all
their marches and Quarters; Arise, kill and slay, and take possession: For,
this has been their cursed hope and design^ ever since they were a nation.

What remains then, but that for the prevention of these Tyrannies in the
future, which now threaten us with open face, men should lay aside all
traitorous Animosities, Compliances and Designs; and since the quarrel is
become purely National, let us then vindicate the honor and freedom of our
Nation with an unanimous consent; if we cannot agree upon other terms, yet let
us unite as Englishmen, and dispute afterward among our selves; for, this
instant is the very critical minute of Englands necessity, and from hence we
must date either our Triumphs, or else an ignoble and ignominious vassalage
under a Scottish usurpation.

What, shall this gallant warlick Nation be betrayed by her own to the lousie
Scot, who dares not look her nobly in the Face? Nothing but our own base
Vacillation and Treachery can undo us; For, judge, in reason what such an
untutored Rabble can do against so brave an Army? That first beat them home
(under Hamilton) to their own doors, with a handful in comparison of the
Scottish Numbers; and last year with such another handful beat them (in
greater numbers) out of the better half of their Country, that God (who is the
Lord of Hosts) might have the praise of the Victory: An Army that, to all
worldly advantages, has hitherto had a special protection from heaven, God
having sealed them for his own by many miraculous Successes, to the wonder and
envy of the world.

Let us rejoice then, and give God thanks, that he has given us such an Army
for our necessary Protection, and not unworthily repine at those poor pence
that go to relieve them. One month of Scotch Free Quarter and Plunder will
grind more than a Twelve-months Tax; yet their intention is not to stay a
month, but for ever; and one Scottish Lord will sit as heavy as ten of the
old Danish Lordanes. Look to it, and consider what may follow; what the Scots
behavior will be, and how different from this of the English Soldiery; whose
discipline is so exact and noble, that the least piece of vice or violence is
very rarely to be found among them; and if at any time, then it is most
severely punish^. What Cries of the Country do they occasion, or whom do they
abuse in a march, without remedy? It was said of King Alfred, before the
Conquest, that by his Severity and diligence he so terrified robbers, that a
Travailer might pass safe all over England, with his purse in his hand; the
like may be said of our Noble Cromwell, and his incomparable discipline, that
any man may pass through the Land, without the least prejudice from the
Soldiery; So that whosoever takes a survey of the rude and licentious Courses
of the Dutch, French, and Spanish Militia, with the rest of the world, shall
find a vast disproportion in the Points of Martial honor and Order, betwixt
the English, and those of other Nations: And he may boldly conclude, that for
some thousands of years, not any Age or Country under heaven, can produce any
one example of discipline in all points equal to the Pattern of England.

Veget. 3. lib. cap. ult. Disciplinam militarem Populi Romani debes inquirere,
qui ex parvissimis Finibus, imperiam suum poene Solis regionibus, and mundi
ipsius fine distendit.

FINIS.

