A SERMON Preached before the Parliament, the Council of State, the Lord
Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London, and the Officers of
the Army, In Christ-Church London, October. the 6th. A. D. 1659.

Being the Public day of Thanksgiving appointed by the PARLIAMENT, to be
celebrated in the Cities of London and Westminster, and parts adjacent, for the
suppression of the Northern Insurrection.

By Doctor NATHANAEL HOMES.

London, Printed By J. B. for Edward Brewster at the Crane in Paul's Church
yard, 1660.

Friday, October. 7. 1659.
ORdered, that the thanks of this House be given to Doctor Homes for his great
pains taken, in preaching and carrying on the duty of public thanksgiving on
Thursday the 6th of October instant, before the Parliament in Christ-Church
London.

And that M. Blagrave do give him the thanks. The like Order to M. Caryl.

ORdered that the Ministers be desired to print, and publish their Sermons; and
that they have the like privilege as has been allowed to others in the like
case.

Thomas St Nicholas Clerk of the Parliament.

I do appoint Edward Brewster Bookseller, and Citizen of London, to print the
said Sermon, in witness whereof I hereto subscribe my hand, Oct. 11. 1659.

NATH. HOMES.

To the Parliament of the Com^wealth of England, and Council of State.
My most Honored Masters,
IT had not been possible for me, sana mente (I speak the truth before the
Lord) to have deemed this Sermon worthy of that dignity, to be printed (much
less to be presented to your Honors), but that your destres, expressed in your
Order, and much otherwise (which are a sufficient Command to me) stamped upon it
that respect. Therefore I have not counterfeitingly painted the face thereof,
fairer then it was: Nor have I cowardly maimed it of anything I then delivered:
But just as ye then liked it, it is now as like it, as possibly may be said of
the same, in complexion, physiognomy, and stature.

The stream is as it first flowed through my mind, then to my mouth, thence to
your ears, and now to your eyes. If now in this last running, the Spirits of it
seem not flatt, and weaker to your fast, but that it still reteins its first
life, and vigor on your Spirits, to incite your further praises for mercies,
and trusting in the God of your mercies, I shall the less care for the censures
of men.

And as God was pleased so (...) it, (and ye could not prevent it) that I
should be much straightened in time, to prepare for so great a work, that all the
Glory might be to him the fountain, and helper; so I am fully satisfied, and do
desire that he may have it, and not I.

I shall say no more (for prolix tediousness in any thing, is irksom to my
self) but what John Gerson the Schoolman was wont to say, viz. When the
Preacher has ENDED, the Sermon is not DONE. For indeed it is still in Doing,
in the hearts, and prastise of spiritual living hearers; which is the prayer
for your Honors, of your most obliged Servant

NATHANAEL HOMES.
From my Study at Mary October. 11. 1659.
Psalm. 33.1. Later Clause: Praise is Comely for the upright.


The FOR, prefixed in our English; is not in the Hebrew. Therefore I considered
the Text no further then as an absolute sentence, on the present occasion.
WE are (ye see) at the head of the Psalm: Therefore no need of an Analysis, to
find the posture of the Text. It will be sufficient to tell you, it is part of
the Proposition of the Psalm; in which we have the Duty, (Comely praise) and the
Doers (the upright). But who (say ye) is the Object, viz. the person to be
praised? Ye have him named in the former part of the verse (in which is my
Text) Rejoice in the LORD. But where is the subject matter, for which we must
praise? It is in the sequel of the Psalm, enumerating many Mercies, pressing
the said proposition. So that the sense of the Text, and sentence of the
Doctrine, come to hand both together, without much a do.

Praising God for mercies, is comely for the upright.

In which Doctrine, Four things are to be opened, to make it fit for Use.

1. Praising, which we have ranck'd in that order as the former may best give
light to the later. 2. Upright, which we have ranck'd in that order as the
former may best give light to the later. 3. Mercies, which we have ranck'd in
that order as the former may best give light to the later. 4. Comely, which we
have ranck'd in that order as the former may best give light to the later.
1. Praising, we have rendered it in the Act; for that is the sense of the Text.
God is Laus, the praise of Israel. Laudatio the Act of praising, that is ours.
Praising is a Cordial emanation of our affections into words and deeds, What
praising of God is?
acknowledging God's greatness, and goodness, in himself, and unto us, Psalm.
135.3, and 5. Praise the Lord for he is good: Sing praises to his name, for I
know he is great. And Psalm. 119.68. Thou art good and do good (spoken in way
of praising God). And this praise is of the higher form of expressions. For
praedicamus ut res sunt; we predicate, enunciate, or declare as things are.
Approbamus quod bonum est; we approve that which is good. Laudamus quod
excellit, we praise that which excells. Suitably, praise is most due to the
most excellent God. In Divinity the things Glorifying God, Honoring God, and
praising God, Concentre to the same general issue, viz. to manifest our
thankfulness to God: but the words critically considered, contein a graduall
difference. Glorifying God is our due estimation of him, Psalm. 24 last verse.
The Lord of Hosts, he is the King of Glory. Honoring God is our manifestation
of that esteem in action and behavior, Mal. 1.6. A Son honors his Father.
If I be a Father, where is mine Honor? Praising God is our accumulating
extollings of God with Arguments giving reasons of our said estimation, and
actions Praedicamus voce, laudamus argumentis. Thus the Psalmist, Psalm. 103, 2
3, 4. etc. Bless the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his benefits, who
forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases, who redeemeth thy
lite from destruction: who crowns thee with loving kindness, and tender
mercy, who satisfies thy mouth with good things, etc. And Psalm. 136.
throughout. O give thanks to the Lord for he is good, for his mercy endures
for ever. O give thanks to the God of Gods, for his mercy endures for ever. O
give thanks to the Lord of Lords for his mercy endures for ever. To him who
alone does great wonders, for his mercy endures for ever. To him who smote
great Kings, for his mercy endures for ever. and sl^w famous Kings, for his
mercy endures for ever, etc. Thus ye see, a Praise and an Argument, a Praise
and an Argument. Like Aarons Coat when he praised God in public worship amidst
the great Congregation, Exodus 28. 34. A Golden Bell, and a Pomgranat, A Golden
Bell and a Pomgranat upon the hem of his Robe round about; so in this act of
praise, a sound of words and a reason, a sound and a reason of our praising God.

Thus you see what the first thing explained amounts to. Praise fundamentally
is in the heart; signally in deed; formally in words; all concurring (pro re
nata) or no true praise, Affections lonely (if they could be lonely) were a
barren root without flowers. Flores plantarum Gaudia. * Flowers are the joys
of plants: Plin. Not. Mist. prata rident. Horse.
so words and deeds are the flowers of praise, springing from true generous
praisfull affections. Deeds without affections, are rotten hypocrisy; and
without words a dumb show. Words without affections are but as an Organ-pipe,
breath, without an heart: and without actions a lie, and trusting in a lie,
Jer. 7.4, etc. to 11. Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these, etc. Behold ye
trust in lying words that cannot profit. Will ye steal, murder, swear falsely,
etc. and come and stand before me in this house. Therefore as the Romans had
three phrases of giving of thanks, signifing the three degrees thereof, viz.
Habere gratias, to be thankful in affections: Ago tibi gratias ^ientissime
Imperator, and si possem etiam reserrem. I lin. Paneg. ad Trajanum.
Agere gratias to give thanks in words: Refer gratias, * to manifest
thankfulness in deeds: so spiritually must be our praise. As we must not
speak a lie, with good words over our bad actions, so not make a lie with fair
profession, contrary to our inward affections. Revel. 21.27. And there shall
inno wise enter into praising New Jerusalem anything that desileth or MAKES a
lie. Revel 22.15. Without are Dogs, Sorcerers, etc. and whosoever loves and
MAKES a lie.

2. Upright: The Hebrew is (...) The Right ones, so the Greek of the Septuagint
(...). And so all the Eastern languages in our great Bible. In the former part
of the verse of our Text they are called (...) the Righteous. Right, and
Righteous, according to our English, especially in a thing of this nature, are
Conjugata, words of near kin. A man spiritually right, is a righteous man; and
a spiritually righteous man, is the only right man. There are three sorts, or
parts of rightnesse, or righteousness, to make, and manifest a man truly
right, or righteous.

1 A rightnesse, or righteousness of person; That the whole man stands right
in Gods opinion, being clothed with the righteousness of Christ by says; and
is called Imputed Righteousness Psalm. 32. v. 2. compared with v. 11. Blessed
is the man to whom the Lord imputes not sin. Ye righteous rejoice in the
Lord, Romans 4. three last ver, It was not written for Abraham's sake only that
faith was imputed to him for righteousness, but for us also to whom it shall
be imputed, if we believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead,
who was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our justification, 2
Cor. 5.19.21. God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing
their trespasses to them, etc. For he has made him to be sin for us, who
knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God. And so Phil.
3.9. it is called the righteousness of Faith, the righteousesse of Christ, the
righteousness of God.

2. There is a rightnesse of heart, as Jehu said to Jehonadab, (2 Kings 10.15.)
Is thy heart right? A right Question, containing a special qualification to
make a man right, though Jehu were not right. This rightnesse (or uprightness,
as it is often rendered) is called in the New Testament Sincere. q. d. (...) A man
is at heart, what he seems in actions, or, Sine cera, as honey refined from the
drossy wax; so is a sincere man from the fraud or connivance of sin, which
goes along inseperably with the former imputed righteousness, Psalm. 32.2.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not sin, in whose spirit is no
guile. Sincere men are called in Phil. ^1.10. (...) that is toazed abroad, (as
a lock of wool) and discerned, and pict at the Sunbeams. Sincere in the Old
Testament is called a perfect heart, a Kings 20.3 Remember, O Lord, (says
Hezekiah) that I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart.
Because such a man seeks the Lord with his whole heart Psalm. 119.2. Blessed are
they that keep his Testimonies, and seek him with the whole heart. And he loves
the Lord (as Christ says) with all his heart, to his utmost power; all other
things subordinatedly to that.

3. Rightnesse or righteousness of Conversation, when a man does in the tenor,
and general course of his life deal righteously with all, suum cuiq, tribuit,
Tit. 2.11.12. The grace of God has appeared teaching us to deny all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, RIGHTEOVSLY and Godly in
this present world. He gives to God (as our Savior says) the things that are
Gods, and to Caesar, the things that are Caesar's; that is, to every man high or
low, according to his capacity, and ability; viz to rescue the oppressed, to
relieve the distressed; and to owe nothing (Romans 13.8 to any man but love.

And thus ye see the result of the second thing in the Doctrine, viz. The right
or righteous man (who is the only meet man for praising God); And that his
rightness, or unrighteousness is Faith putting on Christ's righteousness;
Syncerity of holiness; and righteousness of conversation. If a man has not
the two later, he has not the first. And if he has not the first, he cannot
pray fe God cordially no more then a thief can pray se the Judge, who, he
thinks verily, will hang him. Ye will say the unbeliever has many mercies for
which he may praise. We answer, his mercies (as we call them) whilst he is an
unbeliever and disobedient to the truth, are Curses, Deuteronomy. 28. throughout. And
the Psalmist mentions Their Tables are made a snare to them Whether the
unbeliever thinks so or no, whiles he is an unbeliever, he makes them so, Tit.
1.15. To the unbelieving nothing is pure, but even their mind and conscience is
defiled. And for want of true grace cannot praise truly. So that (as Solomon
says, Prove. 26. ver. 7. and ver. 9.) As the legs of the lame are not equal,
and as a thorn goes up into the hand of a Drunkard; so is a parable in the
mouth of fools. That is, Divine things in the mouths, and management of
ungodly men, are not equally and rightly managed, but with them they do
mischief to themselves and others.

To the third thing in the Doctrine to be opened, viz. Mercies, all that we
shall speak is, briefly to resolve a case of conscience; and pertinently to the
point in hand, viz. Seeing afflictions may prove mercies to believers, and so
to be praised for Psalm. 119.67. Before I was afflicted (says David) I went
astray, but now I have kept thy word; And ver. 71. It is good for me that I was
afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes: Why do believers pray to prevent,
or remove afflictions; and praise for deliverance from them?

To make way for a distinct resolution of this case, I must premise some
previous propositions by way of distinction.

1. That there are two sorts of afflictions; some are killing afflictions,
depriving of natural life. Others are only correcting afflictions, sparing
natural life. Of which we must note these five propositions, or distinctions.

1. That those correcting afflictions are not simply good inse: in their own
nature, but conditionally and instrumentally to such an end, as, to keep us
from evil, or cure us of evil of sin. As chvrurgery using Phlebotomie,
scarifying, or lancings is not good in it self, but as it cures the sick, or
diseased patient. And therefore afflictions are sometimes called by God himself,
evils; as Amos 3.6. Shall there be EVIL in a City, and the Lord has not done
it?

2. Nor are they conditionally, and instrumentally good so, viz. to such an end
(to keep off, or cure of sin) as immediate necessary causes, or media, but per
accidens, that is per aliud, by the help of another, viz. by the special
influence of God, in, and upon our correcting afflictions, blessing, and
sanctifying them unto us. As sometimes the Chyrurgions Phlebotomizing,
scarrifying, or lancings, may cause ranckling, Gangrenes, or festering, without
timely application of his Balsom, etc. We see good Jonah a godly Prophet (in
his prophecy) though the better for his Sea-affliction in the Whales belly,
was the worse (for a time) for his Lana-affliction, when God blasted his
shaddowy succouring Gourd.

3. God does oftentimes only show, and shake his rod, to give us warning,
which if we take, he lays away his rod, and lays not on the strokes, Prove.
22.3. The prudent sore-seeth the plague and hides himselse, but the simple
posse on, and are punished. And Hebrews 11. verse 7. By Faith Noah being WARNED
of God of things not seen yet, moved with FEAR, prepared an Ark to the saving
of his house.

4. When we are brought off from our sins, and nearer to God, the work is
done, the use of the rod is at an end (in GOD'S usual way of afflicting) Isa.
27.7, 8, 9. Has he smitten him (to wit Israel) as he smote those that smote
him etc? In measure when it shoots forth, thou will debate with it. He
stays his rough wind, and By this therefore the iniquity of Jacob shall be
purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his sin. So Jerem. 31.18, 19,
20. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus: Thou have chastised
me, and I was chastised, etc Surely after I was turned, I repented. Upon this,
see there what God says. Is Ephraim my dear Son? Is he a pleasant child?
For since I spoke against him I remember him still. Therefore my bowels are
troubled for him; I WILL SURELY HAVE MERCY ON HIM, says the Lord. Add Hosea 5
last verse, I will go, and return to my place TILL they acknowledge their
offense, and seek my face; in their affliction they will seek me early.

Fifthly The afflictions of believers may be an occasion of great evil in the
hearts and hands, lips and licenciousnesse of the wicked, who thereupon may
triumph over, if not trample upon the people of God, or their religion, and
blaspheam the name of the God of that religion, and of that people. Of which
David complains often ( Psalm. 25.21. Psalm. 42.3 Psalm. 71.11.) that the wicked cry
where A^a; is their God? God has forsaken them, etc.

Now (things thus prepared) take our answer to the case in these positions.

1 There is no doubt but we may pray against Killing afflictions, and praise
for deliverance; because we live to pray and praise. This is David's own
Argument, Psalm. 6.4, 5. Return O Lord, deliver my soul, O save me for thy mercy
sake, FOR IN DEATH THERE IS NO REMEMBRANCE OF THEE: IN THE GRAVE WHO SHALL GIVE
THEE THANKS? So Psalm. 28.1, etc. To thee I cry, be not silent O Lord, LEST I
BECOME LIKE THEM THAT GO DOWN TO THE PIT. So upon such grounds Hezkiah prayed,
that he might not die by that his disease, (which in likelihood was the
Pestilence, or some such Ulcer as appears by the Plaster) Isa. 38. compare 2
Kings 20.1. etc.

2. For correcting afflictions that spare life, we may lawfully pray unto God
to prevent them, or remove them, in these four cases.

1 When God warns, and believers take the Alarm, and are warned, they may pray
to God to prevent the affliction, by divine warrant, Amos 4.12. And because
this I will do unto thee PREPARE TO MEET thy God O Israel. Thus did Niniveh
(Jonah 3.) commended by our Savior for so doing ( Mat. 12.41.) 2 To pray for
prevention of Afflictions, or removing of them, when they may be occasion of
sin to us, is warrantable by Scripture, Prove. 30.7. Two things have I
required of thee, deny me not before I die. Remove far from me vanity and lies:
give me not poverty; least I be poor and steal, and take the name of my God in
vain. 3 When Correcting afflictions have been sanctified to us making us
better, God having had his end, we may lawfully pray for their removal, by
divine example, Psalm. 119.71. David having acknowledged and praised God that he
had been bettered by his afflictions, that it was good for him that he had been
afflicted, etc. he presently prays in verse. 76, 77, 78. that God would remove
his afflictions. 4 When in, and by our afflictions, the wicked are animated
against us, and our profession; insulting over us, and it; we may lawfully pray
to God on that account that God would remove them. Thus did David, Psalm. 35.22,
23, 24, 25. Psalm. 42.9, 10. Psalm. 71.12, 13. And beside we have a promise Psalm.
76.10. Surely the wrath of man shall praise God; and the remainder of wrath God
will restrain. And Zech. 1.15. God professes, I am sore displeased with the
Heathen that are at ease; for I was but a little displeased, and they helped
forward the affliction. By which two last places of Scripture, it appears we
may lawfully pray for what God has promised, and against that with which God
is angry. The Disciples, and the Church with them likewise pray, in opposition
to the enemies insultations and persecutions Acts 4.23, etc. to 31. verse.
The close is, that as in those five cases aforesaid, believers may lawfully
pray for prevention, or removal of afflictions; so we may warrantably give
praise when they are prevented, or removed. For it is a sure Rule, What we may
lawfully pray to have, we may lawfully praise for, when we have it; and that is
our case in this days solemnity. For what we gained in prayer, we now give
praise; viz. Not for the evil that is fallen upon our Mothers children that
were angry with us, Cant. 1.6.
but for Gods gracious prevention of their, and our further Evil. Not for
their misery, but for our delivery. And so, blessed and praised be the Lord,
the Net is broken, and we are delivered out of the hands of the hunter and
fowler.

The fourth and last thing of the Doctrine to be explained, and that in a word,
is Comely, the root (...) signifies to desire. Thence Niphal the passive (...)
(which is our word) signifies Desirable; so that the sense of the Text (ad
verbum is praise is desirable of the upright. But because our word in the
Hebrew fountain signifies desirable, therefore the Hebrew Text, by a
metalepticall derivation, transferrs it to express sundry qualifications that
fall under the notion of desirable; as Fair, Beautiful, convenient, agreeable,
congruous, decent, comely, or it becomes. And therefore as the Septuagint
renders it in our Text (...) that is, it becomes; So the Eastern languages
(daughter Dialects of the Hebrew) viz. the Chalde, Syriack and Arabic render
it in like man^er It becomes, viz. the upright to praise. Which is a phrase of
a stronger signification then to leave it to our liberty, viz. It imports, it
necessarily becomes us to praise: As the like phrase Mat. the 3.15. intimates
necessariness. For when Christ there told John Baptist, he must be baptized of
him, and John must suffer it so to be; for so both must fulfill all
righteousness, Christ uses this phrase in Sir. (...) it becomes, agreeable to
our Text as Matthew also renders it, in Greek, (...) Suffer it to be so now,
for thus it BECOMES us to fulfill all righteousness.

The result of all this fourth particular is, that praising God for mercies is
desirably practicable by the right, or righteous, or upright ones, under all
commendable considerations. It Is a matter full of motive as we shall see by and
by, when the duty is displayed. Thus of the Doctrinall part of the point.

Next of the applicatorie, which is useful for us, chiefly at this time, two
ways. 1. For reflection on our selves touching fitness to praise. 2. For
excitation to stir us up to the fact of praise.


1 For Reflection on our selves, viz. If any be sit to praise, so as to do it
comlily, they must be right, upright, or righteous, as aforesaid But (Ah
miserable hypocryticall times) where shall we find these men? It Is true, among
us in this Nation deduct the dirty dunghill profane, all men almost are
professors; and of them more now then ever are Teachers. Yet I ask where are
those right, upright, Righteous ones? Are they not as rare as in David's time?
Psalm. 12.1, 2. Help Lord for the Godly man cease, for the faithful fail
from among the children of men. They speak vanity, every one with his
Neighbor: with flattering lips, and with a DOUBLE HEART do they speak. They
speak (says the Hebrew Text) (...) with an heart, and an heart. Like St. James
his double minded man, ( Jam. 1.8.) He is (...) A man of two souls, or two
minds. Or are they not as rare as in Jeremies time? chap. 5. verse 1 Run ye to
and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in
the broad places thereof, if ye CAN FIND A MAN, if there be ANY that executes
judgment, that seeks the truth. Both these complaints are of, and concerning
the only Church of God, then on earth. But ye will say; God forbid it should
be so now; we hope it is otherwise. I say so too. But yet, that we may know our
selves, let me put a question or two touching each of those Rightnesses, or
Righteousnesses before described; that make a man a right man.

1 Touching the Righteousness of Faith: I fear the very first question will
find a great many Senes elementarios, old professors ABCDARIANS in the main
practical part of salvation Thou think thou have faith. The first Question
therefore is, what is the footing of thy faith? To this most are Mum. I know
it, upon many occasions, many ways of examining men's spiritual condition. If
any say the promises of the Gospel (which is a right answer); then the second
Question is, What promise have? Here more are at a loss, to produce a right
sort of promises, that must do the work, viz. Faith-breeding promises, for
ordinarily they either bring you promises which only show what will save us; as
He that believes shall be saved. Or else such as tell what God will do for
them that do believe; as that I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. But if
some of them allege some faith-breeding promises inviting, and persuading to
believe; as that Joh. 3.16, 17. God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, etc. For God
sent not his son to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be
saved: or that promise Joh. 6.37. Him that comes to me (says Christ) I will
in no wise cast out: or that in 2 Cor. 5. three last, God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, etc.
Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; we
pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God; for he has made him to be
sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him. Or that common one (that I may not exceed my meditations in my delivery)
Mat. 11.28. Come to me ye that are heavy laden, and I will ease you, etc. I say
if any hit so right, as to recite some such right faith-breeding promise, Then
the third Question is, whether thou have ever made use of any of these, or the
like faith-breeding promises, to that end, to beget faith in thy soul? that is,
have thou taken them home, and applied them to thy self as spoken to thee, and
pleaded them in prayer before the Lord? A main Question indeed. But if so, the
Question then * in the fourth and last place is, I knew a pro^pt young man of
about 18. years of age (I give you the story in the Margin, because I minded it
not in my sermon) He being well bred, and catechized, was once asked at a
p^ivate family catechizing, How he thought to be saved? he answered by Christ.
He was asked (...) again, how he should come by Christ? he answered by says
Being asked again how he should come to believe, he answered, by the promise.
Being asked again what promise he had to ground his faith upon? he answered
Come to me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, etc. All which answers he
gave as readily as here they are to be read. So he went off creditably as to
men, but suddenly after his heart smote him, that he had never practically made
use of that promise to build bis says upon it, by way of pleading, applying,
and relying, though mentally he had had it ready in his memory; and thereupon
was cast into great trouble of mind Apertinent story for this particular; and a
profitable monition to brain professors, notionall Christians that know and do
not, or not to purpose.
whether thou have done that indeed, have actually, really, and effectually so
applied, pleaded, and relied upon thy alleged faith-breeding promises
whatsoever they be, as that thou have (as Gal. 5.6.) Faith working by love; a
says (as Gal. 6.15.) that puts thee into Christ, making thee a New Creature.
There is the Crisis. When a man has such a faith, and by it such a
righteousness, as forms him to a Doing Righteousness, 1 John 3.7. Little
children, let no man deceive you, He that DOES righteousness is righteous. Of
real faith, come real effects.

2 Touching the rightness, or righteousness that sets a man right in Sincerity
the 1 Qu. is, does thy heart go along with thee in all thy religious
performances? as Psalm. 119.10 with my WHOLE heart have I sought thee. And Eccl.
7.25. I applied my heart to seek Wisdom. The Hebrew is, as it is in your
Margin, I and my heart compassed about to know, or understand. Is not thy
heart, does not thy heart, as it is described, Ezekiel 33.31? viz. And they come to
thee, as the people comes, ( viz. for fashions sake, or for company) and they
sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but they will not DO
THEM: For with their mouth they show much love but their heart GOES AFTER
THEIR COVTEOUSNESS. A dangerous disease; take heed of that. Or as Mat. 15.8. to
the same effect: This people draws nigh to me with their lips, but their
hearts are far from me. In vain do they worship me, etc. A second Qu. touching
this second rightness: Do all thou do, as in the sight of God? As Gen 17.1.
Walk BEFORE me, and be thou perfect. i.e. in heart, with sincerity. And Luke
1.6. Zacharias and Elizabeth were both righteous BEFORE God, walking in all the
Commandments, and Ordinances of the Lord blameless. So it is said of Noah Genesis
6.9. That he was a Righteous man, ((...)) and perfect (that is sincere. And how
does that appear?) (...) he set himself continually to walk with God (that is,
as in the sight of God.) Do thou walk thus? Rather is not God far out of thy
sight, and thoughts ( Psalm. 10. 4.5.) Or at most, thou mindest God but by way
of supposition (thou supposest a God) not with actual, useful apprehensions.
3. Qu. Do all thou do for God? As 1 Cor. 10.31? Do ye eat for God? Drink
for God? Feast for God? (that being united in truth and love, ye may be
strength to one another to promote Gods glory)? Cloth for God? sleep for God?
Wake for God? Work for God? Worship for God? Or are we not? do we not, as
Israel? Hos. 10.1. Israel is an empty Vine, he brings forth fruit to
himself, Leaves and Labruscas: such fruit as will shelter and adorn himself,
but of little or no use, to God, or good men, or the common good. Or like those
Hose. 7.14. that howled (see how God compares them to hounds, yelping for
carrion) in their devotions for Corn and Wine, and Oil, but not for obedience.
Or as Zech. 7.5. When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth month, and the seventh
month, even those 70. years did ye at all fast to me, even to me?

Touching the third righteousness, viz. of Conversation, for brevities sake,
only two Questions. 1 Qu. is a plain one. Is thy righteous conversation as to
the Tenor of thy Care, Conscience, and Contest (against unrighteousness)
universal, Like David, Psalm. 119.6? viz. I will have respect to all thy
Commandments. Thou will Conscionablie respect, though thou can not
absolutely effect all the Commandments in all degrees. Though thou do
sometimes (...) Stumble with a slip, yet thou do not (1 John 3.9.) (...) Work
at the trade of transgressing. Thou art none of the Pognale aven (as the Hebrew
phrase is, Psalm. 6. ver. 8.) Of the Workers of iniquity, suitable to St. John's
Greek phrase in that but now quoted. Self-allowance in the breach of any one of
Gods Commandments is a breach of all, a guilt of all. Jam. 2.10. Gods
Commandments being united like the links in a chain, or the stones of an arch;
if one broken, the whole is broken. Or what one sin can a man allow himself
in, but it will entrench on most of the Commandments, if not all? 2. Qu. Do
thou, as often as thou do fail or falter in thy conversation, Write
retractations with prayers and tears? Do retreat with penitential sorrows,
viz. as 2 Cor. 7.1^. With carefulness, indignation, fear, vehement desire,
zeal, revenge against thy sin? Do afflictions ly light, and sin lies heavy as
on David's heart, express in his 7 penitential Psamles, The 7 peniti Psalms are
Psalm. 6 Psa. 3 Psa. 38, Psa. 5 Ps. 102. Ps. 13 Ps. 143.
where (though a most valiant stout hearted man to encounter dangers) he is
cast down in the apprehension of his sin, as at no time, no condition else, the
like. And Paul that can glory in tribulations, Romans 5.3. and throws down the
Gantlet to challenge a combat with all difficulties, Romans 8.32. to end of
chap; Yet let but poor creeping concupiscence p^ep upon him, to hinder him in
the good he would etc. and he cries out, O wretched man that I am, etc. Rom 7.
21.22, 23, 24.

To close this use: It Is most certain that unless a man be such a right man,
upright man, a righteous man as aforesaid, he cannot be a real thankful,
God-praising man, what ever he may jabber with his lips. He cannot truly
praise God without some true spiritual love and joy in God; and these he has
not, unless he attain a grounded comfortable persuasion of the love of God in
Christ pardoning his sins, with the sincere effects, manifesting the same
(before mentioned) Luke 7.47. I say unto thee, her sinus which are many, are
forgiven ((...)) in that (it appears) she loved much: but to whom little is
forgiven, the same loves little. And thus of the first Use, Reflection, etc.

2 Of Incitation to the Fact of praise, to which two things (couchant in the
Doctrine) do engage us, namely, 1 The Comeliness of the duty of praise. 2. The
consideration of the Mercies prepared for our praise.


1 The Comeliness. It is comely, or it becomes us (if we be upright, etc. as we
pretend to be) to praise. Is it not comely, does it not become us, that it
appear We have truth of grace? It is more credit to wear a small Diamond, then
a large Crystal, or Bristol. As Prayer tryes the lawfullness of our Actions (a
man cannot with any face, ask God to assist him in sinning): So praising God,
tryes our graces, 2 Timothy 3.2. Unthankful, unholy, (in gratum dixeris, and
omnia dixeris) therefore vice versa, on the contrary, The more thankful, the
more holy, and the more holy, the more thankful. For prayer may have much (if
not all) of self: but praise cannot but have much of God in it; for which
cause (in part) David, is supposed, to be called A man after Gods own heart.

2 Is it not comely? does it not become us, to come to our selves, when we have
been dull spirited, dead hearted, and our souls have layn bedd-ridden,
spiritually? Praise in these Cases has been the Cure-all-evill. See the
Psalmist often in his Psalms; that when he has been in a deep doleful dump,
as soon as he could get up his soul upon the legs of praise, how high, and
heavenly is his heart, Psalm. 73. in the former part of the Psalm, to the end of
the 22 verse, in what a low deplorable condition (spiritually) is he ver. 2.3.
My feet were almost gone, my steps had well nigh slipped, for I was envious at the
foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked, ver. 12. 13. Behold these
are the ungodly, who prosper in the world, they increase in riches, Verily I
have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence, (a most
dreadful speech for a Saint, not only for matter, but mode, to seal it with a
verily) ver. 22. So foolish was I, and ignorant, I was as a Beast before thee.
But now mark the Calastrophe from the 23. ver. to the end of the Psalm, as soon
as he can turn, and tune his notes to praise, how high is he, saying;
Nevertheless I am continually with thee; thou have holden me by my right hand.
Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory. Whom
have in Heaven but thee; and none on earth that I desire besides thee. My flesh
and my heart fails; but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for
ever, etc. So Psalm. 77. In the first eleven verses the Psalmist is in a deep
dejected condition, ver. 2. In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord; my sore
ran in the night, and ceased not: My soul refused to be comforted a sad
expression). I remembered God, and was troubled a sadder expression); I
complained and my spirit was overwhelmed On which the Psalmist himself puts a
note of Emphasis, viz. Selah. He goes on. Thou hold mine eyes waking, so
that I cannot speak etc. Again, Will the Lord cast off for ever? And will he be
favorable no more? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? Does his promise fail
for evermore? Has God forgotten to be gracious? Has he in in anger shut up
his tender mercies? On which also he set his eminent mark Selah. Now mark the
turn of the tide. As soon as he can give this Torrent a check ver. 10. saying,
I said this is mine infirmity; And in the same verse, and verse 11 12. set
himself to meditate mercies and verse 13. etc. falls to praising, O how sublime
are the gracious workings of his heart, viz. who is so great a God as our God?
Thou art the God that do wonders: Thou have declared thy strength among the
people. Thou have with thine arm redeemed thy people, etc. (suitable to our
business this day) Once more to this see one Psalm more, viz. Psa. 116. In ver.
11. The Psalmists heart is sadly out of tune saying. I said in my have all men
are Liars (he excepts not the Prophets. compare, 1 Samuel 27.1.) But as soon as
this land-flood of passion is over, that the Land of mercies appears, how
elevated are his affections heavenward, as he expresses himself in the very
next verse, viz. 12.? What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits
toward me? He cannot think what may be great enough and good enough. Now he
is ver, 13, 14. fit to pray, to call on the name of the Lord; and forward to
pay his vows, etc. With all these, take a late experiment of the
Heart-reviving power of praising, confessed by a worthy pious Minister (Mr.
Greenham I think, for I had not time to turn Books) I endeavored (says he) to
set my self to study, I could not study. Then I endeavored to meditate, to
set my heart in tune, but I could not meditate Then I would have prayed, but I
could not pray. At last I fell to considering Gods mercies, and to praise him,
and then my heart came to himself, and I was in a sweet temper. And truly other
experienced Christians (and I hope such are some at least of you) do find the
experience of this heart reviving exercise of praise.

3. Is it not comely, does it not become us to have many beautiful returns of
heaven; much manifestation of Gods presence with us? Praise is not only a
Giver, but a Getter. See Jehoshaphat's praising God, 2 Chronicles. 20.22. And when
they began to sing, and to praise, the LORD set ambushments against the
children of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, which came against Judah, and they
were smitten. So also Paul and Silas praying, and singing PRAISES unto God,
Acts 16. Suddenly there was a great Earth quake, so that the foundations of
the prison were shaken; and immediately all the doors were opened, and every
ones bands were loosed, etc. Praise is like a pump, which in pouring out water
draws more water. Or like the strings of an instrument, which being stricken
with the hand, do verberate the air in its first sound, and are reverberated
by the air to an after-sound. Praises to the hollow and holy heavens, never
fail of a sweet Echo to the heart, from Heaven. For Praises as well as
Prayers put out Carefulness from the heart, and put into the heart, The peace
of God passing all understanding which will keep, ((...) Keep as in a Garrison,
there is the excellent Garrison) your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus,
Phil. 4.6, 7.

4. And lastly, is it not Comely, does it not become us to be of a cheerful,
joyful spirit in the Lord, like our God? To be like Heaven, like Angels, in
Complexion, language and business? Surely it is commanded that we rejoice in the
Lord always ( Phil. 4.4.) and again (in the same verse) the Holy Ghost commands
it saying, again I say rejoice, viz. to credit Gods goodness to us. And praise
is the pleasant work of joy, in the former part of the verse of my Text,
ushering it in thus, REJOICE in the Lord O ye righteous, PRAISE is comely for
the upright; joy being of the definition of Heaven, Psalm. 16. last In thy
presence is fullness of joy; at thy right hand are pleasure for evermore. There
are praises and Alleluja's or Halelujah's, the language of Angels, Isai. 6.3.
The Seraphims cried saying, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts, etc. And
Luke 2.13 There was with the Angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising
God, and saying, Glory to God in the highest, etc. And the Churches business,
as represented in Heaven, are Allelujaes, Rev. 1, 3, 4, 5. I heard a voice of
much people in HEAVEN, saying; Alleluja, etc. And again they said Alleluja. And
the 24 Elders, and the 4 Animals worshipped God, saying, Amen, Alleluja. And a
voice came out of the Throne saying, praise God. No creature of the earth so
heaven like, and heart exhilerating as Music; and therefore used in Scripture,
both in the Old Testament and in the New, to typifie the heavenly joy in the
Holy Ghost, and the joies of Heaven. * In praise we testify, So in the Psalms
often; and in the Revelation often. Psalm. 57.8. Psalm. 108.2. And at least ten times
more. And Rev. 5.8. Rev. 14.2. Rev. 15.2.
we feel the first in our affections; and see the other in our faith and hope.
And thus we have brought comlynesse to the highest hight, and so put a period
to our speech of that.

2. Our mercies call for our praise. And here I must rather Epitomize, then
Anatomize (to dissect and read a lecture upon every part). I could mind you of
that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 25.10. ALL the paths of the Lord are mercy and
truth, unto such as keep his Covenant, and his Testimonies. And upon this ALL,
I might enlarge to every finger toe, and nail on them, as our Savior says (
Mat. 10.30.) The very hairs of your head are all numhred. I might also mind you
of devout Austins platform of praise, Quid est tota die, id est, sine
intermissione laudare? In prospe ris, quia consolaris: in adversis, quia
cocrigis antequa^ essem, quia secisti me: Cum essem, quia: salutem dedis^i Cum
peccassem, quia ignovisii: Cum conversus essem, quia adjuvisti, Cum
perseverassem, quia Coronasti. Aug. super illud Psalm. Tota die repleatur os
meum laud.
viz. To praise God in prosperity, because he comforts: in Adversity, because
he corrects: For that before we were, because he made us: For that when we
were, because he has given us salvation: For what when we had sinned, because
he pardoned: For what when we were converted, because he helped: For that when
we have perseverd he Crowns us. I might also run over the mercies mentioned
in this Psalm, wherein is my Text, argumentatively pressing the performance of
it. But, for compendiousness, it shall suffice to touch on some of them by and
by, which Concentre with this days commemoration. Where I shall not delight to
digg into the wounds of others miseries, but duly set forth the dignity of our
own deliverance.

1 It Is a matter of praise (worthy Senators, and Christians) that this day we
may praise, viz. That we live to praise; have leave to praise; do meet to
praise; have a mind to praise; have means to praise; especially in this mode
and majesty of solemnity * as in a day of a princely marriage. The place,
Consedere Duces, and vulg: stante Corond.
the face of this Congregation seem to me to have written upon them Union,
Union Union; Union of hearts, of Parliament, City, and Army: which Union is
the foundation of marriage. The Sermon mainly designed to espouse you all to
the Lo^d, in true joy, praise, and thankfulness; and in that Tertio, to one
another And this union is greater then that of marriage. For they that are
joined to the Lord, (1 Cor. 6.17.) are ONE SPIRIT. The praises now dictated, or
sung by us are the Epithalamia i. e the Spiritual marriage-songs (so we mean,
that mind our business, to sing and give praise for the uniting mercies of this
day) Your Prince-like Feast (interpreted expressly by that common vote of good
people) is your interview for union and therefore justly called a marriage
Feast. And here is your Minister to pray hearty for you, that God would for
ever unite you in the truth, and love, and love of the truth. And upon that,
solemnly and seriously to pronounce those whom God has joined together, let no
man put asunder, I say no man, no Devil, no Jesuit. Amen.

But 2ly, If this be matter of praise that we may praise; how much more the
cause of this days praise, to witthe grand, and stupendous deliverance of this
Commonwealth, comprehending three Nations; and all the Churches, and the
thousands of the people of God in those Nations. And therefore it is (though I
say no more) our justice to praise God; Suum cuique tribuere, to give God his
due; whose justice to the weeds, was mercy to the Corn, according to the 5.
and 10. verses after my Text in that Psalm, pressing my Text, The Lord loves
righteousness, and judgment; the Lord brings the counsel of the Heathen to
naught; he makes the devices of the people of none effect. And of this our
justice, in praising God, there is a kind of Comeliness too. For if of every
moral acquired virtue there is a transcendent beauty that would ravish the
sonns of men if they could visibly behold it: So Cicero has it out of Plato.
How much more of infused grace (called the divine nature). So that our duty is
like the cause, both being glorious. 2 Pet. 1.4.
For our deliverance is like the cloud that was the convoy of Israel in all
their deliverances from Egypt to Canaan, viz. Darkness to our enemies, but
glorious light to us, if we consider these four Qualifications of it.

1 The matter from which we are delivered. Not from proclaimed warning War,
like generous enemies; but rather from a hidden hellish plot ((...) quasi (...)
looking like an intended Massacre. Not from foreigners, strangers abroad, but
from them at home, of our own bowels. Not from dropps, but a deluge of blood,
for all the godly of the Land to drink from the hand of the wicked Cavalliers
(for on them I look as the principal, the rest but as decoyed by them) I say
to be drunk from the hands of the Cavalliers, intending yea, and endeavoring
jointly, and universally to rise at once, in all parts of this Nation at least.
He that denies this, tells me there is no Sun in the Firmament; and would
persuade us not to believe what some, of us have seen with our eye, and heard
with our ears from the mouths of the enemies themselves.

2. The Moment of our deliverancee It was like that of Isaac, Ger. 22.10.
when the blow was fetching. Like that of Moses, when the generality of the
people were about instantly to stone him, then, very then, in that instant,
Namb. 14.10.
the glory of the Lord came down upon the Tabernacle, and daunted them from
their dismal design? Or like the deliverance of Israel at the Red Sea. If the
Sea be not divided that very night (a great work to be done in a night) then
good night to the Israelites lives, Ex^. 14.21.
or liberties, or both. It was an astonishment to us to think that whiles we
were all, Genesis 22.14.
most intentively gazing, and admiring at the setting of a single person, and
glorying in the rising and ascending up of this Parliament (O happy day) the
enemy in all parts are ready to swarm and to come about us like Bees. But (as
the Psalmist says, so say we) in the name of the Lord they were destroyed,
according to that divine Hebrew proverb of old, Behas yehofa yeraeh, That is in
the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen. For so in the 18, and 19. verses after
my Text pressing our duty in it, Behold the eye of the Lord is on them that
fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy, to deliver their soul from death.
Deus videt, and ridet God saw and laughed the enemy to scorn.

3. The manner of our deliverance, viz. a most bloody design, prevented almost
by a bloodless victory. Of which we are glad, as well as our enemies. A rare
Sympathy between two adversary Armies

4. The Means of our deliverance, viz. Digitus Dei, The finger of God. We
acknowledge the diligence, forwardness and resolution of the Souldierie. And
that was of God too. It Is God and his Cause that carries it. We have it
demonstrated by the contrary too, viz. the ill success when these have been
left (though I have not the place). But in this our deliverance behold further
in special, Digitus Dei, the finger of God, the movings of God upon the heart.
For though the enemy were greatly prepared, and mighty in strength, and that
in a chief strength of an Army, viz. in Horse, especially for such a design
(suddenly to over run and subdue a whole Nation) inflamed also (as they
pretended) with great zeal, and most specious pretenses, yet in the day of
Battle they had no heart, nor courage suitable to such a day. God had sent the
Hornet of fear and daunted them. So that our Army Venit, vidit, and vicit. God
the great Master and Commander of hearts (for all their mighty power) had taken
away their heart. So that to this, we may apply that in the 16 and 17 verses
after my Text (pressing the practi^e of it upon us) There is no King saved by
the MULTITUDE of an Host: a mighty man is not delivered by much strength. An
HORSE is a vain thing for safety; neither shall he deliver any by his great
strength. Surely no, when God takes away the heart of the Rider, yea and of his
Infantry too. And this is a main thing that I desire we may mainly mind; That
the grand things that God has done for us in this last and great revolution,
has been by heart-work; wherein none can make any show of claim to share in
his honor. God wrought upon the hearts of the Army a jealousy of a design to
set over us an anti-interested single person, contrary to our interest and
Commonwealth; which made them so effectually importune the dissolution of the
last convention God again wrought upon the hearts, of the same Army, a
sensible satisfaction that their interest was involved in the interest of this
Parliament; and that both their safeties, and of the whole Commonwealth, were
inseparably twisted together, and like Hypocrates Twinns, live and die
together; whereupon, the former Conventions being dethroned, the Soldiery
importuned this Parliament to return to their duties. So that in these, God
wrought in our Army a kind of change of their hearts; whereby of ill masters,
they became excellent servants to this Commonwealth, and came off Gallantly.
Again God works for us with heart work upon, and in our enemies. 1. God took
away the wit, or courage, or both of many parties in many Counties that they
were not up in Arms considerably, at the nick of time. 2. That from that most
considerabe body in the North-East, God took away (as we said) their courage,
So that in these things God took away the heart.

And thus (to close our Sermon) should we well weigh mercies ( praising comes
of prizing) we should weigh them like gold, every cinder and Scintil, to a
grain. And measure them all, so exactly, considering them as a Ball of Silk;
not what is the Globe or bulk of it only, but to what a length it will run, and
what it will make in the improvement. Verily we should discern the length of this
days mercies, by the length of our miseries if the plot had taken: And thence
conclude; that our present deliverance (if we have the grace to keep the Talent
God has given us) extends from this generation to the next, and so the next,
etc. till Christ come. Now if for future mercies the Apostle puts the Question,
2 Pet. 3.11. Seeing we look for new Heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells
righteousnese (the old being dissolved by fire) what manner of persons ought we
to be in all holy conversation and godliness? How thankful and holy, should we
be for present mercies; so as to be as it were distressed (with the Psalmist,
Psalm. 116.12.) what and how to render to God praise and obedience, good enough,
and great enough for all the greatness of his goodness toward us. For surely
the Lord does overcome us, yea overcome our very thoughts with the hughness and
highness of his numerous mercies, Ephesians. 3.20. He does for us above what we could
ask or think. And his mercy (as Psa. 36.5, 6.) is to the heavens; his
faithfulness reaches to the clouds; his righteousness is like the great
mountains; and his judgments like a great deep. Therefore let the people
praise and sing, and let the heavens ring with Halel^jah's, praise, honor, and
glory, be given to him that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb for evermore,
Amen.

Delivered to the Printer, October. 11. 1659.

ERRATA, p. 5. margin at line 20. read Plin. p. 6. (...) p. 8. (...) p. 13.
line 19. Till, p. 24. (...) p. 29. l. ingratum, p. 37. margin vulgi.


