THE HONOR OF LONDON APPRENTICES: EXEMPLIFIED, In a brief Historical
Narration; Containing many Heroical actions done by (some in particular, the
rest in general) Prentices of the most renowned, and (in that regard) truly
honorable City of London, both at home and abroad.

In long, fore-past, present, and modern times.

Collected and published, by a Well-wisher to what himself once was that is to
say, a Prentice (and now a free Citizen) of the famous City of London.

printer's or publisher's device

June 3d London, Printed by ^. A. 1647*

The Honor of London Prentices.
TO give light to thi^ intended narration I account it very pertinent (as an
exord^um to the discourse) to set down an Exemplary practice (in general) used
among London Prentices which might worthily be wished that it wear in some
record drawn into custom in all christian soc^eties, and that is the
unanimous correspo^dency that is among that innumerable company, For it is
worth observation that whereas from all Shiers and Countries of the kingdom of
England and dominion of Wales the sonns of Knights Esquires gentlmen ministers
yeomen and trades m^n come up from their particular places of Nativity, and
aboud, to be prentices in London, each one to a trade, occupation, mystery, or
profession: suitable to their several condition, quallity, or education, yet I
say, though so (...) r^^ote in bi^^^ or habitation being once sealed in this
famous City, (be^ides the commonty which obleigeth every one to his particular
Master) there is (as one may say a kind of a sup^rn^tural Sympathy and a
general Union, which knits their h^^rts in a bond of fraternall affection
under the common ^^^on of London Prent^ces or prentices of London: in so much
that as I have taken notice many a time and often, that i^ by (either real or
suposed wrong, or vyolence be offer^d to any one, the rest (though not
otherwise) knowing him to be a prentice, do imediatly (and commonly without
examination of the quarrel) engage themselves in the rescue, afrighting the
advarsary with this terrible sentence, Knock him down he wrongs a prentice.
This general denomination, has begoten admirable effects in all ages, as may
be seen in our English Chronicle, and in Master Strouds S^rvey of London, where
the honor of London Prentices in general (and of some in particular) is
conspicious to the eye of Christendom, (I and further too) the valiant
exploits and notable feats of arms achieved and done by London Prentices is so
remarkable that from time to time the condition has always been an
inseparable adjunct to an Heriditary Honor, which drawn in a line to this
present age, has Ilustrated with its beams, the glory of that honorable
City, as the Seminary (or seed plot) of martial Spirits as the Isue of my
mu^e in Heroricall verse shall though I confess unworthyly declare to the
reader or hearer of the following Naration.

TRanslucent Muse with thy emphatick beams,
Quicken my genius that this Theme of Theames,
By me may be Ilustrated so full.
That all may know what none can disanull:
The honor of brave London Lads I treat,
Who have achieved many a worthy feate;
Done that which makes the world their deeds admire,
Making great London to more height aspire,
Rasing a general Trophy to the style,
Of London Prenti^es let falce Fortune smile,
Or frown all is one, this Apolation has,
Trod in all t^mes an honorable Path;
Peruse our Chronicles from age to age,
When Fell Bellona did in England rage;
And you shall find (whoever Peace enjoyed
Bold London Prentices in war employed,
And such success attended on their worth,
That rarely any Army marched forth,
Wherein the London Prentices bore sway,
But still they had the fortune of the day,
Whose Part soever this Party sided with,
Were all most sure of victory for the pith,
Marrow and veins of war in them were found*
And all their actions were with honor crowned;
Were London Prentices in force combined,
The adverse party must go down the wind,
At home* abroad, in Europe, Asia, and
Hot Africa, and America by Land
Or Sea, no action worth regard
Was do^e, but London Prentice in it shared.
The raise of London Prentices did shine
Among the Infide^s in Palestine,
When that renowned christian Champion named,
Gedfrey of Bullo^gne (through the world so famed)
Went to the holy war (so called then)
The London Prentices proved men of men,
And in particular In William Conq. G^o. Ellis Haberdasher Fran. Lee, Grocer.
Alex. Beale Cu^ler. Walt. Vincen. fishm. Godf. Haris Salter. C* Fitz williams.
Gelds. W. Valintine Tailor. Guy vaux. sadler. N. Morgan, Bras^er. P. Or^tond,
Tailor. Gre Finch, Skiner. Rosse Sly, Fish. Rich. Salter. Shoo. Roll. Ashley.
Butch. Sir Walter Raulies History of the world, ^^l^^ 229.
fifteen of them
Before the walls of old Jerusalem,
Slew and took pris^n^rs eight and forty Turks,
Boldly adventuring into their works:
Two of these Infidel^ were great Bashaws,
Who came to overtop the christian Laws.
These fifteen London Prentices *stout blades)
Named in the margent, with their several trades
Were knighted in the field, and their bright fame
Shown on fair London City (whence they came)
What honor by these Heroes London got,
Time does record and fame forgets not,
Were not these worthy Prent^ces indeed,
Whose p^owesse all the Army did exceed;
Also when our stout Cordelion went
Against those Miscreants with good intent
(And pious zeal) three Regiments of these
Bold prentices with him did cross the Seas,
And at the I Will of Cipres did such things,
That of their fame learned Marinoe sings,
At stately Acon walls they were the first
Which did adventure; when no other durst;
This was a motive which French Philip moved,
To leave that cause which most he should have loved,
Mere emnlation of these brave young men
Made him march up the hill and down again,
Leaving King Rich, and the holy war,
Because our men out-stript the French so far.
Thus London Prentices where ere they came,
Purchased their own, England and London same.
Likewise when Warlike Longshankes men did raise
For the same warfare in his Fathers days,
A number of these Youths (pricked forward by,
Example of the former History)
(Some with their masters leaves, and some with out)
went to fetch honor from the damned Rout
Of Turkish Infidels (in Palestine)
Doing brave service (in that great design)
And chiefly ten, which their own Story grants,
Slew 22 of the wild Miscreants.
This deed procured them Knighthood, though thus famed,
I cannot name them, cause to me unnam'd.
Thus much for Palestine (the holy Land)
Where London Prentices bravely did stand,
For God, their Prince, and Country, with good chance,
Now will I turn my style to Spain and France,
Where we shall view (as in a glorious glass)
The fame of London Prentices, which was
So memorable in those wars, that time
Has given pray^e to this my present rhyme.
When our third Edward (greatest of that name)
Unto the Realm of France (at the first laid claim,
Among the thousands, which (with willing mind)
In that great enterprise were all combined,
John Hall a Tailor near to Leaden Hall
Apprentice (of a mind heroical)
Having an itching humor to the wars,
He from his master ran to follow Mars,
And at the field of Crecy he did slay
With his own hand and sword 18 that day,
And prisoner took Count Saysons: for which thing
He instantly was knighted by the King,
His Colonel being sla^n, he did possess
The charge, and governed it with rare success,
And for his credit (who had done such deeds)
King Edward still to honor him proceeds;
Not only him, but all the Tailors which,
I^ London lived, his valor did enrich.
King Edward for Halls sake, and exaltation,
Did make the Tailors first a Corpor^tion:
Who linen armours were called till then,
Esteemed as poor and despicable men:
But now that they more honored might be,
The King himself o'th Company was free,
And after him 7 more were Freemen made,
Of this most honorable Kingly Trade.
Then let malicious fools this story scan,
And blush to say, a Tailor is no man;
The Author of these lines, himself is free
O'th Merchant-taylors Company: yet he,
Did not for that respect advance them so,
Here Is nothing but what Chronicles do shoe:
Now leaving France, I will return my style,
And think I see the B^ack Prince in Castile,
Ayding Don Pedro Right there o'th same,
Against the bastard Henry's Harl^t claim,
The London Prentices so lavish were
Of Manhood as by stories does appear)
That all the Christian world did them admire
For from the field they never wou^d retire,
And in particular, one William Man
On Fish-street-hill, a Vintner at the Swan,
Did show h^mself a perfect man (though young)
For with a matchless force he laid along
Five of the Rebels (bleed^ng) on the ground,
Four sla^n (outright) the fifth with many a wound,
Was carried from the field: all men of might
And eminence, for which he was dubbed Knight
By the Black Prince, and Baron made of Denbigh;
Thus you may see that Prentices brave men be.
But on particulars staying to long,
I shall the general honor too much wrong.
Therefore returning to my proper stream,
I Will prosecute my first intended theme:
Observe old stories, more especially
Of the 4th Edward, and sixth Henry:
Let Warwick or his for^une smile or frown.
The scale of victory turned up or down,
Just as the Prentices did aid or fight
Against: was sure to be, were wrong or right,
Which side they took prevailed: the other part
(Wanting the help ot'h Prentices) felt smart.
Now leaving fore-past actions which have been,
Lets now draw near to what our eyes have seen,
In th^s unhappy difference, which of late
Has proved both happy, and unfortunate;
This an Aenigmae may be thought to be,
Yet it is most plain to prove: for don't we see
The Cavaliers bewayling their hard fate,
The Roundheads boasting themselves fortunate;
What would their business have been brought unto,
Had not the Prentices been prompt to go,
Though to the Commanders Victory will ascribe;
Yet known experience shows, that if the tribe
Of London Prentices had not stood out,
The other part, had prevailed no doubt.
I will not say they fought against the King
(For that I lest uphold of any thing)
But to continue as I did beg^n,
Proving which part the Prentice takes must win.
A reason for it, is what I said at'h first,
A perfect union force can never burst,
And they are so united that what part
They took, is served (as 'twere) but with one heart*
Good Lads, they took Religion for their cause,
Their liberties and fundamental laws,
The privilege of Parliament (what not)
But certainly by that auspitiously Lot,
Which follows London Prentices (in war)
The difference 'twards a perids run thus far,
And probable conjectures we may reap,
That from this seed of sorrow halcyon days
Shall spring in England; and we shall ere long
Enjoy King, Peace, Truth, Liberty, our Song,
Shall then be grateful Locans to our God,
Our King, our Parliament, when every odd
Shall be made even; and we Englishmen
Restored unto our Pristine State again;
And London Prentices shall honored be
With what belongs to them (in each degree)
In The intrim as an earnest that with love,
The Parliament does of their zeal approve,
Their just Petitions granted, not by chance,
But even confirmed by an Ordinance,
That as their valor has oblieg'd our Nation,
Once in a Month for honest recreation
A day's allowed; thus service is rewarded,
And London Prentices are well regarded:
For so they ought (if things we rightly scan)
Since no Lord Mayor, no Sheriff, nor Alderman,
But was a London Prentice, ere he came
To be a Citizen free of the same,
And from that first did by degrees ascend
Unto that state which Prentices defend;
Now a short door to shu^ in this small Story,
Is this, Let London still th^nk on the glory,
Which She has by her Prentices accrew'd,
Let Whores and Bawds leave off their courses lewd,
Least a Shrove-tuesday visit (or some hour
Wherein the London Prentices have power)
Chastise their sordities: brave Prentices,
Do utterly abhor such things as these.
Adieu my noble hearts, judge not amiss
Of him who to your honor published this.
FINIS.

