THE DANGER OF DESERTION: OR A FARVVELL SERMON of Mr. Thomas Hooker, Sometimes
Minister of Gods Word at Chainsford in Essex; but now of New ENGLAND. Preached
immediately before his departure out of old ENGLAND.

TOGETHER, WITH TEN PARTICVLAR rules to be practiced every day by converted
Christians.

LONDON, Printed by G.M. for George Edwards in the Old Baily in Greene-Arbour,
at the Sign of the Angel. 1641.

The Epistle to the READER.
CHRISTIAN READER,
THe Author of this Sermon, while be lived here among us, gave God proof of
his solid judgment, acute wit, strong memory, honest heart, pious disposition,
and utter detestation, as of profaneness, so of superstition. He was trained up
in Immanuel College Cambridge, where he showed his indefatigable industry
about his own studies, and conscionable fidelity about his pupils and their
studies. His opinion about the Doctrine maintained in the Church of England,
since the reformation thereof, was Orthodox; but his conscience about the
Discipline and Ceremonies thereof was scrupulous; yet so, as he loved such as
he observed sincere and entire in the substance, though he differed from them
in circumstances. Nor he, nor many of his brethren like him, that were forced
to leave old England to enjoy the freedom of their tender consciences,
deserted their places in any envy, hatred, or other like disrespect against the
Church of England (like many rigid Separatists, who account her self to be no
Church, and her Ministers to be no Ministers,) but partly to enjoy a greater
liberty to themselves then here they could, partly to propogate the Gospel,
and make it known to such as had not heard of it before. Take instance of this
Authors disposition, by this his Farewell Sermon. Read it, and observe it well,
and thou shall find therein savoury of piety mixed with sincerity, and of
zeal with meekness. Read it I say, and then censure it, it needs no other to
commend it then it self, neither can any other do it better then it self.

Mr. HOOKERS FARVVELL SERMON, At his departure out of ENGLAND.
JEREMIAH 14.9. at the latter end. We are called by thy Name, leave us not.


TWo things are intended and expressed by the Holy ghost, from the 1. verse, to
the thirteenth.

First, a denuntiation of judgment, and that reaches to the 17. verse, and
that is sword and famine. First, he would send the famine, and then the sword,
and would not be entreated.

Secondly, in the 8. verse, we have the importunate prayer of the Church, to
turn away these judgments; and the prayer is mavelous sweet, partly in
confession, where they confess their sins, and seek to God for succor
against them: As if they should say, Lo we are as base as base can be, and
therefore help for the Lords sake, and thus they make their supplication in the
7. and 8. verses, and this short prayer discovers it self, partly in the
things prayed for, and partly in the manner, and the holy Prophet intending
this is very sweet in it.

First, they pray that God will not take away his presence from them, Why
stayest thou but a night? As if he should say, it is mavelous strange, that
thou behavest thy self as a stranger.

Thou see our sorrows, and helpest not. Thou see our trouble, and
succourest not. Thou stand, and see Jerusalem in trouble, and Judah in
misery, but thou helpest not. It is strange that thou the great God of Hosts
stand as a man astonished: thou have received us, but now thou stand as a
man amazed, as if thou wast weary of thy work, and could do no more: As if
he should say, Jerusalem cannot be succored, and Iudaea cannot be saved.

Secondly, they beg that God would not take away his presence from them, Leave
us not to our selves. Let us see thy face, if that we dye in thy presence,
though thou helpest not, yet it dothus good to look on a Savior, they are
acquainted first that thou art the hope of Israel. Alas! if thou forsake, us,
our hope is lost, our hope is not in the means, our hope is in thee, leave us
not.

Secondly, thou art the Savior of Israel, and it is that that thou take upon
thee, and thou have made thy self a Savior, and now is the time of trouble,
perform what thou have undertaken.

Thirdly, thou art in the midst of us, thou art a great comforter, ready to
succor us. What will thou see us perish when thou art so near us? 1 Samuel 4.6.
Even as the Arc in the midst of the camp: as if he should say, he lives in
the midst of us, and will not save us.

Fourthly, we are called by thy Name, we have interest in thee, to whom should
servants go for safety, but to their Master? to whom should the wife go, but
to her husband? we have interest in thee, leave us not.

Now we will meddle only with the latter clause, leave us not. God might leave
them, but they beg that he would not, that is their Amento the Petition, though
thou stand by, and wilt not help, yet let us not dye in thy presence. This
is the great request of the Saints, they desire not to be left of God, though
God may justly leave them,

That God may justly leave off a people, Doct.
and unchurch a Nation. Israel suspected it, and feared it: It is that that
they prayed against, that God would not leave them. I do not say that God will
cast off his elect eternally; but those that are only in outward covenant,
with him he may, Isa. 1.2. Hear O ye heavens, I have nursed up children, that
is, the Jews, there is an outward vocation, and for such God may cast them
off. Brethren, cast your thoughts afar off. What is become of those famous
Churches, Pergamus and Thyatira, and the rest? Who would have thought that
Jerusalem should have bin made a heap of stones, and a vagabond people? Hos.
7.9. Plead with your mother, and call her Loammi, ye are not my people, and I
will not be your God. Thus as I may say, he sues out a bill of divorcement, as
it was in the old Law, those that had any thing against their wives, sued our a
bill of divorcement, and so does God, Hos. 2.2. she is not my people, nor my
beloved, let her cast away her fornications and idolatry, lest I make her as at
the first, that is, in Egypt poor and miserable: as if he should say to
England, plead with England my Ministers, in the way of my truth, and say unto
them, let them cast away their rebellions, lest I make her as I found her in
captivity in the days of bondage.

But how does God depart from a people? Ob.


When he takes away his love from a people, Ans.
and as his respect, so his means too.

2. When he takes away his protection by taking down the walls, that is, these
two great means of safety, Magistrates and Ministers.

3. When instead of counselling, comes in bribing, and in stead of teaching,
dawbing, when God either takes away the hedges, or the stakes are rotten, then
God is going.

4. When God takes away the benefit of both these helps, and they are signs of
Gods departing.

May God cast off a people, Use.
and unchurch anation? then let it teach us to cast off all security, for
miseries are nigh by all probabilities. When we observe what God has done for
us, all things are ripe for ruin, and yet we fear it not, we promise safety
to our selves, and consider not that England is like to be harrowed, we cannot
entertain a thought that England shall be destroyed; when there are so many
professors in it, we cannot be persuaded of it, according to the conviction of
our judgments, either it must not be, or not yet, as if it were impossible for
God to leave England, as if God were a cockering father over lewd and stubborn
children: God may leave a Nation that is but in outward covenant with him, and
why not England?

Englands sins have been great, yea and their mercies great. England has
been a mirror of mercy, yet God may leave us, and make us a mirror of his
justice. Look how he spoke to the people in Ier. 7. that bragged of the Temple
of the Lord, Sacrifices and offerings: And what may not God which destroyed
Shilo, destroy thee O England? Go to Bohemia, from thence to the Palatinate,
and so to Denmark. Imagine you were there, what shall you see, nothing else
but as Travelers say, Churches made heaps of stones, and those Bethels wherein
Gods name was called upon, are made defiled Temples for Satan and superstition
to reign in? You cannot go two or three steps, but you shall see the heads of
dead men, go a little further, and you shall see their hearts picked out by
the fowls of the air, whereupon you are ready to conclude that Tilly has
been there: Those Churches are become desolate, and why not England? Go into
the Cities and Towns, and there you shall see many compassed about with the
chains of captivity, and every man bemoaning himself. Do but cast your eyes
abroad, and there you shall see poor fatherless children sending forth their
breaches, with fear, crying to their poor helpless mothers. Step but a
little farther, and you shall see the sad wife bemoaning her husband, and that
is her misery, that she cannot dye soon enough; and withal she makes funeral
Sermons of her children within her self, for that the Spaniard may get her
little ones, and bring them up in Popery and superstition; and then she weeps
and considers with her self: If my husband be dead, it is well, happily he is
upon the rack, or put to some cruel tortures, and then she makes funeral
Sermons, and dies a hundred times before she can dye. Cast your eyes afar off,
set your souls in their souls stead, and imagine it were your own condition,
why may not England be thus, who knows but it may be my wife, when he hears
of some in torments? Ah! Brethren, be not high minded, but fear, as we have
this bounty on the one side, so may we have this severity on the other;
therefore prancke not up your selves with foolish imaginations, as who dare
come to England, the Spaniards have enough, the French are too weak: Be not
deceived, who thought Jerusalem the Lady of Kingdoms, whither the Tribes went
to worship, should become a heap of stones, a vagabond people, and why not
England? Learn therefore to hear and fear, God can be a God without England,
do not say there are many Christians in it, can God be beholding to you for
your Religion? No surely, for rather then he will maintain such as profess
his Name and hate him, he will raise up of these stones children unto Abraham;
He will rather go to the Turks, and say you are my people, and I will be your
God. But will you let God go, England? Why are you so content to let him go?
Oh! lay hold on him, yea hang on him, and say thou shall not go. Do you
think that Rome will part with her religion, and forsake her gods? nay, an
hundred would rather lose their lives. Will you let God go? Oh England plead
with your God! and let him not depart. You should only part with your
rebellions, he will not part with you. Leave us not. We see the Church is very
importunate to keep God with them still, they lay hold on God with words of
argument.

Thou hope of Israel, do not leave us: they beset God with their prayers, and
watch him at the Towns end that he might not go away. No thou shall not go
away, thou shall abide with us still, they are importunate with God not to
leave them.

Hence note this Doctrine.

That it is the importunate desire of Saints to keep God with them. Doct.
This people you see cared not so much for the famine and sword, so God leaves
them not: Good Lord leave us not, this was their prayer, and we cannot blame
them, all things being considered; for it was their grief that God stood by,
and would not help, why stand thou as a man astonished? but good Lord leave
us not, they cannot abide to hear of that, much less to bear it; thus they
did, and thus the Saints of God should do. For the proof, see Exodus 33.15.
there Moses might have gone up upon fair terms, thou shall possess the land,
and peace and prosperity shall be with thee; but what says Moses? If I might
have Canaan, and all the delights, yet carry us not hence, except thy presence
be with us, Psalm. 80.7, 19. this is the stay and string that he sticks on.
Turn us again O Lord God of Hosts, and cause thy face to shine upon us: as if
he should say, here is prosperity.

But what is the presence of God? Ob.


In one word, Ans.
it is the particular favor of God expressed in his ordinances, and all the
good and sweet that follows there. The purity of Gods word and worship, is
that which God reveals himself in. It is not gold, wealth, and prosperity,
that makes God to be our God. There is more gold in the West-Indians, then in
all Christendom besides; but in is Gods ordinances in the virtue of them that,
brings Gods presence. God forsook Shilo where he dwelt, because his ordinances
were not there, Psalm. 78.5. when the Arc left them, God left them: When Gods
ordinances were there in the purity of them, then God was there; for he is
principally there where his ordinances are in the purity of them. Hence it was
that Cain was cast out of Gods presence, because he was cast out of the Church
where his ordinances were, Genesis 4.14. If that a people do outwardly worship
God, and sincerely mend things that be amiss, they may continue. If Sodom and
Gomorrah had but legally repented, they had remained to this day. Hence it is
that the Saints of God are so urgent for Gods services, and in that most men so
slight them. While it is thus with us is not England ripe? is not she weary of
God? nay, she is fed fat for the slaughter. It was not so with the Saints and
people of God in former times, Psalm. 34.4. It was David's great and grand
desire, that he might dwell in the house of the Lord, Psalm. 42.4. his soul
panted after Gods ordinances. The point teaches us thus much, That the Saints
are wondrous importunate to keep God in his ordinances.

But what if a man want preaching, Ob.
may not he want it, and yet go to Heaven?

The arguments are clear, Ans.
the Saints maintain God in his ordinances, the want of which is under the
penalty of death and condemnation. Gold cannot feed a hungry man, but bread he
would have, because that he has need of: so the Saints of God are mavelous
importunate to keep God in his Ordinances, so that though they wear a ragged
coat, or be pinched with hunger; yet he wants God more then these, either food
or raiment. David in the 37. Psalm, fretteth at the prosperity of the wicked;
but at the last breaks off, and mark what a conclusion he makes, and comes to,
whom have I in heaven but thee? as if he should have said, Let them have what
they will, I have nothing but thee. Why so? Thou art the strength of my heart,
and my portion for ever: Thou art the strength of the heart, Showing that all
things in the world cannot help the heart without God. A man were as good offer
iron to a hungry man to refresh him, or air to feed him, as to say, riches,
ease, and honor will help thy distressed soul: These will never establish a
man, he may hope to have comfort in them; but his soul shall be gravelled and
troubled. It must be the God of peace that must speak peace to a troubled soul:
It must be the God of salvation that can comfort a damned soul; that kindness
will comfort, that is the strength of the heart, and portion for ever, and then
no marvel the soul call for God: The soul cares not, though happily the
purse be filled, for it cries and sighs, I am damned. Happily the palate may
be pleased; but the poor soul cries, I may go to hell, and to the Devil.
Now God comes, and he supplies all, for where he comes, there is every good
gift: If once a man has God, he has all good things with him. God blessed
Obadiahs house for the Arkes sake. Now the Arc was a type of Christ, where he
comes all good things follow: When God comes, we are married unto him, Hos,
2.19. As when a wife is married, her husband is hers: so God and all is thine,
and what would thou have more? He speaks to the rain, and it hears the
corn and wine, and that hears Israel. Hell and Death are thy servants; but
now you that have outward things, profits, and prosperity, etc. you have them
with a curse, unless you have God with them: Get God therefore, if he forsakes
a man, all miseries befall him, and then woe beto him, Hos. 9.13. Ah! it is
true indeed, woe beto that heart which God is departed from. When God who is
the God of mercy is gone away from him, who will pity that soul that will not
submit to Gods peace, consolation, and salvation. When God departs, all
miseries follow on amain: when the banks are broken down, the Sea breaks
forth: so when God departs, all miseries come; for that man that makes no
conscience of outfacing God in his Ordinances, mark what the Text says, Deuteronomy.
31. 37. I will forsake them, and many miseries shall befall them. If God be
gone, the Floud-gates are drawn dry, and in comes all misery. You will say,
are not all these things against us, seeing God is not with us? If we would
avoid woe and sorrow, and killing and slaying one another. Would the women be
glad to see their husbands killed before their tender eyes, the men to see the
women taken out of the world by the hands of wicked men. If not then, leave not
God, but hold him fast, then all evil will depart, and so holding God he will
keep us from misery.

Use. To condemn 2 sorts of people. Use.
If the Saints be mavelous importunate to have God with them, what shall we
think of those that are weary of the Almighty, who say to him depart from us:
But you will say, such are to be chronicled, we have none such among us. Thou
that art a servant, and rejectest thy Masters command, thou rejectest God. Why
should a man say that they be so long and so long in prayer, and say, what man
knows not what he says, he speaks this because that he is weary of the
Ordinances, and would be freed from them, and God will do it one day. Alas
poor soul, thou could pity thy condition, thou art weary of Gods
Ordinances, weary of Gods mercies, weary of his patience, and presence. Thou
shall one day be deprived of his presence, and shut up with the haters of God
and goodness in the black Tophet, where the worm never dies, nor the fire
never goes out, then thy crying will do thee no good. God will be God in thy
destruction, he will spurn thousands, and ten thousands such as thou art down
to hell, where thou shall be an everlasting object of his never dying wrath,
though thou could scale the heavens with thy tears, and shrill voice:
Though thou could be heard to cry out of the dungeon, yet thy help is never
the nearer, thy God is gone. I admonish thee what to do, lay thee down and
patiently endure his deserved wrath; Nay, mark what I say, a hundred hels thou
have deserved, and in those hels to lie a hundred years, nay for ever. Hold
thy self contented with thy condition, for thou have chosen death rather then
life, Ier. 31.8. God should wrong himself and thee, if that he did not give
thee thy choosing. Will not these things move you my brethren? that you may be
so happily wise, as to choose life rather than death, Lord grant it, for he
delights not in your destruction. One word more, to leave impression in your
hearts: I desire your souls health, though my meat seem bitter; yet it is the
mind of God it should be so, and therefore, thou man or woman, whosoever thou
art that can not abide preaching, but stand on thorns, to have the Sermon
done, that say too much of one thing is good for nothing. Thou do as good
as say, what need have we of that, a little of that, and more of pleasure, here
is thy delight and desire. Know this whosoever thou art, that have ill will to
the Ordinances of God, thou would have no such Gospel, thou shall have thy
desire, when the Trumpet shall blow, thy ears shall tingle, with that
sentence, Depart from me. Thou that art weary of God, get thee down to hell, I
say, God will set his teeth at thee, and stamp thee down to hell with thy base
lusts: Then will God say, I have fed thee on earth this 20, 30, 40, 50, perhaps
60 years, and yet my mild words could not bear rule in thee, or prevail
with thee, and now get thee to hell, and there remain for ever. Think this
with thy self, God will so serve thee proud Captain, King, or Monarch, Isa.
30.33. The Text says, he will make bonfires upon their bones about their
ears, thus he will get himself glory by your destruction: But you will say to
me being a King or Monarch, I do not fear any such punishment shall befall
me; but God will say, be he a King that rules or reigns, yet as he has
rejected God, so God will reject him. He is a King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
and therefore such a one as will laugh at thy destruction. Take notice of this,
and say thus to your selves: Is he a good child that cannot abide the presence
of his father: Is she a good wife that cannot abide the presence of her
husband: So is he a good creature that cannot abide the presence of his Creator.

This rebukes Gods own people. 2. Use.
We see the Gospel going, brethren, I wonder you hear no better stand up and
hear, and God give you grace to understand. I deal plainly with you, and tell
you what God has told me: I must tell you on pane of salvation, will you give
ear and believe. I poor Ambassador of God am sent to do this message unto
you, though I am low, yet my message is from above, he that sent me, grant that
it may be believed for his sake. Suppose God has told me this night that he
will destroy England, and lay it waste, what say you brethren to it? It is my
message that God bade me do, he expects your answer, what say thou oh
England, I must return an answer to my Master that sent me to night, why
speak you not an answer? I must have one. Do you like well of it, would you
have England destroyed? would you put the old men to trouble, and the young men
to the sword? would you have your women widows, and your maids defiled? would
you have your children, your dear ones to be thrown upon the pikes, and
dashed against the walls? or would you have them brought up in idolatry under
the necessity of preaching, which is worst of all? would you see those Temples
wherein we worship God burnt, and your own houses? will you see England laid
waste without inhabitants? are you willing to it? are you content? God bade me
ask, why do you not answer me? I must not stir without it, I must have it,
I am an importunate Ambassador, send me not away sad, speak comfortably and
cheerfully unto me. Are you willing to have God with you still, you are, are
you not? I am glad of it; but you must not only say so, but use the means,
plead with God: And though his hand be up, and his sword drawn; yet suffer him
not to destroy, but to sheath it in the blood of our enemies, God grant it, and
I should be glad to see England flourish still, and so are you, are you not?
you are. Now if it come to pass that England be not, but destroyed and laid
desolate, thank your selves, and not God, he delights not in it. We may take
up the complaint of the Prophet, Isa. 64.7. No man stirs up himself to lay
hold upon God: For this is our misery, if that we have quietness and commodity
we are well enough, thus we play mock-holy-day with God, the Gospel we make it
our pack-horse: God is going, his glory is departing, England has seen her
best days, and now evil days are befalling us: God is packing up his
Gospel, because no body will buy his wares, nor come to his price. Oh lay
hands on God! and let him not go out of your coasts, he is a going, stop him,
and let not thy God depart, lay siege against him with humble and hearty
closing with him, suffer him not to say, as if that he were going, farewell, or
fare ill England, God has said he will do this, and because that he has said
it, he will do it, therefore prepare to meet thy God O England! Amos 4.12.
least God complain of thee as he did of Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from
thee, and I make thee a desolate land not inhabited.

Thus we see that the godly has done, and this must be our care; but let it be
our Copy, claspe about the Lord Jesus as Mary did, they have broken the Ice,
let us go after them, this is our atonement day, we have nothing to do with
to morrow, this is the day of reconciliation, we are at odds with God; and to
end all controversies, let us labor to prevail with God, and never lose his
presence, I sought but I found him not, Cant. 3.2. and when I found him not, I
followed and sought him, till that I found him. Our God is going, and do you
sit still on your beds? would you have and keep the Gospel with these lazy
wishes? arise, arise, and down on your knees, and entreat God to leave his
Gospel to your posterity. Shall we disinherit our infants of such a blessing?
shall we bereave them of the Gospel, which should be the life of our lives,
and so to have them brought up in superstition? No Lord, we cannot endure this,
give us not health or wealth; but give us thy Gospel Lord, that is our plea,
and when we have found God let us bring him home to our families, that as we
have made him our God, so let him be the God of ours in time of affliction. We
will cry, Lord have mercy upon us, then we shall be glad of him. Oh beloved!
carry God home with you, lay hold on him, let him not go, say he is our
husband, let him not go for your little ones, and so let us leave God to be a
father unto thee.

But how may we keep the Lord? Ob.
it is worth the while, it is comfortable, for at his right hand are pleasures
for evermore.

If you will come to the price, Ans.
you shall have him. The means are these:

1. You must prepare room for him, for he is a King, and a King sends an
harbinger before him to prepare room for him against he comes to any place: so
must you do by cleansing your selves from every evil course; therefore come
out of her, sarth the Lord to his people, touch no unclean thing, and then I
will be your God, and you shall be my people, Rev. 18.19. So brethren come out
of all evil sinful pleasures and practices, and then you may expect Gods
coming into your houses; when you sit by the fire, and when you lie upon your
beds, think thus with your selves: What an equal condition does he propound?
does he require no more but to part with a sin, a lust, a Dalila, which thou
may spare as well as water out of thy shoes, or out of thy bosom; yea it
is so. Will God keep company in the paths of sin? what is this his proffer?
what are the terms no harder? what then should I do but bid sin adieu?
would you have God to be your God, and will you not keep out of sin? If not,
he will not be your God: But now let every soul forsake his uncleanness, and
God will come to that soul; and therefore that place is mavelous sweet, Isa.
58.8. You shall call and God shall say, here I am, if that you will forsake
your evil courses. Thus you see you have as fair an offer, as fair a warning
as God can propound.

2. As you must prepare room for God, so you must give him content, let him
have his will. Where the King comes, there he will have all according to his
mind: so it is with God, if he may have his own worship you please him well,
you must dress his dish according to his tooth; but when you put poison into
his meat, you discontent him, then you do not give him his mind, you must lay
aside all superstition and errors; then you please his tooth above all, when
your souls submit to his truth: At the name of Jesus every knee shall bow.
This is not meant of the word Jesus, to give a bow with the knee, and a stab at
the heart: If so, why do we not bow at the word Jehovah, as at the word Jesus;
but the bowing at the word, the syllable is Idolatry: And here we do not give
him his mind; but the meaning of it is, that we should worship him in spirit
and truth.

3. As we give him his mind, so we must give him welcome also and
entertainment: If you look lowering toward him, and grudge at him and his
truth, no wonder but he go away. This is the sin of England: We bear an ill
will to God and his word, God has done much for us of this land. What could he
have done more for his vineyard, Isa. 5. 4. but it brought forth fruit contrary
to his expectation; and therefore mark what he says, I will take away the
hedge thereof, it shall be trodden down: so will it be with us. Are we better
then the old world? the same sins that were found in them, are found in us:
Sodom and Gomorrah on whom God rained fire and brimstone, are not our sins
as great? and are there not as great sins in us as were in Jerusalem, that
was carried away captive? are we better then other Churches, then our brethren
that have drunk so deeply of the cup of Gods wrath? what are we? I will tell
you we are a burden to God, he cannot bear us, he will think his pains well
over when he has destroyed us. You know all men are glad when their pains are
over: so it is with God, we are a pain and a trouble to him, and why should
God go continually in pain and trouble with us, who are worthy to be
destroyed? If his decree once come forth, then shall England seek peace, and
shall not find it. God will not pity us, as in Isa. 7.25. Ah! Brethren, what
a heavy case is it, when a merciful God does show himself unmercifull? when a
patient God will be impatient? O beloved! there is a hard time befalling us of
England; yet we consider it not; lamentable is our time. God wept over
Jerusalem a long time: Oh that thou had known in this thy day the things that
belong to thy peace, but now they are hid from thy eyes: So may I say to
England, their Lord has wept over it in mercy and patience a long time, but it
has not been taken notice of, God has hid it from our eyes, what shall we do
when his mercy is turned into fury? and his patience into frowning? what shall
we do when we have leisure to consider what once we did enjoy? we can never
prize Gods patience till that we find the great want of it. Thus then the
poor soul will say: There was a time when we might have been at peace with
this patient God, but now it is hid from our eyes: I might have had mercy, but
now the gate is shut, and not only shut, but locked and barred too. Thus when
people refuse mercy, he sends the contrary judgment, and then it will grieve
and wound our souls to think what once we did enjoy; but that man that will
bid God welcome to his heart, may go singing to his grave.

4. You must be importunate with him to stay, and to continue, and count it a
great favor that he will yet be entreated, Isa. 37. Jacob wrestled with God,
and thus must we do if we mean to keep him. You that live under the means,
and will not walk in them, what great condemnation will be to you, over to them
that have not the means, as it is said of Capernaum, Mat. 18. so say Ito
England: Thou England which wast lifted up to heaven with means shall be
abased and brought down to hell; for if the mighty works which have been done
in thee had been done in India or Turkey, they would have repented ere this;
therefore Capernaums place is Englands place, which is the most insufferablest
torment of all; and mark what I say, the poor native Turks and Infidels shall
have a cooler summer parlour in hell then you; for we stand at a high rate, we
were highly exalted, therefore shall our torments be the more to bear. The
Lord write these things in our hearts with the finger of his own Spirit for
his Christ's sake, under whom we are all covered.

FINIS.
THE RVLE OF THE NEW CREATVRE.
GAL. 6.16. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and
mercy, and upon the Israel of God.


THe rule of the new Creature, which is to be practiced every day, by all
believers, consisting of these ten particulars.

First be sensible of thy original sin and corruption, daily know how it
enticeth thee to all evil, and indisposeth thee to all good; groan under it,
and bewail it as Paul did, 7. Romans 14. O wretched man that I-am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death. Also take notice especially of thy actual
sins, or daily infirmities, in thought, word, and deed, endeavor to make thy
peace with thy God for them before thou go to thy bed, by repenting and
confessing of them to thy God; work thy heart to grieve for them by some
melting considerations of Gods mercies toward thee, 1 John 1.9. by believing
or casting thy self wholly on Christ's righteousness, for removal of thy
sin, and reconciliation with thy God, 3 Romans 22, 23, 24, 25. Cleave to Gods
promises of pardon and peace, Isa. 43.25. Romans 5.1. waiting till the Lord shall
speak peace to thy soul, Psalm. 85.6.

that thou art a branchin that vine, a member in that body, 2 Cor. 13.3. this
may be done three ways.

First, by daily renewing thy faith in Christ, especially that act of faith, by
which thy soul knits or ties it self on Christ for salvation, cause thy soul
every day in solemn manner to act that part, put forth this primitive act of
faith in the whole part of thy soul. The daily exercise of this will increase
and strengthen the divine habit of faith in the soul, and make the soul
sensible of every act of it: By frequent believing thou shall feel at thy very
heart root that thou do believe: so shall thou have witness in thy self,
that thou art in Christ, 1 Ioh. 5.16.

Secondly, by examining thy heart on what grounds thou take Christ to be
thine: as first, are thy grounds of taking Christ a sight and sense of thy
sins, of the guilt, power, and punishment of them, and of thy misery by them,
Mat. 19.13. Secondly, are thy grounds of taking Christ, the want of Christ
seen and felt at thy very heart, to justify, sanctify, redeem, and save
thee, else thou art utterly undone for ever, and lost everlastingly, Luke 9.10.
Thirdly, is thy ground of taking Christ, Gods free mercy and general offer of
him to any that will take him by faith, Ioh. 3.16. Manifold promises to this
purpose; the ground of all these offers -- donations of Christ being free
grace, rich mercy, undeserved love, Ephesians. 2.4, 7. Titus 3.4, 5, 6, 7. Fifthly,
is thy ground of taking Christ his sweet and gracious invitation of such to
come to him, as are weary and heavy laden, Mat. 11.28. Buy of him as have no
money, Isa. 55.1. No worthiness at all, or desert in our selves.

Fifthly, are thy grounds of taking Christ thus, that as sinful wretches as
thou art have been sought of Christ, and found of him, 1 Cor. 9.10. Then why
may not you; the more clear thou desire Christ, the more clear will be thy
title to him.

3. In what manner thou desire Christ to be thine.

1. Whether thou do renounce wholly all opinion and conceit of thy own
righteousness and desert, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9, 10. So that thou come to Christ
empty of thy self, very vile, yea nothing in thy own eyes, unworthy to
receive him.

2. Whether thou layest hold on Christ alone with the empty hand of faith,
joining nothing at all with Christ in matters of salvation.

3. Whether thou find God the Father drawing thy heart after him, Ioh. 6.44.
By hungring and panting desires, which will never be satisfied without him, so
that the streams both of thy judgment, 3 Phil. 18. also of thy affections, 1
Cor. 2.2. Gal. 6.14.

4. If thou take as a Lord to rule thee, as well as a Jesus to save thee,
Col. 2.6. one which is all to thee, thy wisdom, thy righteousness, thy
salvation, thy redemption, 1 Cor. 1.3. thy special food, Ioh. 5.6. thy
raiment, Romans 13.14. thy strength, Phil. 4.13. Gal. 2.20.

5. Whether thou seek and wait for Christ out of the sense of thy spiritual
want and penury, in every ordinance public and private, Word, Sacraments,
Prayer, Meditation, Conference, not as ones own works of sanctification; but as
they are Gods Ordinances, appointed of very purpose for the manifestation and
communication of Christ to the soul.



4. Labor to draw and derive from Christ by the pulling attractive force of
faith, special ability sufficient for the day: First, to perform all duties:
secondly, to exercise all grace in the day: thirdly, to resist and overcome all
temptations and corruptions which shall befall thee in the day, make thy
provision of grace and strength from Christ, every morning fetch so much as you
shall have occasion to use all the day long; yea, and in all occasions that
shall fall out on the day; Go to Christ still for the wisdom that must
direct thee; for the holiness which must carry thee, and characterise thee;
for the shoulder that must bear thee: If they be crosses, for the strength
that must sustain them: If they be temptations, perform them: If they be
duties, act thy faith daily on the promises of grace and strength, as John
1.16. Ezekiel. 36.27. Isa. 44.3. Zach. 10.12. These are securities given thee from
God, that thou shall receive grace through the Ordinancer, which are the
conduit-pipes, or instruments of conveying the same into the soul from Christ:
This is to do all in the strength of Christ, and to take forth a great deal
of Christ into the soul every day, that not thou, but Christ may be in thee,
Gal. 2.20.

The fourth part of the new Creature, perform Ier. 48.10. Mal. 1.4. 1 Cor.
21.24. To this end watch to these duties, keep thy heart in a good frame for
them, Ephesians. 6.18. undefiled with sinne^, untainted with the world.

2. Take fit time for the performance of all, when tho art dull and sluggish,
begin the day with the thoughts of God.

3. Be substantial with God in all these duties, endeavor to feel every duty
at the very heart, enlarging and inflaming thy affections. These be duties of
very great consequence, which bring the greatest comfort to thy soul, because
they aim at they souls good.

The fifth rule of the new Creature.

First, fortify thy self very morning against those special insts, to which
by nature thou art most prone and often tempted, as pride, passion, inordinate
affections, covetousness, by argumenting and reasoning within thy self,
drawn from the sad effects of it, as disprofit, discomfort, disgrace, etc.
Labor to see the unreasonablenesse of thy sins discovered unto thee, and
make thy soul ashamed of them; for examine and ponder with thy self, shall I
be proud? then I am sure to have a fall, for pride goes before a fall, and God
accounts me as his enemy, for he resists the proud. Shall I be angry? If I let
passion in, I shall not keep Satan our, Ephesians. 4.26. I shall grieve the holy
Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4.30. Shall I be covetous? I cannot but be very sinful,
for the love of money is the root of all evil, 1. Tim. 6.10.

2. By pondring in thy mind the precepts in Gods book, threatenings against thy
sins, and judgments of God upon others; as on Herod for pride, Dives for
voluptuousness Nabal for churlishness.

3. By applying promises of mortification to thy heart, as a plaster to thy
soul for subduing of thy corruptions daily, as Micah 9.10. Romans 6.14.

4. By drawing virtue from Christ's death to thy soul, which has in it a
killing force of sin, Phil. 3.10. Number. 6.5.

Ps. 112.7. submitting thy self to him, 2 Samuel 15.26. 1 Samuel 3.8. against thy
fears, cares, trials, troubles, afflictions of every day; for sufficient to
the day is the evil thereof, Mat. 6.31. to the end.

1. To foresee prudently thy personal trials and troubles, whatsoever they are
like to be, Prove. 22.3.

2. Go hide and lay upthy self in God, run unto his name; for God is a rock
of salvation, whereunto a poor soul may continually resort, God will give
command to save us, Psalm. 71.3.

3. Especially commit that very thing to God, put it into his hands, whatsoever
thou desire to keep, or fear to lose, 2 Timothy 1.12. be it life, liberty,
name, or friends, maintenance, whatsoever you would have resolved of a doubt,
Psalm. 37.5. or supply, if it be want, removed; if it be a cross, Psalm 50.15.
together with all other things, cast all thy cares, sorrows, troubles, fears,
on the Lord wholly, Mat. 6.31. 1 Pet. 5.7. Psalm. 55.22.

4. Renew thy faith on those promises every day, which most concernethy present
state: As for the promises of supply, if thou be in want, as Psalm. 34.3.
Psalm. 84.11. of direction if in doubt; of deliverance if in trouble, of a
sanctified use of all, Deuteronomy. 8.16. I am. 5. 11. Romans 8.28. Heb. 12.10.

5. Labor to see Gods hand in every thing, Psalm. 34.9. believe his love, Heb
11.6.

6. Resignethy self to him, Mat 26.39.

The seventh part of the rule of the new Creature.

1. Of thy dignity, being the Son of God, the Father of the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. Of thy liberty, being freed out of all thy enemies hands.

3. Of the victory that thou have in Christ to overcome the world, 1 John 5.4.
thou have victory over the evil of temptation and persecutions, Romans 8.35, 37.
by thy faith.

4. Thou have an hedge of providence about thee, a guard of Angels, Psalm.
91.11. an enclosure of mercies, Psalm. 32.10. Gods promises are yet of
protection, Heb. 13.5, 6.

5. Of thy riches, Heb. 10.14. 1 Pet. 2.6.

6. Of the joys, which are precious for kind, plentiful for measure, Psalm.
16.11. they are thy Masters Joy. Meditate on these seriously every day, and
oppose thy pleasures, profits, honors, which thou have by Christ, against the
profit, pleasure, honors of the world.

sanctify God in thy heart daily, 1 Pet. 3.15. get into thy heart the fear of
God, Isa. 8.13. delight in God, Psalm. 37.34.

1. Have serious thoughts of God in his nature, it is this will nourish the
divine nature in thee.

2. Labor to admire God in his works, to taste his love in them, Psalm. 34.8.
take notice of Gods anger in his judgments, Psalm. 119.120. Heb. 3.16.

3. Pray for a heart of flesh, and apply the promises for that very end.

to mind the things of Christ, Phil. 2.20, 21.

1. Mourn for the sins of the time, call thy comforts Icabods, 1 Samuel 4.21.

2. Remember the afflictions of Joseph, Psalm. 137.6, 7. Simpathise with them,
pray to God for them.

3. Mind signs of the times, as the commonest signs, contempt of Gods
Ordinances, departure of his glory from his ordinances.

4. Incorrigiblenesse under former judgments, as errors in opinion, declining
from the truth of God, these precede temporal judgments, Isa. 6.10, 11.

The tenth rule of directions.

1. Get thy heart more and more weaned from

2. It cannot save thee from judgments, from death.

3. Its of a perishing nature.

4. The wicked of the world have the greatest part of these earthly blessings.

These ten rules are to be practiced by Christians every day.

FINIS.

