ERRATA.
PAge 26 line 1 for, in proving read improving. p. 26 l. 15 for, More may
follow the light, r. More light is communicated, etc. p. 26. l. 17. for merits
r. receipts. p. 27. l. 14. for, receive r. leave.

Sins Discovery AND REVENGE.

As it was Delivered in a SERMOM to the Right Honorable House of PEERS in the
Abbey Church at Westminster, on Wednsday, December 30. 1646. being the Day of
the Monthly Public Fast.

BY THOMAS HORTON B. D. Reader of Divinity in Gresham College, and Pastor of
Colechurch in LONDON.

Published by the Order of the said House.

Genesis IV. VII. If thou do not well, sin lies at the door.

I Tim. V. XXIIII. XXV. Some men's sins are open before hand, going before to
judgment; and some men they follow after; likewise also the good works of some
are manifest before hand, and they that are otherwise cannot be hid.

LONDON: Printed by F: Neile for Samuel Gellibrand, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

Die Jovis 31 December. 1646.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, That this House gives Thanks to
Mr. Horton, for his great pains taken in his Sermon Preached the last Fast
before the Lords of Parliament in the Abbey Church Westminster. And he is
hereby desired to Print, and publish the same, which is to be Printed only by
Authority under his own Hand.

Jo: Brown Cleric: Parliamen.

I Do appoint Samuel Gellibrand to Print my Sermon.

Tho: Horton.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HOUSE of PEERS At This Time Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
My Lords,
WHen Your Lordships were pleased to summon me to this Work of Preaching to
You, I must confess I had at the first some reluctancies in me as being privy
to mine own unworthines, and insufficiency to so Great a Task; But when I had
recollected my self, and considered that in Your summons there was in a sort
the Call of God, I now began to be very much satisfied, yea to draw
encouragement from that which before was a dis-heartning to me. Observing this
very well, that it is the usual manner of God in such businesses as these are,
not only to work by weak, and worthless Instruments, but also sometimes by
them (to choose) rather then others, 2 Cor. 4.7.
that the Excellency of the power might be of Him, and not of us. It is no
matter what be the Tongue in the motion of so Admirable a Guide as his own
Spirit; nor it is no matter what be the Pen in the Hand of so excellent a
Scribe as Himself is. Surely the Providence of God in those Employments
whereunto Himself calls us, does make a very Great Difference in those Persons,
which are otherwise the same, either by raising the Actual performance above
the Habitual Qualification, in regard of Assistance, or by blessing the
present performance with an efficacy beyond it self in regard of success.

In these Thoughts, and Hopes (Right Honorable) have I under taken this Double
Service in Obedience to Your Honors Commands; in the Pulpit first, and now in
the Press. The latter of which ^specially, I should never have ventured upon
Mihiquidem ad scrib^ndum animus non tam est cupidus quam nec idoneus; Scienti
nonesse ^bsque periculo multorum Judiciis ingenium tenue and exile committere.
Russinus in Exposu symbol, sub Nom. cypr.
, if as I was warranted thereunto by the fullness of Your Lordships Authority,
Hoc ad crimina nostra addimus, ut c^m in ommbus rei simus, ^^^^m bonos nos, and
sanctos esse credamus: ac sic in nobis cumulentur iniquitatis offensae
praesumptione justitiae Salv.de Gube. Dei. lib 3. Rev. 12.12, 2 Cor. 2.11. De
verb. Apli. Ser 26.
so I had not been animated thereunto by the Freeness of Your Lordships
Invitation.

I here humbly present both to Your Honors, and to the World an Argument,
which I conceive most suitable to these Times, which are now upon us; Being at
once both Days of sin, and Days of security; wherein (as Salvian of old
complained of those Times which Himself lived in,) we do aggravate our Iniquity
by the conceit of our Innocence; and are so much the worse, as we think our
selves the Better.

Indeed I know very well, that the Devil is there most busy, where he thinks
he has the shortest time; And Times of Reformation are for the most part Times
of Temptation, but therefore we should not be ignorant of Satan's devices, but
there increase our Jealousies, where he studies to increase our Dangers.

There are two things which (as Austin well observes) do make the Days to be
Evil. MALITIA and MISERIA. Sin, and the Punishment of sin. * (...). Thucyd.
Histor.l. 1. sub finem.
We have our share in Both at this present Time; And the latter as consequent
to the Former. We might save God a Great deal of labor, and our selves a Great
deal of sorrow, if we had but less sin amongst us; Which (as Pericles said
once to the Athenians) is to be feared does us more hurt, then all the plots of
our Enemies besides' The work of this ensuing Sermon is in some small and weak
measure to lay open this unto us, and to affect us with it. All that I now take
care for, is to have the Blessing of God upon it, to make it successful whtch
(besides the daily remembrance of Your Lordships unwearied Endeavors for the
Public Good) is the earnest and most hearty prayer of

Your Honors most humbly devoted in the service of Christ, Tho: Horton.

A SERMON Preached to the Right Honorable HOUSE of LORDS, On the Day of the
Monthly Fast, December 30. 1646.
Numb. Chap. XXXII. Verse. XXIII. But if ye will not do so, behold, ye have
sinned against the Lord: and be sure your sin will find you out.


THis Day, it is a searching Day; And this Text, it is a searching Text. The
Day calls us to the finding out of our sins, as the proper work of a Fast, and
Humiliation of our souls before God. And the Text tells us of our sins finding
out of our selves, upon supposition of falling into them; and voluntary
continuance in them. It is a Text, which extends it self not only to the
limits of this Auditory, and the Assembly now met together in this particular
place; but which reaches as well to the whole Kingdom besides, and to the
Conscience of every man that lives in it. If a man could preach to All England
Personally, (as I do in part, at this time, Representatively) this Scripture
might very well suit, and correspond with such an occasion.

It was for the first Original, and Primitive rise of it, The Coherence.
delivered by the Holy Man Moses to two of the Tribes of Israel, Reuben and
Gad. And that upon a Petition preferred by them to himself, together with
Eleazar the Priest, and the Princes of the Congregation, for the enjoying of
their Inheritance on that side Jordan; as ye may see in the beginning of the
Chapter. They saw it was a goodly seat, where they now were, and suitable to
their own Accommodations; especially for their Cattle; and now they entreat to
be excused for stirring and passing any further, though it should make for the
Common Good and Benefit of their Brethren. Private respects and interests are
for the most part very Great Hindrances, and Impediments to public services.
Yet this was the present Desire of these two Tribes. And this Verse which I
have now read unto you is a part of Moses his Answer, which be thinks sitting
to return unto them. But if ye will not do so^ behold ye have sinned, etc.

In which words we have two main Parts observable of us. The Division.
First, The Discovery or Intimation of sin. Secondly, The Threatening or
Denunciation of Judgment. Two General parts.
The Discovery of sin; that we have in the first Clause. But if ye will not do
so, behold ye have sinned against the Lord. The Denuntiation of Judgment, that
we have in the latter; And be sure your sin will find you out.

We begin first of all with the Forms; viz. The Discovery of sin; in the first
part, But if ye will not, etc. Where we see Moses deals freely, and plainly,
and openly with them, as became the Prophet of the Lord, and herein approves
himself to be that which the Apostle styles him, Hebr. 3.2.
even faithful in all his house. Before we come to the main point considerable
and as principally intended in the Text, The first General.
as the particular scope of it, here is somewhat which we may observe in
General, The Dis^eve^y of sin.
as preparatory and introductive hereunto, and that in sundry Deductions, which
I shall but name and touch upon.

As first for the manner of his proposal, General Observations.
and breaking of this business to them. If ye will not, etc. We see here, he
does but make an If of it; he does not absolutely conolude it as being willing
to hope the best. Supposi^io wibil p^nit in esse, as we use to speak. There Is
no hurt in an If if that be all. He had heard what came from them, whereby they
had given shrewd suspicions; but yet he thinks they may at last repent them, as
indeed in conclusion they did, I. The manner of proposal. 1 Cor. 13.7.
and therefore but If. This shows us how we should carry our selves upon such
occasions as these are; namely, with a^l the fairness and ingenuity that
possibly may be, joined together with a spirit of discerning and fear of
miscarriage. We ought not to be too rash in our Censures, nor peremptory in our
Determinations against any without just ground, and cause for it, but carry it
with all the charitablenesse, and favorable construction that we can, and as
the thing it self will admit Oculus favoris ^^ga om^em lab^m (...) est; sed
Oculus ^^videntiae promulgat vitia. Arabs. Poeta Anonym
. Thus does Moses in this Text. He does not say absolutely they bad sinned, or
would so, but only supposes it. If ye will not.

And yet this If of His it was not an idle If neither. It was not a supposition
without cause. There was some ground and occasion for it. This smoke it had
some fire which went along with it, and this fire it had some fuel affoarded
unto it. And that was that overture which we find these Tribes to have made in
the beginning of this Chapter. This made Moses to suspect them, and to be a
little j^a^ous of them, and accordingly here to admonish them, and to deal thus
freely with them. Whereby he would hint thus much unto us; That as we must not
on the one side be too rash, and condemn there where we have no cause; so on
the other side we must not be too blind, and not see where things are plain
before our eyes. Either of these is unseemly, and ill becoming those who have
to deal with others souls. But so much in a word of that.

Again, secondly; In that it is said here, If ye will not do so. Observe, II.
The guilt of Omission.
that there is a great deal of guilt and iniquity even in sins of Omission. The
neglect of what we should do is a business which we are accountable for, as
well, as the venturing upon that which we should forbear. And we may as well do
too little, as do too much. These Tribes they were not likely to be guilty of
any great and notorious Commissim. No; but they would shrink from their Duty,
and that work which God had called them unto; and this would be a sin in them.
Therefore Moses warns them of it to prevent them in it. We are not only
commanded by God to abstain from evil, but likewise to do good. And the
failing in this is such a matter as the people of God are wont to be much
grieved and humbled for: And so should every one of us. That we are no more
fruitful in our places, nor diligent in our callings, nor watchtu over those
opportunities, which God affords us, and puts into our hands. That we do and
receive no more good, then for the most part we do, this is ground and matter
of serious humiliation unto us: yea that even for the duties themselves, which
for the substance we set upon our hearts are no more enlarged in them. That our
prayers are so full of coldness, and our hearings so full of dullness, and our
fastings so full of customarines, and our converse so full of unprofit
ableness, as oftentimes it is: that we do not rise to that height, and pitch,
and measure, and degree of goodness, which God expects and requires of us.
This should seriously humble us, and cast us down in his sight. Yet, this is a
point, which but few lay to heart. It may be if they fall into some gross and
heinous crimes, whoredom, or murder, or the like, etc. they are a little
startled at it, and their Conscience begins to check them. But neglects, and
leaving duty undone, this it seldom or never troubles them: Now this is that
which we ought to consider, and to be affected withal. And especially so much
the more, as we have at any time the greater advantages and opportunities
admini^^red unto us. Those which have greater parts then others, in matter of
wit; And those which have greater estates then others, in matter of wealth. And
those which have greater Honors then others, and more Authority, and Eminency
in the world in matter of place. These had need to be so much the more shy, and
wary of these sins of omission, which are so much the more dangerous in them.
Which we learn briefly from this passage before us here in the Text. If ye will
not do so, ye have finned.

Again, III. The manner of expression.
thy dly. Observe here the manner of Expression. First, in the specification of
the Persons, and bringing the business home to their particular Consciences.
Here Is no mincing, nor daubing at all, but plain-dealing: If you will not do
so, you have sinned. He joins the sin and the persons together: lays the
saddle upon the righ Horse; and the Censure there where it belongs. He does not
say only, It is a sin, but you have sinned. The life of Doctrine lies in the
Application of it; as Nathan in his dealing with David: Thou art the man. And
that the rather in regard of our disposition to the contrary, which is still to
drive it off from our selves, as nothing concerned in it: If it be ours, then
forsooth it is not sin, take heed of that by all means. If it be sin, then again
it is not ours: be sure to rid our own hands of it. But therefore does the
Ministry of the Word supply this defect in us. It is a sin, and you guilty of
it.

Besides further, the manner of expression may be taken notice of in the laying
of the Accusation, in that it is here put in the preter perfect tense, ye have
sinned. Have sinned? Nay, but soft I pray, why so? One would ha^^ thought it
had been a great deal more suitable in the ordinary congruity of speech, to have
laid it in the future, and so (...) to have set it thus. If ye will not do so,
ye shall sin, or ye will sin; and not to say, ye have sinned, this seems to be
a little improper, and preposterous, and somewhat too quick to take them up
before they are down. But yet it is that which the holy Ghost rather makes
choice of for very good reason: as namely this: first, hereby to signify that
there is a guilt even in evil purposes and resolutions before they come into
Act. The very thought of foolishness is sin, Prove. 24.9.
as Solomon tells us. For any but to resolve with themselves to withdraw from
that which is their duty, it is a sin in Gods account, though they have not yet
withdrawn from it: so it was here with these people in the Text. Whiles they
now had such thoughts in themselves to decline that work which belonged unto
them, it had the danger of guilt upon them, though they had not as yet done it.
This is that which we should think for our selves, that God considers and
judges of us by what we are in our Intentions, as we has by what we are in our
Actions, whether in good or evil, what we would be, that with him we are.
Secondly; it is said, ye have sinned, rather then ye shall. Hereby to put it
more out of doubt, as a thing which was certainly so indeed, as sure, as if
they had done it already. And so much also for that.

Fourthly, Observe the Nature of the Argument, IIII. The Nature of the Argument.
which Moses here uses unto them. There Is somewhat which we may learn also from
that. When he would put this People upon a service, which concerned them, and
became them to undertake; How does he go about to persuade them, and to work
upon them? Why, he does it in the first place thus; by telling them that in the
Omission of it, they should be guilty of sin. Here was now Argumentum ad
Homines. He knew whom he spoke to, at least for a great party amongst them, to
wit, the people of God: whereby he would hint thus much unto us; That there is
no such forcible Argument to prevail upon Gods people for the doing of any
thing which is their duty, as by working this upon them, that they should sin,
if they did not perform it. If ye will not do so, ye have sinned. Moses thinks
he has now said enough. And so indeed he had; because this is that main
Principle which the godly still go by; that they shun, and avoid this,
whatsoever they do besides. This is that which (...) Gracious Heart does
absolutely propound to it self, as the (...) which shall bear sway with it upon
all occasion, By no means willingly to sin. (...). (...) Prometh.
The rule which others go by, is By no means willingly to suffer; At no hand to
undergo any sorrow, though the escaping of it cost them their souls; They Will be
sure to look to that; And so (as Elibu speaks) choose iniquity rather then
affliction Ioh 36.21.
: But this is the purpose of those which are good; not to allow themselves
wittingly in any sin. So that now if ye can but convince them of this, ye have
sufficiently wrought upon them, and may bring them to what you will. Which
therefore is a very good course to be taken by our selves in such cases as
these are. When we would take men off from any thing, which is am^^^^, or put
them for ward upon any thing which becomes them, this is the readiest way,
which we can take with them; if they be such as are religious, to warn them of
sin.

Only, Caution.
I must put in this caution, That we be sure that it be so indeed, and that we
proceed upon right grounds: Otherwise we our selves shall be guilty of a great
miscarriage, which too many sometimes full into, who to work about their own
ends, and to accomplish their private designs, which they lay down to
themselves do entangle the Consciences of the weak by those burdens, which
they lay upon them, because they know they are tender, and scrupulous. This is
an horrible profanation of Gods ordinances and a great abuse of Gods people;
which therefore we must be wary of Moses here did not so. He knew it was a sin
indeed; this supposed omission, and accordingly is thus urgent with them, to
take heed, how they fell into it.

And further, V. The Amplification of the Argument.
for the Amplification of this Argument. Ye have sinned against the LORD.
There Is a special emphasis in that allo. To signify that this in all our sins
should most of all affect us. It was somewhat, that they should have sinned
against Moses, and against then Brethren, and against themselves (as indeed
they had done all this, in such a neglect) yea, but against the LORD. This was
that which pincht most. How can I do this great wickedness; a Genesis 39.9.
and sin against God; says Joseph*, when he was tempted to uncleanness. And
God forbid that I should sin against the LORD, b 1 Samuel 12.23
in ceasing to pray for you, says Samuel sometime to the people*. c Psalm. 51.4.
And David concerning himself. Against thee, thee only have I sinned. That is,
I stand upon nothing so much, as I do upon this. 1 Samuel 2.29.
And old Eli gives us the reason in his arguing with his sons. If one man sin
against another, the Judge shall judge him; But if a man sin against the LORD,
who shall entreat for him? Th^s is that which Moses urges upon these Tribes,
the more to work upon them. Ye have sinned, and ye have sinned against the LORD.

Lastly, here^s the word of excitement, VI. The word of Excitement.
which is prefixed to make it more remarkable. Behold: There are two words in
this Text of special inforcement, and provocation Here Is BEHOLD, and BE SVRE.
Behold, that is prefixed to the sin. And Be sure, that is prefixed to the
punishment. And both upon very good ground. Wherein the Spirit of God applies
himself sutably to our natural Temper, and Disposition. In matter of Judgment,
and Punishment; here we are commonly secure, and presumptuous, we cannot
believe it; Therefore for this, Be sure. And in matter of sin, and
transgression, here we are commonly blind, and ignorant, we will not
acknowledge it. Therefore for this, Behold. And this latter is that which here
first offers it self tous, as being first in the order of the words.

This is the fiering of the Pe^con, to make us so much the more look about us,
and to confider how it is with us, which is not (as I said) without cause, and
occasion for it. This is the first-step in Repentance to bring the malefactor
in sight, and to set the sin before our eyes: to behold it, and view it well;
without which we cannot so easily condemn it, and set our selves against it.
That man can never be humbled for his sin, who is not first convinced of his
sin; And that man cannot so easily leave his sin, who does not first see and
discern it. Therefore this is a main work of the holy Ghost upon the
Consciences of sinners. Ioh 16.8.
To convince the world of sin. Both to show them that such courses are sinful,
for the nature of the things themselves, and to show them also that they are
taxable for them, in regard of their own guilt and interest in them. But of
this we shall have occasion to speak more distinctly afterward. And thus much
briefly of the Observations in General, which I have no more but only touched
and glanced at; as aiming chiefly at somewhat else, which is behind.

We come now more closely to the Text, in the words themselves. But if ye will
not do so. (...)
Im lo taasun ken.] which (if ye would) might be construed Absolutely. If ye
will not do that which is right. Sinon feceritis Rectum. So the word in the
Hebrew would carry it very well; and so also the sense of the place. But it is
better to take it Relatively, as the Septuagint also does. (...). If ye will
not do so. So? How is that? This we must fetch from the Context by looking back
upon the former part of the Chapter, where the business is related to us; and
near at hand in v. 20. where Moses speaks to them of their going over Jordan
before the Lord, for the driving out of the enemies before them. This these two
Tribes at the present seemed to decline. They were in a convenient place for
their cattle, and outward Advantages as I showed in the beginning; and they
now began to think with themselves, Bonu^n^est esse hic. It is good for us to
be here, and to sleep in an whole skin. What should we stir any further to our
own trouble, and hazard, and discommodity? Hic juvat usque morari, nec confer
gradum. Here we are; and here let us stay, and stick, if we can know when we
are well: Now this does this holy man of God justly tax, and meet with in them,
and tells them that in the neglect of this service, they shall sin against the
Lord; nay to make it more sure unto them, they have sinned already. If ye will
not do so, ye have sinned. That which here offers it self to us as the point to
be observed is this. That the neglect of the Assistance of our Brethren in
their Endeavors against the Churches common Enemies, it is a very great, and
grievous sin. Whosoever are guilty of it, they fin, and against the Lord,

I need not heap up Testimonies for the proof of this unto you. Ye have a
famous place to this purpose; in Judge. 5.23. Curse ye Meroz., says the Angel
of the Lord: Curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, because they came not
up to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against the Mighty. Who
this Meroz was, is not so easily concluded by Interpreters: but this is enough
to know of them, that they had ability and opportunity offered them of being
helpful to the people of God, which they neglected, and thereupon were cursed.
Yea, and that so bitterly, as that the Curse sticks by them unto this Day; and
their Names and Place are cut off from all remembrance of good in the world.
The like we shall find to be pronouced against those which did not help against
Moab. Jerem. 48.10. Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord deceitfully;
and Cursed is he that keeps back his sword from blood; That is, from the
blood of the Church's Enemies, which God had now commanded to be shed by the
Churches friends.

Now the greatness of this sin may be laid forth to us in sundry aggravations;
A double Aggravation.
And those of two sorts; The one, as referring to our Brethren, and the other
to God himself. And most out of the Text in hand.

First in order to our Brethren. I. In ord^r to our Brethren.
And so there are these Aggravations in it. First, as it is a piece of
Injustice, and unsutablenesse, and inequality of proceeding; it is to take to
our selves a privilege, and prerogative above other men, betwixt whom, I.
Injustice.
and our selves there is otherwise no great difference. This is intimated in
the sixth verse of this Chapter. And Moses said, etc. Shall your Brethren go to
war and ye sit here? As who should say; Are you better then they? Is your pains
and trouble, and hazard, and diseasing of your selves more to you, then theirs
is to them? Why should ye refuse to do that, which others do before you? There
is somewhat considerable in this. It is failing in the office of a Member,
whether of the Church, or Commonwealth, and it carries the suspicion of
laziness, and idleness upon it, which is a very great sin (...). Ambo
conjunguntur in Evangelio. (...) Basil Casarien.
.

Secondly, II. Neglect of a good example.
There Is the forsaking of the Advantage of a good pattern, and copy, which is
set us. And there is another evil also in this. This is also included in that
expression, Shall your Brethren go to war, and you sit here still? That is,
shall they set you such an example, and will not you follow it? There are some
which now and then do not venture, nor put themselves upon such and such
undertakings, but then they have somewhat to say for themselves; And that is,
that they have no bod to lead them, and show them the way. As the Eunuch said
once to Philip upon another occasion. How can I except some man should guide
me? Act. 8 31.
This is some kind of pretense for some in their declining of such and such
services. They have no body to break the ice, and to go before them, and show
them what to do. But this in point of Assistance cannot be said; They have
others leading them, and yet withdraw. We are accountable not only for
gosdrules, but also for good examples, how they have been improved by us, and
how our selves have been the better for them; which not to be has much gui
tinesse in it.

Thirdly, III. Discouraging of others. (...)
It is a discouraging of others, who from our withdrawing are made more
unwilling, and provoked to draw back. Thus in v. 7. of this Chapter. Wherefore
discourage ye, or break ye the hearts of the children of Israel, from going
over into the land? Teniu. And this is amplified from an example of great
mischiefs, which hereby happened to their forefathers, in v. 8. so then if ye
refuse to go (says he) who shall? This is a great Aggravation which lies upon
these sins of omission; not only that herein we fail of our own Duty, but that
we make others also fail of theirs, occasionally from our bad example. And
these are the Aggravations of this sin in reference to our Brethren.

Secondly, The second Aggravation.
it admits also of Aggravation, in reference to God himself. It is a sin
against the Lord. And that in these respects. First, I. Misimproving of gists.
As a mis-improving of those gifts and abilities, which he confers upon us;
look how much strength, or wealth, or wit, or policy any have more then others,
it is not their own but the Churches, and for the good of the people of God.
Now therefore accordingly not to use them is a falsifying in this respect. It
is a not fulfilling after God. v. 11. And this must needs be a very great
miscarriage, and defect in them. Because there, where God has given more, even
there he does expect and look for more; which should be returned to him in
answerable improvement.

Secondly, II. Unthankfulness for me^r^^es.
As an Unthankfulness for his mereies; and our own present ease and
relaxation: These Reubenites, and Gadites were now settled in their own
Inheritances; And therefore by way of thankfulness to God it became them to be
helpful to their Brethren: We cannot better recompense, and requite all Gods
goodness, and mercy to our selves, then by pity, and compassion to others
which want those mercies, which we enjoy; and by an endeavor to help them to
them.

Thirdly, III. Betraying of the Church.
As a Betraying of Gods people and Cause into the hand of his Enemies, which by
our Assistance might have some furtherance, and promotion; and a preferring of
our own private interests to his glory, and truth. God himself (so far forth as
he is capable) suffers in the persecutions of his people; and their miseries
reflect upon him. When the Enemy prevails against the Church, it does so far
forth prevail against the Truth, which is professed, and maintain^d by the
Church. As therefore we have regard to that, we should have regard to this. And
thus in all these respects do we see this made good unto us. That this neglect
is a very great sin.

Now the improvement of this Point to our selves in a way of pertinent and
profitable Application may be to keep our selves from this sin, and to take
heed, that we be not guilty of it, The Application.
for our own particulars. And that ye may know what I mean, and drive at all
this while in this Discourse, it is that which is most proper and suitable to
the occasion of this present Day as concerning the elief of Ireland, which is
now in so great distress, and brought into so low a Condition. This is that
(my Lords) which my present Text with the present opportunity leads me to, to
mention, and bring into remembrance; That there may besome speedy course taken
for the reducing of that miserable Kingdom, as to your Wisdoms shall best
appear. Alas (Right Honorable) what a sad thing is it, that while we are
disputing, and contesting at Home, the Church of God should so much suffer
abroad, and a whole Nation so near unto us be quite lost, and destroyed.
There Is a notable place to this purpose, in Pro. 24.11, 12. I^th^u forbear to
deliver them that are drawn unto death, and those that are ready to be slain;
If thou say, Behold we knew it not. Does not He that pondereth the heart
consider it? And be that keeps thy soul, does not be know it? And shall not
be render to every man according to his works? It is spoken there of private
violences and oppressions of particular persons, etc. which every one in his
place is to redress; but is may be also extended and applied to the sufferings
of an whole State: and the duty which lies upon Another for the relief of that.
Where we may observe, how the Spirit of God prevents all excuses and shifts,
which might be made in such a business. Alas, we did not know it, we were
ignorant of the Condition which they were in; we did not think them to be so
bad, as they are. Well (says he) do not please your selves with such pretenses
as these are; for he that pondereth the heart considers it, etc. That is, he
knows, whether this be a shift, and excuse to put off the service, or whether
there be a truth, and reality in it; and he will render to every man according
to his deeds. Therefore I beseech ye let us All take heed how we be wanting to
our selves, in such a Duty as this is of helping Gods distressed people; I say
let us A I take heed of it. For this Exhortation reaches not only to those,
which are interested in the Affairs of State (although to them principally) but
to all others whatsoever in their several ranks and relations. Some by their
persons, and some by their purses; and All by their prayers to put to their
helping hand, for the driving out of those barbarous Rebels, that the land may
be subdued before the Lord; and that afterward we our selves may return, and be
guiltless before the Lord, and before Israel, to use the words of Moses in the
verse before the Text. This, I say, is the work of the Day, at least in regard
of the first original of it; which therefore we ought so much the rather to
hearken and listen unto. Especially considering that hence the fire first brake
out, which has since unhappily reached to our selves, and not only touch^ the
top of our Branches, but even threatened our very root it self. And who knows
whether the sire, which is in some respects quenched, may not from hence break
out again more fiercely, if it be not better looked to, and prevented, that so
we may derive our punishment from that which is the matter of our sin? As He
that will win England, so he that will save or recover England, he must begin
first at Ireland, as we use to speak. And so much of the first General in the
Text; viz. The Discovery of sin. But if ye will not do so, ye have finned, etc.

I come now to that, The second General.
which I chiefly, and principally aim at in this Scripture: And that is the
second General, in the Denunciation of Judgment. And be sure, your sin will
find you out. This is added by way of further inforcement of the foregoing
Intimation. He had said in the clause before that they had finned against the
Lord; why, but to this some might either have said in open terms, or at least
have secretly thought it in their hearts, Why, what great matter of that? sin
against the Lord? so we hope we may do, and yet do well enough for all that.
For the Lord, He is gracious, and merciful, and long-suffering, and slow to
wrath; And as for sin it self, we hope there is no such great matter in it, but
that we may escape well enough with it. To this Moses here adds by way of
prevention and anticipation, and tells them in sober sadness; that it is but a
folly for them to flatter themselves. Be sure your sin will find you out. In
which clause here are two particulars further considerable of us. First, a word
of Threatening and commination upon supposition of a miscarriage. Your sin will
find you out. Secondly; A word of strengthening and confirmation, upon
supposition of a mis-conceit. Be sure you sin, etc. We Will begin with the last
first, The first particular.
as being first in the order of the words. And that is the word of
Confirmation, Be sure. Be sure? Why, but what needs this? Does any man doubt of
that, or call it in question that his sin will sometime or other find him out?
Yes; many thousands in the world not only doubt of it, and call it in question
whether it will; but believe it, and are verily persuaded that it will not;
that it will never find them out. So that here now we have implicitly signified
by this expression (which is the point to be observed by us) the disposition of
most sorta of people, as concerning the Apprehensions of sin; which is to think
when they have once committed it, that they shall never hear of it more. This
is that which is here supposed by Moses. He says, Be sure, as knowing men's
natures in this particular, which is to doubt and make a question of it. Thus
Psalm. 36.1, 2. The transgression of the wicked says within my heart, that
there is no fear of God before his eyes; for he flattereth himself in his own
eyes, until his iniquity be found to be hateful. S., Dent. 29.19. There is
one that whiles he hears the words of the Curse, blesses himself, saying, I
shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of my heart, to add
deunkennesse to thirst. And so Babylon, she said, Sho should be a Lady for
ever, etc. Isa. 47.7.

Would we know whence this proceeds; It is easy, I. Subtilty of Satan.
to give an account of it, First, from the subtilty of Satan, who intises, and
persuades men hereunto. He tells them, and rounds them in the care, that their
sin shall never find them out, let it be what it will be. The devil has two
main projects upon the souls of poor sinners. The one is to tempt them to sin;
And the other is to tempt them to security, upon sin committed by them. Thus he
did in the first sin of a^^ when he tempted our first Parents, Adam and Eve, in
Paradise, He took this course with them, to persuade them, that their sin
should not reach them. Genesis 3.4. Ve^s. 13.
The Serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die. And she afterward
casts it upon him, The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. This was that old
Serpent called the devil, and Satan, which deceives the whole world, as it is
explained, Revel. 12.9 It is He which cheats and beguiles, and deceives many a
soul, and persuades them, that they shall do well enough, not withstanding
their sins. Either that the thing is not a sin: or if it be a sin, that it is
but a small one. Or if a great one, yet that it is not known: o^ if known, yet
that they shall escape punishment, and that there are ways enough to be freed
from the fears, and inconveniences of it Vitate linguam diaboli, etc. M^nt^ur,
ut ^a^^^t, blanditur, ut noceat; bona prom^t^^t, ut malurn tribuat: vitam
pollicetur, ut perim it: pacem pollicetur ne perveniri possit ad (...) c^m
salutatem p^om^^^i, ne cut promittit, veni^t^ad salulutem. Cyp li 1. Ep. 8.
Thus does he ordinarily persuade them, and seduce them, and prevail with them,
which is the cause, that they are to misled. Hence it is said of Ananias and
Sathira, that SATAN had filled their heart to lie against the holy Gh^st Act
^.3.
. He had filled their heart, to persuade them to deceive, and to commit
sacrilege; And he had filled their heart, to find out a lie, and pretense for
the hiding of their deceit. Thus had he filled their heart at both corners. And
so he does commonly with most men in the world; first he intises them to the
miscarriage; and then he persuades them of the concealment, or rather first
persuades them of the concealment, and from thence intises them to venture upon
the miscarriage; Facit hostis seccures, quos cu^pit e^le cap tivos Aug. Hom. 46.
Telling them, that if they will but try it, they shall be never a whit the
worse for it. Indeed sometimes again, as he sees occasion, and as he conceives
it may make most for his advantage, so he will do the quite contrary, that so
he may drive to despair, when the sin is over past. But yet at another time,
when he would bring men off to commit it, he commonly takes this course with
them.

Secondly, II. Perfidiousnes of evil Counselors.
As this proceeds from the subtilty of Satan himself so also from the
perfidiousnesse of evil Counsetlers, which are Satan's Instruments; false
Teachers, and false-Friends, and the like. False teachers. friends


First false Teachers, and seducers. There are many false Prophets which in
this sense also are gone out into the world, which sow pillows under men's
elbows, and persuade them, that such and such evil shall not light upon them,
which is threatened to them. This the Prophet Jeremy complains of, Jer. 8.11.
They have healed the hurt of the Daughter o^ my people sleighily Pacem nunc off
runt, qui ipsi^non h^b^nt pacem Cyp Epist. l. 1. Ep 8.
, saying, Peac^ peace, when there is no peace. As A^^^ had his four hundred
Pr^^hers of the Groves which flattered him, and soothed him up in his sin: Go
up to Ram^th Gilead, and prosper. Even many such like are still alive in the
world, who instead of searching the wound to the bottom, 1 King 22.
skin it over; harden others in their sins, by their applauses and approbations
of them. And I would that great Persons were always free from such
inconveniences as these are. And so as false Teachers, False friends.
so in like manner False Friends, and evil companions, they do the same also.
As the Harlot there in the Proverbs, Cap. 7. ver. 19. Come (says she there to
her mate) let us take our fill of love till the morning, for the good man is
not at home, he is gone a long journey, he has taken a bagg of money with him,
and will not come home till such a day. That is as much as to say, we shall not
be caught, and taken in our fin.

Thirdly; This does also proceed from the deceitfulness of sin it self. Which
having some seeming sweetness in it, III. Deceitfulnes of sin.
does draw on people to the commission of it, without any attendance at all to
the consequents, which issue upon it. That soul, which is soaked in its lusts,
it has no regard of following punishment, or of those judgments, which are
ready to over-take it, because the Mind and Understanding is blinded, and
drawn away with the deceit of sin it self.

Lastly, This does further arise from those diverse false-reasonings and
discourses, which are in men's hearts. IV. False reasonings.
They go upon corrupt deductions, and conclusions in which they mistake, and so
think themselves free from danger.

As first, from the extenuations of sin; for the nature and guilt of it. Oh,
say they, it is but a little one, I. From the extenuations of si^.
and we hope no great hurt of that. Not considering that the least sin that is,
has a voice and cry in it for vengeance, and such as nothing can stop, He^.
12.24.
but the blood of Christ, which speaks better things then the blood of Abel.
And so as the smalnesse of the sin, so the secrecy; it is such as is privately
acted, and therefore they shall lie hid.

Secondly, Present Impunity. That Is another thing, 2. Present impunity.
which furthers this conceit. The Drunkard, He thinks with himself, that he has
followed his cups so long, and was never yet the worse for it; and therefore no
more shall he be yet. And the Adulterer, In themselves.
He thinks with himself, that he has so many years wallowed in filthiness and
uncleanness, and was never yet detected, and why should he fear it now? And
the Cheater, He thinks with himself, that he has cozened and defrauded others
for such a time, and was never yet discovered. And why then may he not still
escape? Thus do men encourage themselves in evil from their present
forbearance.

And so likewise from the forbearance of others, In others.
who have committed the like sins with them. Because entence against an evil
doer is not executed speedi'y, therefore the Heart of the sons of men is fully
set in them to do evil. Ecclesiast. 8.11. When a sinner is taken presently in
his fact, Ioh. 8.4.
(...), here men are a little startled for a while, but indulgence makes them
more secure.

Thirdly, 3. Present prosperity.
Present Prosperity. This now carries it a little further; when they shall
think, they have no hurt from their sin, but (as they conceive) a great deal of
good by it, this is apt to flush them more (...) Pinda.
; whereas the successes of Providence are no further encouragements to us then
as, they hold touch with the Rule. As the wind and tide going together they
may further and promoteus; but when they are opposite they cause a Tempest, and
storm. All things fall alike to all; and there is one event both to just and
unjust. Eccles. 9.2.
But so much of the first particular, to wit, the word of Conformation. Be
sure. Know it, or take it for granted.

The second is the word of Commination or Threatening. The second Particular.
Your sin will find you out. The phrase is a little obscure; and therefore will
require some explanation; we must find out what this finding-out means. A two
fold finding out sin.
And we may reduce it to two heads; The one, in a way of Discovery, and
manifestation. And the other in a way of Revonge, and Vindication. It will find
you out, to detect you, and to show that you are guilty of it; And it will find
you out to punish you, and to revenge the guilt of it upon you.

First, to speak of its Discovery. Sin, it will find men out here: when they
have taken all the courses that can be to conceal it, I. By way of Discovery.
yet it will not be concealed (...) Ch^^ysost (...)
. As Solomon of a contentious woman; Whosoever bides it, bides the Wind, and the
ointment of his right hand, Pro 27.16
which betrays it self. That is, he makes himself ridiculous by undertaking of
a thing which is impossible. For a man to think to hide the wind is a very
fond, and foolish imagination, Who has gathered the Wind in his fists? Prove.
30.8. And Eccles. 8.8. There is no man has power over the Wind to retain the
Wind Ha^^uach.] This is a subtle and a searching creature, which will sooner
over-turn mountains, and Cities, then it will be restrained. Why, such a kind
of thing now is sin, when it once gets into the heart. It will out some way or
other; If it does not, it will make an H^a^t-quake, as the other will make an
Earthquake; as ye may see Act 16.26.

This we may see in the example of David in the matter of Vrijah; An instance
which I rather make choice of for the discovery of sin, because so many abuse
it for the commission. You know how many ways he went about to conceal his
adultery; by making Vrijah drunk, by sending Vrijah home, and at last by
killing Vrijah, and taking away his life in the war: yet all would not do the
deed. His filthiness must out for all this, and so it did. This is the
condition of sin, where men's consciences are once wounded with it, that it must
out in one kind or other, and cannot be held in. Look as it was with the ship
in Jonab, as long as Jonah was in it, there was no quietness nor safety for
it, but the Sea wrought, and was tempestuous, and the ship it self ready to be
broken through the violence of the storm; And though the Mariners dig'd hard
to save it, yet it would not do, till Jonah was cast out: Even so is it
likewise with a Conscience, which has sin lying in it; like a child in the
mothers womb, which is restless till it come into the world, so is sin for
the discovery of it self. Thus it was with Achan in his sin when he had stolen
the Babylonish garment, and thought to be hid with it. And thus it was with
Gebezi in his sin, when he wiped his mouth as if he had been innocent; they
were both of them found out in their evil courses. And so, many others besides.

Now when we speak of this discovery of sin, Discovery of sin twofold.
and the readiness of it to reveal it self, we must know that this holds true
according to a double reference; first, in reference to men themselves; To our
selves. others.


and secondly, in reference to others; In reference to their own consciences;
and in reference to the knowledge of the world.

First, in reference to themselves, and their own consciences; I. To themselves.
your sin will find out here by making work in your own private spirits. Those
sins, which m^n have lodged a long while in their souls without any
self-reflexion, they will at last be made known unto them, and they shall see
the vileness of them, and their own wretchedness for them. People commonly
think it an advantage for their Consciences not to be touched and affected with
sin, but alas this will not always last, there will a time of discovery come
at length, when it will be so much the worse with them, as they have not seen
it all this while. When sin once flies upon the Conscience, it rages so much
the more fiercely, as it has been hitherto concealed, and layen hid; And
former security is now paid home with present vexation; what before they saw
not at all, they shall now see perhaps too much, and more then they would; As
God speaks there to a wicked person; Psalm. 50.21. These things have thou done,
and I held my peace, and thou thoughtst that I was altogether such an one as
thy self, but I will reprove thee, and will set thy sins in order before thine
eyes.

Now when we say, Three ways of sins Discovery to a man's self.
that sin will find men out in their own Consciences, we must know that this is
done by a threefold occasion. First, I. In the Ministry of the Word.
in the Ministry of the Word. This is a means which God has sanctified and
ordained for such a purpose as this. The Word of God is quick and powerful,
sharper then any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul
and spirit, and joints, and marrow, and is a disterner of the thoughts and
intents of the he art. It has such a power as this is in it, but this power is
not always brought into act, neither does it reach, and obtain this effect.
There Is many an one, which comes to the Word, and who partakes of the
Ministerial Dispensation, who still abides and continues in his sins, without
any remorse; but yet the Word is appointed for this end, and accordingly does
in diverse so prevail. Those who before had no stirrings at all, the Ministry
has so wrought upon their Consciences, as that they have presently been
convinced in themselves. Thus it was with St. Peter's Auditors. Act 2.37.
When they heard they were pricked in their hearts. (...). And thus it was with
the disciples of Emaus; Luke 24.52.
their hearts burnt within them whilst Christ preached and discoursed unto
them. And thus Felix the Governor, when Paul preached to him, it is said, He
trembled, and could not endure it. The Word of God meeting with his Conscience
did so shake him, that he could hold out no longer; He was impatient of any
further discourse in that matter. 1 Kin. 21.20.
You know what was the complement of Ahab, which he used to the Prophet Elijah
when he met him by the way. Have thou found me O mine enemy? The same is that
which many persons return to Gods Ministers inwardly in their hearts, when they
touch upon their sins; And the Minister may answer them again, as the Prophet
did Him, I have found thee, etc. Because thou have sold thy self to do evil.

Secondly, II. In some special judgment, or affliction.
Another occasion, in which sin finds men out, is some special judgment, and
Affliction; Those which in time of welfare and prosperity were so busy in
following of their lusts, and sinful pleasures, that they had no leisure to
think of their sins, or at least would not attend unto them; when the Hand of
God begins once to be upon them, they will then begin to consider them, and lay
them to heart. As those which have some bodily weakness and infirmity hanging
about them, though it may be they feel it not otherwise, yet they shall feel it
in bad weather. Even so is it likewise with men's sins, Affliction will put them
in mind of them. And so the seventy Interpreters read the words of the very
Text it self. (...)
And you shall know your sin, when calamities, or miseries light upon you. Thus
Manasses, when he was among the thorns, and bound with setters, and carried to
Babylon, it is said that in his affliction he humbled himself greatly before he
Lord. 2 Chronicles. 33.12. The widow of Sarepta to the Propher Elijah; Othou man of
God, art thou come unto me, to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my son?
1 King. 17, 18. And Jusephs Brethren, one to another; We are verily guilty
concerning our brother, etc. Genesis 42.21. Verily guilty? so, I hope, they were
before; Yes, but now they came to apprehend it, when this distress sell upon
them.

Thirdly, The commission of some other sin, III. The commission of some new sin.
especially of more heinous consideration. As long as men go on in a fair and
civil course without the guilt of any noted offense, some sins which yet
nearly concern them, do not show themselves, or appear unto them; but when they
fall into some grusse abominations, this discovers them, and makes them known.
Scandalous miscarriages, they more discover the corruption of Nature; which
though it be couched in the smallest, yet in them is not so easily discerned,
as in greater sins. When men once fall into these, they hence see that filthy
spring of lust and wickedness, which they carry about them, which occasionally
is found out to them. And so also some smaller sins which they have given
themselves allowance in, these are found out to them by greater, which
afterward through Gods just permission they fall into. Nemo repent fuit
turpissimus. Men do not usually jump into gross sins at first, but upon some
slighter ones favored in themselves, as remissness of communion with God,
and neglect in duty, etc. One sin finds out another, and leads to the
discovery of it. And so we have seen this Point in the first reference, how sin
discovers and finds men out to themselves.

Secondly, II. Sin finds men out to others. Diverse ways.
it does so also to others; it finds men out in the view of the world: And this
it does again in diverse ways, which I can but name, and point out unto you.
First occasionally from themselves. I. From men themselves By their Diseases.
As men's sins shall find them out to themselves, so from themselves also to
others. There is somewhat in their own persons, and carriages which shall show
and discover their sins. And that again by sundry means. As sometimes their
Diseases, and those effects, and consequents which their sins have upon their
bodies and outward man. There are some kind of sins, which leave a mark and
witness behind them, upon those which are guilty of them. As Rev. 1.27. They
received in themselves that recompense of their error which was meet. As under
the Law there was the water of Discovery, which being drunk by the guilty
person, caused the belly hereupon to swell, and the thigh to rot, as a symptom
of guilt; so there is somewhat which is proportionable still. Dreams.
Sometimes by their Dreams; many robberies and murders thus discovered.
Sometimes by their waking distempers; In drunkenness, and fits of intoxication
E^brictas opertarceludit. Drunkenness Melancholy.
In Melancholy, and phreneticall distractions. Their idle speeches have made
known their idle courses, and those sins which they have been heretofore guilty
of in times of health. Yea sometimes also in terror, and trouble of
Conscience, and the disquietnesse of an afflicted spirit; here their sin it
will find them out indeed. Those who have thought it should never have been
known, Terrors of Conscience.
because nobody knew of it, but themselves, these themselves, when they have
been upon this rack, have been glad for ease it self to discover it. Me, me
adsum qui feci, etc. Lo here I am, it is I, which am thus or thus guilty. This
is that, I say, which many persons have been brought unto. There Is no such blab
in the world, as a terrified, and wounded Conscience; as a soul awakened by God
to the sight of it self; this it will be sure to tell tales; it will out with
all that is in it, rip up every seame, and search into every corner, and pluck
up every stone in the heart; and glad that it can find any peace or relaxation
upon such a condition; Thus occasionally from men themselves.

Secondly, 2. From others,
Occasionally also from others; By their jealousies and probable conjectures,
which have put them upon such and such inquiries. And by their confessions,
when partners in the sin; sometimes in a way of self-love, for their own
freedom; some (...) of anger for their own revenge; sometimes (...) for their
own clearing, and the discharge of their (...) like ways from other men.

Lastly, 3.
(...) you also occasionally from the other creatures. (...) and unexpected
ways to bring sin and sinners to (...) the stone out of the wall to cry,
Habbac. 2.11.
and there is the be (...) to answer it. Eccles. 10.20.
There Is the bird of the air to carry the vo^e^ and that which has wings to
tell the matter. All which expresions serve to this purpose, to signify what
strange ways there are for the discovery, and revealing of sin beyond all
expectation.

Thus will sin find men out here in this life; ^ins Discovery a^th day of
judgment.
But now if by chance it should be concealed and kept close here, yet we know
it will be manifested hereafter. Every man's sin shall be made manifest, for the
Day will declare it. 1 Cor. 3.13 the Day of Judgment, that is emphatically
called the Day of Discovery (...) Rom 2.5. Romans 2.16. 1 Cor. 4 5.
In which day all men's actions shall be sought into, and found out. When God
shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to the Gospel: Bring
to light the bidden things of darkness, and make manifest the counsels of the
heart, as the Apostle speaks. But this is a point which I cannot now insist,
and stand upon.

Well. To close up this Head with an Use. The Application.
Seeing these things are so indeed; that sin is of so discovering a nature, as
we have heard it to be; Here Is that which may meet then with all reserved and
close kind of sinners, who give themselves liberty in any secret way of
wickedness whatsoever, (...) Prove. 7.10. Of a reserved heart.
upon this ground and encouragement, as that their sins shall not be known.
There are abundance of these in the world, slye and hypocritical persons, that
labor to carry all things in the clouds, and deep contrivances; that think to
dance in nets (as we say) and not to be seen, and yet very desperate wretches;
close drunkards, and close adulterers, and close cheaters, and deceivers of
others; It may be sometimes cover their villainy with some outward show of
piety, and profession of Religion: well let them look to it whosoever are
guilty of it. If I should by chance speak to any at this time in this present
Auditory (as it is hard in so great a number not to be some) I say if I should
now speak to any such; I might say to them in the words of Moses to these
Tribes, Besure your sin will find you out. Find you out to your selves, and
find you out to others, and discover you to the world. It Is impossible that any
wilful sinner should absolutely, and totally lie hid. No, but he will at last
come out quaking and trembling, Mark. 5.33.
like the woman with the bloody issue to Christ; Who came and fell down before
him, and told him all the truth. Thus shall it be with such kind of persons as
these are; as the Apostle speaks of some seducers. 2 Timothy 3.9. Their folly
shall be manifest to all men, as theirs also was. And so much of the first
head, viz. sin in its discovering nature.

The Second is sin in its revengefull and Virdicative nature; The second
Explication. Sin in its vindicative nature
there are some impudent and hard-hearted sinners, which it may be do not care
though sin find them out in the first sense. Let at be known, its all one to
them, they do not regard it they blush not to commit their lewd practices even
in the sight of the Sun it self. Isa. 3.9.
They do not hide their sin as Adam, but declare it as Sodom; and sometimes
glory in so doing Nondum times peccatum, time quo preducit peccatum: Dulce ^st
peccatum, s^d a^ara est mo^s. Aug hom. 42.
. Therefore here is a second thing which seems to be intimated to us in this
expression; And that is the heavy effect of sin, in its just punishment, and
revenge. These words are to be taken effective, Your sin will find you out;
that is. God will meet with you for your sin, and give you the just recompense
of it, so that if shame does not work upon you, smart may. This the Scripture
is clear for in every page. That though hand join in hand, yet the wicked shall
not go unpunished. Prove. 16.5. And that evil shall hunt the wicked to
overthrow him. Psalm. 140.11. And that the sinner shall be recompensed on the
earth. Pro. 11.31. etc.

Now this revengefulnesse of sin does vent and discover it self in diverse
particulars. Diverse ways.
First, I. In the proportion of the punishment to the offense.
in the proportion of the punishment to the nature of the offense. A man's sin
may be said to find him cut, forasmuch as God does oftentimes punish it with
some affliction answerable to it self. God meets with men in their own ways,
and so orders his dealings toward them, as that they may read their
miscarriage in their correction (...). Precopius in Isaiam.
. Thus he did with Adonthezek, Judge. 1.7. As I have done to others, so God has
done to me. Thus he did with Ahab, 1 King. 21.23. Him that dies of Ahab in the
City the dogs shall eat, etc. answerable to his carriage to Nab th. Thus he did
with Agag, 1 Samuel 15.22. As thy sword has made women childlesse. so shall thy
^n there be childlesse among women. And thus he does likewise with many others
besides. He suits the punishment to the sin. Where the sin is pride, the
punishment is usually aba, ement; where the sin is excess, the punishment is
many times want; where the sin is too much fondness of any comfort, the
punishment is for the most part deprivation, or else the turning of that
comfort into a cross. As to instance a little further, David he is proud of
his people, 2 Samuel 24 15.
and in a bravado will have them to be numbered; God punishes him by lessening
their number, in sending a pestilence to consume them. Hezekiah, Isa. 39.6.
he is proud of his Treasures, and boasts of them to the Ambassadors of Babel;
God takes away his treasures from him, and all that was laid up in his house.
Absalom he is proud of his hair, 2 Samuel 8.9.
which he nourishes as his glory and Crown: God makes it an halter to hang him,
and thereby exposes him to reproach. The Daughters of Sion go haughty and
mincing as they go, Isa. 3.24.
and are proud of their rich attire, God takes away their ornaments from them,
and gives them burning instead of beauty.

Secondly, II. In punishment mistaken.
This revengefulnesse of sin is seen in Punishment mistaken, and it may be (in
regard of such a fact) unseasonably inflicted. There Is many one, who is
wrongfully punished and censured it may chance from man; who yet from God is
most righteously dealt with. There Is some guilt or other sticks by them which
the world is not acquainted withal, and now it shall be occasionally punished.
The Lord does in this case with them, as in Solomon's dealing with Shimei; He
punishes one fact in another. Shimei had contrary to his Covenant gone beyond
the bounds, which were set him, and whereas he was confined to Jerusalem, he
runs further to Gath; This was a business which in it self we may conceive had
no great matter in it, you but under the punishment of this miscarriage, is
censured his insolency against David. God does not always so punctually stand
upon it, as to punish such a sin immediately with a punishment proper to the
offense, he will punish it now and then with a punishment it may be mis-placed,
and mis-taken, and wrongfully imposed; or if not so, yet at least not intended
in particular against such a sin.

This it may very well satisfy many men, even in their unjust sufferings, at
least in regard of God; it may justify Him in he proceedings against them;
that he does no other with them then right when he suffers such evils to befall
them, because himself has a quarrel against them for some other misbehaviour
besides, which he takes notice of in them, either the neglect of some
opportunities of doing good, or the doing of somewhat which is contrary and
amisie; for which cause it is safe for us in such cases to search our
Consciences to the bottom, and rather to let out our indignation against our
own sins, for which we justly suffer from God; then too much to plod upon our
injuries, wherein we suffer unjustly from men Thou have had some secret evil
course it may be, which thou have not yet repented of, and though the Lord has
forborne thee in one particular, yet he will meet with thee in another way, as
the Barbarians reasoned about Paul, Act. 28.4.
when they saw the Viper hanging upon his hand: No doubt this is a murderer, a
hom though he has escaped the Sea, yet vengeance suffers not to live. This
was in regard of Paul at present, but fa^sly concluded, (and to by the way it
may be sometimes of other men, which therefore we must be cautelous how we
apply to particular persons) but yet there was this general truth in it, which
it seems these Heathen were sensible of; Gods punishing of sin by exchange; Oh
it is a sweet thing to keep in good terms with God, and to have nothing lie upon
our Consciences which may expose us to his wrath and judgment, at such a time,
when we are least aware.

Thirdly, III. In the punishment of sins committed long ago.
in the punishment of sins, which were long ago committed, we use to say,
Nullum tempus occurrit Regi. It holds true in the King of all the world;
Forbearance with him is no acquittance. Nay the longer he has forborne, so much
the worse (...) Chrysostom.
; it being the greatest punishment, as yet not to be punished. Spraines which
are got in youth, will be felt in old age, to purpose. And so also will sins;
they will be sure at last to pinch, and find men out; find men out in their
duties, to hinder the performance of them; and find them out in their prayers
to obstruct the success of them; and find them out in their afflictions, to
make them so much the more tedious, and to put a sting and venom into them.

Fourthly, IV. In the punishment of pusterity.
sin may be said thus to find men out, in that escaping themselves, it many
times falls upon their issue and posterity after them. Following generations
shall bewail former miscarriages; and God visits the sins of the parents upon
the children in succeeding times. God will be sure to have that which is his
due, and arear one way or other; either in the person, or else in the
succession, if the guilt be not first taken off. And therefore the Church very
seasonably prays (as some Interpreters expound the words) Psalm. 79.8. Oh
remember not against us the iniquities of those which have been before us.
Gnavonoth rishonim.] (...)
Sin will find a man out in his posterity; And thus we have seen this
Revengefulnesse of sin in the General ways wherein it vents it self.

Now further, for the particular means of Accomplishment; The particular means.
these are also diverse and various. First, I. By the hand of Justice.
by the Hand of Justice in the Sword of the Public Magistrate: The Magistrate
is said not to bear the Sword in vain, to be a terror to evil works; to be the
Minister of God, Romans 13.3, 4.
a Revenger to execute his wrath upon him that does evil, etc. To show both
him what is his office; and others, what to look for from him. In those
Kingdoms, and Cities, and Commonwealths, where Justice flourishes, and the
execution of good, and wholesome Laws is in any force, sin will be sure to find
men out in this regard.

Secondly, II. By the hand of violence.
By the Hand of Violence, in the sword of the Common Enemy. Those which escape
the executions of peace, they meet sometimes with the punishments of war, and
common invasion; And the Soldier here does that, (though it may be upon other
principles) which the Magistrate should have done before him. There Is many a one
has been a prisoner of war, which should have been a prisoner of
Common-justice. Many one has been plundered, who should have been confiscated;
And many an one has lost his life by a Bullet, which it may be, if he had had
his due, should have lost it another way. In the prosecution of these late
bloody wars amongst our selves, as God has punished the whole Kingdom in
general for the common abominations, so he has met with some persons in
particular (no question) for their particular miscarriages; which in so great a
number on either side may be well supposed without any uncharitableness.

Thirdly, III. By the hand of Falsehood.
By the Hand of Falsehood, in the sword of strange Children; As God meets with
men by common Enemies, so also by false friends, whom he makes sometimes
Instruments of Justice. As Benhadad slain by Hazael; Sennacherib by his own two
sons; Ishbosheth by his servants, etc.

Fourthly, IV. By the hand of Despair.
By the Hand of Fury, and Despair, in the sword of Men themselves (...) then
sin shall not find some men out, God will make it to find them out now and then
even by their own wicked hands. (...). As Saul, and Achitophel, and Judas, and
such as these; so fearful a thing is it for any to take liberty in any sinful
course, upon hope of escaping punishment. Though they might be safe from
others, yet they are not sure to be safe from themselves And this for the Means
of Accomplishment.

Now further yet for the Designation of the persons; The Designation of the
persons.
It is said here in the Text, Your sin will find you out. You? Who Is this you?
Surely, if we take it historically, it is no more but Reu'en, and Gad, the two
Tribes which are here mentioned in the Chapter; But if moreover we take it
morally (as indeed we ought to take it) so it reaches to many more, even to all
sinners whatsoever; And that under All the Privileges and Qualifications which
may seem to exempt them, and to make for the discharge of them; As briefly
these First, you, though never so Great. The sin of Noblemen and Princes.
Secondly, you, though never so wise. The sin of Statesmen, and Politicians.
Thirdly, you, though never so good; the sin of godly men and Saints. Fourthly,
you, though never so many. The sin of an whole Land, and Nation. You in All
these acceptions will sin be sure to find out.

First. I. Great men.
You, though never so Great. The sin of Noblemen and Princes. I do not come
hither (Right Honorable) in a cynicall humor to reproach, or in the least
manner to detract from outward greatness; whether greatness of Birth, and
Parentage; or greatness of Authority, and place; I honor them, and esteem
them, as I ought. Neither do I come hither to deny or cast a Veyl upon the
Graces and Virtues which are in diverse great and Honorable persons; I
acknowledge them, and rejoice in them; That there are those in this number
which are a great ornament to Religion, which are a great blessing to the
Kingdom, which are a great encouragement of godliness in others of inferior
condition; But yet with all give me leave to add this as a Minister of Christ,
that if there be any which are not thus, but rather the quite contrary (as I
would with all my heart, it were uncharitable once to suppose) their greatness
can be no shelter to their wickedness. Sin will find us out though never so
great; under a coat of Velvet, as well as under a garment of Rags; under
Tissue, as well as under sackcloth. Kings, and Princes, and Nobles, and all the
Great ones, and Honorable of the earth, their sin without repentance will be
sure to fall heavy upon them, as well as on any other. There Is but one way to
heaven both for great and meaner persons. And the same ways, and means of
salvation, which are necessary for either. Ye see that Nature makes no
difference of you; and why should ye expect it from Grace? If ye be sick, it is
the same Physic must cure you: if you be wounded, it is the same Balsam must
heal you, which must also other men; you must be purged, and blooded, and
lanced, and scarified, and blister^d as occasion serves, as well as those of
meaner condition. And is it not so in spirituals, as well as in corporals? Yes
out of all question; that so you may the better entertain these ministerial
awakenings. For though ye may be above the Preacher, yet ye are not above the
Ordinance; and though the speaker be inferior to you, yet the Word has a
command over you. Alas (my Lords) what do we speak of greatness, when we think
of the Great God, 2 King. 10.4.
and that Majesty which is in Him, who if he do but let a sparkle of his wrath
fall upon the conscience, the greatest that are cannot subsist or hold up their
heads. Two KINGS could not stand before him, as was once said of Jehu, how then
shall We stand? Oh let Great men stand in awe of this Great God; let Great men
take heed of Great sins; and yea of little ones too, which in them are greater
then in others; and so are easier found out; S^honoratior est persona
peccantis, peccati qu^^ major invidia; ubi sublimior est prerogativa, major est
culpa. Salvian.
you, though never so Great.

Secondly, 2. Wife men. Eccles. 7.12.
you, though never so wise; The sin of Statesmen and Politicians. Wisdom
(says the Preacher) is a defense; and so indeed it is. It keeps off many an
evil, which might fall either upon a State, or upon a person. But it is still
wisdom in a right and good way. Where there is not Piety as well as Policy,
there can be no absolute safety. Prove. 21.30.
There Is no wisdom, nor counsel, nor under standing against the Lord. Men may
use all the tricks that may be to shift themselves from the searchings of sin,
2 Samuel 16.23.
but it will at last for all this find them out. Achitophel was a very wise
man, a great and deep Politician; His counsel in those days was accounted as
the oracle of God But yet for all that he proved in conclusion but the Brother
of a fool, (...)
as his name it self signifies; and his sin, it found him out for all his wit.
He is wise indeed that is wise for himself; and he is truly wise for himself,
that is wise for his soul. He that is not wise for eternity, and salvation, and
the things of God, is a fool, and a fool in grain in the midst of his greatest
wisdom. God delights to confound proud wits that set themselves against him in
their deep projects and designs; Job 12.17.
he disappoints the devices of the crafty, and brings to nothing the
understanding of the prudent: He leads away Counselors spoiled, and makes the
Judges fools. So unable is Humane Wisdom to keep men off from His wrath. You,
though never so wise.

Thirdly, 3. Good men.
you though never so good. The sin of Holy men and Saints. God will not spare
sin in his dearest servants; but it shall be sure to find them out amongst the
rest. There are some which would make us believe, as if God saw no sin in his
children. Does he not so? Yes, I warrant you, and to purpose; and so they shall
feel too, to their cost, which go about to put him to the trial; It is not
safe to make too bold with God, and to try conclusions with Him; as there are
too many which sometimes do, who venture very desperately in this regard;
falling now and then upon such ways as are not only matter of quarrel, and
captiousnes to those which are naught, and that watch an opportunity for their
slipping: but which are also matter of scandal, and just exception to those
which are good, and that would fain cover their infirmities. Which do not only
provoke their Enemies, but offend their Brethren; And not only give occasion
to the Adversaries of the Lord to blaspheme, and to rail at them in public,
but also give occasion to the people of God to mourn, and to weep for them in
secret; Which turn the grace of God into wantonness, pervert their success in
employments, and abuse that interest which they have in the hearts and good
opinion of those which are faithful; both to the spreading, and also
justifying of their own unsatisfactory courses. Well, let all such take heed:
their sins will at last find them out. And they shall know and see with a
witness; that the better they desired to be thought, the better it has become
them to be; * Fx boe pso deteriores sumus, si melores non sumus, qui melores
esse deb^mus. Cruminosior en^m culpa est, (...) bonestior status, Salvian.
that goodness is no privilege to sin. And that the better they are for their
principles, the more shame not to live by them. God having deserved better from
them, and bestowed upon them more opportunities, and encouragements then others
partake of. The goodness of the person does not justify the badnesse of the
action; But the badnesse of the action may give occasion to suspect the person.
You though never so good.

Fourthly, 4. Many men.
you though never so many: The sin of an whole Land, and Nation. Thus says the
Lord, though they be quiet, and likewise many; yet thus shall they be cut down
when he passes through. Nahum 1.12. And Job 34.29. When He gives quietness,
who then can make trouble? And when He hides his face, who then can behold him,
whether it be done against a NATION, or against a MAN only? It is all one with
God to punish the one, as the other; and it has a like easiness in it. He
increases the Nations, and destroys them; He inlarges the Nations, and
straitens them again. Job 12.23. We find how God has for sin destroyed the
whole world, and not cared to spare that, 2 Pet. 2.5. Righteousness exalts a
Nation, but sin is a reproach to any people. Prove. 14.34. To any people
leummim. (...)
To people or Nations in general, and indefinitely, let them be what they will
be.

It is true of All People, and it is true of All sin; The sins which find out a
Nation.
but yet of some sins more especially which the Scripture points out unto us,
and which I shall briefly instance in.

First, I. Murder and Blood.
the sin of murder and blood. That Is a searching and a crying sin, where ever
it lies. It Is one of those sins for which a Land principally mourns. Hos. 4.2.
They break out, and blood touches blood. And what then? Therefore shall the
Land mourn, and every one that dwells therein. v. 3. Blood, it is such a sin as
will have vent, where ever it is; and that Land cannot be innocent, which is
any way guilty of it; If this do but lie at the bottom, there can be no perfect
peace till it be removed, and taken away; like a Blood-hound that follows the
sent, and never leaves till it has found out the thing. This a Land may be
guilty of, not only by immediate commission, when it lies under some bloody
Act; but also by participation either by concurrence, or else by connivence.
That Law which God gave to Noah is peremptory and indispensable. Genesis 9.6.
Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. And this is not
only a prediction as signifying what shall be; but it is likewise an
Injunction, as signifying what ought to be, and what God Himself expects should
be; as appears by the words before in the 5. v. of the same Chap. Surely your
blood of your lives will I require, at the hand of every Beast will I require
it; and at the hand of Man. At the hand of every man's Brother will I require
the life of man. Observe here two expressions; At the hand of man. And, at the
hand of every man's brother. At the hand of man, as the principal: And at the
hand of every man's brother as the accessiry. That Is one land-finding sin; the
sin of Murder and Blood.

Secondly, II. Injustice and oppression.
Injustice and oppression. Woe be to her that is filthy and polluted, to the
oppressing City; Zephan. 3.1. And Isa. 3.14, 15. The Lord will enter into
judgment with the Ancients of his people, and the Princes thereof, (...) (...).
Why? For ye have eaten up the Vineyard; the spoil of the poor is in your
houses, etc. And Psalm. 14.4. Have the workers of iniquity ^^knowledge, which
eat up my people as they e^t b^^ad? This oppression, it is a sin which the
Scripture much complains of, and still notes with a tang at the end of it; and
which God will be same to punish where ever he finds it. Thus Eccles. 5.8. If
thou see the oppression of the poor, and violent perverting of Justice in a
Province, marvel not at the matter; For he that is higher then the highest
regards it, and there be higher then they. Marvel not at the matter; as if it
were a strange thing it should be so: for it is an ordinary and common sin, in
regard of man's corruption; And then, marvel not at the matter; that it should
be permitted to be so, for the providence of God does wisely suffer it for very
good reasons; He that is higher then the highest regards it: that is, He which
is above all Civil Magistrates whatsoever, who are the highest upon Earth.
Regards it, that is, takes notice of it, by way of sinple observation, And
regards it, that is, intends to punish it, by way of wrathful vindication.

This is a point which were very well to be considered, and thought of by
ourselves; whether we have not that in this kind among us, which will find us
out; whether we may not justly take up that complaint of the Preacher Solomon;
I saw under the Sun the place of Judgment, that wickedness was there; and the
place of righteousness, that iniquity was there. Eccles. 3.16. What!
Wickedness in the place of Judgment? And Iniquity in the place of
Righteousness? Oh fearful! Wickedness is always odious, and abominable,
let it be where it will be; And iniquity is never commendable, what ever place
we choose for it. But wickedness in the place of Judgment, this is horrible
indeed. And iniquity in the place of righteousness, this is by no means to be
endured. Sin, it is bad enough in it is center, and in that place, which is most
proper to it, even in Hell it self, and amongst the damned crew there. But when
it gets amongst those, which are good, and into those places which should most
abandon it, as it were into Heaven it self, here it is most intolerable; yet
this is that which sometimes it does. Those which should most releeve the
oppressed, are sometimes the greatest oppressors: And those which should most
punish violence, are the most violent of all others themselves. This was that
which God took so ill at the hands of his people: Isa. 5.7. That he looked for
Judgment, but behold Oppression: for Righteousness, but behold a Cry. In the
Hebrew Text there is a very elegant paronomasia to show the greatness of the
inversion, and dis-appointment, Le-mishphat ve-hinneh mispach; le-Tsedbakah,
ve-hinneb Tsedhnakah. And that is the second sin; Opp^ession.

The third is Hypocrisy and Dissimulation; III. Hypocrisy and Dissimulation.
this is another kind of sin, which finds out a Kingdom, Isa. 9.17. Therefore
the Lord shall have no Joy in their young men, neither shall have mercy on
their fatherless, and widows; for every one is an Hypocrite, and an evil
doer, etc. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched
out still. So again, Isa. 10.5, 6. Oh Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, etc. I
will send him against an Hypocritical Nation, and against the People of my
Wrath, will I give him a charge. Where an Hypocritical Nation, and the people
of Gods wrath are made to be terms convertible. Hypocrisy in a Nation brings
the wrath of God upon it.

This runs out in diverse heads. First, In diverse kinds.
in the Semblances of Humiliation; Secondly, in the Pretenses to Reformation;
Thirdly, in the Falsifications of Covenant.

First, in the Semblances of Humiliation. I. In the semblances of Humiliation.
This is such a miscarriage, as does provoke God exceedingly against them, as
ye may see by sundry instances in Scripture, I can but mention them. Hose.
7.14. They have not cried unto me with their heart. Isa. 58.5. Ye fast for
strife, and debate, etc. Zach. 7.5. When ye fasted, ye did not fast unto Me,
etc.

Secondly, In pretenses to Reformation: when people make as if they would
reform, but intend nothing less. 2. In pretenses to Reformation.
As those in Jeremy, Cap. 42. ver. 20, 21. Ye dissembled in your hearts, when
you sent me to the Lord your God, saying, Pray for us to the Lord our God; and
according to all that the Lord our God shall say, and declare, that will we do.
And so again those in Ezekiel, cap 33.31. They coin as the people comes, and
with their mouth show much love, but their heart runs after their
covetousness. This is that which lies heavy upon our selves, our miscarriage
in this particular; If we would deal plainly and freely with God, and tell him
what we are resolved on (as indeed we show by our practice) namely, to live as
we list, and to do whatsoever seems good in our own eyes, it may be, he would
take it better at our hands; Exodus 33.5.
If we would put off our ornaments from us, be might know what to do unto us;
but now to pretend to amendment, and repentance, and reformation of life, and
yet to abide still as we do, this must needs very deeply provoke him. For what
is this but to do as Israel in Psalm. 7^.36, 37?

Thirdly, 3. In the f^lsifications of Covenant.
In the Falsifications of Covenant. This is a very great quarrel which God
takes up sometimes against his people: The Quarrel of his Covenant, when they
deal falsely and hypocritically in this; which may be considered in a threefold
Explication. First, I. In taking it.
in point of taking of Covenants; when people shall do it only for sinister
ends; some by, and politic respects; only to advantage themselves in some
external and worldly consideration; and not out of the principles of Religion,
and conscience, and regard to God. This is that which will find them out;
especially in the missings of those very ends, which they propound, and aim at
in it. There Is nothing more dangerous in Religion, then to make that which is
desirable for it self, to be no other then a means, and conducement to somewhat
else, which is inferior to it. As if the ways of God were good for nothing,
but only to promote us in the world, and to set us forward in our secular
affairs; when as indeed there is an intrinsecall worth, and value in them, which
may intise us, even where we suffer by them. Covenants are not matters of
Policy, but Piety, and so to be undertaken.

Again, 2. In urging it.
As there may be falsenesse in taking of Covenants, so there may be also
falsenesse in urging them, and an Hypocritical standing upon them. As ye shall
have some, when they would promote any thing which is suitable to their own
affections. Oh we must keep our Covenant. Yes, and good reason, why should ye
not? But then be sure to keep it indeed. Else ye do but falter with God, Gal.
6.7.
and mock Him, who will not be mocked. There Is a twofold urging of a Covenant
in an hypocritical manner. The one is, Partially. Perversely.

when it is urged partially; and the other is, when it is urged perversely.
First, when it is urged partially; in some parts, but not in others. As for
instance, ye shall have some, who will be for the Covenant, as it is contrary
to Heresy; Oh by all means that. But they are not for it as it is contrary to
profaneness. Here, they will not be shackled by it. Again on the other side,
ye shall have some who will be for the Covenant, as it is a renouncing of
superstition. Here, remember our Covenant. But they will not be for it, as it
is a renouncing of Schisrme: Here, it is no Covenant at all. What Is this, I
beseech ye, Librum Dei ut pe^cis inspices: Scripturas D^i ad hoc audi^, at
facias, quod displicet De^. August.
but to play and trifle with Religion, as we please, and to make the ordinances
of God subordinate and subservient to our own loose affections? So, secondly,
there may be an urging of Covenants perversely also; when we shall strive to
draw that out of them, which is not intended in them; make them a nose of wax
as men do also sometimes with the Scriptures, 2 Pet. 3.16.
Which those that are unlearned, and unstable, wrest to their own destruction.

The third is falsenesse in Breach of Covenant; 3. In Breaking it.
which is the highest step of all. There are some which take Covenants, but
never think of them, and so take Gods Name in vain. And there are others which
take Covenants, and yet wittingly break them; which is a fin of a most fearful
guilt also. And truly, it does very much depend (for the occasion of it) upon
the first; For those that take Covenants hypocritically, will never keep them
conscionably. There Is nothing will hold an Atheist fast; not the solemnest
engagements that can be: All the Oaths and Covenants, and Vows that can
possibly be thought of, they are all nothing to him. And this is the third
searching sin; to wit, Hypocrifie, and Dissimulation.

The Fourth is, IV. Contempt of the Ordimances.
Contempt of the Gospel, and Ordinances, and Ministerial Dispensations. This
is a sin which will find out that people which are guilty of it. As ye may see
by Christ's upbraiding of those Cities where he had sometimes preached. Matthew.
11.21. Woe unto thee Corazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida, etc. It shall be easier
for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment then for those places. Sodom and
Gomorrah, we know what fearful sins were amongst them, and what punishments
fell upon them; But the neglect of the Gospel, and Ordinances, ye see is
threatened far above these. This might justly make us to tremble of this Land
and Nation our selves, for our guiltiness in this particular. What little
fruit have we brought forth answerable to the means which we have enjoyed? yea
how do we begin to loath and despise the heavenly Mannah which lies about our
Tents? How do we disgust and disrelish the wholesome Truths of Religion, and the
form of sound Doctrine, and apply our selves to nothing almost but fancies and
conceits of our own; 1 Timothy 6.4.
whereof comes strife, etc. What does this portend, but the taking away of the
Candlestick from us, (if by repentance we do not prevent it) which is the
Greatest Judgment that can befall us?

And to this slighting and contemning of the Gospel, Slighting of the Ministers.
we may join, which is very pertinent to it, the slighting of those which are
the Ministers, and Messengers of it; Despising of their Gifts, dishonouring of
their persons; withholding of their dues, etc. This is a Point which we which
are Ministers must not meddle with, our mouths are here stopped; when we speak
of them we preach our selves, and our own ends; This is presently laid in our
dish, and objected to us, though the souls of our people be never so much
concerned in it. But therefore it concerns people themselves so much the more
to look after it; and to take heed of being guilty of it. Where the Patient
forbids the Physician to take care of him, he had need to be the more watchful
over himself; Ioh 5.41.
And so here. As for Us, we would have the world to know; That we receive not
honor from men; neither from men do we expect our reward. Thy money perish
with thee; As Peter to Simon Magus. Act. 8.20. Keep thy gists to thy self, and
give thy rewards to another; as Daniel said once to Belshazzar. Dan. 5.17.
There Is no true Minister of Christ but counts his work to be his greatest
Honor, and such as he would not exchange for what ever the world can cast upon
him; And for reward, we serve a Master that will pay us, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16.
we are sure of that. We would not have all our wages here (woe be to them that
have!) But yet this shall not serve their turns, Mal. 3.9. Dout. 33.11.
which would keep it from us. Their sin shall be sure to find them out. These
are things which are not believed, because they are not presently felt. Well,
let us go on, and mark what will be the End of ^^. God has time enough to
punish this sin, when we are dead and rotten in our Graves.

A fi^t Land finding sin is Licentiousness, V. Licentiousnes, and Toleration
of Error.
and want of Government, whether in Church or State; whereby the floodgates
are opened to all Error, and Heresy, and to All vice and profaneness. This is
such an Iniquity, and mischief as God will not endure, And that because it is
opposite to his Soveraigntie, and Authority in the world, and (as much as it
can, as we may speak with an Holy Reverence) puts himself out of his place.
Those that take away subordinate Government, they do by degrees strike at
Supreme, which is the Government of God himself. They have not rejected Thee,
but they have rejected Me. 1 Samuel 8.7. This is a sin which will be sure to fall
heavy upon those people which are guilty in this kind; yea, and that from the
thing it self. That which is their sin shall be their punishment, and they
shall at last be sure to rue that liberty, which they now so much plead for.

Lastly, to add no more now: This very sin here in the Text; VI. Neglect of
Assistance of the Church.
The neglect of Assistance of the Church against their Enemies is a sin which
will find a Land out; And that especially by making those Enemies most grievous
and burdensome to them. But of this I have spoken largely in the beginning.
Thus you though never so many. And thus much also of the Designation of the
persons; Your sin will find YOU out.

Well, seeing these things are so; That sin will find out Us; The Application.
let this be the use we make of it, to be careful to find out It; and to begin
with that first. This is the best and safest course, which can be taken by us;
It being of the nature of that creature, which if it be first spied by us it
spares us; but if we be first spied by it, it kills us. And this suits very well
with the words of the Text, according as they seem to run verbatim in the
Hebrew; And know your sin which will find you out. Udegnou chataathkem, asher
ijmtsa ethkem.] So the Arabique also translates it.

Now there are two things which concern us in this particular: First, to find
out whether: And secondly, to find out which. To find out whether which.


First, to find out whether. That is, to find out the nature and condition of
those things which we venture upon, whether they be lawful yea or no; To
resolve our selves well in that,, I. Whether.
and not to lie in any sin unknown. This is one way of finding out our sin.
Remember that of Solomon's, Prove. 20.25. It is a snare for a man to devour that
which is holy; and after Vows to make inquiry. It is good for us to be
sufficiently satisfied, and well informed in that which we do, and not to
venture upon sin we care not how. For next to a sin against knowledge, is a sin
of affected Ignorance, (...) 2 Pe^. 3.5.
yea indeed does little differ from it. There are some people which are
willingly ignorant concerning such and such sins; Because their lusts carry
them to such ways whether Ambition or Covetousness, or the like; and with all
they think their Consciences would rub them if they were thoroughly informed
about them; therefore they choose to content themselves with any slight, and
easy inquiries, as thinking to salve themselves at last by this shift, That
they knew not indeed that they were sins; These are such (as our Savior speaks
of) which hate the light, and which love darkness rather then light, because
their deeds are evil. Ioh. 3.19.
These are just like some kind of thieves, (...) etc. Chrysostom.
which put out the candle, that they may the better steal in the dark. But let
Us for our parts by all means take heed of this, let us labor to find sin out
in this Explication; And that because there may be a great deal of danger and
mischief even in a sin unknown; Danger to an whole State, which from hence may
lie open to miscarriage, as it was once with the people at Ai about the sin of
Achan. Josh. 7.11.
And Danger to a particular person, which from hence may lie under a curse, and
wither, and moulder away he knows not how; And especially in his inward-man,
which is the chiefest of all. As a man which has a servant, which is a theif,
he goes backward in his estate, insensibly; so does a man which has a secret
sin in his soul go backward in grace; is not so serviceable, nor profitable,
nor comfortable, as otherwise he might be (...). 1 Cor. 9.27.
. Hence it was that David desired to be kept from secret sins; not only such
as were secret to others, but especially which were secret to himself; which is
the proper meaning of that place. Psalm. 19.12. For which purpose he also
further desires the help and assistance of God. Psalm. 139.23. Search me O God,
and know my heart; try me, and know my thoughts: And see if there be any wicked
way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. And thus far of sins whether;
which is the first thing to be found out by us.

The second is of sins which; II. Which.
that is, what those sins be which we are most guilty of, of those things which
we are persuaded are sinful. This is that which lies upon us All: But
especially (to speak a word in season) upon those which have the Government of
Kingdoms, Especially Statesmen.
and Commonwealths committed unto them. These had need to find out sin more
especially, for the safety and welfare of that State, which they have the
ordering, and managing of.

First; I. Their own personal sins.
Their own personal sins; which have a very great influence upon the state and
condition of the Commonwealth. And that in two particulars; First, As a
Provocation of wrath; And, secondly, as an obstruction of mercy.

First; As a Provocation to wrath; in that God oftentimes punishes a Kingdom,
and gives them up to such ways, and judgments, especially for such men's sins.
As we may see in Israel upon David's miscarriage. 1 Samuel 24.1.
Persons of Quality and Place as they are Great Blessings, where they do that
which they should do: so they are the contrary, where they do that which is
amiss: and an whole Kingdom fares the worse for their sakes, as provoking Gods
wrath the more against it.

But Secondly; That Is not all; It is not only a Provocation of wrath, but an
Obstruction of mercy; when such lie under any guilt, God defers to heal a Land
for their sakes also: and refuses to make use of them, in the repairing of the
Breaches. He will not vouchsafe to work by them, which walk in any evil way.
And so the Land also suffers from them thus: This shows how far it concerns
such persons to find out their sins, not only for the good, and salvation of
their own souls, but also for the good and safety of the poor Kingdom
whereunto they belong. And this for the search of their own person all sins.

Secondly, 2. The sins of the Nation.
They are to find out also the sins of the Kingdom. I have already administered
some help in this performance by the hint of those sins before mentioned; All
which I humbly desire may be taken into serious consideration. And especially
(which grows so much upon us, and which threatens so much evil to us) that sin
of Libertinisme, and Toleration, which is the ringleader to all the rest, and
involves all others with it. Oh that this should ever be once mentioned amongst
us here in England, who have enjoyed so much of the Gospel of Truth, as we have
done; Derived to us from our Godly forefathers, sealed to us by the Blood of
the Martyrs, prosecuted with so many Blessings, and Victories, and Gracious
successes both of former and later times, to the admiration both of Enemies and
Friends! Is this the fruit and issue of all that God has done for us? And do
all our overtures of Reformation come to this? Surely God cannot but take it
very ill from us, that we should but incline and lean hereunto; As he said to
David of his building of the Temple; Thou did well that it was in thine
heart: And accordingly was well pleased with him. So will he say to us of our
contrary carriage; That it is ill that it is in our heart; If so be it be come
so far, as I hope it is not. What? when we have so much appeared against Popery
and Superstition, shall we now begin to think of Indifferency and Toleration?
Certainly; It Is but a sorry exchange of a Bad Religion for none. Although
indeed it will be no exchange, but rather a further Confirmation: Toleration of
All other Errors does but strengthen Popery amongst the rest; which will at
least think so well of it self, as to come in for a childs part.

We see, how it is still with us at this present Day; Notwithstanding all the
Blood, Quid quer^mur quod dare agat ^ob^soum Deus? Mu^^o nos cum D^o durius
agimus. Salv. ^.4.
which has been hitherto shed in the Kingdom, yet we lie under many
jealousies, and distractions still, in which we know not what may befall us.
And is it any strange matter that it should be so in good earnest with us, if
we consider all? Is it any wonder that We should not know, how God will deal
with Us, when as He does not know how we will deal with Him? (I speak after the
manner of men.) How must we not needs be so unsettled in regard of Peace, whiles
we are unsettled in regard of Truth?

Well, The Conclusion.
to draw to a Conclusion. God has now (Right Honorable) brought us to the close
of an Old Year: wherein we have had Great Experiences of his Goodness to us.
Of his Goodness to the Land in General; And of his Goodness to our selves in
particular; To the Land in General, in the completing of our Victories, and
success, and in Reducing of the Kingdom to the Power of the present
Parliament, so that now we may sing with the Psalmist. Psalm. 48.12. Walk about
Sion, and go round about her, tell the towers thereof; mark ye well her
Bulwarks; Consider her palaces; that ye may tell it to the Generation
following: for this God is our God for ever and ever; He will be our guide even
unto Death. This is a Great Mercy: And this for the Land in General.

And further for our selves in particular; God has here also done most
graciously with us, in that he has kept us from the Devouring Pestilence, and
those contagious sicknesses, and diseases which the City for this last year now
past has been visited withal. What does he expect now from us, but that we
should answerably give up our selves to His service? And in our several
opportunities be Active for His Glory; as knowing that the Greater our sphere
is of doing good, the more does he expect from us.

We have heard, how sin will find us out; And so let me add for our Comfort by
proportion will Grace to. 2 ^in 1.17, 18.
Onesiphorus that found out Paul in a way of Compassionate visitation, Mercy
found out him in a way of answerable compensation. And so it shall likewise be
with all others besides: There Is no man that does any Good, which shall go
unrewarded for it; Rev. 14.13.
But then when he rests from his labors, his works shall follow him. Yea let
the Good which he does be never so secret and private, yet it shall also be
found out. Secret prayers, and secret alms, and secret mournings, and
humiliations for sin; Matthew. 6 6.
Thy Father that sees in secret will reward thee openly. There are some, which
can do no Great matters, except all the world take notice of them, and applaud
them, and cry them up; making their Greatest contentment to lie in their
encouragements from Men; But these are things which will soon wear off, and
come to nothing; When all comes to all, this will be our Greatest Rejoicing;
The Testimony of a Good Conscience; That in the sense of our manifold
Infirmities we have indeavovred to discharge our Duties, and to approve our
selves to God; who will never suffer any of us to be loosers by his service;
but in all the dis-regards of the world will himself bestow upon us a full
reward. A Reward in our Consciences; 2 Ich. v 8.
And a Reward in our Conditions; And a Reward in Heaven it self; which is the
Great Reward of all; What ever good we have done, it will sooner or later find
us out; and especially then, when we have greatest need of it; In affliction
and temptation; at the hour of Death; and at the Day of Judgment; Then will
Goodness be Goodness indeed, as well as sin; which though we may not rest in
it, in order to merit, and carnal confidence, yet we may be very much
satisfied from it, in order to comfort, and self-reflexion; and accordingly
should often think of these things to quicken us to Duty.

And now for this ensuing New Year, let us be hence persuaded to set upon it,
with a purpose and endeavor of doing all the Good that we can, and to make
amends for any former neglects. To serve God in our several opportunities, and
to be advantageous to the Good of his Church, and that Cause which himself owns
in the world; and will own. So shall the Lord himself take pleasure in us, and
delight to do us good; to bless us in our persons, and to bless us in our
counsels, and to bless us in our undertakings, and to bless us in our whole
Kingdom, and to continue to be a God unto us, and to all Posterity after us
even to succeeding Generations.

But if ye will not do so, behold, ye have sinned against the Lord, and be sure
your sin will find you out.

(...)
FINIS.
The Names of the Preachers before the Parliament: Anno 1646.
Mr. Whitaker 2 Chronicles. 26.15. Mr. Hickes Hos. 5.15. Mr. Evance 1 Samuel 2.30. Mr.
Caryll Jam. 4.8. Mr. Vines Jam. 4.8. Mr. Case Psalm. 107.30, 31. Mr. Caryll Luke
10.20. Mr. Woodcock Genesis 49.23. Mr. Jenkyn Hag. 1.2. Mr. Goodwyn Psalm. 105.14.
Mr. A. Burges Numb. 11.12. Mr. Case Exodus 5.22. Mr. Bolton Matthew. 1.21. Mr.
Cheynel Genesis 18.19. Mr. Caryll Psalm. 118.17. Mr. Peter's Psalm. 31.23. Mr. Nalton
Jer. 13.27. Mr. Owen Acts 16.11. Mr. Tailor Genesis 35.1. Mr. Heyrick Hest. 4.16
Mr. Torshel Deuteronomy. 16.20. Mr. Wilkinson Numb. 23.23. Mr. Cradock 1 John 1.3, 4.
Mr. Borroughs Matthew. 5.6. Mr. Palmer Isa. 58.12. Mr. Marshall Psalm. 8.2. Mr.
Bridge Zeph. 2.3. Mr. Maynard Phil. 3.21. Mr. Lockier Isa. 53.10. Mr. Strong
Ezra 9.13. Mr. Price Ezra 9.6, 7. Mr. Dell Hebr. 9.10. Mr. Roberts Psalm. 51.17.
Mr. Marshall 1 Chronicles. 12.32. Mr. Nucomen Hebr. 4.13. Mr. Good Amos 7.5. Mr.
Horton Numb. 32.23.

