THE QUAKERS Acquitted from the FOUL ASPERSIONS Of the SCANDALOUS LIBELLER.
Being a detection of three most abusive and sorbid Pamphlets, entitled: I.
The Monstrous Eating Quaker. II. The Quaker turned Jew. III. The Quaker and his
Maid. Which are confuted by plain Evidence to undeceive the ignorant, clear the
Truth and stop Debauchery.
By Ellis Hooks.
Mendax Calumnia vitam corrumpit.
SInce the Lord raised us up to be a People to bear witness to his Name, and
blessed everlasting Truth, great has been the rage of the old Enemy, called
the Devil and Satan, and of all his Children against us, for the Truths sake,
and no devise nor stratagem has been left, but all manner of ways has the
wicked one, through his Instruments tried to render us odious in the sight of
Men; and the more our Innocence and Uprightness appears, the more earnest is
he in finding new devises to darken and to corrupt the Understandings and Minds
of those in whose disobedient hearts he rules; so that when no wrestling nor
perverting of our Words and Testimonies will serve his turn, nor no real matter
of Charge or Guilt can be found against us; then does he and his Children flee
to the old refuge of Lies, saying, Report, and we will report it; so framing
and inventing wicked things out of the wicked Treasury of their own hearts, and
casting the same (so far as in them lies, upon us) yea, oftentimes framing and
inventing such abominations as they themselves dare not appear to own with
their Names, but leave them as Bastardbirths without a Father, only doing this
service for their old Master the Devil to busy and to corrupt the Minds of the
Sons and Daughters of Men, and to get money; for which service in due time they
shall have their reward.

And although we account not our selves engaged to take notice, or to answer
all such scurrilous, wicked, and ungodly Pamphlets, especially such
Bastard-births as aforesaid, yet at this time seeing such a large Brood of
these Viperous Brats brought forth almost together, we are free to give the
world a brief account of the malice, falsehood, and wickedness of these our
Adversaries, whoever they are, that none may say if they were Lies why did you
not tell us, that whoever believe them evil may be wholly upon their own heads.

I. And first of all we take notice of a wicked Pamphlet lately Printed for W.
Savidge (as if said) with Allowance, called Sad and terrible News from
Newberry, or, Th. Monstrous eating Quaker, etc.

Concerning which Relation we have made enquiry; and whereas it is said that he
was born and lived at the Devizes, that is one Lie; for we find that he was
born and lived at Westbury, as appears by a Certificate under the hands of the
Mayor, Officers, and Inhabitants of the said Borough of Westbury, as follows:

Wilts.
WE of the Inhabitants of the Parish and Borough of Westbury, whose names are
hereunto subscribed, do declare and testify unto all people where ever this
may come, or whom it may Concern:

That whereas one Joseph Bourn, late of our Parish of Westbury aforesaid, where
he was born, and from his Childhood bred (after years of understanding) to the
Trade of a Tailor, who now Travels the Country begging, and is become such a
great Eater, not less then a Wonder to most sorts of people wherever he comes.

Now forasmuch as we understand that he is in some Countries by some taken to
be a Quaker, and that he had formerly had some estate, and that by leaving his
business and going amongst the Quakers is now impaired, We do a Testimony
signed by us, signify unto all, that he the said Joseph Bourn was never any
Quaker, nor otherwise a Professor of any Religion, neither was he that ever we
heard of at any Quakers Meeting, nor held their Tenants, nor had he ever any
estate of his own, as we perceive by some has been supposed; but being from his
Youth an idle Boy, has so lived till this came on him; the truth of which is
very well known to us his Neighbors and Relations, who have hereunto
subscribed the 28th day of April 1675.

Nicholas Clift, Mayor, John Edwards Churchwarden, John Parker, Overseer,
Edward Wilkins, Constable, Roger Cater, Samuel Gibbs, Tho. Edwards, W. Elkins,
John Norway, Tho. Phipps, Zach. Baley, Giles Adlam, James Blatch, Stephen
Blatch.

We have many other Certificates to the same purpose both from our friends at
Westbury, and from diverse other of the West parts of the Nation, too many here
particularly to insert; which if any makes further doubt of we shall be ready
to produce; at present judging this sufficient for the removing and reproving
this notorious Lie, and Liar.

Another fruit of this corrupt Tree we find under the name of the Quaker turned
Jew telling a devised Story of one Thomas a Quaker of the Isle of Ely,
committing wickedness with his Neighbors wise, and afterward being denied by
the Quakers for his wickedness, as the Author says, having much trouble upon
his Spirit, took vengeance on himself, and Circumcised himself: is it possible
that this Author should be so wicked to frame such a cursed Lie, and to tell of
trouble of Spirit, and Judgment for the same, and should meet with no reproof,
nor Judgment in his own Conscience, for the framing of such a horrible and
abominable L^e; but seeing he is so hardened that he meets with no reproof
within him, he shall meet with reproof without him; and that we might not
detect him and his Lies without sufficient ground, we sent to the Isle of Ely
to have an account from the Inhabitants, who write as follows:

Loving Friends:
WE understand what false report has been spread in London by a Pamphlet
called, The Quaker turned Jew, and that a Meeting was concerned about him; we
have enquired from several of our Meetings in and about this Isle concerning
the matter, and do certify to all people, that we have neither known nor heard
of any such Person or matter as this Pamphlet releteth of, but do conclude it
to be an absolute Lie, raised out of the bottomless Pit of Perdition, whether
it will return and the founders thereof in due time except they repent.

Clement Crab, Sam. Fulbiggs, Hen. Wadelow, Will. Bowtell, Ezekiel Cater, Fra.
Bugg, Steph Blow, Rob. Barber, Will. Jves.
Littleport in the Isle of Ely the 16th 3 Mon. 1675.
A Postscript to the Magistrates in and about the City of London.
THere having lately been many vicious and obscene Pamphlets cried up and down
the City tending greatly to the corruption and debauching the minds of young
people, and particular these two most gross, lying, and abusive Libels, The one
Entitled, The Quaker and his Maid, fictitiously framed by way of Dialogue; and
the other, The Quaker turned Jew: We cannot but deem it your place so far to
take cognizance of these and suchlike filthy Pamphlets as to put a stop to
them, it being a disgrace to this City that such things should be cried about,
or spread to vitiate the minds of young people; and many sober people wonder
that they are suffered to cry such things about this City: as for the said
Dialogue, it is such a gross blasphemous and Atheistical Piece of Debauchery,
wherein the Sacred Scriptures are blasphemously made use of in such abominable
obscenity, the like of which was never seen or heard in Print, and so divulged
in England, Wherefore we entreat you for the sake of Christianity, the worth of
Souls, the Honor of this City Government, that you would please to put a stop
to these and such abominable corrupting Pamphlets and Libels, it being your
Places to give a Check to Vice, and to endeavor the prevention of such impious
and scandalous Pamphlets for the future.


