THE DECLARATION OF JOHN ROBINS, the false Prophet, otherwise called the
Shakers God, and Joshua Beck, and John King, the two false Disciples, with the
rest of their Fellow Creatures now prisoners in the New-prison at Clarkenwell:
Delivered to diverse of the Gentry and Citizens, who on Thursday, Friday, and
Saturday last resorted thither to dispute with them: With the Citizens
Proposals to the said John Robins, concerning his Opinion and Judgment, and his
Answer thereunto: Together with his Prophecy of what is to come to pass this
year, 1651. and the strange things revealed to him: his Religion, Principles,
and Creed: as also his blasphemous Tenants, in attributing an inspiration from
the Holy Ghost: with the manner of their Diet, and his Woe pronounced
concerning all those that drink Ale. By G. H. an Ear-witness.

4 scenes representing the supposed activities of the Ranters or Shakers: Two
men in hats pointing to a man and woman kissing; A man in a hat standing on a
barrel preaching to a crowd of men, women, and children; Three men in hats
sitting at a table; a man in a hat holding a musical instrument while a group
of men, women, and children dance naked This is the way

I will deliver you.

We are all Shakers.

Play Music



London, Printed by R. Wood, 1651.

To all that desire the Truth.
Courteous Reader,
HAving been an Eyewitness of the deportment and carriage of M. John Robins,
Mr. Joshua, M. King, and the rest of their Fraternity called Ranters, now
prisoners in the new prison at Clarkenwell, through the importunity of certain
friends, I was desired to present to public view the true Character of the
various Opinion and Judgments of these persons, which are three: And first, for
Mr. John Robins, whom the parties cited in the ensuing Tract acknowledge to be
their God, and only Redeemer; but he utterly denies the attributes thereof,
saying that there is no other God, but the Creator of Heaven and Earth; and
that by the merits of his most glorious and blessed Son, he hopes to be made
partaker of eternal joy and felicity; for (says he) Jesus Christ died for
all, and he is the substantial cause and means for all, and that all men may be
saved if they will, and that every man has a will to come; but will not come,
so that the cause is in themselves that they are damned.

A second sort there be that say, That Christ died for none but for the Elect,
and that none but the Elect are saved by the death of Christ.

But that which is the most saddest, and of great astonishment, is, The
blasphemous Opinion of John King, and his Associates, who deny the Godhead, and
blessed Trinity, acknowledging no other Lord and Savior but John Robins, whom
they honor and worship; as will more evidently appear by the ensuing subject.

A Declaration of the several Tenants, Opinion, and Principles, of Mr. Jo.
bins, the new Prophet, and the rest of his Fellow Creatures, now in safe
custody in New-prison at Clarkenwell.
ON Saturday the 24 of May, 1651. John Robins, and the rest of his
Fellow Creatures had a meeting in Long-Alley in Moorfields, where the Right
Worshipful Justice Hubert having information thereof, immediately sent his
Clerk, and certain other Officers to the said place, who apprehended them, and
brought them before the said Justice; and after examination, Ordered that they
should be committed to safe custody, and accordingly were sent to Newprison,
where diverse Lords, Knights, Ladies, Citizens, and others, daily frequent, to
dispute and converse with them; And amongst the rest, one M. Alexander (an
Oxford Student) on Friday last in the Afternoon, gave them a visit, who entered
into discourse with the aforesaid John King, and ask't him, Whether the Report
abroad was true, That they acknowledged John Robins to be their God, and (his
Wife) Mary Rob^ns, the Virgin Mary, and the child conceived by her (for indeed
she is very big) to be Christ, He answered, Yes, all this I verily be^ieve, for
this man whom you call John Robins, is God, He is both King, Priest, and
Prophet, he is that Melchesedike formerly spoken of, and is n^w come to reduce
the world to its former condition, as it was before the fall of the first Adam.
Alas! replied M. Alexander, I pity your condition, these are mere delusions of
Satan, and may be put in the same balance with that of Balaam, who taught
Balac to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to sacrifice to
Idols, and to commit fornication, Rev. 2. 14. Well Sir! this is but one Doctors
Opinion, said John King, smiling: Yes Sir, It is truth, and flows from the
pure fountain of Holy Writ: I beseech you give me leave to instance a few
presidents: Well Sir! proceed. In Queen Elizabeth's Reign (said M. Alexander)
the like erroneous Opinion sprung up, which you now assert, and diverse there
were, that accounted one Hacket to be their God; and amongst the rest one
Ardingworth took upon him to proclaim him Christ in ^heapfide, where they were
both apprehended, and soon after Hacket received sentence to be hanged on a
Gibbit near the Standard where he belcht forth these blasphemous words, O thou
God of Heaven, come down and save me, or else I Will rent thy Throne asunder; and
so miserably died. But at the same instant of time, it pleased God to work a
sudden change in the heart of Arthingworth; for he became a pure Convert, and
died a worthy penitent.

One thing more has happened, which is very remarkaable, and is an evident
symptom of Gods displeasure against Ranters; Wherein I shall declare, the last
words of one Mr. Underwood, now a Reformado in the Lord Generals Regiment, but
formerly Cornet to a Company of Dragoons; which words were written from the
said Cornet Underwoods own mouth (at his own request) by Captain Clare, a
Reformado in the same Troop with the aforesaid Underwood; and sent by the
abovenamed Captain Clare, to Lieutenant Empson. This Underwood having been a
notable companion with those people which are vulgarly called Ranters, who
maintain certain dangerous and unheard of (till of late days) tenets, tending
to the destruction of their poor souls; being troub^ed in conscience at his
wicked ways, after he had made this following recantation, fell into a slumber,
and within half an hour after died.

M. Alexander having ended his conference with J. King, he went into John
Robins chamber, and after a short salute, asked him, Whether he was the God of
those creatures, that so attributed him to be: He replied, No, I am but a
mortal creature as you are, only I have received many Revelations from the
Holy Ghost, and am inspired by the blessed Spirit. Another standing by said,
This woman affirms that you are God, Hang her (replied he) she is damned:
whereupon the woman fell down on her knees trembling, to the great astonishment
of the spectators, and had no power to rise, until her Prophet gave her
command to stand up: whereupon M. Alexander stated this question, How have you
power to cast down, and raise up, unless it be by some satanical art, and
abominable Witchcraft: He replied, All Arts come of the Devil, but mine
proceeds from inspiration of the Holy Ghost. Then said another Gentleman
standing by, Why do your followers term you the third Adam? To that I answer
particulary (said he) in the behalf of my self. So I am, for these reasons. The
first Adam was made a living soul: the second, a quickening spirit, and in this
law stands all the council of God the Father. The first, the servant of Death
appointed: The second, the Son of life thereunto foreordained. And I am the
third Adam, that must gain that which the first lost. Alas! this is no sound
Argument (said Mr. Alexander) I pray Sir, what belief are you on? I believe in
God the Father (said he) the maker of Heaven and Earth, and I believe in the
communion of Saints, and the resurrection of the dead: What can you have more?
I pray clear the room, for I am now called to some private meditation; and so
the dispute ended.

Their food is only bread and water, although they have plenty of moneys to
buy other provisions.

This Robins being asked the reason why he would drink no Ale, answered, Because
it was not of Gods making: it is the drink of the Beast (said he) a poisonous
liquor, and woe be unto all them that drinks it.

On Thursday last, diverse of the Gentry resorted to John Robins in their
Coaches, and having access into his chamber, after some questions, asked him
whether he was the God of the Shakers: His Reply was, Is there any necessity
that I must resolve you? It was answered, That some of the Gentlewomen desired
to be resolved therein: They shall have satisfaction immediately, and with that
he pulled a paper out of his pocket, and presented them with it; a copy whereof
follows:

WHereas I John Robins, do at this very instant lie un^er the censure of the
people to be the God of the Shakers, and their only Lord in whom they put
their trust in; I do here declare in the presence of Almighty God, the Creator
of Heaven and Earth, That I am free from assuming any such power or Title to my
self, being but a mortal creature as you are; only I have received the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and have had great things revealed to me, and am
now sent to call the Jews to conversion, which will be accomplished this
present year, 1651. As for humane learning I never had any; my Hebrew, Greek,
and Latin, comes by inspiration. And so grace and peace be with you all, Amen.

JOHN ROBINS.
The Names of the Shakers.
John Robins Prophet. Joshua Beck. John King. Gabriel Smith. John Langley.
William Welsh. Mary Robins. Mary Wenmore. Mary Arthingworth. Jane Thwait.




FINIS.

