A MESSAGE Sent from the Kingdom of IRELAND TO A Member of the ARMY, under the
command of His Excellency the Lord General Fairfax, concerning their
proceedings in this Nation, and the crowning of their heads with Laurel.

WITH Several Quaeries, touching the bleeding condition of both Nations, VIZ.
I. Whether there be any way to unite the Representative Body of a State, and
cut the heart in the middle. II. Can a Kingdom think you stand fast, and the
affections of men in it tatter to and fro. III. Shall the Presbyterian strive
to get a Vote one day, and the Independent another the next, that so the day
following you may be the fitter to clash one another a pieces; and do you
think this way to better and settle a Kingdom?


Imprimatur, Theo: Jennings.

Imprinted at London, by B. A. MDCXLIX.

New News from Ireland.
Noble Captain,
MY unfeigned love, and courteous respects remembered unto you, I understand by
your last, that you have left Col. Whalleyes Regiment, and have now a command
under the Lord Generals Brigade.. I likewise hear that God of late has done
great things for you, I pray the Lord of Hosts to make you humbly and sincerely
thankful, and that you may not bury in oblivion, those memorable mercies that
are yet among you: for truly, I do wish your real happiness, and the
continuance of your splendour with my heart, and that your light may so shine
forth on earth, that it may glorify your Father which is in Heaven: But I hear
there are divisions among you, and indeed I partly believe it, yet if any man
seems to be contentious, you know we have no such custom, no nor the Ghurches
of God, but there must be Heresies among you (I do not mean with consent and
toleration) that those that are made manifest, may be the more approved. Now if
it be not so, how comes it then to pass, instead of helping of us in our
quarrel, you earnestly dispute the lawfulness thereof. Methinks that B^ittain
degenerates from himself, that goes about not only about to prejudice, but
circumvent himself, and as our proverb, though a homely one relates, It Is a
very ill Bird that defiles its own nest. Shall David, Joshua, or Iehosaphat be
afraid to fight against the Moabites, Hittites; or the A^orits, because it was
their native Country: but it may be you will object, they had immediate command
for what they did, and truly so have we, only here is the difference, God spoke
to them by his Prophets, and sends us word out of his Holy Word and preaching
Ministers; or thus, Shall Esau let fall his birthright for mess of pottage,
and may not his brother stoop to take it up; or shall some great man born to a
vast estate forfeit and surprise it by rebellion, and shall not this great man,
notwithstanding his great birth, be punished and made sensible thereof: Do but
impartially examine the present course of Justice, that you are now upon; but
to wave this, seriously (acquaintance) let me tell you, did you but walk so
exactly, and so close as many in the world suppose you do, you could not choose
but in some measure simpathize with grief mourning with them that mourn,
considering those in bonds as being bound your selves: then pray resolve me
friend, is it not a sad thing that we which have expected some comfort and
relief this 6 or 7 years together, now that the Lord has put into your hand a
gracious opportunity, crowning your heads with Laurel where ever you go,
making you Victors of a spacious field, that you should be so churlish and
unkind, as to deceive us of our expectation. Are we not your Brethren, or do
you out us in the state of grace, because we jump not with you in opinion; you
do confess your selves, that difference in judgment, should not differ men in
love. But may be you will say, when a safe and well grounded peace is settled
here, and the kingdom quiet, then you will do something for us; indeed, should I see
some impotent poor sick man ready to perish for want of bread, and hereupon
should tell him, I would but step home, and see if my own family wanted not
themselves, and ere I should return, this same poor Creature should faint and
die in the street, my conscience would go near to trouble me for this. If
whilst you are settling one kingdom another should be lost, I cannot see by any
rule that's right, that you should any way be gainers by it. Besides, do you
ever think to settle a kingdom, till your affections be so? is there any way to
unite the Representative Body of a State, and cut the heart in the middle? Can
a kingdom think you stand fast, and the affections of men in it tatter to and
fro? Shall the Presbyterian strive to get a Vote one day, and the Independent
another the next, that the day following you may be the fitter to clash one
another a pieces? And do you think this way to better a kingdom? Shall the
Presbyter complain in the Pulpit, and the Independent revile in the Press, and
will you yet press forward for a peace? Shall the Presbyter diminish his
affection where a steeple is, and an Independent that makes it their chiefest
pretense, neglect the duty of love, and do you think this way to settle a
kingdom? Do you imagine when a fountain is corrupted, that the streams will ere
glid clear? Can the heart of a kingdom be sick, and the Suburbs of it be sound?
Come Christians, be wise, and take a fools advice, give some visible
demonstration, and manifest testimony to the world, that though some of you
dissent about the Law, none of you do so in love; and though you differ in the
Mould, yet you agree in the mettle: to that end, let the Presbyter preach, and
pray against known and scandalous offenses, and the Independent against Sects,
Heresy, and Schism: Let the Presbyterian practice what he does know, and the
Independent know what he does practice: Let the Presbyter lend his hand to set
up the Scepter of Christ, and the independent join his to pull Dagons down, and
both in the simplicity of soul, and sincerity of heart, endeavor to keep
unfeinedly the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace; by which means you
will quickly purchase joy, and we gain some relief from England.

Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all things, which
yet has been, and still shall be the prayer of

Your assured, though forgotten iriend, William Hopkins,
Dublin ult. Feb. 1648. Luke 10.36; 37. Which now of these three think thou,
was neighbor unto Him that fell among the Thieves. And he said, he that showed
mercy on him; then said Jesus unto him, Go thou, and do likewise.

Luke 6.33, 34. For if you love them, which love you, what thanks have you; for
sinners also love those that love them; and if you do good to them, which do
good to you, what thanks have you, for sinners also do even the same.


Postscript.
SIR,
I Have sent your son Samuel a Copy of Verses; We can spare you a few of our
Irish Cries, though you cannot spare us a little of your English love; but we
hope the next fair wind to hear or see better things from you.

VALE.


Contribution for Heaven.
THis is a taxing Age wherein we live,
Then blessed Emanuel, let me ever give
Due praise unto thy Name, that taxes no man
To pay the least of things more then he can;
And let my Soul, my poor Soul ready be
To pay a Contributiall Fast to thee.
And since my sins so evident appears,
Oh let me pay Excize of sighs and tears,
Unto thy Name for aye; but let them be
Never repaid with base Reluctance:
But let me freely sorrow, and bewayl
My sinnh against thee, and my most blessed Bayl,
My arrears are all behind; it is very right,
If thou strainst for 'em, it is my undoing quite;
But if thou please to set me but a day,
I am persuaded that thy Son will pay:
I cannot work with so much art, it is true,
As many of thy Saints and Servants do:
And yet I hope thus far to prevail,
To bring a Trowell, Hammer, and a Nail,
Toward the perfecting what is begun,
By thy all holy, and most sacred Son:
And do not doubt in everh fitting place,
To purchase so much grace, as call for grace.
And truly Lord, I do conceive I ought
To tax my heart for every idle thought.
And if thou will thy heavenly grace afford,
I Will tax it too for every idle word:
And if thy breathings do apace distill,
I Will make my deeds to pay against their will,
The Incomes of thy spirit will suffice
Far better then an Army when they rise:
Then rouse my soul, and see thou never be
A sad Antagonist to thy self and me.
Perfect, O perfect, what thou have begun,
Dear Father speak the word, the deed is done;
My feeble prayers may perchance molest thee,
Yet I Will not leave the Lord, until thou bless me.
Then grant me my desire, for fear I be
A second Widow, in my woing thee:
My eyes have seen salvation; I surcease,
Now when thou will, let me depart in peace.
FINIS.

