THE MISCHEIFE Of Mixed COMMUNIONS, FULLY DISCUSSED.

All maine Arguments on both sides, are largely Canvased.

Many difficulties demonstratively cleared, as that JUDAS was not at the Lords
Supper, etc. When, and how was the Original of Parishes in ENGLAND.

Several Cases of Conscience resolved. As in case unworthy ones thrust into
the Lords Supper; what single Christians should do, and what the Congregation
should do.

A discovery what is the Original, and rise of all these Disputes, and how a
fair end may be put to all.

By Doctor NATHANAEL HOMES.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Roycroft, and are to be sold by William Raybould at
the Unicorne, near the little North Door in PAUL'S Church yard, 1650.

The Mischeife of MIXED COMMVNIONS.
INstead of such mixturs, Professors are called upon by the word to Separation.
This separation, both name and thing, has a very ill name and opinion in the
World. But if we will hear the Scriptures, if we will be for purity, we must
do it. There has been in all Ages, a generation, of Pharisaicall men, not
without some show of learning, that have always counterplotted, to keep
Ordinances low, and keep under the power of godliness: But if we desire our
righteousness should exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees
(as Christ commands, Matthew. 5.20.) we must not be behind the Scribes and
Pharisees, See the ^oot, (...)
whose name signifies, and their practice manifested that they did separate.
They separated from the gross offenses of the World. Luke 18.11. They
separated from any semblance or society of the gross sort of people; they
would neither be with them, nor like them: Counting the common people ( John
7.49. (...), but MOVEABLE Annimals, yea ignorant Idiots, and so accursed.
Therefore their common phrase of the Commonalty, was, (...) People of the
Earth. They separated from the common sort of people in habit, garments, or
attire; contemning the bravery of the World, they attyred themselves in such a
garb as might have more show of sanctity (like them of old, Zech. 13.4.) And
this Sect of Pharisees were as ancient as diverse hundred years before Christ.)
'Twas their common phrase (as R. Sophon testifies) to say, The garments of the
people are the trampling of the Pharisees. And they separated in their
washings, and purifyings, to keep themselves undefiled with worldly things,
Matthew. 15.2. Mark 7.3, 4, 5. And in many other things they separated from the
common people. But that which is most pertinent to our purpose, is, they
separated from their company as much as possibly they could, Luke 7.39. like
them of old, Isa. 65.5. Come not near. Hebrew, (...) Touch me not, according to
that of Luke 7.39. And the Publican stood afarr off, because the Pharisee would
not join in worship with him. So then, not to separate at all, is to be behind
a Pharisee; not to separate more then a Pharisee, is not to obey Christ, that
our righteousness should exceed theirs; nor to obey the general voice of the
Scriptures, from Genesis to the Revelation, Genesis 4.16. Caine went out from the
PRESENCE of the LORD: that is, Caine was cast out of the Church, otherwise Gods
presence is every where. And it is mentioned, Genesis 6.2. as a most sinful
mixture, that the Sons of God took to Wives the Daughters of men: And thus we
might go on step by step thorough every book of the Bible; but the multitudes
of businesses command me to be brief.

In 1 Kings 8.53. Solomon urges it to God in prayer for a blessing on Israel,
that they were a people separated from all the people of the earth. In Ezra
10.11. they are commanded to separate themselves from the people of the Land,
as well as from their strange Wives. Isa. 52.11. the precept runs thus, Depart
ye, depart ye, go out from thence, touch no unclean thing, go ye out of
the midst of her, be ye clean. Observe, 1. That here is no expression of
Babylon. 2. That the intimations of the Chapter extend it to a separating from
all Nations, as to a polluting mixture. 3. That it is express in the Text, that
the design of God is, that we so separate as to keep our selves from pollution
with others. 4. That the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.17. does extend this place further
then to the Jews, or to Babylon, or the like particular place. 5. That the
Jews were not now in Captivity.
This duty of separation is commanded likewise in the New Testament, to all
Christians: In 2 Cor. 6.14. etc. Be ye not unequally yoaked together with
unbeleivers; for what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? And
what communion has light with darkness; and what concord has Christ with
Belial? Or what part has he that believes with an Infidel? And what
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? For ye are the Temple of the
living God; as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I
will be their God, and they shall be my people. Wherefore come out from among
them, and be ye separate says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and
I will receive you, and I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons
and Daughters, says the Lord Almighty. Observe, 1. That great famous men for
learning and piety, Erasmus, Beza, Calvin, Piscator, etc. do not think this
to be restrained to Marriage (as some have dreamed by occasion of the phrase,
Unequally yoaked) but of communicating or partnership with men in spiritual
pollution: Plainly the Apostles bidding them Come out from among them, cannot
relate to Marriage once plighted. For he states the question contrary (1 Cor.
7.12. etc.) That the believing married person may dwell with the unbeleiving
yoakefellow. And the Apostle levels his exhortation against all spiritual
pollution; and particularly against Idols, and Heathenish Temples, etc. 2. That
the Corinthians were neither Jews, nor were they in Babylon. 3. That unless
we thus separate, God will not be a Father to us, etc.
In Revel. 18.4. this duty of separating is commanded to all Believers by a
voice from Heaven. John says, I heard a voice from Heaven, saying, Come out of
her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, that ye partake not of
her plagues. Observe, 1. That this is spoken to John a Jew, when the Jews
(properly so called) were not in Babylon) but in Jerusalem, and Judea, as do
testify the Gospel of John, and of the other Evangelists. And 2. it is spoken
to all Gods people, in opposition to all Nations that had been polluted, Verse.
3. And 3. that it is meant of all fellowship with such as use a polluted
worship, with enmity against purity. As Christ is said to be crucified in the
street of the great City, which is spiritually called SODOM and EGYPT, Revel.
11.8. Though crucified locally at Jerusalem, yet spiritually in Aegipt and
Sodom, because those names signify filthy pollution, and enmity to purity. So
Babylon is put to signify the same in this 18. of Revel. 4. And to come out
from Babylon is by the same proportion to separate from polluted worship, and
worshippers that hate, and to their power persecute them that stand for purity.
And that pollution, and those kinds of men are elsewhere then in Babylon. You
see then a separation commanded. Thus we ought to Preach, Jer. 15.19. If you
take the precious from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth. And thus ought ye
to practice; else why do you profess purity and pretend to be Gods peculiar
people (as Malachie 3.) It Is added therefore in that 15. of Jer. 19. Let them
turn to thee, but do not thou turn to them: If we Preach otherwise we are
not Gods mouth. If you practice otherwise, you act not like Christ's members, as
we shall show you presently.


From the general of separation, let us come to the particular intended. I
showed you before in another discourse, that there is no show or fair pretense
can be held forth, that the Children of Parents, whereof neither can be judged
to be a Believer ought to be baptized till the Child grows up to manifest his
own Faith, Genesis 17.7, 8, 9. Acts 2.39, 40, 41. Acts 16.31, 32, 33. 1 Cor. 7.14.
Now I come to demonstrate that we ought to separate from mixed Communions, where
good and badd are admitted. Those that have not true grace, as far as
believers of Minister and People can discern, ought not to be admitted; those
that are to be admitted by the Officers and members of a Church, must be as
far as they can judge, true members of the true Christ, and of his true
Church, 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup and Bread are the communion of the body and blood
of Christ. For we being many are one bread and one body. For we are all
partakers of THAT ONE BREAD. And where the Church is rightly constituted by and
according to divine Gospel-institution, God is specially with them, to give
them a spirit of discerning, 1 Cor. 2.10, 15. By right constitution, to give
you but a word now, I mean, A Church of a due matter and form: The matter true
regenerated persons as far Believers can judge, a man is alive by his
breathing, and discern the tree by his fruits, Jam. 2.26. (the Margin is
Breath) Mat. 7.16. Form an agreement, making known to one another their Faith
and holiness, that they will walk together according to the Gospel-rules and
examples touching Churches in the use of Ordinances for Gods glory, and mutual
edification; and in order thereunto, to receive none unto the Communion with
them, but such as are manifested to the generality of them in the judgment of
charity to be truly godly. All this is couched in the inscriptions of Paul's
Epistles, calling the companies of godly ones in those places, (...) Gathered
or selected Congregations, or Churches; and Saints, 1 Cor. 1.2. 2 Cor. 1.1.
Gal. 1.2. Ephesians. 1.1. Phil. 1.1. Colos. 1.1. And is amplified in the patterns
of Churches, Acts 2.41. to the end of the Chapter, Acts 4.32. And Paul charge
it as a duty on all the Brethren of the Church of Corinth to cast out the
unworthy person, 1 Cor. 5. and therefore by the rule of contraries, he that is
received in, should be so received by the approbation of all; but of that more
after.

This keeping out of graceless people from the Communion, by the Officers and
Brethren of a CHURCH is no new Doctrine, or practice, but ancient; so that in
the several ages of the Churches as they less or more degenerated, we have
more or less print and footstepps of this left us. The very Papists (who
before the Council of Trent, says learned Polanus, was a true Church, though
most impure) had their shriftings, examinations, and confessions of people
before they were admitted to their Communions: The Episcopal way had it in
form of a Law in their Rubric, for the Administration of the Communion, in
these words, They that intended to partake of the holy Communion, should
signify their names BEFORE to the Curat; and if any of those be an open, and
notorious evil liver, so that the CONGREGATION is OFFENDED, or have done any
wrong to his NEIGHBOR, by Word or Deed, the Curat having knowledge thereof,
shall call him, and advertise him in any wise not to presume to the Lords
Table, until he have OPENLY DECLARED himself to have TRULY REPENTED, and
AMENDED his former naughty life; that the CONGREGATION may thereby be
SATISFIED, etc, And the same order shall the Curate use with those, betwixt
whom he perceives malice, etc. Not SUFFERING them to be partakers of the Lords
Table, until he KNOW them to be reconciled: Or if one be penitent to admit
him, but not the other, remaining obstinate. As for the Presbyterial way you
know that by their Directory, and Laws annexed, they must not receive any to
the Communion that are ignorant or scandalous, or profane in their
conversation. The Congregational way go higher then this, viz. by conference,
by enquiry, and by conversation, to discern what breathings and fruits of true
grace appears in a person, before the Church admit him to their fellowship and
Communions. And this is one of the great quarrels of these times, that
particular Churches of the Congregational way, as men think, are too precise in
their admissions; that they must be persuaded there is some grace in a man, and
that "all the Congregation present at his admission must be satisfied, that
there "is nothing to the contrary known to them, but that he has grace.
Therefore to keep out those from the Communion, of whom the contrary to true
grace is known, may be easily granted, it being an evident truth of God. You
heard before, twice out of the New Testament, COME OUT from among them, add
Phil. 3.2. Beware of Dogs; Who are they? Evil doers: and the Concision, viz.
were not outwardly, and therefore likely not inwardly pure. How beware? Mat.
15.26. The dogs must not eat of the childrens bread: And Revel. 22.15. the
dogs must be WITHOUT, What dogs? Sorcerers, Whoremongers, Idolaters, and
whosoever loves and makes a lie. Accordingly it is said, Revel. 21. (a Chapter
that cannot be meant of Heaven, as, says Brightman, and others, every Verse
can witness) in the 27. Verse. thus, INTO the New Jerusalem; that is, the
reformed Church, no unclean thing, or thing that defiles, or works
abomination, or makes a lie shall enter. Which way soever we take this new
Jerusalem, either for a more perfect state of the Church on earth yet to be,
then hitherto has been, or for an absolute perfect state in the highest
heavens; sure we can infer no less, then that we should conform to that
pattern all we can, strive toward perfection. Add according to all these
places, that in the 1 Cor. 5.12, 13. The Church and its members, are said to be
WITHIN; all others are said to be WITHOUT. Now conclude from all, as Doctor
Ames does in his cases of conscience, WITHIN, and WITHOUT, cannot be all one.
If only meet members, Saints, as the Apostle called them, Chap. 1. v. 1. be
within, then those that are not, such are to be without: Accordingly the
Apostle shows us in this same, 1 Cor. 5. That not only Heathens, or odious
debaucht men are without, v. 9. but a Brother walking disorderly, is to be cast
OUT, v. 2. v. 5. And such a one that continues so to walk to be kept out; and
they to carry themselves toward him as one without, v. 11.

More particularly, 1. In 1 Cor. 5.2, 4, 6, 7, 8. it is said. That the
Corinthians should have mourned that the incestuous brother might have been
taken away from among them. This the Apostles shows was their duty, and should
have been done, before he needed to have sent to them to do it, because they
had neglected it. The Apostle goes on telling them that such a one must be cast
out by them all. Purge out therefore the old leaven: likely that, Delivering up
to Satan, might be more immediately the Apostles sentence: But the duty of all
the Brethren, as well as of their Officer, or Officers, was to cast him out, to
take him away from among them, to purge him out, before the Apostle sent to
them: For before he sent to them, they all, the whole lump was leavened,
soured, polluted, because they had not done it; but had admitted him to their
feast, and still now that the Apostle by their negligence is forced to take
Cognizance of it; though as an Apostle, according to the just nature of that
office, he calls upon this (as other Churches) to do their duty, yet not the
Apostle, but the whole Church of the Officers and Brethren, even that whole
lump that had been soured, must do the deed of casting that incestuous person
out. And they are still levened till they do it: therefore the duty lay on
all, else the sin could not have layne on all. The Brethren should have watch
men's walkings, should inform, should protest, should vote a disorderly Brother
out, though an Officer be to regulate the meeting and debate, and to pronounce
the sentence. All the brethren must have a hand in it (Women being forbidden to
vote or prophecy in the Church, 1 Cor. 14.34.) I say an hand in it to cast our
the incestuous person, or the like offender, else the Apostle could not justly
have charged the sin upon all, without limitation. As their Women also might be
guilty if they did not give information, and testimony, against such a one in
case they first knew of it. As the sin of Achan (some others of necessity being
privy to it, as circumstances show, and not testifying against him) is punished
on the whole Camp of Israel, whilst he is unpunished, and the whole Camp is
threatened, now Achan is discovered, that God would not be with them, if they
did not cast him out; and therefore all in their several places, as far as
was needful, were to act in it, Josh. 7. So is it in the business of a Church
against an offending member.

From all, conclude these three rules, 1. That which may cast out, after
admittance, may keep out before admittance. But not only greater sins as here,
but smaller sins, as the World count smaller (we will name them by and by) may
cast out; therefore they may keep out. 2. Rule, Those that may cast out after
admission, may keep out before admission; but the whole lump, all the Brethren
of the Church of Corinth, as well as their Officer, are to cast out, and any
other might inform and give testimony; therefore all these are to be satisfied
before any one be received in, if they declare they are unsatisfied. Quod tangit
omnes (says the rule of equity) ab omnibus faciendum. 3. That which levens,
soures, pollutes, a whole Church, does mediately at least, pollute such a
particular person as joins to such a polluted such; yea immediately polluts
such a particular person that joins in that act, that polluted that whole
Church: Therefore a man or woman ought not to join to such a Church as is
polluted by keeping in it such as walk unworthy, much less may a man or woman
act with them in communicating with unworthily persons, which is the very thing
that (as the Apostle says here) levens, soures, and pollutes the whole Church.
If touching a leprous person, or dead body, in the ceremonial Law, did pollute
a Jew, and render him unmeet, for the present, to meddle with holy things; and
to stand by the company that commit a felony, or murder, not protesting
against it, does by our Law make a man accessory; surely then there is more
then nothing of guilt to such a soul that shall co-act with a Congregation in
mixed Communions, that, according to the Apostle, pollutes them all.


2. It Is said in that 1 Cor. 5. v. 9, 10, 11. I Wrote unto you in an Epistle,
not to COMPANY with fornicators. Yet not altogether with the fornicators of
this World, or with the covetous, or extortioners, or with Idolaters; for then
must ye needs go out of the World: But now I have written to you not to keep
company; if any man that is called a BROTHER be a fornicator, or covetous, or
an Idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such a one, NO
NOT TO EAT. Observe, 1. That the word Company, or keep company, is twice in
the Greek, (...) that is, Not to be MINGLED TOGETHER, as striking at unlawful
mixtures in relation to a spiritual pollution. 2. That this unlawful mixture
is forbidden upon occasion of fellowship, and keeping the feast with the leven
of wicked ones among them, as to keep all of them for future from such
pollutions at the greatest distance that might be. 3. That this business of
avoiding spiritual polluting mixture, is of such consequence, that he writes
twice about it, and that in two several Epistles, though the former of them be
perished. And that therefore every single person (as well as the whole Church)
is to beware of spiritual polluting company with any one Brother that walks
disorderly, as the words are plain, v. 11. and the exhortation prosecuted, v.
9, 10. in the words you and ye, must needs be understood distributively of any
one, keeping company with one another in an unlawful way, as the 11. Verse
explains. For if the unlawful fellowship with one can a pollute many, sure it
can and will pollute one, unwarrantably accompanying such a one. 4. Observe,
that the Apostle does distinguish of a double companying, or fellowship with
those that walk disorderly; one so necessitated, as to buy and sell, or the
like, that whiles a man is not gone out of the World, he cannot avoid. This the
Apostle says he does not forbid. Another companying with disorderly persons,
is a voluntary chosen fellowship, society, or accompanying; as to eat with
such disorderly walkers; this the Apostle peremptorily forbids *Election of
evil company is the great detection of the evil heart of him that chooses
that company. *And to know that others are spiritually infected, and that we
have the distemper of original corruption very apt to take infection, and yet
voluntarily to thrust into society with them, is to bring upon our selves the
guilt of our own danger and infection. 5. Obs. That the Apostle distinguishes
between godly men's going out of the world and godly men's keeping an evil walker
out of their company, and out of the Church. You cannot avoid it, says the
Apostle, unless you will go out of the World, but necessitatedly, upon some
unavoydable occasions, you must have civil business with men that are
covetous, extortioners, fornicators, etc. But there is no necessity you should
have a fellowship with such in eating, or at your feast, or among you in your
Church. For you must cast them out from among you, or you must withdraw from
such, 2 These. 3.6. and not eat with them. 6. Obs. That the Apostle allows
expressly that there may be a necessity for temporal things, of having civil
fellowship with evil men out of the Church, such as never were Brethren; but he
does not express so much of men in the Church, or of such as were once called
Brethren, now walking disorderly: As if the Apostle would have us conclude,
that if we are necessitated to have business, and for that time fellowship,
with men of evil conversation, it would be safer for us to supply that our
necessity, in, or among the company of them that always were of the World, and
never of the Church, then by any necessity (that can be supplied any where
else) to have to do with men once called Brethren, but now walking disorderly.
Obs. 7. That the Apostle down right does declare that as we should avoid, what
may be, all fellowship with worldly men, that are covetous, fornicators, etc.
so much more we ought to avoid all fellowship with covetous, fornicators, etc.
once called Brethren. 8. Obs. That the Apostle in reckoning up the sins that
must divide fellowship, he does not only name greater and grosser sins, as
fornication, drunkenness, extortion, but such as in common account are lesser,
and in their nature more mental or aerie. As 1. Idolatry (but to sit in the
Idol Temple, and eat or drink with the company, chap. 8. and chap. 10.) And
there is the same reason proportionably in all unwar-ranted worship in matter
or manner. 2. Covetousness, which is an heart, sin, a spiritual mental sin in
the maine; extortion is the manifestation of it; and by the same proportion
great pride may be included, etc. 3. Railing, which is a verbal sin; and by the
same proportion, all swearing and lying, as 'twas mentioned before, is of the
same nature. 9. Obs. That the Apostle says, that godly men must not with such
as walk in such sins as these, (...), so much as EAT TOGETHER with them. Now
if those that are for mixed Communions will say that this is meant of spiritual
eating the Lords supper with such before named; then they yield the question of
avoiding mixed Communions; that godly men must not receive the Lords supper with
covetous, railers, etc. If they say it signifies civil eating of our common
meals in our houses; then they grant by necessary consequence, that we may not
eat at the Communion with such inordinate persons; for if it be a sin to eat
our common meat with evil livers, once called Brethren, then much more unlawful
to eat at the Lords Table with them. Surely, surely, the Apostle could not
mean to be more careful to keep Saints more pure at their own Tables then at
the Lords Table. Of which I leave the consciences of them that are for mixed
Communions to judge.


These few, of many things more that might be spoken against mixed Communions,
will be sufficient to them that are willing to understand. But the unwilling,
will dispute, though they bring but their own fantasies to oppose the plain
Word of God. And therefore I am not very willing to take the pains to follow
them with answers: But, least they should persist and be hardened, the rather
because we give no answer at al; I shall reply briefly, and the rather because
our cause against mixed Communions will gain by it, upon the minds of
considerate men.

There are, I find abroad, two sorts of opposers; some more ignorant, others
more cunning. To the first in the first place more briefly. Objection, The
Wheat and the Tares must grow together till the harvest. Answer, Such tares,
and so long, as are so like the wheat, that there may be danger in plucking up
them, to pluck up the wheat also, Matthew. 13.29. But tares when they grow rank,
and appear, they must be weeded from among the wheat, as we have heard before.
Obj. Thou must forgive thy Brother to seventy times seven. Answ. True of
private personal offenses against our selves. Them we must forgive often, if
our Brother repents; but we cannot forgive his sins against God. These two
Objections as they are levelled, strike at all Magisterial and Ministerial
discipline, evident in the Word of God, even in judgment of all judgments,
Papisticall, Episcopal, Presbyteriall, and Congregationall: And therefore
these Objections are not rightly mounted. Obj. It Is said, 1 Cor. 11. Let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat. Answ. This indeed is that thousands of
times repeated argument, by the vulgar, to no purpose: For Observe, 1. That one
Verse does not contain all Gods mind; we must compare Scripture with
Scripture; and so, Mat. 18.15. and 1 Cor. 5. etc. of ^asting off and out from
the fellowship of one that persists in evil ways, especially after admonition.
2. Self is a comprehensive word, there is a man's self as he is a man; a man's
self as he is an Husband, a man's self as he is a Father, a Master, a
Magistrate, a Minister, a fellow-member and fellow-Communicant of such a
Congregation; all these are a man's self* and a man must examine himself
touching all his sins in all these relations; and so whether he has done his
duty to admonish his neighbor that comes to the Communion with him of his evil
life, according to Christ's rule, Mat. 18.15. etc. And according to that rule,
if in case he does not so hear thee, or others with thee, as to reform (so the
Greek, (...), that is, though he heard thy words, yet he neglects thy counsel)
whether or no have thou told the Church, til they cast him off, as an Heathen
or Publican. Our Savior says, a man's self is concerned so in his Brothers
spiritual welfare, that a man must when he is to go to worship, mind and
consider how it is with his Brother before he worship: Study the fifth of Matthew
23. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother
has ought AGAINST THEE, leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy
way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift: Mark
the reason following, Verse. 24. Least he deal with thee, and thou be cast out.
Surely the New Testament worshipp is as purely to be kept, as the Mosaicall:
And if we must be careful when we go to offer to God, that the mind of our
Brother be clear and quiet toward us: we must also be careful that our
consciences, troubled at the sins of our brother which we have against him, may
be discharged, and thereby quieted before we communicate with him. 3. Obs. That
this Let a man examine, etc. is spoken to Churchmembers in Corinth, that were
Saints, and fit matter for a Church that they might receive in a due manner,
and were not men of evil lives habitually. Ad to all that of our Savior so
often repeated, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy SELF. A man's neighbor is
a kind of self. Answ. 1. We have showed but now thou do not come prepared,
if thou let thy Brother alone in his sin. 2. Though his personal sin of
drunkenness, swearing, etc. is not communicated to thee by a transmigration of
that evil quality in him into thy soul, to make thee a drunkard or swearer
too, like to him; yet it becomes the Congregational and Partnership, or
accessory sin of thee and the Church, if thou and they let him alone to go on
in his sin; and the mean while admit him without control to the Communion.
When Adam had disobediently eaten of the tree of knowledge of good and evil,
God would not let him eat of the Sacrament of the tree of life, but thrust
Adam out of Paradise. Adam and Eve both must be soundly schooled unto
repentance before they shall have any Sacrament allowed them, or types of
sacrifices importing the same thing. And so in the New Testament, the Church of
Corinth must cast out the incestuous person, and must not eat with an
inordinate brother, so long as unreformed; because (mark the reason to the
point in hand) if they do, they all, the whole lump is levened and soured. His
sin became the sin, some how, of the rest of the Communicants. If a member of a
Corporation, or Company be unjust, contrary to the Laws of that Corporation,
or Company, though they do not the same injustice, yet it is their injustice not
to punish that member. 3. Thou that let thy brother alone in his sin, do
contract a particular sin to thy self: namely, the sin of hating thy Brother,
Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not HATE thy Brother IN THINE HEART. Thou shall IN ANY
WISE rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. 1. Thou do hate him
in not loving him so as to reprove him. So this Text makes that love and hate
immediate contraries. 2. He growing bad, if thou be good, thou can not but
hate him in his evil way; and this hate is because thou do suffer his sin
upon him, as it is plain also in the Text. 3. Hereupon secretly thou do hate
him, and so, as to vilify him behind his back, as the phrase, In thine heart,
signifies (as Genesis 37.41. Esau said in his heart, that is, in secret) and all
because thou have not done thy duty, in reproving him. 4. Giving consent to
receive into a Church office, or into the Church as a member, such as are
unworthy, if but through rashness and suddenness of admission, before
thorough means and trials be used to know such, is a partaking of their sins
that are so admitted, 1 Timothy 5.20, 21, 22. Them that sin rebuke, etc. I charge
thee observe these, etc. Without preferring one before another. Lay hands
SUDDENLY on no man, neither be partakers of other men's sins. The Prophet
Ezekiel charge on them that do not reprove their Brother more then sin;
namely, judgment also, Ezekiel. 3.20. When a RIGHTEOUS man does turn from his
RIGHTEOUSNESS and commit iniquity, etc. he shall dye; because thou have not
given him warning, he shall dye in his sin, etc. but his blood will I require
at thy hands. You heard before, rebuking is enjoined People as well as
Ministers. Ob. The thief repented at last; and an evil liver in his now
coming to the Communion, signifies, for ought I know, that he does repent.
Ans. 1. The thief does not repent by coming to an Ordinance of God, therefore
this Objection is impertinently urged. 2. He is now under an heavy judgment of
God, which usually more works on the wicked, then single Ordinances: therefore
this Objection does not suite with the point in hand. 3. Here is God making
known to us, that the thief repented at last; yea, the gracious words and
confessions of the thief of his sin, and his justifying of Christ show as
much: But the dumb coming of a wicked man to the Communion, does no more show
that he repents, then Judas his coming to the last to Christ's Sermons and
Passover, did show that he repented of his covetous and traiterous heart. 3. By
this Objection we should still conceive a wicked man to repent at every
Communion, though between Communions he lives wickedly all his life long; and
so never any Church discipline should be executed upon him, but Christ's
discipline be laid aside and never used. 4. This of the thief is but an
example, which is an inartificial and insufficient argument: and it is but one
example of that kind, from the beginning of the world, never the like to be
again; as there was to be but one Christ, and to suffer but once on the Cross,
and that once to show his power, in that his lowest humiliation to forgive the
thief on the Cross. 5. But we have an evident rule to go by, set down for us
by Christ, how to deal with one that goes on in his sins; and not for us to
go by guess, that when he comes to an Ordinance, a Communion, etc. he then
repents: The rule is, Matthew. 18.15. If thy brother shall trespass against
thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him ALONE; if he shall hear
thee, thou have GAINED THY BROTHER (see by this an hearing to obey and reform
is here meant) If he will not hear thee (Greek, to neglect what he hears)
take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses,
every word may be established. And if he shall neglect to hear them (the same
Greek word still) tell it unto the Church: But if he neglect to hear the
Church (the same Greek word) let him be unto thee an Heathen or Publican. See,
a man that walks disorderly is not to be trusted (for ought this Text allows)
not one time after any one sees his sin, but that one Brother or Sister must
go tell him of it alone, that so his sin may go no further, nor the
knowledge thereof, if he reform. If not, the next time he is discovered
again, two or three must join together to admonish him; and so to stop the
sin, and the disgrace, if it may be, among them: If he goes on, then these two
or three must complain to the Church, or Congregation where he partakes of
Ordinances: If he will not be reformed at the admonition of the Church, then the
Church, as it is a Church of Christ, can do no less then cast him off as an
Heathen: But if the Church should be negligent to do it, the pretense of
saying, what can one member do in this thing, and so of sitting still is
easily removed; for if thou have managed thy business according to this rule,
there are two or three of you to call upon the Church, and to quicken at least,
the better party in it, to prevail with all the rest to cast him off. If all
this will not do it, thou have this to do, namely, to call in for the advice
of other Churches, as they did, Acts 15. and until this be reformed, you have
another remedy, namely, to withdraw Communion with such a Church, as shall so
grossly neglect their duty. For if, as in 2 These. 3.6, 14. We must withdraw from
every brother that walks disorderly; then sure we have no warrant to
communicate with a whole Church walking disorderly, where there is more sin and
sinners, with sin upon sin; that offenders sins, and their own, in not
punishing him, and disobeying the command of Christ, pressed upon them by those
two or three; and the judgments of Christ hang over the heads of such a
Church, as over the Church of Pergamos, and Thyatira, for not proceeding
against the Balaamites, Nicolaitans, and Jezabelians: Yea, as over Ephesus, and
Laodicea, for being cold in their zeal. Yet in the mean while, there is no
necessity for you two or three that have thus justly withdrawn, for a time, to
be without that precious Ordinance of the Communion, seeing other Churches,
more pure, to whom you complain, will allow you that privilege til things be
settled. But it may be, some will say this rule is, If my brother trespass
against me: but his trespass is not against me. Answ. David took it to
himself, that the dishonor that was done to God by men of evil life, was in
some sort against him, Psalm. 119. Psalm. 139. And therefore he there lamented
the sin, and abhorred the practice. 2. If a Servant of your Family should
commit fornication, or drunkenness with strangers, not of the Family, you
would soon charge it upon him or her, that they had offended against you, and
all the Family. 3. If the offense does not, or will not fall under the orderly
admonition, first of one, then of two or three, so that thy brother goes openly
on in his sin in the general observation of the Church; the Church without any
more ado, seeing his obstinacy, may cast him out; as 'twas the very case of
the incestuous person, 1 Cor. 5. Lastly, we answer to this objection about the
thief on the Cross, That men that have been noted to walk disorderly, should
first give proof and experience of their repentance, that they have confessed
their sins and forsaken them (as the Scripture speaks) before they should be
thought to repent, and be fit to come to the Communion; which we cannot
righteously think they do, who go on in their old sins, longer then they are
at the Ordinances. If the Deacons, whose chief trust was only the Churches
stock of contributions, must first be proved, before they be admitted into
office, 1 Timothy 3.10. how much more should the evil liver be first proved before
he be trusted (after his evil walkings) to partake of the holy things of God.
I appeal to you, whether after a Servant has been found false twice, you
would receive him the third time, only because he comes and offers you his
service again? Shall we deal worse with God, and men's consciences, then with
our selves about our estates, and civil affairs. Judas was at the LORDS
SUPPER, and out of doubt at the PASSOVER. Answ. 1. If he were only at the
Passover, it yields no argument for mixed Communions; for from a ceremonial
form of worship of a National Church under the Old Testament, to an
Evangelicall form of worship of Congregational Churches under the New
Testament, is no true plumb and level to pitch the due height of the purity of
the worship under the Gospel. We see evidently all along the old Testament,
that if men were but ceremoniously cleansed, and not guilty of capital crimes,
they were admitted to all Ordinances for the general. But we see the New
Testament rules are more exact about the partaking of the Lords Supper, as we
have largely heard before. 2. If Judas were at the Passover, and at the
Communion also, before he was openly discovered, it makes nothing for mixed
Communions of such as are openly known to walk wickedly, Christ now about to
leave sensible rules of a visible process, as might suit to his office, as he
was a Mediator, would not now anticipate as a God and searcher of the heart, to
keep out Judas from the Passover, because he knew his heart was naught. This
had been to have left us a pattern that would have been more against mixed
Communions, then to keep out, and cast out gross offenders; namely, to have so
done by them, as soon as the Church had suspected their hearts had not been
right. 3. For certain (if I do not grossy mistake) Judas was not at the Lords
Supper. 1. That which makes many mistake that he was there, is the order of the
story of the Gospel, as set down by Luke, Chap. 22. Namely, because first,
there is mention of the Lords Supper, v. 20. Then after that, follows the
mention of Judas his hand at the Table, v. 21. And therefore as they think,
Judas was at the Lords Supper: But we answer, that we have but the sum of the
history of the Gospel; and the holy Ghost is not curious in observing the order
of all things; and therefore the order is quite contrary in Matthew. 26. Namely,
first there is mention of Judas his hand at the Table, that should betray
Christ, v. 21, 22, 23. And then after is the mention of the institution of the
Lords Supper; but no more mention of Judas till he came with the Officers to
apprehend Christ. So, that same order is observed by Mark, Chap. 14. First in
v. 18, 19, 20. Is the Discovering of Judas, that he should betray Christ: And
then after, in v. 22. etc. is mention of Christ's institution of the Lords
Supper; and no more mention of Judas till he comes with the Officers, v. 43. to
apprehend Christ. So that we have two to one, for this order, that Judas was
discovered before the Communion, and therefore Judas might well go forth
(according to Saint John, chap. 13.) before the Communion. And therefore Luke
did not intend to set down those things, according to the accurate order of the
doing of things. Your most ancient mark in your Bibles, at v. 21. of that 22.
of Luke, is used by the learned (before we had any Verses) to signify a new
matter, and that a distinct discourse begins there. Namely, that when Christ
did discover Judas, he was at the Table with him (mark it, At the Table, it is
not said at the Communion) and with this begins the new distinct story of Judas
his betraying Christ. But is not a joint story (in order of doing) knit on to
the end or conclusion of the Lords Supper; though our English BUT, at 21. Verse
may seem to some to look that way. But in the Greek it is not (...), which
infallibly had signified BUT; but it is (...), that is, Truly, or moreover,
etc. which may well fit to begin a new distinct story. And there is this
further in that 22. of Luke, to prove, that Luke in that Chapter did not intend
to set down things according to the order of doing, because there is another
distinct story annexed to that of the institution of the Lords Supper, namely of
the Disciples contention about Supremacy, v. 24. set down with that before it,
which Matthew in chap. 18. 1. and Mark in chap. 9. 34. set down long before
Christ's betraying by Judas. Yea, further the Evangelists do not regard
acuratenesse of order (sometimes) in speaking the same matter in one and the
same Verse. For whereas many cry, all men must be first taught before they are
baptized, building on that order of words, Mat. 28. Go teach and baptize; in
Mark 1.4. there is a contrary order, John did baptize in the Wilderness, and
Preach: So that bare order of story cannot yield any infallible argument that
such a thing was done then. 2. We affirm that for certain (as far as we can
possibly see) Judas was not at the Lords Supper, upon this argument out of John
13. Christ and his Disciples ate two Suppers before the institution of the Lords
Supper. 1. The Passover Supper. 2. Their own civil supper. 3. Followed the
Lords Supper. For in this we all agree (I think) that the Lords Supper was the
last of all, according to all the Evangelists, that relate the institution
thereof. The first Supper, namely, the Passover, we have it, beginning, and
ending, John 13.1, 2. (turn to the place, else you will see nothing) This
supper being ended, Christ rises from the Table, v. 4. lays aside his
Garments, takes a Towel, and water, and washes the Disciples feet, v. 5. to
the end of v. 11. In v. 12. he takes his Garments again, and sits down: In v.
18. he says; He that eats bread with me, has lifted up his heel against me.
In v. 21. he says, One of you shall betray me. In v. 26. the Disciples having
by John asked him whom he meant, Christ plainly says, He it is to whom I
shall give a Sopp, when I have dipped it; and when he had dipped the Sopp he
gave it to Judas Iscariot: Here you see they were eating again. This the
second Supper, their civil Supper, because of their Sopps. In v. 27. Satan
enters after the Sopp into Judas. And then, said Jesus to him, do that thou
do QUICKLY (Greek, (...) in the Comparitive degree, more speedily) wherein,
in effect (now Judas was discovered) Christ bids him be gone from amongst them:
the Devil was in him, and he might be gone. Christ bids him speedily to end
his treason, which he would do. Then says the 30. Verse. he having received
the Sopp went out, (...), (a keen, acute, and punctual word) Immediately;
which can signify not an Iota less then that nothing of action intervened
between Judas his taking the Sopp, and with it the Devil, and Judas his going
out. And v. 31. upon his going out, Christ in a laudative manner says, Now the
Son of man is glorified, and God in him; and presently falls to Preaching, and
last to Praying in that high sublime and transcendent spiritual manner, Chap.
13. and 14. and 15. and 16. and 17. as never before, while Judas was with them.
The Evangelist John does not mention the Lords Supper, which was the third and
last, for reasons best known to the holy Ghost. But does most punctually tell
us, Judas went out immediately after the Sop, which clearly was at their second
Supper, Viz. their common civil Supper. And therefore stayed not at the Lords
Supper, which was last of all, according to the other Evangelists. For if Judas
had stayed at the Lords Supper after his receiving the Sop, he had not according
to the text, gone out immediately. But the text must be true: therefore Judas
was not at the Lords Supper. If this argument be too long, I will give it you
another way in a shorter manner: At the Lords Supper which was the last Supper,
there was neither Sop nor Sauce; Christ mingled no such thing, or Sippets in
Wine, or, etc. that we read of: But Judas went out immediately when he had
received the Sop; for being then discovered, and filled with Satan, Christ, in
effect, bid him be gone. Therefore Judas was not at the Lords Supper. I will
yet, if it may please, give it you a third way: John expressly mentions that
Judas was at the Passover, and the common Supper, but does not say he was at
the Lords Supper, not mentioning the Lords Supper at all; and the other
Evangelists, or Scriptures, do not affirm Judas was at the Lords Supper;
therefore we have no ground to believe Judas was there.

Thus of the plainer sort of Objectors: we come in the second place, to deal
with the more cunning disputants, who will undertake to answer our arguments,
and to urge their unanswerable arguments (as their confident manner of
disputing imports) against us in the behalf of mixed communions. To speak
briefly to both: First, to their answers to our Objections. The^ Rep^
1. They reply, that though out arguments prove, that wicked persons ought not
to come; and that they ought not to be admitted, by them that have power to
keep them away, in case they do come, yet they do not prove that wicked men's
undue coming should keep a good Christian away. An undoubted duty omitted, is
not excused by my mistake concerning some circumstances. And if the impediment
be real, I must know it to be so; my thinking it in my conscience to be an
impediment, will not excuse my omission of that duty, etc Our duply to take off
this, is, 1. Plain sin must keep one away. Ou^ ^ply
But to communicate with unworthy persons is a sin, a levening and souring, 1
Cor. 5.6. To disobey that command, 2 These. 3.6.14. a sin: and 1 Cor. 5.11. a
sin if we be secure, and not humbled for such mixed Communion, and keeping of
the spiritual feast, 1 Cor. 5.2. 2. Though to come to the Lords Table, if it
may be had according to Christ's institution, is an undoubted duty; yet it is
not an undoubted duty that any should come to take a sin upon them, that they
should come to known mixed Communions, where other men's sins, some how (as we
have showed) become theirs. 3. The company of unworthy persons at the Communion
is more then a circumstance; for the contrary, namely, Saints meeting in faith
and charity to partake of the Communion, is of the essence, i. e. of the matter
and form of the Churches right receiving. But where there is a mixture of evil
persons, there is no ground of Scripture to believe I do do well; nor any
virtuous object in such unworthy persons for me to love them, as fellow
Communicants. 4. To except against unworthy persons; and because they are
admitted, for me to forbear the Communion is not a mistake; that cause is just,
as we have showed before, and shall after. There is a mistake at least, or more
by your own intimation in them that having authority, do not keep unworthy
ones away; and in those unworthy ones, that they keep not themselves away. And
if the former will bring a defilement on themselves, and the latter will bring
judgment on themselves, I cannot be excused if I may keep my self free from
both, and will not. Distinction of Parishes in England were made by Pope
Honorious, about 1200. years since, and so of no divine institution, nor
enforce any divine obligation for me to receive only in mine own Parish. The
Scriptures send me to a true Church, not to a Parish. If one Church be
polluted, and there is another not far off that is free, from that known
pollution; in ordinary prudence one would choose pure things before polluted.
Its a stated case in Casuists, as in Doctor Ames cases of conscience, etc. that
a man may go from a polluted Church to a pure Church: and yet here is no
danger in such a particular person of separation upon separation, as you after
object, if Churches will do their duty. If a Church will separate from the rule
of the Word, what would your conscience troubled at it, do, in such a case?
Would you against conscience offend and transgress with the rest. For fifthly,
If a matter about religious things be against my conscience, though by
mistaking; the godly Casuists resolve, that till I be informed, I shall sin
against conscience to do it. So Doctor Ames, and study, Romans 14.22. Yea so
Saint Paul, Romans 14.23. whatsoever is not of faith is sin: For the Apostle
speaks of things indifferent, and so of matters that I might have done, and
'twas my ignorance that I was not persuaded I might have done them; and
therefore Paul exhorts Brethren not to eat any thing to the offense of a weak
Brother, Romans 14.20, 21. although it is his weakness to take offense about kinds
of meats. And therefore, sixthly, we say, why do not Churches that use mixed
Communions more tender the consciences of them that cannot bear these mixtures?
They keeping out the unworthy would prevent all this ado. Save your words, and
Paper and Ink, in writing in behalf of mixed Communions, what need we plead for
rubbish? We cannot be too pure in our practice according to the Scriptures. If
the Church and Officers be they, whom you mean, have authority to keep out
unworthy ones from the Communion (so had the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 5. And I
know none else but the particular Church, by joint consent have the immediate
proper power) why do not they do their duty? Why must there such load be laid
upon a particular tender conscience, that out of conscience does abstain from
a mixed Communion; whiles the whole congregation go on in their sin of
admitting sinful mixtures and suppose against conscience, and against
admonition. For sure no Minister and People more or less in any congregation,
but could wish, that unworthy persons were kept out. And the case here, as
before touched, is not only of one private person, as private. For we put the
case as men according to rule ought to act (in case they were so imprudent as
to incorporate to a congregation that shunned not such mixtures) a godly man
sees a neighbor that came to the Communion transgress, he admonishes him of
it, etc. according to Matthew. 18.15. The matter at last by these two or three
Brethren is brought before the Church. Here is more then one. And in the Church
they act as public persons, fellow members. As three Justices on the Bench are
public persons, though there be twenty more there. If these three brethren,
with some other that no doubt will adhere to the rule, cannot prevail against
the Officers or major vote, to cast out the unworthy; a withdrawing from such a
congregation is not upon so private a consideration: Yea, the matter is of so
public a concernment, that other Churches must blame that Church (if they
reform not) and countenance such as withdraw, according to rule (in 2 These.
3.6, 14.) because they cannot attain the end of that rule, Matthew. 18.15. Sure
if we must withdraw from any one Brother, walking disorderly contrary to rule,
as it is in that 2 These. 3.6, 14. then much more from a whole Congregation of
Brethren walking contrary to rule, and so offending Christ, and the consciences
of his Lambs. The design then is not separation upon separation, but to keep
Churches to the rule. But to speak al in a word, Parish congregations, for the
most part as in relation to the communion, have so il a constitution, that they
cannot tell where to begin to reform; and then they must defend it, seeing they
cannot amend it; and so break Christ's Commandments, and teach men so, But if
it be separation upon separation, or a taking Churches out of Churches, it is a
thing, I think, not contrary to all rule, 2 Cor. 6.14. to end, Revel. 18.14.
(explained before) and the best Saints generally in all ages have practiced, and
they also (I mean the Presbyterians) that cry out against it. There was a true
Jewish Church, and particular Jewish Synagogue-congregations, among which
Christ Preached, for three years and an half; yet, Acts 2. and thence forward
out of them was a separation, and a gathering of Christian Churches: Therefore
simply and absolutely, to go from Church to Church, or gather Churches out of
Churches is not unlawful. Again, the Romish Church was a true Church, as
famous Polanus proves (though a most polluted one) it was essentially a true
Church, till in the Council of Trent they pronounced an Anathema against all
the maine truths of Christ, and so gave him a bill of divorce, yet justly when
Luther Preached more light, and holiness, many Nations, and among them anon
England did also separate from them, and their congregations departed from them
in Doctrine in part, and in form of worship. Many corruptions remaining among
the Lutherans, partly in Doctrine, namely that of Consubstantiation, and partly
in ceremonies; many Christians gathered themselves into purer Churches at
Geneva, etc. And here in England of late, the Presbyterian Churches were a
little refined in some things out from the Episcopal congregations. So then to
tell me there must not be separation upon separation; and that if another
discern not the Lords body, yet I do; and if another has no right to it, yet
I have, etc. these are all contrary, as well to former practice, as well as
rule, and are impertinent to our point in hand. Churches that will be called
and counted Churches, must be constituted as Churches, and act as Churches:
they must be godly persons, joining together, and settling their officers among
them, with one unanimous consent to keep out unworthy persons; and upon due
complaint and proceeding, as aforesaid, to cast out unworthy persons. So the
dispute is at an end. Consciences shall not be troubled. No danger of
separation. Good men's consciences shall be cherished, and bad men shall be
shamed till they repent; the dogs shall not have opportunity to snatch the
childrens bread, nor the children afraid to go to their meals, lest if they
let not the dogs take share with them, they bite and tear them. Is he a wise
governor of a Family that will say, Children, Servants, go to dinner, let the
Dogs alone to share with you, though they take of your meat, do you take your
meal? When he may far easier, by help of his Family, shut the Dogs out, if
they be so unruly: And it is at least as unwise an exhortation to stir up godly
men to go to mixed Communions, as to incite them to go thither, when it is known
that there are many there that have Plague-sores upon them: Sure spiritual
infection is worse then corporal, and the soul more precious then the body.

But in your second Reply to our Objections you say, ^ir se^d Re^
that that 1 Cor. 5. about Leven, and that 1 Cor. 10. of one bread does not
signify any spriritual pollution, by reason of society at the Lords Supper.
But that in 1 Cor. 5. only signifies that the Church of Corinth might be
corrupted by the incestuous persons, evil example, if he were not cast out.
And that in 1 Cor. 10. cannot signify that either the wicked man can become a
true member with me, ^r Du^.
or I a false member with him, by reason of fellowship at the communion.

To which we duply, and answer thus, to both places distinctly. 1. To that of 1
Cor. 5. it is evident that the Apostle speaks in the past time, of things past
(not of what in future, that evil example might effect, but of an evil past)
that 'twas their sin, all the churches sin, that they had not been humbled for
letting such a one abide a member amongst them, v. 2. Secondly, That he speaks
in the Present tence of their present condition, that the whole lump of them was
now at present levened by that person being one of them; though they were
unlevened in their persons, in regard of regeneration, or else they could not
be said to be levened, but rather to be very leven; yet levened in their
actions in regard of polluting mixture, and polluted worship. 3. For future, 1.
The Apostle cold not imagine that by example all the church of Corinth could
become incestuous persons; but Paul speaks of the danger of the levening the
whole lump. 2. He speaks of keeping the feast purely; and of not eating with a
Brother walking disorderly: Therefore from all its plain the Apostle drives at
more then evil example; namely, at evil of Church Communion with unworthy
persons; so likewise to the 2d. place, Viz. 1 Cor. 10. we say that as there is
a Anti-federall unholinesse or uncleanness in children whose Parents neither
of them are believers, though these children may be elect, and in time may
believe, 1 Cor. 7.14, And a matrimonial-like, or a tanquam conjugal union
between an Harlot and a Christian, whiles that Christian by temptation, etc.
falls into that ditch as Solomon speaks, of which union, see 1 Cor. 6.15.16, 18.
So there is a confederate oneness unto spiritual pollution, or purity,
according to the matter and manner of worship men join in. If in the due
partaking of the Lords Supper; it is the Communion of the body and blood of
Christ, 1 Cor. 10.16. If in eating and drinking at the Idolatrous feasts, they
that did so, though Christians, are said to partake of the cup of Devils, v.
20. And by the same proportion, a compound of good and evil, does make the
partners in the same to share in that evil mixture; as we have heard much
before. 2. Let us speak something to their arguments for mixed Communions: a
little will serve, because former things have anticipated. chap. 11. some that
even denied the resurrection, chap. 15. and sundry other grievous offenders, 2
Cor. 12.20, 21. yet are they still a Church, though these, uncast out, and he
no where blames for coming to the Lords Table, because of them, no not in that
1 Cor. 5. matter a Church, of such as were called to be Saints, and sanctified
in Christ Jesus, chap. 1. v. 2. And they were altogether a Church in form,
(...), orderly gathered, and united of such, according to the Apostles
direction, 1 Cor. 11.34. and 1 Cor. 14.40. But Parochial Churches in the
matter, for the generality consist of profane and ignorant; and their form
and union, is only by the Gutters and Stones, and Posts of the Precincts of
the Parish, making them to belong to that congregation of that Parish. But when
they move house but over the Gutter into another Parish, they are no more of
that Parish Church. Here is no spiritual bond, relation, or mutual owning, or
reciprocal watching between Minister and People, or between People and People.
So that this Objection does nothing help the now Churches that are for mixed
Communion, least of all these defending mixed Communions, which the Church of
Corinth did not, If they brake the commandment of God, yet they did not teach
men so. So that in many respects it was safer to call Corinth a Church, and
more tolerable to communicate with it, then with the Parish Churches now
extant. The Church of Corinth, however at a time negligent, yet the rule was
known and owned among them, to keep out, and cast out, the unworthy. 2. We
answer, That it "is not true, that the Corinthians are not blamed for coming
because of "them uncast out, no not in the 1 Cor. 5. For we argue thus, if they
are blamed for not casting out unworthy persons, but let them abide as members
with them, in 1 Cor. 5. they must needs be blamed there, for coming to the
Communion with them: and if they are told in 1 Cor. 5. that they must not eat
with any Brother that was a less sinner (then any named in the Objection)
namely, a railer, or a covetous person, then sure the blame of the breach of
this command in 1 Cor. 5. is upon them, if after this, they did eat with them
at the Lords Table. 3. We answer that in 1 Cor. 11. first Paul blames them for
coming together to their Church-meetings to their hurt, v. 17. where the
Apostle plainly tells them they were the worse for those meetings; and his
figurative speech in an Hyperbolicall Meiosis, namely, I praise you not, is a
vehement reproof of them, as the witty Objectors well understand: and this
sharp reproof is the Preface to all the Apostle would Declare to them, both
the first and second part of his Declaration against them; which two parts
should seem by the Apostles therefore, in v. 20. did unhappily depend. Their
disorderly communicating, sprang from their divisions. Again, in that 1 Cor.
11. the Apostle bids them examine themselves, whether this were right
receiving? And brings them to the institution, just as Christ reproved sins
against marriage. And in the Lords institution of his last SUPPER, there is not
only rule but example; that after Judas took the Sop, and thereby was
discovered (which Sop must of necessity be before the Supper) Christ in clear
effect bids him be gone; and punctually it is said upon the receiving of the Sop,
he immediately went out, John 13. Fourthly, We answer, as full to all the great
offenders mentioned in the whole Epistle before, and objected here in the
present Objection, Paul concludes his Epistle with this direction to the Church
of Corinth, If ANY MAN love not the Lord Jesus, LET HIM BE (he does not say I
pronounce him so) but let him be ANATHEMA MARANATHA; which is the form of the
great excommunication. unworthily, eats and drinks damnation (or judgment)
to HIMSELF, not to others. gratis, that unworthy communicants may drink
damnation or judgment to themselves, rather then they will by the rule, Matthew.
18.15. keep them from so drinking. For if they were kept from the Communion,
they could not be said to drink their own damnation, or etc. 2. Behold what a
sophisme and fallacy here is in this Argument: The poor ignorant profane
unworthy wretches in coming to the Communion, drink damnation to themselves;
therefore the able gifted Brethren and Ministers (and such are the objectors)
do not drink pollution to themselves in coming and drinking with them at the
Communion. But it is plain by that which has been argued against mixed
Communions, that the unworthy receivers drink pollution to the other, and they
in communicating with them do pledge them. 3. The Lord, in Ezekiel. 3.18.
teaches us better Logic, and pertinent to the thing in hand, When a righteous
man does turn from his righteousness, etc. he shall dye; because thou have not
given him warning, he shall dye in his sins, but his blood will I require at
THY hands. You see here that there is danger to the sinner, and to him also
that did not endeavor to reclaim him.

false Prophets, false Teachers, and Pharisaicall Rabbis, and Professors, who
spend their wits and parts, to keep holiness low, in Doctrine and Practice:
Saying, Every man that can say the Creed, the Lords prayer, and the ten
Commandments, is a Christian; yea if he does but confess Christ is come in
the flesh, and come to Church (as they call it) he is a Christian: that all
Infants whatsoever, although both the Parents be apparently unbeleevers, ought
to be Baptized: That all the Parishoners offering themselves, ought to be
admitted to the Lords Supper: To Preach spirituality, and of the inward power
of the spirit of Christ in a soul, are but strange fantasies of man's wit; and
that an ordinary man, a faith and troth Professor has the spirit of God as
well as another, whom you call a Saint. With many the like holinesse-depressing
doctrines; and suitably (as needs must) the people practice. Thus, as in Jer.
5. v. ult. The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their
means, and my people love to have it so, and what will ye do in the end
thereof? Thus in 2 Pet. 2.1. There were false Prophets among the people, as
there shall be false Teachers among you, etc. How shall we know them? By their
laying holiness low, despising, or bringing into contempt Christ, making the
way of truth evil spoken of; through covetousnes making merchandise of men's
souls or salvation; leading or leaving people in their riotings and
wantonness, etc. throughout the Chapter. The Apostle teaches us better, 1
Cor. 12. v. ult. covet earnestly the best gifts, and I will show you a more
excellent way: and charge us, Phil. 1.10. as we will show our selves to be
sincere, to approve the things that are excellent, and to be without offense.
So that if it were lawful to have some unworthy at the communion, but it were
best, or more excellent to have none, we should choose the best way, and that
which is most excellent. You see, notwithstanding all objections, that this
truth stands firm; that persons known to walk unworthily, and unbeseeming an
ordinary true Christian, should not be admitted to the Lords Supper, nor should
true Christians communicate with such unworthy ones, in case others will admit
them. And the trut^ is, to speak my conscience, therefore ordinary partakers of
mixed Communions are so little reformed, because the Church-rules ( Mat. 18.15.
2 These. 3.6, and 1 Cor. 5.) are so neglected, and in stead thereof, graceless
men are nuzled up in a self-flattery, because admitted to the privileges of
the best Saints: and the best that partake of such mixed communions are not so
quickened and comforted, because polluted Ordinances are not so blessed to men,
that by neglect of rule pollute them. Study that place, Ezekiel. 22.26.28.31. and
that in Mat. 15.3, 6.

Qu. How should a Congregation know what a Communicant is? Ans. By conference,
by enquiry, by conversation: In other things men would be inquisitive, by those
means to know exactly, as in matters of Marriage, servants, Partnership, etc.
Qu. But may not Congregations for all those ways by them used, be deceived in
admission of some. Ans. 1. Not ten for one. 2. In observing the rule to their
power, they keep themselves from sinning against knowledge, and through
negligence. 3. If any such break out and appear worse then they were, they are
to be cast out, if not reformed, according to rule. * But those assemblies that
take in among them those that are apparently bad at first; they cannot with any
show of Justice, according to their principles cast out such, whiles such,
because they are as good at last as at first, Viz. naught all along. 4. In
careless Congregations receiving all to the Communion, men come in openly bad,
because no stop is made, and so continue, because no orderly admonition is
exercised: but in Congregations that are exact, to look well to the Gates of
the Church, and yet some make the Church believe they are right, because they
pronounce Shibboleth right, I mean they make a laudable confession, and are
unblamable in their conversation, and so creep in, and at last appear to be
naught, it is the sin of the received, not of the receivers; and they lie open
to the Law of Churches to be thrown out, because grown worse: And usually
unsound hearted Professors do grow worse, for this reason, because
Pharisaically they trusted in their relation and membership, etc.
Lay all together, and consider whether the way we have propounded, or the way
of mixed Communions do most tend to purity and reformation which we profess,
and pretend, in opposition to former corrupt times. The Lord give the Reader
understanding in all things, Amen.

FINIS.

