THE NEW WORLD, OR THE NEW REFORMED CHVRCH.

Discovered out of the second Epistle of Peter the third chap verse 13.
Nevertheless we according to his prom^se look for new Heavens, and a new
Earth, wherein (...) righteousness.

First opened briefly, and some points pourtrayed and propounded ^^fore some of
the Nobility and others in the Country.

Afterward more fully delineated, and prosecuted before the Honorable House of
PARLIAMENT; May 30. An. Dom. 1641.

And upon the request of some of them, desiring Coppies, was limbed up for the
press according to the maine parts then, and there delivered.

By NATH. HOMES Dr. in D.

LONDON, Printed by T. P. and M. S. for William Adderton, and are to be sold at
his shop in Duck-lane. 1641.

TO THE HONORABLE THE KNIGHTS, AND BVRGESSES, OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS ASSEMBDED
IN PARLIAMENT.
Worthies of Israel,
IN this extreme age (for this last is mostly upon extremes) if I should
write nothing but a Title of dedication (as they call it) J should seem
Cynically to neglect. N^mios in (...) Hesiod.
If J should enlarge the Phylacterie, or Panegyric of usual prefacing, J
should be thought Pharisaicall, or Parasitiscall. If I should relate what
relations have been between some of you and this Embryon of thoughts, to
quicken it to that it is now grown, J might be deemed here importune, and
unseasonable if not impertine^t. Or if I should take upon me now to implore
your forward spirits to do any thing for the Church or State, I should but
anticipate the book it self. Therefore J shall only spend so much time,
paper and words as to assure you, that in and from my best intentions, and
affections this discourse is yours, my prayers yours; and what by my utmost
abilities, and endavours J may do for you, in the Lord is also yours. Your
acceptance is only to read that, and to believe this. I know truth will
maintain it self. The Lord has made it a God on earth. Magna est veritas,
and praevalebit. But sometimes her speaker is maligned, Gal. 4.16.
for her sake; though an Apostle. The ungrammar'd world will pinch on the mood
and tense, when they cannot gain say the sense. Jf the sermon was preached for
your sake, and the world prate against me for the Sermons sake, I hope you
will look upon me innocent and candid in my intentions, for the same reason
Solomon favored Abiathar that was really in fault. (...) Hortis vir.
He forbear to punish him as he deserved, because (says heto him) thou
bear the ark of the Lord God before David my father, and because thou have
been afflicted in all wherein my father was afflicted. J mind my promise of
brevitie. Therefore for close.

The sweet God of heaven bless his Majesty, the true nobly Nobles and you
worthies in this our Israel for that great good you have done; and the same God
prosper you, that the wine of the Churches through reformation kept to the
last, may prove the best, to the increase of the Churches joy of feasting, bear
with her Christ, John 2. Prove. 9.1, 2, 3, 4.5. Isa. 25.6. Mat. 22.4.
in his pure ordinances; Is the earnest prayer of him that is entirely yours in
the Lord with all humbleness,

NATH. HOMES.
From his unworthy obscure study. Agust 4. 1641.
THE NEW REFORMED CHVRCH.
2 Epist. of PET. 3. cap. verse 13. Nevertheless we according to his promise
look for new heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness.


THat your thoughts may go Logically down with me to my Text, I shall give
but a word, but point with the finger, to intimate the way of the Apostles
method, viz. his scope being to cure the immorality of the last times, he goes
the Paracelsian way of Physic. That is to apply hot remedies, to hot
diseases. The diseases of the last times, Verse 3.
being scoffing and jearing at the last times, the common walking fire, or
squib-guns of Hell-Zelotes to flare and flash in the face of truth, and
honesty. The Apostle applies this hot operating dosis. That as sure as the Lord
would hasten the last day, so would he make it an hot day: as much hotter then
the day of judging the old world, as fire would be hotter then those waters,
verse. 5. to the end of the 10.

This therefore says the Apostle, should awaken men. before it come. The
consideration, before the execution, as the dawning before the sunne-rising;
and put men first upon a conversation of piety, verse. 11. And so secondly, upon
an expectation of eveilasting felicity, verse. 12.

Yet so (says the Apostle) as we do not look over, or beyond that we are to
look for, before that great day, namely new Heavens, etc. And therefore the
Apostle, like a Cautionist brings in the word with a Nevertheless.
Nevertheless, we according to his promise, etc.

You perceive already (I believe) that in the first word, there is just
occasion given, not to slight the very Grammatical expression of the holy
Ghost in my text. As that (...) in Greek, (to which the Sir. (...) directly
answers) signifies either Nevertheless, as in our new translation, or an
adversative, High Dutch, Aber. So also Arius Montan.
or diversative But, as in the old translation, and in the translations of
other Churches in their native language. The learned Translators therefore in
our last translation saw some emphaticall thing in this small title (...), that
they drewit out into such a length; and perceived no doubt as we conceive and
receive the Apostle; that if he had here meant the same material Heavens, as
in the former verses, he would have said, And we expect, and not have used such
an exceptive, or a word so commonly, rendered exceptively, and adversatively, as
thereby to glance our expectation to an heaven upon earth before the Churches
arivall at the Heavens above the earth. And that with a believing expectation
or hope (as the word in the original signifies) and not a conjecturall, (...).
or of bare opinion; So that the blessed Apostle in his illation of this verse
seems to use a kind of Rhetorical Epanorthosis, or correction of himself;
thus, say I the heavens shall be dissolved? Nevertheless, so understand me,
as that I still mean we shall have now heavens, etc. here. And because
naturally men's thoughts are very flat, and their affections dull touching this
heaven upon earth, therefore the holy Ghost uses other flowers of eloquence to
dress forth and adorn this glorious estate of the reformed Church. First, a
metaphor, comparing it to Heaven; the best condition that is, because the
Churches reformation has its orig^nall thence, and its end of perfection
there. And mean while has the special presence of God there, which is the
very form of heaven. Some of the pious Fathers.
In so much as in that respect some of the Ancients said, Heaven was a
quality, rather then a place.

Secondly, and Hyperbole, or high sounding expression of the newness, or
newalty of this state of the Church; calling it a new heavens and a new earth,
as if of another substance (for so new imports) of a new substance. Howbeit the
Apostle only means, new in accidents, in qualities, and circu^starces. Yet so
he speaks to draw on our minds to reach home to a right opinion of those new
heavens, etc. That there shall be such a renewed condition of the Church, as if
it were a new one. The like expression the Apostle uses in describing the
righteous condition of the renewed Church saying, that therein shall dwell
righteousness, putting the Abstract, for the Concret, Righteousness, for
righteous men, a righteous people. For no men or people can be purely righteous
in this life. That is the prerogative, and incommunicable difference of Heaven
properly so called.

Lastly, for a full evidence what is the meaning of this text, let us consider
it Theologically in the Divinity of it. Nevertheless is a distinctive
particle: first, of a new Heaven on Earth, from that above secondly, of the
Saints hopes from the worlds. As for Heavens and new Earth; Some looking on
these words cursoryly, A lapide.
and with an ordinary eye, have run away with a confidence that they are to
be understood of the Heaven of Heavens, and the eternal glory of the Saints
there. But these interpretors are heavenly wide. For this interpretation is too
spiritual. For besides what we said in the Grammatical consideration.

Note here first, what need was there of this commendatorie information of the
glorious estate of Heaven, which is glimmering in the dark minds of heathens,
witness their discourses of the Elysian fields, (...) and the immortality of
the soul; much more does it glare in the enlightened minds of the Saints. Last
of all was there any need to tell the Saints that in Heaven above dwells
righteousness. Secondly, how or wherein might the Prophets and Apostles mean
that the heavens of the blessed were new, more to the Saints in their ages then
to the rest of all the Saints, who by a continued howerly sucession, in one
place or another are going to the same? Thirdly, If Heaven here signifies the
state of glory, what shall we do with, or what shall we make of the new
earth? Fourthly, if the new heavens here meant, are promised new heavens, and
with known promises, and in all ages the ablest of Gods Church could never
parallel to this text any other places then Isa. 65.17. Isa. 66.22. as
precedent promises. And Revel. 21.1. Asuttered by S. John the Apostle, who was
Co-Apostle, and Coeve of the same time with Saint Peter, though the time of
writing may somewhat differ; how shall we wrest those promises to mean the
heavens of glory? for no violence can do it, without many manifest
contradictions.

Chiliasts, or Millenaries, would (as their names import) understand this text,
of the Martyrs reigning a thousand years on earth as in a particular special
heaven upon earth, peculiar to them, before they be taken up, soul and body
into heaven above. But these are as wide on the other side, and that as far
as earth from heaven, of innumerable particulars that might be alleged, let
us at this time be content with a few touches. First, for that leading place
(as they account it) Revel. 20.4, etc. let us go no further then the express
text, and thus far it acquites it self; First that the text speaks of
(...). That the souls of them (whose bodies had been smitten or be headed
with the axe) not their bodies too, should reigns these 1000. years. And
although souls often times in the Scripture do signify the whole persons,
souls and body conjunct; yet souls cannot so signify here, because the holy
Ghost precisely and emphatically prevents this by telling us that the axe, or
some such mortal engine of Martyr-dome had distinguished the soul from the
body as far as Heaven from Earth. The holy Ghost intending hereupon, to
comfort herein the Church on earth touching those bleeding members. i. e. an
eternity of felicity in Heaven, or their souls have many years felicity in
Heaven till God set their heads on their shoulders again, and rev^ite their
bodies to their souls.

living again by regeneration in the second Adam, since their death in lapsed
first Adam, in whom standing in innocence they were alive. And so says the
text expressly, for the thousand years, Pareus, on Revel. Haee opinio est
contrasidem cothalicam. Ioh. 5.28.29. Let him that will be satisfied in this
poine read that learned Pareus on Apoc. 20. where besides his c^ment, he has
exquisite tracts and particular disputes of the point.
i. e. the long time the Martyrs souls had been, and should be in Heaven,
even before the general resurrection; the wicked so ill thrift all this time on
earth under the means of grace that they attain not to the first
resurrection, the first degree of life eternal to live by conversion. John
5.28.29. as he quotes the place. And therefore it made the Church of God along
time to doubt of the authority and authentie of the books of the Revelation.
Even so long as unskilful interpr^tours wrested it to this opinion.

pious and learned Fathers were led away with that opinion.

Augustine believes Victorinus Picta^iensis. He Dyonisius Alexandrinus. He
Hepos Episcopus Egypti. He Tertullianus. He Irenaus. He Justin Martyr. (at lest
these were the men if the order not so exact, that handed this tradition from
one to another.) And the last man on whose sleeve they all hang the chief of
their belief in this point (as Irenaus confesses) was Papias, whom they
conceived to have been Saint John's hearer. And so (as they intimate) knew
Saint John's mind and meaning to lean that way. But as the text in that 21 of
Revelat. shows that Saint John did not so mean; so Papias was not a hearer,
or seer of any of the Apostles, and therefore not of Saint John: So he
confesses himself, In exo^^^ Sui. operis.
(...)

And for the ignominy that that opinion drew on it self, Lib. 3. Hist. cap 33.
Eusebius says, that Papius the first Author of that opinion was a credulous
man, and apt to receive fables for verities. So he; Therefore Saint Hierom
justly confuted him, and his followers. And so in allages following their times
are recorded in the most judicious and pious ecclesiastical writers most
justly confuted as guilty of a gross error in that respect. To ssan. Cens.
patram. Fox. Act. and Mon.
And for mine own part, I see not Cui bono, to what end any should be zealous
for the opinion. I would willingly know of the late Arminian sect, why they are
so hot for it? And of those Anti-Arminian orthodoxe, that seem to hearken this
way whether this Tenet may not dazzle their sight from seeing and looking after
that more general restoration of the Church of Gods pious ones, whiles they
stare so after a surmised and imagined comfort of the small handful of
Axe-hewen, or bloodshed martyrs. And until then that I receive that
satisfaction, and an answer to other doubts, I shall desire by the leave of
charity to hold where I am against Chiliasme, with modesty.

As for this text of Peter it seems far enough from that opinion. First,
because Heaven and Earth are distinctly named and heaven before earth, as the
chief of that newness here meant. Secondly, this newness was first in these
express terms primarily prophesied to the Jews (though participatively to
the Gentiles,) and that after Isaiah had prophesied, their captivity, Isa. 65.
Isa. 66. view the contents, and after the method of the chapter, how Jews and
Gentiles are put together to receive these promises; but the Jews are put
first, and as the principal, the Gentiles as accessory partners.
should seem as a comfort to them. And to them now scattered, and to the same
purpose, mentioned again by Saint Peter here. But if this new heavens, etc.
should be promised only to Martyrs resisting to blood from how narrow and
particular, and sad a Topic place or argument would these intended comforts
be drawn. For we see how few or none of the Jews have been Martyrs
hitherto, and how forlorn their condition has been, and so unfit to here of
greater misery, as a way to so short and particular a comfort, with the
restored Church of the Gentiles, in that kind.

We must therefore fly in the middle Region, go in the middle path. Medio
tutissimus ibis.

We therefore by new Heavens, and a new earth, understand a new form of
worship; religion in the expression thereof reformed, brought more close to the
rule of the Gospel, made more spiritual, and heaven like; and earthly men made
new, changed, turned into new creatures by the power of Religion so reformed.
And thus in diverse places heaven signifies religion, and earth, the persons
religionised. Mat. 13. often. Epistle to the Ephesians often, chap. 1. verse. 3.
chap. 2. verse. 6. chap. 3. verse. 10. chap. 6.12. Because the external worship
is a type of heaven, Psalm. 15. Heb. 8.5. Heb. 12. verse. 26, 27. Hagg. 2.6. In
which two last places, where it is said, God shook once, and would shake
again heaven and earth; the Lord alludes to mount Sina, Exodus 19.16.
that thereby thunder and lightning and earthquake, he shook the heavens
material; and spiritual, the law, and tables when he delivered them, and the
earth, material, and metonimicall or metaphorical, the men, Moses and the
rest trembled, and so at the giving of the Gospel, Heb. 12.18. to 28.
by the sufferings of Christ, the heavens and the earth seemed to be moved. The
Sun eclipsed, the earth trembled, the heavenly temple rent, the beholders
quaked: And at the giving of the spirit for extraordinary gifts as seals of
the Gospel, there was a shaking of one of the lower heavens, the air (as Saint
Paul calls it an heaven) by reason of a mighty wind. So that this shaking
signifies all one with making, and creating new heavens, etc. And to do this
according to his foregoing promise is to do it according to Isa. 65.17. Isa.
66.22. and Hagg. 2.6. In the expectation of which Saint Paul. Heb. throughout
the Epistle. And Saint John throughout the book of the Revelation join for
this new state of the Church, being then but begun, and in part, and here and
there but in a few particular places in comparison of what should be for
future, when Jews and Gentiles should both come in; and in regard that this
begun newness soon suffered much eclipse and interception, over it should
for future, therefore the Apostle Peter, and the rest of the Apostles looked
beyond that to a future perfection.

As for the righteousness that shall inhabit in this new estate of religion
and men, it is questioned by some, whether the righteousness of Christ as more
promulgated, or the righteousness of men, as more practiced be here meant?
But the rules in subordinate things are not contrary: therefore nothing
hinders but both are here meant. And by reason of their Connection must be.

First, Its here meant that Christ's righteousness shall be more revealed unto
men, and into men. Romans 1.17. And Christ being made unto them righteousness,
he shall also be made unto them wisdom, sanctification, and redemption, 1
Cor. 1.30. For when the grace of the Gospel appears not only unto men, but
into men, it teaches them to deny all ungodliness, and to live godly
righteously, etc. Tit. 2.12. And these righteousness, or righteousnesses in
the descent, shall be a town dweller, a free Denison of this new world, and
its kingdoms. A freeholder, in feesimple.

The text being thus opened, you may perceive the sum of it to be a divine
Cosmography, or a divine description of a spiritual new world.

In particular, we may note first, the Antipodes, the contraries to the
inhabitants of the Eden, or more glorious tract of this new world: And these
are pointed at in the Nevertheless. What ever the world think, whether
scoff, or not scoff. Have a vain hope or no hope; or what ever mere good
states men, or general honest minded men, touching only an heaven above. Yet
We: Nevertheless we look for, etc. So that this antithesis distinguishes
these discoverers of the new world from their hope, and the object thereof.

2. The Hemisphere of the new found land of this new world. And that 1. By the
substance Heaven. Earth.
2. By the Accidents or qualities, or properties of both. 1. The Noveltie or
newness. 2. The Equity or righteousness.



So that as in the morning you heard handled by my predecessor, the
Architectonica; Out of 1 Chronicles 28.10 By Mr. Symonds.
the building of the new house of the reformed Church. So now I am to present
you with a map of the Cosmographie, or description of the new world of the
Church.

A Map. I say, one map (not several particular ones) and upon that to
discoutse, or at the bottom or margin thereof to set down the history thereof.

This one map, is the general thesis, or doctrine I shall draw out of all the
parts of the text, or wherein I shall draw together all the parts of the text,
thus:

Heavens and a new Earth, of a righteous reformed Church, according to Gods
promise.

As for our history or discourse to be added or annexed to this doctrinall
map, it consists of the explication, vindication, probation, demonstration, and
application of if.

First, Explication (for the illation of the Doctrine from the text is most
plain, I need not insist upon it.) The knot is, how the godly in all ages
expected a reformed Church, Genesis 3.
which we explain thus: That as upon the First fall, God made the first and
grand promise of raising the Church; so ever and anon as the Church took some
wrenches of her old hurt, so the Lord renewed, and enlarged the first grand
promise. When the Church received a second blow, in the murder, of Abel, the
Lord bound her up, with the birth of Seth, and a prophecy upon him. Genesis 4.25.
And Adam knew his wife again, and she bare a son, and called his name Seth.
For God (said she) has appointed me another seed in stead of Abel, whom Caine
slew. When the Church in Seths posterity grew sore sick, then the Lord
cheered the Church in Noah. Genesis 6.2. Genesis 5.29. Genesis 6.18.
He shall comfort her, with thee says the Lord will I establish my Covenant.
When by the drowning of the world, the Church was almost fallen into her grave,
then the Lord raised her to life by a gracious promise to that most eminent Son
( i.e. Melchisedeck, Genesis 9.26.27.
King of Salem, and of righteousness.) When the Church fell from the buildings
of the tower of Babel, Genesis 11.
that she was confounded in her language, like one speechless, or amazed with
a fall, then God renewed the grand charter of the first promise with
inlargements to Abraham and his posterity. Genesis 12.
And at the same time that it was prophesied and after performed, that the
Church should sink as low as the clay pits, and brick kilnes of Egypt, was it
promised, and after proportionably performed, that she should be advanced by
Gods power in Moses. Genesis 15. Exodus 12. 1 Samuel ^. 1. Sam. 3.19. 20.21. 1 Samuel
8. 1 Samuel 13.14.
When the Church was lapsed, by Elies sons, Samuel is chosen, and manifested
by special signs that that the Lord had appointed him as a support to the
Church. When things declined by Samuels sons, and the ill propping it up by
Saul, then David was promised, as a sure and perpetual stay, in himself and
his posterity. Finally, when the Church had that great blow in Babylon,
whereof she lay sick seventy years, then was Christ promised, Dan. 9. All
the chapter.
the magnus instaurator. The stay of all stays for ever. So that when Christ
came, and began the new Testament, was Mirabilis annus, the admired period of
the Church. All those periods of restoring and comforting the Ghurch in the Old
Testament were but praeludia prefaces to this one of Christ coming in the New
Testament. But this great restitution of the Church of the New Testament has
several particular periods before it come to that instaurationem maximam; O
that greatest and inaugmentable restitution at the end of the world. For that
is called (and well may) a restitution. Whom the heavens must contain until
the time of restitution of all things. Acts 3.21.
For Saint Peter had seen one great period of the New Testament reformation,
from his fishing to his fishing after men (as Christ promised and prophesied)
yet he thinks not that the foregoing promises of the Prophet Isaiah were yet
quite emptied. Some payments yet due, some of the fart, and strokings of these
breasts of consolation yet to be milked out. Isaiah 66.11. Some think Saint
John lived till near an 100. years after Christ.
Nevertheless we look for new heavens, etc. And Saint John the longest living
Apostle after Christ, had seen more of the effect of Christ's restoring the
Church; yet does he prophecy in the Revelation of seven particular periods of
the Church of the New Testament to come; in the seven seals, the seven
trumpets, seven thunders, and seven viols. All which in brief, for our
understanding them in short, may be reduced to these two heads.



Mat. 24.14. The Gospel shall be preached to all the world.
and with many interruptions, transplantations and the like, shall from thence
forward be universal (as wide over the face of the earth, as God will ever
have it) and as continued and uninterrupted, as is suitable for a Church not yet
in heaven it self.

2. Vindication. Because a doubt rises out of this explication, we insert this
next, before probation.

Object. The objection is, that if there be so many degrees and periods of the
Churches reformation, how shall each age know how much belongs to their time.

Answ. The answer is, that first, to each age to which belongs a particular
promise, God gives a special light, to compare the promise and the event
together. Secondly, by consideration of evens yet unfulfilled in former ages;
Antichrist not yet pulled down. The Gospel not yet preached to all the world.
Isa. 30.20.
The Jews not yet converted. That the Churches teachers should be no more
driven into a corner.

Thirdly, that as Saint John has measured out the changes of the Church by
periods, of halfeings; Daniels great period for his time to Christ (which was
about 490. years) distinguishing them into about 250 years. So the Church
(that casts up far greater pieces of chronology) may the more easy account
how the Church passes through any of her seven two hundred and fifties,
especially of the first six; so plainly noted by Saint John by several
events and circumstances. For as Eclipses of the Sun or Moon, or such
remarkable events, are the Time-markes of cronologie, that in computation of
hundreds of years, not one year is lost. So the sevens of events set down by
Saint John, are the stages of the course of times most easily pointed at.

3. Probation, we go no further for proof then Saint John, Coeve, and of the
same time with Saint Peter, who also was told by the spirit of God, that though
the promises of the Prophet Isaiah, touching the new created heavens were to be
fulfilled in this life, that yet the events were yet to come. And therefore
that the Church might know them more distinctly, Saint John sets them down
more largely, so as in every verse throughout that 21. chapter of the
Revelation (wherein he handles the point) there is a plain argument, that
Saint John cannot be understood of heaven above (as some would) but of the new
heaven here below.

4. Demonstration, the reason why the Church hopes, is in regard of God. The
reason why the Lord gave the Church that ground of hope, is in regard of the
Church.

The Church hopes, in regard of God. i.e. in regard of his promise to the
Church. There would be no looking, no sight, if there were no color and light,
no ground of word, and a Prophet or an Apostle from heaven to give light of it.

And the Lord makes those promises by the Prophet Isaiah, and gives us more
light of them by his Apostles, in regard of his compassion to the Church.

To remove her evils.

To promote her good.

To remove the evils of the Church, viz. Nothingnesse. Childishness.
Rustinesse.


That the Church might not decline either toward nothing, or childishness and
foolishness, or rustinesse, and sinfulnes. For what is original to the
Church, the Church is inclined to be actual in, if she be in her declension,
not in her spiritual augmentation.

By Adams fall was the grand wound given the Church, to make her decline, to
break her, and imprayre her perfection, yea and at first almost brought her to
nothing. So then God made the Church the first grand promise to put her in
hope, that as long as the world stood she should not turn into nothing, she
should not be annihilated.

After this, all the times of the old Testament, espectially of the Fathers,
the Church grew so childish, that nothing but rudiments, the rattles of the
ceremonial law, the gilded corners of things, shaddowed landskips of things,
would give her content. Of these the Apostle speaks in his Epistle to Galat.
Chapters 2.3.4.
Therefore least the Church should rest in these, the Lord by his Prophts in
the old Testament, prophesied and promised a more excellent estate under the
New Testament.

Finally, when this time was past, that the New Testament was begun, the Church
no sooner obtained some rest from persecution, but she grew rusty with
ambition, contention, and other aberrations, both of opinion, and practice. See
Fox Acts and Mon. in Constantine.
As is apparent soon after Constantine the great his time: and nearer both of
times and places, how restinesse causes the Churches rustinesse. Therefore
that still the Church might hold up her head and look beyond all these things,
to a more glorious condition then the world could afford; the Lord by the
Apostles set before them the promises of the new heaven and earth.

1. By Saint Peter, in text. 2. By Saint John, enlarging and inculeating them,
in Revel.
Because vice versa, by a retrograde motion, from rustinesse the Church will
decline to childishness. Rust weakens the mettle, sin weakens the soul. And
rusty old age makes a man twy-child. And from childishness will the Church
decline toward nothingnesse. In Rome, if not nearer this may be seen. From
abundance of sinfulness, through ease and idleness the Church grew to
abundance of ceremoniousnesse. From thence, she fell into idolatrousnesse, and
so far she went there, she became utterly nothing.

To prevent therefore such a gradation, and dissolution of the Church; both in
regard of his own Compassion, and in regard of that impression he has made
upon the Church, he has promised to lend her his assistance to raise her to
this glorious condition.

In regard of his Compassion, for if when the Church wanted no goodness, he
promised her greatness in Para^lise, much more now in more distress, that
she has i^oulke a greatness, but wants goodness, will he promise it, and
perform.

In regard of that impression the Lord has made upon the Church, for if God
has stamped on nature a general abhorring of vacuum, of a void place, empty
of any natural body (for that would break off some linckes of the chain and
fast dependence of the natural universe, and cause a self annihilation of
nature more or less;) And therefore nature has devised many changes,
(generation, corruption, alteration, augmentation, diminution, local motion,
and that of particular bodies, contrary to their own proper natures; as water
to ascend in a pumpe, Air to descend into the earth, in an earthquake) to
shift her natural sons out of the way upon attempts of vacuum that none of
them may perish: how much more is there an impression of grace on the Church,
of abhorring this least self annihilation, or loosing any of its spiritual
perfection; and is most loath to be worse, but desires to be as much better as
she may. Therefore, as the Lord helps the natural world to conserve it
self, so he helps the Church by efficacious promises, to sustain her
spiritual condition.

2. To promote the Churches good, viz. To draw on the Church. To draw up the
Church.


To draw on the Church, in patience and holiness. So runs the context with
the succeeding verse; Wherefore (beloved) seeing that ye look for such things,
( i. e. promised new heavens and earth, as it is in the text) be diligent that
ye may be found of him in Christ, without spot and blameles. Heb. 12. i. 2.
Compare with this that of the Epistle to the Hebrews. Wherefore seeing we are
compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every
weight, and the sin which does so easily beset us, and let us run with
patience the race that is set before us, looking to Jesus, the author and
finisher of our faith. As aparent promising his married children to be a daily
friend to them, to build their decayed house new for them, and to make every
thing new is a great encouragement to them more patiently to bear the
deprivation of their parents personal presence and the combrance of the many
cares and troubles in the flesh, 1 Cor. 7.28.
(as the Apostles speaks) attending on marriage; so Christ personally, being
gone into heaven, till the full restitution of all things, promising his
children to build them a new world, Revel. 21.
or a new city, i.e. many houses, and to make all spiritual things new for
them; it does much stay their hearts: It makes them hold up their heads as
after a redemption drawing nigh; as after a recovery to life, after a lying at
the point of death. Romans 11.15.
As a travellour, the more he sees the approach of his journeyes end, the more
he is cheared; so spiritually in this.

2. To draw up the Church, to make her as more heavenlike, so more heavenly.
And that in her judgment, as well as her desires. For if an estate of the
reformed Church on earth, be called heaven, and compared to a new heaven, how
excellent is heaven it self, which is the pattern and exemplarie cause it
self which this lower heaven does but imitate? Acts 3.2.
If the gates of the material temple were beautiful, how beautiful is that
temple of heaven, where God himself is immediately in fullness of glory, whose
maker and builder is God? If one part of this new heaven be so glorious, viz.
Heb. 3.4. 2 Cor. 3.5.6.
the Ministry of the Gospel, in so much that the ministry of the law, in the
Mosaicall Church, had no glory in comparison, how transcendent is the glory of
the whole state of glory? 1 Cor. 2, 8.9.10.
If eye had not seen, nor ear heard, nor heart conceived the excellency of
the Gospel, till God revealed it experimentally by his spirit; much less can
it be apprehended what are the heavens of glory, till we partake of the glory
in heaven. And as these prophesies and promises do make the Church more
heavenly in her apprehensions, so in her affections. As woings make lovers
minds betrothings, betrothings make them mind marrying; so these woing and
betrothing restitutions do cause the Church to long for that condition, when
the Church shall be as a bride ready trimmed to be fully married and enter into
heaven to sup with the lamb, Revel. 21.
Christ Jesus her husband in glory. As the more success the sayler has in his
voyage round the world, the more acquaintance he has with, and delight in the
new hemispheres, of the heavens, and new constellations of stars; so the
further the Church on earth goes with her full-saite of knowledge, faith, (...)
coll. 2.2. (...) Heb. 10.22. (...) Heb. 6.11.
and hope of the new militant Church on earth, the more she will discern and
desire the last and best heaven of heavens.

This Doctrine being thus inferred, explained, vindicated, proved and
demonstrated, is useful for Instruction. Examination. Humiliation Consolation
Exhortation


First, for Instruction, or information of the judgment, in three things.

1. That the thoughts and hopes of the world are very much at rovers, and
randume, besides and asquint from the common cause; the Common good. So the
Doctrine (closely grounded on the text) whatever the world promise themselves,
etc. whatever they tinck, or think, they think not as the godly, hope not as
the godly, intent on the common good: yea who can guess what their vain
thoughts or hopes are? The common good, Ier. 4.14.
or evil of the Church is nothing to them, so they pass by. Lam. 1.12. If
they be presented with considerations of Divine justice, future judgment, in
case of non-repentance; at these either they mock, or are as stupefied,
through wilful ignorance. So our Apostle in the beginning of this chapter
before the text. They return to their former walk in their own vomit, or
common mire, or salt matshes of the world, ut juvat immenso spatiantem vivere
Caelo, like vaine-headed men in a walk, whiles they see most of heaven, they
think least of heaven. If their spirits be a wakened, they turn their edge
the clean contrary way. If a Rome (as one once said in an Apothegme) be to be
sold, these worldlings these terrae fily, these roving archers are the men
that set the price on her. A Machiavellian a tribe of friends, a kingdom of
common good, for his own ends. For he holds close to his theoreme, or rule.
Pereant amici, modo intercidant inimici. He is at the same pass to put off at
a low price, some few great ones, as many inferior ones. Now he can as trimly
act the Judas. If the K. of the Jews may be bought and sold, for Quid aabis at
a rate, he will betray him. These are the Popes Merchants and Markets, Revel.
18.13.
and his butchers shambles, to deal in slaves and souls of men. But one the
other side let these worldlings meet in the face any opportunity of advancing
the common good, to bind up the wounded Levites, to preserve many a poor
Sosthenes from beating, Acts
like Gallio, they care for none of those things, especially if the business
of so great consequence as to rebuild the decayed temple, they stick heavily
and answer lazily, Hag. 1.2.
The time is not yet come to set about it. If a church a Kingdom should put
themselves into such men's hands, entrust themselves with such moles how
profoundly and remedilessely might all be betrayed. And therefore it is not a
small mercy, that the Lord has found out so many worthies of Israel, to be
faithful to Israel.

2. Thing wherein this Doctrine does instruct is this, It is the common
condition of godly men, that though they dwell in the heavens of the Church on
earth, as long as they dwell in the old heavens, in that state of the Church
that is old in comparison of the new to come, they shall be where there is a
want of righteousness. There will be store if not of corporal, be sure of
spiritual wickednesses in So Greek (...).
heavenly places. Ephesians. 6.2.
This heaven is seamed and fringed about with Hell. Things are not right there
is a want of righteousness in the Psalm. 12.1. Hebrew (...) vilitas. Genesis 15.
Zech. 1. Psalm. 137.
abstract So when the godly dwell in Egypt, in Babylon, still they found
righteousness to be a Phaenix a scare bird. Always thus it will be (be we
contented with old things as long as we will; I mean still the old Heavens:)
either, there will be a defect of righteosnesse; Or, a defection from
righteousness; Or a disaffection against righteousness.

A defect of righteousness, either men will be ignorant, or negligent of
righteousness. Ignorant, when men look not after the righteousness of God
(the original of all righteousesse) but go about to establish their own
rightousnesse, Romans 10.3.
and so do not submit to the righteousness of God. Thus it is with men, when
they are blind at the Doctrine, or fumble at the practice of righteousnessse.
So stubborn Papists, and ignorant sottish Protestants; they seek a
righteousness in blankes: as that they mean no hurt. In negative
'Phariseisme, they are not this nor that: In things of no life, or activitie in
themselves, viz. in performances, as their, we have fasted. Isa. 58.3. Luke
18.12.
And that often too (though too often to be good) However; Performances of
duties, are good praises not payments to God thankesgivings to God: No
salvation given to men. For they all are nothing in themselves, though done
never so well, John 5.39.40. Observe well and (...) the word search is to be
read indicatively as a relation, rather then imperatively as a command. Compare
the 39 and 40 verses together it well easily appear. Zech. 13.1. Genesis 4. Heb.
11.
but as they find and center upon Christ: And it is common with the most of
men to build their false righteousness where the nest may easily be pulled
down. Upon some non causes, some mere probables, or some pieces or fragments
of obedience, some care of the second Table with neglect of the first, or
contrariwise: To seek righteousness, or put righteousness in any of all
these, is as vain as to seek waters in the Mill-streame, when they are
exactly pind up in the Mill-pond. If the fountain of Christ's righteousness be
not opened upon the uncleanness of men, how shall they be washed righteous in
person and nature. And if not righteous in person and nature, how shall they
practice any righteousness toward men, as a righteousness? much less can they
do any performances of religion so rightly as to make of them any small piece
of righteousness. Abell by faith. i. e. in Christ, offered an acceptable
sacrifice. First, Christ is made to us righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. two last.
before we can make or do any thing, so as we may glory in God, or take
comfort in him, and not in our selves. 2. Negligent of righteousness, when men
know of the fountain Christ; of the Scriptures, the promises, the cock to let
go that fountain of faith, the only hand to turn it; yet are of a sluggish
nature and practice: strive not to be eminent in righteousness, eminent in the
assurance and application of Christ's righteousness, and in the insurance and
warranting that application by the evidence of a conversation of righteousness
as a Christian. I say this sort at most, Heb. 10, 22.23. Ephesians. 5.15.
strive not to be eminent; to believe confidently; to wake accuratly; lie along
as contented to live as bed-ridden Chrstians, from hand to mouth. No good suit
to their backs, of Christ's righteousness, by application. No good glass upon
that suite, or profession of Christ of more holy and innocent conversation. No
good warmth by putting on of Christ, as by the spirits infusion of abundance of
grace. This Spittle or Hospital of pitiful Christians; these impotent
professors (grant they be true) improve not their stock. And so at every turn
of great expense of much faith, and hope, and prayer, in a sickly time of
fears and afflictions, they are found to be exceeding poor.

A defection or declining from righteousness more and more appears often in
this old Heaven. As when people and Ministers, the stars, and the starers
after them err from the right doctrine, and doctrine of righteousness; when
they dislike the purity, power, and plenty of it: what need (think they)
such grinding the edge of the sword of the spirit the word so thin? what
need such nice and close dividings by it? Heb. 4.12.
And less of any preaching will serve (once a day enough of conscience, i. e.
of their conscience and enemy to the rule of conscience,) less profession is
enough, 2 Timothy 4.1.
unless men will be too forward. They like a mixture that may abate the
acrimonie of sound truth, as not enduring truth in the simple. Therefore the
ingredients these men give and take, in the mixture are smokey distinctions,
popish evasions, carnal pretenses, pharisaicall collusions, human rules and
traditions, fleshly forms of worship, seeming pretenses of flattering
devotions, by all which to blind the eyes and puddle the streams of the
Scriptures (and sibires, non se rebus submittere.) For they make the Scrptures
by violence to justify these, not to try these, just by the Scriptures. This
pack or heard of men, are like horses that first pounce, or plunge with their
feet, and mudde the water, and then drink. They put in their corrupt
ingredients to the word, or doctrine, and then give it, and take it to drink.

Thirdly, the want of righteousness in the old heaven appears by a frequent
disaffection to righteousness, to deal, and to unrighteously do set against,
and abuse righteousness, to be unrighteous both against God and man.

First, against God; Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. The world will smite God,
by oaths, cursings, imprecations, blasphemies: God never wronged them; he that
is wronged by them, was the maker of them. Acts 17.28.
Jn him they live and move, etc. against whom they move and live so wickedly;
they debase and vilify God to his face. They prefer every creature, yea
every sin they have a mind to commit, above God himself. To commit
spiritual adultry, idolaterie, in preferring the first, and witchcraft to
love, and put confidence in the devil in preferring the second, is nothing
with them. Psalm. 11 9.
God is good, and does good to them. And they are evil and do evil against
him, as a meet requital. As for Christ, if they do not swear by his precious
wounds, passion, body, death, sacramental bread, they will be sure to slight
his merits, Heb. 10.29.
his sufferings as things of no necessity or use to them. His Gospel to them a
pack of fables, no more faith and credit (to speak of effectual faith) do
they give to it. As once a Bishop one of the Popes said: how great a gain have
we "made of this fable of the Gospel? They live as if they should never dye,
and die as if after that they should never live. As another of the Roman
Bishops a Pope was unresolved at his last dying pillow. Saying, now I shall
(says he) be resolved of three things. 1 Whether there be a God? 2. Whether
the soul be immortal? 3. Whether there be an Heaven and Hell?
And for the Holy Ghost. they will jeare and scoff at that holiness that is
wrought in men's spirits, by that holy spirit: yea hating, and opposing all holy
profession and conversation.

Secondly, they are unrighteous against men, both themselves and others. They
will put out both their own eyes to put out one of their godly neighbors: like
the Philistines that stopped Isaacks A fountain and an eye in Hebrew, called by
the same name (...)
wells, to their own hurt as well as his. They reproach religion as fast as
they can wherein they do as the Roman that cut off the bridge he stood on,
although he must needs fall into the river himself, so as he might drown
his enemies. Religion and profession, is the bridge to carry them over the lake
of hell to heaven, yet its no matter, they will cut it off by sharp sarcasmes
and derisions, that by their good will there should be no such
conscience-troubling profession upon earth Therefore they let flee freely at
others, that seem to have any thing of God in them. These worldlings, these
earth, Ier.
^ar^^, ^^^th, (as the Prophet speaks) all dirt, will bedaub the Saints most
odiously. They will smite them, as I^r^miah with the tongue. Name-blast them.
They will smite them in the body, Acts
as Saint Paul on the mouth, yea on the back^. Yea they will stick yet closer
to them. They will smite them in the conscience, stick a dagger of offense in
it pull it out who can. So in the ten persecutions, by fears to make men
sacrifice to the idol. So in the Phillip and Marian persecutions, to threaten
men till they made them abjure and forswear the truth. And when they have
wounded thus, will they, can they heal? Howbeit God would not loose his
Martyrs, but his spirit made them keep their first vow in Baptism, and so
after they suffered death for Christ voluntarily. Exech 13.22.
no. If the Pharisees draw a Judas into a fact of Treason against Christ, all
they answer to him coming to them with his consience dreadfully bleeding, see
you to it, what is that to us? much less do they regard the affliction of a
Joseph, although (as in that Hos. 6.) caused by them. It is their joy to make
the hearts of Gods people sad, whom the Lord would not have to be sad, and to
strengthen the hands of the wicked. Mark the hands, for sin cannot
strengthen the heart. And yet they think they come not close enough, and
therefore they will give the Saints one deep stab more. They will smite them
in the very image of God in them. You be the holy brethren. And how are they
brethren but by being children of one Father, God; and having his divine nature
in them? 2 Pet. 1.4.
And how are they holy, but by and from God wishing and working them to be
holy, as he is holy? 1 Pet. 1. Mat. 3.7.
yet this holiness they venemously (just as a generation of sharp toothed
vipers) bite at. You be the precise ones, pure ones, the Puritants. Which last
term has been a long lived murderer to kill sound doctrine, holy life,
sobriety, equity, all that is good. As said a Parliament man in Parliament,
the word Puritan in the mouth of an Arminian, signifies an Orthodoxe divine; in
the mouth of a drunkard signifies a sober man; and in the mouth of a Papist
signifies a Protestant. So general is that name grown now, that with it the
wicked Ismaelites open their mouths wide, make an odious wide mouth, Isa. 57.4.
and sp^rt themselves. So that their mouths being venomed and their throats
hissing, this name in them is as a sting to make them ^ike the dragon, Revel.
12.4. ready and prepared to devour a young professor before he is hatched.
Therefore pious Queen Elizabeth, seeing the mischief coming upon religion,
by such approbious terms, made an injunction against them, that they might not
thunder strike, or lightning blast or cerebrate the gay blossoms of tender
profession. And I live in hope to see a good law enacted against so bad a
malefactor, as this soule-killing Nickname has been for these many years,
even far too many. And thus, and thus, and thus will the wicked smight and
smite the godly, the mean while, Revel. chap. 13 10. chap. 14.12.
if the Saints lie still (and if they do here is the patience of the Saints,)
the wicked smight on, and strike, as if they cudgelled only a sack, not a
Saint. The smighters sing whiles the Saints cry. The smighters curse whiles the
Saints pray. The smighters shed the Saints blood, whi^es they shed tears. If
on the otherside the Saints ever so modestly stir in the behalf of
righteousness, what a stir do those men presently make. If the god^y speak
of, and in the behalf of righteousness before ch^se m^n, then they jeare
them. These be factious, all ^or law; they be precise pharisaicall,
hypocritical, seeming to be after Gospel. If the Godly speak to th^se men for
righteousness, and justice, then they will use them, as the So^^mites did Lot
(at least say they would) viz. worse, Genesis 19 9.
for speaking but reason. They will misuse them wose for entreating them to be
better; Exodus 2.17, etc.
as Pharaoh dea^t with the Israelites.

If the Godly speak to God much in prayer to procure, or administer to them
justice, and righteousness; then their small friends, those sons of the world
will call them Lollards, Fox. Act. Mon. in Queen Mary's time.
because they cry Lord, Lord unto their God. If they be hunted with
persecution, so that they are forced to turn night into day, to pray before
day or a portion of righteous usage among men, and to worship the maker of
night and day, then those sons of Belial spirt that poison upon them, that
they rise early, to worship the Sunne-rising. Fox Act. Mon. of the ten
persecutions.
If they profess their belief of, and in all the Scriptures, that promise
them succor and propound to them examples how the Lord has delivered his
people from their enemies, as Sampson, and by him the Israelites from the
Philistines, by the jaw bone of an Ass, then they cast upon the Christians
this Heil-hatch't obloquie, Fox ibid.
and made-ly that the Christians worshipped an Asses head. If the Saints
profess they love the righteous, and especially that right doctrine and
righteous conversation they confessed and professed as Waldus, Hus, Luther,
Calvin, etc. then they call them in scorn, Waldenses Hussites, etc. As if
either of these was the highest original of that truth they profess; and that
they were as very Heretics, as they would have those to be, in the opinion of
them and their adherents. Finally, if these poor harmless sheep are
worried, and wearied from among men, Heb. 11.
to mountains, and dens, and Caves, and so part with all, and kiss poverty
with piety, rather then in riches to loose Christ, yet the wicked leave them
not, but as the dragon, cast out these floods, vomit out this filthy phlegm
after them, that they are poor men of Lions, the religion does naught, but
make men fools, and turn beggars (as many amongst us now adays can say, on
less occasion) and that such flying Christians are i. e. wolves of the ^ocks.
Fox Act. mon.
Turri-lupins. If these are not touches enough to discover the unrighteousness
of the old heavens, then men's cyes are old, and their judgments u^righteous,
that they cannot or will not see the right. For proportionably still it is so,
every particular way of piety and equity, and standing for these, get an ill
report, and a scornful name, from the black mouths of the sons of
darkness. As that they are Factionists, Humorists, Scrupulous fools,
Protestants stripped of their wits, enemies to the common peace, etc.

Thirdly, This Doctrine instructs us in this. That as long as the Church
dwells under, or in the old heavens, though she may in her true members have
some newness, and righteousness in themselves, yet in regard of the present
opposition of this old unrighteous world, and the indisposition of the present
old Church, contented with her old wrinckled, ragged condition, as if she knew
no better; that newness and righteousness are nothing to that she shall have,
when she shall see and sue for a better condition. The footing of this
instruction upon the doctrine is this; that the Church hopes for that she yet
has not. Saint Peter so long since Christ, and the Church still so long since
Saint Peter, sees more in the promise, Hope that is seen is no hope, Romans 8.
all is not yet shaken into the lap of the Church. She has in the Apostles
time, and in all times of true conversion, some newness, Ephesians. 4.23. Collos.
3.10. i. e. some personal new qualities, some particular new dispositions and
actions. Again, she has some righteousness. 1. Cor. 1.30.31. Tit. 2.11.12.
i. e. Relatively righteous in Christ, applied by faith, and imputed by God;
personally in her particular members righteous, with qualities and actions. But
these are nothing to that she shall have. Be ye. Ephe. 4.23. Heaven and
Earth. Renewed, Ephesians. 4.23. Col. 3.10
Saint Peter putts a difference: how a few members severally, then all the body
of the Church jointly, through the whole Habitable of the Church; now in
qualities and actions, then as it were in the very substance; Now in the
Concret; But then in the abstract, shall the Church be new, and righteous. All
the word of the Church so. New.
Revel. 21. Greated as a new substance. Isa. 65.17. made righteousness in the
abstract. Revel. 19.8. Righteously. Tit. 2.12.
All her newness now is but as the new-moone to a sevenfold sunshine. All her
righteousness is but as a glaring Diamond ring on one finger, Isa. 30.26.
to a whole suit of cloth of gold of sunbeams, nay of the sun, nay of the
sun of righteousness. Mal. 4.2. Rev. 12.1. And in this glory and state shall
righteousness dwell as Master of the house of the Church, and command in every
room and corner. But as yet, hitherto the Church has been withheld from this
eminent condition partly by the opposition of the old world; mixing the old
things of ceremonious Iudaisme, Mat. 9.16.
and Gentilisme (which spoil the newness of the Church.) Hindering, and
withholding righteousness. Romans 1. verse verse 18.32.
And partly by the indisposition of the old infirmity of the Church, to be
dark sighted and stiff in her limbs, spiritually to see, and move for that of
her dowry behind. She has been examinated, unsouled and exoculated. So that
as Christ said to the Disciples, John 16.12.
and Saint Paul to the Hebrews, she was unfit to hear of and see a better
condition. Heb. 5.11.12.
She has been beaten with unrighteousness, and bound from righteousness,
that she could not preach, speak, dispute or practice righteousness, Psalm.
125. Psalm. 37.6. Mat. 13.43.12.20.
till she was black and blew with her bonds and blows, and looked old with
sorrow, yet has been flattered to be the most knowing and righteous Church.
But these to come when new.

Use of examination.

1. Who are the true godly. 2. What the new heavens, etc. promised by God.
First, EXAMINATION, who godly In general, they are persons of an excellent
hope of an hearty heavenly heroic hope. They look and expect for what ever
God has promised to them, singly to their persons, or collectively to them in
their relation to the Church. We our selves (says the Apostle) groan within
our selves, waiting for the adoption, Romans 8.23.24.
there demption of our bodies. For we are saved by hope. But hope that is
seen, is no hope. But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with
patience wait for it, or expect it. As sure as Elijah hoping for rain from
heaven to refresh him and the whole kingdom, looked for it, sent his man to
view the clouds. So hope mentally looks for the mercies it hopes for from
heaven, for himself, and the Church. Hope is the eye to faith, as in the face
is the eye to reason, to look after what we believe, or know shall come to
pass. And therefore the Saints from time to time in the Scriptures (mark it
you that think ye believe) as they professed their faith, Ezra 10.2. Job 5.16.
Psalm. 42.11. Psalm. 43.5. Psalm. 119.49. Pro. 10.28. Ier. 17.7. Act. 26.6.7.
so solemnly they professed their hope. To teach us, no doubt what a barren
faith that is, which breeds no hope: what an helpelesse faith that will prove,
that is an hopeless faith. Let the wicked and ungodly therefore take this as
their character to have no true hope. Ephesians. 2.12. For they are the men that
are but the imagery, the imaginary of Christianity, that seeming to have an
eye of hope, but cannot turn it this way or that way, after that they profess
they believe.

In particular the hope of the true godly man is notable for its Resolution
Distinction Foundation Dimension Gradation
That is, its Setlednesse and courage Difference from false Buildings on the
promise Looking to the Church too Expectance of yet more newness and
righteousness.


All which show the bravenesse of the godly man's spirit, 1 Cor. 2.1^.
above them that have received only the spirit of the world.

The resolution or setldnesse of his hope, shows the godly man's patient
spirit, patient through courage. Romans 8.24.


The distinction, the betternesse of his spirit like Calebs. Numb. 14.24. Psalm.
119.80. 2 Timothy 1.7. Phil. 1.20.21. Heb. 11.24.25. Like the Bereans. Acts 17.11.


The foundation shows thee soundness of his spirit.

The Dimension, or width, shows his public spirit.

And the gradation, his sublime and heroic spirit.

Resolution. The godly man's hope is an hardy hope. For though (as the Doctrine
intimates) his hope shall be put to it, and that with so much (and more) as
breaks or melts away the worlds hope; And although in all ages (especially
hitherto) there is somewhat still behind even of this promise, that is hoped
for, and so the man is never fully pertaker of his hope: and although the day
of judgment comes apace (that cuts off all hope) and the scoffing of the
unbelievers hasten it, yet the godly man's hope comes in with a Nevertheless,
what ever the world hope; however his hope be put to it, yet he will hope. Hope
in the Motion is an expectation of future happiness of this life and that to
come, Spes in motu.
grace, and glory, in the inchoation, augmentation, and consummation. So that
in regard of thus much of its nature, hope must be, nay is an holding hope.
Spes in virtute.
If it be not always of a like bigness and strength; yet it is a long and
lasting hope. Hope in the virtue is a boldness of mind, conceived upon Gods
promised bounty, by which, through the use of the means, to attain to all the
degrees of happiness. So that is not ashamed; it is groundedly confident: Romans
5.
though it be not demonstratively sure, like the certainty of reason (as it is
not so contingently certain as the certainty of bare opinion) yet relatively,
in relation to the promise, and by the relation of the promise, informing for
certain what God will do, it has an infallible mental spiritual certainty
of Narration, nor the man nor his hope can possibly be mistaken, what he is
told. Nor can he mistrust him that promised, whether he will make that good
he told him in the promise. Heb. 6.18, 19.
Hope is an Anchor, its tooth or beard is afar off, unseene; and the ship may
play about, but not from the Anchor. So the things hoped are not seen; The
soul hovers, Romans 8 23.
and seems to be ready to run into the quicksands and sink, Psalm. 119.
Heb. 6.
but that the Anchor hope, fastened in the promise held toughly. And in this
tempest the Anchor is wrought further into the rock of Christ promising, by
the windlesse or engine of prayer. As the Apostle subjoineth unto hope
energeticall and efficatious prayer. Romans 8.
Thus brave Hope shows her self fixed, resolute and valiant both for the man,
and the Church. Will the spiritual enemies of the particular Christian fight?
she will fight, and conquer too. If sin and Satan, and world strike to make
him despair, 1 John 5.4. Romans 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
he will by the promise get up and stamp upon them. Faith steps up first, hope
immediately at the heels as the Armor-bearer after Jonathan, and both triumph
together: will the back friends of the Church dispute; hope will dispute, and
confute too. If difficulty object, hope will answer.

Difficulty objecting, that tampering a reformation, especially, it speedily,
and thoroughly, is full of danger to a state, to cause Casmes, and such
violences as attend on vacuum.

Hope answers, that she hopes better things. Reformation, if reformation,
cannot be dangerous. Papists have not been afraid, in Phillip and Mary's
days to alter Religion (the true, to false) therefore says hope, she hopes
that good protestants need not be afraid to make a reformation, in the
out-workes of true religion, ecclesiastical offices, and discipline, etc. A
thing which has been done in so many places with no mischievous effect; as in
the Low Countries, Denmark, Geneva, yea the reformation of all Christendom, by
Luthers means, wherein the substance of religion was altered, mischiefed no
Common wealth, or state matters. Yea Henry the eight, his rejecting the Popes
supremacy, and mining of the Abbeys (a greater matter then the things now
talked off) brought no prejudice to Church or state, but a preparative benefit
to both. So in Edward the sixth time to go much further. And Queen Elizabeth's
time, to return back all those turnings of religion, persons, ceremonies,
discipline, Nullus pudor ad meliora transire. Ambros.
etc. (invading by Queen Mary) did all well succeed. So that the Churches
need not repent of any thing they did.

If Difficulty object, that great is the antiquity of many things in the
present government.

Hope answers, that she hopes whatsoever is sin or error may not plead
prescription. Such things are not veritatis antiquitas, but vetustas erroris.
Tertul.
Or if but things in nature indifferent, or at first of some probable use, yet
as the Brazen Serpent, in the use were so altered, that they were altared,
though they were seen only in the air, but made crosses or scratchings of
blood in the conscience, they may says hope (for ought she knows) very
conveniently by good Hezekiahs be taken down: much more must ill customs be
cancelled, Justin.
though very ancient, if ill. Consuetudo non munita ratione non est consuetudo
sed corruptela. And that in our Church offices, Liturgies, Ceremonies, and
discipline are things much to be complained off, we cannot doubt, when the
Fathers (though in some things parties, at least some of them) do among them
make up a great and many voted complaint, against all those things we complain
of. The complainers are Ierom, Ambrose, Austia, Sedulius, Primasious,
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Theophilact, Cyprian, Ignatius. And their
particular complaints will Bucer, Gerard, Jewel, Schamier, and Voctius tell
you, in heaps and clusters, if any have not time to read the fathers
themselves, turn in those named controverters, to any head of Episcopacy,
discipline, etc. and ye may store your selves. And no wonder that these
Fathers, among the rest of their invectives, and stated questions resolved that
Bishops are not Jure divino; when Pope Pius the fourth said to the Spanish
Ambassador, that his Master did not know what he desired, in petitioning that
Bishops should be declared to be Iure divino in the Council of Trent. For said
the Pope, that being done, they would be as independent as he the Pope
himself.

If Difficulty object, that if things were so amiss all this while in the
Church, why did not the world hear of them sooner.

Hope answers, that she hopes the world has heard of somethings from some
heretofore. And she hopes that men will see that later times have set a new
impression almost upon all Ecclesiastical things and persons, and so by
simpathie, or consequence upon many secular. Men were not permitted to speak,
write, dispute, or any how to meddle with the questions now on foot, unless to
state them the clean contrary way. Scholars put upon it that they must chifely
read fathers, and Schoolmen. The book binders found their very trading to be
altered. Few books unless written by Papists would sell, among Scholars. And
the great volumes of renowned Protestants, yea a whole study of them at once
pronounced in mine ears a pack of Puritan Authors: Men coming to be made
Ministers, told they must hold their Tenets according to the times.

And unless the body of the Common wealth had been sick of convulsion fits,
that men had smarted in their purses, and bodily privileges, God knows how
long the soul of the Church had lain speechless with unutterable sorrow,
without comforting compassions or encouraging permissions showed unto her, that
she might speak for her self.

But says Difficulty, why what is the matter? what great reformation yet
wanting? have not we now gone fairly on, far enough? let ut not please our
brainesicke humors with changes.

Hope replies that she cannot but think that good changes rung by Artizans are
musical in judicious men's ears. That an ill Scholar is not said to be gone
from his College and university, till he be gone Cum pannis, with his
clothes; no more is inormitie gone from the universalitie of Ecclesiasticalls,
till it be gone Cum pannis. Not a ragge of superstition left behind. In some
Courts it is held that in some cases a dog keepers possession. Sparks left
in ashes sometimes fire an house. And that it has been found by experience,
that a door of an house being left unbolted, and tapers or candles left in a
readiness, they have been easily lighted by pilferers to affright the
inhabitants, and rob them. Christ at his passion rent the veil of the Temple
in twain from top to bottom, to teach the Jews to rend all their Jewish
ceremonies. And when in thirty or forty years they would not understand, the
Lord sent Vespasian and Titus, who beat the Temple to pieces. Better that that
Church had reformed with less cost then greater.

Thus you see the valor of true hope, whereas false hope, is a faultering
hope. To Satan, sin, the world it will succumbere. The hope of hippocrites
perish, wither at every blast. If it seem to have any life for a time or
struggle for life, it plainly desires to feed on that which Cannot nourish it
to live in health. It looks on examples, by ends, etc. Says false Hope, Do
any of the rulers believe in Christ? what if they do not? But they do.
Nicodemus the Publican, Matthew the Centurion. What now, will the Jews also
believe? No. So in our complaints. Do any of the Fathers, say some, hold with
you in your dislikes? what if they do not? Saint Paul himself will be
followed no further then as he followed Christ. Justin. Mart. Council. lat.
Conc. Carth. Council. Mil. Eusebius. Jren. Tertul. Greg. Naz. Conc. Carth. Con.
Aquis. Origin. Every ono casting in his share of opposition against the
corruptions of these times.
But the fathers are for us, as we have in part showed, and might name many
more. What now, will ye be of our side now? No. Why then you do but pose us
with questions. But intend to oppose our judgments of truth. Now is no time
nor place to ^tie particulars, and those Authors and made treatises, store are
in print.

Secondly, Distinction. The Godly man's hope differs from worldly men's hope, in
one maine thing (above the rest) intimated in Text, Context, and Doctrine. We
must then know what that is. And to speak the best, or moderately of it: Their
hope is such as tends to security, carnality, formality, etc. More distinctly
and particularly. The worldly man, or man of the world, personally for himself
hopes (as the Text Context and Doctrine intimate) that he need not be so
terrified from sin, with the consideration of judgment to come, or with the
word threatening it. Deuteronomy. 29.19.
He hopes, as those in Deuteronomy. and in the Psalms, Psalm 50.21. 2 Timothy 3.
that God is not so severe against sin. He hopes as they in Epistle to Tim.
that a form of godliness without the comberance of the power, will serve the
turn. Apoc. 3. verse. 1. verse 17.
He hopes as Sardis, and Laodicea, that a name to live, and a lukewarm
condition in religion, is a safe and a rich condition.

Ecclesiastically concerning the Church his hope is, verse 8.
as Collos. chap. 2. that the glory of the Churches religion and worship
consists in subjectionto vain deceit and tradition of men, to ordinances,
taste not, touch not, handle not, in a show of humility and wisdom in
will worship and neglect of the body. In meat and drink, and holy days. In
doctrines of men. In bowings, operibus operatis, or in whatsoever else humane
devised thing mixed with a confused intention of blind devotion. Though by this
position, that human honest intention of it self may devise forms of
devotion, has brought in all the Iudaisme, Turcisme, and Papisme that now
pester the Christian world. This poor hope hopes that it is no superstition to
fix devotion upon the foresaid or the like humble, seemingly harmless
expressions, and gestures, without a divine warrant. Though if any thing, that
be superstitio. And it hopes that the Pope is not the Antichrist though that
Tenet over throws the book of the Revelation. He hopes that the same
ecclesiastical offices, ceremonies and discipline, as are set up by the Pope,
are no appendix, nor tail of Antichrist. And finally he hopes that this hope
is a good hope. Though a good hope is only of good things, not of evil. Spes
est tantum de bonis Fides de bonis and malis.
And if it hope for things only good in appeareance, that hope is only good in
appeareance.

Whereas the hope of a Christian (that we may now see its difference) is of
all good things, especially spiritual, and mostly those things that are most
spiritual. The godly man for himself hopes to attain an height and eminency
of comfort and conscience, as the Apostle intimates in this chapter, and text,
and doctrine. And therefore the godly man is afraid of the lowest, meanest, and
smallest sins. In action, his heart smites him for vaineglorious numbering any
outward confidences. 2 Samuel 24.10.
For taking any pride or putting the least confidence in the creature. In words
he fears a witty kind of jesting, Ephesians 4.5. (...). Which Arist. in his Eth.
commends for a moral virtoe Psalm. 19.
if sinful, tending to the dishonor of God, or wronging of his neighbor. In
his thoughts he fears any secret evil thoughts, yea so much as the filth of
them. And concupiscence to him (though the Papists say it is no sin) is that
which makes him cry out of his miserableness by reason of the body of sin,
Romans 7.
and so of death.

As for the Church, Exodus 10.26.
and her reformation; For the matter of its reformation his hope is that not an
hoof of it shall be bated to the adversary. By the divided hoof the Church
was distinguished, This the Apostle alludeth to Gal. 2.14. (...). verse 14
as she that had skill to discern between law and Gospel. His hope in that not
adust, or small stone of the reformation of the Church shall be trodden
underfoot and lost, Psalm. 102. And for the time, he hopes the time is come,
when Gods peoples hearts are come to a full bent of prayer. As it is in that
Psalm, and other Psalms. verse 13. Psalm. 10.17.
And sutably his desire that the Church should not give way, nor himself
approve of any thing contrary to reformation, (...).
not so much as for an hour. For he knows that every dust and every minute of
the Churches liberty, Gal. 2.5. Col 2.14.15.16.
cost a precious drop of Christ's blood. Things so sadly bought should not be
lost for a pipe or song.

Thirdly, Foundation. The ground of this hope is the promise. A good man is a
great promise man, all for promises. In prayer, he looks to the promise, Jacob
in his prayer urged the promise. Genesis 32.9.
In practice he looks to the promise. Shall I go up? shall I conquer; says
David. In all he looks for a promise. In faith he looks to the promise; In
hope he looks to the promise; Acts 2.41.
so here. So that the godly man is conversant in the promises; converted by the
promises; Acts. 2.
yea versed and turned whethesoever God will have him by the promise, as is
abundantly showed in the Hebrews, cha. 11. This therefore makes the hope of
Gods Israel, in this land so quick, and lively, so cheerie and fixed on God, in
his way, works and means, and among the means, on you the Parliament,
because some words have fallen from Gods mouth, whereby we have promises, to
make this our land a land of promise. Now about, to be the promised time of the
reformation of the Churches in Christendom. Yea, and in all divine
probability (so far as we can see) you to be a promised people, to help in
the reformation of the Church in his Majesty's dominions. This, a promised
land, i. e. one of the promised lands. For it is one of the ten homes, i. e.
one of those kingdoms of the ten dominions of the ten Kings of Europe, that
having once hated and opposed the whore of Babylon, shall never be reconciled
to her, till she be burnt with fire. Apoc. 17. verse 12. to the 17.
And that we may not fear and doubt the fulfilling; it is added, that the word
of the Lord shall be fulfilled. And that those things that seem to oppose,
shall no longer oppose, till Gods word be fulfilled and to the end that all the
words of God be fulfilled. But when that is done, See Dent upon the Revelat.
Gods time is come (of which by and by) he will no doubt put it in their hearts
(let men buzze in their ears what they can) to fulfill that aforesaid promise.
This promise is so plainly interpreted by the Holy Ghost that it cannot be
evaded, or eluded; Revel. 17.12.
For it shows that the ten horns are ten Kings which formerly submitted to
the beast, and lost their regal power; but in Gods time shall be her
destruction.

Again, some learned, Parker on that place of Revel.
upon that Revel. 16.8. understand by sun, some eminent Church and state (for
so the Scripture sometimes speak) who having a vial of Antichrists tyranny,
oppressions, superstitions, etc. powered upon them, are provoked hereby to
scorch men, all Antichrists brood, and make them blaspheme for their utter
rejecting them.

Take this for a close, when Antichrist is to come down, the Isles shall fly
away, rather afraid of her judgment, then in love with her sins. Revel.
16.20.

2. This is the promised time; Now by this time its begun. For the period of
the reign and power of Antichrist of Rome is but forty two months in all;
Apoc. 1^. Apoc. 13.
even all the while the Temple is measured to be trampled, the woman flees into
the wilderness, and the faithful witnesses prophecy in sackcloth. Signs sad
enough, and plain enough, that this while that Antichrist reigns: especially
seeing the same time and beginning and length of time is prescribed to all
those events. These forty two months reckoning after the prophetical manner,
usual in all prophesies of this nature, a day for a year, Antichrists period
is about 1260. years; That is, from his evident rise in the world, to his
general, and final fall in the world, are so may years. For times a time and
half a time signifies three years and an half. i. e. Forty two months
solarie. i. e. of 30 days in a month, and Forty two months, of 30 days in a
month, makes just 1260 days, which prophetically are 1260 years.

From hence some of the most learned reckon thus, That seeing it is said the
whole bulk of the 42 months, contained, the beast shall still have some power
to war against, and kill the two witnesses in sackcloth; that therefore his
power of 42 months is not to be accounted in a continued time. But that the
beast was interrupted above five of those months, whiles he lay sick of the
deadly wound which was about 140 years. And now after the faithful witnesses
had finished their prophesies (but not their mourning and sufferings) the beast
redeemeth the 140. years, the five months he was before let from his prey,
and so to make up his full Forty two months. For for five months the woman,
the temple, and the witnesses also had a respit from his fierceness. And so
all in their several conditions the persecutor and the persecuted had an
intermission of like length, and so after their return to their former
condition to do and to suffer, their 42. months run on and period together.
Now by these learned accompters shutt on the forty two months (continuedly
considered, not excepting out the five months cessation) to the apparent rise
of the Roman Antichrist, apparent in all Histories, Divine and Humane, to have
been about 600 years after Christ, or therabouts, not very many over or under,
by general agreement, and Antichrist must needs be fully down within two
hundred years, Very probably near half the work is done, by the state
preparations in Christendom. And the third part near at hand. Eusebius. Eccles.
Hist. lib. 7. c. 11.
a few over or under. Mean while long before the work must begin, and be on
foot, in doing. For a 200. years are but a small time to pull him down in a
hundred kingdoms. Rome was not built in a day; nor will it be pulled down in
a prophetic day a year, or two. But if Antichrist arise sooner. 425.
Celestinus then so much the sooner. But reckon we with them more exactly, and
except out the five months of cessation, out of the middle of the 42. And knit
the five months, i.e. about 140. If we should advance the first rise higher as
some do, as it presently follows here we need not wonder, considering that
text. 2 These. 2.7.
years on to the end of the 42. months, that is 1260 years and add to all
306. as the more exact account of Antichrist beginning, and then he must needs
be utterly thrown down within 50 years hence. And therefore the work must
needs be now on foot, to some good purpose.

Others upon these principles lay down by Saint John long concluded with much
comfort, that the time of Antichrists fall should begin to good purpose 1639.
Napier. Dent
which they expressed in their books some 40. some 60. years since. And what
God has done from that year and so on, you have eyes and years to inform
your selves, perhaps better then I.

Add to these things, touch the time, Revel. 16.17.
that when the seventh Angel powered his vial on the air, it is said it is
done, i.e. Then presently Babylon comes in remembrance to be judged; just then
when vexation was powered upon the spirits of all carnal men (yet of the
kingdom of the Prince of the air.) being gulled with the Agents of
Antichrist, and stung with his tail. And just thus also one of the seven
Angels that had the vialls of the seven last plagues (likely he that had the
seventh) came and showed Ioh: the bride the lambs wife. Though this place
immediately means the Old Teastaments Antichrist in the time of Michabees, yet
it is the type of proportion of the New Testaments by Antichrist, prophetical
application comp. Dan. 8.13 with Apoc. 11.2. Dan. 12.7. (...) ^poc. 12.14 and
Dan. 12* 21.12. with Apoc. 11.3. Daniel says the power of the holy people
shall be scattered, A time, times and half a time, three year and a half
i.e. 1260. days. But if we begin the account lower; From the ceasing of the
sacrifice, and setting up abomination after that scattering. Then the days are
1290. But if any desires to be so happy as to see not only the inchoation but
also the augmentation of the Church, his new reformation, let him reckon upon
1335 days. i.e. years. So Saint John had a double sight of the new Church;
first prepared Revel. 21.2. secondly consummated verse 9. First, she is a
prepared bride. Secondly, a married wife to Christ.

Close we the consideration of time with propounding that Dan. 12. verse. 7.
verse 11. verse 13. to the consideration of wise men.

Lasty, for ought I can see you are the promised people, you the Parliament and
Parliaments of his Majesty's three kingdoms to be leaders and examples to the
Christian world to pull down that of Antichrist that is yet standing. Beside
that you are Gods gr^^^ (...) ^ost solemn ordinance for such a design, for
nation (...) exploits, 1 Samuel 6.1. You are the votes of all well (...). You are
the subject of Millions of prayers (...) ^^^ng cries of the godly (no small
good sign, Psalm. 10.17.) This further is to be considered, that they that are
to measure out the reformation of the city, the Jerusalem of God, must be a
man, yet an Angel, Revel. 21.17. Humane yet divine, and sublime, in a higher
degree of having stamped upon them the image of God in power and Majesty. 2 Samuel 14.17.
And a King (which is the chief of your entire body) is by the Scriptures
termed an Angel. Revel. 21.8.12.
Yea sometimes a collection of worthies in the Church is termed an Angel; as
one Angel, for their divine unity and amity. Revel. 21 5.6. See Brightman.
Again they that help in the reformation must be those that can make a
decreed writing, can write statutes.

Finally, the northern gates of the reformed Church, are set up with the
first, Revel. 21.13. Absolutely, first Ezech. 48.31. should seem the Northern
people of the Christian world shall first, or with the first enter into the new
reformation. They and the Eastern parts, the forefront. New England, Swedes,
Danes, and our Kingdoms belonging to his Majesty. Evil from the North. Ier.
4.6. Good from the North.
In stead of the former. Abs Aquilone malum, spoken in Scripture, and in our
country proverb (in another sense) now it is Abs Aquilone bonum. God will
thus in mercy, recompense the evils of the Church, that the places of her
troubles, shall be the beginning of her reformation. Psalm 48.2.3. Isa. 14 13.
As the temple was at the North side of Zion, King David's palace, and therefore
his posterity looked much on that Northern tract. So Christ the Son of David
on the North of the Church. Now all your hearts that are ballasted with true
hope upon the consideration of the promises, will take more life, will be fed,
and refreshed with the promise, the most proper Cordial and food of hope. You
will hear the promises say often in your ears, as God did often, even four times
in one chapter, to Josh. Be strong, Josh. 1.6.7.8.9.18.
and of a good courage. And as you heard in the Morning, by another, out of 1 Chronicles. 20.10. Be strong and do it. Mat. 7.
But false hope, being unpropt by promise in tempestuous trials fall as the
house on sandy foundation. False hope, produces nothing but the water-bladders
of fantasy, they seem as comely, as big, but they are as suddenly
nothing, as they swelled to that seeming thing.

Fourthly, Dimension. The compass and reach of true hope, Heaven and Earth. It
gripes within its circle the public good, the restoration of the Church like
repayring Nehemiah and Ezra. Ezra 10.2. Lam. 3.20.24. Psalm. 130.7.8.
Like lamenting condoling Jeremiah; like Psalmodious, King David. Though true
hope, be not always a strong hope, at every minute, in every inch of the
twisting it is not alike big, yet it is a long hope every way large. And in the
public good, good men hope to find their particular good. Psalm. 132.
As Alexander hoping to conquer the world, hoped no doubt to find a meet
palace for his own habitation. And as sounds come to the ear per circuitum,
by ayrie waves and circles, and so the sound is gathered into the ear per
anfractus, by the windings thereof; so true hope comes to the ear of the soul
by the circulations of the general promises, of the promises of the general
good of the Church, that in the midst of that (and no otherwise) they shall
find true comfort. This part or piece, the Saint hopes no otherwise to live and
be safe, but in the welfare of the whole. The whole being of relation, is to
be referred to another. Hope is relative to the promise (as we said before)
and the Hoper is relative to the Church as a part to the whole; And therefore
true hope cannot be divided from its strong^tye and subsistence with and upon
the general promise of the publik good. In so much that this genuine and
generous hope strongly sympathiseth with the public good, Lam. 1.12. Amos 6.
Psalm. 139.
with an Antipathie against the worlds Apathy and sencelesenesse of the common
good. Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by. And woe be to them, they
consider not the afflictions of Joseph. Hate I not them O Lord that hate thee?

On the contrary the worldly man's hope is a narrow hope. His way is the broad
way. But his goodness (even his seeming goodness) is very narrow. No wider
then his own door. No longer then the reach of his own arms. Himself is
the center. All means to advance his own ends, the circumference; like a
jugler, he labors to conjure all into his own circle; upon all else his hope
looks a squint, with a purblind eye that can see only things close to it
self. He hopes to live to build, to purchase, to enjoy the world, what ever
become of the common good. The world can Glut it, and bowl it, at least cant
it, Amos 6.
and laze it, and never be troubled at the affliction of Joseph.

Fisthly, Gradation, eminency or Exaltation of this pole star of hope. For a
yet more new and righteous heaven and earth. The godly man hopes that the
Church shall not always live in a mere drudgery and struggling to maintain
life and soul, and to attain to no more, still to live from hand to mouth,
and get no stock of comfort before hand. But as there are heroic moral, so
heroic theological virtues, among which faith and hope have their chief
rooms. Romans 4.38.4.18. Hab. 3.17.18.19.
So that this heroic hope of the godly man is that though all the Church, in
the true members, be new, a new creature, be righteous, is in a kingdom of
heaven, i. e. in the Kingdom of grace: yet that there shall be a more abundant
grace, and godliness bestowed, on the Church, she shall be more heavenly,
more new, more righteous. And that upon earth. Even the earth of the Church
should become more new. The earth shall be as the Heavens, and the Heavens
shall be far more heavenly. Isa. 30.26.
The light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun. And the light of
the sun shall be seven fold as the light of seven days, in the day that the
Lord binds up the breach of his people, and heals the strok' of their wound.

And whiles the godly man primarily hopes thus for the advancement of the
Church; he cannot but put in himself by consequence that he hopes for
himself that he shall he a Convert of the second edition. Not a convert
barely, and for want of Gods special presence and his special acquaintance
with God, to be as a beast sometimes, in temptations especially. This special
acquaintance with God (of which Jobs friends spoke) is as a second convertion.
Psalm. 73. Job 22.21.
Such a man knows more of God; such a man is not contented to be newborn
only, Psalm. 25.14. Job 22.21.
and cry as an infant, and barely live; Be a general honest man, salute God in
morning in family duties for all day. And not live particuly with him all day
after. Psalm. 119.164. Cant. 1.2.13. Cant 2.5.6.
But he must have intimate society with God, eminent conscience and comfort. On
contrary, Carnal Gospellers, pusillanimous half professers, are men of a
weak spirit, of a dwinderling spirit. They think it is a jolly hope, a great
strength to hope the Church shall not be annihilated, totally eclipsed. A good
hope to sit down and say it is well the Church is no worse. She shall never
be free from blemishes and therefore to what end should I seek for further
reformation?

And such a man as this that is so low, and flat in his hope for the Church, he
is as flat in his hope for himself. He hopes if he can a little dislike some
gross vices in others, some inormous disorders in the Church, that presently
this is conversion. That a good kind neighbor, a good common-wealteh man to
maintain the principles of the building (no matter for the wainscot and
trimming within, verse 13.
like the Kings daughter, Psalm. 45.) is presently a good Christian. He minds
not the example of Ioab, that was good in the former way, but little or nothing
in the latter, that we can read. Magistratus judicat virum. If a man has any
power of godliness, Exodus 32.26.27.18.
he will show it on Gods side when he is empowered with civil power, to
countenance the power of godliness: David having danced before the Arc would
not now be daunted for his dancing. Thus Joshua Josia, Hezech. Nehem. Ezra.
upon a lawful call he will be as zealous as Phineas. Upon an open contempt of
profession, he will answer for the honor of religion as David to Mich^l; upon
a threatening of the true worship of God, and disclaiming Idolatry, he will be
as resolute and as open as Daniel. No flatteries of the Court, or fears of his
enemies cruelties, cold make him to shut his windows to true piety, or open
his mouth to Idolatry.

2. EXAMINATION, what is that promised newaltie in the text and doctrine. And
by the way let me tell you that now, before it be on earth, every man has not
a sight strong enough to see it. They have a false eye, as he that thought a
field of thistles to be a squadrant of pikemen, and armed men; So many fear
the thistles of the Church, as edge-tooles, sharp swords to cut the hands of
them that shall meddle with them; Cherubicall, et Serapbicall. Flying and
flaming knowledge and zeal.
as before we showed, that angelical men, only meet to make an angelical
Church, exact walking, Noah and Enoch with God in their persons, the fit men to
set up righteousness in their generations; so now that not every man is
capable to see absent or afar off this new estate. Nevertheless we (says
the Apostle (not every one) look for a new heaven, etc. And so the Apostle
Saint John in the 21. of the Rovelation, makes the same preface to his
discourse of this new estate, with showing to whom this shall be revealed
aforehand to an angelical man. A John like man, acquainted with Gods special
manifestation. This the Scripture intimates every where. Both in the places
alleged for the special convert: Job 22.21. Psalm. 25.14.
and else where. As God drew nearer to the true plain hearted Jacob then to
diverse others. Showed himself more to tender conscienced Ios^ph, Psalm. 16.7.
then to all his brethren. More to David, then to many other good men of the
same greatness. In a word therefore, Psalm. 45. Cant. in every chap.
the man that would have still more close union with Christ, shall see more of
the glory of the Church. A man slack in practice shall be dim in knowledge.
2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. But whiles men are co^sciencious doing men, they shall
be more knowing men. John 7.17. A moving hand strikes fire, and causes more
light. Let me appeal to men and Ministers that lay still four and five
years since, not stirring a finger for many truths, whether they have not
seen more, since they have practiced more. All this I preface, being carried
by the text, and commentary, Revel. 21. that men may see that if they can^ not
foresee, not withstanding all discriptions, that new glorious Church, that the
fault is in themselves.

Now to the use of Examination it self. This new glorious Church, if we go to
the promise intimated in Doctrine and Text, as thither we must go, is to be
discovered under these three notions.

This new Church is a new world.

An holy City.

An a dorned bride.

So that though in the Text and Doctrine is expressed only a new world; yet in
the promise is consignified, and in the world is included the city and the
persons, the Bride, or it would be a strange world that had neither of the
other two in it.

A NEW WORLD.

The substance whereof are Heaven. Earth. Sea.


The qualities. Newness. Righteousness.


1 Substance.

1. Sea. There S. John begins first. Telling us there was none. i. e. No
foggie, pudled, restless sea of corrupt Doctrine. And our Apostle Saint Peter
mentions not the sea at all; therefore it was all one, as if he had said there
was none. He would have it taken for granted: and yet the Church, has a sea,
that is a pure sea, of sound doctrine. And therefore called a Sea of glass,
clear as crystal. Revel. 4. Revel. 15. For as such a sea is most like to the
shining heavens, and is the more excellent, strained, clarified part of the
earth, like as Diamonds, etc. So the sound doctrine of the Church, is the most
excellent thing on earth, and most like to Heaven. But the Church (thus
renewed) has no watery puddle sea of corrupt doctrine. At the mention whereof,
Saint John begins, because such doctrines, As good doctrine transformes, 2
Cor. 3. last so bad
such All-things. State doctrines make timeservers, fantastic, quidditative
doctrines make proud factious, man advancing doctrines, the power of his will,
the goodness of his nature, the worth of his works, make licentious livers,
in confidence they can mend, and make God amends when they lust. Sin-mincing
doctrines. Socinianisme is herein worse the^ Arrianisme Arrianisme denies the
Deity of Christ. But yet makes him as ancient as the creation That God created
Christ first, and then by him all things. But Socinianisme denies the Deity of
Christ, saying he is of no more antiquity then his conception. Est ne Christus
Deus? Imo, sed non summus. So the Socin. Chatechisme. Phil. 3.20. (...). Mat.
21.25. John 7.16. 2 Pet. 1.21.
The Pope is not The Antichrist, neglect of the Lords day after public duties,
is no fin, etc. Make a high way for the Popish Synagogues, and the Protestant
Churches to become one mass or lump of confusion. For this cause, this is
laid first as a foundation of comfort, that the Church has no corrupt sea of
false doctrine. No sea of Rome; no Episcopal sea, that shall commit or permit,
or shall be permitted to cause any tides of new Arrianisme ( i. e.
Socinianisme) or Pelagiamisme, Semi-Pelagianisme, Arrinianisme advancing
nature, or Papisme, advancing superstition and works. Observe that the new
Heaven and new Earth has no sea, when new, i. e. when the power of the Church
was restored to her self, all the Heavens and the Earth called the Church, and
in it wholly, was the power to sist doctrines. No Churches so free from
diversities and corruptions of doctrines as the Churches of Holland, Geneva,
etc.

2. Heavens; as hear are many Heavens mentioned, so many things to be noted.
But we can but name them, hardly, because many.

1. The Church is called Heaven; 1. because she is heavenly. Heavenly in her
mind, and conversation. Her whole polity or traffic is in heaven; her
doctrine is from heaven, not from men. Heavenly, in her devotions. Unto thee O
Lord says David ( Psalm. 25.) will I lift up my soul. And thy will be done in
earth as it is heaven, O our Father which art in Heaven. Heavenly in her
intention, all she does, do tend to heaven, that she may end in heaven. 2.
Because she is Heavenlike. 1 Cor. 10.31. Revel. 4.10 11.
The whole platform of her discipline and form of worship, is according to
the fashion of Heaven. See you make all things according to the pattern showed
thee in the mount, Heb. 8.5.
i. e. from heaven. When she prays in all things thy will be done in earth as
it is in heaven; be sure she means chieftly in things of divine worship,
Malach. 4.2. Revel. 1^.1.
that all may be as immediately from God, and to God, as spiritual as may be.
She is heavenlike for her light, heat, motion, influence, etc. She has the
light of the sun. The glory and righteousness, and doctrine of Christ. She
has at her several changes (when it pleases God to clear her nights) the
light of the moon, outward comforts. Revel. 12.1. Revel 1. Genesis 1.
She has the light of the stars, her Ministers, and all their parts to
inlighten her. Yea as God made the first heavens all a light body, before the
several lights were made; and since by the translucidation of all the stars
no part of heaven is dark, Ier 31.34.
So all the heaven of the new Church is full of light in every member; every
true member has the spirit of illumination and knowledge teaching them the
inmost meaning of the Scriptures, in all necessaries to salvation. So also has
the Church heat as well as light, as the light of the heavens, is the chariot
to bring heat to, and in the sublunarie bodies here below, natural and proper
light, that is not borrowed, will not be separated from heat. Therefore the
officers of the Church are called Angels. And they often are called Seraphims,
coals, for their zeal; and all the members of the Church are said to sees in
spirit. i. e. Rom 12.11. (...).
servent in zeal. Not like Sardis, nominall, or like Laodicea lukewarm in
profession. The Church also is full of motion like the Heavens. She has her
motion of trepidation. Psalm. 2
She rejoices in the Lord with trembling at his glorious greatness, She
serves him, but with holy fear; She has her direct motion from east to west,
she rises from death to life; she grows in her graces; she has her
sublimities of heavenly raptures; and she has her retrograde motion; her
returning motion. That when she has gone astray like a loss sheep, she
repents and return's to the chief shepherd of her soul; she returns to her
first husband. 1 Pet. 2. last.
She returns to her father as the Prodigal. For her motion, Hosea 2.
her Ministers are also called Angels, which are often called Cherubims, i. e.
wings. Finally, Luke. 15.
the influence of the Church is hevenlike. That as the heavens prosper the
earth, with spring and harvest; so whoever receive and entertain the Church,
or its members, prosper for her sake. Potipher by entertaining Joseph, Laban by
entertaining Jacob, Psalm. 122.
Obed-Ed^m by entertaining the Ark^, yea all that love and pray for Jerusalem
shall prosper. 3. Church called Heaven. Because as there is more heaven then
earth; So there is (reckoning every way) spiritually more heaven then earth,
more heavenlinesse then earthlinesse. i. e. In the Churches judgment, desire,
approbation, supplications. She altogether esteems, approves, desires all
heavenly things. And all earthlinesse creepes in by stealth, with dislike when
discovered. The Church meddles with earthly things, but in an heavenly manner.
She has to do with earthly things, but for a moment, but she has an
eternal state of glory in heaven. Finally the earth is of no use to her, Luke
16.9.
but to further her toward he^ ven. The unrighteous Mammon to be her friend;
to befriend her in her journey to heaven. Acenter is only to draw a circle


2. The Church is called, or compared to heavens, in the plural. And that
because there is a plurality of heavenly things in the Church. Beside that
principally God is there Revel. 21. His doctrine is there. His worship is
there, his graces there, in every true particular member. So that here is the
heaven of the primum mobile, the first moving heaven, viz. Convertion by Gods
grace. God is called by the heathen Philosopher, the first mover, and he first
moves by his grace. Here is the Christalline heaven. The heaven of purity and
sanctity of discipline, moving every thing orderly. Here are the heavens of
the stars of light, of which before. Yea here is, in the reformed Church The
Caelum empyrium, the heavens of glory. For that sanctification of men's persons
and conversation is nothing else but a part of glory: Romans 8.29.30
and therefore in the chain of man's salvation, the Apostle includes it and
signifies it under the word glory. And all these heavens sweetly move one under
another, orderly and perpetually.

3. The order is observable, first the heavens are named, then secondly the
earth, answerable to the order of the Creation, and the history thereof. Genesis
1.1. In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. If ever we will
have men reformed, we must get religion to be reformed. If salt shall loose it
favor, wherewith shall any thing be salted? If ever we will hope for a
reformed common wealth, we must help forward the refortamion of the Church.
The standard must be right, if you will have private men measure and deal
right. If the vital parts the brain, liver and heart be amiss, do not
minister right blood, spirits, and motion, the exterior limbs of the body
cannot be well. A sad soul makes a sickly man. Till Jacob reformed the Church
in his family, casting out the idols, etc. he was never settled in the
polity, Genesis 31. Genesis 32. Genesis 33. Genesis 34. Genesis 35. ver. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and worldly affairs of his family, but hunted like a patridge, by Esau, by
Laban, by fear of Sechemits. But when the Idols were thrown out, and an alter
built to the true God, and religion settled, then had he rest, in Canaan. So
when Church and common wealth grew to big for the shell of a particular house
and family, and so crept forth into a Kingdom, and Nation, when the whole
Church in her general worship was corrupted, the whole common wealth was
vassalised, look else over all the story of the Judges.

3. Earth. Hear is the last part of the new world. And though there is but one
earth in the singular mentioned, yet here is more then one thing remarkable.

First, The Church is called Earth, 1. To mind her of her impiety,
mortality, and misery, while she is on earth. Ier.
That as the Prophet Jeremiah cried out three times O earth, earth, earth,
hear the word of the Lord, to put every man in the world in mind that he is
earth in his beginning, earth in his continuance, earth in his dissoltuion. So
it puts all the collective Church in mind, that whiles she is on earth, she
has some iniquity, some sin, and so has not here her spiritual
perfection. That she shall meet with outward miseries (besides inward agonies
of mind and conscience) and so shall have the Gospel-afflictions. 2 Timothy 1.8.
Partake of the afflictions of Christ. That she is mortal, she must leave the
earth at last, to get to heaven. Secondly, to mind her of her consolation;
that where she has been wronged she shall be righted; she has been
tyrannised over, on earth, and she shall reign on earth, Revel. 5.10. she
has been made old, in her face by tears, in her clothes by superstition,
and humane inventions. And now she shall be made a new earth. All her
particular members shall be new with grace, comfort, liberty of the Gospel
above all that formerly she has had, in quantity, or quality, in one if not
both. Rugaque in antiqua front senilis erat, --

I am juvenilis erit.

2. The earth is joined to or with the heavens. Nay, it is placed in the middle
of the round of the heavens; so that it cannot depart from its center point
(when that may be) but unto the heavens. i. e. at the last day into glory.
So that all the particular members are compassed about with heaven, influenced
with the virtue of heaven. All of them are heavenised; and therefore all the
members of the Church are called the new earth within the Orbs of these new
heavens. The Church is the whole of the particular members. Not a Hierarchy, a
Prelacie, or a Clergy only, are termed the Church But all that Christ
redeemed, are called Christ body, i. e. his Church. A body must have all its
variety of members 1 Cor. 12. It were monstrous to see one all mouth or all
eye, or all both. Ministers can be no more of the body of the Church, as a
Church, but the eye and mouth of the Church, yea moreover; when the whole earth
that is under heaven is put to signify the Church, what less can be
understood, then that all the world shall be a Church, in the renewed condition
thereof. Sure not many, if any whole Kingdoms shall be excepted: Mat. 13. Out
of our common prayer book was expunged the fair interpretation of kneeling at
the Communion, That the Papists might not be offended Then. 2. The prayer
against the Pope, that we might not offend his Clerge. 3. The prayer for the
Kings posterity, as the elect posterity of an elected father. That the word
elect might not offend the Arminians.
some sprinklings of bran theremay be in the 3. peckes of meal of the Church,
but not one or two of sand, and the rest of meal. The Protestant reformed
Church shall no more shoot away themselves to find Papists, etc. till they had
almost lost themselves. Thus of the substance of this new world. Heaven and
Earth.

Next of the qualities Newness. Righteousness.


For both are to be referred both to Heaven and Earth. For it is not (...) in
which earth. But (...) in which heaven and earth. As for the Sea, that is not
mentioned unless by way of exclusion. i. e. of the bad. As for the good, ye
sea of Crystal, the sound doctrine; that cannot be said to be new, for it is
semper cadem; always the same, in substance and meaning. Nor can it be said
to have righteousness; for it is righteousness it self, and so non recipit
magis and minus, it is always alike righteous. But the heavens of a reformed
worship, of worship made more spiritual, set more right, and the earth of men
renewed in knowledge and grace, and made more righteous in life, may be
properly said to be new heavens and new earth wherein dwells righteousness.

1. These Heavens and Earth are said to be New: first, to note that all old
things are done away, Revel 21.4. Isa. 65.17. All things of the old Serpent,
Idolatry, Revel. ^1.12.
superstition prophannesse, Hos. 2.17. All the things of the old man. All his
man inventions, Mat. 15.9. All old things of the old ceremonial law, of
Judaisme, much more of Hethenisme, Papisme, etc. When God abolished that he
intended not, that his Church should only change their yoke and burden. The
whole dispute of the Apostle in his Epistle to Galat^ tends this way. The
intent of Christ's coming was to this purpose. John i.
The Law came by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. 2 To note
that this new state of the Church must be as created, of nothing; So the
promise. Jsa. 65.17. men are so wedded to their own pha^tasies, and brain
devised forms, so opposite by nature to spiritual worship, they themselves
being carnal, and sensual, that God must create all new, if he will have all
new. And this he will do, as he did the world. He created it by the word, let
there be; let it be so. So the Lord by the power of his word of his Gospel will
direct and draw his own Church, and all the friends thereof to set up their
new reformed worship, and to draw men to that new life and conversation in and
toward the Church, which he calls here the new heavens, and the new earth.
The Lord will in special manner inlighten, and inliven men, especially
Ministers, to write and discover what is this new state of the Church. Master
Brightmar on Rev. 21.9. Thinks that some holy man shall set forth a book
wherein he shall make it plain to all the faithful that the glory and
Majesty of this Church shall be most divine and heavenly. But more likely a
collection of men, one or two out of every shire and County appointed by
authority, to meet and agree as one man, to draw nakedly and barely out of the
Scriptures, those clear truths concerning this new state, as will not endure
any quiddities or querckes, and able to bear down all contradictories opposed
against them.

2. These Heavens and Earth are said to have righteousness dwelling in them.
(...) in which Heavens and Earth dwells righteousness. Therefore all these
righteousnesses dwell in the one or the other. First the doctrine of truth and
righteousness, or right tenets. Not the doctrines of lies, legends, fables,
flatteries. 2. The Doctrine of Christ's righteousness, of justification by
faith in him. As with much struggle that doctrine was opened in the first
founding of this new Church (though long and much, Romans 10.3.
since that eclipsed) so now it shall dwell, and abide in the settled new
estate, and never be banished from its free hold. The doctrines of man's ability
to keep the law of justification by works, etc shall have no more place. 2
Tit. 11.12.
Thirdly, the righteousness of piety, or godly conversation, every man shall
have a care in his particular conversation, to practice righteousness.
Fourthly the righteousness of amity, and charity shall dwell hear. Isa. 11.5.6.
Men shall not be wolves, tigers, etc. i. e. persecutors of their brethren.
Fifthly, here shall be the righteousness of Christ's discipline. Christ himself
by the scepter of his mouth, not of mers brains, shall order, and disposeall
things; Isa. 11.3.4.5.
He shall so settle his Church, that the unrighteous, not the righteous shall
be smitten. And in what Churches do all these righteousnesses more evidently
dwell, then in those that come nearest to the Apostolical founding of
Churches. See the Churches of Geneva, Holland, etc. No cries there, by reason
of persecution. No cryings up there of human traditions.

Thus of the new world.

Next (that this might not seem to be a world without inhabitants) the holy
Ghost describes the holy city (which intimates inhabitants) in which as we
shall see in the last place dwells the adorned spouse.

Secondly, therefore we come to the holy city. Where we are to note 1.
Civitas, the Citizens. 2. V^bs, the City.


1. The citizens. And that these are here to be understood, both the Apostle
Peter intimates in the text, putting righteousness for righteous men. And
dwelling, which relatively inferrs inhabitants. As also the Apostle John.
Revel. 21. both in calling the new Jerusalem, the adorned bride. As also in
saying, God shall dwell with men, in this holy city, and no liar, or
abominable person shall enter therein.

Of these citizens note the Substance. That is the society of them. 2. The
quality. Holy.


1. The substance. i. e. Society. Citizens constantly make a corporation, a
well governed body (answerably, this city called the holy city,) which has
great variety of officers, yet with great unity, amity, and regularity. As
things digested in a predicament, or table. No opposition between things
subordinate; as we see in the wheels of a clock, that wheel next the poyse,
being the first mover, communicates motion to all the rest. This corporation is
governed by themselves among themselves; that is, according to their immediate
particular laws, and priveledges. The supreme magistrate runs above them in
the general laws for the whole kingdom. i. e. The King and Parliament, and
Commonlawes are above them. But otherwise, their privilegia, i. e. their
privata leges, their private laws of their own corporation, are managed by
themselves, among themselves. The foundation of the relation between each
member of the corporation, is internal; the general, choose the particular.
And the particular accepts the privilege, and promises faithfulness and
justice toward the general. The communion that is amongst them is such that
they admit into their society only the good, and they eject the degenerating
that turn bad.

Just thus it is in the reformed Church of Christ; every congregation is as a
particular corporation. First, In it are all the sorts of officers appointed by
Christ; named often by Christ that the Church might not be ignorant. I say all the officers to continue to the end of the world. Ephesians. 4.11. Pastors and
Teachers. 1. Cor. 12.28. Teachers, and helps in government. 1 Tit. 5. Elders
or Bishops in every city. And Deacons two, besides the elders. 1 Timothy 3.1.2.
etc. to the end of the 13. Philip. 1.1. To all the Saints at Philippi with the
Bishops, and Deacons. Romans 12.7.8. Are named, Teaching, and exhorting. 1 Timothy
4.17. Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor,
especially they that labor in the word and doctrine.

Secondly, in and among them, with great unity and amity, the government of
themselves is by themselves, touching all things done among them. Mat 18.19.
Observe well. Two or three cannot, may not d^e^^. So the text. But the Church.
Tell the Church (says Christ) if more private admonition will not serve. And
if the offender will not hearken to the Church, then let him be
excommunicated; which Church throughout the New Testament, the holy Ghost by
the Apostles explaines to be every particular congregation. So that from
Christ's time, downward it was so to be taken. As the Church at Antioch, Acts
13.1. And when they had preached at Derbe, Lystra Iconi^m, and Antioch, they
ordained them Elders in every Church, Acts 14.23. And when he bad ^anded at
Cesarea, and gone up and saluted the Church, Act. 18.22. He sent to the Ephesus
and called for the Elders of the Church, Acts 20.17. The Church at Aquila and
Priscillas house. Romans 16 3. 1 Cor. 16.19. So the Church at Philemons house. In
hard times, particular Churches were made up of religious families, and other
Christians there abouts joined to them in their meetings. So Peter Martyr,
Willet. The Church at Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.2. The Churches of Asia, 1 Cor. 16.19.
which Saint John names, to the number of seven, Revel. From the Apostles time
300. years hot persecution for the most part. So called by Homer and Virgil,
and Historians, Hundredcitie Cret. 1 Cor. 5.2.
1 and 2 and 3 chap. Now it was much to have one congregation in a County, or
city. In Creet an hundred cities. And several Elders ordained in them all,
for every particular congregation. Tit. 1. Innumerable things and places more
might be spoken for this acception, and meaning of the word and nature of a
Church. But to return to the point. Saint Paul is much troubled that the
Church, the congregation at Corinth were so careless;e as that they had not
mourned and removed the incestuous person. And the Apostle exhorts them (he
being absent.) I say exhorts them to excommunicate him. If the Apostle had
been a particular member of that congregation, he must have been present. As
in all instances natural, civil, ecclesiastical, the member acts in the body
whiles united, no longer. But being a transcendent eye over all congregations
(as we know he was an Apostle to all the world) though absent, he exhorts them
to act, Mat. 28.19. Act. 9.6.15. Act. 13.1.2.
and to do their duties among themselves, toward themselves, in the union and
relation they stood. So that still the particular Church or congregation is
subject to Christ's Apostles, and all lawful Synods orderly and lawful
gathered according to the Scriptures, in the nation where the Church has her
being, to rectify them where they are wrong, to excite them when deficent. Or
else they themselves manage and act and officiate among themselves, their
particular discipline and priveledges pertaining to their particular Church.

Thirdly, The foundation of relation between the Church, and her lawful
officers, especially Ministers; is internal, i. e. from mutual union of
affections solemly interwoven, and engaged and twisted together. The Church
makes choice of her officers and Ministers, Act. 13.1.2.3. 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy
1.6.
and they embrace their places, and flock. The Minister being ordained a
Minister by the imposition of hands of the Ministers, with prayer and fasting,
the congregation choose him to be their Minister by the elevation of their
hands. A thema^, (...) tendo (...) pretensa manueligo (...) (in quit
Demosthenis.) (...) i. e. populus (ublatione manumte stabatur se babere decreta
mea rata.
Acts 13. 23. (...) i. e. They gave their voices to elect the Minister, by the
elevation of their hands, or stretching forth their hands. And so the Minister
is charged to look to his flock, as over which the holy Ghost had made him
overseer (...). The Minister is a Bishop to his congregation. Act. 20. verse
17. verse 18. And the people are commanded to obey, and submit to their
Minister, as to him that rules over, and watches for their souls. Observe,
over their souls, not bodies. Heb. 13.17. And are said to rule over them in
the Lord to admonish (not over them as men, to constrain) and so to be highly
esteemed of their flock, for that work. 1 These. 5.13.

The necessity of this inward foundation and root of relation in things of the
most spiritual and strongest combination, appears by paralleling other
relations though but in natural or civil things. No husband, Parent, Master,
will suffer a wife, child, or servant obtruded on him, or on contrary; wife,
child, or servant will admit of obtruded husbands, parents, masters, as long as
they be of age, and in their wits. How much less should obtrusion be in
spiritualls. Yet if these obtrusions be exercised, we see the unprosperous
event betray the unlawfulness of the attempt. There is no love, mutual duty,
or edification following. As we see in all the obtruded offices in our Church,
which shows much irregularity in the Hierarchy; where many have the greatest
acts of power, yet not committed to them by the general vote of the Church:
and much disorder in the ordinary ministers, who ordinarily come in without the
approbation, and so without the affections of their people.

Fourthly and lastly, (touching the city, or society it self) note the
perfection of their communion. They neither admit, nor permit (if after
admission degenerated) him that is unworthy, neither officer, nor member of the
assembly, congregation, or particular Church. See the Churches, choice of an
Apostle, Acts 1. of Deacons, Acts 6. See their rejection, and admission of an
unworthy member. 1 Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 2. of their acceptance and admission of an
unknown, or doubtful brother and Minister. Acts 9.26 27.28.29. etc. to the
end of 31.

All which four particulars diligently being observed in the reformed Churches
of Geneva, Low Countries, etc. how sound in Doctrine, and holy in manners have
they long time continued above other Churches: And so we come to the qualities
of this society. Holy.

2. This Civitas. This spiritual city, is an holy one; which is expressed
with an Emphasis (...). That city, that same holy one. Should seem that the
old heavens, are unclean in some measure. As it is said in Job. 15.15. The
heavens were not clean in Gods sight. i. e. by reason of some unclean (but in
their first thoughts) in the heavens, the lapsing Angels. Job 4.18. So the
Church below, before renewed, although in comparison with the dunghill of
Hethenisme, and the hell of Papisme, it is called a heaven, yet it is but as
spotted, clowded heaven, Isa. 30.
in comparison of a sun-bright heaven. As an old garment, that may seem very
handsome, yet much fuller of dust then a new one. Holiness becomes Gods
house, at all times, Psalm. 93.5.
in all places: much more his fairest house, newly repaired. This new Church
shall be so holy.

1. In regard of the more abundant and apparent presence of that essential
holiness. God in Christ; he like as he made Moses face shine, 2 Cor. 3.
shall make the Church shine. He like fire, Revel. 1.
being among the golden Candlestickes shall make them glare. When the Lord more
specially is in the Tabernacle, it is filled with his glory. Exodus 40.34.
As it was prophesied that the second temple should be more glorious then the
first, because Christ should preach in it, and be personally present. Haggi.
2.9. So this new Church should be more holy then the old, because the God of
holiness should he more specially presen there. This is expressed verse 3. of
this 21 of Revel. And it is immediately annexed to the speech of the holiness
of the new Church, where also the reason is given why the Lord would be more
present in the Church thus renewed. viz. because their was no more Sea, i. e.
of corrupt doctrine, and traditions of men. Those things that grieve God are
removed.

2. The rule of holiness in the new Church, should more rule and reign. i. e.
The Scriptures. When the Jews shall come in, knowledge shall be much more
increased. Yea when the veil of human traditions shall be removed, that the
Church shall see that all in the worship of God that is not evidently from the
word of Christ, is not of Christ's but of Antichrist; then will the Lord reveal
to her the full of the discipline of the Church. The full freedom of the
Gospel. The scales must first fall from Saint Paul's eyes, before he can see the
Gospel to preach it. Whiles our Church lay swadled and rocked in the unsettled
cradle of humane inventions, the face-cloth of ignorance lay over the eyes,
hundreds of truths lay hidden, which now are talked of distinctly in every ones
mouth. So great an advantage of light do they get, that turn their faces
toward the Sunrising, and their backs upon the dark climates of the old
heavens.

3. The scope, and intention of the Church shall be to advance holiness: not
to make her self great in honor and dignity among men, but good with
holiness toward God. Not to enrich her self with worldly pomp, but with
comfort and with conscience, and the graces of the spirit. Her doctrine, her
discipline, her form of worship. etc. all spread the wings to hatch up
holiness, even as Saint John was carried by the Angel, Revel. 21.10.
willingly to see, what the Angel was eager to show him, from the top of an
high mountain; touching the new state of the holy city: so sure the new
Church must look, and aims at holiness and newness. And not only aims,
and addresses all things to that purpose, but also hitts the white. For

Fourthly, the new Church is holy in practice, and conversation. She makes all
her members, in the common eye and charity of men to be holy, or else she
will not own them for her children. By this general frame of holiness in all
her members, Ministers, and people; she becomes all glorious. For
sanctification is a kind, or degree of glorification. Romans 8.
Therefore the Apostle wrappes it up in glorification, in reckoning all the
linckes of the chain of salvation. Psalm. 45.
And the Church is said by holiness to be all glorious within. The Church is
all glorious by justification. But that is without her, and about her. She is
wrapped in that, as in a garment. Romans 13.14. But sanctification is within her,
as her proper quality, as a Church. Answerably Saint John calls her holiness
and lightsomnesse with knowledge and reformation, Verse 11.
her having of the glory of God. And that God was the light of the city, and
the nations that were saved should walk in the light thereof. And for all
things that are contrary to this new, holy, Verse 23.24.
and glorious estate she cast out, Revel. 21. verse 4. verse 27.

Fifthly and lastly, holy in opinion and estimation. The Church should be so
really, and universally holy, making all her members at least outwardly and
probably, to embrace holiness; that holiness, shall be in fashion, and so in
estimation among men. It shall be no more a jeere, but a joy. As its said by
the Prophet, many shall take hold of one Jew, for religions sake; so in this
new Church much more shall men admire and esteem her for holiness. So verse
24. The Kings of the earth shall bring their glory to the Church. Revel. 21.
verse 24.

And thus of the Civitas, the city, the corporation of men.

Next of the V^bs, the material city of buildings, etc. whereof note 1. The
form, or fashion. 2. The matter, or edifice.


The form is considerable for two things 1. Quantity. 2. Figure.


1. Quantity. As here the compellation or comparison, Heavens signifies or
intimates greatness. (For what is of created things, extra calum ultimum,
without and beyond the utmost heaven.) So the geometrical dimention there, in
Rev. 21. delineated makes it, by some accounts, the greatest city that ever
was. For if we read the text, according to the ordinary reading, Verse 16.
And he measured the city with a reed (...), to the some of twelve thousand
furlones, and understand them in a more plain and obvious sense, of the
compass of the city, that every side of the four square, was three thousand
furlongs, it will follow that this city of the Church is twelve thousand
round. For every four square is one hundred times as much every way from side
to side, as the length of that side is. Supspose a four square of 110.
furlongs in each straight line of the sides of that square. Th^s four square
measured all along over-thwart from side to side was 3000 furlongs. ^^n King.
So Geographers.
And the whole plot of ground, from each side to each side, three hundred
thousand furlongs: which is beyond all other cities that ever we read of. For
old Babylon the great was but a village in comparison. Every side of the square
thereof being but 120 furlongs, and so the whole plot of ground could be but
four thousand furlongs. So Nineveh, was not comparable; for the text in the
Prophet Jonah, 3 3. was o^ three days journey. i.e. (as the learned will have
it) the walls were three days journey about. A days jurney being (according
to the civil law) twenty miles. So that every ^^^e, square, o^ side of the
quade^angle was 15. miles. i. e. 15. (...) eight furlongs. i.e. 120 furlongs,
and so was just of the (...) of old Babylon in the East, and no more. Not is
Babylon in the West, Babylon the new, Rome comparable for at first it was but
two miles in compass; now at last, but a-leaven miles in compass, and in the
middle age thereof, but 50. in compass; so that it fall 10 miles short of the
measure of the compass of the walls of Nineve.

But if we read as Arias (...). To the sum of furlongs 12. times 12.
thousand, Then the city is 44. thousand furlongs about, and the whole flore a
100 times more.

And just as the state of the new Church, under the notion or a city is
greater then other cities, so under the notion of a Church, greater then ever
was any Church. For the largest description of the former Church, was but 144
thousand long, and but 12. thousand broad. But this renewed Church is by this
last reading, 144. Revel. ^.
thousand in the whole square compassing it about. And by the former reading 12
thousand in the whole square bouting the city And the whole floor or breadth
every way 300. thousand measures. For it makes no matter what you call them
whether furlongs or etc. The bare numbers sufficiently report the proportions.
And well may the new Churches proportion so exceed, seieng this makes one maine
difference that she shall be as wide as the world, (as we said before) nee^e
upon before the Lord leave the work. And so she shall be as great as good,
i.e. greater, and better both, then ever any Church was.

2. Figure. Which is expressed, first more indefinitly. As if only a square
upon a flat. i.e. square in regard of length and breadth Secondly, more
distinctly and exactly that it was measured with a reed 12 thousand furlongs,
and the length, and breadth, and hight, were equal.

First, from the more indefinit expression, observe that however it was a
square, whiles it is expressed under the notion of a city. And the Church is a
round, a round heaven, and a round earth, whi^es expressed under the notion of
a world, the round; to signify the laboriousnesse of the Church labor
agricolae currit in orb, 1 Cor. 3.9.
the Church is Gods husbandry, her work is never at an end. She must
continually move here, propter qui^tem, that she may rest when she is above the
rolling heavens. To signify that the Church thus renewed shall be capeable of
all truths, and contain, and know and teach all truths of doctrine, of
discipline, of manners, and practice then too. As a circle (says the
Philosopher) is the most capacious figure that is. The square to signify, that
as according to the Philosopher, a square is the most settled and solid, fast
standing figure, so the Church thus renewed and refined in doctrine, Heb. 12.26.
discipline, and manners shall never be shaken any more, never altered in the
substance of either, no not of her discipline that has been liable to so many
changes, but only in degrees, to as much better as may be.

Secondly, from the more distinct expression that the Church is as much in
altitude, as latitude, as high as broad, this signifies that as the Church is
grown eminent in holiness, and high in heavenly mindedness, so she is seen
of men, and esteemed, and esteemed and highly extolled with the respect she
has from them. So that Hier^salem is the praise of the whole earth, according
to promise, Isay 62.7. So that as King David preferred it above his chief joy,
Psalm. 137 6. So all Kings shall bring their honor to it. Revel. 21 24. All
shall as the Psalmist delight to tell the towers thereof, Psalm. 48.12. i. e.
joy to find all perfect nothing missing. All shall lay down all, forget all,
even the cunning of their right hand, in comparison of the Church as Psalm. 137.
Christ in this his coming shall (as at the last day) be admired of all that
believe. 3 These. 1.10.

Thus of the form or fashion.

Next of the matter oredifice which includes the Walls. Towns. Streets^
Temple, or public place of worship.


The walls are confidesor their Situation. Foundation. Superstruction.
Apertions.


First her situation, 1. The walls are without the city; 2. Contain all the
city. 3. Are conformable to the fashion of the city.
1 Without the city, to signify that no annoyances, things, or persons should
come near the city of the reformed Church; Mat. 27.33.
without the walls are the dunghills without Jerusalem, is Golgotha, the place
of dead men's sculls. The form of execution of offenders, was to carry them out
of the city, Heb. 13.12.
and so to punish them. The civil punishment carrying in it a character of the
spiritual excommunication. Phil. 3.2.
The Church is warned to beware of Dogs. i.e. Those Mat. 7.6. For they are of
the concision, and are evil doers (as the Apostle intimates) They have their
dogs nature and skin still in and on, in heart and in life; for they are
evil doers, biters, as well as barkers. And how shall the Church better beware
of dogs, then as the house-holder, by shutting them out of doors. So the
prophecy runs, Revel. 22.15.
without there shall be dogs; which are described by their dogge-trickes.
Their mad sorceries filthy lecheries, biting murders, houling idolatries, and
false barking lies. 2 The walls thus situated, contain all the whole city,
and parts and persons thereof; exclude none of those. To signify, that Christ
his Church, in no wise does pluck up the wheat, in stead of tares. For she
sees plainly the tares to be tares, Mat. 13.
by their ripeness, before she pluck at them. She remembers her Saviors
rule. That he will in no wise cast out him that comes to him, John 6.37.
Thirdly, the walls so conformed to the city, signify the sweet harmony
proportion and conformity that is between the Church and her discipline. She
is not yoaked with a discipline that will wring her neck, and gall her
shoulders. Nor with such a one as is like the hoope that the Juggler can creep
through. Gal. 5.1. Compare man. 11.28.29.
Her discipline reaches to all occasions, causes, persons, things. She makes
not her meshes so wide, as Actaeon. A hunter of wild beasts, that catches only
those that would with open mouth devour him; Nor does she as Vulcan make her
net so subtle, that the simple naked soul may be caught before it is aware.
The Church has from God her exact measure, how to knit her discipline, the
pure golden measure of an unstrretchable reed. i. e. The pure word of God.
Revel, 21.15.
Isa. 8.20. Gal. 6.16. Blessed are they that walk according to this Canon.
(...) mark the double emphasis. This notable Cannon. This Canon of Christ.
This Canon of the Scripture, or this Canon of walking as a new creature in and
by Christ, according to the Scripture.

Secondly, Foundation. And this is of twelve precious stones. The natural
foundation (as of an house the rock, 1 Cor. 3.
gravel, or compacted clay) is only one, and that rock is Christ. But the
Artificial foundation (as of an house is the wall built within the ground)
this is twelve fold, or many fold, consisting of the plurality, and variety of
all the offices, These twelve stones were used in the old Testament as
prophesies of the qualities and conditions of the twelve Pa^^ia^k^s and their
tribes. And hereof the state and condition of the Ministers building (...) ^ew
Church on the doctrine of the Apostles.
ministers, and their several gifts grounded and guided by the doctrine of the
Apostles. Small parts, or pieces, make not a foundation: many ranckes of stone
make a foundation. Disunion, or interruption of the continuation of a
foundation is dangerous. The Church cannot consist, with an index
expurgatorius, cannot possibly bear inhibitions of reading these or those
books of Scripture, of preaching these or those fundamental doctrines or
sound truths.

3. Superstruction; or raising the superstructure. And that is done up all of
Jasper, as the foundation was of 12. precious stones, whereof the first also,
was a Jasper as two other were, the Sardius, and Emerauld, which three stones
are put to represent the Trinity. Revel. 4. The green Jasper, the eternal
Godhead, and Father, the red Sardius the crucified Son Christ. The groenish
Ra^e-bowlike emerauld, As Gods bow in the clowd a token of an outward covenant,
Genesis 9.14 15.
the proceeding Holy Ghost, the token of Gods covenant in the heart. Now that
the wall mu^^^^ built up above the foundation, all of Jasper, what can (...)
signify, but that the Church must be ad of God, all according to the
Scriptures. If men will build on the foundation not Jasper, divine truths, but
the hay and stubble of ^^man inventions, their work shall be burnt, if the
men escape. Jasper is hard and strong to make the squared polished face and
superficies of the wall against all washing; of floods or tempests; and
precious, and sound stuff to fill up the wall between both surfaces or
outsides of the wall. To signify that the Church is as well all glorious
within, Psalm. 45. That she is strong, so that the gates of hell shall not
prevail against her. Mat. 16.18. 2 Timothy 1.7. Phil. 1.10. 2 Pet. 1.1.
That she is sincere, and sound at heart. And so is, and must be, every one
that is indeed and in truth a very member of the Church. Precious within as
well as without, with the precious graces of the spirit.

Having thus touched the bulk of the signification of these stones, we rest
chiefly therein. Some (as Master Brightman) put much in the order of these
stones; as if therein were signified, the qualities of the several Ministers
that should follow, Saint John's time for the rearing of the Church. As the
first stone Jasper (used to signify God, Revel. 4.) to signify a Ministry
most like God (as the stone is of an heavenlike brightness) strong to bear
the first difficult brunts of the Churches reformation. The second, the
Sapphir, glittering with golden points to signify a succession of teachers
excelling in some peculiar gifts to repair the Churches wants in that age. The
third, the chalcedonie, of a fiery brightness, to signify a third succession
of ministers, abounding with holy zeal, for the further building up of the
Church. And so of the rest. But many will be ready to think these things to be
niceties; and much more me to be over curious if I should but intimate a
proportion, between the Jasper and the first reformers, Luther, Prague, Husse;
of whose spiritual magnanimity histories speak aloud; as that Luther said he
would go to the meeting to dispute for the truth, though every tile of the
house were a devil, or to that purpose. That infimite reproaches, the name of
Heresiarcha, the putting on the head, the picture of the devil, the threats of
torments, could not daunt the other two from the truth, nor from maintaining
the truth; or if I should whisper a sutablenesse between the Saphier, and the
next succession of Ministers, excelling with that golden gi^t of settling
discipline, after Luthers spreading of doctrine. For which go^den purpose is
mentioned the golden reed, Revel. 2^. which was so well managed by C^l in,
B^za, etc. Or if I should point at the zeal us Ministers of these last times,
which with the light as well as the flame thereof were carried above others, to
set forward the Churches reformation, by pen, by preaching, by hazarding, by
suffering, that they answer to the fi^ry chalcedony And likely enough that it
would be thought as hyperphysicall a quidditie, if I should note that this
third stone is a Northern one, Note that as the Northern and Eastern gues
are set up first, see before. So the first six stones are Northern and
Eastern i. e. found in those parts.
found and glaring in the northern parts of the world, as Historians tell me.
To leave men therefore free to their own just thoughts; thus much I will be
bold to set down touching the application and order of the stones here. In the
Old Testament the Jasper was Benjamines stone, the Sapphire Jssachars, the
Chalcedonie Judas. The Emerald Levics, etc. And that these stones are here set
down in the order of Moral or Spiritual consideration, not of natural of the
time of the birth of the Patriarchs, not of civil considerations to reckon
every mothers children by the mother severally, According to several causes
and considerations they be severally ordered, Exodus 1.2.3. compare Each. 28.13.
Genesis 25. Genesis 29. Gen 30.
naming al one mothers children first, though not first borne before others
named. The moral, or spiritual consideration may be this, not to run over
all the twelve. Ruben his Sardius should have been first, but he lost the
place by incest. Genesis 35.22. Then Joseph his Beryl should have been first,
Ruben being deposed, because he was the first borne of the first betrothed
mother Rachel. But he lost it by Jeroboam coming out of his loins, and
setting up Idolatry. Therefore Bejamin his Jasper is but put first being the
remaining son of the first wife in point of law. So that those Ministers that
are scandalous, or idolaous, are no way fit to direct, or project in any
reformation; any way to build the Church on her bases or foundation. Secondly,
is put Jssachar his Saphir, which second place Simeon his Topaz should have
had, Genesis 34.
but being a man of a guilefull spirit, wonted to conspiracies to betray a
city of Shechemites to death, Genesis 37.
and was one of them that gave counsel to kill Joseph (for all were not of
that mind; namely, Ruben and Judah were not) and therefore he is put from his
place and Isachar the fifth borne of the second wife of Jacob, namely Leah is
put second, and he the fifth, is so put because Rubens and Simeons faults you
have heard already, and Levi and Judah follow by and by with the reasons. So
that Ministers that are treacherous in doctrine or polity against Church or
state are not fit builders of the Church. Thirdly, is put Judah his Chalcedony,
Judah is put after Isachar, for that happily he might the sitlyer intimate
Christ's outward meannesse in this world; and how he would not be a civil ruler
over men, his errand being of another nature, a spiritual mediatorship. But
commended civil rule to the magistrate, submitting to it himself. But the
most remarkable thing to be noted is, that Levi by birth, should have had his
Smaragd or Emerauld put in the third place. But the Evangelist S. John puts
Judah here, and Levi next after, because, as the Apostle Paul disputes to the
Hebrews, Christ a Priest for ever after the the order of Melchisedeck, should
put down all Levitical priesthood and ceremonies, and form of worship. So that
the Ministers that cry out for and in the behalf of Priests, Ceremonies,
Altars, Sacrifices, etc. are not meet for the building of the Church. But on
the contrary. Benjamins, that will be Gods right hand, will be Gods agents and
instruments; and their Jasper, their parts and prayers will help the woman,
the Church in her hard travel, to be delivered; So at Frankfort. See the
Church his need of help some times.
as the material Jasper a natural woman in natural travel; Jsachars, that
are the youngest sons, little in their own eyes, much in Gods; And are
Sapphiricall, i.e. heavenly (as is the prophecy and promise made to Jsachar,
Isa. 54.11.) which heavenlinesse conteines as well a spirit of discerning and
desire of the new heavens, as well as the highest heavens: and Judah's that
will desirously advance Christ in all things, ministry, doctrine, form of
worship, Isa. 37.3.
and will oppose against the opposite or contrary things to Christ, I say such
Benjamins, Isachars, and Judah's as these are fit for the building of the
Church. I may not expatiate upon the rest, to tell you Levi is put next to
Judah, and not so low as Simeon (with whom he sinned in slaying the Sechemites)
because Levi after recovered his fall by slaying the idolaters, Exodus 32.
Thereby to signify here, that men that have showed them-selves (as the Levites
did when Moses called. Exodus 32.) have stood for right of doctrine, and a good
conscience, such ministers are fit for the building of the Church; I will not
now descend to the rest of the foundations. In a sermon discourse we can give
but tastes of things.

Fourthly, Apertions, i. e. Gates, or rather gate-waies, then gates. For they
are always opan: yet nevertheless there are gates, and usefully mentioned,
both touching the time when they stood so always open, viz. when all was new,
no fear of old orders that any lying in the old Adams condition, might rush
into the assemblyes of Christians, and unto the Ordinances of Christ. And
touching the nature, made of pearl. A shell of a fish generated by the dew of
heaven. Most fitly to signify Christ, the loore and the way: yea the one and
only door, because they all of pearl, so generated, even as Christ was
generated of the dew of heaven, i.e. The holy Ghost, Compare Psalm 110. verse. 3.
overshadowing Mary. And be sure Christ will have a care of his Church, not to
admit on his part, any polluted persons. So that albeit it is necessarily noted
that there were twelve gates in number (for all are but one, in kind, or
matter) to note that Christ has made way for all the twelve tribes of Israel;
yet withal it is most appositly expressed, that the keepers were 12 Angels.
i.e. The Angels of the Churches, Revel. 21.12.
as called Revel 2.1. chap. 2. chap. 3. often i.e. The faithful ministers, to
look that no wicked Angels or men, that is false teachers, or foul practisers
enter in, and set up a synagogue of Sathanneere Gods Church. So that by all
this continual opening of the gates, and yet continually watched, is signified
that the Churches time of reformation, shall not be a time of open hostiltie
from outward potent enemies; then the gates would be shut; but if liable to
any enemies, it will be to the Hypocrites, that will se^ne to come in, as if
honest and when in, labor to dis^^be, and defile. And therefore these are
watched and examined by the Angels, upon any the least suspicion: mark no^
the sum of all (in relation to a reformation) intended in these gates; That
if there be not able and holy ministers set in all the entrances of the Church,
and they without flattery or iniquity do not bring in men into the Church, by
Christ. Christ is not by them advanced in all things, and all things else,
doctrines, ceremonies, etc. deposed in comparison of Christ and his doctrine
and government, etc. then that is not the holy city here spoken of, nor any
part thereof.

Thus of the walls of the city.

Secondly, of the towns, places, or material parts of this city. The whore
of Babylon sits upon seven hills, suitable to her many abominations. But holy
Jerusalem the true worshipper of God-trinitie in unity, consists chiefly but
of three. i. e. Mount Era the lower town, for trading and honest walking in
men's several callings. Mount Moriah, for the public place of Gods worship.
For there the temple stood. Mount Zion, for the place of public justice and
relief of the oppressed, for there was David's throne. And all these firmly
compacted, into one city as in territories, so in spiritual, and civil
agreement. All these are sweetly sung of in Ps. 122. out feet shall stand gates
O Jerusalem, whether tribes go up to the testimony of Israel. For there are
thrones of judgment; in regard of all which now so harmoniously united, Iun.
in Psalm. 122.
civilly and spiritually, it is called a compacted city. i. e. (says Iunius)
union, that union of three, of three into one, the King joys, and the people
joy, and all shall joy and prosper that can wish well to it. See the title of
the Psalm. And verse 1. yea every verse of the Psalm. For what politic man,
if a just man, and a godly man will not joy when kingdoms and Churches are
made as well stronger and better as well as greater: That quietness, and
righteousness, and Godliness kiss one another. Thus shall be the reformed
state of the Church, of the new Jerusalem. There shall be mountains, thrones,
streets, etc. all compacted into one holy Jerusalem, See Revel. 21.
There shall be no crying through injustice; there shall ye no defilement
through uncleanesse. And Kings shall take contentment therein; For they shall
bring their glory and honor unto it. And then all may see the Church begins
to be new, when she so shines, that princely glory admires her.

3. Thing of this new city are the streets; which are said to be of Gold. And
their use is (we know) to be an high way for the people. This is another
character of the reformed Church, that the ways and conversation thereof in
all her members, shall be first solid according to the truth of God; not
quagmires, and hollow earth of human inventions; secondly pure, not only from
sin, but from scandalls, and appeareance of evil. Phil. 4. Taking heed of
what is not of good report. And thirdly shining. As Mat. 5. carry out good
examples to all. And studying what has praise and virtue in it. Phil. 4.

4 Thing is the temple. For though it be said Saint John saw no temple, yet
he saw that which was equivalent, yea far more eminent in stead of the
Temple. For the Lord God Almighty, and the lamb are the Temple. The Temple was
but a type of Gods presence in Christ; therefore removed, when God the Antitype
comes. And not only the material Temple, as the walls and buildings were
overturned by Vespasian, and Titus, between 30 or 40. years after Christ: but
all the appendixes, all the shadows, yea all the darkness of those
shadows to be removed. i.e. All Jewish ceremonies and all Romish and humane
apish ceremonies that are the imitation of them. If the temple was to be done
away much more the moveable tabernacle. If divinely instituted Jewish
ceremonies must be done away, though not changed for 3000 years, much more
human, liable to change every day, that like a tailor, the Church has never
her perfect trade of discipline, by reason of daily innovating fashions. Ob.
Revel. 21.3. It is said the Tabernacle of God was with men. Sol. Not the
Tabernacle of the congregation; But the Tabernacle of habitation: as
tabernacles signified, 2 Cor. 5.1. So that tabernacle signifies in that place
of the Revelation only Gods dwelling among men, in a special manner, and in a
spiritual manner, without the representation of himself by a temple. All the
representation of him, was in the living Temple of Christ's body, whiles on
earth, which now is to be continued in the office of Christ, and the order
appointed by Christ. Christ resignes not his office of mediatorship till the
end of the world. 1 Cor. 15. Therefore this state here described, cannot be
that of glory. John 4.24.
Therefore it is said in the text of the Reve^* That God and the Lamb was the
temple. i.e. God in Christ. The characters of the new Jerusalem intended in
all these are two. 1 That she is most spiritual, and immediate in all her
worship. No temple but Christ. No sacrifice but the Lamb Christ. No light in
Temple, no lamp, or shine of the heavens, but Christ. They therefore are none
of the new reformed Church; nor do they act any part of the new reformed
Church, that send the people about per ambages, by circuits the farthest way
about to God in worship by as many materials, human forms, and dictated
lessons, to be learned by rote, and vayling her with as many shadows as may
be: when as the worship, and the going to God under new state of the Church
should be so immediate, that nothing should come between, but the mere close
observation of the rule of the Scripture. 2 The new Jerusalem has God more
effectual in the Church. He will be better to her then the temple, or
sacrifice, or light, though of the Sun. As he made the second temple more
glorious then the first by his presence in it in Christ, so he will make the
third more glorious then the second, because he himself will be that temple.
i.e. He will make the second Jerusalem more glorious then the first, because
he will more manifest his efficacy, in the ministry thereof. For if but the
dawnings of the day, but the foundations of this new state. Acts 2. were so
efficacious, to convert such multitudes at one Sermon, what then will be the
efficacy of the noon, and full perfection of it, so far as is atteinable
here.


And thus you have seen the holy city, the holy temple, and the entrance. Now
advise with Ezech. 8.9.10. chap. if in any Church the city, i.e. the
conversation and righteous dealing of men, the threshold. i.e. the entrance,
and admission of Ministers and men, to the ministry, to the word and
Sacraments; the Cherubims and Arc, i.e. the inmost parts of Gods house and
worship be polluted in any Church? If so that Church is not yet made new. But
if the inmost of Gods worship Holy Communion, and prayer be polluted, Ezech 8 6
and chap. 9.3.
altered, and Altared, the Divine managing thereof, turned into human, then God
will depart to the threshold. If the threeshold be polluted, all unworthie
Ministers be admitted to the ministerial function, all all unworthie persons
admitted as members of the Church, and so make linsy-woolsey, the ass is
yoaked with the ox, Ezech. 11.23.
then God will depart to the middle of the city, and if that be polluted, as
formal worship, procreateth a profane conversation (witness the Church of
Rome) then the Lord will depart out of the city unto the mountain. Ibid.


Thus of the first and second notion under which this new state of the reformed
Church is described.

Now follows the third, i. e. A preparedly adorned Bride.

We cannot here in the branch of an use, touch these severally, as we shall in
another text. But in a short and general consideration of them, we may
perceive the Church here to have two characters.

1 A chaste disposition. 2 Dutiful subjection.
First a chaste disposition, against all idolatry. She uses no wanton kissing,
or lascivious talking, or imbracings of any idol whatsoever; but holily
desirous to kisle, talk of, embrace Christ, disclaymes all false lovers;
wantonly to talk of an Idol, is unne^ssarily to mention him. Hos. 2.16.17.
Thou shall call me no more Baali, etc. Ob. That signified as well my husband,
as the word Ishi. Sol. Because the Idolater used the phrase Baali. And
therefore the godly Jewish Church must not use that phrase, ne nominans maritum
cogitet idolum, So S. Hierom.
least whiles she mentions God as a husband, she think of an idol. And Ephesians.
5.3.5. Let not covetuousnesse be once named among you, which is idolatry.
Wantonly to kiss an idol, is to bow or cringe, or make a salutation toward
it, though a man comes not near it. Job 31.26.27. If I beheld the Sun when
it shined, or the Moon walking in brightness, and my heart has been
secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand. To embrace an idol, is to
worship God, in, on, through or toward that Idol. Hos. 4.17. Ephraim is
joined unto idols let him alone. For still they intended the worship of the
true God. verse 15. they swear the Lord lives, whiles they transgress at
Gilgal, and Betharen, the house of idolatrous vanity. These three are more
illustrated by their contraries. The true Church chastely talks of Christ,
when in word she does extol and magnify him. Cant. 5.10.11. etc. She
salutes Christ, and kisseth him, when she applies her soul to the words of
his mouth. Cant. 1.2. This is called Heb. 11.13. Greek (...).
Saluting the promises. She imbraceth Christ, when she chooses him only and
forsakes all opposites to him, Hos. 2.7. I will go and return to my first
husband, for then was it better with me.

Question. But what is Idolatry?

Answer. It is mente ente medio modo
in mind. matter. means. manner.


In Mind, when a man has vain imaginations of the true God, Romans 1.21. or a
meare imagination for a God, 1 Cor. 8.4. Thus Neptune, Aeolus, etc.
.

In Matter. When a creature is made a God. As the heathens gods; of which were
30. thousand under Jupiter, whereof some were merely imagined, Hesiod. (...)
Persius. The idolatry of these times.
as we said but now; others visible creatures, as the Stars, beasts, etc. As
the Egyptians adore Leekes, yeeles, garlic, onyons, etc. porrum and cape nefas
violare and frangere morsu.

In the Means, when as one makes that to be the thing, in, on, through, by,
toward, or before which a man will worship God, which God never appointed in
his word the mean of his worship. Exodus 32.5. They intend to worship the true
God. But they err in medio, in the means, in, through, etc. which. Thus verse
4. Therefore the Apostle calls it idolatry, 1 Cor. 10.7. So Acts 17.23. They
intend to worship the same God that Saint Paul would preach to them. But they
err in the mean, him they will worship, in, upon, or before an Altar.
Therefore the Apostle charge them with superstition.

In Manner, when any worship for substance or circumstance is without footing
in the word of God. Collos. 2. See the whole chap. And Galat. 5. So Mercer
(though a reader at Paris) says on Hos. 2. omnis cultus sine verbo dei est
idolatria. All worship without footing in the word of God, is idolatry.

2. Dutiful subjection, against all impiety, she will neither in discipline
nor manners, be disobedient to Christ. Ephesians. 5.22, 23.

Object. Well you have told us a long story out of Saint Peter, and Saint
John, of a new reformed Church; but all those things seem to be like cobwebbs,
too curious to hold, too pretty to be potent, and prevalent; for you dream
not how dangerous this new reformation may be to the state, and how
prejudicial to Kings and Princes. And therefore those hopers, and hopes must
rest satisfied without those hoped things, though now indeed they seem to
promise never to be satisfied in their minds, desires, and petitions without
it.

Answ. All these things are opportunely objected here because they are cleared
by Saint John, and so we shall hear him free his own prophecy from all
objections, before we leave him.

First, to the danger of State objected, Saint John opposes, 1 the danger of
condemnation, if any man shall be fearful regularly to reform or practice
reformation according to the power, parts, and place God has lawfully
inpowered, and privileged him withal, Revel. 21.8. But the fearful and
unbeleevers, etc. shall have their portion in the lake, etc. Saint John utters
these words amidst his prophecy of the new reformation. Therefore they must
needs have some such relation to non reformation. 2 He opposes the dignity,
and commodity of bringing to pass this new reformation. For says Saint John,
God will dwell there with men, Revel. 21.3. Therefore no inconvenience. For
says the 4 verse. 1 God will wipe away all tears, by reason of antichristian
Tyranny. 2 There shall be no mourning because old things are done away. None
shall have cause to complain of the loss of them.


Secondly, to the pretended prejudice to Kings and Princes, Saint John assures
that there shall not be the least surmise or conceit of any such thing arising
in the minds of kings and princes when they see what that reformation is, but
contrary wise shall bring their honor to it, v. 24.

Thirdly, to the surmised vainenesse of hope of satisfaction, Saint John
promises that the Saints hopes and desires of this reformation shall be
satisfied. Read the 5, 6, 7. of that 21 chap of the Revelation. Therefore
Mo^decai his speech to Esther must be remembered by all in whose hands God has
entrusted the power of reformation, If thou altogether hold thy peace at
this time, Ester 4.14.
then shall the Churches enlargement, and deliverance arise from another place.
I will not threaten that which follows to them that shall neglect to help in
the Churches deliverance. But thou and thy fathers house shall be destroyed. I
daily pray the contrary. But those in place, may do well to weigh those words
to preserve them from carelessness. And the words that follow with a little
change, to put them on to activenesse. And who knows whether you are come to
have that authority in the kingdom for such a time as this. And lastly to
consider all these were spoken to a woman, whose power (more then by
persuasion) what was it in comparison of a Parliament of men, or corporations
of magistrates.

Thus of the use of examination. 3 Use is for Humiliation, viz. to the world,
to the Antipodes, the opposites to the hoping Saints; being opposite not only
in their hopes (if to be named hopes) but in their practice. The considerations
to humble them, arising out of the doctrine are four. 1 Their hope does not
tend the right way; they do not tend in their hope the right way. They do not
hope as men of hope; They do not hope for the good of the Church as if they
themselves were of the Church. They hope not as if they and the Church had one
Christ, one says, one baptism, one hope of glory. And so they show plainly
that they are not of the common wealth of Israel. Ephesians. 2.12. And so not in
state of salvation. For there is no name given under heaven whereby we may be
saved, Acts
but Jesus Christ. And extra ecclesiam nulla salus. Christ, ordinarily saves in
and by the Church, i.e. men coming to the congregations, or assemblies of the
Church are there called by the power of the word preached. Romans 19.
And besides the loss of salvation, they shall not share in the outward
condition, comforts of the Church.

2. That having no newness, no righteousness personal, whereby to desire the
newness and righteous condition of the state Ecclesiastical (for every habit
of grace is truly desired by the dispositions of the same grace) they shall
never enter heaven, John 3.5.1 Cor. 6.9.

3. The godly Church and her members shall be happy, their condition shall
be joyfu^l, whiles the enemies that are opposite to them shall gnash their
teeth, with torment of envy to see them prosper.

4. The Church being renewed and rectified shall not be annihilated (as the
wicked hoped): but shall endure to the worlds end, in a comfortable condition
to trample and we are out their enemies as old rags. The highest part of the
wheel the wicked triumphing, shall feel the lower part of the wheel of the
whole universe of men. i. e. the Church going over them, and pressing them.
Being thus turned by or upon the extree of Gods divine justice. That as the
captivated King drawing the conquerors Chariot, looked often behind him and said
(when he was asked the reason why he so often looked back) that he observed how
that part of the wheel that was uppermost, suddenly was undermost; so may
the Church see and say of the wheel of divine providence. And as that
conquering monarch upon that speech of his Kingly captive, left off to make so
Royal a person his coach-horse; so may the enemies of the Church be advised
(if they would learn righteousness) to leave off their wheeling and rolling
over the Church. Isa. 26.9.
For the wheel of the wicked shall go over them. i. e. Them themselves* Prove.
20.26. And the wicked will prove chafe. Psalm. 1. They are old, they will wear
out. Their very lamps of profession will go out. Thus of the use of
humiliation.

The fourth is of Consolation. Let not drouping hearts sink within them, as if
things should never be better. First mind the text and doctrine, that gives us
item not to think as the world, not to be hopeless as the world. It is the
character of the wicked to have no hope of the Churches good; we must be
contrary to them, 2 we have a promise, therefore let us not cast away our
confidence. The word of Prophecy and promise a more sure word. 2 Pet. 1.19.
3. All godly men for the general (says the Doctrine and Text) do hope. Be
we therefore, as well as profess our selves like them. Say we to our souls;
Psalm. 43 5.
why art thou cast down O my soul? And why art thou disquieted within me? Hope
in God, for I shall yet praise him.

The fist and last use is for exhortation, that all godly men would be men of
hope, of a strong hope to expect that which is promised in the text, and
propounded in the doctrine, viz. those new heavens, and new earth, etc.
Motives. 1 It is the clearing of your title; 1 Motive.
of your spiritual estate, i.e. whether ye be godly and shall have a share in
those new heavens, and new earth, etc. So the Philos. So the Poets. Homer calls
minerva in commendation. (...). And co^mends Agamemnon for having an eye like
Jupiter. (...). And they commend a sky colored eye, a heavenlike eye.
For he is the creditor, and has right to the sum, that has the bond, and
looks for payment at the day. Besides, nothing more discovers an excellent
nature, then an excellent eye. And hope is the eye of the soul, yea of the
grace of the soul, yea of faith the principal grace of the soul. Romans 8.23.
So that it being rightly fixed on God in his promises proves home to man his
safe spiritual condition. So the Psalmist. Lord I look as one of thine. And
Psalm. 25.15. mine eyes are ever toward the Lord. The spouse also is said to
ravish Christ with one of her eyes. Cant. 4.9. And the excellent Saints are
like the beasts Revel. 4. verse 6. full of eyes, within, and before, and be
hind. Therefore upon this first motive let us labor to have this eye of hope,
this expecting looking eye, which makes the Church its prospect, and her
renovation its expectation. 2. Motive.


2. A serious hoping hastens the performance of thing hoped for (for God must
be pryed into, eyed with hope; and prayed unto as the challenger of the things
hoped, before he will do any thing Ezekiel 36.37. Psalm. 31.24. Psalm. 33.18.19.
So the Psalmist. God shall strengthen your heart all ye that hope in the Lord.
The eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his
mercy, to deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine. Our
soul waits for the Lord, he is our help and our shield. The Lord takes
pleasure in them that fear him: in them that hope in his mercy. Psalm. 47.11.
When a creditor tells a debtor, that he looks for his money at his day,
according to the debtors promise, the debtor will hasten to make ready his
money. So the Lord to perform his promise, when we by hope look for it at the
day. And therefore as the Lord is pleased by promise of mercy to become our
debtor: so David challenges him at his day. Psalm. 102.13. Arise O Lord, and
have mercy upon Zion, Romans 8.32.
for the time to favor her, yea the set time is come. So when about the time
set by God. Dan. 9. The Saints Zechary, Elizabeth, Simeon, Anna, etc. waited
for the consolation of Israel, then in due time God sent his son. Romans 5.6.
And if he has given us his son how shall he not with him also freely give us
all things.

Thirdly, 3. Motive.
Most would have heaven, especially if they could have heaven upon earth. Se
here it is so promised, it and so to be possessed. And Rev. 5.10. And have made
us Kings and Priests unto our God, and we shall reign on earth. And this
heaven beneath is the earnest of heaven above. Therefore, shall we not hope for
it? In passion we wish our selves in heaven; much more should we on grounded
consideration. And if to be in the house, then to be in the porch that
necessarily leads to it for all of that age; and for our posterity if not for
us. We are so wheeled about with heaven, that we cannot (one would think)
forget it, sure enough not get out of it, fall through it. So that if men
perish it must be by burying themselves alive in the center by earthlinesse,
and emptiness of heavenly hope. 4. We mightily affect newalties. 4 Motive.
As one once, so we make it our Motto Nil jucundum, nisi quod reficit varietas.
Nothing has any jucunditie in it, but only there is a refreshment from
variety. Lo here is a newness of all things. The Astronomers mightily gaze
after new stars (though but so, in their sildome appearance) The husbandman
mightily joys in a new soil, new broken earth. How much more should we desire
believe, and hope for a new spiritual heaven and earth, upon earh, when so
firmly prophesied, and promised. 5 We mightily cry out against
unrighteousness, and sigh for right to take place. And we are quieted and
comforted if a Judge promises us, that he will do us right. How much more
should we desire and hope on God (that cannot lie, nor be weak or unwilling
to do good) to be eased of the unrighteousness that oppresses the Church.

Means. 1. Consider we have a promise, 1 Means.
under Gods hand; yea many promises. By the Prophet Isay of which a fore. Of
Saint Peter here taking up those promises, and avouching them: yea since Saint
Peter, we have a Prophetical promise by Saint John in the Revelat. 21. yea
the whole book of the Revelat. tends to this as one whole System of promises.
Now God cannot lie. Tit. 1.1. He has sworn that in Isaac, that is in Christ,
Gen 22.16.17.
all the nations shall be blessed (this includes all things) God cannot be
perjured.

Secondly, It is God that makes these promises long since. Above 16 hundred
years since, the last of them, And much more, the foremost of them, and as all
other his promises have not failed. The nations are blessed in Christ coming.
Josh 21.45.
The rest of Isaiahs prophesies are fulfilled touching the Israelites
captivity in Babylon, and their return. The rest of Saint Peter's prophesies
are fulfilled. He suffered Martyrdom as he foretold. All the other of Saint
John's prophesies are fulfililed in the former viols and seals, to these times.
And now if ever, we see a dawning of the prophecy of the text, and the
promised mentioned in the text, why should we not believe. Above all in promise
keeping does the Lord glory to show himself a Jehovah.

Thirdly, Exodus 6.3.
consider these impleaded promises. Saint Peter has impleaded the promises in
Isai. Saint John the types and visions in Ezech. And the Saints especially
within these few years, have mightily challenged God on these promises that
speak of a new heaven, etc. uttered by Saint Paul, and Saint Peter. Therefore
make sure, God for his honor, will not have so many eyes upon him, and fail
in his promises so divulged, and canvased.

Object. 1. This is a difficult business.

Answ. Hope is of such things, Romans 4.8. creation is a about such things,
Potentia irresistentiae.
the promise says these new heavens etc. shall be created. In creation, the
creature cannot resist. Remember the Atoms, and hopeless beginnings of Luthers
time.

Object. 2. God uses means; we see none competent.

Answ. Hope that is seen is no hope, Romans 8. Creation is without means.
Immediate creation, absolutely of nothing. So the Chaos. Mediate as of Adam, of
that which was as good as nothing. Nor can the object be so properly intimated
to be a means in creation, which is merely passive, but God presents to us
many means, which we see not, especially under the relation of means. As the
enemies own plotts are oftentimes made means. Psalm. 9.16. Pro. 11.8.

Object. 3. But often, and by fits, things run cross, and contrary.

Answ. Creation is out of contraries, Genesis 1. And so is the creation of the
Churches reformation. Remember Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt.

Object. 4. But still the Churches enemies are many and strong, and the Church
is weak.

Answ. Creation is invinciable. It turns water into wine. God could make any
thing of the beautiful world out of the Chaos.

Object. 5. We are unworthy, many unworthy persons, and things yet in the
Church, and not only here left, but here loved.

Answ. God tells Israel he would deliver them for his own sake, for his name,
Ezech. 36.21. He will be jealous for his name, Ezech. 39.25. And not for their
sakes, Ezech. 36.22. There is no worthiness in the matter of creation. God
made us his new creation in Christ when we were enemies, much more therefore
being now reconciled, shall we be delivered from wrath Romans 5.10.

To wind up all (for it is high time.) God has said, and said, it shall be;
trouble we not our heads, when, how, wherewith. Trouble we (if we will do
any thing) our hearts to bring them to believe. God is so sweet in his mercy,
so sure in his truth, so supreme in his power, that as in prayer we cannot be
denied, Luke 18. v. 1. ver. 7.
unless we will be denied; so there is no reason why we should not believe
and hope but only that we will not. Wherefore let us fall short of nothing for
want of a doing, praying living says and hope put forth we our hope upon the
promise, with an holy protestation of mind, often resolved, Ezech. 33.11.
and renewed, according to the expression of the text. Neverthe^^^^^,
notwithstanding all difficulties and doubts, we according to his promise look
for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness; and still at
the close let our own hearts answer, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

