ENCLOSURE Thrown Open: OR, DEPOPULATION Depopulated. NOT By SPADES and
MATTOCKS; BUT, By the WORD of GOD, the LAWS of the LAND, and Solid ARGUMENTS.
And the most material PLEAS that can be brought for it, considered and answered.

By HENRY HALHEAD.

LONDON, Printed by Ja. Cottrel, for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread-Eagle
at the West End of Paul's. 1650.

Christian Reader,
BEing desired by the Author to make These of his against Enclosure common; I
shall as publicly expose the Reason of my undertaking the same.

I have known the Author from my childhood, and have observed him (ever since I
observed any thing) to be a constant and zealous Witness against Depopulation;
and no Encroachment of New Times, Places, or things, could ever remove this
Landmark from off his spirit. Yea, now* in his old age, his Courage and Hope
against this is as fresh and green as ever. So that this is no new nor sudden
Conception of his Fancy, but a settled and well-digested Principle in his Heart
through a long tract of time and observation.

Nor can any Particular interest of his own (by those that know him) be
suspected to set him on work; he living the best of his time in a
Burrough-town, where he was a Magistrate, and exercised his Calling in the
house, as a Shopkeeper; not in the field, as a Husbandman: Until Providence
snatching him thence, made him Governor of the only Island called by her
name; where he continued, until the Isle of Great Britain, being about to be
born again into a new and free state, might deservedly be Christened The Isle of
Providence; whither he might be brought back, as we may soberly judge, for this
end, partly, if not mainly, to give in his witness and testimony against
Depopulation. And no sooner were his other travels ended, but the pangs of this
travel came fresh upon him (though he had never been dischared of them;) and
the office of delivering these his Meditations, and bringing them forth to
light, he laid upon me, for the long acquaintance he had with me; charging me,
under a very great and solemn adjuration, not to neglect the same. Upon this
score do I put my hand to this work; otherwise, I confess, it is a Question
remote from my Cognizance, which I should not therefore undertake to determine.
I skill only the Equity of it; and certainly that is obvious to All men.
Depopulation is odious and abominable both to God and men: Therefore, that
Enclosure which is guilty of Depopulation, must needs be unlawful: Otherwise, I
suppose, the Author himself is not against such Enclosure as is for the
necessary accommodation of housekeeping.

The truth is, the just Bounds and Limits cannot be set by me, nor, I think, by
any man; yet all men may see there is a fault among us. And when God comes to
judge, (which how near that may be to us, is not perhaps considered) he will
find means in every man's Conscience to convince and reprove them, wherein they
have served their Covetousness in pretense of necessary Accommodation.

Did men believe they were Stewards, and have for others sakes whatever they
have more then food and raiment, I am persuaded the heat of their covetous
Ambition would soon be over.

We are taught by our Savior, to pray only for our daily bread; and that to
be given us this day, (or from day, to day.) It will not be a good Plea to say,
I enclosed my ground, because, though I could maintain my charge on my revenue,
yet I could not raise my family.

But were the Enclosure or Close-fistedness of men's Minds thrown open into the
largeness and bounty of a divine spirit, we should not need to regulate the
Enclosure of Land. For I would not have any think it is the Form we strictly
aim at but the Equity: whether in the form of Enclosure, or of Common field,
let men answer the End, which is Charity.

The Law was not made for a righteous man, but for the ungodly and sinners.
Those whom the Spirit of the Lord Jesus has made free, need no Law to
prescribe them: but to such as are not under that Law of the Spirit, are these
things intended, and are profitable, yet not for Righteousness, as that they
should think, when they have answered this Letter, they may rest therein; but
it is for a witness and testimony unto them of that inward spirit and power
which they are humbly to wait for to come upon them, in the exercise of this
outward Rule; that so what they do, may be done in truth. And those that are
above the coercion of an outward Rule of this kind, yet will stoop to the
observation of it for others sakes, as has been the practice of Christ's
freemen formerly. For, to him that is resolved of the End, and principled to
it, whereto there are various Ways and Methods tending and serving equally,
though he be not simply in bondage to one more then another, yet it is (and
must needs be) to him indifferent any of them; and that which through any
advantage may be most conducing, must needs be most acceptable.

They to whom this Counsel is the savor of death unto death, let them
remember, the time is coming that their gold shall rust, and their silver
canker; and that rust and that canker shall eat into their hearts: for they are
the last days.

Thine, in the Lord, JOSHVA SPRIGGE.

ENCLOSURE thrown open: OR, DEPOPULATION depopulated.
ECCLES. 4.1. So I returned, and considered all the Oppressions that are done
under the sun; and behold, the tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no
comforter. And on the side of their oppressors there was power; but they had no
comforter.


Chap. 5. verse. 8. If thou see the oppression of the poor, and violent
perverting of Judgment and Justice in a Province, marvel not at the matter:
for he that is higher then the highest, regards; and there be higher then
they.


THe consideration of these and many more Scriptures, has put me upon
consideration what might be the Causes of that Displeasure of God (for it has
been a mixed Dispensation) that has appeared against this Nation in his late
Administration. And finding* in the reading of the holy Scriptures, by the
Threats and Woes denounced by all the Prophets, that, amongst other things,
Violence and Cruelty, of any sort, has been a most provoking sin, much cried
out of: And observing, in the late Experience, the Woes denounced against such
sin to have been fulfilled in part, in these our Times; I thought it my duty to
hold forth my Observation, that so, in this time of Reformation, there might be
some lawful Remedy found out, for the amendment of the provoking Evils, before
Desolation come upon us, as it came upon the old world. The end of all flesh is
come before me, Genesis 6.13.
says the Lord: for the earth is filled with Violence.

In the beginning of the world, Almighty God, after the rest of the Creatures,
made Man, appointing him Lord over them all, and giving him Dominion, that he
should subdue the earth, and rule over the Creatures. Yet so it is come to
pass, through the Lust of Man, even the Covetousness and Self-seeking of many,
regarding their own profit more then the glory of God, that the course of
things is altered from their first Order; where through, the Brute creatures
are now, in some sense, become Subduers of Mankind; to the great dishonor of
God and his Institution, as well as to the hurt and prejudice of Mankind in
general, and of Societies and Commonwealths in particular; yea, to the utter
subversion of the same, without some speedy course be taken for redress
thereof: which, how it should be done, is almost beyond the apprehension of man
to conceive; those which should be the Reformers of such Disorders and horrible
Abuses in a State, being, for the most part, the greatest Offenders, or their
fathers being so before them: which causes much sighing and crying out by the
poor, in the bitterness of their spirits, to that God who will no doubt hear
their cries. Now for the oppression of the poor, and the sighing of the needy,
will I arise, says the Lord.

If it were my purpose to reckon up all those sins, that, according to the
declaration that God has made of himself in his Word, might justly be
suspected to procure the wrath of God against this Nation, I might not forget,
nay I should remember in the first place, that Violence and Cruelty that was
practiced against the Saints and Servants of God; not only in the Marian days,
but in our days, by the Bishops, for Nonconformity; silencing and ejecting
many faithful and able Ministers, to the utter undoing of them, their wives and
children, for things that the Persecutors themselves then called Indifferent,
and are now cast out as Superstitions. Yea, which adds to the Cruelty, not
only were they cast out of the Ministry, but means used to deprive them of
Life and Livelihood; a Proclamation being sent forth, That such deprived
Ministers should not be suffered either to keep Lecture or School, or be of any
Trade; nor should it be lawful for any man to entertain them in his House, or
allow them any Maintenance. O horrible and bloody cruelty! And yet exercised
against Persons that their very Persecutors durst not but at other times say,
were Honest Godly men. Indeed, they were painful and zealous Witnesses of the
Truth in their time, content with mean things, not seeking Augmentations, or
power to Lord it over their Brethren, as some of late days have done, that
have come in their places. These did good, and received evil; being termed
Factious, Troublers of the Land, Enemies of the State: when as, like sheep,
they suffered loss and spoil patiently; Some being imprisoned, and dying
there, others constrained to flee out of the Land. They were scoffed,
reproached, scorned of the World; slighted, and insulted over by those
Ministers that came in their places. Thus they did of old, they mocked the
Messengers of the Lord, misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord brake
forth against them, and there was no remedy. And for this has the Lord taken
vengeance on the Prelacie; and let those Ministers look to it, that were
content to see this cruelty exercised against their Brethren, and to come into
their places.

And let it be of warning to us all, to take heed of the like Spirit and
Practices against the people of God, under a new Name and Pretense. If the
Edomites, for their violence against Jacob, were destroyed for ever; What will
become of these now-a-dayes, that seek to root out and destroy any of the
people of God, under the Notion of Sectaries, and Disturbers of the State;
though they have many of them adventured their lives to do them good!

But my intent is not to be large in this: Only I could not but hint the wrong
that was done to the silenced Ministers. The maine Evil which I am to decry,
and which remains yet unremedied, after all that has been done toward
Reformation, is, DEPOPULATION; which, it cannot be denied, is a most cruel and
bloody sin. O that men would consider of it, and lay it to heart! Many are the
Woes, in Scripture, that are denounced against it. All the Prophets cry out of
it, as a sin that brings Desolation. Our own Experience seals to it. How many
great Families are come to naught! Although they have had (many times) much
more then their Fathers had, yet some secret hand of God has followed them,
that they have been brought even to misery and want: whereof no man could give
any other Reason. Yet notwithstanding, men will not be warned, but are as eager
upon that cruel bloody sin as ever. Wherefore, I am induced to declare my
experience: Yea, I am enforced (by the manifold cries I hear daily, and the
distresses of thousands destitute of Livelihood through this, and seeing
unavoidable misery coming upon this Nation thereby) to put Pen to Paper in this
kind; hoping in God, that some or other, of the Godly learned, that are better
seen* not only into the Scriptures, but into the Laws of the Land against
Depopulation, (for we are not without such Provisions) and that are of more
large and copious Observation and Experience, may be stirred up to set
themselves to lay open the Evil and Abominableness of this sin, and the
mischeivous Consequences thereof.

And therefore, as in a Public Danger, (for example, if a Town were on fire)
no man will blame the poorest and meanest creature, that, spying the fire
break out, shall cry, Fire, Fire, because every man's interest is concerned in
such a public danger; Upon the same account, I beseech you, whosoever shall
peruse these, blame not me (the unworthiest of all) that I cry out of
Depopulation; having seen and felt the danger of it. And truly, in my
apprehension, and by all that I am able to discern, it is a desolating sin.

And whereas it is said in the Text, They had no Comforter; Here is the sad
Condition, and Complaint of the People of this Land, that, notwithstanding the
Pressures and Burdens they have a long time groaned under, by Depopulation,
Wracking of Rents, Cruel Usury, and other the like Courses; yet has there no
way or means appeared to them, from whence they could yet have, or indeed hope
for redress. Complain to the Judges, they could not help them: Complain to
Parliaments; O that it might not be said, that they, or their Fathers, have
been deep in this transgression! and that they, as well as others, have enclosed
Common-fields, or do keep them enclosed, that were once for the Common use; and
Wrack up their Rents, whereby poor people are constrained to work in the very
fire, for the maintenance of them that do live Deliciously, if not very
Vitiously, as too many of the Gentry have done.

But since it has pleased God, by his mighty hand and outstretched arm, to
create for us an opportunity for Reformation, (which has not been gained
without much blood, and very many difficulties) and to turn the faces at least
(we hope, the hearts) of the whole Nation toward the same; I beseech you all,
our Representatives in Parliament, as you tender the glory of God, and the
flourishing of this Commonwealth, that you deny your own Interest, wherein it
tends to the Ruin of a Country or Nation; and that ye all join Heart and Hand
together, for the recovering of this almost-ruined Land out of this weak
estate whereinto it is fallen, by Depopulation: that so ye repairing the old
waste places, and raising up the Foundations of many Generations, may justly be
called, The Repairers of the Breach, Restorers of paths to dwell in. Oh! how
would this engage the hearts of the people unto you!

I know some will say, they did not Depopulate or enclose but they bought it
so, or it was so left them by their Fathers, and the Poor were provided for
when it was first enclosed and turned to pasture. I, but where are they and
their breed? Are they not constrained to flee into other Towns, to the great
annoyance and charge of the places whither they were driven? Where, I say, are
those good Housekeepers that brought store of Corn to the Market? and where
are the Horse, Beasts, and Sheep that were bred there, besides Men, Women, and
Children that dwelt there?

These things would be enlarged, by the experiences of ancient men, that know
more of this then I can utter.

And this may be one Reason why Free Quarter of Soldiers is so exceeding
burdensome, because many houses of Husbandry are decayed, and the Lands laid
down to Sheep-pasture* whereby it comes to pass that the charge lies but upon a
few. But of the Reasons and Arguments against Depopulation, in their place.

And to reduce what I have to say to some Method, I shall,

First, Endeavor to convict this sin, by the Laws of God, and of the Land
where we live, to be a forbidden, an accursed thing.

Secondly, I shall endeavor to lay open the Mystery, and the way of it.

Thirdly, I shall offer such Arguments as I have ready against it.

Fourthly, I shall answer what Objections I have met withal in the behalf of
it.

The first Scripture-evidence I shall produce against it, is, Isa. 5.8. Woe
unto them that join house to house, and that lay field to field, till there be
no place left, that they may dwell alone in the midst of the Earth. In mine
ears said the Lord of hosts, Of a truth many houses shall be desolate, even
great and fair without inhabitant.

The place is plain and pregnant; I shall forbear to gloss upon it: Only at
the Event, we may give glory to God, and be his Witnesses, that what he has
spoken with his mouth, he has fulfilled with his hand. As, might I call all
the Ancient men to witness, they were able to say, Where ever they knew any
that did throw down Townships and houses of Husbandry, to set up fair houses
for themselves and theirs, and either They, or their Children, came not to
poverty and want?

See, in the next place, Mich. 2.1. A Woe denounced against them that devise
iniquity, and work evil upon their beds, and when the morning is light they
practice it, because it is in the power of their hands. And what is the evil?
Why, (verse. 2.) They covet fields, and take them by violence; and houses, and
take them away: so they oppress a man and his house, even a man and his
heritage. Therefore behold, verse. 3, the Lord comes in with his device: Thus
says the Lord, Behold, against this Family do I devise an evil, from which you
shall not remove your necks, neither shall you go haughtily; for this time is
evil. In that day, they shall take up a parable against you, and lament with a
doleful lamentation, (and truly so they do now-a-dayes) and say, We are
utterly spoiled: for they have taken our fields. Now follows their judgment:
Therefore thou shall have none that shall cast a cord by lot in the
Congregation of the Lord. For the meaning whereof, whether it be, that for
their Cruelty and Oppression they were to be cut off from the Assemblies of the
godly in that time, or that in time of dividing their Inheritances they were to
have no lot among their Brethren, or both these, I commend you to the godly
learned to examine.

Habakkuk likewise denounces against this wickedness, Hab. 2.9 10, 11. Woe to
him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house, that he may set his nest
on high, that he may be delivered from the power of evil. Thou have cosulted
shame to thy self by cutting off many people, and have sinned against thy
soul. For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber
shall answer it.

How many of these houses have there been of late years, that were built by
blood and cruelty, by Wracking of Rents, and overthrowing whole Townships and
houses of Husbandry!

Thus we may see, by some few instances, the Laws of God are against this sin
of Depopulation. Neither are the Laws of the Land for it.

First, in the fourth year of Henry the seventh, Chap. 19.

Item, The King our Sovereign Lord having a singular Pleasure, above all
things, to avoid such Enormities and Mischiefs as be hurtful and prejudicial to
the Commonweal of this His Land, and His Subjects of the same, Remembers,
that, amongst all other things, great Inconveniences daily do increase, by
Desolation, and pulling down and wilful waste of Houses and Towns within this
Realm, and laying to Pasture Lands which Customably have been used in Tilth;
whereby Idleness, which is the ground and beginning of all Mischiefs, daily
does increase. For, where in some Towns two hundred persons were occupied, and
lived in their lawful Labors, now bin there occupied two or three Herds-men,
and the residue fall into Idleness. Thereby, Husbandry, which is one of the
greatest Commodities of this Realm, is greatly decayed, Churches destroyed, the
Service of God withdrawn, the Patrons and Curates wronged, the defense of this
Land against our Enemies much feebled and impaired; to the great displeasure of
God, to the subversion of the Policy and good Rules of this Land, if Remedy be
not provided.

Wherefore the King our Sovereign Lord, by the Advice of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and the Commons in the said Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, Have Ordained, Enacted, and Established, that no person,
of what Estate, Degree, or Condition soever he be, that has any House or
Houses, that at any time within three years past, has been, or now is, or
hereafter shall be letten to Farm, with twenty Acres at least, or more, lying
in Tillage and Husbandry, That the Owner or Owners of every such House, or
Houses and Land, to keep, sustain, and maintain Houses and Buildings upon the
said Ground or Land, convenient and necessary, for maintaining and upholding of
the said Tillage and Husbandry.

So also in the Statute made anno 39 of Queen Elizabeth, entitled, An Act for
the maintenance of Husbandry and Tillage, is the like provision made against
Depopulation by Enclosure, wherein also is to be found a Recital of several
Laws (always some or other in force) from the 27 of Hen. 8, until the 35 of Her
Majesty's Reign, ordaining and requiring the Conversion and Continuance of a
certain quantity and proportion of land for Tillage unalterably.

Yet notwithstanding this good and wholesome provision of the Laws against this
Evil, it has by notable sleights insinuated and upheld it self. And it may not
be useless, but afford some content and satisfaction, to lay open the manner
how These kind of Oppressors do work this their unnatural work, to displant
Men, and place Sheep in their rooms; that so it may appear in its odiousness to
all that shall consider the same; and that men may be aware of the beginnings
of their Plots, and wicked Devices upon their beds.

1. They will claim to be chief Lords of the Town which they mean to depopulate.

2. They will alter the customs of the sides of the fields, and hain that that
was not wont to be hained, and alter ancient known Ways in the field.

3. They will go about to make new Field-Orders, overthrowing the old
Field-Orders or Customs.

4. They labor by fair means, with the common people, to obtain their consent
for Enclosure; telling them, that for some little charge, their Living will be
made three times as good as they are, for profit.

5. They will say, Enclosure is a goodly thing; it stops many Strifes and
Contentions, when men may have things by themselves; it nourishes Wood in
hedges, whereof there is great need; and keeps Sheep from rotting.

6. If by fair means and persuasions they cannot prevail, then they will
commence a Suit in Law, and make the poor people dance attendance in some of
the Courts, for many years together, as I have known, of my own knowledge. And
then they will offer them large money, to buy them out: and if that take not,
then on goes the Suit; and a Decree is got out of Chancery, pretending
stubbornness, and that men will not be ruled by any good Order.

Some also have soug^^ to pick a quarrel against men in the Law of their God,
as for going from their Parish Church, when they have no Sermon at home, or as
good as none; and so vex them in the Chancellors-Court. But they are now down,
and gone, blessed be God.

7. They will ditch in their own Demeasns, and so make the poor Commoners go
about to their lands, to their great toil, and against their old Customs: and
all this, to weary and tire them out of their Possessions. They will also
allege that their Demeasns is too little for their Families, and that they
would enlarge it: But, in truth, their minds are too great for their means;
and so at last they set up a fair House, and overthrow many a Family.

8. Some have also labored to entitle the King to their land, without any
cause.

They will also make Coney-grees in some places, and let them increase, that
they may eat up the labors of poor men, to their great hinderance and
discouragement at length.

And thus, by these means, they seek to obtain their Ends.

Now, in the next place, I shall give you my reasons against this course of
depopulating Enclosure; and endeavor to satisfy the Objections and Arguments
that are made in behalf of it.

1. And first, it appears to be highly dishonorable to Almighty God; altering
that Course and Order he appointed in Nature; who said unto man, Grow, increase
and multiply, replenish the earth, and subdue it: which by these practices is
prevented and obstructed; Cattle being increased in stead of Men.

2. Likewise, hereby are overthrown many Churches and Congregations of men,
who, by holding up their hands to God, might pull down Blessings on a Nation,
and divert Judgments therefrom.

3. And where are the Soldiers in those decayed Towns, the men that should do
their Country service, and stand in the face of an Enemy coming to invade?
Where are the Horses that many Countrymen bred for the Service?

But the evils that come to the Commonwealth, are more then can soon be
reckoned, or easily expressed: for, in such Towns that are depopulated, the
inhabitants are constrained to flee to other Towns, to their impoverishment.
Neither do the Inclosers keep a house according to their estates; but many a
Farmer spends as much as they. When these places were all Champion-Countries,
many a shiver of Bread was given: but now, all such Liberality is laid by, and
a fair house is set up, with goodly Demeasns; but no Hospitality at all.

And, that I may not let it pass, another Burden lies upon the Commonwealth,
and that is, That the Highways, about such places, are most intolerable, and,
for the most part, unpassable; especially in the Wintertime: for which, many a
bitter oath is cast out against them. And if the people so depopulated, should
be strictly tied to mend the Ways, and repair the Church, it would be more then
their poor means will afford, their Rents are so exceedingly inhansed. And what
reason can be rendered, that that Soil should not pay as much to the State as
ever before, as much to the Church as before, as much to the Poor, and keep as
many people as ever it did? yet if they should be compelled thereunto, they
would get nothing by their Enclosure: for I dare boldly affirm, that never did
any man get by depopulating Enclosure, but he saved it out of the bodies of
men, or by not keeping of Cattle according to the old proportions.

2. It is a great increaser of Idleness: for, when the Plow goes forward, the
Old Saying is, The Plow-man's work is never at an end. But, in such decayed
Towns, they have very little to do: then they fall to a habit of Idleness, and
so they turn to haunt Alehouses, to Adultery, and other Felonies, and
destroying and wasting their Bodies, Estates, and Wits.

3. It increases Usurers, the Vipers of the Commonwealth, to eat out the
bowels of it; so that free lending is for the most part taken away. And it
hardens men's hearts one against another: for, they make their little Land into
a Stock, and so they get to some Market Town, and either turn Usurers,
Ale-house-keepers, or Maultsters, to the no-small hurt of the Commonwealth.

4. It fills Market-townes with Husbandmens Children; who, because they cannot
take any Livings for reasonable Fines, as before-time, do thrust themselves
into such Market Towns, and there use unprofitable Trades, such as this
Commonwealth has no need of; to the great hurt of those that be borne in that
soil. And because there is no Law to forbid men to remove, to dwell in
Market Towns, they and their posterity, being thrust out from such decayed
places, and constrained to go where they can, resort thither; to the great
burden of such places.

5. And unhappy Experience shows, that Market Towns and Cities being so
pestered with people which are driven thither on heaps, only that they might
live, are thereby mainly exposed to dangerous Infection, as of the Plague, and
other Diseases, and also to unavoidable Poverty. And if any Service be to be
done for the State's Wars, then they have recourse to those places where men
are; which places do not only find Men, but also Furniture for such men, to
their great burden; the Soil wherein those men were bred, in the mean time,
finding neither Men nor Money.

6. It is also the utter decay of Trading: For the Yeomen and Husbandmen, they
lack all the Commodities the Tradesmen have to sell; Hats, Bands, Jurkins,
Dublets, Points, Breeches, Stockings, Garters, Shoes, and all other
necessaries: Iron-work for Cartwheels, and for Harrowes, and Plowes, and all
other necessaries that they know full well. All which things set men on work,
and maintain Tradesmen, who maintain Londoners, and so Merchants, and so to
the Highest and Best of men. But the Depopulating-Incloser overthrows all at
once, and lives either in London, or in some City, or Town Corporate, and gets
heaps of money, though all in vain; they, or the most part of them having it
with a witness, to their utter overthrow and ruin; for, I never saw any of
them, but some remarkable hand of God followed them. Oh that it might fear men
from such cruel courses!

7. Depopulating Enclosure does not only drive out men from such places, but
it makes them poor that live there: The houses, for want of straw, do drop
down; so that there is no comfortable dweling for the Poor: the richer sort
are gone away, the poorer sort are cruelly handled: For, there is some Bailiff
set over them, that is like to the Fuller that dresseth Northern Cloth; they do
so wrack them, and strain them, that at length they break their hearts. These
Bailiffs are something like to the Taskmasters of Egypt, who cruelly vexed the
poor Israelites: And the Landlord (being absent from them) dwelling at London,
or elsewhere, little condoles their misery; so that these poor Tennants know
not to whom to complain. Besides, they do raise things to so great a rate, that
men know not whither to go in this Land to ease their grief unless, with their
many sighs and tears, to Almighty God, who no doubt will hear their
complaints. Now for the oppression of the poor, and sighing of the needy, I
will up, says the Lord, etc.

8. It does mightily impoverish and oppress other Towns that are not
Depopulate: For, they that are driven out elsewhere, do press into such towns,
and erect Cottages. This, if you ask, you shall find, that every Town is
mightily increased with poor people, so as there are not houses to be taken for
reasonable money, that have any Land belonging unto them. But the breed of
mankind increasing, and the great ones thrusting them thus on heaps, men are
driven to live wonderful hardly; so that if the State should want Soldiers,
strong and able men, there are very few to be had in such decayed Towns.

Now it follows that I should answer some of their Objections.

1. Their maine Objection is, That the benefit of Enclosure is great, and does
countervaile all that can be said against it. Where before it is said it
nourishes Idleness; They say, that many sheep are kept on such grounds so
enclosed, the wool whereof does serve to set many poor on work; and so it does
much good.

Answ. It is true, they are set on work; but what have they for their work? and
how is their work able to maintain them and theirs? and what can they lay up
for their Posterity? and how many strong and able Soldiers does such labor
maintain for the States service? how hardly do they fare? how bare do they go?
and much a-do to live in plentiful years. But if a dear year come, how are
they pinched and starved! Or if the Clothier have not sale for his Cloth, and
be constrained to sell at low Rates, then come they upon the Poor with
Abatement, which utterly overthrows them: so that, at such a time, the Labors
of the Poor will not near maintain them. And herein, by the way, the gatherers
of the Labors of the Poor are like the Taskmasters, that exact more and more
upon them. And when* did you see any, out of their mean and mere Labor, marry
their Children, and provide for their Posterity, in a comfortable manner?

2 Object. It nourishes Wood, which the Country has great need of.

Answ. To the which I answer, That first of all, for the most part, they
destroy all the great Elms and Oaks about such Towns. It is true, they plant
Hedge-wood, which, in the age of a Man comes to have some bigness to be sold;
but by that time their Mounds be served, and Hedges fenced, there comes little
to a Common use, but most goes for Repairs: and before they come to defend
themselves, they take up much wood to preserve them; so that the Commonwealth
has no benefit hereby.

3. Object. It keeps Sheep from rotting: and they are better kept in
Pasture-grounds, then they were wont to be in Common-fields, and yield more
profit.

Answ. To the first, I answer, They may as well, by digging and trenching, be
preserved in Common-fields, as in Pasture-grounds, if men would be orderly;
which they should be tied unto by Law, rather then by their Janglings destroy
Houses and Towns, and subvert a Kingdom and Nation.

The second part of the third Objection, is, They are better kept, and yield
more profit.

I confess that is true, they are better kept; for they keep fewer then in
Common-fields they do: But if they kept as many Cattle as were kept before such
Depopulations, the Grounds would not bear it. It is observed by many, (which I
confess I cannot show the reason of) that a Lordship enclosed will keep nothing
near so many, no, not by the half, (being, I say, enclosed and depopulated)
either Horse, Beasts, and Sheep, or Men, Women, and Children, as it was wont to
do, before such Enclosure and Depopulation; besides all the Corn they brought
to the Markets. So that it is to me manifest, that there is some secret hand of
God in it, whereby he shows his dislike of such Depopulation. Many a father
has lived comfortably and well with the tenth part of what the son has had;
yet the son could not live of it. If you mark it, they keep no Houses, many of
them; but run in debt, and, many times, are not able to pay. Yet there is no
man that takes warning by these Examples, neither will they see the high hand
of God upon them.

4 Object. But you see Corn as cheap, many times, since such depopulating
Enclosure, as it has been before-time; and what need is there then of so many
Open fields?

Answ. To which I answer: God has sometimes blessed the earth with abundance,
to show, that he can make a little, by his blessing, to be an abundant store,
and so to be cheap: but no thank to such Depopulators.

But will you know a further Reason? It is, because much Land is laid down from
a Common use, and Men are much diminished in such depopulated places, and
Cattle are much abated, and become fewer then have been in former times. For,
if there were Men to spend it, and Cattle, Swine, and Pullen proportionable to
former times, much Corn would be spent that way, which is now saved. Much Corn
would be for Seed, which now is not used. Horses might be better kept, which
should be for Service: and Store would be preserved, against a time of Dearth.
Mankind, the best of all the Creatures, would be nourished and bred up
stronger, and able to do more service to God and their Country, and have in
their hand to lay up for their Posterity. But, if you do but take notice of it,
you shall see those Housekeepers that of old used to buy a Strike of Corn, do
now buy a Loaf or two of Bread. People are not kept in heart; they are famished
in many places, and are so pinched with Poverty, that it would grive the heart
of man to see: neither have they any thing about them, but live poor and
meanly. And as for works of Mercy, and for the maintenance of the Worship of
God, they have not any thing to contribute; no, not to pay for the education of
their children. So then, the laying down of Land, is the diminishing of Men and
Cattle; and that is the cause of cheapness of Corn in plentiful times.

5 Object. I, but such Inclosers will plow up their Pasture-grounds when Corn
is dear, and so bring in Plenty. When the Land has gotten strength, they will
take out that strength; and so the Incloser does good.

Answ. The Answer to which, is: There lies a great Mystery; but I will tell
you mine opinion, That the Corn so increased, turns to no good to the
Commonwealth. First, when the Land is laid down, it is a good space of time
before it turn to be a good Sward; which is a hurt to the Commonwealth. Then
they will break it up: But observe, they will keep no constant houses of
Husbandry therewith; but take the heart out of the Land, and lay it down again:
So that the time before it gather heart, and the time after it is laid down, it
is no way so profitable for a Common good. But the Yeoman or Husbandman that
keeps a constant Family upon his Land, does till it; and when it grows out
of heart, does fetch it in again: and it never lies still, but one year in
four, for the better husbandry of it; which fourth year will (by Gods blessing)
bring a double increase. Then again, the Gentleman sells his Corn at dear
rates, dearer then the Husbandman: for he can give some time with his Corn; and
so wrap in the poor Husbandman, that in haste he cannot get out. The poor man
sells for his need, to buy necessaries; and, most commonly, sells six pence
in a Strike cheaper then the Gentleman does. So that when the Yeoman should
make his profit at Seed-time, he cannot sell his Corn; the Country is supplied
with one that keeps no constant Husbandry.

6 Object. The sixth Objection is, That Ditches do preserve Corn from spoiling
by passengers that travel upon the way: and therefore it is good.

Answ. Then might they ditch from the Way only, and not divide it into smaller
parcels; and ditch also in such places where there are stones to make good such
Highways, and not in deep Clay-Countries, where to enclose, is to bring
Highways to such a dangerous passage, that no man can pass, without danger
both of horse and man (at least, to the great annoyance of both) many having
perished of late years thereby. And besides all this, the former exchanging of
Lands before showed, shows men's intent. Thus have I endeavored to answer the
most of their Objections, as I can remember.

7. I, but it will be demanded, Will you say that Enclosures in all places are
unlawful? We see, that such Countries where there are such Enclosures, are the
richest of all.

Let me not be mistaken: I say, and shall prove, that all Enclosures wherein is
Depopulation, and thrusting out of poor men from their dwellings, or making
their dwellings uncomfortable to them, wherein one fair House is set up, by the
throwing down of many Households, is utterly unlawful, both by the Law of God,
and this Land; and is one of the Crying sins of our Time. And if in any Country
this be practiced, it is the overthrow of that Country, as hereafter will more
appear.

Now therefore I beseech you all, that are the ancient Yeomen and Husbandmen of
every County, declare your experiences of the evil of Depopulation, and
overthrowing of houses of Husbandry; and what you have seen, and what has
befallen those that have been actors in it, and the evils that have come of it,
and the pressure and burden that has come upon those Towns that have not been
enclosed, by the means of those that have been enclosed, and turned from the
Common use. Oh that in all the Counties of this Kingdom, there might be a View
of all the Villages, and Towns, and Houses of Husbandry, that have been decayed
within these fifty years, and the Desolation that has come by that means, by
laying of Lands accustomed to Tillage, and now turned into Pasture-grounds;
whereby Idleness, one of the sins of Sodom, is much increased, Men women, and
children, and their Progenies be diminished, and Husbandry, the greatest
Commodity of the Land (for the sustenance of Man) is decayed, Churches be
destroyed, the service of God is withdrawn, Cities and Market Towns be brought
to great ruin and decay, Necessaries for man's use and sustenance be made
scarce and dear, the people of this Commonwealth be sore minished, the power
and defense thereof is enfeebled and decayed; to the high displeasure of God,
and against his Laws; and to the subversion of the Commonwealth, and
desolation of the same. Wherefore, and for the redress thereof, there have been
good Laws made in Parliament, in former times, for the repressing of these
Disorders, but never put in execution in my time; whereby this Oppression and
Desolation is very usual and common. Yea, so bold are they grown, that now in
Parliament-time, which we thought should have been a time of Easing of Burdens,
this Monster none dares to attempt. Oh that our present Parliament might be of
the number of them that build the old waste places, Isa. 58.12.
and raise up the foundations of many generations; that they might be called,
The Repairers of the breach, and the Restorers of places to dwell in.

Wherefore, you the Yeomen and Husbandmen of all Counties, should humbly
petition to the honorable House of Parliament, (now that they intend the
Reformation of things amiss) that they, amongst their great affairs of this
distracted Nation, would be pleased to look upon this Horrible, Oppressing,
Desolating, Crying sin, which (no doubt) amongst and above most other is one of
the highest nature, and worst consequence, which God himself has promised to
devise an evil against; as more at large shall appear, God willing. And to the
end it may appear in its colors, I pray you take some pains to let the State
know, how many men, women, and children; horse, beast, and sheep, swine, and
pullen, have been usually maintained upon such Villages, and Towns, and Houses
of Husbandry now decayed: which, by proportion you may know, counting how many
Plow-land there where, and how many do usually go with a Plow: That so, the
number being guessed at the Parliament may see the mighty decay there has been
and is in this Land; that their hearts may be wrought upon. And you may, and
ought to complain; for there is none that can better tell where the shoe
pincheth, then those that wear it. And they are your mouths in Parliament,
the highest Court of Justice in the Land; who ought to seek your good, and keep
you from Tyranny, and Oppression. And if by this lawful means you can find no
redress, do not Murmr, nor Muteny against God or them: But silently sit down,
and wait upon God; who has promised, For the oppression of the poor, and the
sighing of the needy, he will arise, and set at liberty those whom the wicked
have snared. For, Psalm. 12.5.
be you well assured, that if help come not by these lawful means and ways,
God will send help and deliverance another way. And then, let those
Oppressors, with their houses and posterity, look to it.

If thou see the oppression of the poor, and violent perverting of jugdment
and justice in a Province, Eccle. 5.8.
marvel not at the matter: for he that is higher then the highest, regards;
and there be higher then they. Moreover, Verse. 9.
the profit of the earth is for all: the King himself is served by the field
that is tilled.

Yet through the extreme wickedness of man, who has perverted the course of
Almighty God; the inferior creature comes to be preferred above man; who is
made after the Image of God: Which is a sin of a very high nature; all the
Prophets crying out of it, and denouncing fearful woes against it. For God
tenders the good of his people now, as well as ever he did before-time. He
calls the house of Israel his Vineyard, Isa. 5.7.
and the men of Judah his pleasant plant: he looked for judgment, but behold
oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry. Isa. 59.14, 15.
And is it not so in our days? And as then the Lord did (by his Prophet)
denounce woes against the oppression of those times, even so does he now
against all the oppressions of these times: for the righteous Lord hates and
abhorres all manner of Violence, Cruelty, and Oppression, as much now, as ever
he did.

Furthermore, God would have men grow, increase and multiply, replenish the
earth, and subdue it: But the Oppressors of our times do what in them lies to
diminish men, women, and children, by whom God is honored, and the
Commonwealth sustained. Isa. 3.13, 14, 15.
And therefore, The Lord is risen up, and stands to plead for his people, and
to judge their cause. He will enter into judgment with the ancients of the
people, and the Princes thereof: for they have eaten up the Vineyard; and the
spoil of the poor is in their houses. And the Lord will know what they mean,
in dealing so with his people. Verse. 15, What mean ye, that ye beat my people
to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor, says the Lord of hosts? Much like
to the times wherein we live. Ier. 2.34.
Also, in her skirts is found the blood of the souls of the poor Innocents:
Look to the end of the Chapter.

Lament. 4.12, 13.
The kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the world, would not have
believed that the adversary and the enemy should have entered into the gates of
Jerusalem. Yet, For the sins of the Prophets, and the iniquities of the
Priests, that have shed the blood of the just in the midst of her, it was done.

Therefore, let none of us make to our selves any vain confidences, or put our
trust in any arm of flesh, or the strongest Fortifications that can be made by
any of the sons of men: For Jerusalem was a famous City, and very strongly
fortified; so that it would hardly have been believed, that that should have
befallen it, that did. But we see (as aforesaid) that, for the sins of the
Prophets, and for the iniquities of the Priests, the Lord laid it waste. And it
is further showed, Isa. 30.1, 2, etc.
concerning those Rebellious children, (spoken of in the 30 Chapter of Isaiah)
that strengthened themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and trusted in the
shadow of Egypt; The Lord says, (by his Prophet) Verse. 8, Now go, write it
before them in a Table, and note it in a book, that it may be for the time to
come, for ever and ever, That this is a rebellious people, lying children,
children that will not hear the Law of the Lord; And that their downfall will
be sudden, like a swelling wall. Read also from this Chapter to the 31, 32, and
33. where it is declared in verse. the 14, who shall be surprised with fear;
and those are there said to be Hypocrites: Isa. 33.14.
And also who shall stand in the trying-time; which the Scripture there holds
forth to be Godly men, by this Sign: He that walks righteously, and speaks
uprightly; he that despises the gain of oppressions, that shakes his hands
from holding of Bribes, that stops his ears from hearing of blood, and
shuts his eyes from seeing evil, It is said of him, verse the 16, He shall
dwell on high; his place of defense shall be the munitions of rocks; Verse. 16.
bread shall be given him, his water shall be sure.

Lay not wait, O Wicked man, against the dwelling of the Righteous; spoil not
his resting place.

Remove not the old Landmark, and enter not into the field of the fatherless:
for their Redeemer is mighty; he shall plead their cause.

FINIS.

