THE PILLAR and PATTERN OF Englands Deliverances.

Presented In a Sermon to the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Aldermen,
with the several Companies of the City of London, in their solemn Meeting at
Paul's on the Lords Day, Novem. 5. 1654.

Being also the First Sabbath after his Lordships entrance upon his Majoralty.

By THOMAS HORTON Doctor in Divinity, and Professor thereof in Gresham-Colledge
LONDON.

PSALM. 77.11. I will remember the Works of the Lord; surely I will remember thy
WONDERS of old.

2 COR. 1.10. Who delivered us from so great a Death, and does deliver, in whom
we trust that he will yet deliver us.

Printed at London by R. I. for Jo. Clark, and are to be sold at the entrance
into Mercers Chapel, at the lower end of Cheap Side. 1655.

TO The Right Honorable Christopher Pack Lord Mayor, with the Honorable Court
of Aldermen of the famous City of London.
Right Honorable:
THe Devil has had a double Design about this business of the
Gunpowder-Treason; the First was to blow up the Parliament, the Second is to
blow up the Deliverance, and to make it appear less to the World than indeed it
is. It is true, I will not deny, but that as Corruption will be sure to be at
the end of every Action, so there might be possibly some Politic advantages
made of the Discovery of this Plot, by some which had then the managing of
present Affairs; but that is no Disparagement at all to the Mercy it self, nor
excuse to those which were Instruments in the Conspiracy. The Danger was
unquestionable, and the Preservation very remarkable, and such as we have All
cause very deeply to lay to heart, with the fullest resentment that may be. The
scope of this plain Sermon is a little to help us herein, which I have now at
the last by your Order (not of mine own inclination, nay indeed with some
reluctancies in my self) brought to the public Light, but in a desire of the
public Good. I have purposedly deferred it to this Time for the publishing of
it, that so, as the thing it self was as the beginning of a New Life, so the
Discourse about it might fall in with the New Year, wherein our Lives are in a
manner restored and renewed unto us. Besides that, the time of Printing it
might somewhat answer the time of Preaching it, which was New-Year in the
Calendar of the City, as it is now in the Calendar of the World. And lastly,
That as the Deliverance is a Monument of Gods goodness to the Nation, so the
Sermon might be a Testimony of mine own respects and thankfulness to your
selves in the enjoyment, and likewise continuance of so much favor and
encouragement from you, as I am still partaker of. I have this only to add,
That the Lord who keeps Israel, and who alone is the safety of his people,
would delight still to watch over this City for good, to make the Walls of it
Salvation, and the Gates of it Praise, and the Officers of it Peace; to
establish Holiness and Righteousness within the borders, and in the midst of
it, that it may prove an eternal excellency, and the joy of many Generations,
which is and shall be the prayer of

Gresham-Colledge January 1. 1655/4. Your Servant in the work of the Lord:THO.
HORTON.

A SERMON Preached in PAUL'S on the Fifth of November, being also the Lords day,
A. D. MDCLIV.
NUMBER. 23. ver. 23. Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is
there any divination against Israel. According to this time it shall be said of
Jacob, and of Israel, WHAT HAS GOD WROVGHT!


THis day on, The Occasion.
which we are now met, and assembled together at this time, (Right Honorable
and Beloved in our Lord) it carries the signature of a double Solemnity upon
it; the one in its weekly revolution, as it is the Lords Day, the Day which God
has sanctified more especially for his own service; And the other in its
annual revolution, as it is our day, the Day which God has marked with an
eminent, and famous deliverance of this Land and Nation, of which we are, from
that horrid and dreadful conspiracy of the Gun-powder-Treason. In either of
which respects, it is a time much to be observed, and regarded by us throughout
our Generations; and in reference whereunto we may say of it, in the words of
the Psalmist, this is the Day which the Lord has made, Ps. 118.24.
we will be glad and rejoice in it. He has made it to be a Day of Rest, and
he has made it to be a day of Joy both. And these two, they do no way cross,
or contradict one the other, but do very happily agree together: for we can
never better sanctily a Sabbath, than by works of Praise, nor we can never
better celebrate a Thanksgiving, than by works of Piety. Indeed, every
thanksgiving-Day is in the proper nature of it a Sabbath, and accordingly (if
we rightly understand it) is in that manner to be kept by us, as an Holy Day,
not as a play-day; as a day of holy and spiritual merriment and rejoicing to
the Lord; but this which is now before us, is so (as I may say in a manner,
whether we will or no, from the present frame, and disposition of the year,
which therefore I hope we shall improve to the best advantage of the duty it
self; that is, not to profane the Sabbath, that we may keep the Festival, but
rather by keeping of the Festival, so much the better to sanctify the Sabbath.

I may add one Notion to it more (though inferior to the other two, yet not
altogether to be neglected by us) which makes it more solemn yet. It is the day
wherein the chief Magistrate of this City appears first in this place, with
that badge of Government upon him, who cannot lay a better beginning and
foundation of such an employment, than this of Praise and Thanksgiving to God;
especially (as the occasion now calls to) for protection and preservation from
danger, being that, which those that are Governors, as they have most need of,
so they have most promise for, of any men else besides. All these, they concur
and meet together in this present performance.

But that which I shall especially frame my discourse unto is the commemoration
of the deliverance it self, which I have answerably fitted with a Scripture, as
I conceive most suitable to it, in the prophecy of Balaam upon Israel. The
occasion briefly was, The Coherence.
this Balak the King of Moab, hearing of the general success which the people
of Israel found, in all places whithersoever they came, and withal
understanding of their pitching in the plains of Moab, began hereupon to be
distressed and fore afraid. And now, partly to secure himself, and partly to
displeasure the Israelites, sends to Balaam the Magician to curse them. The
Sorcerer seemed at first to be unwilling, but being encouraged by Balaks
promises of reward, attempts it, and that often, though in vain. Instead of
cursing he ^^ses them; yea with his own mouth signifies, that no cursing could
prevail against them; Surely there is no enchantment, etc. And thus are we now
come to the Text, Wherein we have two general parts observable of us.

First, The deliverance or preservation it self. The Division.
And

Secondly, The celebration of the deliverance. The deliverance it self, that is
laid down by way of solomn declarations in the first branch of the verse, (...)
is no enchantment etc. The Celebration of the Deliverance, The Deliverance
under a threefold Consideration.
that is by way of prophetical prediction in the second. According to this time
it shall be said of Jacob, etc. we begin with the first, viz. the
Deliverance or Preservation it self, Surely there is no etc. Now this again may
be looked upon three manner of ways.

First, In its proposition.

Secondly, In its reduplication.

Thirdly, In its Reflection.

The Proposition of it that is absolute; no enchantment against Jacob. The
Reduplication of it, that is the same Truth in a diversity and variety of
expression; no enchantment against Jacob, no divination against Israel. The
Reflection of it, that is this Truth considered as coming out of the mouth of
such a person as uttered it, wicked Balaam, a sorcerer, one who was of the
Counsel of Balak an enemy to God and his people.

First, 1 In it. Proposition.
to look upon it in the bare simple and absolute proposition, There is no
enchantment, or divination, against Jacob, or Israel. Interpreters do somewhat
differ concerning the reading of these words; for some read them thus, There is
no Enchantment in Jacob, nor no divination in Israel. The Explication.
Thus the Septuagint, Saint Hierom, and the Vulgar Latin, yea our own last
Translation in the Margin, as some others before it in the Text, making it a
part of the praise and commendation of the People of God, that they had no such
Arts as those of Sorcery and Witchcraft amongst them. 1 In Jacob.
And so the Chaldee Paraphrase has it expressly, Enchantments are not pleasing
in the House of Jacob, neither does the multitude of the House of Israel
delight in divinations. In particular no Sorcery.
This, it has a very good sense and meaning with it, and such as may be
profitabely improved for our instruction; to signify how ill such Studies and
ways, as those of Astrology and Magic, and Divination, do become those which
profess Religion; being such things, as the Church of God in all times of the
World has professed it self an Enemy to them, and God himself has taken them
off from them, as we may see in diverse places of Scripture tending to this
purpose; but I will not trouble you with them now; I only give you an hint of
it by the way, as lying before us. In General, no indirect means.


We may carry it (if we please) a little further, by taking Enchantments and
divinations here by a Synecdoche Speciei, for all sinful and unlawful means,
as to the compassing of any design. There is none of these neither in Gods
people; Gracious and holy persons, so far forth as they have Grace in them, and
where they are not surprised by a Temptation, they do abhor and withdraw
themselves from all unjust and unwarrantable Courses for the effecting of any
business whatsoever. And this now Balaam might seem to speak (though as we
shall hear afterward, by a Spirit above his own) in opposition to what was
practiced by himself, and Balak the King of Moab, in attempt against Israel.
They made use of such means as these were (as we may see in the story); but as
for Israel themselves, which were Gods people, they did not do so. The Servants
of God living by faith in his promises, do content themselves in the use of
those means which himself has appointed, not diverting or steping aside to any
thing which is unconscionable, though it were to gain the whole World it self.
Thus, if we will, we may expound one verse by another; that in this verse, by
that in verse 21. In this verse, There is no enchantment in Jacob, nor any
Divination in Israel. In that, He has not beheld Iniquity in Jacob, neither
has he seen perverseness in Israel. That is, Iniquity and perverseness of
this kind, whereof he now speaks, and which by their Enemies was used against
them, God saw none of this now in his people; though for other matters he saw
enough, yea and saw it likewise with effect, so as to correct and chastise them
for it. But so much of that Interpretation, by reading the word In: In Jacob
and in Israel.

The other Interpretation is that before us, No enchantment against Jacob etc.
2 Against Jacob.
And so the Preposition in the Hebrew is oftentimes used. This is not to be
understood in regard of endeavor, but of success. If we speak of endeavor,
so there are enchantments enough against the people of God, there is no want of
attempts upon them; nor will not be, whiles there is a Devil in the World to
join with corrupt Nature, but as to the success, here they fayl. Many a time
have they afflicted me from my youth, may Israel say; Many a time have they
afflicted me, but they have not prevailed against me. Attempting is one
thing, but Prevailing is an other; And this the Enemies of the Church want. No
enchantment shall hinder Jacob, or prejudice him; so the Arabic, which is the
proper sense of the Text. For the better opening and amplifying of this present
passage to us, we may look upon Jacob and Israel according to a threefold
notion or acception, in which they may be taken, Jacob and Israel in a
threefold acception.


First, Personal; Secondly, National; and Thirdly, Mystical, or Representative.

According to the First; so it point^ out a particular Person, as the Patriarch
Jacob was; whose name was called upon the Family, or by whose name the Family
was called. Genesis 48.16. According to the Second, so it relates to that
particular Nation and State, and Commonwealth of the Jews. According to the
Third, 1 Mystical, or, representative.
so it signifies the whole Church and Company of Believers, styled by the
Apostle Paul, the Israel of God. Gal. 6.16.

We will begin with the last first, as that which is most considerable, as it
referrs to the whole Church, And so we have this in it,

That all Plots and Conspiracies, and Endeavors against the Church of God,
they are in vain, and to no purpose. They are such as are as good as none,
being none in the event. This is clear, from the Text; Balak would have Israel
destroyed. How does he go about to effect it? He calls Balaam to curse them, a
man of his own disposition, forward enough to such a work, but being further
encouraged with hopes and expectations of preferment, very eager and earnest
upon it; and yet for all that, it would not do, his enchantments and sorceries
would not take, but like so many sparks of fire falling into the main Ocean go
out of themselves. And so it is with all others, which are employed in the same
work, they meet with the same success sooner or later. Pro. 11.18.
The wicked (says Solomon) work a deceitful work; and they never work it more
truly than in their endeavors against the Church: Here it is a deceit full
work indeed, and so will prove, in regard of the miscarriages and disapointment
which it is subject unto. And that twofold, First, Enemies miscariage double.
Sometimes in the thing it self, which they labor to effect. Secondly, At
least, and always, as to the evil and mischeivousnesse of it.

First as to the thing it self, 1 Of Disappointment.
they fail now and then here. So it was in this present instance of Balaams
cursing of Israel. He could not proceed so much as to the performance; though
he endeavored it, and went about it, yet he still miscarried in it, and
could not do it at all. According to that of Eliphaz Job 5.12. he
disappointeth the decrees of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform
their enterprise. God sometimes will not suffer the enemies to effect that
particular plot, which they design and propound to themselves.

But Secondly, If they chance to do that, yet they reach not what they intend
in it. God may suffer a plot to take, as to the performance, and yet to fail,
as to the principal end; because it does not work the destruction of the
parties, which it is laid against. As we see in the great contriver and
complotter of al, Satan himself, who miscaries even then, at such a time as he
seems to succeed; in as much as whiles he does some things which are
materially prejudicall to the Church, yet God keeps them from that absolute
ruin which he intends to them in it.

And yet that's not all which is considerable in this point neither, there is
somewhat more, as pertinent to this purpose, and that is this.

First, That these endeavors prove at last to the Churches advantage.

Secondly, To the greater disadvantage of the enemies themselves.

First. To the advantage of the Church. These Enchantments and Divinations are
so far from being against Israel, as that they make rather for it; Thus it
was here in this business of Balaam, 2 Of Dis-advantage.
as to the cursing of Gods people; Instead of cursing them, he blesses them;
he does not only not do that which Balak desired him to do, but he does that
which is quite contrary to it; so far from subjecting them to mischief, as
that he so much the rather confirms good upon them, yea and that Balak himself
could see and confess too at length. Therefore, he who was so fierce at first
to persuade Balaam to curse them, is fain at last to call upon him to suspend,
and to do nothing with them at all, ver. 25. of this Chapter, And Balak said
unto Balaam, neither curse them at all nor bless them at all; Do not bless
them, lest they prove to be happy; do not curse them, lest even that curse it
self turn to a greater Blessing to them. God will make the Enemies of his
Church, before he has done with them, weary of plotting mischief against them,
by converting that mischief of theirs, which is plotted by them, to his peoples
greater good.

Yet this is not all yet, there is something further in it still; God does not
only convert these Conspiracies to the greater advantage of the Church, but
moreover to the confusion of the Enemy; so that now there is no enchantment
against Jacob, but rather against Balak, nor any Divination against Israel, but
rather against Balaam himself; against Moab, not against the Church. They that
wish ill to Sion, and curse that, their curses and ill wishes shall fall upon
their own heads, and turn to the ruin of those from whom they proceed. We need
not go far for instances of this kind, we have enough of them continually before
us, and standing upon record, in Pharaoh, Herod, Achitophel, Julian, and the
rest of that wicked crew; so sure and certain is this observation here
presented unto us. That no endeavors against the Church shall be successful, no
weapon that is formed against them shall prosper, and every tongue that rises
in judgment against them shall be condemned, etc. Isa. 54.17.

Would we know whence this comes about; The Grounds.
It is easy to give an account of it. 1 Gods Affection.
First, From the interest which they have in Gods Affection; They are the Dear
ones and Beloved of the Lord. Love it is a waking Affection, which is anxious
and solicitous for the party which it is fastened upon, that no evil may at any
time betide it; and thus it is with God toward his Church; It is much in his
heart, and therefore it is much in his preservation: He loves it, and therefore
defends it, and keeps it from wrong, according to that famous place, Isa. 27.3.
speaking concerning the Church, Sing ye unto her a Vineyard of red wine. I the
Lord do keep it, I will water it every morning, lest any hurt it, I will keep
it night and day. There is no man can be more chary of a Vineyard, or Orchard,
or Garden of his own plantation, and which his own hands have set, than the
Lord is of his Church and People, which his own hands have made and fashioned,
which are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians.
2.10. These are precious, and tender in his eyes; and he has a special regard
unto them, for the preserving and securing of them. His bowels here yern in
him, as Queen Hesters sometime did in her, upon the like occasion, How can I
endure to see the evil that shall come unto my people? or how can I endure to
see the destruction of my kindred? Hest. 8.6.

Secondly, 2 His Covenant.
The Church are a people in Covenant, therefore a people preserved: They have
given up themselves to him, and therefore may very well expect to be secured by
him. Protection is a part of Gods bargain with his people, when he takes them
to be his, and they him to be theirs. Fear not, Oh Jacob, I am with thee, be
not dismayed, I am thy God, Isa. 41.10. God having once taken us to be his own,
ingages himself to keep us from all kind of evil whatsoever, so far forth as
it is fitting for us; The Lord will preserve me from every evil work, says
Paul, 2 Timothy 4.18. whether we take it actively or passively, from doing evil,
or suffering it, from both he will preserve me, from his special engagement to
me.

Thirdly, 3 His Interest.
Gods own honor is concerned in the preservation of the Church, who are a
people addicted to him, and keep up his name in the world. The conspiracies
which are laid at any time against the Church of God, are not so much against
the Persons as the Cause; not so much against these or those men, as against
the Truth, which is professed by them, and the Worship, which they give
themselves to, from whence, God himself is interested in the protection of
them. So blessed and happy a thing is it to be found in good ways, and to be
maintaining of good causes, that whiles we stir for the promoting of them, we
defend our selves, because we make God a party with us, so that he cannot
forsake us, but he must deny himself. Therefore there is no Enchantment against
Jacob, because there is no Device against God. There is no wisdom, nor counsel,
nor understanding against the LORD, Prove. 21.30. They that plot against the
Church, they plot against God himself, his Cause, and Truth, and Worship, and
all that is his, and how can they think to prosper, or succeed in it?

But so much of the first Acception of the words, Jacob and Israel, taken
mystically, or representatively, for the whole Church.

The second is, 2 National.
as taken Nationally, as pointing out that particular Church, and State, and
People of the Jews; for so the words do commonly import in Scripture; and there
is a Truth in the Proposition so likewise, That all endeavors, as against the
whole Church in general, so against any Church, or State, or Nation whatsoever
in particular, which God does own, and take into his protection, they are in
vain also. It was the privilege of these people of Israel, that they were the
Darlings, and beloved of God; The Lord chose them from all other Nations, and
People beside in the World, to be a peculiar people to himself, and his own
inheritance: Now these, notwithstanding, does Moab here let themselves against,
but vainly, and with no success at all; Those whom God will bless, they shall
be blessed, maugre all opposition to the contrary. How shall I curse, whom God
has not cursed? or how shall I defy, whom the Lord has not desied? says
Balaam himself to this purpose, verse. 8. of this Chapter. Happy is the people
that is in such a case; yea, blessed is the people, whose God is the Lord, says
the Psalmist, Psalm. 144.13. And again, Psalm. 33.12. Blessed is the NATION whose
God is the Lord, and the people whom he has chosen for his own Inheritance;
They are blessed, and blessed by God, and whiles they are so, no cursings of men
shall reach them, or prevail against them. That is the second sense of the
words, as taken Nationally.

The third is, 3. Personal.
as taken Personally. Jacob and Israel, they are the Proper Names of one man,
and they carry a Truth in them so; teaching us thus much from them, That God
does not only take care of the whole Church in general, to preserve that, but
also of every private Soul and Member of it in particular; God takes care not
only of Nations, but of persons; not of Israel only, but of Jacob. Take
notice of that. And this he does, whether as to keep them from the Attempts of
Satan himself, or of his Instruments; For Satan himself, Christ has vanquished
him, and beaten him already, not only for himself, in his personal conflict
with him, but also for all his members, which are related to him, Luke 22.32.
And so for his Instruments, they shall not prevail neither against those which
are good in their particular persons: Let it be as to Sorcery, and Witchcraft,
and Enchantment, taken in the letter; there is for this a great security upon
them; or as to any thing else besides, they are in that also under a
Providence. The times of the Servants of God are in his hand, and their lives
are at his disposing, so that none can take them away, but as he pleases. Act.
18.10. Fear not Paul, for I am with thee, and none shall set upon thee to hurt
thee, for I have much people in this City. God preserves all his Servants, but
especially any, as they are of more public and greater employment, Magistrates
and Ministers, and the like. He has a double fence for them, to guard them and
protect them from evil, and the assaults of evil men, from evil hands, from
evil tongues, and from evil devices, Psalm. 31.19, 20. Thus much of the words
also personally; And so much likewise of them in the simple and absolute
proposition.

The second is in the Reduplication. II. In the Reduplication.
Not only no enchantment against Jacob, but besides, No divination against
Israel; the same Truth repeated in a diversity and variety of expression; and
that for this reason especially, to show the certainty of the thing it self, as
in Pharaohs dream, which was doubled, because the thing was established; Even
so it was here; It was a resolved and determined case, and that also upon the
experiences even of Balak and Balaam themselves; they had endeavored it again
and again, as to the undertaking of it; to curse them here, and to curse them
there, to double curses upon them; and here now accordingly, they have a double
acquittance from it in the ingemination of the phrase, that so there might be
no question made of it, but be received for an undoubted Truth, it is therefore
double.

Now therefore are we answerably to entertain it, The Improvement.
and to be persuaded of it, and to it, improve it to the best advantage that
may be. 1 For Comfort
It is a point of singular comfort and encouragement to the people of God, that
the case is thus with them; that whiles they dwell in the secret place of the
most High, they abide under the shadow of the Almighty, Psalm. 91.1. That they
are secured and protected by God himself, from the Assaults and Attempts of
Enemies plotting against them, who though they may use their endeavors, yet
shall not prevail; or if at one time, yet not at another. They may prevail a
little for a while, to encourage them, and harden them so much the more in an
evil course, and to further their destruction; but they shall not prevail at
last, so as to get the better of the Church; This shall not be granted unto
them. They may prevail over a party, but they shall not prevail over the whole
Generation and company of the people of God: They may prevail over the
Preacher, but they shall not prevail over the Truth; over the Person, but not
over the Cause; over the life, but not over the heart, and spirit, this they
shall not do.

Which further, in the next place, 2 For Terror.
serves for a word of amazement, to all such persons as those are which set
themselves against them; that they do herein but lose their labor, yea, which
is worse, conspire against themselves. Thus Psalm. 37, 12, 13. The wicked
plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth, but the Lord
shall laugh at him, for he sees that his day is a coming, He that fitteth in
the Heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision. Men may laugh
sometimes at that which they do not understand, and which they cannot hinder,
or prevent; but when God laughs, there is somewhat more in it than so; He laughs
at the plots of wicked men, as discerning the vanity of them, and as being able
to frustrate and defeat them: And whiles He laughs in scorn, they have no cause
to laugh in triumph. His laughter it may justly provoke their tears, as being a
forerunner of ruin unto them; He will laugh at their destruction, and mock
when their fear comes, Prove. 1.26. Yea, as he will laugh himself, so he will
cause the Church to laugh with him, as she did against Ashur, Isa. 37.22. The
Virgin the Daughter of Syon has despised thee, and laughed thee to scorn, the
Daughter of Jerusalem has shaken her head at thee. God vouchsafes to his
Church and people an holy triumph over their Enemies, whiles they think to
insult over them, As Isa. 8.9, 10. Associate your selves, O ye people, and ye
shall be broken in pieces; and give ear all ye of far Countries; gird your
selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces, gird your selves, and ye shall be
broken in pieces. Take counsel together, and it shall come to naught; speak the
word, and it shall not stand, for God is with us. Romans 8.31.
If God be with us (says the Apostle) who can be against us* that is, still as
I said before, so as to hurt us. If we speak as to matter of Dis-affection, so
there are enough against us, and more than could be wished. Men do no sooner look
after God, or God after them, but they have Multitudes of people against them;
but against them, so as to conquer them, that they are not, nor cannot be.

How much does this then surther enlarge the Honor, (...) For Exultation.
as well as the Safety of the Church of God, and serve to draw others into it!
who would not now be in the number of Gods servants, and in love with the state
of Gods people, who have so great a privilege as this belonging unto them!
Happy art thou O Israel, who is like unto thee O people, saved by the Lord, the
shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thine excellency! It is the
Epiphonema of Moses unto them in his blessings of them, Deuteronomy. 33.29. And may be
applied to the whole Church, in all times and ages of the world. And thus much
of this Truth here delivered, both in the Proposition and Reduplication of it.

The Third and last is in the Reflection, III The Reflection.
as coming from Balaam. Speeches they have regard given unto them, much
according to the quality of the persons from whom they proceed. And so it is
with this here before us: It was a Truth in it self, but it was more wonderful
from the party that uttered it. If either Moses, or Joshua had said as much,
we should not have thought it any Great matter. But for Balaam to say it, was
incredible. What! Balaam! A Sorcerer! an Idolater! an Enemy to God and his
people! for him to let fall such a speech as this is, Balaam under a double
notion.
it was beyond all expectation. There is a twofold Notion under which we may
look upon him.

First, 1 A wicked man.
As a wicked man, and yet speaking that which was good.

Secondly, as an Enemy, and yet speaking that which was comfortable, and to the
encouragement of Gods people.

First, A wicked Man, and yet speaking that which was good. We see here, how
good speeches may sometimes come from bad men. Those which are themselves
naught, and rotten, and unsavory, yet they may now and then utter, and let slip
from them, that which is good. Thus did Balaam here, and so some others
elsewhere; as Caiaphas in the behalf of Christ, John 11.49. And Gamaliel in
the behalf of the Apostles, Acts 5.35. When men shall speak but out of Common
illumination, strength of parts, and natural sagacity, or at the best, but out
of Divine suggestion and impulse, and the like, here Balaam is no better than
his Ass, which upon occasion speaks as well as himself; or like a Trunk, which
nothing savours of the words which are conveyed through it, but in it self is
still the same.

This is a good Item to us especially which are Ministers, and Preachers, A
Caution.
who by reason of our Employment, and the work it self which we are exercised
in, are cast upon good Discourses, as I may say, before we are aware, not to
rest our selves satisfied in them merely as such, but to labor to find our
hearts in them, and to have some savor upon our own spirits of that which
comes from us. It is not so much what we say, as what we are; nor so much
what comes from us, as what is indeed wrought in us; when we impart not only
the Gospel, but in this sense also our own Souls, as the Apostle speaks. Then
are Sermons, 1 Thessalonians ^. 8
and Treatises, and good Speeches, that which they should be, when they carry
upon them an impression of the Spirit of those they come from, and that savoury
and sanctified with Grace. Otherwise they may profit others, but will little
benefit those themselves whose they are, except it be so much the more to
aggravate and increase their Condemnation, and to judge them out of their own
mouths.

But secondly, 2 An Enemy.
As Balaam was a wicked man, and yet spoke that which was good; so an Enemy,
and yet that which was comfortable. God will not only confound the Churches
Adversaries in their Plots and Conspiracies against it, but will likewise make
themselves to be proclamers and publishers of it. He will make their Tongues
the conveyers of comfort, where their Heads are the contrivers of mischief. As
Saul to David, Thou shall both do great things, and also shall still prevail, 1 Samuel 26.25. Thus we see this truth also in the Reflection, and in reference to
the party that uttered it, even wicked Balaam. This is one of his Apophthegms,
Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, etc.

Where (before we proceed to the Second part of the Text) we may look upon
Jacob and Israel in one Notion and Acception more than as yet we have done,
Jacob and Israel in the Moral.
and that is by considering it in its Moral. And here two things more; First,
as an expression of integrity; Jacob a plain man, as the Scripture styles him;
Secondly, as an expression of importunity; Israel, a Prince with God; which
gives us a double qualification in Gods people, 2 Integrity.
intitling them to this protection. First, so far forth as they are upright,
and sincere, and plain-hearted; No enchantment against Jacob. When men are free
from Plottings themselves, they are likeliest to be free from the mischief of
the Plottings of other men. God takes a special delight in a simple-hearted
Christian, that has no reaches, Joh. 1.47. 2 Cor. 1^.3. 2 Importunity.
nor fetches in him an Israelite indeed in whom is no guile, and partaking of
the simplicity which is in Christ. Secondly, Those which are much in
acquaintance and communion with him, which are Israelites, Princes with God, to
wrestle and contend with him in prayer. These do stave off many an evil which
others fall into. The Prayers of the Church are above all the Anathemaes of
their Enemies; what though they curse, so these pray? what though they (as we
see in Popery) send forth their Bulls, and Execrations, and Maledictions
against the Servants of God, yet they shall be all of no effect, except it be
like so many Arrows falling upon the heads of those that shoot them up. And so
now I have done with the first general Part of the Text, which is the
Deliverance and Preservation it self, by way of solemn Declaration; Surely
there is no Enchantment against Jacob, etc.

The Second is the Celebration of the Deliverance by way of Prophetical
Prediction. Second, General. The celebration of the Deliverance.
According to this time, etc. wherein again we have two Branches more; First,
the Prediction it self, It shall be said, What has God wrought! Secondly, the
particular Regulation of it, or Qualification of the performance, according to
this time. For the first, the Prediction it self; This it does signify to us,
what account shall be made of Gods Mercies and Deliverances of his Church in
future Ages, that they shall then be spoken of in the world, and that two
manner of ways; First, by way of Acknowledgement, and Secondly, by way of
Astonishment; by way of simple acknowledgement, It shall be said, and by way of
greater Astonishment, what has God wrought!

First, 1 By way of Acknowledgement.
It shall be spoken of and acknowledged; It shall be said what God has
wrought, as some Interpreters render the words, taking them absolutely. And so
there is no more than this in it; That the goodness of God to his People, in
his Deliverances and Preservations of them, it is such, as even succeeding Ages
and Generations shall take notice of. Though it be done but now, yet it shall
be said and spoken of hereafter. This shall be written for the Generation to
come, and the people which are not yet born shall praise the Lord, Psalm
102.18. Therefore in some Translations we find it thus; It shall be said in
time what God has wrought; In time, that is, in its due time; though now
perhaps it be not spoken of, yet then it shall; or if now, yet and then too,
according to that of the Prophet, Micah 6.5. O my people, remember now what
Balak the King of Moab consulted, and what Balaam the Son of Beor answered him
from Shittim unto Gilgal, that ye may know the righteousness of the Lord. Now,
for so many years after that this Mercy and Deliverance is past, yet now
remember it.

This God will have to be so, 1 For the Honor of God.
for sundry ends; first, for his own Glory, that Himself may have the greater
renown, and his Attributes may be declared in the world; therefore it shall be
said, That his Name may be known through the earth, and that all the ends of
the earth may see the salvation of our God, Psalm. 98.3. God gets himself Honor
hereby, as he did upon Pharaoh.

Secondly, 2 For the shame of the Enemy.
For the shame of his Enemies, and those which conspired against his people; it
shall be said for their reproach, and as a perpetual blot upon them to all
Posterity. And there is a double Disgrace which comes to them by this means:
First, A Disgrace from their Attempt; And secondly, 1 In their Attempt.
A Disgrace from their Dis-appointment. Disgrace from both. From their Attempt
first, When ever it shall be mentioned, what they have endeavored against Gods
people, it will lie as a reproach upon them, that it should ever enter into
their hearts to devise and contrive such a wickedness as that was. This very
thought of foolishness is sin, and a blemish to the sinner. But then again from
their Dis-appointment. 2 Their Disappointment.
When those which were so confident shall be confounded in their greatest
confidence; and notwithstanding all their braggings and boastings, shall be
able to accomplish so little; what a Disgrace will this be to them for ever,
and standing upon record? as ye know it was with Pharaoh and the Egyptians; and
it is said of them to this day, Exodus 15.9, 10. The Enemy said, I will pursue,
I will over take, I will divide the spoil, my lust shall be satisfied upon
them, I will draw my sword, mine hand shall destroy them. Here are a company of
big threatening words; but whatfollows? Thou did blow with thy wind, the Sea
covered them, they sank as lead in the mighty waters.

Thirdly, The comfort of the Church.
For the comfort also of the Church and people of God; It shall be said, that
so they may be in couraged. The remembrance of Gods goodness in former ages, it
is a great heartning to Posterity, and gives them occasion to rely upon him
for time to come, as we shall see more anon out of the Text.

It is said here indefinitely and impersonally, It shall be said
It shall be said; but by whom it shall be said, it is not said, to signify
indeed, 1 By the Enemy.
that it shall be said by all sorts of people; it shall be in every ones mouth.
First, It shall be said by the Enemies; even they shall take notice of it, from
the eminency, and remarkableness which is in it. The contrivers of the Mischief
shall be the proclamers of the deliverance, and be so far convinced of Gods
vigilance, and activity for his people, as to discourse of it amongst
themselves. Thus Psalm. 126.2. Then they said among the HEATHEN, The Lord has
done great things for them. And Psalm. 46.10. Be still, and know that I am God;
I will be exalted among the Heathen, I will be exalted in the Earth. And again,
Isa. 61.9. Their seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their offspring
among the people. All that see them shall acknowledge them to be the people
which the Lord has blessed.

But secondly, 2 By the Church.
It shall be said by the Church and their Posterity, more especially, as those
which are most especially interested and concerned in it. Because it shall be
said of Jacob and Israel, for the occasion; therefore, it shall be said by
Jacob and Israel, for the celebration: Therefore, in the place before cited
does the Church, as it were, take it at the rebound, and eccho's to it. Then
they said among the Heathen, The Lord has done great things for THEM. The Lord
has done great things for US, whereof we are glad. It is but natural for the
Church to say it, whiles the Enemies say it before them; and accordingly, so
they shall, and so they ought. It is our duty to be mindful, and talkative of
the goodness of God to us in the times and generations which are past, This and
That has God done. As it should be often in our memories, and thoughts, and
meditations, and mental reflections; so it should be often likewise in our lips,
and mouths, and speeches, and daily converse: we should be ever and anon, as we
have occasion, speaking of them. As for other matters, we can speak of them
frequently enough; if it be any of our own performances, any thing that we our
selves have done, this shall be said, and said, and said, and said over again;
we have never done talking of it, but repeat it, even to vanity it self. Yea,
We should speak of the mercies of former ages.
but we should rather be mindful to recount what God has done for us, as a
chief part of our discourse; And yet (when we think of it) how dry and barren
are we for the most part in this particular? How seldom do we practice this
Duty, which we now speak of? how do the Mercies of God rather die and go out
with us? were it not for some singular kind of men who have taken pains in such
businesses as these are to divulge them, and transmit them by Writing; or were
it not for such solemn Times as these are, which are set apart on purpose for
their Commemoration, they would be as things which were never done or thought
of in the world. Now we should therefore be henceforth quickened and provoked
hereunto. What? has God done? and shall not we speak? Has he wrought? and
shall not we declare? Has he accomplished? and shall it not be said? How ill
does this silence become us, especially considering how our selves are so much
interested in it as we are, in a very great degree?

But again, We should convey our own mercies to Posterity.
As we should be speaking of the Mercies of God to our Progenitors, so we
should likewise be speaking of our own Mercies and Deliverances to our
children, and convey them down to posterity, that still it may be said. Tell it
your childrens children, and let your children tell it their children, and
their children to another Generation, as the Scripture speaks in another case,
Joel 1.3. We should do as much here for our Posterity, as our Forefathers have
done for us; Not biding it from our children, but showing to the Generations to
come, the praises of the Lord, his strength, and his wonderful works that he
has done, Psalm. 78.4. Parents should to this purpose instruct their Children,
and Masters of Families, those which belong unto them. As they should instruct
them in other things, in the Grounds and Principles of Religion, and the
mysteries of Christianity, and the way to eternal Salvation; So also moreover,
upon occasion, in the mysteries of Providence, and the Dispensations of God to
his Church, in the deliverance of it: They should explicate them and unfold
them, so far forth as they are capable of them, in all the particular Branches,
and Circumstances, and Appurtenances of them, whereby they may distinctly
understand them. This was that which the Israelites, Gods people, were careful
of, and accordingly, God expected it from them, as you may see touching the
Passover, Exodus 12.26, 27. And it shall come to pass, when your children-shall
say unto you, What mean you by this service? that ye shall say, It is the
sacrifice of the Lords Passover, who passed over the houses of the children of
Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses. And so
of the stones in Jordan, Josh. 4.21. When your children shall ask their Fathers
in time to come, saying, What mean these stones? Then shall you let your
children know, saying; Israel came over this Jordan on dry land, for the Lord
your God dried up the waters of Jordan before you. Thus I say are Parents to
teach and inform their children in such like passages, that it may be said what
God has wrought. And thus much for the word of acknowledgement, or
Commemoration.

The next is the word of Astonishment, 2 Astonishment.
or Admiration, by carrying it a little higher, and with some further
elevation; which is a great deal more agreeable to the Text, and more
emphatical. WHAT HAS GOD WROUGHT! that is, what a strange and unheard of
deliverance has the Lord brought about for his people! This is that which the
Scripture does abundantly testify to us, the wonderfulness and miraculousness
of Gods proceedings in this regard. Indeed (if we speak at large) all the works
of God, they are in their kind works of wonder: There is nothing which he does
or ever did, but it has matter of wonderment in it. Isay 6, 9.
As his Name is WONDERFUL, so are his Works. Look upon his works of Creation,
and we may very well say of them, what has God wrought! As David himself does,
Psalm. 8.3. When I consider the Heavens, the work of thy singers, etc. O Lord,
our Lord, how excellent is thy Name, etc. And when he speaks but of his own
framing, I am fearfully and wonderfully made. And marvelous are thy works, and
that my Soul knows right well, Psalm. 139.14. Take him further in his Works of
Redemption, and the new Creature, And what has God wrought there? in changing
our Natures, in stamping his own Image upon us, in conforming us to himself, in
translating us from darkness to light, from death to life, from the power of
Satan, to God: What a wonderful work is this to all those, who are made
sensible and apprehensive of it! Oh The depth of the riches both of the wisdom
and knowledge of God! etc. Romans 11.33. But yet none of these are meant here in
this Text. The Deliverance of the Church wonderfully.
We are in this place to understand it concerning the works of his Providence,
in the deliverance of his Church; God is here oftentimes very admirable, and
full of wonder, and we may very well say of them indeed, What has God wrought?
The Scripture is full of expressions to this purpose; Thus Psalm. 78.11, 12. It
is said of the Israelites, That they forgate his works, and his wonders that he
had shown them. Marvelous things that he did in the sight of their Fathers. So
Psalm. 105.5. Remember the marvelous works that he has done. And so in other
places he is said to be wonderful in working and doing wonders, Exodus 15.11. As
he is so in many things else, so more especially in his delivering of his
Church. The passages of Gods Providence here are wonderful, in sundry respects.

First, 1 From its Improbability.
In regard of the Unlikelihood and improbability of the things themselves. They
are wonderful, because they are unexpected: That which a man did not look for,
when he beholds it, he wonders at it. The accomplishment of things improbable
and unlikely they cause astonishment. Why, thus are the dealings of God with
his Church many times, in this respect. He delivers them where they do not
expect it, nor can see any likelihood for it; yea, rather, where they see every
thing opposite and contrary hereunto. And so the Arabic translation (though
not in our last Printed Copy) yet according to the Erpenian Edition, seems to
carry it in the very Text. God has wrought a DESPERATE thing. As Paul speaking
of himself and his Companions in their great danger in Asia, says, They were
pressed out of measure, above strength, insomuch, that they despaired even of
life, and had the sentence of death in themselves, and yet God delivered them
from so great a death. It was so in the Israelites redemption from the
Babylonish Captivity, Psalm. 126.1. When the Lord turned again the Captivity of
Sion, we were like to them that dream: Why like them that dream? namely, in
regard of the strangeness, it was such as they could not think there was any
truth or reality in it.

Secondly, as to the manner of Transaction, 2 The manner of transaction.
these Providence are wonderful so, and we may be very well amazed at them
upon that account. What has God wrought, as to the means which he has wrought
it by; such poor and contemptible instruments as he is pleased now and then to
employ, and to make use of for the deliverance of his people!

And then thirdly, 3 The unworthiness of the Persons.
The unworthiness of the persons which are made partakers of it, this advances
it so much the more; for God to work so strongly and powerfully for those which
deserve so little at his hands, as he sometimes does; this is a Wonder of
Wonders, and which may very well work us to Astonishment.

All this comes to this purpose, 1 Admire Gods Providence to his Church.
That we for our parts be so much the more affected with his dealings with us,
we should not look upon them as ordinary matters, but as things above common
performance, and so they are. As the things themselves are admirable, so
accordingly should they be admired by us, and we should bless and praise him
for them upon his consideration, as the Prophet Esaias teaches us to do, chap.
25. ver. 1. O Lord, thou art my God, I will exalt thee, I will praise thy Name,
for thou have done wonderful things, etc.

And further, it should teach us to trust in God, 2 Trust him in difficulties.
and to depend upon him in cases of difficulty. We should not despair in the
greatest Extremities, nor limit the Holy one of Israel; for God, he works
Wonders for his people, and such as they themselves are not able to
pre-conceive, or to imagine how they should be wrought. It is a great piece of
weakness in us, when we shall measure the Power of God by our poor and shallow
apprehensions. That because we forsooth cannot see how such and such things
should be done in our reason, therefore they cannot be done at all. O let us
take heed of that, God does sometimes bring about such things for his Church
and People, as they themselves shall be ready to Wonder at then when they are
done. And so much of the first Branch observable in this second General, viz.
The Prediction, or Celebration it self, It shall be said of Jacob, and of
Israel, what has God wrought!

The second is the Qualification, The regulation of the Performance.
or particular Regulation of it, according to this time. Now this again it may
be understood two manner of ways, either as the Occasion, or as the Pattern.
According to this time, that is, derivatively from it; or according to this
time, that is, 1 As the Occasion.
proportionably to it. Answerable to Gods Goodness in this Mercy, shall be his
Goodness in many others. First, take it as the occasion; according to this
time, that is, with respect had unto it; when future Ages shall reflect upon
the Mercy which God has vouchsafed to his people, in their deliverance from
this Conspiracy, they shall exceedingly bless him for it, and say, What has he
done? they shall not only take notice of the Deliverance, as it concerns the
Church, but of the Author of it, as it concerns God himself; not only say, what
is wrought, as to the mere event, but what has God wrought, as pointing out
the Worker of it. There were diverse occasions of Thankfulness and
Acknowledgement in this Providence to Israel, as fit to be celebrated by them.
First, The disappointment of Balak in his intendments against them. Secondly,
Not only disappointing him of his intended Curse, but also vouchsafing a
Blessing instead of it; this was somewhat more. Then thirdly, That all this
should be done so publicly, and with so much solemnity, as it appeared to be
from the circumstances; As it was matter of Astonishment, so it was likewise
matter of Acknowledgement; as of Admiration, so also of Thankfulness. And
according to this time, that is, for the Mercy that was wrought at this time,
it shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, What has God wrought. That as the
Occasion.

2 We may take it also as the Pattern, 2 As the Pattern.
according to this time, etc. that is, look how God has done at present, the
like will he do also hereafter. These words, It shall be said, do not only
denote the acknowledgement and celebration, in regard of the Persons, but also
the ground of it, in regard of the thing, there shall be matter for this saying
afforded to following times, agreeable to what there is now. There are two
Conclusions which do hence natually arise from these words; First, That God
will be one and the same to his Church in all Ages and Generations of the
World, for the protection and preservation of them. Secondly, That there are
now and then some standing and more eminent Deliverances which God vouchsafes
to his Church and People, and which he propounds also to himself, as so many
patterns and examples of the rest.

First I say, God is the same to his Church in all Ages; as he has been in
former times, so he will likewise be in this, and so downward, even to the
coming of Christ. God is as careful of his Church now, as ever he was, and
Christ has as great a regard to his Spouse now, as ever he had; be loves her
never a whit the less because of her age; nay rather, if there be any
difference at all, he loves her so much the more, she is so much the dearer
with him, as she has longerhad relation to him.

This point which we are now upon, 2 From Gods unchangeablenesse.
is grounded upon these considerations; First, the Unchangeableness which is in
God himself considered in his own Nature; I the Lord change not, therefore ye
Sons of Jacob are not consumed, Mal. 3.6. God is the same in himself, therefore
the same also in his dealings, and passages of Providence toward his Church.
He does the same, because he is the same; Thou art the same, says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 102.27. As the same for the continuance of being, so the same for the
continuance of properties, and attributes considerable in themselves.

Secondly, 2 Unchangednesse of the Enemy.
There is the unchangeableness, or unchangedness rather of the enemies, they
are the same for their affection and behavior. If the enemies of the Church
were less wicked and malicious than ever they had been, the Preserver of the
Church needed not to be so vigilent and watchful over it; God might abate of
his care, if men did abate of their malice; but now there is the same
naughtiness and cruelty in wicked men, and therefore the same activity in God.
Balaam was not only confined to the times of Israel, he lives even still, now,
and to this day we have those which are true and perfect resemblances of him,
as the Apostle Peter has fore told it long ago, speaking of the latter times,
2 Pet. 2.15. Which have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray, following
the way of Balaam the Son of Basor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness,
etc. Satan, he is as busy himself, and as malicious as ever he was, and his
Instruments, they are acted by the same cursed Principles as before; there is
no change nor amendment of them at all, but one Generation and age, and it is a
lively Picture and Image of the other. Look what Balak and Balaam were in Moses
time, the same were the Pharisees in Christ's time; and what the Pharisees were
in Christ's time, the same are diverse others in ours; nothing better, if not
somewhat worse. That enmity which was foretold should be put between the seed
of the Serpent, and the seed of the Woman, it holds out to this present day,
from the beginning of the World, without any diminution at all. Just as it is
also with other fierce and cruel Creatures of the same nature with them,
Wolves, and Tigres, and Bears, and Leopards; they have still the same
dispositions that they ever had from the fall of man; so also have these
enemies, and persecutors, that are so like unto them, which lays a second
ground for this equal carriage of God toward his Church.

Thirdly, 3 The unchangeduesse of the Church.
Gods people themselves are carried by the same Principles likewise that ever
they have been; There is the same gracious Spirit in them, which has been in
times past; The same Spirit of Prayer, Importunity and Supplications, and they
are as able to prevail with God as ever they were. As there have been
heretofore Moseses, and Jaeobs, and Daniels, and Jobs, and the like; so there
are still the same now. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man, it is
able to do as much now, as ever it was, as the Apostle seems to intimate, Jam.
5.17. Prayer, it has not lost one jot of its primitive efficacy, nor Faith,
which is the sinews of Prayer. A true child of God indeed which is in Covenant
and favor with him, and actual terms of Peace and Reconciliation, he may as
boldly, and confidently go to him in the behalf of his Church now, as ever
could Moses, or Elias himself heretofore, and may be as sure to speed and to
prevail in these his Addresles, as ever they might; having the same Cause, and
the same Promise, and the same High Priest, and Intercessor, and Mediator, as
any of them had, and this latter, with greater advantage. As there is no decay
in the World (which some have taken pains to prove) so neither in the Church;
Which therefore may expect the same dealings from God himself, in the same
circumstances, that ever he has shown.

And further as for the whole Church at large, An encouragement to Magistrates,
and Ministers, in a s^ccession.
so for those which are special parts, and members of it, it is an
encouragement to them likewise: To Ministers, that Christ would not be only
with the Apostles themselves, but with succeeding Teachers; Lo I am with you
always, even to the end of the World, Matthew. 28.20. And so for Magistrates; not
only with Moses, but with Joshua, As I have been with Moses, so will I be with
thee, Josh. 1.5. God does not only continue the Place and office, but he
continues the assistance, because the work is the same, therefore will he
afford the same strength for the discharge of it. God is the same to his Church
and people in one age of the World as in another. That is the first Proposition.

The second is not unlike to it, and that is this; That God is pleased to make
some Deliverances to be as it were standards and patterns to the rest. This
Mercy of God to Israel, in delivering them from the Cursing of Balaam, upon the
importunity of Balak, it should be a copy which God would set to himself in his
following Deliverings of them. He would deal with them all along much alike as
he had done in this. All Gods carriages to his people, they are the
Dispensations of much loving kindness, but there are some which are more
eminent than others; and from whence they may in special conclude of his care
and watchfulness over them; such was this in this particular Scripture. And
therefore when God would persuade his people of his favor and good will
toward them, he calls them to the remembrance of this in the place before
alleged; O my people, remember now what Balak the King of Moab consulted, etc.
Mich. 6.5. why remember that? because it was a more eminent Deliverance, and a
pledge of many more answerable to it. So their Deliverance out of the Land of
Egypt, out of the House of Bondage; it was a Deliverance of the same nature
with it, and such as God makes mention of to them, when he gives them his Law
upon Mount Sinai, as that which might stick closer by them, I am the Lord thy
God that brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt, Exodus 20.2. so afterward
when they were delivered out of Captivity, and restored to their own Land
again; this it was a remarkable Deliverance, and such as was made, as it were,
to swallow up the other. As we may see in Jer. 23.7, 8. Therefore behold the
days come (says the Lord) that they shall no more say, The Lord lives, which
brought up the Children of Israel out of the Land of Egypt. But the Lord
lives which brought up, and which led the Seed of the House of Israel out of
the North-Country, and from all Countries whither I had driven them. Their
return from Captivity, it was more strange than their deliverance from Egypt,
and such which should be more frequently in their mouths, as the great Mercy,
and Deliverance of all.

This God does chiefly so order for the strengthening of our weak faith, For
the strengthening of Faith.
that so we might have somewhat to hold to, and to fly back to, and to recover
our selves by, even then when we have, as it were, lost our selves, as
concerning the apprehensions of his love. Ordinary and common favors, though
they are good testimonies of Gods Affection to his people, his daily
preservation of us, and his continual watching over us for good, and his
constant providing for us, yet these for the most part do very easily slip out
of our minds, and pass us without any great observation, But now these Great
ones, they will a little stick by us, for so much better confirmation of our
faith, and we may make exceeding great use of them in temptation and time of
need. Thus is one greater Temporal Mercy a pledge and assurance of a less. And
thus again is a Spiritual deliverance, a pledge, and an assurance of a
Temporal. And Faith it will accordingly improve it, and draw it forth, as
occasion shall serve. There is a double end in the Deliverances which God at
any time gives us, not only as they are comfortable in themselves, but likewise
as they are forerunners of more, and have others in the bowels of them.

This should teach us therefore to improve such passages as these are for our
greater comfort, Improvement.
both in our own particular cases, as also in the case of the Church; for our
selves, if we be in any strait or difficulty, or perplexity whatsoever; ^ For
our selves.
there are Times which we may call to mind, and according to which we may
reckon of Gods goodness to us; when we were once in such a danger and God
delivered us from it; lay under such a Sickness, and were recovered of that;
were brought into such an Exigence, and God found out a way for our relief.
According to this time it shall be said of us, and by us, What has God
wrought! It is a great fault and infirmity in us that we do no more make use of
Experiences in this kind, than we do, for the encouragement of our selves. We
should keep a Register of Gods favors to this purpose, especially Greater
favors, and which are Patterns of Gods goodness to us; We may have as much
comfort from an Experience now and then as we may from a Promise, and it may be
(as it may so fall out) a great deal more, as being accommodated to our outward
sense; but especially upon a promise, and seconding it, will it be effectual to
us.

Again secondly, As in our own particular, 2 For the Church.
so likewise for the Church of God in general, we should improve our
Experiences here also. It was that which God laid to the charge of the people
of Israel, that they forgot his Works, and the Wonders which he had shown
amongst them, forgot them? How so? What is the meaning of that? Not that they
were absolutely out of their memories, that they could not well be, but they
forgot them so as to apply them, and to make use of them now upon occasion; so
they forgot them; they forgot them so as to be thankful, and they forgot them
so as to be fruitful, and they forgot them so as to be faithful; They were to
them in regard of any Benefit or Spiritual good which they got by them, as
things which had been never done amongst them. This was that which the Lord did
so deeply censure in them, in that they questioned, Whether he who had done so
much for them already, were able to do as much again. This it was very vile and
unworthy in them; No, but they should have rather upon such and such an
Experience have reasoned as here in the Text; According to this time, etc. So
much of that Branch, viz. The regulation of the performance; and so much also
of the whole Text, as it lies before us here in this Scripture.

ANd now to bring the Text and the Occasion both together; The Application of
the Text to the Occasion.
this day is this Scripture sulfilled in your ears; and not in your ears only,
but in your eyes; we all both to the glory of God, and our own peace and
comfort see this truth verified to us, That there is no Enchantment against
Jacob, nor any Divination against Israel. We cannot say there has been none in
regard of Attempt, no more than Jacob or Israel could say in regard of then
selves, for that there has been sufficiently and apparently enough. There has
not wanted the working of Enchantments, nor Divinations neither; we have had
both the Consultations of Balak, and the Answers also of Balaam against us.
This Powder plot wherein the Representative Body of this. Nation was by the
Devisers of it devoted to destruction, what was it else but an Enchantment
against our Jacob and Israel? Enchantment we know whence it is fetched, it is a
word which smells of the Vault, which savours of Hell, and takes in the Devil
himself for the efficacy of it. And certainly if Hell at any time were in any
thing set on work here upon earth, it was undoubtedly in this Conspiracy. It
was the Devils Masterpiece, and such, as it is a great Question (seeing that
this has failed) whether he has ever such another or no; sure we are if there
be such another it must come from Him, for the Monstrousness and
Prodigiousness of it.

Where (because we are now upon the Parallel) ye shall see that it was not
only agreeable, but transcendent to that of Balaks and Balaams by far, in
several Circumstances. First, if we consider the quality and condition of the
Persons on either side; this will make it very different. For there in Balak
and Balaam, it was one Nation plotting against another; Moab and Midian against
Israel. Here in this of our Conspirators, Englishmen against their own
Countrymen, Kindred, Blood, Alliance. Now, in all mischievous attempts,
Unnaturalness is ever an aggravation; where Nature is most extinguished (which
in some things is a great restraint) wickedness is there most notorious, and so
it was here. Then secondly consider the smalness of Provocation; In the doing
of another an ill turn (though it does not excuse to be provoked, because there
should be so much meekness as to overcome those injuries which are offered) yet
where the Provocation is the less, the Iniquity is the greater. To harm those
that do not hurt us, nor we have received any wrong from them, nor cause to
fear it, it is so much the more abominable. And this was the case again here,
above that of Moab to Israel; for there there was some cause of jealousy, and
probable danger from them, Numb. 22.4. Moab said to the Elders of Midian, Now
shall this company lick up all that are about us, as the Ox licketh up the
Grass of the Field. There was no such matter in this; they were Persons which
were tolerated, connived at, favored, had received many courtesies from the
State in which they were, and yet could find in their hearts thus to work
against it. This makes it more Prodigious still, and this Enchantment more
Devilish by far than that in the Text. Then thirdly (which is the main of
all) consider the matter of it likewise, and the thing it self, which the Plot
did extend to. There in Balak against Israel, it was only to let fall a few ill
words upon them, and there was an end; to Curse them, but strike not a Aroke
unless they began first. But here in this present design there was not only
saying, but doing; not only wishing, but working; not only cursing, but acting;
There was digging, and undermining, and barrelling and laying Trains of Powder,
and more intended if God had not prevented it, and come between; it was
absolutely and directly to destroy without Mercy, or Pity, or Compassion, or
Commiseration, on a sudden, in a moment, all at once, without any warning, King
and Peers, and Judges, and Knights, and Citizens, and Burgesses, and a great
many more besides, Spectators and Auditors with them, the very prime and flower
of the Land. A thing almost incredible that it should come into men's Heads to
think of it, into their Hearts to close with it, into their Hands to undertake
it! Yet thus it was, we know it to be so, and should have known it in another
manner than now we do, if that they might have had their wills (...) so that
there is no question to be made of that, but there was Enchantment enough
against our Israel, as to matter of Attempt; that must be needs acknowledged.

But yet was there so in good earnest? Was it indeed? Was it so in the effect
and accomplishment? No, that it was not, and this is that which we are now come
to acknowledge this present day; that through the goodness of our gracious God
that watched over us, There was no Enchantment against Jacob, nor any
Divination against Israel. Our state secured, our Religion kept inviolate, our
lives preserved; Psalm. 124.7.
Our souls escaped as a Bird out of the snare of the Fowler, the snare is
broken and we are delivered.

And yet that is not all neither; For the making of this Mercy complete, as it
was here in the case of Israel, we are from hence not only never the worse, but
much the better; it has tended to our greater Advantage, and the confirmation
of Gods goodness upon us ever since. Popery has from hence the more suffered
(and ever shall) and the true Religion gained by this Conspiracy. And this for
the first part of the Text, brought down to the occasion in the Deliverance it
self.

Now Secondly, as to the Celebration of it, we may very well add also here.
According to this time it shall be said of Jacob, and of Israel, what has God
wrought! It shall be said by way of Astonishment, and by way of Acknowledgement
both; it shall be wondered at, and it shall be spoken of to all succeeding Ages
and Generations; this Mercy which we this day celebrate.

First; I say it is matter of Astonishment; we may here hold up our hands and
cry, What has God wrought! As we may wonder at the Conspiracy, so we may as
well wonder at the Deliverance, especially in the Circumstances of it, and the
Qualifications which it is clothed withal; That God should deliver us and us
in such a manner, and such a way, and by such means as he did, in that
extremity, when the business was come so near to accomplishment, as indeed it
was, what a miraculous thing was this!

But yet it was not so wonderful as that, therefore it should stop our mouths,
and hinder our speech, as matters of Wonder sometimes do so amaze as that they
put to silence; No, it shall be spoken of for all that, It shall be said of
Jacob; Said? when should it be so? It may be just at that time when the thing
was newly done; when Balaams mouth was wreathed to the blessing of Israel, when
Israel was delivered from Balak, it should be said then; nay not only so, but
for a great while after, in following times. And so likewise shall this be of
ours, it was wrought nine and forty years ago, but it shall be spoken of now,
yea and nine hundred and forty years hence, and longer, if the World so
continue; It is a Deliverance and Preservation which is never to be forgotten
by us, nor our Posterity after us, so long as the Sun and Moon shall endure in
Heaven.

Yea, but it may be this was All that God ever meant to do for us, when he had
delivered us from the Gunpower-Treason, he had then shown his skill, and he
could never do the like again; when he had once delivered us now, he would
never deliver us more; never own us, nor look upon us as his people. It is
true, we deserved no more from him, but that this should have been the very
last Mercy and Favor that he would bestow upon us; but yet it was not so, God
has more Blessings than one, and more for us, if we be capable of them; his
Goodness is from Generation to Generation. According to this time it shall be
said, what has God wrought! Not only occasionally from it, but proportionably
to it. God has taken Pattern, he has taken Pattern by this standing Mercy, to
show us Mercy in many particulars ever since. There are two great standing
Mercies, which are the pillars of Gods goodness to us; The one is our
Deliverance from the Spanish Invasion in Eighty eight, and the other, our
Deliverance from this Powder Plot in Sixty five, and God has perfectly kept to
his Copy ever since.

Yea and is ready to do so still, if we be careful for our parts to be (as I
said) Subjects capable of it: which it concerns us to be, by a thankful
improvement of those Mercies which we have already received, and conversations
suitable thereunto; Especially we of this City, who have the greatest share in
the Mercies of this Nation, of any other which are parts of it. Not only this
particular Deliverance which now we commemorate, but many other Blessings
besides, in correspondency to it. When we shall look back upon the times lately
past, and consider other places of the Land, so terrified and disturbed, and
wasted with the late Civil Wars, whiles we our selves have in the mean time
sat in peace and quiet, in a manner all the while, under our own Vines, and
our own Fig Trees; no seditions nor combustions amongst us, no breaking in, nor
going out, nor complaining in our streets; but as the Children in the fiery
Furnace, safe our selves, whiles all others consumed about us. How well may it
be here said both of us, and by us, according to this time thus past, What has
God wrought!

Now as one Question commonly begets another, so likewise here, This of what
has God wrought? infers this, of what have we wrought? what have we done for
our particulars in answer to all this Goodness and Mercy of God toward us? It
is a question which will one day be asked us by one who will have Authority to
do it; let us before hand ask it our selves, that so we may be able to answer it
more comfortably then, That as God has wrought for us, so we have wrought for
him; and as he has preserved us, our Lives and Friends, and Estates, and all
we have; so we have also (as much as we can) preserved Him, his Truth, and
Gospel, and Government, and Glory amongst us.

Beloved, we can be no further sure of preservation than we are careful of
Innocence, when we shall once depart from this, we strike at the very root and
foundation of all the comforts which we ever yet enjoyed, or do enjoy; we
forfeit our claim and title to all Gods Blessings of us, which we can expect
upon no other terms than this of our Good behavior, and faithful discharge of
our Duties in the opportunities we are entrusted withal.

As for the Times in which we live, there is a great deal of uncertainty upon
them, and we know not how they may prove. It will be our wisdom therefore to
get an interest in God, and his favor in Christ, which is better than life it
self, that so whatever befalls the World, it may be sure to be well with us
for our particular; Though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be
carried into the midst of the Sea, as the Psalmist expresses it, Psalm. 46.2.

And to encourage us so much the more in the expectation of Gods goodness to
us, upon our closing with him; let us still set the Deliverance of this Day
before our eyes, and let it be always fresh in our thoughts. Ancient and
long-past Mercies, they are apt to be out of date with us, and lose of their
respect for their Antiquity; but that is a great piece of fondness and
foolishness in us, whiles the things in their own nature are still the same.

As for this of our Preservation from the Powderplot; it will advance our
thankfulness for it, if we shall but consider, what a miserable condition it
would have probably involved us in, if it had taken effect; which that we might
in some manner guess at, and conceive with our selves, God has been pleased
of late to give us some experiments of the force of such mixtures, De^f.
Tower-street
both in a Town in our Neighbour-Country, as also but a few years since by a
sad event here in this City; that so this Deliverance from Gunpowder might the
better take with us.

To conclude all, Let our Experience of Gods Power and Goodness both, in this
remarkable passage of his Providence so much the more engage us to him, in
dependence and new obedience. And for our Enemies, let us say of them as Jethro
sometime of the Egyptians, the Adversaries of Israel, Exodus 18.11. with which
I will end. Now I know that the Lord is greater than all gods, for in the thing
wherein they dealt proudly he was above them.

FINIS.

