THE SAINTS GUIDE, IN THREE TREATISES; I. The Mirror of Mercy, on Genesis 6.13.
II. The Carnal Man's Condition, on Romans 1.18 III. The Plantation of the
Righteous, on Psa. 1.3


By THOMAS HOOKER Minister in New England.

Printed at London for John Stafford over against Brids Church.

1645.

The Contents of the First Sermon. Genesis 6.13.
Doct. IN the generality, marriage with a contrary Religion ever brings
destruction. p. 5. Doct. 1. The Spirit of God does ever undoubtedly accompany
the Ministry of the word. p. 12. Reas. 1. Because God has set apart the
Ministry of the word to sanctify the soul. p. 13. Reas. 2. Because it is
always either a savor of life, or a savor of death. p. 14. it does always
accompany the word, but it does not always work. p. 14. Reas. 3. Because it is
able to do all things. p. 15. Use. For information to take heed least we take
up Arms against the word of God, for the word of God. and the Spirit of God
go together, p. 17. this sin is near to the sin against the Holy Ghost.
p. 17. Doct. 2. The Lord by the Power of his Spirit in the Ministry of the word
strives with poor rebellious sinners for their good, and they appose both his
Spirit, and their own good, p. 19. Q. How does the Spirit strive. p. 24. A. 1.
By way of persuasion, 2. By terror and punishment. 3. If this prevails not
then mercy overcomes the sinner. p. 25.
1. If the sinner be secure, the Lord summoneth him into his Court. p. 26. 1.
By bringing him to the word. p. 27. 2. By bringing the word home to his
understanding. p. 28.
2. If the sinner careless, God makes him attend, and bring the word so evident
to the Soul, that it cannot evade it. p. 28. 3. If ignorant he informs him.
p. 30. 4. If carnal reason come to excuse the heinousness of the sins, the
Spirit answers all its pleas, p. 36. 5. Least the sinner being convinced should
despair, the Lord lets in the manifestations of his goodness, p. 37. 6. If the
sinner shall turn this grace into wantonness, so that the wisdom of God
resolves to forsake him. p. 39. 7. Then the Patience of God pretend for a
longer time, p. 39. 8. But if the sinner grow more careless, so that Patience
is at a period. p. 41. then comes in the long sufferance of God. p. 42. Reas.
1. The Lord does thus strive that he might glorify the attribute of his mercy,
p. 56 2. That he might leave the world without excuse, p. 57.
Use 1. For instruction to consider, 1. Of the riches of Gods free grace, 2. Of
the depth of that rebellion that is in the souls of men, p. 57.
Use 2. For information, That the condemnation of the wicked is mavelous
just, p. 62. Use 3. For reproof of them that strive with men, for their hurt,
and ruin, p. 64. Use 4. For exhortation, in imitation of God to strive to
bring others to the Lord. p. 68. Use 5. For comfort, if the sinner after all,
will but entertain the Lord, the Lord will entertain him, p. 78. Doct: 4.
Though God strive long with sinners, and give them long time of repentance, and
yet they return not but abuse his mercy and patience, the Lord will cease to
strive with them, and take either the means from them, or them from the
means, or his blessing from both p. 80.
The Contents of the second Sermon. Romans 1.18.
Obser. 1: SIns against the first table are sins of a deeper dye of a sadder
nature, then sins against the second table. p. 92. Obser 2. Gods wrath is not
primarily not principally intended against men's persons, but against their
sins. p. 92. Obser 3. The Gentiles naturally have that ingrasted in them
whereby they may come in some degree to the knowledge of God, p 93. Doct: 1.
Much of God, of the power, greatness, and goodness of God may be known, and
learned out of the Book of the Creatures, p. 97. Doct. 2. That all wicked men
are enemies to, and opposors of the truth of God, p. 97. Doct. 3. The ground of
this opposition against the truth of God is from that corruption that is in
their hearts, p. 97. Doct. 4. All such unrighteous ones as oppose the word of
truth, shall surely bear the wrath of God, p. 98. Doct: in general. Carnal
and corrupt men do hinder the powerful officatiousnesse of the word of truth
from working upon their sinful hearts, prevayling with them, and subduing of
them, as much as in them lies, by reason of that inbred corruption that is in
their hearts. p. 98. Q. What is the Power of truth, or what would it work upon
the soul that wiked men oppose it. A. First it is a word of information
discovering things in their proper colors: p. 106. 2. It is a word of
quickening, it not only shows the way, but inableth a man to walk therein.
p. 108. 3. The word has a drawing power with it. p. 108. 4. It is a word of
conviction, able to bear down all carnal reasonings. p. 109. Q. How does a
carnal man hinder the powerful working of the word, p. 110. A: 1. He is
unwilling to listen to the truth of God, p. 111. A: 2. He is ever ready to
raise an evil report of the truth. p. 115. A: 3: A carnal heart does oppose
the truth by resisting the word of conviction, p. 119. and that is done either
by extenuating his sin, or villifying of the word of God: p. 120. and a low
esteem of the word is the ground of all opposition against the word, p. 120.
A: 4: If a carnal heart cannot, by carnal reason defeat the truth, then it
falls to down right opposition against the truth. p. 124 A: 3: Reas. 1.
Carnal men do oppose the truth, because they are unwilling for to have their
sins removed, p. 126. Use 1. First to examine our selves whether the
Commandments of the Lord are not grevious unto us. p. 129. Use 2: For
consolation to them that find their hearts willing for to let go all beloved
sins, and to come up to the Lord in every known truth. p. 134.
The Contents of the third Sermon. Psalm. 1.3.
Doct. It is the duty of a godly man not only to perform those duties,
discharge those services that God requires of him, but to do them in the
fittest season. p. 147. Q. How shall a man discern the season of his services,
p. 151. A. 1. When all circumstances, and occasions do concur for a duty
that is the season. p. 151. A. 2. We must let each time have his allowance. p.
152 A. 3. That time is most seasonable when we find our bodies, and spirits
best disposed for such services. p. 153. A. 4. We should so discharge them that
one duty may be helpful to another, p. 156. Several rules for oceasionall
duties, p. 157. That duty which is most necessary, and excellent must be taken
up, and the other let pass. p. 159 That which concerns Gods glory is to be
preferred before that which crucernes a man's self. p. 159 We must do good to
our selves in the first plase, p. 160. But I must not prefer my body, before
another soul, nor my temporalls before his spiritualls, nor my good; before
his life. p. 160. Reas: 1. If the season of doing duties be taken, it
beautifies all our actions. p. 161. Use 1. For trial, whether we have
seasonably discharged our duties in regard of our general, and particular
callings. p. 165. Use 2. For instruction, it teaches us that the life of a
Christian is not an idle life. p. 167. Use 3. For encouragement, now to stop in
that we may be cured, while the season of grace lasts. p. 168.
THE MERROR OF MERCY.
GENESIS 6.13. And God said my Spirit shall not strive with Man, for that he also
is flesh, yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years.


THe Scope of this Chapter, and the intendment of the Spirit of GOD therein, is
mainely to discover two things, viz. The different condition, or several sorts
of the people of the old world before the Flood, in the first part of the
Chapter, and then the different dispensation of Gods providence toward them,
answerable both to their persons and sins, in the second part of the Chapter.

In the first, observe first, the carriage of the common route in several
Expressions, from the fifth, to the end of the seven verse; and Secondly, the
holy demeanor of blessed Noah in the eight and nine verses, But Noah found
grace in the eyes of the Lord, Noah was a just man and perfect in his
generation and walked with God. Noah in that wicked time and place, and amongst
a wicked people, was an holy and righteous man, says the Text.

Touching the carriage and behavior of wicked men, observe the heinousness of
their sins in those unreasonable and unlawful lusts and abominable actions
against the light of Nature and the law of God; says the text before, the
sons of God saw the Daughters of men that they were fair, and they took them
wives of all which they chose. As who should say, they cared not whether they
pleased God or not, they are resolved to please themselves, their own filthy
appetites and humors.

The sons of God were the posterity of Seth who had the ordinances and the
worship of God in outward profession: And the daughters of men the daughters of
Cain, they were of another brood, and these sons against Reason, Religion,
even all common sense and honesty against the Laws of God and the works of
their own consciences join with these daughters in marriage, and these
mongrell kind of marriages produce Monsters, not only for state of body, but
of monstrous condition and manners, such as were monstrously proud, profane
and in all wickedness abounding.

Secondly, touching Gods proceedings and carriage of himself against the
generation of these men. Observe it in the words of the Text, wherein the Lord
sets down as it were a sentance of doom against them, whence observe that as
soon as sin is propounded God enters immediately into a Counsel and
determination against the Sinners.

Obser.
Expect when once base and sinful courses are put in practice, Judgment comes
and that suddenly. So from the sins of these people observe That marriages with
a contrary Religion ever brings destruction. Soloman took strange wives and
therefore his Crown was rent from him. They chose new gods faith Deborah and
there was war in their gates. Here is no sooner mention made of combining and
mixing with contrary Religions, Seth and his posterity, with Cain and his, but
Judgment forthwith ensues and proceeds, And God said my spirit shall not strive
with man, for that he also is flesh, yet his days shall be an hundred and
twenty years. In which words take notice, First of Gods determination what he
will do; seeing they will have their own ways and wills, he will not want of
his will, he will proceed to Judgment, and if God determine a Judgment, who
shall hinder it?

That God does and will destroy Sinners.



Generally, That God will strive with Sinners before he enters into Judgment.
In the Text, one hundred and twenty years, a large time of Repentance, longer
then they had of living.

Particularly, There is the bounds and limits of Gods mercy, God will not
always strive with man.

For that man is also flesh. As if it had been said, not only that base
generation of Cain that had cast away the Law of God, and made Lust their Law,
but even Seths Posterity, Even thy servants (O Lord) that profess the Faith,
and have the worship and Ordinances of God, they even they also are fleshly
and sensual; not only Rome, Spain, Italy; and Turks, but England thy people
that have been baptized professed thy truth, enjoyed thy Ordinances, They are
loose and profane; So that this also apparently implies not only Cains
Posterity, the wicked, but Seths Seed, the Church of God, members of the
visible Church; these, though professing the truth, depart from the truth, and
practice the abominations of the wicked.

Before we come to the several passages of the Text, we must unfold the words.

First, what is meant by spirit here, it is the Holy Ghost, for God owneth this
spirit, My Spirit, The third Person in the glorious Trinity; Now God striveth,
not only miraculously or immediately by Divination, but most usually, and now
mediately by the Ministry of his Word. God strove with this generation of the
old World by the Ministry of Enoch and Noah, the Lord immediately assisting and
advising them, they spoke not their own words, but such as Gods Spirit, put
into their mouths, 2 Pet. 1. the last ver. Holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost, so that by spirit here is meant the Spirit of God, and
by that spirit in the Ministry of the Patriarks and Prophets, the Lord strove
with the men of the old world, and former Ages.

Secondly, what is meant by striving; The Greek Interpretors translates the
word so as it has no agreement with the word Spirit, and indeed we shall
rather aim at it then explicate it.

The word is taken from a Theme which signifies to judge, or condemn in
judgeing, but it is not here meant in judgment, but a debating of the matter
between God and a sinner. Now, if God should call a man to account and enter
into judgment with a sinner, who is able to stand before him? what man may
contend with him that is mightier? Ecclesia. 6.10. No man is able to abide God
or contend with him in judgment. But God here deals with man answerable to the
nature of a man, not with blows, but with reasonings and disputes, He, as it
were, enters a Law Case with the poor sinful sons of men, and proceeds
in a judicial course to recover a poor sinner from the paths of death
wherein he straied, to his own worship which the sinner wholly declined from;
as ye see men go to Law, one says the Land is mine, another says he has
best right to it, and so their title comes legally to be tried: Even so sin
and Satan say the soul are theirs, and the sinner is content to go with with
them to Hell, but the Lord enters lists, and claims by a higher title, and
says that the soul is his; by him it was created, Redeamed, made to honor
his Creator, to be happy in his Savior: And how God strives herein you shall
see afterward. But I take this to be the value of the sense, so that from the
first part of the Text, observe these four Doctrines.

The Spirit of God does ever undoubtedly and unseperably accompany the Ministry
of the Word: Gods Word and his Spirit always go together.

The Lord by the power of his Spirit in the Word, in the course of his
Providence, strives with poor rebellious Sinners for their good and they
oppose both his Spirit and their own good.

God striveth long with Sinners, here with the old world one hundred; and
twenty years.

Though God strives long with Sinners, and yet they return not, God will leave
them to themselves, and their sins to the power and curse of sin, and the
judgments and plagues deserved.

Of the first Doctrine, viz.

That Gods Spirit does ever accompany the Word and the Ministry thereof.

By the Spirit of God, I mean the eternal Spirit, the holy Ghost, does in
special manner accompany the Word; know that God is every where, and knows
all things, but in a special manner he is with this; if the Word commands, he
commands, and if the Word forbids, he forbids, Romans 1.16. The Gospel is the
power of God to the salvation of man.

But how does this appear to be so?

I Answer, it appears in three things: First, God does please to set this
work apart, to wit, the Ministry of the Word, to save and sanctify our souls
which all the learning in the world cannot do.

Cor. 2.16, 17. To the one it is a favor of death, to the other it is a favor
of life, it either kills the soul, or saves the soul, though it ever
accompanies the word, yet this work of the Spirit is a voluntary work.

it does not always work. Look as the brazen Serpent was lift up in the
wilderness that whosoever looked on it that was stung with the fiery Serpents
should be healed: there was a healing virtue in it, he set it apart for that
purpose; for that had no virtue of it self, but because God would work by it,
so that whosoever looked on it might be healed: so it is with the Word of God:
for the Ministers thereof are no more able to convert then others, but because
God has promised to accompany them in dispensation of it.

Reason. First taken from the fruit and effect of this Word, that it is able to
do all things: In the beginning it was able to do that which men and Angels
cannot do, Heb. 4.12. The Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper then
any two edged Sword, piercing even to the deviding assunder of the soul and
Spirit, and a discovery of the thoughts of the heart. It is Gods faithful
word, the reason why Carnal men fall out with the Ministers of the word, and
say, you speak against me, I know you mean me. No, no, we know not your
hearts, but God does, and the word of God knows them and that finds you out,
John 5.25. The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, the meaning is,
they that are dead in sins: for by Nature every man is dead in sin. It must
be more then all men can do, as our Savior said to Lazarus, when men stood
weeping by, but Christ said Lazarus come forth, Joh. 11.43. It must be Gods
Word that must raise us from the death of sin to the life of righteousness.

Use. First of Instruction to take heed of taking up of Arms against the
Spirit of God, we see the heinous sin of them that despise the Ministry of the
Gospel, men may think it nothing; but alas, you know not what it is: for the
word of God, and the Spirit of God go together, as the blessed Martyr Steven
said to the Jews, Act. 7.51. Ye stiffenecked and uncercumsised in heart and
ears, ye do always resist the holy Ghost as did your Fathers so do you,
therefore take heed, you are near to the sin against the holy Ghost: for it
is not the Word of man, but the Word of God, it is the Spirit that thou
should be saved by, that thou have opposed; you go away with the contempt of
the Gospel, and make that nothing, thou have sinned against God and his Spirit
that accompanies the Word: O Counsel one another, say, do you know what you
do? It is Gods Spirit, that must comfort you? that must save you; It is that
that you oppose: when you oppose the word, take heed, for this is above
incestuous sins. Luke 3.19.20. Herod was an incestuous sinnner, but above all
his sins he added this, that he put John in prison, he was an incestuous
Adulterer, yet putting John in prison was above all, Math. 11.21.22. It shall
be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment then for you that
oppress the word of the Lord. So much for the first point.

And now I will fasten upon the second point, which I conceive is the pith and
substance, even the maine life of the Text; viz. That the Lord by the power of
his Spirit in the word striveth with poor sinners for their good, and they in
the mean time oppose both his Spirit and their own good. The Parties are God
and man; God strives, and the sinner strives, The Lord invents ways to work
off the Soul from its sins, and its destruction, and the Sinner makes it his
maine piece and care, his chief skill and cunning to hinder the good word of
the Lord, in the work upon his soul for his salvation. In common experience
we see it, If God open the eyes of a Drunkard, or awaken the Adulterer, what a
deal of stir there is; One drinks it off; another plays it out, a third
dambes up his Soul with untempered mortar; Any thing, or any way, that the
good Spirit of the Lord may not prevail. If the Lord turn the face of a child
or a servant in the family toward him, then presently there is hue and cry
up by the Father or the Master; He is an undone man, or an undone woman; then
there is laboring by all means possible to stifle the work of grace in the
heart: Thus when God striveth to pluck men out of their sins, they continue
in sin, and so subject themselves to eternal punishment, therefore may the
contention grow mavelous great, God striveth, and sin and Satan strive, and
man holds it out to the last, As appears Math. 23.37. O Jerusalem, thou that
killest the Prophets, and stonest them that were sent to thee, etc. there is
the business, and mark, how often would I have gathered you, etc. and you
would not. The Father would draw men to his Son to be faved, but John: 5.4.
ye will not come unto me that ye may be saved: whilst our Savior thus strives
with the cords of mercy to draw men to salvation, they labor to withdraw
themselves from him, and to plundge themselves into damnation. Act. 18.5, 6.
Paul strengthened with the spirit convinced them boldly, and by strength of
Argument laid hold upon their understandings proving that Jesus was the Christ.
But they came as in pitched battle against that Doctrine of life, and
salvation, they did gainsay and blaspheme it; the word in the original
signifies, They planted forces in order, and came in battle array against
those blessed truths he delivered: and in other places of the Acts, when Paul
revealed the truth, part joined with the Apostles, part with the Jews, some
were convinced, others gainsayed, and resisted. See then how a poor sinner
breaks all the cords of grace and mercy, as Psalm. 2.3. when there the wicked
combine against Christ, say they, Let us break his Bonds assunder, and cast
his Cords from us. Gods Counsels, Commands, Reproves, etc. are the cords they
break: the threatenings of the word, the checkes of Conscience, all the ties of
mercy, they snappe in pieces, they break all and wilfully withdraw themselves
from salvation, we need no more witnesses to cast this cause, woeful
experience daily produces too many; all difficulty rests in the Explication of
this: And therein

First, I will discover how God draws and strives with the sinner, what a
deal of do it is to bring a sinner to

Secondly, the reason why God does so strive.

Thirdly, Application hereof.

First, how does the Lord strive? The good Spirit of the Lord follows a Suit
himself against a sinner, and pleades a Law-Case with him. I do confess the
dealing of God is marveillous strange herein, and I ingeniously acknowledge I
want both skill and heart to set forth the pleadings of God herein: But, he is
only able to speak for himself, and by his gracious assistance we shall
observe to you such pleaes as God affords in Scripture, how the Lord has dealt
herein. To the point then. How the Lord pleades and strives with a sinner, I
refer to two heads.

1. By way of persuasion. 2. By way of constraint and compulsion.
Wherein we shall observe all the cords of mercy and bonds of compassion.
First, striving, and if those do not prevail, execution of punishment,
terrors and a strong hand pursues a sinner in mercy, and at last, if all
fail, mercy overcomes the sinner; wherein see, God first discovers the matter
in controversy Proceeds to execution, and by repreive at last prevails by
mercy over judgment.

Touching the first part, and of the pleaes of mercy in scripture we must
refer our observation hereof to four heads.

First, As in a suite of Law before there can be a day of Heareing, the Party
is summoned to answer.

So the Lord having a Controversy with a sinner, the Lord summons the sinner
into his Court, the Lord causes a Writ to issue out to attach a sinful
Creature that lies snorting in his sins, and securely posts to destruction,
one that never saw his misery and wants, and never sought for mercy and
supply, Salvation being the furthest end of his thoughts, and the least part of
his care. Now the Lord does bring this about in his providence, by bringing
them to the word, and therein mercifully making known the sinners estate
before ever he imagined thereof. Jsa: 65.5. I was found of them that sought me
not. Hence in ordinary experience many a poor sinful creature has been
accidentally cast into such a Town, or into a good family, and the Lord comes
upon him on a sudden when he never dreamed of life and grace. As many a soul
in the acknowledgment of Gods mercy and providence breaks out in this wonder,
Oh that I should be brought into such a place, such a family, and meet with
such opportunities, when I dreamed of it as little as of doomes day and desired
nothing more then mischeife, that God should stop me in the way to Hell: See
that of Saul when he was running to Damascus, ah (says he) I will take these
Puritaines in their Conventicles; a light shined suddenly from Heaven and
almost tumbled him down into Hell; Even such a kind of light is let into the
soul; not that we must expect a miracle, or a new thing, but when the word is
brought home to the understanding, the soul will think those strange things,
such as he never heard or thought of.

And if the finner grows careless and will not attend, God calls upon the
soul, and draws the mind to attend, holds the light to the eye, and brings
the Word so evident to the soul that it cannot evade, Ezekiel. 16.2. Son of man
cause the Children of Jsraell to know their abominations. The Prophet, 1 Kings
21.20. having a Message to Ahab after his great wickedness, see how the sight
of the Prophet startles him, and makes him snarle, Have thou found me out? Oh
mine Enemy, says Ahab. The word finds a man out and draws the mind to
attend it. The soul would be careless and secure, will not hear, not attend.
The Lord knockes as the door of the soul, finds him out behind the Pillor,
awakens him asleep in his Pue, finds him out his sins, and discovers his
abominations. The Lord comes home to the soul, and tells him thou art the man
that has sinned, and thou shall be plagued; God deals like a Wrastler, first
catches hold then comes in, and at last throws a man upon his back makes him
yield and confess, I am the man. Thus the Lord causes the mind to attend
the word. The Lord tells the Drunkard that the Alehouse is not the way to
Heaven, and the Adulterour that his way leads, to perdition, brings them to the
word, and causes them to attend thereto.

And further the Soul attending the word, and being ignorant and knowing no
good, the Lord informs a sinner and sets up a light of wisdom in his mind
to conceive of the nature of sin, whereby he has provoked God. He that yet
never knew what sin was, now it stares him in his face, and he beholds it
with amazement, and in some measure also comes to conceive of the nature of
grace, he begins to see the excellency of Faith and Repentance, what it is
to be in a Christ, what it is to want a Christ: the man is become an
apprehensive man (says God) I will cause the house of Jsraell to know their
abominations. It is not sufficient to come and hear the word, and never
attend it, or consider of it; But if God comes with it, it will make the
Drunkard know what it is to be drunk, and the Dissembler what it is to deal
fasly with God and his truth, Job. 36.9. He shows them their works and their
transgressions. God shows a man his iniquities, God shows a man his pride,
his vanity of mind, the judgments threatened, the plague deserved. Oh then,
The sinner says, this is my sin, and this is the punishment due to me, that
is, the Nature of my abomination, and that is the judgment of God for it.
Thus I say the Lord takes hold of a sinner; And this is the first way by
summons or Subpena, If a sinner be secure, God brings him to the word; if then
careless, God makes him attend; If ignorant, he informs him; As in a Law case,
The man is not only attatched to appear, but when he appears there is a
declaration of the fact; So the Lord shows the soul what his sins are, what
need there is of Christ, grace, faith, and repentance, which he never knew of
before.

Secondly, Thus the Action being laid, oh, the sinful heart invents mavelous
strange shifts and evasions.

The day is appointed for the trial, what Lawyer does the Soul get to plead
his Cause? He sends for carnal reason, as Pharaoh sent for the Magicians, And
when God has opened his eyes, and discovered his soul to his soul, then he
calls in, I say, the Magicians of carnal reason to plead against the word of
God lest it should prevail, or his sins should lie so heavy upon him as to
tire and weary him out of them. First, it excuses the heinousness of sin,
that the sin was not so great, that though the Minister speak as if we were
all Saints, yet are we not all sinners; who then shall go unpunished? we do
not look to be saved by our selves or our works, but by Jesus Christ, and he
came to save Sinners, It is but looking toward him, and crying God mercy at
last; but, says the Minister, we must be sanctified as well as saved. Acts. 3.
26. God having raised up his Son Jesus sent him to bless you in turning
every one of you from his evil way; That is blessedness; we must be reformed,
if conforted; humbled, if glorified; What says the Sinner, must I forsake my
evil ways? we know no man can, what need a man to be so precise and curious?
Thus with these and many other please carnal reason, like a cunning Solicitour,
with the help of the Devil, who will play the crafty Lawyer, and what the one
can invent, and the other suggest will be surely pleaded to beat back the
power of the word. And it is admirable to consider what contentions there are
herein, and how the wicked heart of man will outbid all the means under heaven
until the spirit of God come in upon the soul, and then as the wisdom of
God informs a sinner, so the spirit becoms the Advocate of God, that wise and
holy Spirit by the Ministry of the word convinces the sinner, John 16.8. And
when he is come he will convince the world of sin; he will answer all the
pleaes and arguments that the sinner can make. 2. Cor. 10.4, 5. For the weapons
of our warfare are not carnal but mighty through God, to the pulling down of
strong holds, Casting down immaginations and every high thing that exalts it
self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought
to the obedience of Christ: when the soul cavills, what needs all this ado.
Shall not a man go to Heaven unless he pray, hear Sermons, and sanctify the
Sabbath? Then the Spirit of God convinces a man fully, that he has not a word
to say against the evidence of truth, he gives up the day, and says, I
confess I am the man, these are my sins, I must forsake these or perish;
nay, I must forsake all my sins or else I forsake none: I see I cannot be a
good Christian and a swearer, a proud vain person, a careless liver, then a
Heathen, a profane Atheist will be as good a Christian. Thus the action being
laid by Information, and the sinner cast in the action by the Spirits
conviction. Then

3. Least the sinner now in this estate apprehending his sins and the
heinousness of them, and of his desperate forlorn estate thereby should sink
under his burden, the Lord lets in the manifestation of his goodness into his
soul, and the Soul thinks with it self how good is God in his providence to
provide the means of grace to bring me under them, to show me my wanderings,
Ah sinful, lost, undone creature; And yet the Gospel of grace and the word of
grace invites me to mercy. Oh, Is it possible that such a foul as mine should
be recovered? That I am yet alive, yet on this side hell, yet enjoy these
means? Rom: 2.4. The goodness of the Lord leads unto repentantance, and it
incourageth the sinner both to comfort and amendment: does the Lord vouchsafe
me these mercies? why not my heart purged? why not my corrupt Natures
cleansed? why Lord, thou wast merciful to Manasses who after all his
wickedness repented and received mercy.

4. If yet the sinner shall turn this goodness of God into wantonness, and
pervert the means of grace unto by ends, because he is yet in strength and
health, does and will continue still in his sins, delays his repentance,
Repentance will be soon enough hereafter. That the wisdom of God grows
almost resolved to forsake him, because all the ways thereof for the sinners
reformation are neglected, The goodness of God is resolved to encourage him no
more because despised: yet the patience of God comes in, and when the Lord is
even leaving the sinner, and Justice taking hold of vengeance, the blessed
patience of God steps in and pleades, and enters a new succor, It intreates the
Lord to stay one year longer.

When the Lord came three years to the Figetree, Luke 13.7. and found no
fruit, Cut it down (says the Lord) nay, stay Lord, (says the Keeper of the
Vineyard) another year it may bear. So that Gods patience prevails, that
God does not yet proceed in justice and execute judgment. Hos. 11.8, 9. How
shall I give thee up, O Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel? how shall I
makethee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zebeim? mine heart is turned within
me, my repentings are kindled together, I will not execute the fierceness of
mine anger, etc. See how patience pleades for a poor creature, Oh Lord, this
poor sinner has delayed, but he will now resolve, he has put off the time,
but now he has promised that all things shall be amended: now indeed he will
set upon the work of Reformation of himself and his family. Lord, try him one
month, one year longer, and he will pray in his family, sanctify the
Sabbath, and live holily, and strictly. But, yet if through the patience of the
Lord the sinner grows more careless, he has promised fair, but indeavoures
not to amend, continues not in these good resolutions, but is more vain and
secure, patience begins to be weary. Jerem. 5. 6, 7. Their transgressions
are many, and their backslidings are increased. How shall I pardon thee for
this? Patience is at a stand, comes to a period. How shall I spare? I can go
no further, Then comes in the long sufferance of God, and though the contempt,
neglect, and carelessness of a sinner is continued, yet God indures, Jerm: 13.
in the last verse. VVoe unto thee, Oh Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean?
when shall it once be? 140. years here in the Text. Oh that the Lord should
bear with a man until he be an old gray headed sinner; Oh this long
fufferance of God is admirable; If not for this, long before this day we had
been all consumed, Jer. 15.6. I am weary with repenting. Oh ye ancient
sinners, ye gray headed and stout-hearted sinners, so many years to continue
in your sins, That God is not only weary of your swearing, blasphemies and
prophanes, But his long sufferance also is even come to a date. Forty years
long was I greived with this generation: Psalm. 95.10. What forty years
together a Contemnor of Gods word, a Despiser of the means of grace, and yet
spared? See, and wonder then poor sinner, how thou labourest to get the better
of God, and to out tire his patience, And yet God bears and indures to gather
up: when the sinner was careless and ignorant, the Lord did awaken and inform
him; when the sinner was quarelsome and contentious, the Lord did convince and
cast him: when the soul might be discouraged and despair, the Lord did
quicken and raise him up, yet the sinner delayed, and God did bear, the sinner
falsified his promise, and God did endure: And, what shall these fair promises
come to nothing? Did not thou think and resolve to leave thy sins, to take
up a new course? Remember the time, the place, the bed of sickness, the
Ministry of the word, At such a Sermon, under such a cross, Did not thou at
such a time before thou wentest out of the Congregation say with thy self, now
if it please the Lord, this good word of God shall prevail. I will forsake my
lusts, I will never walk in any former courses; But alas, all is forgot, and
the Lord says, have I thus long endured, and shall I endure you to continue
ever in sin? Now patience and long sufferance are both for vengeance: God
can, will not endure longer; now he comes to execution, Isa. 1.24. when the
Lord was tired with their abominations, Ah, says the Lord, I will ease me of
mine adver saries, and avenge me of mine enemies. As who should say, I will
now take hold of vengeance, and that Drunkard and loose person that would not
forsake his Cups and his Queanes, but continue still in their filthy
beastliness, I will ease me of them with sudden destruction, and that false
dissembling professor that made 2 show of godliness, but denied the power, I
will ease me of him, and spue him out with shame to his face, and horror to his
conscience.

But of this in three patriculars.

First, the fierceness of the fury of the Lord breaks in upon the sinner,
and the Lord lets in the veins of vengeance, and his heavy displeasure upon
the conscience, and like a Pursevant breaks through the Chamber door, and the
wrath of God says, come away to Hell, away suddenly, go down to everlasting
destruction, Psalm. 42.7. All thy waves and thy billows are gone over me.

He that was a kind loving friend, now is become a terrible enemy, and
pursues as fiercely as he persuaded mercifully, Job. 15.24, 25. Trouble and
anguish shall make him afraid, they shall prevail against him, as a King
ready to battle, For he stretches out his hand against God, and strengthens
himself against the Almighty. But though Pharaoh said, who is the Lord, (Exodus:
5.2.) that I should let them go, that I should obey his voice; yet God ran
upon him, even upon his neck, even upon the thick bosses of his bucklers, and
crushed the pride and vanity of his soul. The poor sinner when he was informed
in his judgment, convinced in his conscience, and striven with by much
patience, and long sufferance stretched out to the utmost, yet what though the
Minister told him of plagues and threatenings, Come (says he) let us drink
etc. what though they say we must go to hell and perish, we see no such
matter, thus out-faceing the Almighty, and out-braveing Gods Ministers: and
they are sturdy, and will be so sturdy still, and rebellious, and so still
continue; well, do they think to carry it away thus? The Lord will run
upon them, and crush them to pieces: the Lord does not take advantage, but when
the sinner is strongest, stoutest, when his pride is shameless and impudent,
and he ruffles it out in despite of Minister, Magistrate, and all bonds, Then
God will be even with him. Because he covers his face with fatnes, because he
is carnal, careless, goes away, eats, drinks, riots, takes content in a
secure, sensual, stubborn course: the Lord will run upon their brows,
terrify the conscience, and confound his impudence: thus, when the sinner
seems most strong and secure in sin, God will be most keen and startle the
soul. And thus the soul comes first to be arrested.

Secondly, the wrath of God further sends for the sinner, and drags him to
prison and when he is in prison casts him into the Dungeon, Justice and Gods
truth come to take the forfeiture of all favors and mercies heretofore
enjoyed, and not profited by: and as one that is cast into prison, then action
upon action, and execution upon execution is laid upon a man until they break
his back, an undone man for ever (as we say) so with the Justice of God, Psalm.
50.21, 22. These things thou have done, and 1 kept silence, and thou thoughtest
I was such a one as thy self. Thou did not think I heard thee in such a
Tavern speaking against God, his people, his ways, mark, I held my tongue;
Oh the patience of God: and his forbearance of sinners in the midst of their
wickedness, They profaned Gods Sabbath, and yet prospered, they thought God
did not reguard it, God allowed it; they despised his holy ones, and lived in
jollity, and thought God did not see it, But all these backereckonings, and
forfeitures, and all their abominations are now set in order before their eyes.
Consider this ye that forget God, least I tear you in pieces, and there be
none to deliver you.

Ah, the good Spirit of God; ah, the goodness of God, his patience, his long
sufferance; Every one of these comes in and enters an action against the
soul: these that should refresh my soul, relinquish it, nay, they aggravate
my anguish and torment, Job 14. 16, 17. For now thou numbrest my steps, do
thou not watch over my sin? My transgressions are sealed up in a bag, and
thou sowest up mine-iniquitie.

Remember such a time what thou did, and how I did forbear, but I will
forbear no longer, and at last Justice with a full swindge brings in all the
bonds and all recknings, all those exhortations that have been slighted,
reproves scorned, means of grace enjoyed, and not bettered by, and those
ancient multiplied and great transgressions; these all will break the back of
mountains, and rocks are not able to bear off the billows of the wrath thus
kindled; and thus the soul is in prison and under execution, and there like to
lie, and rot, and perish.

Yet again, and at last cast, after the wrath of God has thus arrested the
soul, and the justice and truth and mercy and patience and the forbearance of
God has laid action upon action upon the soul, and the soul is in execution,
everlasting ruin being ready to seize on it, then mercy bayles the sinner,
even the mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ comes in, and undertakes that the soul
shall appear or mercy will satisfy for him, so the sinner is yet reprived,
Mercy gets the day, when a sinner comes out of the horror of conscience, and
the devourings of justice. Oh the bowels of mercy: Oh the mercy of a Father:
the blood of a Christ, the comfort of the Spirit calls the soul out of prison.
Oh turn, why will ye dye, Ezekiel. 18.13. Remember the knocks and horrors of
conscience, the beginnings of hell: they all come and mourn over a sinner. Oh
ye Drunkard, turn, be drunk no more, come to me and be saved: so to the
proud profane rebellious and malicious sinners, why will ye yet oppose God,
and so ever be confounded by him? why will ye go to hell, O ye sinful sons
of men? Come to me and I will pardon your sins, Come to me and I will
satisfy and pay all your debts, says Gods Spirit, I will subdue, crush all
your Rebellions. Oh this, this is the last time. Now observe, if ye come in,
receive all the good offered, If ye now be a servant to the Lord your God, all
your former iniquities shall be pardoned, old arrerages shall not be laid to
your charge. By me (says Christ, believe, and ye shall be justified from all
things, Act. 13.39. Now observe this is the last stroke, the last period, the
suit is at an end, if you entertain mercy to pardon ye, the blood of Christ to
satisfy for you, the motions of the Spirit to quicken you: It Is well, if not
now what can be looked for, but fire from Heaven to destroy Gods Adversaries.
Thus you see how God strives and wrastles hard before he brings men to
repentance and salvation.

The upshot of all is this, the Lord finding a sinner careless and secure by
his word, gives him notice of his ways, when he has the word he makes him
attend, attending awakens and informs him. The sinner seeing his Estate
begines to wrangle with God, then God convinces him, when convinced, least he
should sit down in despair, comforts him, and being encouraged, the sinner
again grows careless, and delays the time; God waits, he abuses Gods
patience, and yet his long sufferance indureth, and yet not work effectually:
then God is put to it, and with a strong hand lays hold on a sinner, and sets
his wrath to arrest a sinner, and Justice binds him over to judgment, yet at
last Mercy comes in, offers grace, pardon of sins, and salvation in the Lord
Jesus Christ. This is the pursuit of the Law-Case. The Reasons why God strives
with sinners thus, are briefly:

First, that he might express and glorify his attribute of Mercy, and that
the world might know it, and rejoice in it.

Secondly, that he might leave the world without excuse, that if they go down
to the bottomless pit they must thank themselves.

But, to come to the Uses. We see what God does, how he striveth with a sinner,
for his everlasting welfare, and we see what the poor soul does strive with
God for his own eternal ruin that the great Greatour that was happy before
all worlds, and will be glorified if he should suffer thousand millions of us
to perish, and go down to hell, should strive with a pooresinfull creature, it is
admirable.

First, we see, and let us stand amazed, and wonder at the admirable goodness,
the riches of the kindness of the Lord, together with the depth of the
stubbornness, rebellion, and evil of the soul, how strong in wickedness to
strive with the God of Heaven, nay, seems (as we say with reverence) to get
the better. The Lord teaches, and he will not hear; the Lord convinces, and
he will not yield; the Lord is good to him, and he despises him; the Lord is
patient, and he abuses it; God bears long and he contemnes: were it not that
God is just as well as patient, the sinner would overcome God, but God will not
have his patience always wronged: But yet observe the baseness and depth of
the wretchedness of man's heart, that nothing will do him good: foul is the
Leaper that all the water in the sea will not wash: Great are the spots that
nothing will cleanse or take off; what state is that body in, that no diet will
nourish, no physic cure? Death must needs appear in his face, it is thy
estate and mine. Let us go home and reason with our selves in secret: Good
Lord, what a heart have I, Is there such an heart in hell? The Devil never had
that patience to strive with them, that mercy to cure them, the good Spirit of
God to strive with them, Oh! the Lord has called and revealed himself to me;
yea, found me when I sought him not, nay, caused me to see mine abominations,
made me to see the wickedness of my ways: yet, oh the secret grudges of my
heart that it bore to Religion. How did I taunt the professors thereof, and
loathed the profession thereof it self; ye are one of those holy ones, and
what shall I be so precise? yet the Spirit of God did not leave me, but laid
hold on me, surprised me in my bed, and followed me wheresoever I went, yet I
opposed all, did wind away from the power of the truth, grieved the good
Spirit of God; good Lord, what a heart have I, and good reason have thou to be
ashamed of such a base heart. A poor worm, sinful dust and ashes, a shadow, a
miserable hellhound to grapple with the Almighty, thus to strive against mercy
and patience, and not to be tumbled into the bottomless pit of hell. It Is
admirable unspeakable mercy. Let us see into the depth of our misery, and
weep if we had a fountain of sorrow. See, there is a Drunkard, God has
opened his eyes, and he is become an holy gracious Christian: Look here upon a
wretched Adulterer, yet a wonder of mercy. Does he that goes into an harlot
ever return? yet the Lord has pardoned all his abominations. Beholdest thou
thy self to stand still like a horse in a Mill, as vain, as vile, as
careless and wicked as ever, Oh wonder at Gods goodness and be ashamed and
confounded at thy desperate case and wretchedness.

have their own desires as deserts; they are damned, because they will be
damned; perish, because they will perish. It is strange to observe the madness
of men to strive to go down to hell: they take Post-horse to everlastlasting
destruction, strive who shall go first. They strive who shall be most vain,
malicious, gainsay the truth, oppose God and goodness; well, the Lord has
striven with you, and you have striven against him, and ye will go to hell,
and then that patience that has striven with you will stop every one of your
mouths, when the body shall lie down in the dust, and the soul be roareing
in the bottomless pit. Now ye have your own desires, you have worn your own
Garland; ye would be proud and stubborn, loose and profane contemning all
means of Reformation: now ye have your belly full of sinning, Prove. 30.31. The
Lord will satisfy them with their own ways, and fill them full of their own
devices. As who should say, ye shall have your own hearts content, ye would
have none of his Council, ye despised all his reproof, and ye will despise
the word, oppose the Minister, scorn God to his face, despite his Spirit,
resist the work of the Lord, shift, put off, and put back the Authority of
the truth, and the power of grace; well, when ye are full low in the
bottomless pit, then ye shall have elbow room enough, liberty and time to be
full of all evil, for ever to sin against, and blaspheme God for ever, and
just will God be in his Judgments.

his ways and service; certainly, either God is to be blamed for dealing so,
or they to be condemned in their mischiefs. They are the Devils, Captains,
and give press money, nay, his Brokers; if a wife, child, or servant, or
neighbor begines to look toward Heaven, then the husband frowns, the Master
chides, the friend forsakes. Oh, lay your hands on your hearts, the devil if
incarnate could do no more. Oh know not only that thine own sins shall
condemn thee, but the blood of your wives, children, and servants; Oh
brethren, I beseech you hear, fear and tremble. Acts 15.8, 9. The text says,
that Paul came to the Island, and found the Deputy of the Island desirous to
hear the word of God, Paul would have brought him to the faith, and Elimas
would have drawn him from the faith: mark what Paul said in the tenth verse,
thou child of the devil: because Elimas would not go to hell himself alone,
he draws others. and Paul comes with fire and thundering, as it were, Oh, child
of the Devil, O Enemy of all righteousness.

The Adulterer is an enemy to chastity, the Drunkard to soberness, the unjust
man is an enemy to justice, but they that strive to hinder any man from God are
enemies to all righteousness. But you will say you would have prayed but my
husband would not let me, I would have gone to Church, but my Master would not
let me, this will not serve the turn, it will be no plea for you to say
Masters hinder you, Mat. 23.15. Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees that compass
Sea and Land to make a Proselyte, and when he is so made, you make him twofold
more the child of the Devil, then your selves. To be the children of the
Devil that is bade enough in conscience, but you are twice more the child of
the Devil, if you hinder any from God: if you sin, you shall go to hell,
but they that occasion others to sin, shall be twice more the children of
hell then you; Oh, then fear and labor every one to amend one another.

Heb. 3.13. Exhorting one another daily: Imitate God and Christ, they strive
with poor sinners for their good, do thou so strive with men, yea though they
strive against thee. Thou have a wicked father, a profane mother, pray for
them: thy friends and kindred are opposers of God and his worship, exhort them;
if thou see for the present little hopes of amendment, continue thy prayers
for them: thou prayest once, pray again, it may be God will hear; when a man
is laid in his grave, yet his stock of prayers remains, and goes forward, and
shall do till doomes day; what a sweet comfort will this be to them that do
good to others; you therefore that go in companies and assemblies with others,
strive to draw them on in goodness by exhortations, and sometimes by
reproves, that if it be possible you may prevail with their hearts to come in
and take mercy, 2. Tim. 2.25, 26. Lastly, therefore what remains? Oh that I
could follow Gods suite, be entreated and exhorted in the Lord: Does the Lord
strive with you, what should you do but yield to the Lord? Strive no more
against him, contend no further with the Almighty, Let this advise be
acceptable, and the Lord make it powerful to you. The Lord has a great suite,
many year it has lasted; a Chauncerie suite, it has lasted ten, twenty,
forty years: Oh ye of ancient years, with reverence to years, be persuaded
to the fear of the Lord. Oh ye young ones bless God, that ye have not so long
resisted the work of Gods grace, and withstood his patience. The Lord has an
old controversy with you from your first birth to this present. That of David,
Oh God from my youth I have depended upon thee. Oh what Sabboths have thou
enjoyed, what Sermons have thou heard, what sweet opportunities for thy soul
have been afforded thee? Oh the blessed motions of the good Spirit of God? how
has God sent and sued to thee, pursued and followed thee, mercies on the one
hand inviting thee, justice on the other side threatening, comforts of mind,
and horrors of conscience? Oh at last hear and be persuaded to let the suite
fall, Oh especially ye ancient sinners, notwithstanding all this, yet to be an
ancient Drunkard, an old black mouthed swearer, an ancient Adulterer, an old
gray headed sinner settled in wickedness; the father naught, and the son
naught, ah, vile wretches, the bane of all goodness: The Lord has striven
forty, fifty, sixty years together, and do you not think the Lord was
admirably patient? Now, now let the word of the Lord prevail, and the Council
of Gods poor servants take place with you, for your eternal good. Think with
your selves, what shall I stand out in law with God? shall I still resist his
grace? Go into a corner and sigh, and sorrow: bewail your selves; ah,
miserable Creatures that we are, how have we behaved our selves all our life
time to God: ah, those cords of mercy that would not draw us, those powerful
perswassions, those keen reproves, those forcible exhortations, and those
bestowed and continued with much goodness and long sufferance, and we not
bettered by any of them to this very day: why then it is high time (poor
wretches) to lay down the suite, to renounce it and to yield to the word of
God, and not a word more. Give up the day to the work of Gods grace, and the
power of his Spirit, as Job, Job. 39.37, 38. though he held out long until the
Lord schooled him out of the whirlwinde, showed him his Glory and Power and
Jobs vileness and nothingnesse. Then he cries out I am vile, what shall I
answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth, once (says he) have I spoken
but I will answer no more; So all of ye say that hear the word of God this
day, and persuade one another: Say we have been Brethren in wickedness, but
now we will submit, we will no longer defer, well then be encouraged. The
Lord strives with you, nay he promises you if you will at last yield,
whatsoever has been formerly amiss shall be pardoned: whatsoever is or shall
be wanting shall be supplied: why will ye yet contend, Did ever any resist
the Lord and prosper? Oh ye have friends or estates, and ye bear your selves
upon these and the like stays; these, and all such are but broken stays.
Where are all the enemies of God? where is stouthearted and stiff-necked
Pharaoh? He would not let the people of God go, etc. His body was drowned in
the sea, and his soul is roaring in hell, unless God was more infinitely
merciful then we can conceive: What became of proud Nebuchadnezar that exalted
himself to the Heaven, he was brought as low as Hell, How does God many times
slay the drunkard, and cut off the sinner on a sudden? And good Lord what are
become of their souls? Therefore let every man consider, no man can resist
God and prosper, either thou must overcome God, or be confounded by him.
Consider also, the longer ye stand out with God, the harder to agree the suite,
and remember this ye strong ones.

A Law suite at the first might happily be ended for a small sum or nothing,
but if it proceed, the charges of suite many times grows to be greater then
the debt: A^^ think of this also ye ancient sinners, gray headed swearers,
constant secret opposers of God and goodness: But forget it not (I say again)
ye young ones, little ones, goeing on in a way of sinning. If ye do not
agree betimes with God, God will recover his charges, he will not lose all
those exhortations, reproves, his patience, goodness, loving kindness, the
mercy and blood of Christ: Christ paid dear for these, ye make nothing of the
abuse of all these, but Christ paid for every Sermon not profitted by, every
intimation of Spirit slighted, every mercy not improved; Oh, this is able to
undo any man. Oh poor people be wise in time, especially I say ye young ones,
your reckoning is not yet so heavy; if now ye get a hear to yield to the
Counsels and Reproves of God, to submit and come in, your sins shall be
pardoned, your persons accepted, and your souls eternally saved: if not, thou
must pay charges, answer for all the patience, long sufferance, and goodness
of God. And consider now, even this day the Lord holds out the Golden Scepter
of grace, and if ye yet return to him, ye shall be accepted of him: it may be
the last time you shall have an offer of mercy. How soon may Death seize on
thy body, and then Judgment overtake thy soul: this may be the last day of
thy living, much more of thy hearing the word. If ye now accept, all arrerages
shall be forgotten, God will lay down his suite, all his anger and displeasure
will be laid aside, He will put up all if ye entertain his mercy and embrace
Christ. This may be the last offer. And does the Lord offer mercy after all
the stubbornness of the heart, after all unprofitablenesse, after all the
neglect of all the means of grace, after all thy drunkenness and profaneness,
hypocrisy, after all thy sins and wickedness.

Yes, then hear what the Lord says: Are ye content to forsake these, yes?
Then the Lord will not forsake you: if ye will entertain the Lord above all
these, he will entertain you: if ye lay down your lusts and corruptions, he
will embrace you for ever in the everlasting Arms of mercy: Say, answer, and
let every man's conscience answer, that I may return my message.

Me thinks none of you should be so senseless, so unreasonable, so
desperately wretched, as to stand out. Good Lord, shall all my evils be
pardoned, if I be content to receive Christ and his mercy? will the Lord Jesus
never leave me, if I be content to leave my sins? Good Lord take all my sins
and throw them in a bottom less pit, let me never see them again. I will
never more strive against thy word: Let thy word reveal my sins and subdue my
sinful soul: Let that good Spirit of thine come in and rule this heart of
mine.

Now the business is at an end, all controversies cease, when (therefore)
occasions shall come, temptations renew, corruptions stir; Go to God, and
for ever remember this days resolution, and let the Lord take place in thy
heart, and he will preserve thee to serve him here, and eternally to be saved
hereafter.

I should proceed to the third and fourth Doctrins, but I am prevented by the
time, I will only name them in one and so conclude.

Though God strives long with sinners, he gives them a long time of repentance;
ye see the old world an hundred and twenty years, and every knock in the Arc
a Sermon of repentance, yet after the long abuse of Gods mercy and patience,
the large time of repentance, and unfruitfullnesse under all the means of
grace. The Lord cease to strive with sinners any more, he takes either the
means from them, or them from the means, or his blessing from both. God has
bounds of his bounty and patience, hitherto and no further he will strive, but
not always: when his time is expired, not a jot or minute is further to be
expected: As with the Sun it has its time of increasing, and so there is the
spring and harvest, it has its time of decreasing, and then blasting, and
winter: there is also a time of consuming the store, as of bringing it in: so
it is with the Son of Righteousness, who has a time to receive, quicken, and
ripen the graces of his people, and a time to leave men to hardness of their
hearts in the darkness of Aegipt. He will rid them of his word, or in
hearing they shall not hear. Gods season of mercy does not allwaies last;
there is a Term time and a vacation: the sunshine of Gods goodness now
comforts and makes grace to grow, the Gospel is gone, and all mercy and
comfort is gone; when Ephraim was gone to Idolatry, Hos. 4.17. God was also gone,
nay, Let him alone, says God, he is joined to Idols, let him make up his match
with mischief, let him have his belly full of sinning, I will now no more
strive with him.

The Lord make us wise to know the day of our visitation, least he remove his
Candlestick from us, and he be seen no more, least he in his wrath go away,
and leave us to die and perish in our sins.

FINIS.
THE CARNAL MAN'S CONDITION.

Set forth in a Sermon on Romans 1.18.

By THOMAS HOOKER, late of CHELMSFORD in Essex, now Minister of the Gospel in
New- ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed for John Stafford, dwelling in the Alley against Brides
Church, 1645.

THE CARNAL MAN'S CONDITION.
ROMANS 1.18. The wrath of God is revealed from heaven, against all ungoodlinesse
and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness.


IN the beginning of this Chapter, the Apostle Paul, by way of Preface,
prepares way for those many excellent truths, that the Spirit of God had
furnished him withal, to send to the Saints that were at Rome: And that those
Heavenly Mysteries might take the deeper root in their hearts, and find the
better acceptance with them, In the first place he clears the Authority of
his Calling, and that he came not before he was sent of God. ver. 1. Paul a
Servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an Apostle, separated unto the Gospel of
God. And therefore being thus called, it became them to receive his doctrine,
not as the notions of his own brain, but as the Word of the immortal God.

Secondly, by way of insinuation he prayseth them for that good progress, that
they had made in the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, verse 8.

Thirdly, He discovers the tenderness of his love and affection toward them,
and his uncessant and unwearied desire to do them good, from the ninth to the
sixteenth verse.

Fourthly, He lays down the maine point, the Critical point, the hinge upon
which all the rest of his glorious building should move, viz. That a man is
justified in the Sight of God by faith and not by works, which Proposition he
proves, first by Scripture, ver. 17. The just shall live by faith.

Secondly, by force of Argument, in the words of the text, showing that no man
can stand righteous before God, by works, because the best works that a man
can do of himself, are wicked and unjust, and therefore punished of God, for
all men out of Christ stand guilty both of ungodliness and unrighteousnes, and
so are subject to condemnation, therefore they must needs seek righteousness
in some other: his Argument runs thus. If no man by the works of the Law
can appease the Wrath of God, then by the works of the Law, no man can be
saved, but by the works of the law, no man can appease the Wrath of God,
therefore by the works of the Law, no man can be saved, this he propounds in
the text, and prosecutes in the Chapter following.

In the words of the text, we may observe in the general these two parts.



Holding it in unrighteousness. God stands against them in a way of Wrath and
Vengeance, they deal roughly with the truth, and God deals as rigorously with
them. More particularly, here is first the subject, The Wrath of God, secondly,
the object, Ungodly and unrighteous men, Thirdly, The Universality of it, in
this word al, God does not deal partially; but all, be they what they may be,
that Hold the truth in unrighteousness, shall feel the Wrath of God, no sin
how little soever it seems to a carnal eye, shall escape it.

Fourthly, The place from whence this Wrath shall come, that is, from Heaven.

That Sins against the first table, are sins of a deeper dye, of a sadder
nature, then Sins against the second table.

ungodliness, and not ungodly men, we learn, That Gods Wrath is not
primarily, not principally, intended against men's persons, but against their
sins and wicked ways.

truth in unrighteousness, we learn, That the Gentiles naturally had that
ingrafted in them, whereby they might come, in some degree, to the Knowledge of
God, of the Almighty Power, greatness, goodness, and everlasting Nature of
God, even by looking upon his Creatures, so that their own reason might condemn
them, of their wickedness both toward God and men.

For the clearer understanding of the words, we are to consider.

First, What is meant by the wrath of God: The wrath of God is an act of Gods
Justice, punishing wicked men, sometimes it is put for the judgments
themselves, as plague, sword, famine, and such like; It is here set down in
opposition to the Righteousness of God spoken of ver. 17. which is Gods
merciful goodness, and gracious dispensations toward poor lost men.

Secondly, what is meant by truth: by truth here is meant, the remainder of
light, that was left in Man kind, after the fall, that rubbish that was left
upon the fall of that first glorious building, that Common light, that is in
every man's conscience, since the fall of Adam that serves to show him what God
is, in His Power, Glory, Majesty, and Bounty, and that he is to be worshipped,
by adoring and fearing of him above all, sometime truth is put for the efficacy
and power of truth. Gal. 2.14. Paul reproves Peter, and the rest for not
walking according to the truth of the Gospel, because the truth had not been
so efficatious with them, as to drive them from those beggarly elements of the
Ceremonial Law, but they would have had the Gentiles for to have come up unto
the Jewish practice.

Thirdly, What is meant by holding the truth in unrighteousness. To hold the
truth of God in unrighteousness, is either by a kind of violence, and strong
hand, to suppress it, and keep it back, as if men would imprison it, least it
should shine clearly abroad, when it is not only, not submitted unto, followed
and obeyed, but resisted, and gainsayed, and that which is point blank contrary
to the direction of truth, is practiced: or when it is fettered with some lust,
that hinders the powerful opperation, and efficatiousnesse of it upon the
soul, so that the word cannot perform that work, which otherwise it would, in
the heart of them to whom it is sent.

Fourthly, What is meant by the word unrighteousness.

In some places of holy writ, it signifies, only such sins as are committed
against the second Table, but in this place it signifies, not only the
violation of the Law of Nature, in respect of our duty to men, but our
violation of the Law of God, in regard of that homage and service we owe unto
His Majesty, so that it implies all sinful distempers, and corruptions of
heart, all irregular belchings out of the affections: Out of the words thus
opened we may observe these Propositions.

against the word of God, is from that corruption that is in their hearts.


That carnal and corrupt men, do hinder the powerful efficatiousnesse of the
word of truth, from working upon their sinful hearts, prevailing with them,
and subduing of them, as much as in them lies, by reason of that imbred
corruption that is in their hearts.

It is true that truth is powerful, and will prevail, and if the Spirit of God
set it home upon the Conscience, there is no heart so hard, but it will soften,
no heart so proud but it will humble, and lay it lower then dust as low as the
nethermost hell in its own apprehension, and when God sends his truth to subdue
a corrupt heart, he does not stand to ask the sinner whether he be willing or
no, to submit to the word of truth, to put his shouldiers under the Government
of Christ, for it is natural to us since the fall of Adam, to run farther, and
farther from God. Cain when he had slain his righteous brother, and was
banished from God, it is said that he dwelt in the Land of Nod, which
signifies wandering, for when he had once lost fellowship, and communion with
God, in whom alone soul satisfiing rest is to be found, all the world was not
sufficiently to satisfy his immortal soul: as it was with him, so it is with
us all by Nature, therefore the Lord is feign, not only to vouchsafe unto us
means and helps, and heavenly directions, to do our souls good, but likewise
to conquer our wills to submit thereunto, even to force us, to receive
dirrection, how our souls may be happy for ever.

But Gods Spirit does not always accompany the Preaching of the word by its
efficatious working, God many times strives only by his word, and by the
common workings of his Spirit, by instruction, by conviction, by correction,
but carnal hearts resist, withstand, and as much as in them lies, labor to
keep the word of God out of their hearts; for the better understanding of this,
consider these particulers. First, There is some relickes of the Law of God,
left in the consciences of heathens, though they be strangers to the life of
Faith, and covenant of grace, 2 Romans 14.15. For the Gentiles which have not the
Law do by nature the things contained in the Law, they having not the Law are a
Law unto themselves, which show the effect of the law written in their hearts,
etc. Hence many heathens have written large Volums of vice, and virtue, and
have made many good Judicial Laws, for the punishing of murder, adultery,
drunkenness, and the like, with death it self, Conscience keep many carnal
men from the act of sin, Conscience stand over them with a whip, so that they
dare not do many things, they have a mind unto, and a longing after.

Secondly, the works of Creation do discover much of the power, wisdom, and
Soveraignitie of God.

But thirdly, the word of God is that which most clearly discovers God in all
his glorious attributes: Now though God discover himself, by that light which
he has set in every man's Conscience, by his works of Creation, and
providence, and likewise by the bright Ministry of his word, never so clearly,
and unquestionably, yet carnal hearts will not yield thereunto, nor glorify
God in giving credit to the truth, neither be thankful unto him for these
glorious mercies, but endeavor, what in them lies, to shut out, and keep out
that light that dar^eth into their souls, to quench the motions of the spirit,
and to eclips the light of the Gospel, when it shines cleerer then the Sun at
noone day, as it was with the Jews, Acts 7.51. When Steven brought the word
near to their hearts, and touched them to the quick, says the text. 57.58.
verses, Then they gave a shout with a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and
ran upon him violently all at once, and cast him out of the City and stoned
him: thus it was with the Sodomites, all the persuasions and entreaties of Lot
could not prevail with them, but they cry out away hence, he came as a
stranger, and shall he judge and rule? Genesis 19.9. As they said to Lot so does
every carnal heart to the word of God, when a Minister comes unto them with
an unfeined desire, to do their souls good, to guide them in the way to
blessedness, to woe them, entreat them, and beseech them, to be reconciled to
God, and no longer to resist his truth, blaspheme his Name, pollute his holy
things, to break off their sinful courses, and to become as zealous for the
ways of God, and servants of God, as heretofore they have been for sin, and
Satan, in stead of yielding to these blessed motions, they cry stand back, who
made you judge, we regard not your council, we fear not your threatenings,
and say in their hearts as they did, Iere. 18.12. We will walk after our own
immaginations, and do every man after the stoubbernesse of his own wicked
heart, thus they even take up arms against the Ministers of God, and the
truths of God, when they come to pull them out of their carnal courses.

For the better discovery of the point, I will clear it in these three
particulars.

1. What is the Power of truth. 2. How wicked men hinder it. 3. The reason why
they do so hinder it.




1. First, it is a word of information, discovering things in their native, and
proper colors, pulling off that vizard that carnal reason has put upon
them, Prove. 6.23. For the Commandment is a Lanthorn, an instruction, a light;
A Light is useful in a dark and narrow way; so is the word of God to direct
us, and inform us, how to walk in the narrow path that leads unto life, by
this a man is informed, what is to be shunned, what to be followed, what is to
be loved, what to be hated, A man cannot miscarrie nor loose his way, so long
as he is directed by the Light of the truth: as the Sun shows all the moates
that be in the house, so this discovers all the corrupt corners that be in the
soul, all that envy, pride, hypocrisy, blasphemy, that lodges in the heart:
Ephesians. 5.13. But all things when they are reproved of the light, are manifest,
for it is light that makes all things manifest; A man may there be resolved in
every doubtful case of conscience, the balance of the Sanctuary is that
wherein we should weigh our thoughts, words, and works.

David, Psalm. 119.50. speaking of the word of God, says, It is my comfort in
my trouble, for thy promise has quickened me.

the Church, Cant. 1.3. Draw me and I will run after thee. The Church
confesses that she cannot come to Christ, except she be drawn, now the word
of God has such a drawing power in it, though corruption be strong, and the
Outward man heavy, yet it will lead a man on in the right way that he should
walk.

4. Fourthly, it is a word of conviction, it is powerful to overthrow all the
gainsayings of man, it has a sovereign, supreme Authority in it, to bear
down all carnal reasonings, when the Lord is pleased to accompany it. 2.
Cor. 10.4. The weapons of our warefare, are not carnal, feeble and weak, but
mighty thorough God to the pulling down of strong holds. There is a mighty
operation in the truth, hence says the Apostle, 2. Cor. 13.8. We cannot do
any thing against the truth, but for the truth. So that truth is powerful,
and though corruption be strong, the world enticing, and the Devil ensnaring,
yet if the Lord be pleased to set the truth home upon the soul, either to
inform it, or to quicken it, or to draw it on in Heaven ways, or to convince
it, all these avocations, and pull backs, shall not hinder it; thus we see the
truth will work.

appear in these four particulars.

out to gather it in, men naturally stop their ears agaainst the truth Esaias
30.10. They say to the Seers see not, and to the Prophets prophecy not right
things, speak to us smooth things, prophecy deceits; Get thee out of the way,
turn aside out of the path, cause the holy one of Israel to cease from before
us: So Job. 21.14. They say also unto God depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways; They desire nothing more then to be exempt from all
subjection unto God, that in Acts. 28.27. is likewise here considerable, For
the heart of this people is waxed fat, and their cares are dull of hearing, and
with their eyes have they winked, least they should see with their eyes, and
hear with their cares, and understand with their hearts, and should return
that I might heal them. Winked with their eyes, that is, they made as though
they saw not, that which they did see, against their wills, carnal men are
loath to know the truth, if they do search for it, it is only as a Coward
does for his Enemy, with a hope not to find him, yea with a fear lest he
should find him; So a natural man is fearful to search, and loath to find
the truth, but if the truth do glanse in, and conscience begin to recoile,
then, he seeks out for some merry company, that may help him to smother these
motions of the Spirit, as Saul sent for David to play before him, when the
evil Spirit came upon him. We use to draw a Curtain before the Sun when it
shines too bright in our eyes, so says every carnal heart when the word
shines in his soul, Oh, draw a Curtain before it, let me hear no more of
this, least it drive me out of wits, I would have Christ, but I would have the
world also, if God would but allow me such a finne, meaning his bosom
corrruption, I would willingly come up unto him, in every thing else that he
should require at my hands, thus conscience puts them to do something, and the
word has some slightly work upon them, like the seed that fell in the stony
ground, but yet they will not part with their Dalilah Corruptions, but when it
touches the covetous man's gain, the voluptuous man's pleasure, then they cry
out, draw a Curtain before it.

Secondly, A carnal heart is always ready to raise an evil report of the
blessed truth of God, that so it may appear deformed to the eyes of them that
begin to express some desire after it, they deal with it as the spies did with
the Land of Canaan, Number. 13.32. So they brought up an evil report of the Land
which they had searched, unto the Children of Israel, saying the Land which we
have gone to search is a Land that eats up the inhabitants thereof, etc. The
Giants were so cruel that they eat up one another, and those that came amongst
them; upon this report the Children of Israel murmoured against Moses and
Aaron, and they wished themselves in Egypt again, Exo. 14.2. They would
willingly have been in Canaan, they still cried out for the Land that flowed
with milk and honey, but they were not willing to encounter with any hardship by
the way, when once they heard of Giants, then the Leekes and Garlic of Egypt,
was preferred before the delicacies of the Land of Canaan, when Christ feed his
followers, many flocked after him, but it was more for love to the loaves, then
to his Doctrine, John 6.26. Many would be happy that are not willing to be
holy, when once they are called upon to deny themselves, to crucify their
beloved sins, to forsake all, yea life it self for the truth, then they cry
out it is a heard saying and who can bear it, and then they scandalize the
ways of God, and the truth of God, and raise evil reports of them.



spirit be somewhat willing yet the flesh is weak, and that you have a base
deceitful heart that is ready to embrace every occasion of sinning, that lies
in the way, beseech him therefore not only to begin, but to consummate every
good work within you; Though it be not in men's power to save themselves, yet
their own Consciences will tell them, that they might do more then they do.
Luke 7.29.30. The Publicans justified God, (that is said that he was faithful
and merciful) Being Baptized with the baptism of John, but the Pharisees, and
Lawyers rejected the council of God, against themselves, (or to their own
hurt) and were not Baptized of John; terms of grace and Salvation, were offered
both to Publicanes, and Pharisees, the one reject the good council of God
given, the other accept of it; therefore when we see others called, converted
by the same means we live under, we should blame our selves, and reflect upon
our souls, and say, the word would have enlightened me, had I not contemned it,
it would have quickened me had I not gainsayed it, I was almost converted, I
had some tastes of Heaven and happiness, but, oh, wretch that I was, company
came, thoughts of the world came and choked it, the Lord has oftentimes
knocked at my heart but I would not set open the doors of my soul that the
King of glory might come in.

Thirdly, A Carnal heart does oppose the good word of God, so that it works
not upon his soul, by resisting the work of conviction, when the word of God
has had some powerful work upon the soul, that the sinner is a wakened, and
his conscience roused up within him, that he cannot but say, I am the man,
these are my sins, which (finlesse the Lord in mercy prevent it) will surely
be my ruin now carnal reason endeavors either to extenuate the sins, or to
villifie the word of God, and the truth of it, which is the ground of all
opposition against the word, for if men did indeed believe that it was the word
of an Almighty God, and that every curse therein denounced, should surely fall
upon the heads of those that transgress those Ordinances divine, they durst
not sin against the plain commands thereof as they do. When Balack sent to
Baalam to curse the people of God (thinking him to be a Witch, and therefore
whom he blessed was blessed, and whom he cursed were cursed) God says to
Baalam, thou shall not go with them, therefore he went not; But when Balack
sent more honorable men then they, and promises him promotion; then says the
poor sinful covetous wretch, Stay all night, and I will see what the Lord
will say, when as the Lord had peremtorily said thou shall not go with them,
yet his affections were lingering after the house-full of gold, therefore he
hoped that God would have changed his mind, and thus he tempted God, to
require him contrary to his commandment, a low esteem that he had of the
word of God was the cause of that fearful sin. Now how many be there that
follow the ways of Baalam as the Apostle Jude speaks, who are willing to
obey the commands of God so long as it may stand with their profit, and hononr,
but when such a try all comes, as that by lying and deceit, they may get gain,
as hear a house full of gold proffered, then they look for a despensation, then
they cast the Commandments behind their backs: Many a Usurer, that finds the
sweetness of it, and is resolved to continue in that sin, he will study all
the Arguments that he can to palliate it, and readily catch hold of every
thing that may seem in the least manner to countenance it, but oh, how hardly
can he be brought to give ear to what the word of God says against it. When
Moses stood before Pharaoh, and his rod, by the immediate finger of God was
turned into a Serpent, Pharaoh does not sit kowne under the Miracle, but to
make it of light esteem, he sends for his Magicians, who turn likewise their
rods into Serpents, but Moses his rod devoured theirs, Yet says the text
Pharaohs heart was hardened, so it is with every carnal heart, when the word
comes home, and convinces him, and fills his soul with terror, and trouble,
then he send his Magicians, carnal reasonings, and though the word of God does
eat up all those reasonings, yet the carnal heart goes away satisfied, and
with Pharaoh grows harder and harder.

Fourthly, and lastly, if by carnal reason they cannot defeat the truth, then
they fall to down right opposition of it, laying violent hands upon it, and in
despite of the truth do whatsoever their own wicked hearts suggest, as it was
with the Children of Israel, when their proud hearts prompted them to ask a
King, Samuel makes a gracious Sermon unto them to diswade them from it, and he
shows them the manner of their King, and how he should enslave them, and make
their sons and their daughters and all that they had to be at his disposing;
not that Kings have any such Authority by their office, but being he was to
reign in Gods wrath, therefore he should usurp this power on his brethren)
but the people would not hear the voice of Samuel, but did say, Nay, but there
shall be a King over us: So it is with every carnal heart, when the word
comes so close home to his Conscience, that he cannot evade it, yet out of a
desperate madness, he says, I will not obey it, but let all such know, that
though the command of God prevail not with them, to convert them here, yet it
shall one day prevail over them, to damn them for ever, Mat. 25.46. These
shall go into everlasting pain. The reasons of the point follow.

First, Carnal men do thus oppose the truth, as has been showed, because they
are unwilling for to have their sins discovered, and removed, there sins are
as dear unto them as their lives, as the life of their precious souls (which
are more worth then all the world) and will not a man strive for his life? Now
when the word of God comes to pluck the cup from the drunkard, the whore from
the Adulterer, pleasure from the voluptuous man, they part with them as they
would part with their lives, they will rather suffer their sins to kill their
immortal souls, then the word to kill their sins.

Secondly, Because a carnal minded man, cannot take pleasure in any thing if
he be debarred of his liberty of sinning, he accounts it a plague and vexation
to live under a stirring Ministry, or in a Godly family, where he dares not
wallow in sin as he would, Oh, how tedious is it; Hence how will he rejoice,
when the Godly, (who are the Pillars of the Land) are removed, Revel. 11.10.
When the two witnesses are killed, Then they that dwell upon the earth, shall
rejoice over them, and be glad, and shall send gifts one to another: because
these two Prophets vexed them that dwelt on the earth; The Gospel of Christ is
not only a stumbling block but an affliction to the world, and the Ministry
thereof, is the savor of death unto death to those that perish. 2. Cor. 2.16.

Thirdly, carnal men do thus oppose the truth, because it will not allow them
any fin, my of their sweet morsells. they would be willing to part with those
finnes that they are not much inclined unto; the young man in the Gospel went
far, and Herod reformed many things, and Agrippa was almost persuaded to be a
Christian, but when it came to their bosom corruption there they stick,
Demetrious and his fellow-crafismen raise sedition against Paul, when he once
began to confute the opinion which men had of Dianas Image, by which craft they
got their gain, for gain cloaked with a show of Religion, is the very cause
whereof Idolatry is stoutly, and stubbornly defended.

deceitful above all, and desperately wicked, as Jeremiah speaks. There is
indeed in the best of Gods Children some secret resisting against the truth,
because there will be flesh, as well as spirit in them, so long as they are on
this side the grave, but when it stirs, they lie not down under it, but fall
out with their own hearts, and take up Arms against those enemies of their
peace and happiness, it is one thing to have sin remaining, another thing to
have sin ruling.

Now this truth meets especially with two sorts of false-hearted men.

1. Discreet hypocrites. 2. Subtle hypocrites
1. Discreet hypocrites: Discretion indeed simply considered in it self, is a
blessed work of Gods Spirit, wrote in the hearts of his people, and is always
acting upon good grounds, in a good matter, and to a right end; But there is a
worldly discretion that lodges in hypocritical hearts which turns to the
destruction of many a soul, therefore I call such a one a discreet hipocrite,
one that will always endeavor to be on the strongest side, one that will
join with the most, though it be with the worst, one that according to the
Proverb, Will hunt with the Hound, and run with the Hare, one that regards not
whether the Cause of Christ sink or swime, so he may save himself, one that
thinks them all mad men that will suffer for Religion, or for conscience
sake, that want his discretion, and will not turn with the wind, as he does,
he is one that can be zealous for the Glory of God, so long as it runs a long
with his own advantage, as John; false hearted John was very zealous in
executing the Lords Command, in cutting off the house of Ahab root^ and branch,
that so he might settle himself the faster in the Kingdom: But when it comes
to the touch that he must either forsake Christ, or the world, then De^^^ like,
he follows this present world, his religion ebbs, and flows with the Current of
the times he lives in, with the wicked he can show himself wicked, with the
righteous he can show himself righteous, be has his religion as it were in a
ser^e, he can set it higher and lower, according as the times go, he can serve
God upon any terms, after any fashion, he endeavors to please all, that so he
may get himself a name amongst men, when as the Lord will spue hins out of his
mouth because he is neither hot nor cold, Rev. 3.16. This is a discreet
hypocrite.

Secondly, the subtle hypocrite, one that pretends nothing but love, and
likeing to religion, as if he made it the aim, and end of his course, one that
would not be known to think, much less to speak any thing against the
truth, when in the mean while his own heart knows, that he is a secres
Underminer of it, he pretends he seeks after the Liberty of the Gospel, when
he seeks his own carnal liberty, like Saul, who pretended that he kept alive
the chief of the Cattle, for sacrifice, when it was merely out of a covetous
humor that he did it; Further he is one that will pretend mavelous humility,
he will seem to be content to do any thing, to suffer any thing for the
truth, and all this out of a vain ostentation, he seeks himself in all, and
though he can deny himself in some lawful comforts, yet it is only out of a
self end that he does it, and therefore it is not acceptable with the Lord,
says David, Psalm. 119.6. I shall not be ashamed nor confounded when I have
respect to all thy Commandments, Now this hypocrite has not respect to all
Gods Commandments therefore he shall surely be confounded.

the word, who are willing to let go all beloved finnes, (though never so
pleasant and profitable) and worldly ends whatsoever, yea to give up their all,
yea their life it self when God shall call for it, this may be a ground of
unspeakable comfort unto them, for they find that distinguishing Caracter in
their souls, which cannot be found in the hearts of any hypocrites in the
world: Consider therefore with thy self, how thou can stoop as well to the
Commands, as to the Promises of the word, can submit to every blessed truth,
art willing both to know it, and to practice it, and to delight thy self in it
day and night: Is there any soul here, whose Conscience bears him witness,
that it is thus with him, that he is willing not only to hear, but likewise
to entertain every Truth of God, even those that are most contrary to flesh
and blood, and that he can say in the uprightness of his spirit as before the
Lord, be there any more Truths of the Lord to be discovered, Oh! that I might
hear them, and come to understand them, how willingly would I come up unto
them, and put them in practice; that can say with the holy man Job, Surely it
is meet^ to be said unto God I have borne chastisement, and I will not offend
any more, that which I see not, teach thou me, and if I have done Iniquity I
will do so no more. Such a man as can thus love, and thus entertain the
truth; he is a Freeman of Heaven, one of the blessed Company of Saints and
Angels, John 8.32. And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you
free. This was the joy of the Apostle, 3. Epist. John 4. I have no greater joy
then to heave that my Children walk in the truth. If it was so great a matter
of joy to him that he had been an Instrument to work this blessed work upon
other men's souls, how much greater cause of joy have thou, that it is wrought
upon thy soul; God himself loves the truth, and requires truth in the
inward parts, He delights also to reward the lovers of it: Do thou love the
Truth of Christ? then it will give the same testimony of thee, as it did to
Demetrius. 3. Epist. of Joh. 12. Demetrius has a good report of the truth it
self, And if the Truth report well of thee, Fear not what the world, what thy
friends, or enemies say of thee, for the testimony of the truth will be a
comfort unto thee when all false witnesses shall stand aside, and thou shall be
able to lift up thine head, when those that have derided the truth, and thee
for the truths sake, shall hang down their heads, and have their hearts to
fail within them. Then this shall be a comfort to a poor soul, when his
conscience shall bear him witness, that although he has had many
weaknesses, yet there was never any truth made known unto his soul, but he
was willing to entertain it, never any sin was discovered to his soul, to
be a sin, but instantly he loathed it, then the Truth shall stand up and say
I bear witness Lord, that he loved me, entertained me, and delighted in
me, though he endured bitter persecutions for my sake, and so the truth shall
make him free, the devil shall not have any thing to lay to his charge, and
God the Father, God the Son, and God the blessed Spirit shall be ready to
embrace such a Soul, for God is a God of Truth, Christ is the Word of Truth,
and the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of Truth; Therefore labor after the Truth,
let not your hearts any longer oppose its efficatious working upon your souls,
but uncessantly entreat the God of Truth, to set every truth that you shall
hear home upon your hearts.

FINIS.
THE PLANTATION OF THE RIGHTEOUS. Set forth in a Sermon on Psalm 1.3.

BY THOMAS HOOKER, late of Chelmesford in Essex, Now Minister of the Gospel in
NEW ENGLAND.

LONDON. Printed for John Stafford, dwelling in the Alley against Brides
Church, 1646.

THE PLANTATION OF The RIGHTEOUS.
PSALM. 1.3. But he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that
brings forth his fruit in due season, his leaf also shall not wither, and
what soever he does shall prosper.


IN the beginning of this Psalm the Prophet David gives somewhat a general,
and confused veiw of blessedness, which is the desire of all our hearts, the
end of all our hopes, and travails; and then he first, points out the
bypath in which those that walk, shall be sure never to attain unto this
blessedness, 2. He sets out the true and ready way to happiness, and the
several stations therein, which are but two, delighting, and meditating in the
word of God, 3. In the words of the text he does more particularly, and
distinkely discover this happiness, that so he might win upon men's affections,
and make their souls be enamored therewith. 4. He shows the woeful estate,
and condition of those that do not walk in this way, that leads to
happiness, they are not so, but the wind of Gods Wrath shall drive them away
like chafe. Lastly, he gives the reasons of it, for the Lord knows, that
is, does approve and prosper the way of the righteous, but the way of the
wicked shall perish.

Now in the third verse, here is first a familiar Similitude of a Tree, and
this tree is further discovered, 1. By the nature of it, it is a planted tree,
not a wild tree. 2. By the place where it grows, and that is, by the rivers
of waters. 3. By the property of it, it brings forth his fruit in due
season. 4. By some effects. 1. A perpetual flourishing, his leaf shall not
fade. 2. A good issue to every undertaking, what soever he does shall prosper.
As it is with a Tree dug out of a barren land, and transplanted into a
fruitful Soil, and set by a river of water, it brings forth much fruit,
and remains in a flourishing estate; So it is with those who having bin
rooted out of the dry wilderness of sin, and are by the great Husbandman God
the Father, transported into the true Vine Jesus Christ, and set by the Rivers
of his word and Ordinances, they grow fruitful in grace and goodness,
bringing forth flourishing fruit, and that in due season, when it may make
most for the Glory of God, and the good of his people, and their fruit shall
neither fade, nor perish, until they attain unto perfection, and a full
fruition of Happiness with Christ in Glory.



So that this third verse does in particular discover the difference betwixt a
godly, and godless man: They are contrary in their principalls, and ways,
They are contrary in their fruits, and they shall be contrary in their
accounts at the last Day.

Now for the present I shall wave all the other Characters of a godly man, and
treat only upon this: viz. That as he brings forth fruit, so it is fruit in
due season: So the Point hence considerable is this: Doct.
viz. It is the duty of a godly man, not only to perform those duties,
discharge those services that God requires of him, but to do them in the
fittest season; Or take it thus in breife, The duties of Saints ought to be
seasonable.

The point may seem strange to some, it is little known and less practiced
amongst most. I shall therefore 1. Prove the point. 2. Show the grounds and
reasons of it. 3. Apply it.


First, for the proof of it, the Lord commands it, Numb. 9.2, 3. The Children
of Israel shall celebrate the Passover at the time appointed thereunto: In the
foureteenth day of this mounth at Even ye shall keep it in his due season,
according to all the Ordinances of it, and according to all the Ceremonies of
it shall ye keep it. That is, in all points as the Lord has instituted it, if
they did not observe the right time and season the Lord would not accept it.
And as the Lord commands it, So Exodus 12.1. Levit. 23.5 28.16. Deuteronomy. 16.2.
so he practices it, Psalm. 145.15. The eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou
give their meat in due season. And the Prophet Esaias shows that for this end
the Lord sent him to his people Israel, Esaias 50.4. The Lord God has given me
the tongue of the Learned, that I should know how to minister a word in due
season to him that is weary. And Christ shows in the parable of the Vineyard,
Mat. 21.41. That God will let out his Vineyard to such husbandmen as will
deliver him the fruits in their seasons. And he shall be Steward of Gods
Household who will give unto his fellow servants their meat in season, Luke
12.42. And it is said, Ecclesiast. 10.16, 17. Woe to thee O Land, when thy King
is a Child (that is without wisdom and council) and thy Princes eat in the
morning: that is, out of season, more for just, then for necessity: But blessed
art thou O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles, (that is noble for
virtue, and wisdom,) and thy Princes cate in due time, for strength, and not
for drunkenness. And Prove. 15.23. How good is a word in due season; for there
is a season for words, as well as for actions, and every good thing is proper
only in its place, and a thing in it self praise worthy, loses its
commendation unless it be set in its proper seat: So we see that the point is
plain, that the Saints of God ought to observe the fittest seasons and
opportunities for their performance of duties and that is a thing both
commanded, and commended.

discern the due season for his services, the sit time for those duties that
are to be discharged by him?

fully laid open, then it is a fit season for a man to bethink him self of
repenting and returning; For in hell a man shall have time enough to repent,
but there he shall want a season, an opportunity: therefore a Christian should
be wise to observe his season, and when occasions, opportunities and abilities:
Sure, to take that time for the performance of his duties.

1. In particular: 1. We must be sure to let each time have his allowance that
concerns that day, and that time; says Christ, Mat. 6.34. Take no thought for
to morrow, for sufficient to the day is the evil thereof. Every day brings
evil enough with it, there are sins, failings, and imperfections enough this
day, therefore no need to take care for a second or third day, it is
seasonable therefore to set our thoughts upon our present condition, for as
sufficient to the day is the evil thereof, so sufficient to the day are the
duties thereof, that daily task that God has set us, may be sufficient to
take up our whole thoughts; we are every day to beg our daily bread, to sue out
the pardon of our sins, to make our peace with God, we know not whether we
shall live till the morrow, therefore we ought daily to discharge those duties
that are suited to the present day.

Secondly, that time is most seasonable for the discharge of our duties, when
we find our bodies, and Spirits best disposed for such services: we should
strike while the iron is hot, fashion the vessel while the clay is soft, so we
should set upon duties when we are in full strength, and activity of spirit: It
is not seasonable for a man to go to pray when almost asleep, or when in bed,
but when his spirit is awake, active and stirring. For a man to put off his
repentance and making his peace with God, till he is old, and weak both in
body and spirit, and then think of serving of the Lord, when he can serve the
devil no longer, this is not seasonable, what man would accept of such
service? This is just as if a young man that is in his prime strength, should
say here is such a burden that I must carry upon pain of death before I dye, I
will let it alone until I am old and weak, and then I will carry it; Does not
this man lose his season? As Watermen take the advantage of the tide, so
should we learn to take the advantage of our natures. The Holy Ghost gives
this charge Honor the Lord with the first fruits of thine increase, Pro. 9.10.
and to such he annexeth this promise, So shall thy barnes be filled with
plenty. And in the old Law the Lord required the first that opened the womb;
that also is here considerable, Malac. 1.13.14. The Priests and the people were
weary of serving the Lord, and regarded not what sacrifices they offered up
unto him, therefore says the Lord, Cursed be the deceiver, that has in his
flock a male, (that is ability to serve the Lord according to his word and
sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing, that is, serves the Lord according
to his covetous mind.

Thirdly, that our duties may be seasonable, we should so discharge them, that
one may be helpful and not hindering unto others, and we should learn so to
forecast the businesses of our outward calling, that we might lose no
opportunities for our souls advantage; Further we must so discharge our
duties, that any particular may not cross the general, as we must not take up
so much time in our own businesses, as to deprive ourselves of time, and
strength, for the duties of Gods worship; So, neither must we so spend our
strength in one duty, as thereby to make us unfit for others, for though we
have time for duties, yet if we want strength, and spirit, it cannot be
seasonable.

Now for Duties occasional, therein we must observe two rules.

First, if it be such an occasional duty, as may be omitted without prejudice
to any, and if discharged an opportunity for the doing of another good would be
neglected, then a man may pass it by: But if a duty comes in a man's way
that requires present discharge, and if neglected, cannot be recalled nor
recovered, when as the duty of his common course may be regained again, if it
be for the present passed by, now this is a season for an occasional duty; as
for instance, it is a man's duty daily to pray in his family, now if a
necessary occasional duty be cast in, which cannot be discharged afterward,
a man must omit prayer for the present, and discharge that other duty: In many
cases God will have mercy, and not sacrifice, if our Neighbors house be on
fire, and we have our duty to perform, we must for the present pass by our
duty, and help our neighbor, and our Savior shows that it is lawful for a
man to pull his Ox, Mat. 12.11.
or his Ass out of the pit upon the Sabbath day, in such cases God will have
mercy, and not sacrifice.

taken up, and performed?

Look which duty is most excellent and necessary, take up that and let the
other pass, and herein know that duties of the first table, are to be
discharged before duties of the second, we must serve God before men, that duty
which is highest in place, and worth, must first be discharged, this is
seasonable.

How can a man know the pre-eminence of any duty? Que. 3.


That which concerns Gods Glory is to be preferred before that which concerns
a man's self, Ans.
that which is for my good must give place to that which is for Gods Glory, for
we must have an eye more to Gods glory, then to the Salvation of our souls, in
all the duties that we perform.

Secondly, for those duties that concern our neighbor, though I must do
nothing to others, that I would not have done to my self, yet I must learn to
do good to my self in the first place, if the duties that are to be
discharged in reference to others be of the same rank and quality, with those
that concern my self, then I must prefer my own occasions before another
man's, my goods before his, my body before his, my life before his, serve my
self in the first place, and my neighbor in the second, but I must not
prefer my body before his soul, my temporalls before his spiritualls, nor my
goods before his life. If we take such like directions as these, then our
duties will be seasonable, and so acceptable with the Lord.

Prove. 25.11. A word spoken in season is like apples of Gold in pictures of
Silver. If a man strike while the mettell is hot, glorious forms may be
effected; So in the work of grace, if a man take the opportunity while the
wind is blowing, the word preaching, the Spirit lifting, and stirring in the
Soul, then a glorious work, a new creation may be wrought, but if men delay
until their eyes be dime, their limbs feeble, their strength spent, their
spirits weak, and corruption strong and fast rooted in the Soul, this seldom
proves a season for the doing of such a Soul good, for if conscience now
comes to be awakened, and the sinful Soul to see, what opportunities God
has vouchsafed it, what profers he has made, what seasons for the doing, and
receiving of good have been afforded: all which he has abused and trifled
away, and the Soul now fearing that it shall never have such seasons more, but
that the day of grace shall set upon it, hereupon it is driven to despair.

in its season, and that work goes on the best that is undertaken in a
fitting time, therefore the Preacher, Eccle. 12.1. calls upon men to remember
their Creator in the days of their youth, whilst the evil days come not,
nor the years approach wherein thou shall say I have no pleasure; For old days
are likely to be evil days, unless we make our peace with God in our young
days for that is the season that God looks for, and calls for, that men
should remember him in, and God seldom gives the grace of repentance to men
in their declining years, who have despised it in the days of their youth. A
thing out of season is like physic brought to a dead man, which if it had bin
seasonably applied, might have done him good: Be wise to take every opportunity
to do good to others, and to receive good for your own souls, least ye
repent with a sad heart, when it is too late, when ye have lost the season of
grace and mercy; consider what the Lord says, Prove. 1. 28, 29. They shall
call upon me but I will not answer, they shall seek me early, but they shall
not find me, because they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the
Lord, they would none of my council, but despised my correction, therefore
shall they eat of the fruit of their own doings, and be filled with their
own devises.

Is it so that the Saints of God ought to do their duties in season, Use 1.
then let this be for trial to every one of our souls, and let us examine our
selves whether we have seasonably discharged those duties that the Lord
requires of us both in our general, and particular Callings, and be humbled
if we find our selves blame worthy. If we do consider our ways, and look
back upon our former carriages, and veiw over the whole course of our lives, I
doubt that the best of us shall find, that many opportunities, many blessed
seasons, for the hoarding up of comfortable provision against the evil day
have bin neglected, how often has this gracious Proclimation from heaven
sounded in the ears of us notorious Rebels, that whatever our sins have bin,
for the nature, for the number of them, yet if we would but come under the
garment of Christ and stoopeto that Royal Scepter of Christ, and accept of the
promise of life in Jesus Christ, we should be saved by Christ, yet how many of
us have refused these glorious profers of grace, and unspeakable loving kindness
offered to our souls. How many Markets for the buying of Spiritual food has
the Lord vouchsafed unto us, and yet still we have come empty away. Let us now
look back and confider, how many Sermons we have heard, how many times we have
received the Sacrament, and there renewed our covenants with the Lord, how many
motions Gods Spirit has made at our hearts to repent, and return, when we
have bin hearing of the word, and likewise in our private meditation, saying
unto our souls why will ye dye; yet (sinful wretches that we are) have we not
flighted these motious, and cast them behind our backs, as though they did not
concern us? let us now look back upon all slightings of grace, and mercy
offered unto us, and say with Pharaohs Butler, Genesis 41.5.
I will call to remembrance my faults this day, and let our souls be deeply
humbled under the remembrance thereof before the Lord.

holy conversation. watching all seasons, and readily embracing all
opportunities, as he ought to do, that so whatsoever he does may rend to Gods
glory, and to the good of his Church and people.

from us, or we from them, and when the door is once shut, though with the
foolish virgins we may knock, yet it shlal not be opened unto us: and for our
help herein we should remember the former directions, and likewise learn so
to order, and overlooke all our businesses, that we may be able to allot to
every employment a proportionable time, and we must always take especial care
that our duty to our neighbor never justly out that homage and service that we
owe unto our God, we must therefore never over-charge our spirits with
multiplicitie of worldly businesses, but keep our souls in such a frame, that
we may be able when ever we go to converse with God, in nny holy ordinance, to
set aside all worldly occassions, that neither our hearts, nor our thoughts,
may run out upon them.

David, Psalm. 119. 148. Mine eyes prevent the night-watches, to meditate in thy
word. He was more earnest in the Study of Gods word, then they that kept the
Watch were in their Charge, and Psalm. 63.6. When I remember thee on my bed,
and meditate on thee in the night-watches: He got up before his Nobles when
others were asleep, he was awake, so that he had performed his duty to God,
before any State matters were brought before him, before his thoughts were
scattered upon the Affairs of his Kingdom, he is a good President in this for
all of us to imitate.

Lastly, we should learn how to cut off all unnessary expense of time; if it be
sinful to spend that time which should be for spiritual employment, in
worldly businesses, which in themselves are lawful, if seasonable discarged,
how much more sinful is it to spend it in sinful sports, and pleasures; we
should therefore learn how. to redeem the time out of the hands of our lusts
and corruptions, which have too long employed many precious hours, and
glorious opportunities in such services, as do directly tend to the eternal
ruin of our immortal souls, even now whilst it is called to day, least the
Lord swear in his wrath that our souls shall never enter into his rest.

FINIS.

