THE DECLARATION Of Captain HOTHAM Sent to the Parliament, wherein he shows
the Reasons of his marching into the County of York, with some troops of Horse
and Foot, as also why he consented not to the treaty of Peace agreed upon by
some of the Gentlemen of that County.

Imprimatur, H. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Best, October 11. 1642.

The Declaration of Captain Hotham, sent to the Parliament, wherein he shows
the Reasons of his marching into the County of York, with some Troops of Horse,
etc.
WHereas diverse ill-affected Persons seeking the ruin of Religion and the
public liberty have procured illegal Commissions to be issued out unto them
thereby to get a color to deceive those that naturally sift not into the
bottom of their pretenses and to perfect their De. designs, have by fear and
terror caused diverse persons to send in their arms and horses for them to make
use of. And whosoever refused to second them in their violent courses, they
have of some seized their persons, and of others plundered their houses, as of
Master Carter the Minister, Thomas Lake of ( Castleford, and diverse others
during the Treaty, and M. Nevill has made Proclamation in Wakefield, that
whomsoever shall not assist them, themselves, wives and children shall be
seized on, and their houses razed to the ground To prevent these mighty
violencies, and to give a stop to these miseries, that the Subjects every where
groaned under, I was forced to make use of that power and authority the
Parliament the great Protector of the Oppressed) had put into my hands, to
march into this County with some troops of Horse and Foot, and to give a
breathing to these Oppressions. In pursuance of which, contrary to my Order,
and express Command, the unruly soldiers have committed some misdemeanors,
for which there have bin diverse punished, and all care shall hereafter be taken
to keep them in order and obedience. And my not observing the last
pacification, I expressly declared, that I could never give my consent to
anything, wherein the Parliament advise and consent was not first asked,
neither do I conceive it to be by any general consent seeing there was six
for the West Riding, and (...) for the North and East. And that all liberty is
given to transport the Ordnance now in this County to the King, to the great
dis-service of the Parliament, and an association to 07 obey neither as if the
County were independent to the King, Parliament, or the rest of the Kingdom.

And I do here profess, I have no other end in this business, but to give
assistance to those that are by violence oppressed, for doing their duties in
performing the commands of the Parliament, and bringing to punishment those
that have been the causers of all these unhappy breaches betwixt the King and
his people, and have been so declared by Parliament. For the effecting of
which I doubt not of the assistance of all those that are sensible what it is
to have neither Religion or Liberty, but at other men's pleasures. This I
thought fit to testify to the World, that men may be no more deluded with
specious pretenses. And this is all that I aim at, and therefore have sent
abroad this Declaration, attested under my hand.

John Hotham.
Cawood 6. October. 1642.

