SALVATION FROM SIN BY JESUS CHRIST: OR, The Doctrine of SANCTIFICATION
[which is the greater part of our SALVATION] founded upon CHRIST, who is both
the Meritorious, and Efficient cause of Sanctifying Grace, purchasing it for,
working and perfecting it in his people.

Applied (as it was specially intended) for the better information of our
Judgments, and quickening of our Affections in holiness, wherein our
everlasting happiness chiefly consists.

Preached in the weekly Lecture at Evesham in the County of Worcester,

By GEORGE HOPKINS, M. A. Minister of the Gospel there.

JOHN 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Nathanael Web, and William Gran^ham, at the black
Bear in Paul's Churchyard, near the little North door, 1655.

To the people of my special charge in the Borough of Evesham, Both
Magistrates and others.
Dearly Beloved,
I Know not to whom I may better dedicate this little Treatise, than to your
selves, to whom I have dedicated my self, under Christ, in the work of the
Gospel, from my first beginning to be a constant Preacher of the Gospel. And I
have accounted it my privilege to succeed such faithful Ministers, who, for
many years, continually instructed you in the ways of holiness. The first of
them was Doctor Baily, who preached unto some of you, yet living, the Practice
of Piety, which he after published. And, during the time of my continuance
among you, I have not ceased to preach (according to my talents) the Doctrine
which is according to godliness. As Paul required Timothy to charge some, that
they preach no other Doctrine; So I charge you (as having received the charge
of you) that ye receive none other Doctrine, than what is according to
godliness. Be not hasty to hear such, as bring contrary Doctrine: run not
with men of itching ears, after such as are admired for teaching mere Novelty:
Wandering stars (to which such teachers are compared in Scripture) sparkle
more than the fixed stars of greatest magnitude. And one Comet, or Blazing
star (though it portend mischief) is more wondered at, than all the Stars of
Heaven, yea, than the Sun in the firmament. But be you careful, with the wise
men, to follow such stars, whose motion tends to the place where your Savior
is. And although you find him here, not clad in soft raiment, nor decked with
tapestry, but, as in his infancy, laid in straw; yet think not much to bow down
and worship him, and offer your gifts, your whole selves, spirit, soul and
body, (of far greater value than gold, frankincense, and myrrh) as due to him,
who offered his soul a sacrifice for you.

Beware of being entangled with the profits and pleasures of the world, which
(as I have lately showed you) are the two great bars that hinder souls from
coming to Christ. Think it not much to attend once in a week upon a Lecture
sermon. Those that will not leave their ordinary worldly business to attend
upon the Word of Christ for one hour, when they may return to it again, will be
loath to forsake all to follow Christ, if they should be called to it: and
without this you cannot be his true Disciples. Oh be not like the murmuring
Israelites, that despised the heavenly Manna, because it fell daily at their
tent doors, and lusted after flesh. Be not like the multitude of unthankful
poor, that wax wanton in this time of plenty: Lest the Lord, by sending among
you a famine of hearing the Word, cause it to become precious. But while you
have the Ordinances of grace, wait diligently upon Christ who is the fountain
of grace) in them: Pray, and labor for sanctified hearts, and lives,
considering that Holiness is your real Happiness (as I have more largely
taught you in these following Sermons.)

Never fear that my pressing you, or your pressing on to holiness, or good
works, will in the least derogate from the freeness of Gods grace: for they
are not your own work but Gods work in you, and by you: neither by them do you
add any thing to God, but God to you: you do not increase his glory, but he
augments your happiness; so that what good you do (being done in the strength
of his grace, and tending to the perfection of your own souls, makes no
Recompense to God, but makes you the greater Debtors to him. The more holy, and
abundant you are in good works, the more you have received from God, and the
more you owe to God. And you have no more cause to glory in your selves, for
what good you do, than to glory in your selves for the free pardon and
remission of your sins.

These Sermons were not preached, neither are they now published without my
unfeigned prayers to God for a blessing upon them to your souls. As I have
been at the pains to compose, prea^h, and publish them, (in which I have found
Gods assistance and direction) for your sakes; so be you at the pains to read
them carefully, and practice them diligently: which, that you may be enabled to
do, pray earnestly, that so glory may redound to God, advantage to your own
souls, and comfort to

Your unworthy, but faithful Minister of Christ, Geo: Hopkins.

Holiness being the very Image of God upon the soul, and the blessed
perfection in which we were Created, to the reparation whereof we are Redeemed
by Christ, renewed by the holy Ghost, conducted by the Word, and furthered by
all Gods Ordinances, and in which so much of our everlasting Blessedness will
consist; It is no wonder if it have many Adversaries in the world; and if
Satan, and all ungodly men, do employ their wit and power to extinguish it;
subtle Heretics secretly undermine it, and bring in Doctrines, which if
practically entertained, would destroy it: The Libertines more plainly slight
and contemn it, and the profane do openly deride and persecute it. No man but
the Son has seen God at any time, but in the glass of his Word and Works must
we here behold him: One of these Glasses is the Church, and its sanctified
Members: here do the wicked see the holiness of God and hate it; here do the
just behold the holiness of God and love it: It is as neglecters, and
despisers of Christ in his holy ones, that the wicked are condemned, and as
lovers of Christ in his holy ones, that the righteous are rewarded in the
judgment that is before us, Mat. 25. All Doctrines and Practices therefore
that derogate from Sanctification, do tend to Damnation, and are enmity against
God. The usual ways by which the Deceiver and his Instruments attempt this
work, are these four: 1. By denying the necessity and true ends and uses of
holiness, and persuading men that it is necessary, no otherwise than as an
evidence of some better thing, or as a point of gratitude only for salvation
received: when as it is part of our salvation it self, and a necessary means
to the rest, which yet remains. 2. By setting Justification and
Sanctification in opposition, as means of pleasing God, and saying, It is not
This, but That, when it is, indeed, both This and That, and both are links of
the same Golden chain, inseparably conjunct. 3. By pretending an humble
abasing of man, as if we must disesteem Sanctification, because it is in our
selves, and the works of it done by our selves: But indeed it is our selves
that Christ means to cure; in our selves he dwells by faith; our selves are
the habitation and temples of his Spirit, and it is our selves whom he will
perfect in Glory for ever, and our selves by whom he will be praised and
honored. Is grace the less grace, because it is in, or upon our selves? If
God had thought that all the goodness that is in any besides himself, or all
the good that is done by any other, had been derogatory to his glory, he would
never have made any creature, nor made use of any; or else he would not have
made them good. Is the goodness of a Watch a dishonor to the Watchmaker? or
the beauty of a House dishonorable to the Builder? Will God bring men to
Heaven, and to perfection of Holiness, at so dear a rate, that we may then
dishonor him, by being personally perfect? They that digest this unhappy
doctrine, are unlikely to give God the glory of his works, and particularly of
this excellent part of his grace. 4. Another engine to destroy Sanctification,
concurrent with the former, is the pretended advancing of Christ and
Free Grace; as if Christ, within us, were no Christ, and Sanctfication were no
part of Free Grace: Or as if to deny Christ our love and obedience were to
advance and honor him? Or to Love and Praise and obey him, were to dishonor
him. The vanity of these delusory conceits, is by Reverend and dear Brother,
plainly, judieiously and solidly discovered in this following Treatise, neither
clouding the free Remission of sins, by extolling mortification, and holy
living, as the Papists; nor laying our recovery wholly in relative changes, and
all our righteousness in mere reputation, as the Libertines do, seeing it is
by the right apprehensions and considerations of the Understanding, that the
Will must be rectified, and the Affections elevated; and sound Doctrine is the
means to sound Apprehensions: I may groundedly persuade thee, Reader, that by
a diligent and faithful perusal of this Treatise, thou art likely to receive
an addition to thy Sanctification, while thou shall read and consider of its
Excellency and Necessity; and to be more freed from sin, while thou considerest
the Desirablenesse, and the way of that Freedom. Read, therefore, and
consider, and the Lord give his blessing. So prays

London, December. 21. 1654. An unworthy Servant of Christ, for the promoting of
the Faith and Holiness of his Chosen, Rich: Baxter.

The AUTHOR to the READER.
Christian Reader,
IT is generally and truly observed, That Civil wars are far worse than with
a Foreign nation: for they are more violent, and more destructive; which
party soever prevails the Public is a loser, and such victories leave small
cause for triumph. Sad experience in this nation tells us, that there have been
more desperate military engagements in those few years of our late wars,
than have been in twice the time between other warring nations. And how
destructive they have been both to persons and estates, the sensible Country
will pathetically tell any man, if he need information. Oh how many gallant
English Champions slain! how many fair Buildings burnt pulled down, and vast
Estates ruined! And where is the man almost (if he had an estate before) that
is not a great loser? But there is another Civil War that is yet remaining,
of more dangerous consequence (although the multitude are not as sensible of
it, as of the former) and that is the discord, that is even among brethren in
spiritual matters, who yet agree in the fundamentals of the Faith. This War,
as it has the like violence, so is it more destructive in the Church, than
that has been in the Commonwealth. How many poor souls have been destroyed,
and Churches ruined! and what Christian almost (if he will but faithfully cast
up his account) but has been a great loser by it in his spiritual estate! How
sad is it to see Protestants, not only of the same Nation, but of former
intimate and indeared acquaintance, write more bitterly one against another,
than an ingenious Protestant would do against a Papist! He that does but read
our modern English controversies, will find among many of them (I dare not say
all) such personal aspersions and reflections, criminations and recriminations,
false charges, and foul mis-interpreting of one another writings, that a
third person, who expects to read somewhat of the Question controverted, finds
so much written adhominem, that there is but little ad rem I am sorry to see
how much gall many godly men put in their ink. A man would be also ashamed to
see, how some that oppose other men's writings, do so far wrest their words
from their meanings; yea, go so far wide both of words and meanings, that it
must be either through notorious wilfulness, or ignorance, that they so
misreport them; if through wilfulness, how great is their sin! if through
ignorance, how unfit are they to write Controversies! How sad is it, that some
of good abilities, spend most of their time, they can well spare (and more too)
from their necessary work of the Ministry, in studying, and writing some small
Controversy (in comparison of many more weighty Truths) and thus employ their
talents for many years, in the best of their age, in which time they might
have done the Church of God good service, by some more profitable Tractates.
Had they bent that force against the Kingdom of Satan, and Antichrist, which
they have done against their Brethren, to the rending of the Church; their
labor had been worth the owning, which now grieves them, because they see it
so much slighted. Well may I say in this, what was ill spoken in another case,
Quorsum perditio haec? Why is this wast? Wast of time, wast of taelent, to the
wasting of each others reputations; yea to the wasting (I fear) of most preious
grace in the Antagonists themselves, and which is worst of all, to the wasting
of the Church. Our Savior tells us, A Kingdom divided cannot stand. And, had
not our late Wars (through Gods mercy) soon ended, we should have seen (those
of us that had survived) the saying sadly fulfilled in our selves. But how
doleful a sight is it to see the Visible Kingdom of Christ himself, in this
Nation, so miserably divided: and though the war of Field, and Garrison, be
ended; yet the war of Press, and Pulpit, is as hot as ever. Alas! that in this
sense we so truly deserve to be called the Church Militant! And I have little
hopes to see it ended whilst I live. And if it proceed as hotly, and
destructively, as it has done hitherto (which we have reason to fear) judge
what Church-desolation is like to be before this age be expired. This sore evil
is both our great sin, and heavy judgment. And for thi^, and by this, justly
may the Kingdom of God be taken from us, and given to a Nation bringing forth
the fruits thereof. O that God would both pardon, and remove this devouring
evil, and create peace in the hearts, and Churches of his Saints! Then should I
hope to see holiness in a thriving condition; in the midst of contention it
must needs be languishing. For where envying and strife is, there is confusion,
and every evil work, Jam. 3.16. And it is not without cause, that peace and
holiness are linked together, Heb. 12.14.

Reader, thou will find in this small piece little of Controversy; but
something of the mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16.
which (I hope) is without Controversy with thee. The Antinomian and Libertine
(which are scarcely two, but rather one) are the chiefest Adversaries that I
oppose, which every Minister of the Gospel must do, that will preach practical
Divinity. Yea, which every man must really confute, that will be a serious
Christian: and if thou art such a one thy self (though but of small gifts) it
is probable thou have (besides thy Bible) diverse better Treatises than this,
written by some such men, as Preston, Sibbs, Bolton, Ball, etc. which I shall
not desire thee to lay aside, for the reading of this. But if thou have spare
time to read variety, thou had better read this, than many of the swarming
Pamphlets, that fly abroad in these times. Thou will find cause enough (I am
confident) to approve the subject, although (if thou art judicious) thou may
have reason to blame me for handling it no better. Here are (I hope) but few
(...) things hard to be understood: for it is my usual course in preaching, to
run (with Ahimaaz) the way of the plain; that so I may the sooner bring good
tidings to the soul. Such as it is, I leave it to thy candid perusal at thy
leisure. It was first preached to the people of my own Charge, and since
published specially for their sakes: And now, that others also may reap some
spiritual advantage by it, is the unfeigned desire, and earnest prayer of

Thy Servant, and Fellow Servants, in the Work of our Lord, Geo: Hopkins.

The Contents.
CHAP. I.
WHy fallen Angels are left to perish, and Man redeemed, p. 1 The Analysis of
the chap. Mat. 1. and Explication of the Text, ver. 21. p 4 Doct. The great
work of Christ our Savior is the saving of his people from their sins, even
from sin it self, p. 7 Explained in 5. Propositions, p. 8 Proved by Scripture,
p. 9
Four Arguments confirming the Doct. 1. Hereby God is most honored, p. 10 2.
Hereby Man is delivered from the greatest Evil. Sin proved to be so, p. 12 3.
Hereby Man is restored to the chiefest good, that he is capable of. Holiness
proved to be so, p. 15 4. Arguments drawn from the current of Scripture, which
treats most of the Doctrine of Sanctification, p. 25 Obj. from Gal. 3.13. and
Luke 1.71, 72. answered. p. 27

CHAP. II. How Christ saves his people from their Sins.
I. As the Meritorious cause purchasing Sanctification for them, p. 29 II. As
the Efficient cause working sanctifying Grace in them. He is 1. The Procreating
cause, p. 34 Obj. The Holy Ghost is in a special manner called our Sanctifier.
Answered. p. 37 2. The Conserving cause, p. 40 3. The Perfecting cause, working
perfection of Grace in his people. 1. Comparative. 2. Absolute, p. 44 Qu. Why
are we not perfectly sanctified at our first Conversion, Answered, p. 49 The
Isntrumental causes of our Sanctification. 1. Whereby Grace is first wrought,
p. 51 2. Whereby it is preserved and increased, p. 55 The subject of this
Salvation, the Elect, by nature children of wrath, p. 57 The power by which
they are saved, is an Almighty power. And why necessary so to be, p, 60 Six
Propositions for the further clearing of it, p. 62 Obj. If man be merely
passive in the work of Conversion, to what purpose should a carnal person use
the means of Grace? Answered, p. 65 Obj. Against outward teaching from Jer.
31.33, 34. and Heb. 8.10, 11. Answered. ibid.

CHAP. III. The Uses of Information.
1. Inf. How from this Doctrine to answer a Popish Argument. 1. Against
Justification by Faith in Christ alone 2. Against Assurance of Salvation, p. 70
2. No wonder if the godly want assurance of their Salvation, when they fall
foully, p. 74 3. We may, and must, avoid evil, and do good to this end, that we
may escape Hell, and obtain Heaven. p. 76 4. Christ has not died, and done
alike for all men, p. 79 5. The difference between saving Faith, and the Faith
of carnal persons, p. 83 6. Those that preach the Doctrine of Sanctification,
as well as Justification, are the best Gospel-preachers, p. 84 7. Those that
have most grace are the best Christians; not they that have the greatest Gifts:
Gifts and Grace compared, p. 93 8. A Soul given up to a state of sin, is in a
most sad condition, worse than those that fall under the worst of Judgments,
p. 101
CHAP. IV. The Uses of Reproof.
I. To such as hinder the salvation of their own souls, p. 105 II. To such as
hinder the salvation of others: 1. Such as teach corrupt Doctrine, p. 110 2.
Such as are enemies to Church-reformation, p. 118 3. Church-dividers, p. 119
Their sin aggravated by eight Considerations, p. 126 The sin not the less,
because many godly persons are guilty of it, p. 132 4. Such as give bad
Example, p. 134 Bad example the more dangerous, 1. In Ministers: 2. In
Magistrates, and other Persons of note: 3. In Superiors of near Relation, as
Parents, Masters: 4. In eminent Professors, p. 135 5. Such as entice, counsel,
or persuade others to sin, p. 143 6. Persecutors, p. 148

CHAP. V. The Uses of Exhortation.
I. In General, To get the heart deeply possessed with a serious consideration
of this Truth, That the great work of Christ our Savior, is the saving of his
people from their sins: The not understanding, or not considering this, is the
cause of diverse evils, p. 153 For the better understanding of this, it is
showed how the Sanctifying work of Christ is specially held forth, as well as
his Justifying work: Of the Old Test. 1. In the Sacraments and Types, p. 159 2.
In the Promises, p 162 3. In the Prophesies, ibid. 4. In the Sacraments of the
New T. p. 164 5. In the Gospel-invitations, and other Scriptures, p. 165
The Exhortation further prosecuted, 173 Obj. Must we be saved by our Graces
and Duties? Answered in seven Propositions, p. 174 II. The Exhortation
Particularly directed, 1. To such as are carnal, p. 177 Obj. A natural man
has not power to convert himself, Answered, p. 178 Carnal Persons left
without excuse; for, 1. God is willing of their salvation, p. 179 2. Christ is
willing of their salvation, p. 179
Five Arguments by way of Expostulation with them, p. 183 The Carnal Plea [I
hope God will give me grace at the last] Answered, p. 189 Close preaching
defended, in answer to the objection of those that call it Legal preaching, p.
192 Ten directions to carnal persons, p. 203 Such ought to pray, p. 211 2d.
Particular Exhortation to such as are spiritual, to labor still after their
Salvation from Sin: Holiness is their real Happiness: The Saints are blessed
in doing, though not for doing the will of God: There is something of
destruction in every sin, p. 215 Ten Directions under this use, p. 222 3. To
such as are doubtful of their Condition, to try by their Sanctification whether
they are in a state of Salvation, p. 230 Five Marks for trial, p. 231 4. To
such as are in a state of Salvation to praise God, p 243 Four Considerations
moving them to thankfulness, ibid. 5. To such, to praise God for being saved
from particular acts of Sin. p. 247 6. To use this as an argument to leave
their sinful condition in the world, p. 252 7. To help on the Salvation of
others by Admonition, etc. p. 257 The indirect courses of many, that would get
loose from this duty, blamed, p. 258 This duty we owe both to the Godly and
Ungodly, p. 262
CHAP. VI. The Use of Consolation.
Comfort to such as are in a state of Salvation: 1. Against the fear of falling
away, p. 267 2. In assurance of full deliverance from Sin at the last, p. 273
CHAP. VII.
A Parallel of the Lords joint carrying on the work of Sanctification and
Justification, from the first to the last, in nine Propositions, with some
Corollaries. p. 277.
READER,
Do thy self and the Author so much right, as to correct these few faults, and
pardon some others of less moment.

ERRATA. PAge 5. l. 15. persons. p. 11. l. 4. not at all. p. 16. l. 20. Heb.
12. p. 18. l. 25. specifically, p. 38. l. 29. (...). p. 64. l. 10. Christ's
work. p. 66. l. 20. inward parts. p. 79. 8, and did, l. 24. has done. p. 91.
l. 15. to thy. p. 94. l. 26. miserable. p. 100. l. 19. mis-imployed. p. 103.
12. seducers. 110. 28. to the commission. p. 128. 21. eos qui in. p. 130. l.
22. blot out so. p. 133. l. 14. wranglings. p. 150. l. 9. strong cities. p.
151. l. 5. the work. l. 11. this wile. p. 158. l. 7. for only r. also. p. 164.
l. 26. for and r. as. p. 165. l. 2. [invitations. p. 169. l. 9. (...). p. 170.
l. 4. blot out up. p. 201. l. 9. formerly. p. 204. l. 19. the cup. p. 215. l.
8. that art. p. 218. l. 30. to his laws. p. 219. l. 9. the assistance. p. 224.
l. 17. heedlesse. p. 226. l. 13. finds thee. p. 263. l. 13. enough. p. 283. l.
6. purposed.

In the Margin. P. 36. (...). p. 45. l. 3. dele (,) p 58. l. 4. didicimus, l.
14. praeventus, l. 20. nivibus. p. 63. l. 24. ipsum. p. 128. schismaticos.

Salvation from SIN BY JESUS CHRIST.
CHAP. I.
MATTHEW. 1.21. -- And thou shall call his name JESUS, for he shall save his
people from their sins.


WHen I first seriously considered that saying of the Apostle concerning
Christ, Heb. 2.16. Supereminet enim omni scicutiae tua inestimabilis charitas,
quam ostendistri in nobis pro sola pictate, and bonitate tua. F^lius namque
tuus, rex noster, nusquam angelos* sed semen Abrabae apprehendit, assimilatus
nobis per omnia absque peccato. Humanam itaque non angelicam suscip^ens
naturam, and eam munere sanctae resurrectionis, and immortalitatis glorificans
vexit super omnes coelos, and super omnes choros angelorum, super Cherubin and
Seraphin collocans ad dextram tuam. Hanc laudant angeli, adorant dominationes,
tremunt potestates coeli, coelorumque virtutes, ac beata Seraphin socia
exultatione concelebrant. Aug. Theol. conf. par. 2. c. 11.
Verily he took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of
Abraham, I could not but much admire the work of God, in leaving Angels (the
best of his creatures) to perish eternally for their Sin: and sending his
only begotten Son to become a Savior for fallen man. It Is true, I have long
since learned, that the Angels fell without a Tempter, and therefore justly
perished without a Savior. But were it not as just with God too, that Man
should perish without remedy for making so much Willet on Genesis 3.23, gives ten
arguments to prove, that Man fell in the day of his creation, and quoteth many
ancient Authors to that purpose. Mr. Walker in his treatise on the Sabbath,
argues much for it. And it is generally concluded, that Man fell soon after his
creation.
have to obey the Tempter against so reasonable, easy, and express a Command
of God his Maker? If it be said, that only some of the Angels fell from God,
and all mankind was lost in Adam, and God therefore saves a remnant of Adams
posterity, that he might have of both sorts, to wit, Angels and Men, eternally
to serve and praise him; It may be answered, that God did so is true, but, that
therefore he did so is not manifest. To which may be further added, that Angels
being more excellent, capable, able, agile creatures, the fallen Angels, being
legions of them, would have been able to do God more service, had they been
restored, than all the generation of mankind. Yea, if God would needs have men
to serve him, he might have created more I may say) at an easier rate Magis
clucebit haec misericordia divina, si quanti Deo constiterit haec secunda
hominis reparatio cogitemus: creavit bominem primo ad imaginem suam voce, and
verbo suo; sed reparavit secunao morte, and senguine suo, Dav. in Col. c. 3.
ver. 10.
, than he redeemed these: But God, whose infinite perfection receives no
augmentation from Men, or Angels; but is above all their service, uses the
mere good pleasure of his will in his dispensations, both of justice and
mercy. He will have mercy, on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will, he
hardens: and in so doing, how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways
past finding out! God deals with Angels, and men, as he did with Esau, and
Jacob; he leaves the elder (by nature, and praerogative the more excellent) and
chooses the younger, that it may appear, that the work depends upon the mere
good pleasure of his will. And all, that we can say in this, is what Christ
himself spoke in another case, Mat. 11.26. Even so Father, for so it seemed
good in thy sight.

Taking this then for the only satisfactory answer, Behold the goodness, and
severity of God: on the Angels, that fell severity, but toward fallen man
goodness, in that he sent his Son, made of a Woman, that so being bone of our
bone, and flesh of our flesh, he might become unto us a meet Savior. And the
verity and mystery of his Incarnation is plainly recorded in this Chapter:

Which divides it self into two general parts, 1. A Genealogy of Christ, from
the beginning of the Chapter, to ver. 18. 2. The History of his Nativity, from
thence to the end of the Chapter.


In which, that I may clear the way to the Text, consider with me these few
particulars:

1. Mary's Conception, [ She was found to be with child, v. 18.]

2. Joseph's false-Conception, or misapprehension concerning it, which made him
afraid to take his espoused wife, and this caused

3. His Resolution [ to put her away privily, ver. 19.] but before the
Execution of his purpose, behold

4. Gods timely prevention [ fear not to take unto thee Mary thy Wife, etc.
ver. 20.] In which yet more particularly consider how God teaches Joseph: 1.
By whom Mary had conceived, viz. By the Holy Ghost. 2. What she should bring
forth, [ She shall bring forth a Son, v. 21.] 3. What he should name him, [thou
shall call his name Jesus.] 4. The reason of the name, [For he shall save his
people from their sins.]


In this work of Salvation, according to the words in the Text: consider 1.
The Efficient Cause, or person saving [Jesus.] 2. The Subject, or person saved,
[his people.] 3. The evil, from which, [from their sins.]


1. The person saving is called (...), from the Hebrew word (...), a Savior,
from the Hebrew root, (...), which signifies, to save. The reason of the name
then, is from the nature of the work he takes in hand.

2. By his people, which are the persons saved, we understand not the nation of
the Jews adaequately, as if they all, and only they were his people here
spoken of. They were indeed his people, 1. by nation and his natural relation,
as man, unto them, himself being of the seed of Abraham, as appears in his
Genealogy.

2. They were his people by outward profession, for they professed faith in,
and waited for the promised Messiah; yea, and to them only was he at first
sent, for says Christ, Mat. 15.24. I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel. But the generality of them did not embrace him; for, when he
came to his own, his own received him not. Joh. 1.11 Therefore by his people,
the nation of the Jews is not here understood.

2. Neither by his people Apostolus ait, Conclusit enim Deus omnes in
infidelitate, ut omnium misereatur. Quos omnes, nifi de quibus lo quebatu^
tanquam dicens. and vos, and illos? Deus ergo and Gentiles and Judaeos, quos
praescivit, and praedestinavit conform, fieri imagini fi^i sui, omnes in
infidelitate conclusit: ut de amartiudine infidelitatis suae paeuitendo
confusi; and ad dulcedinem misericordiae Dei credendo conversi, clamarent illud
in Psalm Quam multa multitudo dulcedinis tuae, Domine, quem abscondisti
timentibus te, perfecisti autem sperantibus non inse, sed in te. Omnium itaque
miseretur vasorum misericordiae Quid est omnium? Et eorum scilicet, quos ex
Gentibus, and ^^um, quos ex Judaeis praedestinavit, vo^avit, juscificavit,
glorificavit, non omnium hominum, sed istorum omnium nominem darenaturus. Aug.
de Civ. Dei, lib. 20 cap. 24. (...), id est, sibi datum a Patre; ut ipse
loquitur, John 17. Periphrasis electorum. Piscat. in loc.
do we understand all Mankind, as some would have it. A^l of all nations are
not his people, but some out of every nation, according to that new song. Rev.
5.9. Thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every
kindred, and tongue, and people and Nation. Yea, the words themselves, [his
people] are restrictive, and intimate (not an extension to all men) but a
limitation to some only.

3. By his people (therefore) we understand those that are his by donation,
those that were given him by the Father, Joh. 6.37. All that the Father gives
me shall come unto me. Thus says the Lord also to Paul concerning Corinth,
Act. 18.10. I have much people in this City.

The evil from which they are saved is their sins, and doubtless from their
sufferings too, but as their sins only are (expressly) mentioned, as that,
from which they should be saved; and this the reason, why Christ should be
named Jesus, so doubtless this is that, that Christ primarily and chiefly
intended to save his people from their sins, even from sin it self, at which I
mainely aim in this Discourse. Whence observe,

That the great work of Christ our Savior is the saving of his people from
their sins. Even from sin it self.

For our more clear proceeding, I shall lay down these following positions;

1. Man is fallen from God, and by nature lies under two great evils, 1. Sin.
2. Wrath for sin.

2. It is the work of Christ, to save his people from both these.

3. Our Salvation by Christ from the wrath of God due for sin, is a mercy, so
far beyond our ability to deserve, or requite, that if we had the tongue of
men and Angels, we could never sufficiently praise God, and Christ our Redeemer
for this unspeakable mercy.

4. Yet the work of our Salvation from Sin it self is a greater mercy to us,
and this is the Masterpiece of what Christ our Savior has undertaken for us.

5. By Salvation from sin I do not understand a bare removal of corrupt
qualities, but a procuring, and bestowing of good instead thereof: for we are
redeemed, as we are called, from uncleanness to holiness. And the privation of
moral good in man is a sin, as well as the position of moral evil, and in
this latitude the Apostle defines sin in that one word (...), the transgression
of the Law, 1 Job. 3.4. Which consists both in Affirmative and Negative
precepts, and the not being, and doing, what is commanded is a transgression,
as well, as being, and doing, what is forbidden.

The Doctrine being thus stated, I proceed to the proof of it, 1. by Scripture,
2. by Argument.

There are diverse Scriptures that speak to our purpose, amongst many take these
few. First, hear what Christ's harbinger speaks, yea, see how he points him
out, Joh. 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the World.
And John says, that he was manifested to take away our sins, 1. Joh. 3.5. And
the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. that he loved
and washed us from our sins in his own blood. Rev. 1.5. In all these texts we
see, that sin only is expressed, and I believe that, which is specially
intended, although I know, that the guilt and fruit of sin is also included.

Thus Paul tells us, that Christ loved his Church and gave himself for it,
that he might sanctify, and cleanse it, Ephesians. 5.25.26. thus likewise in his
Epistle to Titus c. 2. pressing the duties of several ages, sexes and orders
of people to ver. 11 uses this with other weighty arguments, that Christ gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto
himself, a peculiar people zealous of good works, ver. 14.

Thus also Peter, exhorting the elect to be active in the ways of holiness,
not fashioning themselves to their former lusts, 1. Pet 1. from ver. 10. to v.
18. uses this, as a most forcible argument (among others) ye know, that ye
were not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver, and Gold, from your vain
conversation, received by tradition from your Fathers: but with the precious
blood of Christ.

Joh. 17.4.

That God is most glorified in the saving his people from their sins is
manifest by its contrary, God is most (yea only) dishonored by the sins,
and not all by the sufferings As a cause, or occasion given of his dishonor:
although the wicked take occasion to blaspheme God when his people are brought
low, Psalm. 79.10, 12.
of his people. Gods people by their holiness glorify him, and he is much
honored in the midst of their sufferings, whereas Sin dishonours him in the
midst of ease and abundance of mercies: Gods honor Will well agree with the
sufferings of his people; but Sin is directly injurious to his glory (though by
accident he gets himself glory by it, as he at first produced light out of
darkness.) Thus God is much honored by the great sufferings of Job, while he
sins not. Job 1.20, 21. yea, God is so much honored, that he makes his
boast against Satan of his Servant Job, cap. 2, 3. And the Lord said unto
Satan, have thou considered my Servant Job, that there is none like him in the
Earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that fears God, and escheweth evil;
and still he holds fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against him
to destroy him without cause? And on the contrary, how much is God dishonored
by our sinful ease, and prosperity; yea, most dishonored by it in those that
are redeemed from the guilt, and punishment of sin. The gross miscarriages
of Gods people, give occasion to the Enemies of God to blaspheme his name, and
ways. Thus when David had foulely offended, says the Lord by his Prophet,
Thou have given great occasion to the Enemies of the Lord to blaspheme. 2 Samuel
12.14. The crimes of Professors are ever the most scandalous; yea, the sins of
Gods dearest children, are most offensive to God himself, because they are
also committed against the greatest mercy, and loving kindness. The Lord in
this case is ready to say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 55.12. It was not mine Enemy
that reproached me, then I could have born it. But when a Sinner is saved from
his sins, God is much honored both before Angels and Men.

sin above suffering. That must needs be the greatest work in our Salvation,
whereby we are saved from the greatest evil, but sin It is better for a man to
be cast into the torments of Hell among the Damned, than to be overcome with
any Sin. Hookers Souls Prepar. page 16. See Master Buroughs his Treatise of
the Evil of Evils.
is the greatest evil, and therefore our Salvation from it must needs be
answerable. That sin is the greatest evil is evident, for many reasons. 1. It
is the procuring cause of all other evils, and therefore must needs it self be
the worst of evils. The cause is ever more eminent than its effect, whether
for good, or evil, a good cause is better than its effect, and an evil cause
is worse. That sin is the only procuring cause of all evils, is without
controversy; for as sin entered in the world, death entered by sin, and death
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned, Romans 5 12. And the wages of sin
is death, says Paul, Romans 6.23. Death temporal, with all the evils of life,
as sickness, wounds sorrows, and whatsoever else tends to Death; and Death
eternal. All the horror of hell is the fruit of sin; the foundations of Hell
are laid upon sin: Hell the (worst of torments) was built merely for sinners,
therefore sin must be the worst of evils. And, because that sin is the Souls
greatest evil and unhappiness, it is, that when God comes to deliver a Soul
(out of mere pity, and bowels of compassion) his Eye chiefly pities them, and
his Bowels yerne over them, because of their misery in sin it self, as you
may read at large, Ezekiel. 16. the former part of the Chapter. And the saving
mercy that he shows his love in, is opposed to hardening in sin, rather than
damning for sin, Romans 9.18. He will have mercy on whom he will have mercy,
and whom he will he hardneth. And the punishment of sin with sin, we account
the greatest judgment.

2. Sin is Man's greatest evil, because it hinders him from the enjoyment of
the greatest good, which is God himself. It is sin only, that separates
between God and the Soul, this is the only partition wall. Isa. 59.2. Your
iniquities have separated between you, and your God, and your sins have hid
his face from you.

3. Sin is the greatest evil, because of all things it is most displeasing
to God (the chiefest good) yea, there is nothing displeasing to God but sin,
(primarily) and this is an abomination to him, and therefore, Sins are called
in Scripture abominations. Ezekiel. 9.4. And the Lord said unto him, go through
the midst of the City, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the
foreheads of the men, that sigh, and that cry for all the Abominations that be
done in the midst thereof. Prove. 15.9. The way of ths wicked is an Abomination
unto the Lord. And God does so loath sinners for their sin, that he will not
abide them in his sight. The foolish shall not stand in thy sight, thou hate
all workers of iniquity, says David, Psalm. 5.5. But the evil of suffering is
not at all (in it self) displeasing unto God. Yea, he himself who is
infinitely good, is the Author of it; and there is no evil of suffering, but
what comes from him, as the principal efficient. Can there be evil in the
City, and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3.6.

As by being saved from sin, See Master Baxters Saints Rest, part. 1. cap. 4.
sect. 4. By Reason man excels beasts, by Holiness, he excels himself,
inferior only to the Angels in Degree, and made like unto the Lord, as far as
a Creature may be to his Creator, Ball of Faith, page 285.
, the image of God, and the enjoyment of him, is Man's greatest good; yea, what
greater good is any creature capable of, than to be brought into conformity to
God, and the fruition of him to all eternity? Now, righteousness and holiness
are Gods Image, and therefore the new man is said to be created, (...), after
God, that is, after the Image of God, in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians.
4.2. And the new man is expressly said to be renewed in knowledge (which we must
understand of sanctified knowledge) after the Image of him that created him,
Col. 3.10. And by this we are made capable of the eternal inheritance of the
Saints in life. Col. 1.12. Giving thanks unto the Father, which has made us
meet Haec autem aptitudo, vel novae dignitatis conditto, ut in nobis
inveniatur, duo prae^upponit ex part Dei; potentem operationem, misericordem
acceptationem. Operatione en^m. and acceptatione divina ^oonei constituimur ad
participandam sortem sanctorum. O^ divina necessaria est, quia mutari nos
oporre^, and navas (...) efficip^ius quam participes esse p^ssumus coelestium
benefi^^^um Nam in nobis nihil est aliud, quam summa in^ptitudo ^^^num
spirituale sive intelligendum, sive faciendum, sive denique ^^^um. Dav. in loc.
to be partakers of the inheritance with the Saints in light. This meetnesse
requires a twofold work of God, 1. His gracious acceptance of us. 2. His
powerful operation of a work of grace in us, for we must be changed and made
new Creatures, before we can be partakers of the heavenly blessings. Blessed
are the pure in heart (says our Savior Christ, Mat. 5.8.) for they shall see
God; Nega^ quenquam posse, Deum videre fine sanctimonia; quoniam non aliis
oculis videbimus Deum, quam qui reformati fuerint ad ejus imaginem. Calv. in
loc.
And without holiness no man shall see God, To. 12.14. Sanctification makes us
capable of the vision of God, not as a mere condition, or passive
qualification, but as the necessary disposition of the Agent, toward its
Object, as the seeing faculty is required to the act of seeing, as well as a
visible object.

Joseph said unto his Brethren, Ye shall not see my face, except your younger
Brother be with you. Benjamines being with them, was nothing to their natural
faculty of seeing, they had eyes sufficient to look Joseph in the face, if they
might have been admitted into his presence without Benjamines being there, and
therefore his company was a mere condition. But when the Psalmist says, Psalm.
119.18. Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy Law,
we take this to be his meaning, that, unless the blind eye of our
understanding be illuminated, we can discern no more in spiritual, than the
man born blind could of natural things, till Christ had opened his eyes: For
the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, neither can he
know them, because they are spiritually discerned. Thus without holiness no
man shall, because without it no man can see Ita Deus nobis erit notus, and
conspi^uus, ut videatur spiritu a singulis nobis, in singulis nobis. Aug. de
Civ. Dei. l. 22. c. 29.
God. For by the Sanctification of the understanding, the Soul is enabled to
behold him, and the sanctified will, and affections only are able to enjoy
him: and were an unsanctified soul in Heaven, it could enjoy nothing at all of
the glory of the Lord.

Yea, if you will but acknowledge, that the great work of Christ in the
Salvation of his people consists in his bringing them to glory (which none
that is a Christian can deny) our argument will be strong enough. For what is
grace but the beginning of glory? and what is glory but the perfection of
grace, wherein sin is removed, and complete holiness bestowed upon the Soul?
Our growth from one degree of grace to another, is called our being changed, or
transformed from glory to glory. 2 Cor. 3.18. But we all with open face
beholding, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. Here then grace
is called glory. For grace and glory differ not specifically Magis and minus
non variant spe^iem.
, but gradually; and therefore are the same essentially. Davenant calls Grace,
aetas infantilis gloriae, the infant age of glory. A man is the same person,
when he is grown to full stature, as he was, when he was an infant; consisting
both of the same essential, and integrall parts. But the difference is in
growth: so the glorified in Heaven are the same, that were the sanctified on
Earth; only in this they differ, what was begun here, is absolutely perfect
there: here they were regenerated, John 3.3. 1 Pet. 2.2. Isa. 66.11. Ephesians. 4.13.
and born again, and as newborn babes fed upon the sincere milk of the word,
sucking and being satisfied with the breasts of consolations: but there they
are grown to a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ, and sit down at the marriage supper of the Lamb, continually feasting
themselves in the presence of God.

Because this argument may probably be the most taking with those, that wait,
and rejoice in the hope of glory, I shall insist the more largely upon it, and
more particularly consider, wherein Heavens glory consists. Paul tells us,
Romans 14.17. The Kingdom of God is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the
Holy Ghost. He speaks indeed of the Kingdom of grace, but glory being the same
in kind, we may take a view of it, (as we are able) according to these
particulars.

1. Righteousness, which is the first part of glory mentioned, has different
acceptions, and therefore we must give you a distinction by the way, 1.
Righteousness is sometimes taken in a strict, and narrow sense, and is
distinguished from holiness: holiness being a conformity to the first table
of the Law, and righteousness to the second; holiness having respect to God,
and righteousness to man (immediately) and in this sense we take it in such
texts of Scripture, where holiness and righteousness are both expressed, as
Luke 1.75.

2. Righteousness is sometimes taken more largely, and promiscuously, or
convertibly with holiness. And so where we read of righteousness, or
holiness severally in Scripture, one, and the same thing is usually intended.
And in this latitude, righteousness, or holiness is our conformity to the
whole will of God, here sincerely, hereafter perfectly. That grace and glory in
this agree, I know will be easily granted; but how heavenly peace and joy
should depend upon perfect sanctification (as I conceive it does) may be more
doubted. For the clearing of this (therefore) I shall speak of these two later
the more largely. Peace, which is the second part of glory, is threefold; 1.
with God, 2. with our own Consciences, 3. with Saints and Angels. 1. Peace with
God is twofold, 1. Procured, 2. Continued. 1. Peace with God procured is (I
confess) from a work wrought without us, to wit, the satisfaction of Christ on
our behalf according to what the Law required, and depends upon Gods gracious
acceptance of us in Christ, yet is holiness a necessary condition, or
qualification of the person, that shall enter into peace, as the Prophet
phraseth it, Isa. 57.2. The righteous is taken away from the evil to come, he
shall enter into peace; 1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God?

2. Peace with God continued depends upon a work of Christ within us, to wit,
the work of Sanctification: for (being perfectly Sanctified) in Heaven, we do
the will of God perfectly, and displease him no more; so that the peace
formerly made is no more broken.

2. Peace of Conscience must needs be perfect, when a man comes to be perfectly
holy, and to enjoy perfect peace with God: yea, it were a contradiction to
think otherwise For to have Conscience, accusing for doing well, were a sinful
error of Conscience, and contrary to perfect holiness. Conscience is a Judge,
and to clear the guilty, and condemn the innocent, is an abomination to the
Lord, Prove. 17.15. and how can holiness be perfect, unless Conscience be
perfect also. Does not Conscience belong to the practical understanding? and
if this be perfected, is not the perfection of Conscience included in it? Or if
you will make Conscience to be a distinct faculty of the Soul, it matters not
(in this case) so that we make it any thing belonging to the Soul; for if the
Soul in Heaven be perfectly good; every power and faculty of it must be
perfectly sanctified; amongst which, Conscience will find a place Conscientia
humana est judiciu^ hominis de semetipso, prout subjicitur judicio Dei. Ames.
de Cons. p. 1.
. Conscience (as Doctor Ames defines it) is Man's judgment concerning himself,
as it is subject to the judgment of God. Therefore when God speaks peace,
perfected Conscience (as it is in Heaven) must needs speak so too; and that
Conscience cannot be perfectly good, which is not quietly good.

Some distinguish of four sorts of Consciences:

1. A Conscience good, but not quiet. Such is the Conscience of a child of
Light walking in Darkness. Such was the Conscience sometime of David, and
other of Gods Children.

Secondly, A Conscience quiet, but not good. Such a Conscience, as cries peace,
peace, to the sinner, while he goes on in the stubbornness of his own heart.

3. A Conscience quiet, and good. Such is the Conscience of a Child of God,
when he walks in Gods ways, and in the light of his Countenance.

4. A Conscience neither good nor quiet. Such is the accusing, gnawing
Conscience of a wicked Man: such was the Conscience of Judas, after he had
betrayed Christ.

But after this life, the two first of these will be taken away:

1. For when a man is perfectly sanctified (as he shall be in Heaven) there
will be no room for Conscience to be unquiet, because it will have no matter,
for which to accuse, but will be perfectly quiet, as the state of the Soul is
perfectly good.

2. The Conscience of the damned in Hell, as it is perfectly evil, so it is as
restless and unquiet: the worm as it never dies, so it always works.

3. Perfect peace with Saints and Angels, is but the perfection of the grace of
love mutually exercised.

The third part of Heavens happiness is perfect joy: now joy is an affection
of the Soul, and the Soul being perfectly sanctified in glory, this affection
must be perfected, as well as Love, and the rest of the Affections; which must
all be taken in to make up the perfect sanctification of the Soul. Perfect joy
requires two things to its moral, as well, as its natural perfection.

1. That it be fixed upon God the chiefest good, which is the only
satisfactory object. And our joy here is therefore sinfully imperfect, because
we fix it upon creature comforts, which are not perfect: But God, who is
perfectly good, is to be the only object of our joy, and other things are to
be rejoiced in, only in subordination to him.

2. Perfect joy requires a perfect rejoicing in this perfect object, and in
this life the joy of the Saints, is therefore imperfect, because (though it be
fixed upon God, yet) it is but imperfectly exercised. Thus in both these
respects our joy here is sinfully, as well as naturally defective. But in
Heaven we shall perfectly rejoice in God, our perfect good; and I hope none
will deny, but it is our duty to rejoice in God forever, with the most intense
degree of joy, and it were our sin to do any less. What is this part of our
happiness (then) but a most necessary part of our perfect holiness? And in
all these we see, that perfect Holiness is Heavens happiness.

Another argument proving the great work of Christ our Savior to be the saving
of his people from their sins, Ephesians. 1.13. Col. 3.16.
Therefore this is the great work of Christ, etc. The Gospel is called the
Gospel of our salvation, because it shows us the way of salvation. And it is
called the Word of Christ, not only because it was endited by the Spirit of
Christ; but also because Christ is the subject, whereof Scripture chiefly
treats. Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal
life, and they are they that testify of me, says Christ. Christ is the
subject of Moses writings, and of all the Prophesies of the holy Prophets, and
the New Testament is called the Gospel, or joyful message of Jesus Christ,
because therein is brought unto us news of our salvation by Christ; yea the
will of Christ revealed in his Word, being the instrument, or means of our
salvation must needs concur with Christ the principal Efficient of our
Salvation.

Now Scripture mainly insists upon the doctrine of Sanctification, which is our
salvation from sin, which will easily appear, if we take a general view of
Scriture, thus: Scripture contains 1. Precepts, or Commands. 2. Threatenings. 3.
Promises. 4. Examples.



First, The Precepts of Scripture command Holiness, and teach us how to eschew
evil, and do good.

Secondly, the threats are to deter us from disobedience.

Thirdly, the Promises (most of them) are of the rewards of grace (i. e.)
Gracious rewards; or rewards, not for grace in us, but from grace in God.
, for our encouragement to all holy obedience.

Fourthly, the Examples are,

1. Of wicked men in the ways of wickedness, and the judgment of God upon
them for it, that we may beware of partaking in their sins, lest we be also
partakers of their plagues.

2. Examples of godly men in the ways of holiness, and of the blessing of God
upon them in their ways, that we may be excited to tread in their steps. And
thus we see, that the Scripture, which is the Word of life, and salvation by
Christ, is the doctrine of holiness, leading us all along in the ways of
Sanctification. Yea, Christ's own Sermons (if we do but observe them) are most
upon this subject.

But does not Paul say, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law,
being made a curse for us? Gal. 3.13. And are we not said to be saved and
delivered by Christ out of the hand of our enemies? Luke 1.71, 74. How then is
the great work of Christ the saving of his people from sin it self?

That Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law is true, viz. our
redemption from sin is the greater.

Is not our own corrupt flesh the worst within us worse than all our Enemies
without us? What hurt could all the rest do, were it not for our own inbred
corruption? Satan and the world were as great, yea greater enemies to Christ,
but could not prevail upon him, because they found no evil in him. Sin is the
very chains Nam vinctos nos tenebat (...) Oecum. apud Dav. in Col. c. 2. v. 15.
and fetters, wherein Satan binds the soul, and leads it away captive. Thou
art in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, said Peter to Simon
Magus, Act. 8.23. The Devils snares are baited with alluring temptations to
sin, and those that resist the temptation, escape the snare. And although by
reason of our corruption we are liable to be tormented by Satan; and Satan, as
Gods Executioner, has committed unto him the power of death, Heb. 2.14. yet
that power, whereby he leads us captive into sin, at his will, is far worse.

3. It is said in the forementioned Text, Luke 1.74, 75. that we are delivered
out of the hands of our enemies, that we might serve the Lord in holiness and
righteousness. In which words it appears that our being rescued out of the
hands of our enemies, refers, as a means to our serving God in holiness, and
righteousness, as the end. If a Servant should be imprisoned for some wrong
done, and his Master, desirous of his service, ransometh, and enlarges him:
the servants enlargement is first procured, but his Masters service is chiefly
intended.

Having thus by Scripture and Argument proved, That the great work of Christ is
the saving his people from their sins, I shall in the next place show you, how
it is, that he accomplisheth for his people this great salvation.

CHAP. II.
CHRIST saves his people from their sins, 1. As the meritorious cause,
purchasing Sanctification for them. 2. As the Efficient cause, working
sanctifying grace in them.

1. I. Christ the meritorious cause of our sanctification.
As the meritorious Confiderandae hic sunt causae, cur Servator noster
appellatus sit Jesus, item Christus. Ac Jesus quidem nomine Hebraico, quod
Latin est Servator, appellatus est: quia servavit, and etiamnum servat populum
suum (id est, electos) a peccatis, infra v. 21. Servat autem duobus modis,
merito, and efficacia^. Merito, quiae morte sua meritus est electis apud Deum
remissionem peccatorum, ac donationem Spiritus Sancti and vitae eternae.
Efficaci a vero, quia per Spiritum S. and praedicationem Evangelii efficit in
illis fidem, quae meritum in promissione Evangelii amplectuntur, et ex fide
studium serviendi Deo secundum sancta ipsius mandata. Piscat. Observat. in Mat.
c. 1. v. 16.
cause by his death, and resurrection, purchasing for them the mortification of
sin, and spiritual resurrection to newness of life. This he does by virtue of
his Priestly office. Thus says the Prophet Isa. 53. 10, 11. When thou shall
make his soul an offering for Sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong
his days, he shall see the travails of his soul, (...) he shall see seed: so
it is in the Hebrew; and whether we read it indefinitely, a seed, or his seed,
it matters not. But a plentiful increase of spiritual seed is here
understood, to which that of our Savior Christ may allude, Io. 12.24. Except
Corn, or Wheat, fall and dye, it abides alone; but if it dye, it brings
forth much fruit. As the sown seed by dying brings forth a plentiful
increase: So Christ by his death brings many sons to glory; which is begun in
the work of grace, wherein those, that were dead in trespasses and sins, are
raised up to spiritual life, which is eternal. Or as from Abraham, and Sarah,
as a dead stock, and from Isaac, destinated to the slaughter, and received from
the dead in a figure, there arose a seed, as the stars of heaven for multitude:
So from Christ, the Antitype, sacrificed, and dead, there springs a numerous
offspring, who derive life from him, as may be intimated in the next words
(...) he shall prolong days, the word his is not in the Hebrew, our
translation supplies it, and so some understand it of Christ himself, being
raised again to dye no more. Others read it, he shall prolong [their] days,
understanding it of his seed, being to continue here successively to the end of
the world, and then to live with him for evermore. I conceive, it will be no
inconvenience to understand it of Christ mystical, and to include both the
former interpretations: for Christ raised up himself to life, and his seed
have life in, and through him. As says Christ himself, John 14.19. -- Because
I live, ye shall live also. And says Paul, Col. 3 3. Our life is hid with
Christ, as the fountain, or root. And Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ,
nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. [He shall see the
travel of his soul,] (i. e.) the fruit of his travel, and be satisfied. Though
his pangs were as a woman traveling with child, and far more sharp, yet he
shall not be as those, that traveled in pain, and brought forth wind. Isa.
26.8. Nor as those that brought children to the birth, and had no strength to
bring forth. Isa. 37.3. Nor as those, that bring forth abortives or untimely
fruit. But as a woman in travail, that has sorrow, because her hour is come,
but as soon as she is delivered of the Child, she remembers no more the
anguish, for joy, that a man is born into the world. So Christ was in exceeding
sorrow, and heaviness (at the approach, as I may say, of a hard bargain) when
his hour drew nigh, Mat. 26.38. But how abundantly was he satisfied, when he
saw that he had purchased a gracious, and a numerous seed (as the fruit of his
body) by those intolerable throws, that tormented his soul?

Thus likewise Paul having enumerated many gross sorts of sinners, 1 Cor. 6.9,
10. adds ver. 11. Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified -- in the name of the Lord Jesus Nam sanguis Christi purgationis
nostrae materia est: ex ejus morte, et resurrerectione justitia et
sanctificatio nobis contigit, Calv. in loc. Hoc adjecit ut Mediatorem,
etredemptorem in memoriam redigat, per quem nobis tot, bona provenerunt. Pet.
Mart. in loc.
, and by the Spirit of our God. What is here wrought by the Spirit, was
purchased by Christ, and is wrought upon his account, or in his name: for there
is no other name given under Heaven, whereby we should be saved from our sins.
This is the fountain mentioned, Zach. 13.1. that is opened to the house of
David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin, and for uncleanness that
they may be purified therein. This is signified in baptism under the Gospel,
Titus. 3.5. Which is called the laver of regeneration: For as the washing of
water puts away the filthiness of the flesh, so the blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7.

This also was typisied by the ceremonial washings under the Law, if we look
back unto them, which in themselves were ineffectuall, as is plainly expressed
at large, Heb. 9. take more special notice of, ver. 12.13.14. Neither by the
blood of Goats, and calves, but by his own blood he entered into the holy place,
having obtained eternal redemption for us, For if the blood of Bulls and of
Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer, sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the
purifying of the flesh; How much more shall the blood of Christ (who through
the eternal spirit, offered himself without spot to God) purge your
conscience from dead works to serve the living God. As likewise Heb. 10. The
Apostle shows the insufficiency of the legal rites in the beginning of the
Chapter, and therefore the Sacrifice of Christ must take place, according to
Scripture, which says, Lo I come to do thy will O God, -- by which will we
are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.
And ver. 14. by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified, according to the tenor of the new Covenant, wherein, says the
Lord, I will put my Laws into their hearts, and in their minds will I write
them; as you may read, ver. 16. see more in the following verses. Multitudes of
texts to this purpose might be quoted, as those, that are produced to confirm
the Doctrine, which I will not stand to repeat, and many others.

I shall sum up all in a word. Whatsoever is promised in Scripture concerning
our Sanctification, is purchased, and ratified by Christ Jesus. For all the
promises of God in him are yea, and in him amen, unto the glory of God by us, 2
Cor. 1.20.

Christ the Efficient cause of sanctifying grace. Christ the procreating cause
of sanctification.
Christ saves his people as the Efficient cause, working Sanctifying grace in
them. And he is 1. The Procreating. 2. The Conserving. 3. The Perfecting cause
of it. For in, and by him, Grace is begun, continued, increased, and perfected.
Christ is the procreting, or principal efficient cause of Sanctification. He
is therefore said to be made unto us of God-Sanctification. 1 Cor. 2.30. Heb.
2.11. For both he that Sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, etc. And him
has God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give
repentance to Israel. Act. 5.31. And he is called, Jesus the Author, and
finisher of our Faith, Heb. 12.2. And what is said of Repentance and Faith, may
be said of every Grace: for he is the fountain of Grace, and does willingly
communicate, and readily distribute to the necessities of his people. It
pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell, Col. 1.19. And in
him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3. Hid, not from,
but for his people, for says John, c. 1.16. of his fullness we all receive,
and grace for grace. Christ's sanctifying work consists of two parts. 1. Not
that these are two really distinct parts, or works; but one work in distinct
respects, or considerations.
The rooting out of sin. 2. The implanting of Grace, Sin is called the old
man, the flesh, the body of sin, and our old man is said to be crucified with
Christ, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should
not serve sin, Romans 6.6. And they that are Christ's are said to have crucified
the Flesh with the Affections, and Lusts, Gal. 5.24. Grace is called the new
man, Ephesians. 4.24. the new creature, Gal. 6.15. the first resurrection, Rev. 20.6.
and the faithful are risen with Christ, Col. 3.1. And we are said to be dead
unto sin, and alive unto God through Jesus Christ, Romans 6.11. In all which we
see, that the two parts of the work refer to the death, and resurrection of
Christ, not merely because Christ's death, and resurrection purchased it for us;
but also, because by the same power, that he raised up himself from the dead,
he actually mortifies our sins, and raises us again to newness of life. The
Faithful have an interest in Christ's Death and Resurrection by way of
communion with him, he communicates unto them the virtue of his Death, and
Resurrection, makes them therein conformable to himself. Thus says Paul,
Phil. 3.10. (...).
That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship (or
communion) of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death.

Obj. Is not the holy Ghost our Sanctifier, as Christ is our Redeemer, and the
Father our Creator in a special manner? Why then do you attribute that to
Christ, as the special Efficient, which belongs to the Holy Ghost?

Answ. 1. It is true, that these works are in some special manner attributed
to the three persons severally: and the holy Ghost is specially called by
Divines, our Sanctifier, as may also be proved from several texts of
Scripture. Yet withal we must remember, that the works of the Trinity, that
are termed works ad extra are undivided: thus God the Father created, Ephesians.
3.9. The Son created, John 1.3. All things were made by him, and without him
was not any thing made, that was made. And the Holy Ghost created, Genesis 1.2. So
in this new creation the Father sanctifies, therefore Christ prays, Joh.
17.17. Sanctify them with thy truth. The Son sanctifies, as has been already
proved at large. And the Holy Ghost sanctifies, Romans 1.4. Divines join them
all togegether thus, God the Father sanctifies us in Christ, by the Holy Ghost.
In the forming of the new man, the whole Trinity is employed, as at the framing
of the first Man, when God said, Let us make man after our own image, Genesis
1.26. Where note by the way, that in this work, though the three persons are
all employed, they are not subordinate causes, nor three coordinate causes,
concurring to the same effect; but one cause. For although there be a
mysterious distinction of the persons, yet by reason of the Unity of the
Essence Ubi caedem sunt operationes, ibi eadem essentia Et vice versa.
, there is a Unity of the Divine attributes, and operations. And thus according
to the confession of Athanasius, we say, The Father is God, the Son is God, the
Holy Ghost is God; and yet there are not three Gods, but one God; The Father
Almighty, the Son Almighty, the Holy Ghost Almighty; and yet, there are not
three Amighties, but one Almighty. So we must say, The Father Created, the Son
Created, the Holy Ghost Created; and yet, there are not three Creators, but one
Creator. So also, the Father Sanctifies, the Son Sanctifies, the Holy Ghost
Sanctifies; and yet, there are not three Sanctifiers, but one Sanctifier. Thus
they are all but one cause, because they all have but one and the same
causality, viz. one, and the same Divine power, by which they work. This
mystery may be intimated in that Hebrew Idiotism, Genesis 1.1. (...), where a
verb singular is joined with a noune plural, signifying the unity of
causality, and action, as well as of Essence and Nature in the three persons.

Though the Holy Ghost is specially called our Sanctifier, immediately
sanctify, yet may the work be eminently attributed to Christ, 1. Because the
Holy Ghost (the sanctifying spirit) is given by Christ to his people, Mat.
3.11. He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, which is of a
purifying nature, John 15.26. When the Comforter is come, whom I will send you
from the Father, even the spirit of truth, etc. Chapter 16, 17. If I go not away,
John 1. 16, 17. Col. 1 19. ver. 18. John 15. 1 Part.
the Comforter will not come unto you, but if I depart, I will send him unto
you.

2. Because in Christ is the fullness of all Grace, and the faithful derive it
from him, as the Members from the head Caput distat, and distinguitur a suis
membris tripliciter -- 3. Ratione causalitatis and influentiae. Caput enim
motum and sensum omnibus membris impertit, and communicate: membra omni motu,
and sensu destituuntur, fi a capite sejungantur. Sic Christus vitam spiritualem
and motum gratiae infundit membris suis, altoqui stupidis, mortuis, and ab omni
motu spirituali destitutis. Sin^ me nil potetestis facere: at contra, (...).
Dav. in Col. cap. 1. ver. 18.
, as the branches from the stock; as the stream from the fountain. He
received the spirit without measure, and conveieth it in measure to his people.

As Christ is the Procreating cause of sanctifying grace, so is he the
conserving cause of it. It is he that gives, and maintains the life of grace.
As God at first by his power made all things of nothing, and since maintains
them in their being by his providence, having their continued being from him,
who gave them their first being; so that the Apostle says, Act. 17.28. In him
we live, move, and have our being. So is it in the new Creature, the
continuance of Grace is from Christ Neque ipsum recte vivere nobis ex nobis
est, nifi credentei adjuvet, and orantes, qui et ipsam fidem dedit, quia nos ab
illo adjuvandos esse credanius Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib. 19 cap. 4.
, who created the first Grace in the Soul, and we are no more able to live the
life of Grace, or perform any gracious work without his conserving,
cooperating, and assisting grace, than we are able to live, walk, and work
without the preservation and assistance of Divine Providence. Christ is to the
Soul, as the Soul is to the Body, when Saint Paul says, Gal. 2.20. I am
crucified with Christ, yet nevertheless I live, (he does with an Epanorthosis
correct himself thus) yet not I, but Christ lives in me: As if he should say,
this spiritual life of Grace, which I now live, is not from my self, but from
Christ, who lives in me, (to wit, by his Grace) and gives life, and motion to
me. As the Soul gives life to the Body, and the Body lives no longer than the
Soul is united to it; but becomes a dead carcass, whenever it is separated
from it: So if Christ, (who is the life of the Soul) should be severed from
it, it would immediately become dead again in Trespasses, and Sins, and able
to do no more in Grace, than a dead Corpse in Nature. This our Savior Christ
himself excellently proves, and illustrates in another comparison, John 15.5,
6. As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine,
no more can ye, except ye abide in me: I am the vine, and ye are the branches:
he that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit, for
without me ye can do nothing. As the branches, that sprout out of the vine,
receive sap from it, whereby they are preserved, and become fruitful, but
being once broken off, become dead and fruitless, having no more sap or life
in themselves. So says Christ, (...) severed from me (...), ye can do
nothing. There are in the Greek two negatives, which deny the more vehemently,
as if he should say, ye cannot possibly do any thing, for if a man abide not
in me, he is cast forth, as a branch, and is withered. Philosophers are of
opinion, that if the Heavens should stand still but a minute of an hour, and
withhold their influence from this lower world, man could not move so much as a
little finger. Much more, if Christ should but withhold the influence of his
grace from us, should we be unable to move one hairs breadth toward any good.

Christ is likewise called the head, and the faithful the members Caput and
membra in eo convenient, quod babeant inter se continuitatem, and quod omnia
actum suum, and informationem habeant ab eadem anima. Sic caput hoc mysticum
and omnia ejusdem membra, habent continuitatem quandam inter se, and
informationem suam, spiritualem, and vivificationem ab codem principio. Est
enim inter Christum, and omnia Christi membra continuitas quaedam ratione
Spiritus Sancti, qui plen^ssime residens in Christo capite, imus, and idem
numero ad omnia etiam ejus membra diffunditur, vivificans ca singula, and
uniens universa. Dav. in Col. c. 1. v. 18.
of the body, Col. 1.18. He is the head of the body the Church. As then, in the
natural body, the members have their life preserved by being united to the
head, being compact together by certain bonds and ligaments: and if any be cut
off, and severed, it becomes void of all life, and motion: So is it in the
mystical body, if a soul should be dismembered from Christ, it would (as a hand
cut off) immediately become livelesse and useless. If man, at his first
Creation, so soon lost the life of perfect grace, having the custody thereof
committed to himself; much more would he lose it now, the degree thereof being
so imperfect as it is, were not this life originally in Christ. Were it in us
alone, it would be but as water in a broken cisterne, that would presently
leake all out: But Christ is an ever-over-flowing fountain, continually
streaming forth into the souls of his people; yea, as a spring arising within
them, as his words to the woman of Samaria import, John. 4.10.14. Jesus
answered and said unto her, if thou had known the gift of God, and who it is,
that says unto thee, Give me to drink; thou would have asked of him, and he
would have given thee living water. Whosoever drinks of the water, that I
shall give him, shall never thirst: but the water, that I shall give him shall
be in him a well of water, springing up into everlasting life. Undoubtedly
Christ himself is this Fountain of grace; and well does Paul call it the grace
which is in Christ Jesus. 2. Tim. 2.1.

God has not then given unto his Saints (as Abraham gave to Hagar) water in a
bottle, to be soon exhausted, that they should hopelessely bewail the child
of grace, as in a starving, and perishing condition: But has sent the Angel
of his Covenant, who has cheered their hearts, by opening their eyes, and
showing them a well of water, whereby they may have assured hope, that the babe
shall be preserved, and nourished, till it come to perfect stature. And this
directs me to the next head.

Conserving; so he is also the Perfecting cause of sanctifying grace in his
people. Christ the perfecting cause of sanctifying grace.
He is the Alpha, and Omega in the work of grace: He lays both the foundation,
and the topstone in the spiritual building: He is the Finisher, as well as the
Author, of our Faith, Hebrews Chap. 12. ver. 22. and we are said to be
complete in him, Col. 2.10. In the work of Sanctification; as well, as
Justification: Ph. 2.12.
Not as though we were already perfect, or could attain it in this life, as the
perfectists fondly argue from thence. Quae itaque in sanctis reperitur, est
imperfecta quaedam perfectio, tum scientiae, tum obedientiae. -- De bac Aug
Cont. duas. Ep. Pelag. l 3 c. 5 Secundum istius vitae modum est quaedam
perfectio, cique, per fectioni hoc deputaetur, ut se quisque noverit nondum
esse perfectum. Dav. in Col. cap. 4. v. 13.
In this life, this work of Christ is but opus in fieri, not in facto esse: A
work in doing, not done. Yet is grace perfect in its kind from the first
instant of it in the soul. There is a twofold perfection, 1. Of parts, 2. Of
degrees. Or there is a Perfection 1. Of truth, 2 Of Growth.

1. That is perfect in Parts, to which no parts are wanting; and is opposed to
maimed. Thus a child is said to be perfect in the day of his birth, that has
all parts that a child should have. That is perfect with a perfection of Truth,
which is not Adulterate, or counterfeit; thus that is said to be perfect gold,
which is true, and not counterfeit. In this sense the work of Sanctification is
Perfect at the first: the soul is Sanctified throughout, and in every part,
though it be but partly Sanctified. The new man, at first forming, has all its
parts, and members; and the child of grace has no part wanting in the day of
his birth. Animalia nascuntur, (...). Arist. Hist. anim. l. 7 c. 8. 1 Timothy 1.5
2 Timothy 1.5 2 Cor. 6.6. To. 12.9.
Then also is it perfect in respect of Truth: there is Faith unfeigned, Love
without dissimulation, and every other grace in sincerity: It will abide the
touchstone, although it be not full weight.

2. There is a Perfection of Degrees, and of Grouth; and this is twofold, 1.
Comparative, compared with that, which is very weak, little, and much beneath it.
2. Absolute, as having nothing to be superadded. Thus, in a Comparative sense,
he is said to be Perfect, that is a strong man in Christ, an able Christian in
Comparison of those, that are as babes, and but weak in the faith. Thus says
Paul. Phil. 3.15. Let us therefore, as many as be Perfect, be thus minded. And
Heb. 5.14. Strong meat belongs to them, that are of full age, (...). Heb. 5.14.
(...) Phil. 3.15.
the Greek word here used, (...) signifies Perfect, and is the same, that is
used in the foregoing proof. This perfection also does Christ give unto the
soul that is his: he brings it in, and leads it on in the ways of grace. He,
who is called the Everlasting Father, (who has begotten us again) is not
contented merely to preserve the children of Grace, that they die not; but
does tenderly nurse, and cherish them, and cause them to grow to greater
strength and stature. Ephesians. 4.15, 16. But speaking the truth in love, may grow
up into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ: from whom the whole
body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which every joint supplyeth,
according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, makes
increase of the body unto the edifying of it self in love.

But alas! how imperfect is the greatest perfection that is attainable in this
life! how many are the sinful weaknesses of the best of Gods servants! and
what little dwarfs are they here, in comparison of their heavenly stature!
Christ does not (therefore) set up Hercules Pillars, with a Nil ultra to what
he does for his people here; but he writes a Plus ultra: there is something
more, that he does for them; yea, that he works in them, which exceeds this, as
far, as heaven is higher than the earth.

There is (therefore) in the last place, Perfection of d^gree^ absolute.
an absolute perfection of Degrees. which he bestows upon the Souls of his
people at the hour of death, Tunc enim erit perfectum illud de quo loquens
Apostolus: Ex part, inquit, scimus, and ex part prophetamus, cum dutem
venerit id quod perfectum est, quod ex part est evacuabitur. Deinde ut quomodo
possee aliqua similitudine ostendere quantum ab illa quae fatura est, distet
haec vita, non qualiumcunque hominum, verum etiam qui praecipua hic sanctitate
suut praediti: Cum essem, inquit, parvus, quasi parvulus sapiebam, etc. Aug. de
Civ. Dei, lib. 22. cap. 29.
and upon the whole man, at the great resurrection: then shall the whole man be
wholly perfect, perfect Soul, and perfect Body, united together; and, when they
are brought to the heavenly Canaan, the Canaanites shall be no more in the
land, as thorns in their eyes, and goads in their sides, no more arising of
sin in the Soul: no more imperfections cleaving to their Seraphicall
Hallelujahs: nothing wanting that may be further desired to the completing of
their happiness.

Thus Christ is not like a foolish builder, that laid a foundation, and was not
able to finish it: but he lays the foundation, and carries on the building of
grace here, which he completely perfects, and beautifully adornes in glory
hereafter. In this great work of saving his people from their sins, Christ is
all, and in all. He is all Meritoriously, purchasing grace, for them; He is all
Efficiently, working grace in them: He infuseth grace, preserves grace,
increases grace, and perfecteth grace. He is not like unto Moses, that brought
the children of Issrael out of Egypt, and died when he came near to the
borders of Canaan: Nor like unto Joshua that brought them into Canaan, but
began the work where Moses left: But both of them together will more fitly
typifie the work of Christ our Savior; Ipse Christus -- is proprie est, qui
nos vocat, fide and vesipiscentia donat, ac credentes, (...) justificat,
regenerat, vivificet, servitque in vitam aeternam, Z^nch de dispens. salutis
per Christum, These. 17.
who brings his people out of bondage from under their hard taskmasters, leads
them safe through the wilderness of this world, and peaceably setleth them in
their everlasting rest, having subdued all their enemies under their feet.

Quest. But why, are we not perfectly saved from sin, by being wholly Sanctified
at once, even at our first conversion?

Answ. 1. Some say this is done for the greater exaltation of Gods free Grace,
to make us the more sensible of what he has done for us; that we may have no
cause of glorying in our selves, but may give all the glory unto God. But this
Answer seems to me to be of no great force. For had we bin Sanctified wholly
at once, the work would have been no less of grace, then now it is, there
would have bin nothing of our merit in it. If a Physician should undertake
freely, and upon his own care, and charge to heal a poor sick person, who is
not able to give him a Fee, is it not as free (if he thought it fit) to cure
him perfectly in a day, as if he take seven years to perfect the cure?
Neither should we have bin less sensible of what the Lord had done, or have
gloried the more in our selves, or the less in God. Yea, had we bin perfectly
Sanctified all at once, should we not have bin the more sensible of so weighty,
and sudden a change; and have gloried less in our selves, and more in God in
that state of perfect Sanctification, then now we are able to do in a state of
imperfection? We set up our own, and diminish the due praises of God our
Savior, till we come to a state of perfect holiness.

2. Neither dare I adventure to say with some, that this is done to keep us
humble, and low in our own eyes. It Is true (I know) that our daily
imperfections are matters of humiliation, and the consideration of them should
make us the more humble: But were we perfectly sanctified, we should be
perfectly humble, and there would be no room for pride.

Neither do I apprehend any great weight, in what other particular reasons I
have seen given for it: For I do not remember any special reason given in
Scripture, It is sufficient that God has revealed it his will to have it so,
and we are abundantly bound to be thankful for our deliverance, whether it be
sooner or later completed. We lost our stock of grace suddenly, and are long
in recovering our loss. We were wounded in a moment, but are not so soon
healed: Our Surgeon was able to have wrought the cure in as little time, as
we made the wound. But let us wait the Lords leisure, for the healing of our
Souls in his own order without too curiously prying into the reason of his
method.

Though the work of Salvation from sin, be wholly the work of Christ,
Isntrumental causes of Sanctification.
both in Purchase and application (as has been already showed) yet he is
pleased to fit, and make use of instruments for bringing in, and leading on his
people in the ways of holiness.

The instrument that Christ makes use of in the first Sanctification of grown
persons, (for infants (such in whom Grace is wrought) are sanctified without
means) is his Word or Gospel. Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing
by the Word of God. And the Gospel is called the power of God unto Salvation,
Romans 1.16. Our Savior Jesus Christ has abolished death, and brought life and
immortality to light through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. which is termed the word
of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. And the word which is able to save our
Souls, James 1.21. And says Paul to the Thessalonians, 2 Ep. 2.13, 14. God
has from the beginning chosen you to Salvation, through sanctification of the
Spirit, and belief of the truth, whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to the
obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. The word discovers our sin,
and misery, Romans 7. James 2.9. Rev. 3.17. And directs us to the Fountain of
Grace for healing, and help. Isa. 55.1, 2, 3. Zach. 13.1. Mat. 11.28, 29. Ioh.
17.37, 38.

The Word being but an Instrument works not without the spirit of Christ,
which is the Principal Efficient Instrumentum non movet nisi moveatur.
, as we say, The instrument moves not, unless it be moved. As a Sword cuts not
without some hand to weild it, so the Word, (though it be sharper then a
two-edged sword) slays not corruption, nor converteth the Soul, but as it is
set home by the power of the Spirit, and this may be one reason why the Word of
God is called the word of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. Dr. Gouge upon the place gives
two reasons why the Word of God is called the Sword of the Spirit. 1. In regard
of the Author of it, 2 Pet. 1.21. 2. In regard of the nature, or kind of it;
for it is spiritual, and so opposed to a material sword, made of metal,
which may be called the sword of flesh. To this purpose the Apostle says the
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, 2 Cor. 10.4. And this may be a
sufficient reason also to call it the sword of the Spirit; because it is the
Spirits weapon, wherewith it slaies those fleshly lusts, that war against
Gods glory, and the Souls happiness: As that was said to be the sword of Joab,
Abner, Jonathan, or David, wherewith they fought against their enemies.

Men, more especially Ministers of the Gospel (who are Christ's own
Ambassadors) are Instruments in saving his people from their sins, as they
bring the word, or message of life and salvation unto them. They are called
(...) co-workers, or laborers together with God, 1 Cor. 3.9. and Ministers, by
whom the Church believes, ver. 5. To this purpose says Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.16. Take heed unto thy self, and unto the doctrine; continue in them;
for, in doing this, thou shall both save thy self, and them that hear thee:
And Romans 10.14, 15. How shall they believe on him, of whom they have not heard?
and how shall they hear without a Preacher? and how shall he preach except he
be sent? as it is written: How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the
Gospel of peace, and bring the glad tidings of good things! Therefore Christ
has given Ministers to his Church for this purpose, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. And he
therefore sent forth his Disciples to teach all natitions. Mat. ult. 19.

Private persons, within their sphere, may be isntrumental in the converting
of Souls. 1 Cor. 7.16. What know thou, O wife, whether thou shall save thy
Husband? or how know thou, O man, whether thou shall save thy Wife?
Doubtless the husband is many times an happy instrument of converting the
wife, and the wife likewise of converting the husband; and Parents, and Masters
have been often blessed instruments of much good in this kind, to their
children, and servants: so likewise one friend and neighbor to another.
Brethren, says James, chap. 5.19, ^0. If any of you do err from the truth,
and one convert him, let him know, that he which converteth the sinner from the
error of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of
sins. And the reading of the Word may (through Gods grace) become effectual,
where the preaching of it is not despised.

In Christ's work of preserving, and increasing grace, the same means, and other
also, are isntrumental The Word is Milk for Babes, and Meat for Strong men,
both to preserve and increase their strength and stature. 1 Pet 2.2. As new
born babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby. See
Heb. 5.12, 13, 14. chap. 6.1, 2. The Sacraments also, are means (being added,
as seals, to the Covenant) to confirm faith, and all saving graces: Yea, in
this work, after the receiving of the first special grace, Christians are
isntrumental in the saving of their own C^rie t^men illi sunt, qui nos in
conversione ad Deum truncos esse volunt and lapides. Cum enim quisque sentiat
reipsa dum a spiritu Sancto illuminatur, renovatur, trahitur, se quod ignorabat
cognoscere, quod nolebat velle, quod aversabatur amare, a quo fugiebat, ad eum
libenter, and sponte currere, and quod vitae genus oderat, illud ex animo
amplecti, quomodo lapides, ac stipites sumus? Zanch Ep. ad Marcum Meningum, de
nostra ad Deum conversione.
souls. Thus says Paul to Timothy, 1 Epist. 4.16. Take heed unto thy self,
and unto the doctrine; continue in them, for in doing this, thou shall both
save thy self and them that hear thee. Thus says Peter, 1 Ep. 1.22. Seeing
that ye have purified your souls, in obeying the truth, through the spirit. --
and 1 John 3.3. Every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even
as he is pure. Prayer is a special means, whereby the faithful obtain both a
continuance, and increase in grace. 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. Luke 17.5. Mat. 6.13.
Psalm. 51.10, 11.

Crosses, afflictions, wonderful and remarkable providence, tend many times
(through Gods direction) both to the working, and increase of grace, Psalm.
119.67. Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept thy word.
Ver. 71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy
statutes, 2 Chronicles. 33.11, 12. Acts 16. 26. to 32.

The complete perfection of the soul, wherein it is saved from all the relics
of corruption, is the immediate work of Christ our Savior; for while his
people are here in the flesh, they bear about them the body of sin; and
immediately upon the separation of the soul from the body, is the soul
perfectly freed from sin: The earthly Tabernacle, and the body of sin are laid
down both together, so that the Word, and other Ordinances, and all endeavors
toward perfection, that were useful in time of life, can have no place here,
when the spirits of just men are made perfect in a moment.

The subject of this Salvation, The subject of Salvation.
or persons saved are his people, those that were given to Christ by the Father
(as was expressed in the opening of the Text) viz. the Elect of God, these, and
only these, Romans 8.30. Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called.
-- Those that were predestinate before time, are the called in time, and they
are called with an holy calling, 2 Timothy 1.9. they are called from uncleanness
to holiness, 1 These. 4.7. They are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus
unto good works, which God has before ordained, that they should walk in them,
Ephesians. 2.10. For these only Christ laid down his life, with an absolute purpose
to save. John 10.15. I laid down my life for the sheep: For these he prayed as
Mediator, John 17.9. I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them
which thou gave me, for they are thine. To these he manifests the name of
God, ver, 6. I have manifested thy name to the men which thou gave me out of
the world, thine they were, and thou have given them me. And for their sakes
(says Christ, v. 19) I sanctify my self, that they also might be sanctified
through the truth. These, only, hear his voice, and follow him, and to these,
only, he gives eternal life, Joh. 10.27, 28.

The people that are thus given to, and saved by Christ, are by nature Hoc unum
e S^literis didiscimus, hominem in hic, quae ad pictatem pertinent, sua natura,
eo que antequam fi^ nova creatura, hoc est, ante conversionem esse animalem,
and ideo quae sunt Dei, nihil eorum intelligere posse; habere cor lapideum, and
ob eam causam, nisi prius a Deo carneum accipiat cor, quod flecti in ipsius
obsequium possit, non posse velle, quae suae naturae ingrata sunt, essed
denique mortuum, ac promden fi preventus a gratia Christi per Christum
vivificetur, nullum verae and. coelestis vitae opus praestare posse. Zach. Ep.
ad m. Men. de nostra ad Deum conversione.
the children of wrath, even as others, Ephesians. 2.3. dead in trespasses and sins,
ver. 1. they are indeed Christ's Sheep, but lost sheep, Ovis animal est stolidum
ac iners and omnium quadrupedum stupid ss^^u^ quod in devia et loca deserta
diseurrit, et oberrat, etiamsi pascita aomi habeat, et pabusu^ copiosu^ -- Eisi
a tempestatibus et invibus obruatur non discedit ex loco, nisi a pastore
abigatur, etc. Aristot. de not. animal l. 9.
in a straying condition without the fold of Christ, John 10.16. The term
then, from which they are brought in this great Salvation, is Sin, Satan, and
the World. The term to which, is God in holiness. To this purpose speak many
Scriptures; two I shall mention, which speak fully to the matter: Paul says
that Christ sent him to the Gentiles to open their eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may
receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified,
Acts 26.18. And again, says Paul to Titus, c. 2.3, 4, 5, 6. We, our selves
also, were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and
pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful and hating one another: But
after that the kindeness and love of God our Savior toward man, appeared, not
by works of righteousness, which we have done, but according to his mercy he
saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and renning of the holy Ghost, which
he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior. The Cure must be
according to the nature of the Disease, and the Remedy suitable to the Misery;
which was a departing from God to the Creature, which is called two great
evils. Jer. 2.13. My people have committed two great evils, they have forsaken
me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken
cisternes, that can hold no water.

The power likewise, by which this salvation is wrought, must needs be
answerable to the greatness of the misery. It must be a strong arm that
rescues a Lamb out of the paw of a Lion: It must be no less than a Divine Tu
es Deus omnipotens, qui justificas impios, et vivificas mortuos, et mutas
peccatores, et non sunt. Tibi soli possibile est suscitare silios Abrabae de
duris lapidibus. Aug. Theo. conf. par. 2. cap. 10.
power, that raises a Soul from death to life, and makes it partaker of the
Divine nature. It is the Divine power that gives all things pertainig to life
and godliness, 2 Pet. 1.3. And it is the same mighty power by which Christ
himself was raised from the dead, that works effectually in them that
believe, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. The want of Grace in the soul is not a Physical
privation, before the habit, where the subject is apt, and disposed to receive
the form: but a Logical privation, where the form is excluded, and past a
natural power of recovery. The generation of a living child is natural to
man, and according to nature it is said, Abraham begat Isaac, etc. but the
raising of the dead to life, is a work above nature, and therefore a real
miracle, requiring an Almighty power to effect it. Our new creation in Christ
is a greater work then our first creation in Adam, and our resurrection from
sin to newness of life, is more than the resurrection of our bodies from the
grave. Christ therefore puts forth his Almighty power, to save his people from
their sins, and when he thus works, none can let, he works irresistably, the
greatest ineptitude and depravity of nature shall be overcome. He opens the
eyes of them that were borne spiritually blind, and the unction of his Spirit
is an eye salve, whereby they are enabled to see, and know all things necessary
to Salvation. Though the will be refractory, and the carnal mind not an Enemy
only, but enmity it self against God, Romans 8.7. (...). Ezekiel. 36.26. Genesis 6.5.
he bows and inclines it, and of unwilling makes it willing, Psalm. 110.3. They
shall be a willing people, in the day of thy power. His blood dissolves the
adamantine spirit. He takes away the hard and stony heart, and gives a heart of
flesh. Though the thoughts and imaginations of the heart be evil, only evil,
and that continually he reformes them, and makes them delight in meditating on
his word. Though carnal affections be strong, and unbridled, carrying the mind
to earthly objects, he crucifies the flesh, with the Affections and Lusts.
Though the holds and fortifications of sin be strong in the Soul, and the
strong man armed (Satan) possess them, and the Elect, by nature themselves,
Psalm. 68.18.
be rebellious also, joining with Satan, and warring against their Savior,
Christ who is infinitely stronger, batters these fortifications, spoils him of
his goods, delivers poor captivated souls and brings them into a blessed
captivity, to the obedience of Christ himself.

In a word, where Christ undertakes the work, the roughest and hardest stone
in the corrupted, and confused Mass shall be hewn, polished, and fitted to
the spiritual building, and the most knotty piece shall be curiously wrought,
to a most beautiful statue, after the image of God.

I shall both sum up, and further clear this discourse, in these short
Propositions following;

1. Man by nature Britan. Theol. Sententia in Synodo Dord. These. 1. Voluntas
hominis lapsi nudata est donis spiritualibus, and salutaribus, quibus in
innocentiae statu donata fuit: ac proinde ad actus spirituales nil jam valet
absque viribus gratiae. These. 2. Lapsae voluntati inest non tantum peccandi
possibilitat, sed etiam praeceps ad peccandum inclinatio.

De libero Arbitrio, and Gratia brevis est Ecclesiae nost^ae definitio, Art.
10. proposita in haec verba. Ea est hominis post lapsum Adae conditio, ut sese
naturalibus suis viribus and bonis operibus ad fidem, and invocationem Dei
convertere ac praeparare non possit. Quare absque gratia Dei, quae per Christum
est, nos preveniente ut velimus, and co-operante dum volumus, ad pietatis opera
facienda, quae Deo grata sunt and accepta nil valemus. In quibus verbis homini
in statu lapsus, sive peccati, tam vires, quam merita negantur, ad bonum
spirituale. Daven. De lib. Arb. and Gratiae cooperatione.


is dead in trespasses and sins, and has neither power, nor will to help
himself, yea, he is an enemy to the work of Grace upon his own Soul, and
therefore stands in need of the effectually working grace of Christ.

2. Brit. Theol. sent. in Syn Dord. De conversione, These. 1. Deus animos
electorum suorum praedictis gratiae su^ actibus excetatos, and praeparatos
intima quadam and mirabu^ operatione regenerat, and quafi de novo ereat,
infundendo spiritum vivificantem, and omnes animae facultates novis
qualicatibus imbuendo.
Christ in saving of a Soul from sin works powerfully, and irresistibly,
overcoming all opposition whatsoever, whether within or without us.

3. These. 2. Ad hoc ipsum opus regenerationis habet se homo passive, neque est
in potestate voluntatis humana impedire Deum sic immediate, regenerantem.
In Christ's first work of Grace upon the Soul, the Soul is passive.

4. De Conversione qua denetat actionem bominis, etc. Pradictam conversionem
sequitur haec nostra conversio actualis, Deo proliciente ipsum actum credendi,
and convertendi ex mutata voluntate, quae acta a Deo agit et ipsa, convertendo
se ad Deum, et credendo, hoc est, actum suum vitalem eliciendo. Man by his fall
into a State of sin, has wholly lost all ability of will to any spiritual
good accompanying Salvation: So as a natural man being altogether averse from
that good, and dead in sin, is not able by his own strength to convert himself,
or prepare himself thereunto. When God converts a sinner, and translates him
into a state of grace, he freeth him from his natural bondage under sin; and
by his grace alone, enables him freely to will, and to do that which is
spiritually good. Conf. of Faith by the late Assemb. at Westminster, cap. 9.
Yet no man is converted or sanctified against his will, but Christ works
upon the soul, by inclining the will, of unwilling making it willing, Ps. 110.3.

5. When Christ draws effectually, the Soul comes presently, and infallibly,
yet not by compulsion, but willingly, Cant. 1.4. Draw me, we will run after
thee.

6. Drawing is Christ's word, coming is the Souls act, done in the power of
Christ effectually moving.

Obj. If man be merely passive in the work of conversion, and no man be able in
the use of any means to convert himself, but Grace is of the Lords immediate
infusing; to what purpose is it, to hear the Word, or use any other means to
attain Grace, more than to sit still and do nothing at all. And to what
purpose do Ministers preach the Word?

Answ. 1. The preaching of the Word is Gods ordinary means for the converting
of Souls, Psalm 19.7. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul. Romans
10.17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. And God, who
has ordained the means, has bound us to the use of them: for as the Word,
and Man's endeavors can avail nothing without the Spirit, so the Spirit will
not work, where the Means is rejected. It is God only, that gives the
increase; but his Paul's and Apollo's must be planting and watering. Concerning
the sowing the seed of the Word, we may say as Solomon in another case, Eccles.
11.6. In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thy hand,
for thou know not, whether shall prosper, either this, or that, or whether
they both shall be alike good. Ministers are Gods Husbandmen, and People are
Gods Husbandry, or as the field, in which this seed is sown: 1 Cor. 3.9.
it is the Ministers work to sow, and Gods to make the ground fruitful.

Ans. 2. The less able we are to work grace in our own souls, the more careful
we should be to wait upon the Lord of grace, in the use of the means of grace.
The blind, and deaf, and dumb in the Gospel waited the more diligently upon
Christ for help, because they could not have help any otherwise, than by his
special divine power; they waited in the way, that Christ came, and so must
the soul, that would have spiritual help, wait upon Christ in the way that he
comes; which is the way of his Ordinances.

Obj. But is not the outward teaching to be laid aside? Is it not said, Jer.
31.33, 34. This is the Covenant, that I will make with the house of Israel:
after those days, says the Lord, I will put my law in their inward paths, --
And they shall teach no more -- And does not the Author to the Hebrews
interpret it of the days of the Gospel, and say, expressly, they shall not
teach, Heb. 8.10, 11. Must we not then wait only for the inward, and immediate
teaching of the Spirit of God?

Answ. 1. The Lord intended not the laying aside of outward teaching; for
Christ himself went up and down preaching the Gospel before his passion; he
taught his Disciples also after his resurrection, as appears Ma. 28.18. Mar.
16.14. ad 19. Luke 24.36, to 51. He gave a new Commission to his Disciples, to
go teach all Nations, Mat. 28.19, 20. and promises to be with them, and with
those, that should succeed them in the work of the Ministry to the end of the
world. And he, who is the chief Sheepherd, committed the feeding of his flock
to them. John 21.15, 16, 17. The fruit of his Ascension was the giving of
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
and Teachers for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry:
And we must not be so absurd, as to think that Christ by his own practice,
and commssion to others contradicted the Prophesies; I came not to destroy the
Law, or the Prophets, but to fulfill, says Christ, Mat 5.17.

Answ. 2. The teaching of this Doctrine, is a self confutation to the Teachers:
for if no man must teach another, then they that are of this opinion must not
teach it others, but must leave God to teach them that, as well as other things.

Answ. 3. But to inquire more strictly into the sense, and meaning of the
place, we must note, that the Author of this Epistle, comparing Moses and
Christ together, preferres Christ in all things above him, and comparing the
internal efficacy of Christ, with the external administrations of the Law,
shows, that Christ was the substance of those shadows in the Ceremonial Law,
and that from Christ only was Grace derived to obey sincerely the Moral Law,
according to those words, Ioh. 1.16, 17. Of his fullness have all we received,
and Grace for Grace. For the Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came
by Jesus Christ: Which being well understood would be a good Commentary upon a
great part of the Epistle to the Hebrews. The great error of the Jews, was
their resting in themselves, and the Letter of the Law. They had the Ceremonial
Law, and resting in those types, and shadows, looked not with an eye of Faith
to Christ the Antitipe, who was the end and scope of the Law, and alone able to
take away sin, as pertaining to the Conscience. They had also the Moral Law,
written in tables of stone, and rested in their own strength, according to the
Letter of the Law and thought to expiate their defects, by those carnal
offerings, as Paul plainly and largely declares, if we compare Romans 9.31, 32,
33. with the former part of the tenth Chapter. Now in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, the Apostle clearly shows, that Christ was the substance of those
things, whereof the Ceremonies were shadows: and that as Moses taught outwardly
only, so Christ alone teaches inwardly, powerfully, and effectually; writing
his Laws in the hearts of his people. So that all (as I conceive) that can be
truly gathered out of these words, is, that the inward, effectual teaching, or
writing of the Law upon the heart, is the proper, and peculiar work of Christ;
and he was therefore to be preferred far above Moses, (so highly magnified by
the Jews) who being but a Minister, could only teach outwardly.

CHAP. III.
saving of his people from their sins, then this may inform us, how to answer
an argument of the Papists against two points of Doctrine, wherein we, with the
Reformed Churches differ from them. The first is the Doctrine of Justification.
The second is the Doctrine of assurance of Salvation. In the Doctrine of
Justification (say they) that, which makes us righteous before God, and
causes us to be accepted to life everlasting, is remission of sins, and the
habits of inward righteousness, or Charity with the fruits thereof.

We deny the habits of righteousness, or Sanctification to be the thing, by
which, in whole, or in part, we are to be justified in the sight of God, either
as satisfactory to Justice, or Meritorious of Reward, and affirm, that we are
justified by Faith in Christ alone, without the deeds of the Law.

They object among many, other Arguments, that our way of Justification by
Faith alone, is the way to banish good works out of the world, and to open a
gate for carnal liberty.

To which our Divines usually answer, that we are justified by Faith alone, but
not by such a Faith as is alone: that it is such a Faith, as works by love,
and brings forth the fruits of righteousness. And although we do not do good
works to be justified by them, as any part of our legal righteousness, yet
the practice of good works we hold most necessary, for many other good
reasons. But not intending to give any account of those many reasons we
assign, let us consider what answer this Doctrine in hand will afford. Saving
Faith is to accept of, and embrace Christ for Salvation, to wit, that we may
have that Salvation applied to us, which he has purchased for us, and what
that is, has been already showed, to wit, Salvation from sin, and not
merely from wrath for sin. This is Salvation both in Scripture-sense, and
language, as you have heard at large. Christ did not purchase our Salvation
piece-meale, neither does he bestow it piece-meale, neither can we receive it
piece-meale, he will be a whole Savior, or no Savior. He that believes that
he may be saved, believes that he may be saved from the whole misery of his
Soul; which is both sin and wrath: and he that does not thus believe, does not
saveingly believe, and he that does thus believe in Christ, or embrace him,
leaves no room for carnal liberty.

If we fancy to our selves such a salvation, as Scripture speaks not of, and
then draw absurdities from the Doctrine of Salvation by Faith alone, the
absurdity will return upon the misapprehension of the Objectors. If a Man
should say, he believes in Christ, to be saved from sin, and not from wrath,
our Adversaries (I suppose) would not call that saving Faith, and we have less
cause to call that saving Faith, that professes to believe in Christ to be
saved from wrath, and not from sin, (as appears by the arguments confirming
the Doctrine) Christ, as our whole Savior, to wit, from both those evils, is
the adaequate object of saving Faith, which is therefore both Justifying, and
Sanctifying Faith, and not a Carnal, or Licentious Faith, or rather fantasy
as they make it.

Were there no evil, that we should be saved from by believing, but only that
of suffering the wrath of God for sin, their argument might seem to have the
greater strength, although it would then be found too weak. But when the Soul
looks upon sin it self, as the great enemy, from which Christ came to save his
people; and flies to Christ, that it may obtain deliverance, how can it at the
same time give welcome entertainment to sin? Is it possible for a Man to have
fellowship and communion with pleasure, and delight, and without fear, with a
man, that he is flying from, as his most mortal adversary, hasting to a place
of refuge to be secured from him?

2. They object likewise against the Doctrine of assurance of Salvation. We
affirming, that there may be a certainty, and infallibility by Faith Faith,
together with experience of special Grace, wrought in the heart, gives us
assurance of Salvation.
: they asserting that we can only have a probability by hope; arguing, that the
Doctrine of certainty of Salvation tends to carnal security, to which we may
likewise answer out of this Doctrine: That if Christ came to save his people
from their sins, it would be a contradiction to assert, that a Man may be
assured of his Salvation at the same time, while he allows himself in carnal
security, which is real bondage. He that deliberately allows himself in a
course of carnal liberty, may thereby assure himself, that he is not in a
state of Salvation, for it is evident, that he lies under the great evil, that
Christ came to save his people from: and it may be truly said to such a Man, as
Peter said to Simon Magus, Thou have neither part, nor lot in this Matter [of
Salvation] for thy heart is not right in the sight of God -- thou art in the
gall of bitterness, Act. 8.21.
and bond of iniquity.

In this objection of theirs, there would be likewise the more appearance of
strength, although not strength enough to their purpose, did Salvation consist
only in being justified, and so delivered from Gods avenging wrath. But if the
Masterpiece of our Salvation be to be saved from sin it self, as has been
proved, how can it be supposed, that assurance of Salvation should give liberty
to sin?

trial of his Estate, want assurance of Salvation. If Christ came to save his
people from their sins, can his people be assured of Salvation, while they go
on carelessly in sinning? It is true, a misguided, or sleepy conscience may
forbear to molest, or trouble a man, that has let loose the reins to carnal
liberty: but a clear, awakened conscience, will not speak peace in such a case
as this. When David had fallen into those foul sins of Adultery and Murder,
no sooner was his Conscience awakened, but he was at a loss for the
comfortable assurance of his Salvation: his inward joy and peace, were drowned
in his Lusts, which caused him sadly to bewail his sin, and pray earnestly,
Restore unto me the joy of thy Salvation, Psalm. 51.12. Were we but as sensible
of spiritual, as we are of bodily injury; our sins we fall into, would be
unto our Souls, as so many wounds, and bruises are to our bodies, causing pain
and grief: But the remainder of corruption in the best of Gods Servants, does
much dull their spiritual senses, whereby they are not so clearly exercised to
discern between good and evil: yet the faithful Servants of God have so much
spiritual sense of the evil of sin (at leastwise after some time of
recollection) that they feel their foul miscarriages paining them to the
purpose. They are unto them like so many putrified wounds, broken bones, or
bones out of joint, as David complains, Psalm. 38.3, 5. There is no soundness
in my flesh, because of thine anger, neither is there any rest in my bones
because of my sin. My wounds stink and are corrupt, because of my
foolishness. Blessed are the pure in heart, says Christ, for they shall see
God, Mat. 5.8. to wit, comfortably here, as well as joyfully hereafter: if
purity qualifies the Soul, so as that it may the more clearly see God, then
impurity of Heart, and Life, must be as a thick cloud interposing betwixt the
Soul, and the light of Gods countenance, so that it cannot be refreshed with
the beams of his favor, as formerly, till by serious repentance the cloud be
removed.

him: and he commands us to read, hear, pray, etc. for the subduing of sin, and
increase of grace; and must we not press on still forwards, toward
perfection, continually growing in grace, till we come to glory, which is the
highest degree of grace? This is our salvation to be saved from sin, and
toward this all the means of grace, and duties of piety tend: the Word, that
we hear, is the sword of the Spirit, for the slaying of sin, we pray against
sin, watch against sin, strive against sin, and may we not do it to be
saved from sin? nay, can we rightly or rationally use the means, without
minding this end? Does not Heavens happiness consist in the enjoyment of God
in holiness, and is not God most glorified by us, when his glorious Image is
completed in us? And may we not make this state the end of our endeavors?

May we not make the escaping of Hell also the end of our duties, (if we do
but in any measure understand what Hell is) without being Legallists? That Hell
is a place of intolerable torment, I doubt not, for it is set forth by fire
and brimstone, and unquenchable fire in Scripture, and it is called outer
darkness, where the worm never dies, and the fire never goes out. And Rev.
14.10, 11. It Is said of those, who worship the Beast, and his Image, and
whosoever receive the mark of his name (which shall be the condition of all
the damned) The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is
poured out without mixture, into the cup of his indignation, and they shall be
tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in
the presence of the Lamb. And the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever
and ever, and they have no rest day nor night.

But certainly as the torment is there the greatest, so sin there is at the
highest, where the damned never cease to blaspheme God. Can Gods honor be
dear unto us, and we not fear to blaspheme him? can we make Gods glory our
end, without solicitous care to avoid that state, wherein we should never
cease, with the Devil and his Angels to blaspheme the most High?

When men have framed a Heaven and Hell, according to the model of their own
brain, no mervaile if they deduce strange consequences from it.

Christ died not alike for all men See Ball of the Covenant of Grace, from page
203. to page 264. under this head.

Christ the Mediator of the New Testament, for whom he died, and rose again.


, For he came to save his people from their sins: all are not his people, as I
have showed you before, neither are all saved, or to be saved from their
sins. The Doctors of the Doctrine of equal Universal Redemption tell us,
that Christ dyed, and dyed alike for all men, as much for Cain, Esau, Judas,
etc. as for Abel, Jacob, Peter, or any of the glorified Saints. And this they
boast of, as the only way to exalt the riches of Grace: One of them publicly
excepted against a godly Minister (now with the Lord) because he only invited
sinners to repent, and believe, that they might be saved; and did not tell
them, that Christ dyed intentionally to save all. This Objector called it clipped
truth, as if if it had been a detracting from the truth of Christ.

Egregiam vero landem! A rare commendation indeed of the grace of Christ, that
teaches, that Christ has no more for the glorified in Heaven, than for the
damned in Hell: that Abel, Jacob, Peter, are no more beholding to Christ, than
Cain, Esau, Judas, which must needs follow, if he did no more for the one than
the other. And that when the Apostle asks, 1 Cor. 4.7. who made thee to
differ from another, and what have thou, that thou have not received? The
Believer must answer, [I have made my self to differ, Christ has done no more
for me, than for the vilest reprobate, he died, and did alike for all men, and
put all mankind in a like capacity for salvation, and wherein I differ from
the worst of sinners, it is only from my self.] This is plainly the sense of
their doctrine.

This they boast of also, as the only way to comfort afflicted consciences,
and call the contrary uncomfortable doctrine. Do but well consider it, and it
will prove about as comfortable to a troubled Soul, as it is honorable to the
riches of Christ's grace. The perplexed soul cries out [I have sinned
grievously against the Almighty, and just God, and he has set my sins in order
before me, my conscience is more than a thousand witnesses against me, I see my
self to be a damned wretch, divine vengeance hangs over my head.] This
Comforter answers, Be of good cheer, Christ died as much for thee as for any.
How does that appear? He died for every man alike, therefore as much for thee
as for any. To whom the troubled soul may easily reply, [If he died for all
men alike, then no more for me than for Cain, Esau, Judas, and the rest of the
damned in hell: And how shall I be assured that I shall be privileged above
them, for I cannot believe?] What this miserable Comforter can answer more, but
what may be retorted again in like manner, I know not. If he shall say as some
do, Christ has repented, believed, and done all for thee; It may be answered,
[so you say he did for Cain and Judas, if he did as much for every man, as for
any man, and yet they are damned.] If he shall say, Christ will give thee a
believing penitent heart, and will take away thy hard and stony heart: this
destroys their own tenet; for then there is some special grace purchased for,
and bestowed upon one, which another has no share in.

But I will not now trouble you with the controversy at large; only for your
help, to satisfy your selves, and silence gainsayers, consider what has been
already laid down in the foregoing discourse. Christ has by his own blood
obtained eternal redemption for us, Heb. 9.12. And this redemption is from
dead works, to serve the living God, as you may see ver. 14. How much more
shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit, offered himself
without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living
God? See likewise cap. 10.9, 10.14. Then said I, Lo I come to do thy will (O
God) By which will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus
Christ once for all: For by one offering he has for ever perfected them that
are sanctified. Thus we see he has redeemed his people from all iniquity, as
the Apostles expression is, Tit. 2.14. He has purchased for them perfect
eternal Sanctification: Faith and Repentance, which the Gospel requires,
Christ gives unto his people as a part of what he has purchased for them. He
gives repentance unto Israel, Acts 5.31. He is Jesus the author and finisher of
our faith, Heb. 12.2. of his fullness we all receive, and grace for grace, Joh.
1.16. It is from the fullness of his Purchase, as well as of the fullness of the
Grace that dwells in him, that his people do receive. Christ has purchased the
beginning, increase, and perfection of all sanctifying and saving grace for his
people: And herein has he done more for his people than for others: herein
has he done much more for Abel, Jacob, Peter, than for Cain, Esau, Judas. Here
is enough to make a partition wall between the Elect and Reprobate.

wrath of God only, that is due unto them for sin, and they are willing to be
saved by him: We doubt not but the vilest sinner, that delights in his
abominations, who says, he is willing that Christ should save him from the
wrath of the Almighty, speak truth: We need not question but any man would be
willing to be saved from the flames of Hell; yea, the Devils themselves would
not refuse to be delivered from them; for nature it self abhorres sufferings;
Who would be willing to go to a place of everlast^ng torment? But true faith
accepts of Christ, as a perfect Savior, to save the soul from all its misery,
both of sin and suffering: And this is the main difference between the faith of
a child of God; and the Faith of the ignorant, and carnal multitude. There is
not the prophanest wretch, but would be willing, that God should be reconciled
unto him, blotting out his sins: but how hard a matter is it to persuade a
sinner to be reconciled unto God, willingly parting with his sins! All the
wooing, entreating, beseeching, and the best Rhetoric we can use is too little
to prevail. 2 Cor. 5.20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God
did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God. So
says Peter, Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain
from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul. This is indeed the great and
main work of the Ministers of the Gospel, to persuade sinners to accept of
Christ for salvation from Sin: sin is the mire that carnal persons stick
in, and are unwilling to be drawn out of.

sin, as well as from the fruit and effects of sin. Many think there is no
Gospel-preaching, but only the preaching of pardon, and remission of all sin
to the worst of sinners: If we preach the doctrine of Sanctification, that is
accounted Legal doctrine: but if we persuade swearers, drunkards, and the
worst of sinners, that they have nothing to do, but believe their sins are
pardoned already; and that the legal work of repenting, watching, striving
against sin, and care to please God must not be regarded; then we shall be
extolled for preachers of free grace. Alas, poor mistaken souls! are Christ and
Grace only exalted in the pardon of sin, and must we take no heed to the
sanctification of sinners? Is it a Gospel-work to preach Christ, as having
taken away suffering, the fruit of sin, and is it a legal Doctrine to preach
Christ for the destruction of sin, that is the cause of suffering, and the
worst of evils? You have pretended to be admirers of Free Grace: if you are so
indeed, you may here stand, and wonder with your selves at your gross mistake,
and that you have admired the grace of Christ no more. You have amired, that
murder, persecution, witchcraft, blasphemy, and the like; should be forgiven;
that Manasseh, Paul, and many of the Jews, that crucified Christ, should be
freely pardoned you have been ready to cry, Grace, grace, riches of grace,
grace abounding and super-abounding, to such a work as this. It Is true, there
is cause enough to magn^fie this wonderful work of Christ, and we may well
say, This is the Lords doing, and it is mervailous in our eyes. I would not
willingly, in the least, dimmish this pardoning grace of Christ. Yet come and
behold and admire Grace once more, to wit, the sanctifying Grace of Christ. Is
it not a wonder to see the Wolf dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard lie down
with the Kid, and the Calf, and the young Lion, and the falling together, and a
little Child to lead them? To see the Cow and the bear feed, and their young
ones lie down together, and the Lion eat straw like an Ox? To see a sucking
Child play upon the hole of the Aspe, and the weaned child put his hand upon
the Cockatrice den? Isa. 11.6, 7, 8. To see a Sinner become a Saint? 2 Chr. 33.
Gal. 1.23. 1 Cor. 10.20. 2 Pet. 1.4. 1 John 1.3.
to see a Sorcerer become a sincere Worshipper of the Living God? To see a
furious Persecutor become a painful Preacher of that Faith, which once he
destroyed? To see those that had formerly communion with Devils, to be made
partakers of the Divine nature, and to be called into fellow ship with God the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ? Here is matter of admiration indeed.
Stand here and pause a little, and see whether you have not more cause, than
before, to cry out, O the breadth, and length, and depth and height of the
grace of Christ! The soul, that is betrothed to Christ in holiness, may much
more say in this case, what David said when he was advanced from a mean family
to great dignity: Lord, Who am I, and what is my house, that thou have brought
me hitherto? Here may we likewise say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 8.4. What is man
(Lord) that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of man, that thou (so)
visitest him! And are not they to be esteemed the most faithful preachers of
the Gospel, who shun not to reveal unto the people both parts of the Counsel,
and Grace of Christ; but show forth the glory of his sanctifying, as well as of
his justifying work?

Beware then I beseech you of the dangerous way of admiring grace against
grace; which is (indeed) to destroy grace. Take heed of harkening to them, that
so much contemn the doctrine of Sanctification by Christ, under pretense of
exalting Christ: The Doctrine of the grace of God which brings salvation,
teaches us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, justly, and godly in this present world, Tit. 2.11, 12. Paul teaches
us, that it is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ
came into the world to save sinners, but not to save them in their sins (that
were a contradiction) but to save them from their sins. There is in him
plenteous redemption, and he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities, Psalm.
130. ult. and he saves them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him. Hebr.
7.25. (...), to the perfection of all. And were it so, that Christ should save
us from wrath, and not from sin, he would be but an imperfect Savior: for it
would be but a half salvation, nor so much neither. But Christ does not leave
his work imperfect, those that are his redeemed ones are complete in him, Col.
2.10. he justifies them, he sanctifies them, and so saves them: And he that
will be a faithful Minister of Christ, must preach justificatio^ and
sanctification, which are inseparable.

It is no marvel if Antinomian teachers carry the multitude after them. When
they shall teach them that there needs no sorrow for sin, no repentance, no
such care to please God, that God takes no notice of their sins, nor is
displeased with them for sin; it is no strange thing, if those, that are in
love with their lusts, do follow, applaud, and approve them, when they cannot
bear the plain dealings of a faithful Minister of Christ, who tells them, they
cannot have Christ, and their lusts too: That the wrath of God is revealed from
heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. That the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. That if they will be saved
by Christ, they must be content to have their iniquities destroyed, they must
be saved from their sins, for they, and their sins cannot be saved together. It
is no marvel (I say) to see those loose sort of Teachers gain a multitude of
imaginary Converts. How easy a matter is it to make a Proselite of a
worldling, if he may have Christ and his Mammon too; or a voluptuous man, if he
may have Christ, and his carnal pleasuers too. And who would not have Christ,
when he shall be taught to deny, or part with nothing, not so much as a beloved
lust for Christ. Such clawing teachers are fit to please men of itching ears:
and such rotten doctrine has undoubtedly made so many unsound Professors, as
we see of late. How many Antinomian pretenders to more than ordinary Christians
have attained to, do we see, that give way to intemperate drinking, lascivious
jesting, defrauding, and many other evils.

If Solomon when the two women pleaded their cause before him, concluded that
she was indeed the Mother of the Child, whose yerning bowels pleaded against
the dividing of it, knowing that was the ready way to destroy it: Let the wise
discern betwixt us, and our Antinomian Adversaries, which of the two is upright
in his cause; and whether a divided Christ be like to prove a living, and
quickening Savior.

We may here with the Apostles of Christ lift up our voice to God with one
accord, Acts 4.24. to 29.
and say, Lord, thou art God, which have made heaven and earth, and the sea,
and all that in them is, who by the mouth of thy servant David have said, why
did the heathen rage, and the people imagine vain things? The Kings of the
earth stood up, and the rulers were gathered together against the Lord, and
against his Christ. For of a truth against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou have
anointed, both Herod, and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles, and people of
Israel were gathered together, for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel
had determined before to be done: But this thou in mercy have ordered to the
saving of thy people. But now behold a combination of Antinomians, Familists,
and licentious Libertines, with evil hearts, and wicked hands have (what in
them lies) divided, and separated the saving work of thy Son Jesus Christ,
contrary to the revealed will, to the ruin and destruction of many thousand
souls. And grant unto thy servants, that they may with all boldness speak thy
word not dawbing with untempered mortar, but plainly telling Judah of her sins,
and Jerusalem of her transgressions, that so they may (through thine effectual
grace) be instruments of recovering many from this snare of the Devil, who are
now led captive by him at his will.

the great work of Christ be the saving of his people from their sins, this will
further inform us who they are, that are the best Christians, that have most
interest in Christ; even those that are the most saved from their sins, that
have their corruptions most mortified, that are the most meek, humble, self
denying, obedient Christians; and not they that are most in show, and outward
appearance. This I speak, because I see most judge by a wrong rule, both of
themselves and others, in point of Christianity. I have heard some highly
applauding such as talk, and seem to know much, while they complain of their
own ignorance, want of expression, inability in comparison of them, calling the
other able Christians. And we see in this talkative age, those, that talk much,
to be renowned among many, while the modest, humble hearted are little set by.
I have sometime seen a Gallant in gold and silver lace, strutting in great
state, and perhaps not so much worth in all the world beside, as the clothes
upon his back. To this man many do reverence, ignorantly apprehending him to be
some honorable person; when they regardlesly pass by another man in plain
habit, that may be worth some thousand pounds. So is the esteem of most
concerning the worth of Christians: he that talks most, and wordeth it best in
all company, is the only man, when a weighty, serious Christian, of fewer
words, and meaner outside, is of no account. But the worth of a Christian lies
not in a few good words, nor in plausible performance of duties; but in true
and real sanctification from sin A sincere humble-hearted Christian is worth
his weight in gold, and I doubt not but one such Christian will weigh down a
hundred vainglorious talkers in the balance of the Sanctuary. Think not the
highest Mountains are the most fruitful Land, because they overlook the lower
Valleys: the mountains (indeed) are most in show, especially at a distance, but
the lowest valleys bring forth fruit most abundantly. Gifts and Grace compared.
There is a great deal of difference between Gifts and Graces, as I shall
instance in three particulars: There is the gift of knowledge, and the grace of
knowledge the gift of faith, and the grace of faith, the gift of prayer, and
the grace of prayer. There may be, and often times is, a large gift of all these,
where the true grace of them is wholly wanting. No doubt but Judas, and diverse
others, lawfully set apart to the work of the Ministry, were endued with a
large measure of the gifts of knowledge, faith and utterance, both for
preaching and prayer: But how far were they from the grace of either! Our
Savior Christ himself gives us an account of many, Mat. 7.22. that will say at
the last day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name
cast out Devils, and in thy name done many wonderful works? and then will he
profess unto them, I never know you, depart from me, ye that work iniquity.
But true sanctifying Grace is precious in his esteem: the grace of knowledge is
more precious than any thing in all the world, Prove. 3.13. Happy is the man
that finds wisdom, and the man that gets understanding. For the
merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain
thereof than of fine gold, she is more precious than rubies, and all the things
thou can desire, are not to be compared unto her. Happy indeed are they that
have the grace of knowledge, when many that are endued with great gifts, are,
and shall be eternally miseable. Hell it self is full of large gifts, yea, the
Devils there have greater knowledge than all the Saints on earth. The gift of
knowledge (through the corruption of man) puffs up, as we see by woeful and
abundant experience, when the grace of knowledge makes a man more humble. The
mere gift makes a man wise in his own eyes, and while he takes himself to be a
knowing man, he knows nothing as he ought, 1 Cor. 8.7. See thou a man that
is wise in his own eyes? there is more hope of a fool than of him, says
Solomon, Prove. 26.12. A fool in Solomon's usual sense, is one that is wicked,
and verily there is more hope of a profane person than of him that is well
conceited of himself: The Gospel took better effect among Publicans and
Harlots, than with the Scribes and Pharisees, for to them, says Christ, the
Publicans and Harlots enter into the kingdom of God before you, Mat. 21.31.
And the reason is evident, for a profane person is more easily convinced of his
sin, which is a good step toward conversion, and a necessary antecedent to it.
A self-conceited proud person resists God in his message and motions; and God
resists him, so that there is, as it were, an antipathy between them. The
Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the counsel of God, Luke 7.30. and God
resists the proud, James 4.6. but he gives grace to the humble. And the
grace of knowledge makes a man humble, little in his own eyes, and low in his
own esteem, showing him his ignorance, wants, weakness; and the more a man
truly knows, the more he sees what he knows not, and dare not rashly adventure
upon things above his reach, Ps. 131.1. Lord my heart is not haughty, nor mine
eyes lofty, neither do I exercise my self in great matters, or in things too
high for me.

There was likewise the gift of Faith, even to the working of Miracles, which
was nothing in the Lords esteem, without sanctifying Grace. 1 Cor. 13.2. Though
I have faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have no charity, I am
nothing. But the grace of faith in all that are endued with it, is precious. 2
Pet. 1.1. And the trial of this grace is said to be much more precious than of
gold, 1 Pet. 1.7.

There is also the gift of Prayer; and this furnishes a man with words and apt
composure, as to the outward form, but the grace of Prayer furnishes the heart
with the sense of its wants, and apprehension of the worth of grace, and fills
the soul with sighs and groans, when it wants words to speak its mind. There
was more of the grace of prayer in that short Petition of the self denying
Publican [God be merciful to me a sinner] than in many of the Pharisees long
prayers, and their fastings to boot. The Pharisees prayed by measure, and the
Papists pray by number, but a gracious spirit prays by weight, and such
prayers are most prevalent. Jam. 5.16. The effectual fervent prayer of a
righteous man avails much. Regard not then so much, how long thou prayest, or
what are thy expressions, in prayer as what are thy sighs and groans, and what
the serious sense of thy heart, in prayer and supplication. The special help
of the spirit lies in framing the heart with the affections, not the tongue
with words for prayer, as is evident, Romans 8.26. Likewise the Spirit also
helps our infirmities; for we know not what we should pray for as we ought;
but the spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings, which cannot
be uttered.

Measure not then the quantity of thy gifts to know what thou art in point of
Christianity, but try the quality, the sincerity and growth of thy grace. A
little grace, with little gifts, is of far greater value, than the greatest
gifts without grace. A small vessel, laden with Gold from the Indies, is of
more value than the greatest ship laden with Coals, Salt, or such like
Commodities.

Grace lies not merely in the head, but chiefly in the heart, and in the feet
also of a Christian, to wit, the habit of grace in the inward affection, and
the exercise in the outward conversation, or course of life, together with the
actings of the inward faculties.

1. In the heart, or inward affections. Thus, according to the tenor of the
new Covenant, the true grace of knowledge rectifies the heart. Jer. 31.33. But
this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, after those
days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in
their hearts. -- And it is the heart that God especially calls for. Prove. 23.26.
My Son give me thy heart. With the head man assenteth to the truth of God, but
with the heart man [consenting] believes unto righteousness, Romans 10.10. that
is, justifying faith is seated chiefly in the heart, I do not exclude the
understanding.

The head inventeth words, but the heart inditeth matter for prayer, and
praise, My heart is inditing a good matter, says David, Psalm. 45.1. The head
may dictate to the tongue, but grace frames and fixes the heart for duty.
Psalm. 57.7. My heart is fixed, O God my heart is fixed. Here the heart leads
the way to the outward service, calling upon, and awakening the tongue,
Psaltery and Harp, ver. 8. Awake my glory, that is my tongue, which is
therefore called our glory, because it is the instrument wherewith man
glorifies God: compare Psalm. 16.9. with Acts 2.26. and you shall find, that
that which the Psalmist calls the glory, the Apostle translateth the tongue
in quoting that text, Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad.

2. True Grace is also much in the feet of a Christian, I mean the exercise of
grace is in the course of life and conversation (not excluding the inward
exercise) which is called our way, wherein we are to walk according to the Word
of God. Thus also in the new Covenant, God promises (as to write his laws in
the hearts of his people, so) to cause them to walk in his statutes, Ezekiel.
36.27. Psalm. 119.59. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies, ver. 101. I have refrained my feet from every evil way. ver. 105.
Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. Walking is an act of
continuance, and imports the constant course of life in such Scripture-phrases
as these. Thus says David, Psalm. 119.1. Blessed are the undefiled in the way,
who walk in the law of the Lord; yea, Grace causes not only to walk, but also
to run in the ways of God: Thus likewise says David, Psalm. 119.32. I will run
the way of thy commandments. Thus Paul, I therefore so run, not as
uncertainly, 1 Cor 9.26. and he exhorts us, v. 24. So run, that ye may obtain.

Gifts have been, and are still much abused, but Grace cannot be misimplied.
The strivings, hot contendings, fearful schisms and factions in the Church of
Corinth, were made through the pride and vainglory of the gifted men among
them. There were so many tongues and so many speakers, puffed up with
self-conceit, that those gifts, which were given them for edification, were
abused to ostentation, and confusion in their solemn meetings: which Paul
corrects, as we read at large, 1 Cor. 14.

What is the cause of our sad divisions, and the great disorder that we are
grown into, but this, that men play the wantons with the gifts that God has
given them? Scripture tells us knowledge puffs up, 1 Cor 8.2. And when men are
swollen with pride, it is no mervaile if they break out into contention, for,
says Solomon, Only by pride comes contention, Prove. 13.10.

Let then the most humble, peaceable, selfe-denying, serious Christian, be
accounted the best, and let grace be ever preferred before gifts.

saving of his people from their sins, this informs us, that a soul given up
to a state of sin, is in a most sad condition. No judgment like that of being
given up to a reprobate sense, and vile affections: Had we stood with Abraham,
and seen Sodom flaming, and smoking with fire and brimstone, and so terrible
wrath from Heaven consuming her inhabitants, would not our hearts have aked
within us, at so dreadful a sight? But that which righteous Lot saw, while he
lived among them, which vexed his soul from day to day, even their filthy and
unlawful deeds, was, in itself a sight far more grievous to behold. Men are
apt to judge, that God is highly displeased with those that fall under some
remarkable, temporal judgment, but little regard his wrath, in giving up
souls to sin; yea, a seeming judgment sometimes begets an hasty and rash
censure: When the Viper fastened upon Paul's hand, no doubt, said the Barbarians
this man is a murderer, whom, though he has escaped the Sea, yet vengeance
suffers not to live, Acts 28.4. And had Job lived in our days, we should
have had many ready to charge him in the depth of his misery with wickedness,
and hypocrisy, as his friends did. But beloved, there is a sort of vengeance
from heaven, that lies upon the greatest part of the world, and upon many among
us, which is little regarded, and that is, Gods leaving men up to their own
hearts lusts. Romans 1.24, 26. Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness,
through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their bodies between
themselves; and ver. 26. For this cause God gave them up to vile affections. To
the like purpose speaks Solomon, Prove. 22.14. The mouth of strange women is a
deep pit, he that is abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein. And it is well
reckoned by the Psalmist, among the heavy judgments upon Israel in the
Wilderness, that when they lusted exceedingly, and tempted God, he gave them
their request, but sent leanness into their souls, Ps. 106.14, 16. Ps. 81.11,
12. But my people would not hearken unto my voice, and I rael would none of me;
so I gave them up unto their own hearts lusts, and they walked in their own
counsels: and the judgment upon evil men and seduce is, that they shall wax
worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived, 2 Timothy 3.13. And were it well
considered, we might observe the remarkable judgment of God upon many in these
times. How many of those that waxed wanton, and despised the precious Truths
and Ordinances of God, are now given up to swearing, drunkenness, whoredom,
and such like abominable wickedness! Had these men been smitten with
lightning, and thunderbolts from heaven, for their departure from the ways of
righteousness, we should have been ready to say, this is the finger of God.
Certainly God has already pointed them out more sadly by the heaviest
plagues, in that they have been given up to hellish blasphemies, and to work
wickedness with greediness; and his hand in this is more heavy upon them,
than if we had seen them fall dead in our streets. As it is the Saints
happiness that their little grace shall be improved; so is it the misery of a
multitude of seared Sinners, that their filthy and vile affections shall be
still increased, as it is written, Revel. 22.11. He that is unjust, let him be
unjust still, and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still; and he that is
righteous, let him be righteous still, and he that is holy, let him be holy
still.

CHAP. IV.
IF the great work of Christ our Savior be the saving of his people from their
sins, Use of Reproof.
then this reproves those that do what in them lies, to hinder this saving work
of Jesus Christ. And they are

1. Such as hinder the salvation of their own souls.

2. Such as hinder the salvation of others.

1. Such as hinder the salvation of own souls by resisting the grace of
Christ, tendered in the Word, and the friendly motions of the Spirit. How does
the Lord, by his Messengers, invite, entreat, persuade, and woo sinners for
their good, and they refuse and hate instruction, despise his messengers, and
harden their hearts against him! How do some neglect hearing, and but seldom
frequent the ordinances of God; others are grown careless in hearing, or
Sermon-proof, so that the Word takes little or no impression upon them, to the
grief of our hearts, and sadding of our spirits, who behold their sottishness!
And how many ways have sinners, that are convinced of their evil estate, to
play the Sophisters with their consciences, and delude their own souls, that
they may retain their beloved sins, though to their utter ruin! when Israel
and Judah sinned against the Lord, he testified against them by his Prophets,
and Seers, saying, Turn ye from your evil ways, and keep my commandments and
my statutes; -- notwithstanding they would not hear, but hardened their necks --
and they rejected his Statutes, and his Covenant that he made with their
Fathers, and his testimonies which he testified against them, and they followed
vanity, and became vain; therefore the Lord was angry with them, and rejected
all the seed of Israel, and delivered them into the hand of spoylers, till he
had cast them out of his sight, 2 Kings 17.13, 14, 15, 18, 19, ^0. And is not
God still the same? may you not expect the Lord to deal with you likewise? you
have sinned against the Lord, and he has testified against you by his
Ministers: Notwithstanding you refuse to hear, but harden your hearts against
the Lord, therefore is the Lord very angry, and that justly with you; yea, as
sure as you live the Lord will deliver you into the hands of Satan, and your
own corruption (the worst of spoylers) and eternally cast you out of his sight,
unless you embrace his counsel, and seek him in due time. What the Lord said
of Judah, because they refused the good way, may you take, as spoken of your
selves, for refusing the message of Christ, Hear, O Earth, behold I will bring
evil upon this people, even the fruit of their own thoughts, because they have
not hearkened unto my words, nor to my law, but rejected it, Jerem. 16 19. and
you may shortly be called with Jerusalem to take up a lamentation, because the
Lord has rejected and forsaken you, as the generation of his wrath, Jerem.
7.29. Yea know, that whereas the Lord is now importunate with you for your
good, and you set at naught his counsel, the time may shortly come, when you
shall call upon him in the bitterness of your soul, from the depth of your
distress, and he slight your cry, yea, laugh at your calamity, as you have
made but a mock at his Word. O Sinners, hear, and tremble at what the Lord has
spoken against you, Prove. 1.24. to 32. Because I have called and ye refused, I
have stretched out my hand and no man regarded, but ye have set at naught all
my counsel, and would none of my reproof; I also will laugh at your calamity, I
will mock when your fear comes: when your fear comes, as desolation, and
your destruction comes, as a whirlewind, when distress and anguish comes
upon you; then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek
me early, but they shall not find me: For they hated knowledge, and did not
choose the fear of the Lord: They would none of my counsel, they despised all
my reproof: Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be
filled with their own devices.

You think it a small matter to reject the Lords Messengers, and despise their
counsel, but herein you reject the Lord Christ himself, Luke 10.16 He that
despises you despises me. In this, as the Lord said to Samuel, 1 Samuel 8.7.
They have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not
reign ever them: So may I truly say, you have not rejected us, who are
Ministers, but you have rejected the Lord Christ our Savior, that he should
not reign over you: Yea, what do you less, than resist the salvation of your
own souls, when with the Pharisees and Lawyers ye reject the counsel of God,
Luke 7.30. May not I here take up the words of Steph: Act. 7.51. and say, Ye
stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in heart, and ears, ye do always resist the
holy Ghost. If they that resist the lawful authority of the civil Magistrate,
shall receive to themselves damnation, Romans 13.2
how just will the condemnation of those be, who resist the saving counsel and
authority of Jesus Christ! Who ever hardened himself against God, and
prospered? Job 9.4.

Sinner, the great work of Christ our Savior is to save his people from their
sins; and how is it, that thou will not be saved by him? that thou will
hazard thy soul to save thy sin? thy sin dishonours God, and God will
either destroy thy sin, or thee, Will thou lose thy soul to save thy base
lusts? have thou the like passionate affection to thy sin, as David had to
his Son Absalom, when he cried out [Would God I had died for thee?] yea,
though, as Absalom, it seeks to berave thee both of thy Life and Crown? Is
filthy abominable corruption so beautiful in thine eyes? Surely thy Dalilah
has betrayed thee into the hands of thine enemies, who have put out both thine
eyes, or else thou could not be so blindly sottish; for thou hardnest thy
heart against thy own soul.

salvation of others, and they are of diverse sorts.

1. Such as teach corrupt doctrine. If truth be the Lords instrument for the
sanctification of the soul (as it is said John 17.17. Sanctify them with thy
truth, thy word is truth) then error is a great means whereby souls come to
be corrupted, and held under Satan's slavery. Are not many seduced souls, that
formerly seemed to be in love with the ways of God, now turned to swearing,
cursing, blaspheming, and other like abominations; yea, and to commit these
sins with greediness? And are not the duties of Piety, as hearing, praying,
singing, sanctifying the Sabbath, and the like, accounted exercises unbeseeming
Saints? Yea, what wickedness is there but some of our late errors will lead a
man to in commission of it? and what course more effectual to bring sinners to
perpetual destruction, than when men make it their work to turn them from the
truth, which is the way of salvation? The Apostle calls the doctrine of the
teachers, (...) heresies of destruction, or as our Translation renders it,
damnable Heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1.

Some errors there are, that more evidently tend to hinder this work of Christ,
I shall instance in one or two of them. First, that Pelagian Heresy, that
denies the propagation of Original sin. They say [we derive sin from our
parents only by imitation.] How shall that enemy be destroyed, that is
concealed and denied? How shall a man labor to mortify this body of sin, when
he denies that we bear any such body about us? Surely Rahabs hiding the Spies,
was not more effectual to their preservation, and the ruin of the city
Jericho, than this Pelagian doctrine is to the saving of sin, and the utter
ruin of the soul. Whosoever covers his sins shall not prosper, but whosoever
confesses and forsakes them, shall have mercy, Prove. 28.13.

2. The Antinomians teach, that no man ought to doubt of Gods love, but
immediately believe that his sins were eternally pardoned, and himself
justified, and that whatever he does, he need not be in care or doubt: God sees
his sin no more, the Lord takes no notice of the sins of his servants, say
they, abusing that Scripture to that end; Numb. 23.21. He has not beheld
iniquity in Jacob, neither has he seen perverseness in Israel. And repentance
they affirm to be the voice of the Law, not of the Gospel.

Is not this the very way of the carnal multitude, to sin without godly sorrow,
and yet persuade themselves of an interest in Gods saving mercy? What is this
but to turn Faith into a mere fantasy? And whither does this tend, but to
make sinners secure in the midst of the greatest misery? O how many souls are
this day poisoned in England with this damnable doctrine! and how sad will the
account be of those that have so grossly deluded them! to deny the doctrine of
repentance to be Gospel-doctrine, is no less dangerous, and destructive to
souls, than that Popish doctrine, that denies Justification by Faith in the
alone merits of Jesus Christ.

I will not now stand to confute this presumptuous doctrine, it being improper
in a use of reproof, and it has been well done already by other By Mr.
Gataker, Mr. Anth: Burgess and others.
hands. But I shall leave a few texts of Scripture to your consideration, which
you may peruse at your leisure for a sufficient confutation, Exodus 4.14. 2.
Sam. 11.27. chapter 12. to v. 13. Psalm. 51.2 Sam. 24. 1 Kings 11.29. 2 Chronicles.
32.25, 26. Luke 13.3.5. Romans 2.4, 5. Acts 17.30.

And here I cannot but take notice by the way of a tenent, much applauded by
some in these parts, which carries all other errors in the belly of it, and it
is this, [That it is better that a hundred errors should be preached, than one
truth be lost.] To which I shall give answer,

First, this supposes, that those, who ordinarily preach Errors, have some
special truth to reveal, that others are ignorant of. But that is strange,
that a truth of God should be hid from all godly, able, and Orthodox Ministers
of the Gospel, and revealed to such as ordinarily maintain a multitude of
errors. When the Apostle (1 John 4.1.) bids Try the spirits, whether they are
of God, because many false Prophets are gone out into the world; he intimates,
that seducing spirits are not of God, and that those that preach gross Errors
are of the false Prophets that are gone forth. Now that God should reveal his
extraordinary secrets to such as these, and hide them from his servants the
Prophets, is a secret indeed, such (I believe) as was never heard of.

Secondly, If this position be true, the Jesuit may come in and plead for a
child's part in this toleration: for he will preach some truths with less than
a hundred errors.

Thirdly, This is a very strange way to preserve one Truth from being lost, for
if a hundred Errors be preached with one Truth, it is most like that the
hearers receive many of the Errors, and lose the Truth, that can scarcely be
discerned in so great a crowd of falsehood, especially considering how ignorant
the multitude is, and how prone we are by nature to err. And a stranger way
this is to nourish souls: Truth is as wholesome food, and Error of a poisoning
nature; and if you cut, and set before a child a hundred bits of poison, and
but one bit of wholesome food, and bid him eat, it is a hundred to one but he
poisons himself.

Fourthly, When a Preacher preaches Truth and Error mixed together, he
presses all upon the hearers for truth. Suppose then a hundred Errors and one
Truth should be received by the people, they lose a hundred truths for the
gaining of one; for in every error received, there is a truth lost to him that
receives the error, because every error is contradictory to some truth. Verily
he that should lose five pounds to gain a shilling, would at last be forced to
cry, Fie on the winning.

Lastly, A hundred errors, such as are in our days, were enough to make
another Gospel, or rather to pervert the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and then tell
me what means that saying, Galat. 1.8. There be some that trouble you, and
would pervert the Gospel of Christ; But though we, or an Angel from heaven,
preach any other Gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let
him be accursed. Consider also that saying, Romans 16.17. Now I beseech you
brethren, mark them which cause divisions, and offenses contrary to the
doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them.

I might instance in diverse other corrupt tenants tending to root out the power
of godliness, and that which makes the temptation the more strong and
dangerous, is, that all manner of corrupt and rotten tenants, go under the name
of higher seize: True piety is accounted but old formality, and the most
wanton Opinionists are reputed for precious Saints. But when Satan transformes
himself into an Angel of light, and his Ministers into Ministers of the Gospel,
no marvail if a vizour of holiness be put upon many strange faces, even
Familists, and Ranters will be rebaptized by the name of Saints, and Arius,
Pelagius, Socinus, etc. must be canonized. Doubtless, his Holiness, the Pope,
has much hopes of a great harvest amongst us, for by this time he may be
persuaded, that many of those that were so hot against a few Ceremonies,
calling them the rags and remnants of Popery, were offended with the rags,
because they were but rags, and rejected the remnants of Popery, because they
had a mind to receive it by the whole piece. What are the Doctrines of
Arminius, but pieces of Popery a little more finely dressed, that they may be
the more handsomely worn? or a Popish dish more finely cooked to please the
palate, and so go the more easily down. It Is not long since this assertion
[that God did choose his Elect for some excellency that he foresaw to be in
them] was presented to some of you, at a private meeting, in a Lordly dish. By
an Officer of the Army, who quartered in town.
Surely Papists are glad to see us relish so many of their dainties, and hope
we will make no bones of the rest; for after we have thus feasted with them a
while, they may expect us willing to fast with them too, seeing Ignorance is
become the mother of our Devotion. But through the mercy of God, though many
have surfeited, yet it is not become an epidemicall disease. Yea, blessed be
his name, he has reserved to himself, for the good of his Church, a
considerable party of faithful Ministers, whom he has furnished with ability,
and courage earnestly to contend for that faith that was once delivered to
them, that were Saints indeed. Yea, England is at this day furnished with a
greater number of godly, able and faithful Ministers of the Gospel, than any
of the generations of our Ancestors before us, or than is found in any other
nation throughout the world.

A second sort of those, that hinder the salvation of others, are such as are
enemies to the Churches Reformation. No doubt but the keys of Doctrine and
Discipline are both Christ's ordinary means for the saving of souls, yea, the
severe censure of excommunication, called a delivering up to Satan, is but for
the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the
Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5.5. And the sharpness of Discipline, as Paul likewise
tells us is a power that the Lord has given us to edification, and not to
destruction. 2 Cor. 13.10. And if so, then the resisting of this work of
Christ, tends to the saving of the flesh, and destroying of the spirit;
directly to destruction and not to edification. Bitter Pills, and purging
Potions, are for the health of the body, though harsh to the taste; and as
those that hinder the sick from the means of recovery, are plainly accessory to
their death, so is it in the case of our present Church-distempers. How do
some plead the disadvantage of these times, as those that cried out The time is
not come that the Lords house should be built. Hag. 1.2. others are ready to
scorn and deride the work, as Sanballat and Tobias, because of the weakness
and paucity of the builders. But if the work be the Lords (as I doubt not but
it is) he will surely declare, that his strength is made perfect in weakness.
Others, by reason of their wilful exorbitances, are bent to reject the yoke of
Christ, as too heavy for them (though easy in it self) and to say in their
hearts, Who is Lord over us? Oh that such would seriously consider that saying
of Christ, Luke 19.27. But those mine enemies, which would not that I should
reign over them, bring hither and slay them before me. Remember likewise what I
lately told you, that those that would be free from the reach of Christ's
Discipline, are fitter to be ranked amongst Heathens and Infidells, than to be
retained and privileged as members of the Church of Christ, 1 Cor. 5.12. What
have we to do to judge them that are without? do we not judge them that are
within? Those that are without, indeed are free from the rod of
Church Discipline, but those that are within ought to be ruled by it.

3. A third sort of those that hinder the work of Christ, in the saving of his
people from their sins, are Church-dividers such as cause divisions, and
contentions in the Church of God. The Church is called Gods building, and
Ministers are called builders in Scripture, and the work of edification, or
building, consists in mortizing, pinning, and firmly joynting the parts
together: to which the Apostle alludes, Col. 2.2. -- being knit together in
love -- (...). The word (...) is metaphorical, and signifies to frame and fix
together, as Carpenters firmly join beams, and other timber, for the
strengthening of their building. And if so, then unmortizing, unpinning, and
pulling down, (for such is the work of division) does not raise, but raze the
building, and is the ready way to the ruin and destruction of it. The
material Temple was built by Solomon in a peaceable reign, and by the
peaceable and united endeavors of them that labored in the Building: and when
Josiah repaired the decaies of the Temple, he gave money to buy timber for
couplings, 2 Chronicles. 34.11. But when axes and hammers were lifted up to hew
down, and knock in pieces, how fast was the beauty and strength thereof
destroyed! And how like is the voice of dividers to the voice of the Sons of
Edom, who at the sacking of Jerusalem, cried, Raze it, raze it, even to the
foundations thereof, Psalm. 137.7.

The Church also being here in a militant condition, is fitly compared to an
Army, an Army terrible with banners, Cant. 6.4, 10. An Army in the field,
though the particular parts of it be committed to the oversight and conduct of
several Captains, and other Officers, yet are they all one Army, under one
General, who gives them all one word, and one field-mark, whereby his
Soldiers may know and own each other in the Battle; and their beauty,
strength, safety, and terriblenesse to the Enemy, lies in their order, unity,
and cordial cleaving each to other under their General, who is Commander of
all. So is the Church of Christ one body, under Christ one Lord General,
known by one Word, or profession of Faith, signed by one Baptism, and
animated by one Spirit, engaging in one Cause, and encouraged with one Hope,
and by entire adhering each to other, all jointly following the conduct of
Christ the faithful Captain General of their Salvation, they become
beautiful, strong, safe, and the more formidable to their spiritall Enemies.
And aptly to our purpose the Apostle exhorts, that we stand fast in one
Spirit, Sat hostiu^ externorum habemus: Satis digladiatum and pugnatum est a
nostris, nonne gravissimo vulnere Ecclesiarum nostrarum, and caeterarum
Christi. Tempus esse ut illud Pauli recte perpenderemus: Quid si invicem
mordetis, videte ne invicem consumamini Joan. Pistorii Ep. ad Joan: Sturm.
Zanch. Ep l. 1.
Phil. 1.27. Those that understand any thing belonging to military Policy, know
that it is much better to fall upon an enemy in several Parties, than to let
them draw up together in one Body; much more to take the opportunity when they
are full of mutinies among themselves. When the Moabites thought, that the
Kings that came against them with their Armies, had fallen one upon another,
they cried, Up Moab to the Spoil. Had it been true according to their
thoughts, they could not have had a greater advantage; But doubtless Satan
does not mistake his opportunity of making a prey, and spoiling thousands of
souls by the advantage of our late and present distracting divisions.

Jerusalem was a type of the true Church under the Gospel. When David had
conquered the Jebusites, taken the castle of Sion, and the whole city was
united under his government, and in one way of worship (he himself being a
type of Christ, the King of his Church) then was that Psalm. 122. composed,
wherein we have an Encomium of their happy condition. If it was Jerusalems
happiness then to be so united, is it not her misery to be so divided? If it
were a lovely sight then, to see the tribes of the Lord going up together, to
give thanks to the Lord, how sad a sight is it now to see the Tribes going some
one way, some another, building Temple against Temple, and rearing Altar
against Altar?

The Soldiers that parted the Garment of Christ, would rather cast lots, than
divide his seamlesse Coat, but those that cause division and contention in the
Church, spare not to rend, not the coat, but the mystical body of Christ. The
Jews that crucified, pierced Christ his hands and his feet; but those that
cause divisions in the Church, set him upon the rack, to rend limb from limb,
and member from member, as is intimated in the words of Paul to the Church of
Corinth, when they were full of factions and schisms, 1 Cor. 1.13. Is Christ
divided? If Christ cried out, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? when he
persecuted his Church, and made havoc of it, and accounted it as an
intolerable injury done unto himself, not only because he has a sympathising
affection with his Church, but also because his Church is his Body, and is
called Christ, to wit, Christ mystical, 1 Cor. 12.12. Verily Christ might take
up a greater complaint against those, who by their divisions and subdivisions,
would tear him limb-meale; and if Paul were smitten down unto the earth, when
he heard the voice of Christ from heaven, methinks those that are Dividers in
the Church should be pierced to the heart, if they did but consider, and mind
the many affectionate calls of Christ in his Word for unity and peace: and the
sad complaints by reason of divisions and contentions, and his judgments
threatened against the authors and promoters of them. Consider but that one
threatening, Romans 2.8, 9, But to them that are contentious -- indignation and
wrath, tribulation and anguish.

We live in times wherein we have great expectation of the fulfilling of
glorious Gospell-prophecies, and promises; and (I doubt not, but) those that
concern the unity and peace of the Church, are to be numbered amongst them.
Zeph. 3.9. For then will I turn to the people a pure language, that they may
call upon the name of the Lord to serve him with one consent. Jer 32.39. And I
will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever. Neither
will these be esteeemed the meanest Gospel-mercies, for it is said in the
latter end of that verse, For the good of them, and their children after them.
But how far are we from the accomplishment of these things? yea, what
probability is there of it in our days? O miseram Christi Ecclesiam, quae
subinde veteribus, and optimis patribus ac doctoribus orbatur: ae novis vero^
imperitis ac furiosis hominibus invaditur, dilaniatur. Zanch. ep. ad Bulling.
If one heart and one way be for the good of a people and their children after
them (as that forementioned text tells us) then our heart-divisions, and
different ways are to be looked upon as a sore evil, both to us, and our
children after us. And it is much to be feared, that the children that are yet
unborne, will fare the worse for our present breaches.

Think not that the dislike of any one party alone, or sinister respects lead
me to speak thus much against dividing practices. Judge not my reproof and
complaint to be superfluous, neither plead for this, as Lot did for Zoar, say
not it is a little one; but hear a little (besides what is already spoken) what
further aggravations of this evil, are found in Scripture.

Paul, Rom 16.17, 18. Now I beseech you brethren, mark them which cause
divisions, and offenses contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and
avoid them: For they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their
own belly, and by good words and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the
simple. When the Apostle bids us mark, and avoid them, does he not rank them
with profane and gross sinners? we are commanded to withdraw from every
brother that walks disorderly, 2 These. 3.6. And says Paul, 1 Cor. 5 11. If any
man that is called a brother, be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or
a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such an one eat not. If the
command of withdrawing from such, and the prohibition of eating with such, is
because they are scandalous, the argument is of force to prove Church dividers
to be scandalous also: for the Apostle enjoins us to avoid them, as he commands
us to avoid fornicators, etc. therefore are Church-dividers equal (yea, I
might add, and justly too) more dangerous sinners. Fornicators, Swearers,
Drunkards, and such like, are accounted gross Sinners, and so they are, and
unfit for Christian communion, because their abiding within unreformed, tends
to the ruin of the Church: but how is it, that they that are of rending and
dividing principles and practices are not esteemed scandalous also, when
Scripture speaks so much against them, and their practices tend more
immediately to the Churches overthrow? Breaches in the roof and walls of an
house, by which rain beats in, and rots the timber-work, will cause a decay,
and ruin of the whole in time, if not repaired: But pulling beam from beam,
post from post, and rafter from rafter, is the most speedy way to ruin the
house. Godly persons are, or ought to be, careful to avoid communion with
gross sinners; and some judge it necessarily infectious, if they communicate
at the Lords table with a scandalous person. Whosoever is of that mind and
judgment, should be as fearful to receive the Sacrament with a wilful
Church-divider, as with a common Drunkard.

But when the Apostle says, mark them that cause divisions, and offenses,
contrary to the doctrine ye have learned, and avoid them; we must understand it
of those that divide by some heretical and false doctrine only, and not of
those that dissent in some smaller matters about Discipline, or the like.



2. If there be an unity in the truth with those from whom they divide, how
will they justify their practice, when they make a causeless breach? Nay,
will it not aggravate their sin? Impium enim, and sacrilegum est divortium,
quo in Christi veritate consentiunt distrahere, For it is a wicked and
sacrilegious divorce, to pull those asunder, who consent in the truth of
Christ. Scismaticos facit non diversa fides, sed communionis disrupta societas.
Aug.
If there be one Body, one Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God
and Father of all, can those that break all these bonds asunder, and cast these
cords away from them, be easily excused?

2. Consider how expressly contrary to John 13.34. A new commandment give I
unto you, that ye love one another, as I loved you, that ye also love one
another.

3. How expressly contrary it is to that John 13.35. Hereby shall all men know,
that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another.

4. How expressly it is contrary to that Ezekiel. 11.19. I will give them one
heart, and I will put a new spirit within you -- where oneness of heart, and
newness of spirit, are joined together.

5. Do not selfe-will'd dividers as Corinth. 1.10. Now I beseech you,
brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same
things, and that there be no divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly
joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. Phil. 2.1, 2. If
there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of Love, if any fellowship
of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like
minded, having the same love, being of one accord, and of one mind. May we not
out of these words have diverse patheticall arguments? but, for brevity sake, I
shall take that [if any bowels and mercies] as another argument for our
consideration.

bowels and mercies, who by rending and dividing, spare not to pull out the
very bowels of the Church? And when Peter says, 1 Pet. 3.8. Finally be ye all
of one mind, having compassion one of another, love as brethren, be pitiful
and courteous: Does not he so join, being of one mind, and having compassion
one of another, so together, and loving as brethren, and being pitiful, that
we may conclude, that true pity and compassion are banished away, where
division and contention possess the heart.

from the Church, pretend usually that they would have all things reduced to
the primitive pattern; and most necessary, indeed, it is, that we write after
that copy: But how unlike is a Church divided, rent and torn, to that Church
that continued with one accord in the Temple, praising God, being of one heart,
and of one soul?

8. As the Primitive church was the walls of partition and separation between
Christian and Christian, sow discord among brethren, and spare not to smite the
Lords sheepherds, that the sheep may be scattered? Will the Lord account this
an acceptable piece of service? nay, is it not an abomination to him? See Prove.
6.16, 17, 18, 19. These six things does the Lord hate, yea, seven are an
abomination unto him, a proud look, a lying tongue and hands that shed innocent
blood, an heart that devises wicked imaginations, feet that be swift in
running to mischief, a false witness that speaks lies, and him that sows
discord among brethren. The last is not the least of these evils, and he that
is guilty of the seventh, cannot well be free from most of the six
forementioned abominations.

Obj. But it is hard charging so much evil upon this one miscarriage; for it is
to be feared, that many godly men, especially in these times, are guilty of it.

Answ. The sin is never the less in its own nature, because godly men (be
they of one party or other) are guilty of it: Murder and Adultery are not a
whit the less evil, because David, so eminent a Saint, was guilty of them; nor
Idolatry the more to be pleaded for, because Solomon fell to the commission of
it; nor is Polygamie to be accounted a small sin, because many of the godly
Fathers under the Law, lived in it: Yea, it is a greater sin, for such as are
godly to commit, than such as have no fear of God before their eyes. The worth
of the person will but add to the weight of the sin; and the Lord aggravates
the crimes of David, Solomon, and other of his servants, because they were
committed against greater mercies, grace, and light.

Upon these considerations, as I cannot but judge this a necessary reproof, so
I am bound highly to prize (and say, blessed be) the labors, studies, and
endeavors of those, who seriously mind and trace out the way of peace, so
little known. And the Church shall reap more benefit, and they themselves more
comfort by such endeavors, than ever any shall receive by all their ranglings,
and perverse disputings for things that are of sevenfold less consequence than
the Church's unity and peace. And I doubt not (my brethren in the work of the
Gospel) but your late and continued prayers, and endeavors for unity and
concord, in the Churches of Christ, will yield you more comfort and peace in
the day of your account, than all that ever you read, or shall read of our
novel controversies. Let us go on then I beseech you, and be as zealous for
unity and peace, as others are for strife and contention; and if there be no
remedy but we must strive, let us strive and pray for the peace of Jerusalem,
yea, let us strive with God in prayer, that her walls may be built up, and that
peace may be within her walls, and prosperity within her palaces, for they
shall prosper that love her.

salvation of others from their sins, are such as are men of evil practices,
who by their bad examples, do mischief to many. Man is of an imitating nature,
especially in things that are evil; spiritual diseases are infectious, and
this is one maine reason, why admonition is required, in case of disorderly
walking, and excommunication enjoined in case of obstinate scandal, because
sinful examples are of a leavening, and infectious nature. A little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump, examples of evil are more effectual for mischief,
than all the arguments we can use for good upon the souls of men; for one that
is saved by good instruction from the Word of God, a hundred perish by evil
example.

As evil examples are dangerous in all, so more especially in these four sorts
of persons following: 1. Ministers. 2. Magistrates, and other persons of note.
3. Superiors of near relation. 4. Eminent Professors.

1. Ministers, who are of scandalous conversation. The example of a Minister in
evil, is very pernicious, because he is sent to teach the way of Salvation;
and people will think, that if those, whose calling it is to study, and teach
the way of Salvation, do these things, they may much more do the same. Is it
not found by sad experience, that where people have lived under profane, and
superstitious Ministers, they are generally so wickedly, and superstitiously
bent, that it is a hard matter for a godly Minister, succeeding in such a
place, to win a little upon them in much time with the most serious and
sedulous endeavors. Such evil Ministers may preach, as long as they live, and
do but little good, unless they amend their manners. Let their Sermons be
never so finely spun, they will be but like Penelope's thread, no sooner done,
but undone again. To preach holiness, and practice wickedness, is but to
do, and undo: a good Sermon is soon ravelled by the bad life of the preacher.
Ministers are Gods builders, and Gods building requires both hands to the
work: but ill-living Ministers, pull down more with the one hand, then they
build with the other. They spend an hour or two in teaching people the way to
salvation, and the whole week besides in leading them the way to utter
destruction. If that saying be true, Longum iter ad doctrinam per praecepta,
per exempla vero breve, It is a long way to learn by precept, but short by
example; Then such Ministers teach their people the farthest way to heaven, but
the nearest way to hell: It is said of Plato, an ancient Philosopher, that he
was crook-back'd, and his Scholars strove to imitate him in that deformity. So
do people readily imitate the crooked and deformed practices of their teachers.

Such Ministers are they, that harden the wicked in their wickedness, grieve
the godly, open the mouths of those that vilify and reproach our Ministry, and
turn the weak and infirm out of the way, like the Sons of Eli, who by their
wretched wickedness, caused the people to abhor the offering of the Lord. O
that the judgment of God upon the house of Eli, were well considered by such
scandalous wretches! yea, the judgment in part is already executed upon some
of them, who are sequestered from their livings, outed from their service, and
reduced to a needy craving condition for some small employment. To such may be
applied the woe denounced against the wicked Scribes and Pharisees. Mat. 23.13.
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye shut up the kingdom of
heaven against men; for ye neither go in your selves, neither suffer ye them
that are entering to go in. O how sad and dreadful will that saying be unto
them one day! Their blood will I require at thy hand.

2. Magistrates, who are of bad conversation, do much hurt. Magistrates are set
to be a terror to evil doers; but when they give bad example, they are
teachers of evil doers. A Magistrate's practice is taken for an authentic
example: If a Magistrate go to the Alehouse, no marvel if the profane rabble
run: if a Magistrate sit idly there an hour, inferior drunkards will take
leave to sit by it all night: if a Magistrate swear now and then, the common
swearer will think himself secure. And no wonder, that some Magistrates are so
slow to punish wickedness in others, when they themselves stand guilty of the
same crimes. The evil examples, as well as the remissness of many of the
Magistracy in England, have been a great cause of swarming wickedness in all
parts of the Land: and the more eminent the person in rule and authority is,
the more pernicious is his evil example; the open sins of great persons
(therefore) are not small: the higher the mountain is, the farther it is seen:
the bad examples of wicked Kings in Israel proved infectious to all Israel
generally; they are said to sin and to make Israel to sin. Yea, so great was
the contagion of this disease, that following generations were infected by it:
It Is no new thing for men to imitate the vices of their ancestors, long after
they are dead and gone. How was Jeroboams Idolatry imitated by diverse
succeeding Kings? 1 Kings 15.26. Nadab, the son of Jeroboam did evil in the
sight of the Lord, and walked in the way of his father, and in his sin,
wherewith he made Israel to sin. Verse 33.34. And Baasha did evil in the sight
of the Lord, and walked in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin wherewith he
made Israel to sin. Thus we see how great and dangerous the influence of evil
example is in great persons: The Lord grant that succeeding generations may not
imitate the horrible sins, that have been committed in our days. The outing of
scandalous Ministers was judged necessary as a mean of reformation; I wonder
how the outing of sacandlous Magistrates came to be neglected.

3. The evil example of superiors of near relation, is very hurtful, as of
Parents and Masters. If Masters be wicked, their Servants will sooner learn
their wickedness, than their trades: Seven years are accounted little enough
to learn a trade; but the trade of sin is soon learned with little teaching,
for there is an aptitude in nature to it. If Parents be ungodly, what more to
be expected, than that their Children tread in their steps? how sad is it
little children babble out oaths and curses, before they are able to speak
plain; but what is less to be looked for? Is it any wonder that children of
Welsh parents speak Welsh, that children of Irish parents speak Irish, and that
every child speaks the language of his parents, that educate him? Is not our
native language therefore called our mother tongue, because we learnt it in the
very lap? When we therefore hear children swearing, and cursing in the
streets, it is easy to guess what language their parents speak. Children
naturally grow like their parents in person and feature; but most of all do
they resemble them in their ill-favored conditions and practices: and when we
see and hear the profaneness of children, we may soon know of what breed they
are of. Alas, how sad is the account of such parents, who have received command
from God to train up their children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord,
Ephesians. 6.4.
but lead them on in ways of ungodliness. If so heavy a judgment befell Eli,
and his house, because his sons were vile, and he restrained them not, what a
curse abides upon the persons and families of such parents, who daily teach
their children to sin against God, their own wicked lives being the copies
their children write after. I doubt not but Eli gave his sons good example; and
when he heard of their miscarriages, he rebuked them plainly, as you may read 1 Samuel 2.23, 24.25. And yet if notwithstanding this, the Lord brought so heavy a
judgment upon Eli and his house, because he did no more to restrain them; What
judgment (then) do such parents bring upon themselves and their families, who
are leaders of their children by example to sin.

4. Evil example in those that are eminent professors, is very injurious to
many souls. Their bad examples are of two sorts: 1. In matters of Practice. 2.
In matters of Opinion. First, in matters of practice, which is also of two
sorts: First more gross, and seldom miscarriages. Secondly, more light and
frequent. First, their more gross (though seldom) miscarriages, do much evil
to diverse. 1. Wicked men are hardened in their wickenesse, and more prejudiced
against the ways of God, whereby their salvation from sin is the more
difficult. 2. They are emboldned the more to reproach and vilify the ways and
servants of God. 2 Samuel 12.14. By this deed thou have given great occasion to
the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, said the Lord by Nathan to David, when he
had fallen into those sins of Adultery and Murder.

2. In miscarriages less, and more frequent. Herein the examples of eminent
Christians are a snare to many; as for example, Some that have been long, and
some noted in the profession of Religion, allow themselves much liberty of vain
talking, unseemly jesting, and sometimes too far complying in evil company:
Now how does this 1. tend to confirm carnal Persons in the like vanity? They
will be ready to say such and such, that are good men, and know more than we,
do thus and thus; why may not we do so too? 2. Weak Christians are brought to
allow themselves more liberty than formerly they did, when they see professors,
far more eminent than themselves, not to be so strict, I doubt not but diverse
Christians can, by experience say, the examples of good men in evil practices,
have done them much wrong; and their lighter miscarriages, in this respect, do
more injury than their soul falls. There was little danger of godly men's being
inclinable to imitate David in his Adultery and Murder: it would be matter of
caution and lamentation, rather, because the offenses were foul and notorious,
and conscience would much resist such temptations at the first thought of them;
but vain talking, idle jesting, and the like, are looked on as small, and no
evils, and many are inclinable to think they may possibly be allowed, yet have
some scruple and hesitancy, and will forbear such vanity for fear of
offending: But when they hear an eminent Christian taking liberty in the way
they formerly feared, flesh and blood will be ready to say, How needless were
such fears and doubts? taking such a man's example to be a resolution of the
doubt.

Eminent and ancient professors had great need to look to their ways, and set
a narrow watch before the door of their lips.

2. In matters of Opinion, examples of eminent Professors do much mischief in
these times. When a Cedar falls, it beats down many shrubs under it: when a
noted person for parts and piety receives an opinion, how many are swayed by
his example? And the temptation in this is more dangerous, than in most
practical miscarriages; for weak Christians ordinarily know what is good or
evil, in things of common conversation and importance; but they want judgment
to weigh controverted doctrines; and therefore follow the example of such as
they best esteem. The proof of this is too full by the sad experience of these
times.

A fifth way of hindering the salvation of people from their sins, is by evil
enticements, counsels and persuasions. Sinners, who are Satan's agents, have
their crafty allurements; hence Solomon gives warning, Prove. 1.10. If sinners
entice thee, consent thou not. Solomon describes the manner how Harlots entice
young men to commit folly; you may read it at your leisure, Prove. 7.6. to 24.
Drunkards have likewise their enticements to gain their companions, and when
they are entangled, they have their various artifices to draw them in to
excess. Ale-sellers also have their fetches to bring in customers to throw
away their money, and precious time in swinish swilling. It Is a sad complaint
that I have heard of some of the wives of poor laborers, that their husbands
can hardly pass with a penny in their pockets, but they are drawn into one
Alehouse or another to spend it, while their wives and children want bread at
home. (This the Magistrate may do well to look to.) But it is far more sad to
consider the wickedness and mischief of such inticers, to the souls of those
that are entangled by them: they plead they cannot live and thrive, unless
they use such means to draw their beer. But alas, what a living is it to live
by the sins of men, to destroy souls for a little gain! The Jews refused to
put Judas his thirty pieces of Silver into the Treasury, because it was the
price of blood; but these inticers make a treasury by the blood of souls, mean
while treasuring up to themselves wrath against the d^y of wrath I doubt not
but the calling in it self is both lawful and necessary; but there are few
that use it lawfully.

Well, whosoever thou art, that art an enticing sinner, that have made it thy
practice to draw others to sin; consider how many souls have perished, and are
like to perish eternally by thy inticements. Thou that art an enticing
drunkard, are not some, whom thou made thy roaring companions now roaring in
hell for the sins that were of thy procurement? When Cain had killed his
brother Abel, said God, Where is thy brother Abel -- the voice of thy brothers
blood cries unto me from the ground: And now art thou cursed from the earth,
which has opened her mouth to receive thy brothers blood from thy hand. So may
the Lord say to thee, where are thy companions thy brethren? the voice of the
blood of their ruined souls, cries to me from hell: And how art thou cursed
from hell, which has opened her mouth to receive thy companions souls at thy
hand! What if thou had wilfully murdered thy Neighbor, by stabbing, or
cutting his throa, would not thy conscience terrify thee, and all men cry out
of thee, as a most desperate and wicked wretch, unfit to live upon the earth? O
the blood of souls is most precious blood; the destroying of one soul is more
than the killing of a hundred innocent persons, and this is the sin, even soul
murder, that thou art guilty of; and if the judgment of Cain be sevenfold,
surely thy judgment must be seventy times sevenfold.

The Danger is greater, when the Inticement is from a special Omnis inimica
amicitia, seductio mentis investigabilis, etc. Aug Con. l. 1. c. 9.
friend, or one of near relation. The enticement of a wife is strong with a
husband, and the enticement of a husband is strong with a wife: Satan can do
more by such instruments, than by his immediate temptations, or by the threats
of an enemy: therefore when Satan had overcome Eve, he makes use of her to
tempt her husband, as being a more likely way to prevail, than to treat with
him himself. Thus he made use of Solomon's wives to draw him to Idolatry. For
this cause the Lord forbad the Israelits to make marriages with Idolaters.
Deuteronomy. 7.3, 4. Neither shall thou make marriages with them; thy daughter thou
shall not give unto his son, nor his daughter shall thou take unto thy son: For
they will turn away thy son from following me, that they may serve other Gods.
And Paul gives the like admonition to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 6.14. Be not
unequally yoked together with unbelievers. And, as the Lord warned the
Israelites of the danger that would ensue upon the making of such Marriages; so
accordingly it befell them, when they transgressed this command, Their strange
wives became a snare to them. Judges 3.5, 6. And the children of Israel dwelt
among the Canaanites, Hittites, Amorites, Perisites, Hivites, and Jebusites;
And they took their daughters to be their wives, and they gave their daughters
to their sons, and served their gods. It was Sampsons Delilah that betrayed him
into the hands of the Philistims. And how is it found by sad experience, that
such as yoke themselves unequally for carnal advantages, are much ensnared in
their spiritual condition. When Marriages are made, the infidelity or
profaneness of the one party is not sufficient to make a necessary divorce;
but the believing and spiritual are to do what they can to win the unbelieving
and carnal: yet when persons are free, they had best take heed how they
entangle themselves. And woe to that person that becomes a snare.

Thou that art an enticing husband, can thou not be content to perish alone,
but thou must needs draw thy wife to the same eternal ruin with thee? Thou
that art an enticing wife, can thou not be satisfied to perish alone, but
thou must draw thy husband to the same everlasting torment with thee? must you
needs go to hell by couples? As those that have been happy instruments in
saving their yoke-fellows, shall reap the everlasting comfort of it: So, on the
contrary, it will be an everlasting torment to those husbands and wives, who
have been Satan's instruments in destroying each others souls. O consider this
and lay it to heart before it be too late.

The last way I shall mention, of hindering the saving of people from their
sins, is by persecution. Although now there is not (blessed be God) such open
persecution with violence, as in the days of Popish Kings and Rulers with fire
and faggot, and other ways of torture: Yet, the scorns, decisions, and
abuses, that have been offered to the ways and servants of God, have been a
great means to hinder some, by discouraging them in the way and to turn others
out of the good way, wherein they were going. In these times (I confess) a
slight form of godliness, and some smooth words, About matters of Religion
especially the arguing of controversies in diverse opinions, is in great credit,
and much in fashion, and the upper garment of Saint ship, is the very livery of
the times we live in. But the power of godliness is but here and there found,
and serious Christian practice has little savor and acceptance. He that will
be a Christian indeed, shall be reviled by the profane party on the one hand
for his preciseness and scorned and vilified by our Novelists on the other
hand, as a Legallist and Formalist, as one that trusts to, and hopes to be
saved by his duties. Is not ancient serious christian practice every where
spoken against by the wantons of our age, who account old steadfast professors
no better than Pharisees, and Selfe-justitiaries? It was a cruel practice of
Paul, before his conversion, that he persecuted the Saints, shutting many of
them up in prison, and gave his voice against them when they were to be put to
death, and that he punished them often in every Synagogue, and being exceedingly
mad against them, persecuted them even to strong cities; but the most
mischievous of all was that he compelled them to blaspheme, Acts 26 10, 11. The
other were but temporal sufferings, this a spiritual mischief. So now may we
say, it was a murtherous practice in Bonner, and others, that burned the Saints
in the days of Queen Mary: but of far more evil consequence is the sin of
those, that by scoffs, and scorns at the power of godliness, under specious
pretenses, have deluded many simple souls, causing them to blaspheme the
ancient, tried, and approved ways of God, and rejoice in it, as if they had
done God good service. O how does this confirm the ungodly in the midst of
their wickedness! and cause many, that began to mind Religion, to take up
with a slight Antinomian profession, and go no further! And how sad is it to
hear many talk of Gospel liberty, and Saints privileges applying all to
themselves, while they are in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity;
their lives and conversations plainly declaring, that they are as great
strangers to the worth of Regeneration, as ever Nichodemus was; And while they
promise liberty, they bring themselves into real bondage. 2 Pet. 2.18, 19.

Whosoever thou art, that have had a hand in managing this will of the Devil,
to secure poor Souls in the midst of their sins, as it were bidding them sleep
on, and take their rest, crying peace, peace, where there is no peace; know,
that a fearful woe belongs to thee, the blood of those souls which thou have
destroyed, will be required at thy hands. Suppose thou had seen the vision of
John, in the opening of the fifth Seal, Rev. 6.9, 10. and had beheld under
the Altar, the Souls of them that were slain for the Word of God, and for the
Testimony which they held: and had heard them crying with a loud voice,
saying, How long (O Lord) holy, and true, do thou not judge, and avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the Earth; would thou not have blessed thy self
from being of the number of them, that should have a hand in their blood? But
there will a louder, and more direful cry from poor damned souls in hell be
lifted up for vengeance against thee, even those, whom thou have destroyed, by
teaching them to spurn at the power of godliness. The Martyrs, that were
slain, died but temporally to live eternally; but those poor Souls, whom thou
have taught to score at holiness indeed, must die eternally and without
recovery.

O that all these sorts of hinderers of the work of Christ in saving people
from their sins, had but this reproof set home upon their hearts! O that
seducing Teachers, mischievous Dividers, scandalous Ministers, and others
exemplary for wickedness, that enticing Sinners, and self-admiring Scorners at
Godliness, had but the loud cry of dying souls, that by their means perish in
their wickedness, continually ringing in their ears, that it might be a means
to recover them out of their sin before they be also condemned to the same pit
of hellish howling.

CHAP. V.
FIrst let me exhort you in general to get your hearts deeply possessed with
the consideration of this truth, 1. Use of Exhortation.
That the great work of Christ our Savior, is the saving of his people from
their sins. This will be of great concernment to the glory of God, and the
good of your own and others souls, as will more fully appear in the following
discourse. The not understanding, and want of consideration of this, is the
cause of great contentedness in sin among profane and earnall persons. They
look only upon judgment, as the great evil they are liable unto, as for
their sins, they love, and delight in them, as if there were no evil in them.
So little do most consider of the evil of sin, that were it not for fear of
the judgment annexed to the Law, and denounced against sinners, they would
have no thoughts of ever-leaving their sins: the Language of many poor carnal
souls declares as much. Tell a profane person of his evil courses, so as to
convince him of his sin, he will answer, he hopes he may repent hereafter,
and God may have mercy on him at the last: The example of the Thief on the
Cross much takes with him; but for present reformation he has no mind to it.
Tell me plainly, thou that live in known sins, being convinced in
conscience of the evil of them, and that yet there is no saving work wrought
upon thy heart: Tell me, I say, and let Conscience answer, when thou have had
good motions upon thy heart from the Spirit of God in thy solitary seasons, or
when thou have been plainly showed by some powerful Sermon, what thy state is,
how sinful and damnable: Has not thy deceitful heart wedded to corruption,
silenced the voice, and quieted the workings of conscience, by telling it [this
work of turning to God, and seeking his grace is indeed necessary to salvation,
but this is a work that may be done hereafter; and so it be done any time, it is
well enough, though in sickness, or old age.] And does not this plainly show,
that thine ey is only upon the evil of suffering for sin, and not upon sin it
self? for were sin accounted a greter, or as great an evil as suffering, yea,
were it accounted an evil of any moment at all, there would be no pleading for
a little more slumber, a little more folding of the hands to sleep in sin. Were
sinners as sensible of the evil of sin, as of the pain of scorching flames, oh
how would they awake, and rouse up themselves and plead no longer for the flesh
to delight it self in sensual pleasures!

Is it not ignorance in this point, that is the cause why so many, in these
times, will not account a Sermon of repentance or holiness, worth the hearing,
and that the Preacher, that spends much time upon such subjects, is esteemed no
better than ignorant of the mysteries of the Gospel? Is not ignorance of this
doctrine the cause why so many self-conceited, self-sending teachers, meddle so
little with the prophetical, and kingly office of Christ, and insist almost
wholly upon his Priestly office, and handle that but by the halves too? They
are much upon the satisfaction, which Christ has made to God for sin by his
fulfilling the Law, and suffering for us: but the purchase of sanctifying grace
is little taken notice of. Verily every office of Christ is very necessary to
the saving of his people: His Prophetical office is necessary to their
teaching and enlightening in the ways of holiness his Kingly office is
necessary for the subduing of rebellious lusts and affections, for the
conducting of them; and leading them on in the paths of righteousness, and his
purchase (as he is our Priest) of sanctifying grace is as necessary as his
obtaining pardoning grace for us.

The not laying of this to heart, is surely the cause of so much slightness
and remissness, even in many of the children of God themselves in their whole
spiritual course. Tell me truly, thou that fear God, and dissemble no
longer to thy own injury, and Gods dishonor, Have thou not many times said
thus in thy heart [I am verily persuaded my estate is good before God, that I
have true grace, and an interest in the precious merits of Jesus Christ, and
though I be not so careful, watchful, and spiritual, as I might be, though I
give way to such and such lesser evils, and neglect such and such smaller
duties, yet having an interest in Christ, who is able to save me to the
uttermost, all these will be pardoned, and done away in the day of account, and
being not under a covenant of works, but of free grace for the remission of
sins, I need not be so very scrupulous.] Whence now comes such evil and
carnal reasonings in thy heart, but from hence, that thou little considerest
that the great work and care of Christ is to save thee from thy sins? Thou
look upon suffering as the greatest evil, and upon sin as little in
comparison of it; thou think free grace is chiefly, yea, almost wholly, if
not only, to be admired in the remission of sins, and magnified in the
justification of Gods Elect diminishing his grace in their sanctification. O
how exceedingly is God dishonored, not only by wicked men, but even by his
own children also, for want of rightly considering wherein their salvation
lies! O learn now, if thou have not hitherto considered it, that it is the
great work of Christ to save his people from their sins: And to that end
weigh well the arguments confirming the Doctrine.

And to the end thou may be further helped in thy understanding of this
truth, of so great importance, study again, and consider better very many
Scriptures, that speak of the work of salvation by Christ, and see whether thou
have not exceedingly straightened the sense and meaning of them, by conceiving
them to speak of salvation from the fruits of sin only, when they specially
intend salvation from sin only. Did not these words in the text, He shall
save his people from their sins, and these words, Behold the lamb of God,
which takes away the sins of the world, seem to thee to be meant only of
the guilt and punishment of sin? O learn now more clearly and fully to
understand the sense of Scripture concerning Gospel Grace, and know, that
Christ's saving his people, by sanctifying them, as well as justifying them, is
the very stream both of the old and new Testament.

And here, that I may help your understanding a little, I shall instance 1. In
the Sacraments and Types. 2. In the Promises. 3. In the Prophesies of the old
Testament. 4. In the Sacraments of the new Testament. 5. In the
Gospel-invitations, together with some other texts of Scripture. Sacraments
ordinary.


1. For the Sacraments, which were ordinary in the old Testament, Circumcision
of the flesh signified circumcising, that is, the sanctifying of the heart.
Circumcision.
Deuteronomy. 30.6. And the Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of
thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy
soul, that thou may live. Romans 2.29. He is a Jew which is one inwardly, and
circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose
praise is not of men, but of God: Consider the foregoing verses. On the
contrary, evil and unsactified hearts are called uncircumcised in Scripture.
Lev. 26.41. -- If then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled. -- Jer. 9.25, 26.
Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will punish them which are
circumcised with the uncircumcised, Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, and the
children of Ammon, and Moab, and all that are in the utmost corners, that dwell
in the wilderness; for all these nations are uncircumcised, and all the house
of Israel are uncircumcised in the heart. Acts 7.51. Ye stiff-necked, and
uncircumcised in heart, and ears, ye do always resist the holy Ghost; as
your fathers did, so do ye. Circumcision then (as you see) was not only a
seal of the righteousness of faith.

The Passover.
The Passover, or Paschall Lamb, Exodus 12. was a Type of Christ, the Lamb of
God, that takes away the sins of the world, as it has been explained before.
The sprinkling of the blood upon the doore-posts signified the sprinkling of
the blood of Christ upon the heart and soul, for removing of the filth, as
well as the guilt of sin, which was also signified by other sprinklings and
washings of the Law, as I shall show you anon.

Sacraments extraordinary.
The Baptism in the cloud, and in the red Sea, figured the same which is now
signified by our Baptism under the Gospel, of which I shall speak in its due
place.

The Manna in the wilderness was a type of Christ, who is the bread of Life,
upon whom whosoever feeds by faith, has a spiritual life in Christ; he
dwelling in Christ, and Christ in him, to wit, by the graces of his spirit.
Christ himself thus expounded what the Manna signified, as you may read at
large. Ioh. 6.48. to 59.

Types.
The Brazen serpent, Numb. 21.9. with John 3.14, 15. was a type of Christ,
restoring spiritual life, as well as delivering from the death of
condemnation. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, even so must
the Son of Man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life. And this is life eternal, that they might know thee
the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent, John 17.3.

The Laver, Exodus 30.17. typified our sanctification by the Blood of Jesus
Christ. Ephesians. 5 25, 26. Even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself
for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the
Word. We read of the Laver of regeneration, Tit. 3.5. (...). According to his
mercy he saved us by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost.

The blood of the Sacrifices sprinkled, signified the blood of Christ in its
sanctifying virtue. Heb. 9.1^, 14. For if the blood of Bulls and of Goats, and
the ashes of an Heighfer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying
of the flesh, How much more shall the blood of Christ, who, through the
eternal spirit, offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience
from dead works, to serve the living God! chap. 10.22. Let us draw near with a
true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an
evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water.

The Promises.
2. Let us consider the Promises, even of the covenant of promise. Jer. 31.33.
But this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel: after those
days, says the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in
their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people. Ezekiel. 36.26,
27. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you,
and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an
heart of flesh. And will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them. Here you see how large
a part of this Covenant consists in the promises of sanctifying grace.

Prophecies.
3. Let us consider the Prophesies. Zach. 13.1. In that day there shall be a
fountain opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for
sin, and for uncleanness. It is the uncleanness of sin that is washed away by
this Fountain of Grace. Isa. 61.1, 2, 3. The spirit of the Lord God is upon me,
because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek, he has
sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives,
and the opening of the prison to them that are bound, etc. This freedom here
spoken of, is from a state of thraldom in sin, from the bondage of corruption,
as well as from the obligation to punishment; for it is said, ver. 3. the
latter part, That they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of
the Lord, that he might be glorified. The like we have chap. 42. 6, 7. I the
Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will
keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the
Gentiles; to open the blind eyes, and bring out the prisoners from the prison,
and them that sit in darkness out of the prisonhouse. Here we see that the
opening of blind eyes is spoken of; and what is that, but the grace of saving
knowledge? and what the prison is, you may gather out of my foregoing words
upon the former text. Mal. 3.2, 3. He (to wit, Christ) is like refiners fire,
and like fullers soap: And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver,
and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that
they may offer to the Lord an offering in righteousness.

Sacraments of the N.T.
4. The Sacraments of the New Testament signify the same sanctifying grace.
Romans 6.4. We are buried with him by baptism into death, that like as Christ
was raised up from the dead by the glory of the father, even so also we should
walk in newness of life. 1 Cor. 6.11. But ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified. Here you see the washing of Baptism signifies
the sanctifying, as well as the justifying virtue of the blood of Christ. John
1.35. He that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom
thou shall see the Spirit descending, and remain on him, the same is he which
baptiseth with the holy Ghost. See also chap. 5.3. Except a man be born of
water, and of the spirit, etc. Here the water of Baptism signifies Regeneration
by the spirit of Christ, Tit. 3.5. 1 Pet. 3.21.

The Lords Supper is for the strengthening of Faith, and the several graces of
the spirit in the Soul, and Food is for the maintaining and increasing of
natural strength. John 6.55. My flesh is meat indeed, my blood is drink
indeed.

5. Let us take a view of some of the principal Gospel inviations: Isa. 55.1.
Ho, Gospel-invitations.
every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, etc. Joh. 7.37. In the last
day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood, and cried, saying, If any man
thirst, let him come unto me and drink, Rev. 22.17. And the spirit and the
bride say, Come, and let him that hears say, Come, and let him that is
athirst come, and whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely. In
these texts we see free and gracious offers made to the thirsty, and
accordingly our Savior Christ pronounces them blessed, which do hunger and
thirst after righteousness, Mat. 5.6. Hungring and thirsting are metaphorical
expressions, and signify the earnest and importunate desire of the soul; for
as the hungring and thirsting appetite is not satisfied, but with meat and
drink, which it earnestly craveth; so the soul that is truly sensible of its
wants, is restless, unless it obtain a supply. Now let it be considered,
whether the offers, before mentioned, be only of pardoning grace, and the
blessedness, Christ speaks of, be to such as hunger and thrist after his
justifying righteousness only; or whether sanctifying grace is not here
principally (I do not say, only) intended. Should we understand these of
pardoning and justifying grace alone, who would not desire such grace, that
ever heard of it? Should the blessedness here spoken of belong to all that
earnestly desire Christ's justifying righteousness who among us, would fall
short of the blessing, that ever heard the Gospel preached? The most wicked
among us desire to be pardoned for the sake of Christ, and justified by his
righteousness; and if in their health and prosperity they little regard it,
yet when sickness arresteth them, and death looks them in the face, they
unfeignedly desire it, which is, to hunger and thirst after it: and so the
multitude of wicked and ungodly men, that live and die in their sins, would
be pronounced blessed by Christ himself, it here were no more intended. When a
wicked impenitent sinner lies upon his deathbed, and expresses his desire,
that God would pardon his sin for the sake of Christ, and justify him through
his righteousness, we have no reason to think that he dissembles, not meaning
what he speaks, for who would be willing to be condemned? But those gracious
offers hold forth to us both pardoning and sanctifying grace; and sanctifying
grace more especially: Hear John explaining the invitation of Christ
forementioned, John 7.37, 38, 39. But this he spoke of the Spirit, which they
that believe on him should receive. And what Spirit is this, but the holy
Ghost, which is our Sanctifier?

Here let me ask the sound Believer, What have thou hungered and thirsted after?
what has been thy desire? did thou never earnestly desire sanctifying grace?
do thou not still find it to be thy greatest want? do thou not daily beg
it at the hand of God? would the assurance of a pardon content thy soul, if it
were possible to obtain it without sanctifying grace? I know it cannot be.

Thus likewise says Christ, Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all that labor, and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest. These expressions are also
metaphorical, and (reteining the Metaphor) what is the burden here spoken of?
If it were only the burden of wrath, due for sin, Cain and Judas groaned under
the burden, and would have been glad of ease, and so would the most desperate
sinner^ in the world. If you say, they did not come to Christ for ease, I
answer, that coming is also a metaphorical expression, and we cannot understand
it of a local motion. To come to Christ for ease, is but to be willing to be
eased by him, and to accept of his help: And what reason have we to think, that
Cain or Judas were unwilling that Christ should ease them of that horror and
judgment their souls lay under? Yea, let me add, I doubt not but all the
Devils in Hell would be willingly eased of the intolerable burden of Gods
eternal vengeance. If you say, But there is no promise made to Devils, but to
Men; I answer, it is true, but sure the men, to whom this rest belongs, have
other kind of desires than what the Devils have. And in this, as James compares
the faith that is not saving with the faith of Devils, Jam. 2.19 so may I
compare the desire that is not saving, with the desire of Devils. The burden
then here spoken of, is the burden of sin it self, with the wrath of God, as
the fruit of it, and those that have found, or shall find, ease by Christ, are
such as groan under the intolerable burden of sin it self, and not merely under
the burden of wrath. And here I might also appeal to the sincere Christian,
Would thou think thy self sufficiently eased of thy burden, if Christ should
only deliver thee from eternal torments? would the body of sin be no burden
to thee? would it be a pleasure to bear it about thee? It was Paul's greatest
burden, it made him (groaning and panting after ease) cry out (...), O wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death. His complaint in
this expression, is the voice of one tired out with a wearisom burden, and
near spent with sorrow.

We shall now consider some other texts of Scripture: When Paul states the
doctrine of salvation by free grace, he magnifies free grace mainly in the
sanctification, and not merely in the justification of the sinner. Ephesians. 2.8.
By grace ye are saved through faith, and not of your selves, it is the gift of
God. What this salvation here spoken of is, let the Apostle himself declare in
the foregoing verses. Ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And you has he quickened, who were
dead in trespasses and sins, wherein in time past ye walked according to the
course of this world -- but God, who is rich in mercy, for his great mercy,
wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us
together with Christ (by grace ye are saved.) In which verses you plainly see,
that Grace is magnified up in the quickening from death in trespasses and sins,
to live the life of grace.

So likewise says Paul to Tit. c. 33. to 7. For we our selves also were
sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures,
living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another. But after that the
kindness, and love of God our Savior toward man appeared, not by works of
righteousness, which we have done; but according to his mercy he saved us, by
the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed on us
abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior. In which he shows, first, what
was our misery, to wit, a state of foolishness, disobedience, etc. ver. 3.
Secondly, he declares the moving cause of our salvation, to wit, not our works,
but his mercy, according to his mercy he saved us, to wit, from the
forementioned misery, and that is done by the washing of Regeneration, and
renewing of the holy Ghost, etc. ver. 5, 6. And herein the kindness and love of
God our Savior toward man appears, ver. 4. Justifying grace is afterward
mentioned, v. 7.

In the third, fourth, and fifth chapters of the Epistle to the Romans, and the
third to the Galatians, the Apostle speaks chiefly, and almost wholly of
justifying grace. But the reason of that is, because he there disputed the
question of justification with those, that sought it by a legal righteousness
of their own; and therefore in this case it was necessary for him (first) to
keep to the question in hand: yet, in the following chapters he shows the
virtues of Christ's death, for the killing of sin, and of his resurrection for
our arising to newness of life. Romans 6. And that they that are Christ's, have
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24.

But where no controversy lies in his way, but the doctrine of salvation is
entirely to be handled, he states salvation mainly in the sanctification of the
soul, as appears in the foregoing instances: And when Paul accounts all but
loss, and dung, that he might win Christ, Phil 3.8. it was not merely that he
might be found in the righteousness which is through faith in Christ, but also
that he might know Christ, and the power of his resurrestion, and the
fellowship of his suffering, being made conformable to his death. And toward
the full attainment of this, it is that he presses forwards, ver. 12.13. Not
as though I had already attained, either were already perfect; but I follow
after, etc.

When Paul wrote to Timothy, to direct him what to teach, as the most necessary
doctrine, and what he should see others teach also, he directs him to teach the
practice of godliness. 1 Timothy 4.7, 8. But refuse profane and old wives fables,
and exercise thy self rather unto godliness. For bodily exercise profits
little, but godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the
life that now is, and that which is to come: He adds, ver. 9. This is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance. And backing it with a further
argument, ver. 10. he adds again, ver. 11. These things command and teach. And
in the fifth chap. with the former part of the sixth, having directed him how to
teach the duties of persons in their several relations, he adds, These things
teach and exhort, ver. 2. And if any man teach otherwise, and consent not to
wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine,
which is according to godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting
about questions, etc. The Doctrines that are now vented against the power of
godliness, are but the fruit of the proud dotage of the times wherein we live;
for the mystery of the Gospel is called the mystery of godliness. 1 Timothy
3.16. And without controversy great is the mystery of godliness, God
manifest in the flesh, etc. Let it be further considered, that when Paul
professedly handles the doctrine of Gods special distinguishing grace, he
opposes saving grace (as I formerly observed) to hardening in sin, rather than
perishing for sin. To. 9.18. He will have mercy upon whom he will have mercy,
and whom he will he hardneth. I might give you diverse other Scriptures, but
these may suffice, being thus opened, to help you in the better understanding
of the doctrine of Saving grace.

Consider well of these, and see wherein thy salvation lies, and labor in the
use of all the means that God affords thee for the saving of thy soul from
sin: Hear diligently, pray earnestly, watch narrowly, work out thy salvation
with fear and trembling, and strive in good earnest, if thou meanst to be
crowned.

Obj. But methink I hear some already whispering, what, must we be saved by
our graces, and duties? What kind of Popish doctrine is this?

To which I answer,

Answ. This is the great Objection whereby Satan, that grand Deceiver, has
hardened many against the most pressing arguments of the most serious
Ambassadors of Christ, to holiness of life. Upon this one slender cavil, many,
for fear of Popery, are become Antinomians, I may better say, professed
Libertines: And for fear of being their own Saviors, have refused to be saved
by the purifying blood and spirit of Jesus Christ. But to speak more
particularly and satisfactorily to this point, consider with me these few
propositions following:

Prop.
1. Man's Misery consists of two parts, 1. Sin. 2. Condemnation for Sin.

2. Man's Salvation consists of two parts (opposite to those two evils) 1.
Sanctification, which is his Salvation fron Sin. 2. Pardon of Sin and
Justification, whereby he is delivered from Guilt and Condemnation: And both
these are essentially necessary to man's Salvation.

3. Justification and Sanctification are both concomitant, and inseparable
twins of unspeakable Mercy and Free Grace, proceeding from the tender bowels of
Jesus Christ.

4. As no man's Justification is the cause of his Sanctification, so no man's
Sanctification is the cause of his Justification; but both are alike, the
proper fruits of the forementioned grace of Jesus Christ.

5. As no man is saved from wrath and condemnation, but by being pardoned and
justified, so no man is saved from sin, but by being sanctified. And thus
salvation depends upon sanctification* And what danger is in this Doctrine? I
am sure the ruin of the soul depends upon the contrary.

6. Justification is a relative change wrought without us, Sanctification is a
real work wrought upon us. Christ is the Author, but Man is the Subject of
Sanctification: Or (to speak to the meanest capacity) it is Christ that
sanctifeth, it is Man that is sanctified.

7. By this sanctifying grace of Christ, those that were dead in trespasses and
sins, have a principle of spiritual life put within them, and maintained,
whereby they are enabled to live the life of grace, to the glory and honor of
God.

Now must we be afraid of setting forth in the strength of grace communicated,
lest we dishonor the work of Christ? Is Christ dishonored by our walking,
running, striving, pressing forward in the ways of his Commandments? When
Christ raised Lazarus from the Grave, he wrought a real miracle in causing his
soul to return into his body, whereby he received life again. Here Christ was
the Author of this Miracle, and Lazarus was the Subject, upon whom it was
wrought. It was Christ that gave life, by causing the soul to return into the
body; it was Lazarus that received life, and his soul that returned, was the
immediate principle of life. Now when Christ had given life unto him, and
called Lazarus come forth, would Lazarus have done well to answer [Lord if I
come forth, and walk upon my own legs, thy power will not be manifested in my
resurrection, the work will not appear to be a real miracle.] Would it not
have been a dishonor to Christ for Lazarus to have lain still in the grave,
when Christ had thus called him forth to manifest his gracious power?
Certainly, the more readily he came forth, and the more he walked, worked, or
performed any actions of life, the more fully was the miracle, and therein the
glory of Christ manifest to the world. And thus it is in our spiritual
resurrection from death in sin.

To return again to the exhortation, consider, I beseech you, what is the great
work you have to mind, as long as you live; that which is the great work of
Christ, must be your great work also, wherein you must diligently labor in
subordination to him, to wit, in the saving of your souls from sin. But I will
not detain you in the general exhortation, but descend to particulars, where I
shall speak

1. To such as are in the state of nature: Art thou yet, poor soul, in thy
natural condition, under the power of Sin and Satan? O consider, thou art in a
sad condition, thou art lying under the greatest misery, and thy great work is
all yet to do; wait upon God diligently in the use of his means, for the saving
of thy soul.

Obj. But thou will presently say, Is it in the power of a natural man to
convert himself? Am I able to deliver my own soul?

Answ. If thou art willing to be saved from the bondage of corruption, know,
that the Lord is willing to afford thee help; but if thou art not willing to
leave thy sin, why do thou complain for want of power? Doubtless, the same
that Christ charged upon the Jews, John 5.40. Ye will not come to me, that ye
might have life, may be charged upon thee, and the multitude of carnal
persons, that live under the means of grace: When Christ bewailed Ierusalem's
sad condition, being ready to be destroyed, he complains, How often would I
have gathered thy children together, and ye would not? Mat. 23.37. So may I
say, how often has the Lord tendered unto thee saving grace, and thou would
not accept it? Were thy defect a mere simple impotency, thy condition were the
more excusable; but thy defect is mainly in thy will, thou art in love with the
sensual pleasures of sin, thou delightest in them, and art not willing to
exchange them for the precious graces that Christ offers thee: Christ invites
thee, and thy excuse is, I cannot, when the truth is, thou will not accept of
grace offered: Say not, I cannot save my self, when thou art not willing that
Christ should save thee. And to the end thou may be left without excuse,
Consider,

1. God is willing to save thee, yea, he would delight in thy salvation, more
than in thy destruction; yea, he has bound it with an oath. Ezekiel 33.11. As I
live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but
that the wicked turn from his way and live: Turn ye, turn ye from your evil
ways, for why will ye die, O ye house of Israel? Has not God also abundantly
declared his willingness in the giving of his Son? John 3.16. God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life.

2. Christ is willing, and had he not been so, he would never have laid down
his life, to open a way for thy salvation. Were he unwilling, he would not send
his Ambassadors to pray and beseech thee to accept of his help. Had he been
willing of Ierusalem's destruction, he would not have wept over it, for
refusing the message of Salvation.

Has God declared his willingness by his word and oath, and the death of his
Son? And has Christ declared his willingness, by giving himself a ransom
sufficient for thy soul? Does he offer to cleanse, and purify thee with his
dearest blood? Do the Gospell-invitations, Come, come, come, often sound in
thine ears? Does he stretch forth his hand all the day long for thy help, and
blame thee for thy backwardness to thy own good? Where is now the fault but
only in thy self? How does the Lord still exercise patience and
long-suffering, wooing and waiting for thy accepting of his gracious offers;
but yet thou turnest the deaf ear, and hardnest thy heart against the
salvation of thy own soul.

Suppose a man sick of some desperate disease, and an eminent Physician sends
to him, telling him, [Thy disease is very dangerous, and there is no hope of
thy life, unless thou accept of my help; if thou art but willing, I will come
and heal thee; I have healed thousands of the same disease, and can as easily
heal thee, if thou art but willing I should do it.] But he answers, [If God
has appointed I shall recover, I shall; and if not, there is no help for me;]
and so refuses the Physicians offer, slights the Messenger, and dies of the
Disease. Is not this man guilty of his own death? and will not all that hear
it, say, [He might have been a living man, would he but have taken the
Physicians counsell] Is not this the very condition of thy soul (poor carnal
wretch?) Thy disease is mortal; and how often has the Lord (the spiritual
Physician) sent his Messengers, declaring to thee the pernicious danger of thy
sin, that it will be thy eternal ruin, unless thou accept of his help! and
how many hundred messages has he sent unto thee, telling thee, if thou art but
willing he will come down and heal thee! And the more to convince thee of his
skill, he has given thee examples of many that he has cured, that were as
desperately sinful as thy self. But thou say, [If it be Gods will I shall be
saved, I shall, or else all means and endeavors are in vain,] and slightest
the offers of Christ by his Messengers. Is not the fault now plainly in thy
self? and is it not manifest wilfulness, if thou perish without help? Say not,
as many do in their hearts) I know Christ can save me, if he will. Let me tell
thee again, Christ is willing as well as able to save thee, if thou art but
truly willing of his help; and if thou art not willing, thy perdition will be
of thy self, the blood of thy soul will be upon thy own head; And let this be
engraven for thy Epitaph, that all may read it when thou art dead and gone: [Lo
here he lies who perished in his sins, because he would not be saved.]

But yet my heart is very unwilling to part with thee thus; yea, methinks the
Lord himself is unwilling thus to let thee go, notwithstanding thy former
wilfulness. When the Lord had pathetically declared and complained of the
wilful wickedness of Israel, Isa. 1.2, 3, 4. notwithstanding his tender
dealing with them, he being still unwilling of their ruin, says to them, ver.
18. Come now, and let us reason together: So let me say unto thee on the behalf
of God, and thy own soul, Come, and let us reason together before we part, and
see whether it be not possible to prevail with thee to be willing to the
salvation of thy own soul. And here let me put a few Queries to thee:

1. Have thou not lived all thy days in the light of the Gospel, and under the
means of Grace; the Lord yet still offering unto thee his saving help, wooing,
entreating, beseeching thee to accept of him, that thou may be saved? And
will not all these means and mercies, thou now injoyest, rise up in judgment
against thee in the great day of thy account? Mat. 10.14, 15. And whosoever
shall not receive you, nor hear your words; when ye depart out of that house,
or city, shake off the dust off your feet. Verily I say unto you, it shall be
more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah, in the day of judgment,
than for that city. Chap. 11.21, 2^, 23, 24. Woe unto thee Corazin, woe unto
thee Bethsaida; for if the mighty works which were done in you, had been done
in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
But I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon at the day of
judgment, than for you. And thou Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven,
shall be thrown down to hell: for if the mighty works which have been done in
thee, had been done in Sodom it would have remained until this day: But I say
unto you, it shall be more tolerable, etc. Hence let me propose to thee a
second Querie:

2. Do not thou account Heathens and Infidels persons in a most forlorn and
miserable condition? and would thou not account it a reproach to be called
Heathen, or Infidel? and is not thy condition far worse than theirs? they
have but the light of Nature, the book of the Creature to read God in, and know
not what a Bible means: thou have the light of Scripture, wherein the will of
God is fully revealed. The light of Nature may discover much of man's misery;
but Scripture reveals it more fully, and shows the effectual remedy, and
that plainly and clearly. Now consider this, that as thou enjoyest greater
light, thy condemnation will be the more heavy, if thou continue to sin against
it; for thou will have no cloak for thy sin, Joh. 15.22.

3. When thou read, or hear the History of the rebellious Israelites, how
they sinned against God, after he had wrought for them great deliverances, and
they had seen his wonders, and been instructed out of his Law: Art thou not
ready to condemn them for their great wickedness? and is not thy sin greater
than theirs? If thou believe Scripture to be the word of God, thou have the
same miracles to convince thee, and all that were wrought by Christ and his
Apostles too: but that which is of greater consequence, is, that all the Types,
Prophesies, and Promises of the Law, wherein they could see but darkly through
a veil of grace, that was to be revealed, Praesens autem in carne ipse
Mediator and beati ejus Apostoli. jam Testamenti novi gratiam revelames
apertius indicarunt, quae aliquanto ^e. ultius superioribus sunt significata
tempopo ibus. Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 10. c 32.
are now fulfilled, and in fulfilling, and we are called under the Gospel, to
behold, as it were, with open face, the glory of the Lord, and the clear
light, that now shines, discovers more fully, by many degrees, the way of life,
than all the doctrine and miracles of Moses. And now, wherein thou judge
them, do thou not more deeply condemn thy self? If he that despised Moses
law died without mercy, under two or three witnesses, of how much sorer
punishment shall thou be thought worthy, who have trodden under the foot the
Son of God, and despised his Gospel of grace? Consider also the words of the
Apostle, Heb. 1.1, 2. with chapter 2. 1, 2, 3. God, who at sundry times, and in
diverse manners, spoke in time past unto the fathers, has in these last days
spoken unto us by his Son, therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to
the things which we have heard, lest at any time we should let them slip. For
if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and
disobedience received a just recompense and reward; how shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation, which began at first to be spoken by the Lord, and
was confirmed unto us by them that heard him!

4. When thou read of the Jews, that refused Christ, when he came among
them preaching unto them, and instead of accepting him, persecuted him; and
when it was put to their vote, whether Christ or Barabbas should be released,
they saved Barabbas and delivered Jesus to be crucified; Does not thy heart
even rise against them? Yea, is not the name of a Jew therefore become odious
among us? And art not thou worse than they? Most of them (although they sinned
greatly herein) yet they did it ignorantly, they did not believe that Jesus was
the Christ, but looked for another, and therefore did not persecute him as
Christ, but as a Deceiver; for, said the chief Priests and Phari^ees unto
Pilate, Sir, We remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive, After
three days I will rise again, Mat. 27.62, 63. For if they had known it, they
would not have crucified the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. But thou believe that
Jesus is the Christ, and know that salvation is not to be had in any other,
yet thou receivest him not, but daily sinnest against him, and provokest him
with hardness of heart. And how often has the Lord put it to thy vote, whether
thou would have Christ or sin to live and rule over thee, and thou have still
given a real voice for the life of thy base corruptions (far more mischievous
than Barabbas) and choosest to live under the power of sin and Satan, and
crucifiest Christ afresh by thy daily transgressions, offering despite unto
the spirit of grace: Thou art therefore inexcusable, O man, whosever thou art
that judge, those Christ-murdering Jews, for wherein thou judge them, thou
condemnest thy self; for thou that judge do the same, or worse things. And
think thou this, To. 2.1, 3.
that thou shall escape the judgment of God?

5. Art thou content (as thy security seems to maintain to die in a state of
sin, and perish as one that wilfully refuses grace offered, and to receive the
saddest condemnation? If thou do indeed believe that there is a heaven of
unspeakable joys, and a hell of intolerable torments, methinks thou should
not be willing to lose heaven, and fall into hell, under the eternal wrath of
God. Sure thou say in thy heart, [I will hereafter return to God sometime or
other, before I die, I intend to repent, and lay fast hold upon Christ at the
last, and I hope I may be saved then, as well as if I do it now.] Have thou not
some such reasonings in thy heart as these? To which I answer, thou art ready
to plead thy own inability now, and say, [I cannot repent, believe, and turn to
God, it is not in the power of a natural man to do it.] Why then do thou
promise what thou will do at the last? will it be any more in thy power then
than now? is it out of the power of a strong and healthy man to repent, and lay
hold upon mercy offered, and is an aged, sick or crasie person able to perform
it? Consider well of it, and give me a reason why thou should be better able
to do this great work, when thy body is decaying, and thy memory and
understanding declining, and thou unable to frequent the public Ordinances,
than now, while strength of body, and mind, and means of grace do all concur
together.

Obj. But thou will say, I hope God will give me grace then, and enable me to
do it.

Answ. 1. God offers thee his help now, yea, his saving grace, why will thou
not accept of it? 2. What reason have thou to think that Christ will bestow
upon thee that grace at the point of death, that thou have wilfully refused all
the days of thy life? Nay, have thou not reason to expect, that before that
time thou shall be judicially sealed up to blindness of mind, and hardness
of heart, for refusing so many of the Lords gracious offers of mercy. Thus it
befell the Jews in the like case: Isa. 6.9, 10. And the Lord said, go and tell
this people, hear ye indeed, but understand not, and see indeed, but perceive
not. Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy; and shut
their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their heart, and convert and be healed. When the terrors of
hell and death take hold on thee, and thou criest to God, may thou not justly
expect, that the Lord will be as peremptory in refusing to hear thy cries and
complaints, as thou have been in refusing to obey his voice in the days of thy
prosperity. Read and consider well, Prove. 1.20. to 31. Zech. 7.13. Therefore it
is come to pass, that as he cried, and they would not hear, so they cried,
and I would not hear, says the Lord of hosts. Read the foregoing verses. 3.
Let me ask thee how many thou have seen converted to Christ in their old age,
that lived constantly under the means of grace in their younger years? The
work of grace is wrought most commonly upon those that are in the prime of
their age: gray headed sinners seldom repent; Why will thou then promise thy
self so much in old age? 4. Tell me plainly, and deceive not thy own soul,
while thou shiftest thus: Is not pardon of sin, and justification, that thou
may be delivered from a place of torment, the great mercy thou hopest for?
and is not this the end thou proposest, while thou promisest thy self future
repentance? If so, thou do but deceive thy own soul. Christ came to save
thee from thy sins, and not merely from the tormenting wrath of God: Christ
will be a whole Savior, or no Savior, he will deliver thee from the power of
thy sin here, or he will never deliver thee from hell hereafter: Think not that
a little counterfeit sorrow, at the last, will prevail with the Lord to pardon
thy sin: O study well the offers, promises, and threatenings of the Gospel now,
for I fear, thou art, as yet, ignorant of the nature of saving grace; I
believe thou do much cheer up thy self with the consideration of Gods
goodness, riches of grace, mercy, and long-suffering, and think thy self, by
these, sufficiently secured. It Is true indeed, the consideration of these may
comfort the humble, selfe-denying, converting sinner, and are well made use of
to lead us to repentance: But thou that continuest in sin upon this score,
after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thy self wrath,
against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God,
Romans 2.4, 5.

Obj. But what kind of legal preaching is this? Is this to preach salvation by
Christ? This is more like the voice of the Law than of the Gospel, more like
the thundering and lightning from mount Sinai, than the voice of Christ from
mount Sion.

Ans. 1. I well remember, ever since I knew what a Sermon meant (till these
late years) that the most thundering, rouzing, sin discovering, heart-searching
Preachers, were most highly prized, and followed by all that were esteemed
godly, and the wicked and profane were wont to call them damnation preachers,
and desired to hear such as would preach them a Sermon of mercy. I wonder now,
how it comes to pass that so many professors, in these times, are fallen in
with the profane multitude, to revile such messengers of Christ: Sure there is
a harmony between the theory (at least) of the one, and practice of the other.
The Antinomian Professors plead grace is free, and God has so revealed
himself, that we need not doubt of his love; it does not become a Gospel Spirit
to repent of sin, or grieve for any miscarriages, their sins were all long
since done away in Christ; neither ought they so much as once question their
spiritual state; neither should Ministers preach any thing but Free Grace and
mercy in Jesus Christ.

And the wicked and profane say, [God is merciful, and Christ died to save
sinners, and hereupon take liberty to go on in sin, impenitently, never
questioning their spiritual condition, but hope to be saved by Christ, as well
as the best.] And the Antinomian sort of teachers will fit them for preaching,
according to their own hearts desire. Either all our old Professors, or these
new ones, are much mistaken. But you will say, These are times of greater
light, and many of our young Professors now see that, that our ancient
Professors understood not in former times. Answ. These are times wherein
Professors are more light than formerly, but whether they have more light, I
much question. Some men have (or at leastwise think they have) much light in
their heads, but little in their hearts, and their Religion is much in
controversies, but little in the life, and power of godliness. 2. Light is of
two sorts, First, the light of bare knowledge, and if this be the light so much
boasted of, the Devils, and damned in hell, may boast more, for they know more
than all the Saints upon earth. Secondly, there is the light of grace, seated
chiefly in the heart, and shining forth in the life and conversation; and this
(if I mistake not, yea, if Christ mistake not) is the true light of the Gospel,
that shines to the honor of God. Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine before
men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your father which is in
heaven. And of this sort of light our late professors are far more barren,
than those of former years. If there be now more light in the head, there is
less in the heart and life; and light in the head will be but an aggravation
of darkness in the heart. The Servant that knew his Masters will and did it
not, was to be beaten with many stripes: Yet I much question, whether this
light so much gazed after, be light from the Sun of righteousness, or not.
There is a sort of wandering light in the night season, which ignorant people
call by diverse names, but Philosophers call it ignis fatuus, fools fire,
because ignorant and foolish people when they see it, wonder, and are amazed at
it, and are led by it out of their way into pits and ditches, and lose
themselves, and afterward usually say, they were led by a Spirit, not
understanding that it is but, a vapor arising out of the earth. So there is a
sort of light, which ignorant professors admiring, wander after, out of the way
of truth, into many pits of Satan's digging, yet they take themselves to be led
by the Spirit, while they understand not, that this light is not from above,
but is earthly, sensual, devilish. But I return to answer more fully to the
Objection.

2. If by the voice of the Law you mean preaching justification by the law, as
a covenant of works, so as by our own works, to be justified either in whole,
or in part; I bless God I never heard any such preaching in all my life, nor
(I believe) any of you.

2. I suppose by the Law, you mean law of ceremonies, for no man preaches such
doctrine among us.

3. If you conceive that those that lived under the Law, till the coming of
Christ, were under a Covenant substantially, and essentially different from the
covenant of grace, under the Gospel, you do but grossly mistake: For the
covenant of God with Abraham, and his seed, and the covenant now made with the
faithful and their seed, is one and the same. Hence, says Paul, Gal. 3.9.
They which be of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham Hence likewise, Romans
4. he proves justification by faith, by the example of Abraham's justification.
And the blessings of Abraham are said to come upon the Gentiles through Jesus
Christ, Gal. 3.14.

4. If you think that those that lived under the Law, did not so clearly
understand the promises of Grace, but were more plentifully threatened with
judgments. It is true: 1. There is a graduall difference of light, or of the
manifestation of the grace of Christ now, from what was then. 2. Judgments
were more plentifully threatened in the Old Testament then in the New. 3. Yet as
the Law threatened more plentifully, so the threats were more of temporal
Judgments. Deuteronomy. 28.16. etc. And as the Gospel threatens more sparingly, so it
threatens more heavily, and dreadfully with spiritual, and eternal vengeance.
As one millstone will weigh down many pibbles: So one Gospell-threat will
overpoise many of the curses threatened in the Law. There is in Deuteronomy. 28. a
Catalogue of curses containing no less then fifty two verses: And that one
Gospel threatening, 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9. is far more dreadful then all of
them: do but weigh, and consider it. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that
know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: who shall
be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and
from the glory of his power. What are all temporal Judgments in comparison of
this everlasting destruction here denounced against all those that obey not the
Gospel? The voice of the Law-threatnings is but as the rushing of winds, less
terrible, but more frequent: But the voice of the Gospel threatenings is like
the loudest thunderclaps from heaven, more astonishing, though more seldom.

5. As the moral Law it self is not yet abolished; so all the threatenings of
the Law for moral disobedience, are still in force also. I doubt not but
war, sickness, poverty, and the like are now Judgments from God upon the
disobedient: for as godliness has promise of the life that now is, and that
which is to come; so ungodliness is threatened both with the judgments of this
life, and that which is to come. And if the threatenings of the Old Testament
are still in force; and more terrible ones are denounced in the Gospel against
impenitent sinners, must a Preacher pass them all by, and take no more notice
of them, than so many ciphers, and preach nothing but grace and peace to all
sorts of sinners?

Whereas the Gospel is a message of glad tidings, or good news, and such
thundrings as these seem somewhat heterogeneous, and unsuitable to it; you must
understand, that as there is a twof^ld coming of Christ, to wit, his first
coming to redeem sinners, and to seek and save that which was lost: and his
second coming to take vengeance on them that have neglected so great salvation.
So there is a twofold intention of the Gospel, 1. To offer life and salvation,
and to confer it upon all those that believe and obey it. 2. To denounce and
pour out vengeance upon all that are unbelieving, and disobedient. As in the
Law of our Land; the first intention of the Law of our land, is the good of the
Subject, that men may be obedient to it, and protected by it: but the second
intention of the Law, is to punish the disorderly; and the penalties are
annexed to the Law, and published with it, that Obedience may be the more
readily yielded, and the transgressors of the Law may know what to trust to. So
the primary and direct intention of the Gospel, is the salvation of the sinner:
yet the judgment of God upon the disobedient, is written and published in the
Gospel, that Obedience may be the more readily given to Christ, and that his
enemies that will not be subject to him, may know what to look for at his hands.

3. I hope Christ and his Apostles were legal preachers: let us see how they
preached, 1. Christ preached repentance, and destruction to the impenitent.
Luke 13.3, 5. Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish. He preached most
terrible woes to them, that they rejected the Gospel-message, Mat. 11.20, 21,
22, 23, 24. He preaches no less than eight woes in one Chapter. See Mat.
23.13, 14, 15, 16, 23, 25, 27, 29. He threatens with the damnation of hell;
ver. 23. Ye Serpents, ye generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the damnation
of hell? And the worm that never dies, and the fire that never goes out? Mark
9.44, 46, 48. And this is the condemnation, etc. Joh. 3.19. See also Luke
11.42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 52. if preaching sharply to obstinate sinners be
legal preaching, you will be constrained to call Christ a very legal
Preacher, if you do but read and consider his Sermons.

Consider likewise the preaching of the Apostles. Peter preached a Sermon (
Acts 2.) that pierced the Jews to the heart, ver. 37. Paul preached a rouzing
Sermon of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, that made Felix
tremble to hear it, Act. 24.25. And John, the beloved Disciple, that lay in
Jesus his bosom, and knew much of his heart, tells us, Rev. 21.8. The
fearful, and unbelieving, and abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and
Sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars shall have their part in the lake,
which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Read also
Romans 1.18. chapter 2. to ver. 10.1 Corin 6.9 chapter 10. and 11. 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9.
Hebr. 1.2. 1, 2, 3. c. 12. 29 Iam 5.1, 2, 3.

As Christ's ordinary practice was a pattern for all Christians (Learn of me,
for I am meek and lowly, says Christ, Mat. 11.29.) So his preaching is a
pattern for those that are Ministers of the Gospel. We must learn of Christ
what, and how to preach. And as Paul says, Be ye followers of me, as I am also
of Christ, to wit, in ordinary conversation: So may it be said of his preaching
also, to those that are Ministers; we must imitate him, as he imitated Christ
in the Doctrine he preached: And if to preach as Christ, and his Apostles did,
be legal preaching, I desire to live and die a legal preacher. And however
many esteem of it, I had rather (as I have formely told you) that my tongue
cleave to the roof of my mouth, than ever I should, with a pleasing voice,
flatter you in your sins, and sing you asleep in the midst of carnal
security. O how dreadful is that saying, Ezekiel 3.17, 18. Son of man I have made
thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; therefore hear the word from my
mouth, and give them warning from me, when I say unto the wicked, thou shall
surely die, and thou give him not warning, nor speak to warn the wicked
from his wicked way, to save his life, the same wicked man shall die in his
iniquity: but his blood will I require at thy hand.

4. Let it be further considered, That when there was more sharp and home
preaching, which was the manner of the Lords Prophets, not many years since,
there was far less pride, censoriousnesse, contention, hypocrisy, and other
evils among professors, and far more true zeal for God, humility, meekness,
tender-heartednesse one toward another, and sincerity, than can be now found
among them. O how unlike are we now to those Saints, that lived twenty years
since! we have indeed the name of Saints more frequent in our mouths than they;
but they had far more of the grace of Saints in their hearts and lives than
we: 'Twere well if we had less of the name, and more of the nature of Saints
indeed.

And to close up the Answer, let us consider what may be the reason why it is
not now meet that the judgments of God upon sinners, should be preached among
us; it is not because men have more tender consciences than ordinary, (although
tender consciences are much talked of) that nothing should be applied to them
but lenitives and cordials from the promises of God: But because men are grown
more tender of their sins, and are loath to have their Delilahs disturbed that
lodge in their bosoms. But let every faithful Minister of Christ remember that
saying of Paul to Titus, chap. 1.13. Rebuke them sharply, that they may be
sound in the faith. And let me tell thee, whosoever thou art, that would have
thy corruptions so tenderly dealt with, the Lord will either break thy heart
for sin here, and bring thee to himself as a sincere convert, or else he will
grind thee to powder hereafter; thou shall not long sleep thus in a whole skin;
thou had best therefore look about thee quickly.

Possible some one may now say in his heart, salvation out of this state of sin
I am in?

I shall give thee a few directions,

1. Meditate seriously of the sad condition of poor damned souls. How
exquisite are their pains, how intolerable are their torments, and how
restless are their helpless souls! Did thou ever feel the vehement pain
of the Gout, Stone, broken Bones, bones out of Joint, or any other wracking
Misery? and do thou remember how grievous it was to endure it for a little
time? Suppose thou had bin to endure it all the days of thy life, without
intermission; what would thou do? nay, what would thou not do to be
freed from it? What if all the parts of thy body were as grievously tormented,
as ever thou have felt any one part, how heavy would it be to bear! But alas,
What are all these to what the body must endure in hell, they are but as a
flea-biting to it, and yet the torment of the soul will be more grievous. All
the torments that the wit of man can invent are but as nothing to what those
poor souls suffer, upon whom the full vialls of the Lords wrath are poured out.
The same drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without
mixture into cup of his indignation, and are tormented with fire and brimstone
in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb: And the
smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever, and they have no rest
day nor night, Rev. 14.10, 11. Consider this as thy own portion, if thou go on
in sin.

2 Meditate seriously of the unspeakable joys of the Saints in Heaven. If all
the delightful objects in the world were united in one, and bestowed upon thee,
and thou were to live here all thy days in the enjoyment of it, it would not
be worth one day in heaven. Psalm. 84.
Illa civitas sempiterna est: ubi est vera and plena foelicitas, non dea, sed
donum Dei. Aug. de civ. Dei l. 5. c 16. Romans 8.18
If David esteemed one day in Gods house on earth, better than a thousand in
carnal delights, we may much more speak so of a day in Gods heavenly presence.
In thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy right hand there are pleasures for
evermore, says David, Psalm. 16.11. As Paul reckoned that the sufferings of
this present time are not worthy to be compared with future glory (though he
himself was abundant in sufferings) so may it be as truly said, that the
greatest wordly glory is not in the least degree worthy to be compared to those
soule-ravishing joys of the glorified Saints. And if Moses esteemed the
reproach of Christ, greater riches than the treasures of Egypt, what may we
esteem the glory of Christ to be, which he has prepared for his people* There
is in the heavenly Mansions a removal of all evils and grievances whatsoever,
and a complication of all good things that may make a soul completely blessed.

3. Meditate seriously of the nature of eternity, which is an endless
duration, whether it be of happiness, or misery. If the damned in Hell should
be released after as many years as there are hairs on their head, stars in
the firmament, and sands on the Sea shore, it would be a large ab^^^ment of
their misery: And if the blessed in Heaven should, after so many years, be
deprived of their glory, it would exceedingly diminish their happiness. But
such is the nature of eternity, that when so many years are expired, the
torments of the damned, and the joys of the blessed are no nearer ended than
at the first beginning. And if thou die in thy sins, thou will fall into those
endless, easeless pains of Hell, and lose those eternal unspeakable delights
of Heaven.

4. Consider how vain, uncertain, and unsatisfactory all things are, that are
here below Vanity of vanities (says Solomon) all is vanity, Eccles. 1.2.
Solomon, who had the greatest wisdom, to invent what might be delightful, and
the greatest riches, to purchase his hearts desire in all carnal pleasures,
and being King of Israel, had power to command what might be further added by
his Subjects; upon experience of all, tells us of one thing, this is vanity;
and of another, this is also vanity: And when he had tried all he could devise,
he cries out, Vanity of vanities, vanity of vanities, all is vanity. The eye is
not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing, nor any sense, with its
Object. And what did thou ever meet with in the world, that fully contented
thy heart? What sweet without the mixture of some bitter? And what assured
possession have thou of any thing? O let this weane thy heart from seeking rest
in thy present condition.

5. Consider how short, and uncertain thy present life is. It is but a little
while but thou must bid adieu to all thy friends here, and wordly enjoyments:
and then must thou enter upon thy eternal estate, either of joy, or sorrow.
When Jacob was presented before Pharaoh, and he asked him, How old art thou? He
answered, The days of the years of my pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty
years: few and evil have the days of the years of my life been. When he had
multiplied his years into days, he esteemed them but few. So says Job, chap.
14.1. Man that is born of a woman is of few days: he does not say of few
years. A day is somewhat less than the three hundred sixty fifth part of a
year, yet man lives but a few days. And how uncertain are thy days! Have
thou not commonly seen some well, and dead within the space of a week, or
fortnight, and some die suddenly? and are not many younger than thy self gone
down to the grave before thee? And what assurance have thou that thou shall
live another week, day, or hour? And should thy life be taken from thee in the
condition thou art now in, what would become of thy immortal soul?

6. Having considered these things as arguments to quicken thee in minding thy
salvation, break off from thy sinful companions, who are the Devils
instruments to hold thee in thy sin and misery. If thou art given to drinking,
gaming, uncleanesse, or the like vice, thou have thy companions to help thee
on, and keep thee in thy sinful course: or if thou art no open sinner, thou
have some, that, probably, help to hold and quiet thee in thy graceless,
sensual condition: as ever thou desire to escape the snare of the Devil,
beware of his Instruments, fly from them. The blessed man is described, partly
by his departing from the society of sinners. Psalm. 1.1. Blessed is the man
that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in the way of
sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful. And, says Solomon, Prove.
4.14, 15. Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil
men. Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away. When Scripture
repeats the same thing, either in words or sense, it intimates either
certainty, vehemence, or earnestnes of speech: But here we have no less than
six expressions in these two short verses, forbidding us the way and society of
the wicked. Here does the wise man, as it were, cry aloud to us, away, away,
away, for your lives.

7. Seek acquaintance with those that are godly, such have experience of the
evil of sin, the beauty of holiness, and the comfort of a gracious life, and
can inform thee in these things, and tell thee how they came to be delivered
from their spiritual enemies. They that have travailed in the same path can
best direct thee in the way thou art to go.

8. Hearken diligently to the preaching of the Word. Faith comes by hearing,
Rom 10.17. and the Gospel is called the power of God unto salvation, Romans 1.16.
and says Jam. 1.21. Receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able
to save your souls. Be constant then in attending to the word, hear the word
of God in season, out of season, take all opportunities to hear: this is the
most ordinary means of conversion; consider how many were converted by the
preaching of the Gospel! three thousand in one day, Act. 2.41. and very many of
them sincere converts.

And when thou hear, consider seriously whose word thou hear; not the
word of Man, but of God, and weigh well the great concernment of what thou
hear, it is the Word, by which thou must be justified or condemned in the
great day of account.

9. Give serious regard to the many friendly convictions and motions of the
Spirit of God. I know by experience, that carnal persons have many such
convictions and good motions, which they do not cherish, but rather quench: I
believe very many (if not most) that attend upon the powerful preaching of the
Word, have, at some time or other, some close workings and stirrings upon their
hearts, however they come to get loose from them again: Some have confessed
their sins with tears, and some have been under some continuance of trouble of
mind, and yet have returned again to their former folly. O take heed of so
doing, left thy last estate be far worse than thy first. Set in rather with
such movings of the Spirirt, thou may probably obtain the saving grace which
thy soul needs.

10. Pray earnestly to God for saving grace, humbly confessing and bewailing
thy sin before him. When Peter had told Simon Magus, that he was in the gall of
bitterness, and bond of iniquity, he said to him, Repent, and pray God, if
perhaps the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee. This Objection is very
satisfactorily answered by Mr. Baxter in his method for peace of conscience.
Dir. 9. Prove. 21.^
Let not the Devil delude thee with that vain objection [The sacrifice of the
wicked is an abomination to the Lord, therefore thou must not pray.] If thou
art obstinately resolved to go on in thy wickedness, then hearken to his
voice, and forbear to pray; but if thou see a necessity of salvation, and thy
heart be by all these, or other arguments inclined to seek after it, forbear
not to cry mightily to thy God for help. Suppose I should say unto thee, thou
must not plough, for Solomon says, the ploughing of the wicked is sin; thou
must not sow, or labor in thy calling, for being an unbeliever, it is
impossible for thee to please God in it: Thou must not eat or drink, because
thou do not do it to the glory of God. Would thou not answer, I must follow
my calling, or else I must be a beggar, and utterly undone: I must eat and
drink, or else I shall soon be famished: no man, but he, that desperately
cares not for his life, would refuse his necessary food. Is not the case
alike, as to thy spiritual condition? No man, but he, that is desperately set
to lose his soul (methinks) can be persuaded from praying to the Lord for
help. When Jonah had preached the destruction of Nineveh, if another had come
and told them, they might save their labor for fasting and praying, their
prayers would be but an abomination to the Lord, and do them no good; Would
they have hearkened to such counsel? Nay, did not the Lord give a gracious
return to their prayer? Suppose the Lord should smite thee with some violent
incurable disease, and death should stare thee in the face, and one of our
Novelists should come and tell thee, thou have been hitherto a wicked creature,
and it is but in vain to pray, thy prayer will be but an abomination to the
Lord, would thou not loath to look upon him, that should speak thus to thee,
and account it devilish counsel? would thou hot say, I must pray, or
perish? And if a man that has been wicked, may, yea, concludes he must pray,
and cannot be at peace unless he pray, when the judgments of God are upon
him, or hang over his head, why may he not set himself to seek God, while he
has health, liberty, and a free enjoyment of the means of grace for his help?
Was it not to the wicked that the Lord said, Isa. 55.6. Seek ye the Lord while
he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near? See ver. 7. Let the wicked
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto
the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him. And is it not charged upon the
workers of iniquity, as their greater sin, that they call not upon the Lord,
Ps. 14.4. How often did the Lord call upon the wicked Israelites to humble their
souls and seek his face! and how often did he hear and deliver them from their
distress! Have thou not read of Ahabs Humiliation, and what success he had?
Make not thy self worse than a wicked Ahab, lest he rise up in judgment
against thee, and lest the men of Nineveh rise up in judgment against thee,
for they fasted and prayed, and humbled their souls at the preaching of Jonah,
and behold a greater message than that of Jonah, is sent unto thee.

It is easy to prove by many texts of Scripture, and arguments from Scripture,
that it is a wicked man's duty to pray, and unless any man will undertake to
prove, that it is his duty to continue in his wickedness, he will speak but
little to the purpose against it. Some can say by experience, that the first
special work of God that ever they perceived on their hearts, was while they
were praying unto him; and though they began to pray formally, yet they were
brought to pray seriously before they ended the same prayer. And if by blind
guides thou will be persuaded to forbear praying, let the character of a
wicked sot remain upon thee. Psalm. 14.4. Have all the workers of iniquity no
knowledge? -- who call not upon the Lord. And let the portion of the wicked be
reserved for thee. Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all
the nations that forget God.

The second branch of the use of exhortation, spiritual. Labor in the use of
such means, as God affords you, to save your souls from sin. This is the great
work of Christ, and this must be your great work also, in subordination to him.
Whosoever thou art, that effectually called, thou art called to holiness. God
has given thee a principle of grace to this end, that thou may war against
corruption, and walk in a holy conformity to his will. O remember, that sin is
thy greatest misery, and holiness thy real happiness. The godly man's
happiness consists in the remission of sins and sanctification of the soul.
Thus the blessed man is described in Scripture by both these parts of his
blessedness, 1. Remission of sins. Psalm. 32.1, 2. Blessed is the man, whose
transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered. Blessed is the man unto whom
the Lord imputes not iniquity, 2. By sanctification. Psalm. 1.1, 2. Blessed is
the man, that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, etc. Ps. 119.1, 2.
Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of the Lord. Blessed
are they that keep his testimonies, and that seek him with the whole heart.
These are not mere qualifications of the persons, to whom blessedness does
belong, but are real and most considerable parts of blessedness it self. Sin,
as I have showed you, is your great misery, therefore holiness is your great
happiness. O how happy is a holy life! Well might Solomon say, Prove. 12.26.
The righteous is more excellent than his neighbor, even as much as spiritual
liberty is more excellent than Satan's slavery. O then labor in the fear of
God to walk uprightly before him, in all holy obedience, as thou desire to be
blessed. Jam. 1.25. Whosoever looks into the perfect law of liberty, and
continues therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work,
this man shall be blessed in his deed. Signifi^cat in ipsa action sitam esse
bea^tiud ne^, non in auditione frigida. Calv. in loc.
I do not say, blessed for his deed meritoriously, but blessed in his deed
really. It is contrary to the glory of Gods grace to make our holiness and
works meritorious of our future happiness: and it is a diminishing of Gods
mercy to us, and our own happiness here, to make our graces and sincere
obedience mere signs and evidences of our good estate here, and our title to
heaven hereafter. They are indeed signs, but (I say) not mere signs; for
they are the chief part of our happiness here, and a part of the happiness we
shall enjoy hereafter: the spirit of sanctification is therefore called the
earnest of our inheritance, Ephesians. 1.14. Now the earnest is not a mere sign
of a bargain, but a part of the sum, and what a man receives in earnest, so
much he has toward the sum he is to receive. So much then as thou have of
sanctifying grace, so much thou have of thy heaven upon earth. Thus when Peter
exhorts us to add grace unto grace, and one degree of grace unto another, he
uses this among many other motives. 2 Pet. 1.11. For so an entrance shall be
ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. The more holiness we obtain, the further we get into
heavens happiness, while we are here upon earth Thus, I conceive, we may
understand the exhortation of Paul, Phil. 2.12. -- Work out your salvation with
fear and trembling: Consider the foregoing words, As ye have always obeyed,
not as in my presence only, but now much more in my absence, Work out your
salvation, etc. As if he should say, as he has begun in the assistance of his
grace, who works in you both to will and to do, so go on to work out your
salvation (to wit) in obeying to the end. O consider what motives here are to
holiness! 1. It is your salvation. By the habits of grace you are delivered
from the state of sin, and by every act of obedience you are saved from the
contrary evil of disobedience. I beseech you consider it well, there is
something of salvation in every act of obedience to God. Mistake me not, I do
not say, that any, or all our obedience deserves ought from God, but in every
duty the Lord inables you to perform, you are saved from the contrary neglect:
In every temptation you resist, you are saved from that evil of sin you were
tempted to, and sin is the worst of evils. Thus Joseph, by withstanding the
temptations of his Mistress, was saved from the sin of uncleanness; and this
was a far greater deliverance than his enlargement from the dungeon he was
afterward cast into. And in this sense well says Solomon, Prove. 19.16. He that
keeps the commandment keeps his own soul. And Christ is called ( Heb.
5.9.) the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him: For he
saves his people by ruling them, and making them obedient to his will.

The second motive here used by the Apostle, ver. 13. is this, For it is God
that works in you both to will and to do, of his good pleasure. Ye have the
assurance of Gods special grace, which is sufficient for you, strive therefore
in the strength of grace.

I might here use diverse arguments to press you on to holy obedience; but I
shall only desire, at this time, that this one may be well considered, and you
will find it weighty, to wit, that sanctification is salvation. Consider the
reasons of the Doctrine, and let thy soul be convinced of this, that sin is
the worst of evils, that God is most honored, and thy self most happy in thy
being saved from sin; and according to the Doctrine, That the great work of
Christ our Savior is the saving of his people from their sins. And then,
methinks, I need say no more to persuade you to hate sin, and fall in love
with the ways of holiness.

And here, before I pass, let it be considered, that properly and immediately
we cannot, either principally or instrumentally pardon our sins, or justify
our souls: that belongs wholly to God. It is God that pardons and
justifies, it is Man that is pardoned and justified, (yet is it our duty to
beg and sue for pardon) but in the sanctification of our souls, 1 Pet. 1.22 1 John 3.3.
we (after the first grace received) are immediately isntrumental in our own
salvation (as you have already heard) we are never commanded to pardon or
justify our selves, Jam. 4 8. 1 Pet. 1.15 Tit. 3.8. Heb. 12.4. Col. 3.5. Phil.
2 12.
but to purge our hearts, and cleanse our hands, to walk in holiness, to
maintain good works, to strive against sin, to mortify our earthly members,
and therein to work out our salvation. And what have we else to do while we are
here, but to glorify God in seeking the salvation of our souls from sin?

And here let me tell you also, there is something of destruction Omnes ^^im,
quoties peccamus tot^es pe^imus, quantum ad nos attine^: Deus forsitan meliora,
and salubriora nobis providet; at quoties peccamus per nos non fiat quin
pereamus. Quod a pe^ditione vindicamur, ex me a est Dei misericordia; peccata
etiam multo graviora prepter Ch^istum condonantis, nosque ad resipiscentiam
perducentis* Interea p^r^n^s non fiat, quin pereamus, quoties peccamus. Twis.
vind. gra. l. 2. crim. 4. Sect. 2.
in every sin you do commit: every sin is as a wound to the soul. And
although the Lord will perfectly cure it in those that are his, yet, methinks,
a sober man should carefully keep himself from wounds, notwithstanding he has
a skillful Surgeon at hand that is able to heal him. When the Apostle
says, Romans 14.15. Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died; He did
not mean that it was in the power of any man finally to destroy him whom Christ
has effectually redeemed: but destroy not (that is) mischief not him, by
causing him to commit sin, which is in its own nature destructive to the soul.
That saying of Philosophers, vehemens sensibile destruit sensum, A violent
object destroys the sense, is true, although every loud sound does not make a
man stark deaf, nor every dazzling light quite put out a man's eyes: the senses
are impaired by violent objects, though not immediately destroyed by one such
object. As Solomon says of one sinner, so we may truly say one sin destroys
much good, Eccles 9.18.
Thus the soul (though not utterly destroyed) is very much damnified by sinful
practices; yea, every sin is in its own nature a mortal wound; and although
the Lord does not suffer his people to die, yet, when they have sinned greatly,
he has caused them to feel so much tormenting pain of such wounds, that they
have roared out, and groaned long sometimes in the bitterness of their souls,
before they have felt the cure wrought. Psalm. 32.3, 4, 5. When I kept silence
my bones waxed old, through my roaring all the day long: For day and night thy
hand was heavy upon me, my moisture is turned into the drought of summer. I
aknowledged my sin unto thee, and my iniquity have I not hid: I said I will
confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my
sin. Consider therefore how much thou art concerned to look to thy heart, and
ways, to mortify sin, and perfect holiness in the fear of God. I shall now
proceed to give some directions for the saving of your souls from sin, and I
will not be tedious in them.

Directions.
1. Study well the sleights of Satan, who prevails very far upon the children of
God, because they are so ignorant of his devises. Satan has his (...), his
wiles and stratagems, whereby he mischiefs poor souls. The efficacy of a
stratagem depends upon the secrecy of it, being discovered, it becomes weak,
and is more easily prevented. Satan's fallacies and subtilties are very many;
and, because of his subtilty, he is called the old Serpent, which deceives the
whole world, Rev. 12.9. And says Paul, 2 Cor. 11.3. I fear, lest by any
means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve, through his subtilty, so your minds
should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. But I shall not now
enlarge my self upon this particular, having not long since preached to you
at large upon this subject, from Mat. 4. the former part of the chapter.

2. Study well the deceitfulness of thy own heart; thy greatest enemy Although
Satan were asleep, although the world were at one with us, although wicked
counsel were utterly put to silence, although no evil example were given us,
although no outward stumbling block were cast in our way: yet have we one thing
in our selves, and of our selves (even original sin, concupiscence, or lust)
which never cease to egg us and allure us from God, and to stain us with all
kind of unclennesse, according as S. James says, Every man is tempted of his
own lust. Golding's ep^ded* before his translation of Calv. on the Bsal.
lodges in thy own bosom. As a bosom-friend is the best, so a bosom-enemy is
the worst. The heart is deceitful above all things -- who can know it? Jer.
17.9. How innumerable are the self-delusions, not only of carnal persons, but
even of the children of God themselves! O what shifts and excuses will they
find out to defend many vain and sinful practices!

3. Be watchful, see that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise
says Paul, Ephesians. 5.15. Be sober, be vigilant, says Peter, Epist. 5.8. security
is very dangerous, when the Danites went to Laish, they found the people quiet
and secure, and so easily smote them with the edge of the Sword. Judge. 18.27.
If there be no guards kept, a Garrison may be easily surprised, and taken by
the Enemy. It has been found by experience in war, that much injury has
been received through the sluggishness of them, that should have been watching.
So is it with Christians in their spiriturall condition. How often does Satan
prevail upon them through their headless security, how often are they merely
surprised by him, before they are aware! O take heed (Christians) Satan is
always waiting his opportunity to fall upon you: it is therefore most
necessary that you be always watching. No Commander would draw off his guards,
when the Enemy lies before him, but rather double them, and rowse them, if they
are sluggish. This is our condition. Our Adversary without is ever attending
upon us, and (which is worse) we have a malignant party lurking within us,
waiting an opportunity also, to betray us to Satan. Let me say with Paul,
Therefore let us not sleep, as others do, but let us watch and be sober, 1
These. 5.6.

4. I shall, in a word, Ephesians. 6.
commend unto you the whole armor of God, of which I cannot now stand to speak
particularly.

5 Consider where thy greatest weakness lies, and draw up thy greatest force,
and exercise thy greatest care and watchfulness there. In a Garrison the watch
is usually strongest, and the force drawn up greatest, where the walls or works
are weakest: Consider then, I say, where thy greatest weakness lies: Have thou
a worldly heart? draw up all the force of arguments thou can, to strengthen
thee against that infirmity; watch carefully, and pray earnestly against it.
Have thou a passionate, rash spirit? this is thy great infirmity, do all thou
can to strengthen thy soul; watch and pray also against this infirmity. Have
thou a proud, self-exalting heart? this is also thy great infirmity; and
whatever thy weaknesses are besides be sure this is one. What I have observed
in my little experience, makes me almost of the opinion of a godly Minister,
Mr. Capel in his Treatise of Tentations.
yet living, that Pride is every man's beloved sin. What sin more natural in
all the world, than this? I fear most of you have forgotten what I have
preached in diverse Sermons, a few years since, from Jam. 4.6. God resists
the proud, but gives grace unto the humble, and it is not now seasonable to
make repetition of it. But consider thy weakness in these mentioned, or any
other particulars, and know that Satan will assault soonest, where he finds the
weakest, and will prevail more easily, unless thou art watchful.

6. Go not forth in thy own strength, lest thou fall through thy own weakness,
but be strong in the Lord, and in the might of his power, as says the Apostle,
Ephesians. 6.10. We must have the Lords arm of strength, as well as the Lords
armor for our spiritual safety. When Peter was confident of his own strength,
the Lord gave him woeful experience of his own weakness. Though all men shall
be offended because of thee, yet will not I be offended, Mat. 26.33. And I am
ready to go with thee both into prison, and to death, said Peter, Luke 22.33.
Who but Peter? who so bold and resolute as he? But see what a Coward he proved,
when he came but to be charged with a maid, (though he took himself for a man)
he denied Christ no less than thrice, yea, he cursed, and swore, saying, I
know not the man, Matthew. 26.73. But Paul took a safer course, of whom I shall
spoke in the next direction. And Peter himself, after he had smarted for his
self-confidence, obtained much strength from Christ, as is evident by his
doings and sufferings for the sake of Christ, recorded in the Acts of the
Apostles.

7. Pray earnestly for strengthening and assisting grace, for the withstanding
of temptations: Prayer is to be joined with all other endeavors. This is to be
used with all the pieces of our spiritual armor, Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always
with all prayer and supplication -- Gird up your loins and pray, believe and
pray, hope and pray. Fly to Christ for strength in prayer and supplication.
Thus did Paul, when the messenger of Satan buffetted him, 2 Cor. 12 8, 9. The
power of prayer is very great.

8. In all temptations to sin, remember what I have told you, over and over,
that sin is the worst of evils, and use this as an argument against them: let a
temptation to sin, be as if a man should persuade you to cast your selves into
the fire. The least sin is worse than the most scorching flames, yea, sin is
worse than the torments of hell. This, if well considered, would much imbitter
the sweet morsells of sin. This will be a great means to keep thee close to
the rule of Gods Word, when temptations are strong, and cause thee highly to
prize the Word, as David did, and take counsel from it. Thus when David's
straits were great, he fearing sin, consults not with flesh and blood, but with
the word of God. Psalm. 119.23, 24. Princes also did sit and speak against me,
but thy Servant did meditate in thy statutes. Thy testimonies are my delight,
and my Counselors. And he had much comfort from it in his distress: This is
my comfort in my affliction (says he) for thy word has quickened me, ver. 50.
not Gods word of promise only, (which was comfortable) but his word of precept
also. See ver. 51. The proud have had me greatly in derision, yet have I not
declined from the law. This was his comfort, that he had the precept of God to
direct him in his duty, that being kept from the evil of sin, his spiritual
adversaries might not get advantage against him. Thy word have I hid in mine
heart, that I might not sin against thee, ver. 11. For, had he escaped his
enemies by a sinful shift, it would have been a remedy worse than the disease.
To be kept close to God, and to have communion with him in a time of
affliction, and distress, is a very great, and most desirable mercy: Therefore
David, in deep distress of persecution and affliction, prays, Psalm. 143.10.
Teach me to do the will, or thou art my God, etc. Yea, this is a far greater
mercy, than to be delivered from the affliction it self.

9. Prize, and frequent the Communion, and society of the Saints and servants
of God, and thou shall find thy hands much strengthened by them. Embrace all
their counsels, admonitions, exhortations, and whatsoever other helps they
afford thee, with much thankfulness. Learn to accept of a friendly reproof, as
a great kindness. Psalm. 141.5. Let the righteous smite, it shall be a
kindness; and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil. -- (This I the
rather mention, because reproofs are hardly born by most.) Suppose a friend
should save thee from perishing by fire, or water, would thou not take it
kindly, though he catch thee out hastily, and handle thee roughly? Know that
the danger of sin is greater; and a sharp reproof, for the safety of the soul,
must be kindly taken, although it seem harsh.

10. Lastly, Be constant in the use of all means for thy Salvation, Satan is
still watching, and thy corruption is daily, and hourly working: and thou can
not be negligent any time, without sustaining some injury by them.

Carnal, and to such as are spiritual; I shall now direct my speech to such
as are at great uncertainties what their condition is, whether Carnal or
Spiritual. And such I would Exhort diligently to inquire whether they have any
actual interest in this great saving work of Christ or not. You cannot discern
what your interest is in the other part of Christ's saving work, but by this.
Pardon of sin, Justification, Adoption, which are Relative changes, cannot be
discerned, but by the Real change, which always accompanies them.

Would you know then whether you are in a state of Salvation? inquire whether
you are in a state of Sanctification or not: Herein lies the greater part of
your Salvation (as you have heard) and the other parts are discovered by this.
It is a Devilish subtilty of Satan (tending to keep men in presumptuous carnal
security) to persuade them not to try themselves by marks, and Signs of what
God has wrought in them, to know what God has further wrought for them, I
know not how a Child of God shall discern himself from a Child of the Devil,
if the difference be only Relative, and not Real. Neither can a Christian have
more grounded hope, or comfort of his Salvation than a Jew, Turk, or Heathen;
if the work of grace upon his heart will not evidence his good estate. I will
not now stand upon this question: but will lay down some few marks, whereby
you may try, and discern whether your estate be good, or not, and they shall
be only such, as fall directly from the point in hand, and may be deduced from
what has been already spoken upon it.

First, If you are in a state of Salvation, you will look upon Sin as the
greatest evil: or, if for want of due consideration, you have esteemed Wrath a
greater evil, yet you will esteem Sin so great, even in it self, as that you
will groan under it, and long to be delivered from it, though there were no
other evil following it. Let me put this question to thee, and consider well
what answer thy conscience will make. Suppose it were possible for thee to go
on freely in sin, without danger of punishment; that there were no penalty to
be executed upon the impenitent transgressors of the Law; that there were no
such thing as everlasting condemnation, or temporal judgment; could thou
then be contented to go on, and take thy course in sin, without serious seeking
to be delivered from it? If thou could, thy heart is not yet right in the
sight of God, thou art in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, and
not in a state of salvation. For to fear sin merely, for fear of punishment, is
not properly to fear sin at all, but wrath only; and this is but a servile,
or slavish fear. I doubt not but the judgment threatened on the one hand, and
the reward promised on the other hand, are motives needful for our help; but
the very evil that is in sin it self, is esteemed so great, that the
consideration of that alone works strongly in all that truly believe. He that
could think himself well enough with profits, pleasures, honors, if he might
have a continued enjoyment of them, without ever being called to an account
before Gods tribunal, is, as yet, but an unhappy man; for as yet he does not
hate sin, as sin, or for it self; nor out of any true love to the ways of
holiness. The Scholar that would be willingly playing all the day long; but
leaves his sport a while, and learneth a little, for fear of his Masters rod
only, is no enemy to Idleness, or true lover of Learning. Inquire then
diligently what thy affections are toward sin, considering it as abstracted
from punishment.

2. Secondly, and consequently, he that is saved from a state of sin, and hates
sin, as sin, A quatenus ad de omni valet argumentum Neque vi^ bonus merito
dicitur; qui scit quod bonu^ est, sed qui diligit. Aug. de civ. Dei l. 11. c.
28.
a hates every sin. Thus says David, Psalm. 119.104. I hate every false way.
ver. 101. I have refrained my self from every evil way. And he that loves
grace, as grace, loves every grace, and every gracious action, having respect
to every part of his duty, Psalm. 119. ver. 5, 6. O that my ways were directed
to keep thy statutes! Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect to all
thy commandments. I do not say, that hatred of sin, or love of holiness, is
gradually perfect in all, or any of the Saints in this life; but it is
prevalent in all of them. Inquire then what is the prevalent, or overpoising
frame of thy heart: Is it against every sin, and for the whole service of God?
I say the prevalent, or overpoising frame; for a carnal person may, and
usually has, many grudgings of conscience, against sin, and some approbation
of the ways of holiness. When the rich young man in the Gospel came to
Christ, inquiring what he should do to inherit Eternal Life; and at his second
question, asked Christ, What lack I yet? Christ plainly discovered by his
answer, that he wanted more love to his spiritual, than to his temporal
happiness. And in this example is confirmed, what Christ told his Disciples,
to wit, that he that loved any thing more than him, is unworthy of him, and
cannot be his Disciple, Luke 14.26. Mat. 10.37. Doubtless Judas had some kind
of love to his Master, upon whom he had waited so long: But the thirty pieces
of silver weighed Christ down in the balance of his affection.

I say also, it is the frame of thy heart, that thou must inquire after: for it
is hard judging by some particular inclinations only. A bad man may sometimes
be in a good mind; as at the hearing of some rouzing Sermon, or under some
great Affliction, or the like; but this goodness is but as the morning cloud,
Hosea 6.4.
and as the early dew, that soon vanishes away. The young man forementioned
was in a good mind, while he was coming to Christ; but it was but of small
continuance. A good man also may sometimes be in a bad mind, as when he is
under a prevalent temptation: So was David, when he fell into the sins of
Adultery and Murder; and Solomon when he declined to Idolatry. Now if a wicked
man should judge of himself by what his inclination was, while he was in a
good mind, for a little season, he may judge himself to be godly, (as, I
doubt, many do) and so deceive his own soul. Or, if a godly man should judge
of himself by what he has observed in himself, while he was under the power
of some great temptation, he may take himself for a very reprobate.

I add, against every sin, and for the whole service of God. Because a wicked
man may have a prevalent, constant hatred of some sins, and a constant
predominant love to some virtues: even very Heathens have been constant haters
of injustice, intemperance, etc. and have been great lovers of temperance,
justice, and such like virtues. And we see by experience, that many mere civil
persons are steadfast haters of swearing, drunkenness, whoredom, and such like
open profanesse; and lovers of truth, honesty, and sobriety. Inquire then what
is the prevalent frame of thy heart against every sin, so far as thou know.
And this requires a serious, and frequent observation of thy heart and ways,
if thou will make a clear discovery.

Let me ask thee then, Have thou well observed the frame of thy heart? and do
thou find it to be against every sin, so as not to be contented with secret
sins, heart-sins, most pleasing sins, common infirmities, even such as may, and
do ordinarily consist with a state of grace? Can thou say with David, Psalm.
119.113. I hate vain thoughts. Psalm. 18.22, 23. All his judgments were before
me, and I did dot put away his statutes from me; I was also upright before him,
and I have kept my self from mine iniquity. For whosoever shall keep the whole
law, and yet offend in one point, (to wit) habitually, willingly, and out of
indulgence, he remains guilty, as a transgressour of the whole law. James
2.10.

3. As a further consequent, He that is saved from a state of sin, fears sin,
and follows after holiness. What a man looks upon as evil, he hates; and
what he hates he fears, if he be in danger of it; and the greater he
apprehends the evil to be, the greater is his fe^re of it. And what a man
accounts good, and so loves, he hopefully seeks the enjoyment of, if it
may be attained; and the better he esteems it, the more diligently he seeks
after it. Thus to our purpose speaks Solomon, Pro. 28.14. Happy is the man
that fears always; but he that hardens his heart shall fall into mischief.
To fear judgment with a love to sin, is a servile fear; but to fear sin, as
a most sad evil in it self, is from a true filial fear of God, who has
forbidden sin; and in the words we see, it is such a fear, as is opposed to
hardening of the heart. And we have Paul's example for earnest pressing after
the good he loved, and hoped for. Phil. 3.12, 13, 14. I follow after, if that I
may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Jesus Christ. Brethren, I
count not my self to have apprehended: but this one thing I do, forgetting
those things which are behind, and reaching forth to those things which are
before. I press toward the mark for the price of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus. My soul follows hard after thee (says David) Psalm. 63.8.

Ask thy soul then, Art thou bold, and adventurous in thy ways without fear
of falling into sin? or art thou fearful and careful in all thy undertakings,
lest thou transgress? Do thou say, as Joseph did, when a temptation arises,
How can I do this wickedness and sin against God? Gen 39.9.
And do thou in doubtful cases consider and inquire what the will of the Lord
is, that thou may keep his way?

4. Hence follows care to avoid the evil, and obtain the good in the use of
such means as tend to the accomplishment of it. Let me ask thee then, What care
and diligence do thou use in hearing, reading, meditating, praying,
conferring, and watching over thy heart? A mere Hypocrite may do most of
these, as to the outward act, with some kind of diligence: But do thou do
all these carefully, setting this as the end thou proposest, that hereby thou
may the more prevail against every evil, and make a progress in all good,
and thereby glorify God thy Savior But alas, what is it that the most do?
they sit out a Sermon, kneel out a Prayer in public, say over their prayers in
private, some perhaps do this, and more merely to get knowledge, to obtain a
good esteem with men, or to satisfy the voice of an enlightened natural
Conscience, or for some other by-end. But if all endeavors do not chiefly
refer to this end, to wit, to glorify God in eschewing every evil and doing
good, it is but lost labor.

5. Lastly, hence also follows a man's joy, and delight in that which is good;
and sorrow, when the contrary evil overtakes him. What a man loves, desires,
and seeks after, as good, he delights in the enjoyment of. What a man hates,
fears, and carefully shuns, as evil, he is sorrowful for, if it fall upon
him, and it is contrary to the nature of the rational soul to do otherwise.
A man that loves riches, desires them, seeks after them, and rejoices in the
midst of abundance. Luke 12.16, 17, 18, 19. but if he be undone by cross
Providence, and poverty befalls him, he is grieved and troubled, as we see
by experience. When the evil, that a man feared is fallen upon him, it makes
him sad. Thus it is with those, that are godly in the spiritual estate. A
godly man rejoices in all the good the Lord works in him, and by him, Thus
Paul. 2. Cor. 1.12. This is our rejoicing, the testimony of our conscience,
that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the
grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to
you-wards. A godly man is truly grieved for all the evil he does commit, so
far as he comes to the knowledge of it. Thus David makes a sad confession of
his sin. Psalm. 51.3, 4, 5, 6. Thus it is said, 2 Samuel 24.10. David's heart smote
him after he had numbered the people, and Dav^d said unto the Lord, I have
sinned greatly in that I have done. Thus Peter went forth and wept bitterly,
after he had denied Christ, Luke 22.62. And this sorrow is not merely for
gross sins, but for lesser also: such as the world never sees. A godly man,
as he hates, so he grieveth for vain thoughts, It must be either a carnal, or
brutish frame of spirit for a man not to be grieved for sin.

Let the Antinomian stop his mouth, and say no more, that a child of God ought
not to be troubled for any sin, whatever he commits; Tunc (...) ista erit,
quando peccatum in homine nullum erit.

Borro si (...) illa dicend^ est quum animum contingere omnino non potest ullus
affectus, quis hunc sluporem non omnibus vitiis judicet esse pejorem? Potest
ergo non absurd dici perfectam beatitudinem sine stimulo timoris, and sine
ullae tristitiae futuram. -- Si autem (...) illa est ubi nec metus ullus
exterret, nec angit dolor, aversanda est in hac vita, si recte, hoc est,
secundum Deum vivere volumus. Aug. de civ. Dei l. 14. c. 9. Apud nos autem
juxta Scripturas Sacras, Sacramque doctrinam, Cives Sanctae civitatis Dei, in
hujus vitae peregrinatione secundum Deum viventes, metuunt, cupiuntque, dolent,
gaudentque. Et quia rectus est amor eorum, istas omnes affectiones rectas
habent. -- Metuunt peccare, cupiunt perseverare, dolent in peccatis, gaudent in
operibus bonis, etc. Aug. ibid.


those that are removed to heaven, being wholly free from sin, have no more
cause to grieve for sin. But whosoever it is that lives upon earth, that being
subject to daily offenses, and sometimes to great miscarriages, yet is not
grieved for them: I will be bold to say, that he is no child of God, although
he may conceit himself that his sins were all pardoned long since. There is no
medium between grieving for sin, and rejoicing in sin, in some degree, while
sin remains in us. And whether he that rejoiceth in iniquity, without any
remorse, or sorrow at all for it, be in a good condition, let any man judge,
who understands any thing of the Word of God. See 2 These. 2.11, 12. And for
this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe a
lie, that they all might be damned, who believe not the truth, but had pleasure
in unrighteousness. Jerem. 8.5, 6. Luke 13.3, 5.

Well, whatever vain minds may fancy to themselves, the old Divinity will
prove the soundest: whosoever he is that is in a state of salvation, does truly
and sincerely grieve for sin, and delight in that which is good, more than in
all worldly prosperity: I do not say more passionately, but more solidly, that
if it were put to his choice, he would not change grace for all the gold in the
Indies. Psalm. 119.14. I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as much as
in all riches. Psalm. 19.8, 10. The statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing
the heart; the commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes; more to
be desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold, sweeter also than the
honey and the honey comb.

Exh. 4. Whosoever thou art that state of sin, rouse up thy heart, and take
unto thee words of praise and thanksgiving to God thy Savior. And to the end
thy heart may be raised,

1. Consider what thou wast, 2 Timothy 2.26. Tit. 3.3. Col. 1.21. Joh. 8.44. c.
3.18.36. Tit. 3.4. Isa. 61.1, 2, 3. Luc. 4.18. Col. 1.13. Romans 8.16, 17, 18. 1
Pet. 2.9.
and what thou art. How sad was thy condition, when thou wast a wretched
bond-slave of Satan, led captive by him at his will, serving diverse lusts, and
running with the wicked of the world, to the same excess of riot with them, an
enemy to God through evil works, a child of the Devil, and heir apparent of
Gods eternal vengeance, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. But now, since
the love of God thy Savior toward thee appeared, thou art delivered from the
bondage wherein thou wast held; the Lord has opened the prison doors, knocked
off thy chains and fetters, led thee forth, and translated thee into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God, and made thee heir apparent of
everlasting heavenly glory. And all this is done, that thou should show forth
the praises of him who has called thee out of such horrid darkness into his
mervailous light.

2. Consider how many thousands there are in the world that live in the midst
of carnal security, contentedly abiding in the bondage of sin, and vassallage
of Satan! and how very few there are that shall be saved, in comparison of the
multitude that shall be eternally destroyed! Now, that God should call thee to
be one of that little flock, and that when there is but as it were one of a
family, and two of a tribe, thou should be singled out from the rest, and
chosen, when they are left; what mere grace, and astonishing distinguishing
mercy is this! Who makes thee to differ from another? and what have thou, that
thou have not received?

3. How many, more rich, more honorable, more wise than thy self, and many
less sinners, and of better natural dispositions and inclinations, are left in
a state of sin to perish eternally! yet God has reformed thy crooked perverse
spirit, and continually pardons thy daily miscarriages, and leads thee, and
guides thee by his gracious spirit in the way to perfect glory. Have thou not
cause to say, This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief? howbeit
for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth
all long suffering for a pattern to them which shall believe on him to life
everlasting, 1 Timothy 1.15, 16.

4. Consider how averse thou wast to the work of grace upon thy owne-soul, Romans
8.7. The carnal mind is enmity against God; not an enemy, but enmity it self.
The saving mercy then thou sharest in, was neither deserved, nor so much as
desired by thee; yet the Lord pitied thee when thou wast in thy blood, and
had not an heart to pity thy self, and said unto thee live; he has
prevented thee with his goodness, and was found of thee when thou soughtest
him not.

O let thy heart and mouth be filled with the high praises of God, and -- Tamen
quod nos oneratos, obrutosque peccatis, and a contemplatione suae lucis
aversos, ac tenebrarum, id est, iniquitatis dilectione caecatos, non omnino
deseruit. Misitque nobis verbum suum qui est unicus ejus filius, quo pro nobis
in assumptae carne nato atque p^sso, quanti Deus hominem penderet nosceremus,
atque illo sacrificio singulari a peccatis omnibus mundaremur, ejusque spiritu
in cordibus nostris dilectione diffusa, omnibus difficultatibus superatis in
aeternam requiem, and contemplationis ejus ineffabilem dulcedinem veniremus.
Quae corda, quae linguae ad ag^ndas ei gratias satis esse contenderint? Aug. de
civ. Dei l. 7. c 31.

Quantum tibi sumus debitores Domine Deus noste tanti redempti pretio, tanto
salvati mysterio, tanto gratis adjuti benificio? Quantum a nobis miseris es
timendus, and amandus, hono^andus, and reverendus, laudandus, and benedicendus,
qui sic nos amasti, and salvasti, sanct ficasti, and sublimasti? Quis di^ere,
quis cogitare sufficiat? Aug conf. Theo. par. 2. c. 14.


say, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed my
soul, and has raised me up a horn of salvation. My soul does magnify the
Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. For he has regarded the
low estate of my forlorn soul. He that is mighty has done great things for
me, and holy is his name; and his mercy is on them that fear him, from
generation to generation. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within
me bless his holy name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his
benefits. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities, and heals all thy spiritual
diseases. Who redeemeth thy life from destruction, who crowns thee with his
loving kindness, and tender mercies. I will bless the Lord while I have a day
to live, yea, the term of this life is too short to praise thy name, O Lord. O
let my soul for ever live, that, being filled with the fullness of God, and
love of Christ, which passes knowledge, I may admire and praise the breadth,
and length, and depth, and height of thy richest grace, and may with the
heavenly quire of Angels sing, blessing, and glory, and honor to God in the
highest, and to the lamb of God, that takes away my sin, who sits upon the
throne to all eternity. Amen. Hallelujah.

Exh. 5. Bless God for every act of sin Satan at any time assaulted thee with
his temptations, or have thou been sorely endangered by thy own corrupt
inclinanation to commit sin, and has the Lord prevented thee by any means
whatsoever? Thou have cause to bless his name. If we have gotten a remarkable
victory in war, we take it for our duty to set apart a day of thanksgiving
for it. If we are recovered from sickness, or delivered from any eminent
temporal danger, we think we are bound to return praise to God, and so we
are. And should we not be as thankful, yea more thankful for Gods manifold
gracious preservations of us from spiritual dangers? Suppose thou were
travailing on a journey with a great charge of money about thee, and a company
of robbers set upon thee, and when their hands were in thy pockets, and their
Swords, and pistols at thy breast; God should by a special providence bring
passengers that way, who come in, in the very nick of time to save thee both
from wounding, and robbing. Would thou not look upon it as a special
favor, and be thankful to God for so great a deliverance, and be thankful
and loving to those that came in for thy help? Thus is it in thy spiritual
condition. Thou art as a wayfaring man travailing toward home, and thou
carriest a precious treasure about thee, and how often has Satan and his
instruments set upon thee to rob thee of what they can, and wound thy soul?
And how often has the Lord delivered thee by sending in seasonable checks of
conscience, motions of his spirit, reproofs, counsels and advice of Christian
friends, and instructions by his messengers, whereby thou have been delivered?
And have thou not cause to bless the Lord for thy preservation, and for the
means whereby thou wast preserved? Are not spiritual dangers greater then
temporal, and is not the consequence of them more dangerous, if they prevail?
And is not the mercy of such a deliverance the more highly to be prized, 1 Samuel
25.
and God more highly to be praised? David has herein given us a very pertinent
example. When he sent his servants to Nabal for provision, and Nabal returned
them back empty with a churlish answer; David, partly by the instigation of
Satan, and partly by the heat of his own provoked passion, rashly resolved to
destroy Nabal, and all that pertained to him before the morning light, and was
marching up with four hundred men at his heels, for the execution of his
purpose. But the Lord sent in Abigail, by his gracious providence, with
seasonable and spiritual counsel, whereby David was prevented of the execution
of the evil he had intended. Now David was presently apprehensive of so great a
mercy. See how heartily he blesses God, for keeping him from the sin of
self-revenge, and blesses the instrument also, whereby he was preserved. 1 Samuel 25.32, 33. And David said to Abigail, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel,
which has sent thee this day to meet me: And blessed be thy advice, and
blessed be thou which have kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and from
avenging my self with mine own hand. And again, ver. 39. When David heard that
Nabal was dead, he said, blessed be the Lord, that has pleaded the cause of my
reproach from the hand of Nabal, and has kept his servant from evil.

Thus consider with thy self, Has the Lord at any time delivered thee from the
attempts of thy spiritual enemies, whether by violent onsets, or by more
subtle contrivances? Call upon thy heart to affectionate praise and
thanksgiving for so great a mercy, and say, Satan, with the world, and my own
corrupt flesh, have handed themselves together, and assaulted my soul with
greatest violence. They came upon me furiously to swallow me up quick, and I
was unable to withstand them for they were stronger than I. Then cried I unto
the Lord in my distress; I said, thou art my refuge, I fly to thee for help
Save me, O my God, and deliver my soul from the hand of mine enemies, I have
no power or might against them, but mine eyes are upon thee. In the day that I
cried the Lord answered me, and strengthened me with strength in my soul. He
saved me from my cruel enemies, he set my feet upon a rock, and established my
goings. He has put a new song into my mouth, even praise unto our God. I will
love thee, O Lord, my strength. The Lord is my rock, my fortress, and my
deliverer, my God, my strength, in whom I will trust, my buckler, the horn of
my salvation, and my high tower. I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be
praised. As for God, his way is perfect, the word of the Lord is tried, he is a
buckler to all them that trust in him. Who is God save the Lord? and who is a
Rock save our God.

My spiritual enemies conspired against me with one consent, they communed of
laying snares privily for my soul, saying, Who shall see them? They took
crafty counsel against me to take me unawares, and my feet were almost gone, my
steps had well nigh slipped, I was almost taken in their net: But the Lord was my
helper, he preserved my soul. Blessed be the Lord who has not given me up, as
a prey to their teeth, Gratias tibt ago piissime Deus qui me de multis
angustiis, tri^ulatienibus, calamitatibus, usiseriis, and infirm^tatibus, de
multis foveis, laqueis and peccatis, da multis infidiis visib l^um and
inv^sibilium mimicorum, de multis malis opprobriis, and adversitatibus
corporis, and animae bactenus liberare dignatus es, dirigens miscricorditer,
and marabiliter vitam meam inter adversa and prospera; ita ut nec adversa me
valde dejicerent, nec prospera elevarent. Posuisti enim propietate, and
bonitate froenum tuum in maxillis meis, and non me dercliquisti penitus in
manuarbitrii mei, habens curam mei paterna pictate, and non permittens me
amplius tentari, and supra id quod potuerim sustinere. Ubi erat locus peceandi
non crat voluntas: and quando voluntas erat, non fuit locus. Sit itaque tibi
laus and benedictio, sit gratiarum actio, etc. Aug. Cons. Theo. par. 2. c. 17.
but has delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, my feet from
falling. My soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowler; the
snare is broken, and I am escaped. Bless the Lord, O my soul, for the Lord
has dealt bountifully with thee.

Thus consider, I say, what particular deliverances of this kind thou have
received. Have thou been set upon by violent temptations to Atheism,
Blasphemy, or the like, and has the Lord preserved thee? Have thou been
allured by pleasing baits to Lust, Pride, Covetousness, or such like Evils, and
has the Lord withheld thee from them? O consider what abundant cause thou have
to be thankful! spiritual deliverances are not to be slighted. And know that
the more thankful thou art for such mercies, already received, the better
shall thou be able to resist future temptations.

Exh. 6. Use this as an argument with thy self, to make thee willing to leave
this unhappy enticing world, and thy sinful condition here (for so it is, in
great measure, at the best) for that happy condition, wherein sin shall be no
more, but thou shall be perfectly saved from it. O check thy self for being so
busy in building tabernacles on earth, and saying in thy heart, It is good to
be here. Was it not thy sin alone that made thee miserable? was it not this
that defaced the Image of God in thy soul, and cast thee from the Paradise of
God to the very Brink of Hell? Did not Christ come into the world, live a
wearisome life, and die a miserable death, to save thee from thy death in sin?
was not sin the burden of thy soul, and the sorrow of thy heart, under which
thou groanedst, when the Lord first awakned, and rouzed thee out of thy carnal
security? Did not thy sin cause thee to cry mightily to God for salvation and
deliverance, when thou sensibly, perceivedst thy lost condition? And was not
this the work that Christ took in hand, when he called thee effectually to
himself?

Have thou complained of sin, and professed to hate it thus long? How come
thou now to plead a forbearance for thy mortal enemy? Sure thou can not
dream (with the dreamers of this age) of a state of perfection here in the
body. Does not experience tell thee, that corruptions arise daily and hourly in
thy heart, which is a continual spring of sin? Thou can not walk, work, or go
about any worldly business, but sinful vanities are still flowing from that
fountain within thee. Thou can not hear, pray, or perform any part of Gods
worship, but this cursed, carnal inmate calls away thy heart to other objects.
Check thy heart for gadding, recall thy thoughts from wandering, and how soon
will they be gone again! though thou make it thy daily work to watch, pray, and
strive against sin, thou can prevent it but in part, though thou daily
weedest out the rambling tares, and choking thistles, that hinder the growth
of the good seed, yet thou can not rid thy field of them, but they spring up
afresh every morning. If thou art negligent for a while, what head do they get?
and how hard is it to bring them under again! Is not this thy sad condition,
and art thou unwilling to be delivered from it? Is sin so delightful a
companion? If it be so to thy flesh, it cannot be to thy spirit, or else thou
art not spiritual. Did thou rejoice, when thy Redeemer brought thee out of
thy worse than Egyptian bondage? and art thou unwilling to enter into the
heavenly Canaan of rest? Is it better to be always wandering Cui peregrinatio
dulcis est, non amat patriam: Si dulcis est patria, amara est peregrinatio.
Aug. in Ps. 86.7.
in the wilderness of sin? wast thou glad to see the foundation of thy
happiness laid? and art thou loath to see the superstructure reared, and
completed? Did it revive thy spirit when Christ first drew thee out of thy
sinful state, and art thou afraid, at last, lest he should perfect thy
deliverance? Death is indeed, in it self, an enemy to nature, and a part of the
curse due for sin, and therefore cannot be desirable for it self. But learn to
look beyond it unto Christ thy Savior (whose presence is most desirable) as
Paul did, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better
than thy present life; willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be
present with the Lord. Nay, does he not speak (ver. 4.) in the person of the
Saints, as groaning (...). 2 Cor. 5.2.
under the present burden, and art thou still willing to bear it? The Spouse in
the Canticles, c. 8. 14. cries, Make have my beloved, and be thou like to a
Roe, or to a young Heart upon the mountains of spices, running swiftly. And why
do thou desire delays, that he should creep as a Snail. and be long in
coming? Did Christ teach thee to say, Thy Kingdom come, and can thou
heartily pray for it, if thou art not yet willing of it? Do thou not profess
to live, and rejoice in the hope of glory, and can thou hope for, and rejoice
in the hope of what thou do not unfeignedly desire? Bethink thy self, and
blame thy soul for thy foolish mistakes. Is not heaven the place where
holiness must be perfect? Is it not there alone, that the perfectly pure in
heart shall behold the face of God? Does not Abraham wait there to lodge thee
in his bosom? Do not the spirits of just men there made perfect, and the
Angels of God joyfully wait to give thee entertainment? Did not Christ thy
Redeemer go before to prepare a mansion for thee, and will he not there show
thee his full salvation? O do but seriously meditate, and that frequently, of
the misery of sin, and of the perfect happiness of a sinlesse condition, and
thou will be so far from making, or desiring delays, that thou will rather
cry out, How long Lord, holy, and true, before thou destroy my cursed
corruption. How long must I bear about me this body of death? O wretched man
that I am, when shall I be delivered. Thou Lord have purchased, and begun my
salvation from sin, when will thou come to perfect the work? Thou that have
done thus much already for me, have said, surely, I come quickly, Amen, even so
come Lord Jesus.

Exh. 7. Lastly, Is it the great work of and have thou had experience of this
saving work upon thy own heart? Labor, what in thee lies, to be helpful, as
an instrument of Christ, toward the salvation of others. Though thou art but a
private Christian, thou may be very serviceable to the soul of thy brother.
Be free in giving seasonable exhortations, persuasions, entreaties, admonitions
in love, and tenderness, as being truly solicitous for his spiritual safety.
The Lord does expressly require it as a duty at thy hands. Lev. 19.17. Thou
shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke thy
neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. Gal. 6 1. Brethren, if any man be
overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such a one in the spirit
of meekness, considering thy self lest thou also be tempted. Heb. 3.13. Exhort
one another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin. And our Savior Christ gives directions how
to proceed gradually in the work, Mat. 18.15, 16, 17.

It is a very wicked course, that some take when they know any to offend
grossly, they make themselves, and others, merry, by jesting, and scorning at
it, especially at those soul sins of uncleanness, and drunkenness, which
should not be so much as once named among Christians, unless with detestation.
For these, and the like sins, the land mourns; it is then a very evil
practice to make sport with them. Solomon says, Fools make a mock at sin,
Prove. 14 9. And it was a great aggravation of the Corinthians sin, when they
had the incestuous person among them: That they were puffed up, and had not
rather mourned; 1 Cor. 5.2.

It is also an unchristian course in those, that when they hear, or see their
brothers miscarriage, they blaze it abroad in all companies among others, to
their infamy and disgrace; but never go about this necessary, and brotherly
work of faithful admonition. O how do some delight to relate other men's
infirmities!

And it is a sinful neglect in those, that perform not the duty, what ever the
cause may be. But it is a most desperate, and preposterous course of those, who
rather than they will be at the pains of faithfully admonishing offenders, will
separate from them; I doubt not but a scandalous offender should be
excommunicated; but not before he is proved obstinate, much less before we
have heard him speak, or spent one faithful and serious admonition upon him
for his recovery. The dreadful sentence of excommunication is only to be
pronounced against an offender, when all other means fail Cuncta prius
tentanda, sed immedicabile vulnus en^e rescindendum ne pars sincerae trabitur.
for his reclaiming. Much less may we cast off our lapsed Churches as no
Churches of Christ, and the members thereof by the hundreds, or in the whole
lump, as no Christians, before we have tried the utmost we can do for their
healing and recovery. We know, that God is a God of patience, and
long-suffering, admonishing, reproving, exhorting, wooing, and beseeching poor
backsliding sinners, and Churches, waiting long for their reformation before
he utterly casts them off. O let us not be so unlike our heavenly Father, as
hastily to conclude their condition to be desperate, and past recovery. Does
not Paul teach, That the servant of the Lord must b^ gentle unto all men, apt
to teach, patient; in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if,
peradventure God will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25.

It is an easy matter to call Christians Dogs, and Swine, and cast them off
from the privilege of brotherly admonition, Mr. Gerce in his Vind Eccl. Angl.
because it is accounted an unthankful office. But this way (as a godly
Minister, now with the Lord, spoke) is too easy to be holy. He is but a
desperate Surgeon, who, when a wounded person is brought to him, cutteth off
the member, because he would not be troubled with the cure, and so leaves the
Patient to shift for himself. O be not hasty to conclude men incurable, and
snarlers at reproof, before you have made some serious trial whether they will
bear it. Some that have gone in good earnest, to some of the worst of sinners,
and dealt faithfully with them touching their miscarriages, have found them
free in confessing their faults, with tears in their eyes, begging prayers to
God for them. Methinks (my brethren) you should remember how many admonitions,
and how much time the Lord spent in waiting upon your own souls, before you
savingly embraced his counsel; O consider it well. And let me further tell you,
you will find more comfort in winning one soul by Christian importunity, than
in casting off a thousand by uncharitable censoriousnesse. Mistake me not, I
speak not, as if I would have all sorts of persons among us admitted to all
Church Priviledges: but I would not have the common sort so lightly cast off,
as they are by some, as if it were no part of our duty to seek their spiritual
good.

And what shall we say of those, who censure their Minister for not suspending
from the Lords table, some that have offended, though he know nothing of the
offense, when they themselves that know it, will not so much as once admonish
them, which is their manifest duty. Men are very ready to complain of others,
for that wherein themselves are chiefly in fault. And it is too usual (sad
experience tells us) for people to complain both of the Minister and
Congregation, to which they belong, when themselves never once set about the
duty of private members. I know, that in so great a place as this, there is far
more ministerial work, than we two, and twice two more are able to perform;
yet will some find fault, because we cannot do our own work and theirs too,
that so they may be quit from the troublesome duty of admonishing an offending
brother. But is not this to bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be born, and
lay them on other men's shoulders, when they themselves will not touch them with
the least of their fingers? I doubt not (Brethren) but both you and we
shalloperform our duties defectively (at the best) as long as we live here; yet
let us faithfully and cheerfully set about each man his part, and do it, as we
are able, without casting it off from one to another.

This duty (Brethren) you owe, as you have fit opportunity, both to the godly
and ungodly.

Do you see carnal persons in the height of wickedness? and think you
therefore they are not to be meddled with? Is not their case the more to be
pitied, and their cure (if it may be) the more seriously minded? God does often
reclaim the worst of sinners, and he does it in the use of his own means,
whereof private admonition is one. When Jerusalem suffered the saddest
desolation, and heedless passengers were grown hard-hearted toward her, she
affectionately cries out, Lam. 1.12. Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass
by? Behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow. So may we say on
the behalf of poor sinners: Is there any misery like unto the misery of those
that lie in the ruins and desolation of sin? Is there any evil like unto this?
and is it nothing to you, all ye that regardlesly pass by? If the deepest
misery be the meetest object of pity, and the greatest poverty the fittest
object of charity, then here may you bestow your spiritual alms very
cheerfully, here are objects enough amongst us fit for your exercise.

Though you may take such a sinner for one that is without, and judge him unfit
to be called by the name of brother, yet vouchsafe him the privilege of a
neighbor. Lev. 19 17. Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not
suffer sin upon him. Give me leave to make use of the parable of our Savior
Christ, of the wayfaring man traveling from Jerusalem to Jer^co, that fell
among thieves. Satan, and inbred corruption, have conspired together, and
wounded a poor soul, leaving him in a dying and perishing condition. O be not
as the Priest and Levite, that seeing, passed by on the other side, but put on
rather bowels of compassion with the good Samaritan, bind up his wounds and
pour in oil: A seasonable reproof from a sympathising heart, may be as a
precious oil, as says David, Psalm. 141.5. and by thus showing mercy on him,
you shall truly deserve to be called his neighbor.

This duty you must exercise toward those that are godly also, as need and
opportunity requires. The faithful have much need of each others help in this,
as well as other ways, and they are the more bound to it, as being
fellow members of the same body, called to that unity for mutual help. How much
might Christians advantage each other, were they but faithful in the
performance of this necessary duty! But alas, how little is done in it!
Remember, I beseech you, what I have formerly taught you in diverse Sermons from
Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. wherein I handled the graduall proceedings of this duty.
Remember also what you have lately heard from my Fellow Laborer, from Gal.
6.1. and let not this duty remain, as it does, almost wholly undone. Observe
the rule of Christ, and in private offenses begin with private admonition; for
if the offense may be put away privily, it is not the mind of Christ, that the
offender should be put to open shame.

This use is excellently and largely pressed by M. Baxter in his Saints rest,
part 3. chapter 12, 13. wherein he gives directions for the right performance of
this duty, sets down the common hindrances, answers objections against the
performance of it, and gives motives to all Christians to set about it: and
particularly presses it at large upon Ministers, and patents, with directions
to them.
I might here descend in this exhortation to speak more particularly, and to
stir up persons, according to their relative obligations to be subservient to
Christ in this great saving work: But I will not now branch forth into so many
particulars, being desirous to hasten toward a conclusion of this Subject. I
shall therefore, in general, desire all, and especially such as are godly
Husbands, Wives, Parents, Masters, and other friends of intimate acquaintance,
to improve their interest in such, as they are so related to, for the promoting
of this saving work of Christ. If your children (through Gods blessing upon
your faithful endeavors) become the children of God; and your servants the
servants of God: If you, that are husbands and wives, be isntrumental for the
espousing of one the other to Christ, that so you may walk hand in hand in
Heavens way, and meet in Heaven to abide together with the Lord for ever, after
a little time of separation by death; how beneficial and comfortable will such
endeavors be both to you and them, and God be honored in both?

The Lord has given great encouragement in his Word to the faithful
performance of this duty. Jam. 5.19, 20. Brethren, if any of you do err from
the truth, and one convert him, let him know, that he which converteth the
sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall
hide a multitude of sins. Dan. 12.3. And they that be wise, (or teachers) shall
shine as the brightness of the firmament: and they that turn many to
righteousness, as stars for ever and ever.

CHAP. VI.
LAstly, If this Salvation from Sin be the Work of Christ, then this is matter
of consolation to all such as are in a state of Salvation, in diverse respects,
especially in these two, which I shall particularly mention. 1. Here is comfort
against the fear of falling away. 2. In assurance of full freedom at last from
all their sins.

1. Against the fear of falling away. Psalm. 34.19
Many indeed are the troubles and temptations of the righteous; but the Lord
will deliver them out of them all. Satan and his Instruments are very
powerful, they do, and shall, deceive many, especially in such times as these:
But the Elect of God (and such only are effectually called) shall not be
deceived: For, says our Savior Christ, Mat. 24.24. There shall arise false
Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch
that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the very Elect. The Elect may be
long deceived before their conversion, they may after their conversion also be
brought off, for a time, from some of the sound principles they have professed;
and from much of the practice of Christianity, wherein they were forward (as I
am persuaded, many are in these days, whom God will cause in his good time to
remember, from whence they are fallen, and repent, and do their first Works.)
And the most faithful of Gods Elect are deceived all their days in lesser
matters, both in judgment and practice. But the Elect of God shall not be
utterly deceived in those things, that are essentially necessary to be known
and done.

Whosoever then thou art, that sincerely fear God, rejoice in thy firm, and
settled condition. The Love, wherewith the Lord has loved thee, is everlasting
love. Jer. 33.3. his mercy he will keep for thee for evermore, Psalm. 89.28. the
kindness of thy Redeemer is everlasting kindness, Isa. 54.8. The Covenant
that God has entered with thee, is an everlasting Covenant, Isa. 55.3. Heb. 8.
8, 9. c 13.20. The spirit Scriptura non uno loco inculcat Spiritu^ S. electis
datum, inhabitare corundem corda. Si autem inbabitat, igitur domicilium,
fixamque sedem ibi deligit; neq zimaginabimur cum excurrere, vagari, redire,
quod malum spiritum facere consucvisse Christus, Mat. 12. testatur. Zanch.
Epist. l. 1.

Datur electis Spiritus S. ut arrbabo haereditatis coelestis, Ephesians. 1. Nemo
autem, qui promissis pactisve vult stare, arrbabonem reposcit, quin potius in
hoc totus est, ut promissa sive pacta praestet, ne tum quidem ubi illa
praestiterit, arrhabonem repetiturus. Consequitur ergo and Spiritum S. apud
cum, cui semel datus est, relinqui. Quod eo quoque comprobatur, quod Ephesians. 4.
dicuntur credentes per Sp. Sanctum in diem redemptionis obsignari. Zanch. ibid.


of Sanctification, already given thee, is the earnest of thy Inheritance, Ephesians.
1.14. Thou art sealed by it to the day of redemption. Ephesians. 4.30. It is sent
unto thee, not as a wayfaring man to tarry but for a night, but to abide with
thee for ever. Joh. 14.16. The seed of grace is an incorruptible seed. 1. Pet.
1.23. The life of grace is everlasting life: For he that truly believes, has
everlasting life, Joh, 3.36. Chapter 5.24. Thou believe the record, that God has
given of his Son; and this is the record, that God has given us eternal life,
and this life is in his Son. He that has the Son has life. 1 John 5.11, 12,
Everlasting life is already begun in thy soul, and the Lord is faithful, who
will establish thee to the end. 2. These. 3.3. Satan indeed desires to have
thee, that he may sist thee as wheat: but Christ has prayed for thee, that thy
faith may not fail, Luke 22. 31, 32. The powers that are against thee are
great, but the power that is for thee is Nemo fallit redemptorem tuum, nemo
circumvenit, nemo premit. Aug. in Psalm. 103. v. 3.
greater. Thou shall be kept by the power of God, through faith unto salvation,
1 Pet. 1.5. The Lord, that has already rescued thee out of the jaws of Satan,
that was ready to devour thee (as David rescued the Lamb out of the mouth of
the Lion) will carefully watch over thee, that thou may no more become a
prey. He that keeps thee, will not slumber. Behold, he that keeps Israel
shall neither slumber nor sleep The Lord is thy keeper, the Lord is thy shade
upon the right hand. The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil, he shall
preserve thy soul; the Lord shall preserve thy going out, and coming in, from
this time forth, and for evermore. Hear how Christ, the great Sheepherd of thy
Soul, speaks for thy comfort, John 10.27, 28, 29, 30. My sheep hear my voice, I
know them, and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal life, and they
shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. My Father,
which gave them me, is greater than all, and no man is able to pluck them out
of my fathers hand. I and my Father are one. And how confidently does Paul
triumph against all opposition, Romans 8.35, 37, 38, 39. Who shall separate us
from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Nay, in all these things we are
more than conquerours, through him, that loved us. For I am persuaded, that
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord. Thou have cause indeed to fear Satan's, and the Worlds temptations, and
thine own inbred corruption, with a fear, begetting care for the prevention of
the evil; but let not thy fear cause thee to cast away thy confidence in
Christ thy Savior; but in assurance of his help and protection, fly unto him
at all seasons, and say as David did in another case. Psalm. 66.3. What time I
am afraid I will trust in thee. Forsake not him, and he will not forsake thee.
In this case I may say, as Azariah said to Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin. The
Lord is with you, while ye be with him: yea, the Lord has said, I will not
fail thee, nor forsake thee. A repetition of the same thing in Scripture, is
like Pharaoh's doubled dream, which shows that the thing shall certainly come
to pass, which is foretold or promised. Now we have here the Lord doubling his
promise, I will not fail thee nor forsake thee. Note also, that, whereas two
negatives in the Greek Language, deny the more strongly, we have here no less
than five negatives, two in the former, and three in the latter clause of this
promise, (...). If we should translate the words literally, it would be thus, I
will not not fail thee, neither will I not not forsake thee. Enemies indeed
thou have, and the worst are in thine own house, I mean, (which is worse) in
thine own heart; Fear with a cautious, but not with an incredulous fear.
Remember, thou art here a member of the Church-militant among many Enemies,
war thou must, and adventure hazards, and difficulties, yet be not dismayed:
Eisi diabolus, peccatum caeterique hosts nostri videntur nos premere, vincere
tamen non potuerunt, quia coercentur imperio Christi dutis nostri sub cujus
pedibus protriti jacent, and conculcati. Daven. in Col. c 2. v. 15.

Permittuntur tentare fideles, and oppugnare, sed nunquam expuguare, ibid.


Troubled thou shall be on every side, yet not distressed; perplexed, but not
with cause of despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not
destroyed. Thine Enemies, like Pharaoh, and his host, may pursue after thee,
and bring thee to a strait, that the power of Christ thy Savior may appear;
but they shall not bring thee back again to thy former bondage. Only be
strong, and very courageous, and fight the Lords battles: Be strong, I say, in
the Lord and in the might of his power, and he shall preserve thee by his
grace, that thou may not be of them that draw back unto perdition, but of
them that believe to the saving of the soul. Set the Lord then always before
thee: because he is at thy right hand thou shall not be moved. Therefore let
thy heart be glad, and thy tongue rejoice, and fear not thy state, while thou
truly fear sin, as the worst of evils. Fear nothing so much as a fearelesse
and careless condition.

2. Here is comfort to such, as are in a state of Salvation in assurance of
their full deliverance from sin at the last. Whosoever thou art that find
thy self to be delivered from a state of sin, learn to rejoice in Christ thy
Savior: Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice, Phil. 4.4. Thou
many times bewailest the blots, blemishes, and deformities, that are upon thee,
and do therefore (and not without cause) abhor thy self in dust and ashes.
O rejoice in this, that it is but a little while, ere all these shall be wholly
taken away, and thou shall be absolutely without spot, or blemish. Are not the
relics of thy sin, which now abide within thee, the remainder of Satan's
image? and will the Lord suffer it to remain upon any of his ransomed ones? Is
not the work of grace a draught (although imperfect) of the Divine nature upon
thy soul? has not the Lord, as it were, begun to draw his own image, or
picture, upon the table of thine heart? are not the lineaments, and proportion
of what it shall be, already traced out? and will the Lord leave it so? No, no,
he will certainly come over it again, and again, he will shadow, and beautify
it, till he has made it a most glorious and beautiful piece.

Thou wast formerly in bondage to Satan, and thy own corruption, but, through
the merciful power of thy precious Redeemer, thou art rescued from the
bondage, wherein thou wast held. Be confident of this very thing, that he that
has begun a good work in thy soul, will complete and finish it unto the day
of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.6. And in that day shall thou see thy corruptions, as
the Israelites did their Egyptian enemies, dead upon the shore. Look back upon
them now, are not their chariot wheels already taken off, which makes them
drive more heavily than heretofore? and is not this a forerunner of their utter
overthrow? Satan (indeed) many times furiously rages, and thy corruption
strongly works, because their time is but short; and what provokes them,
should rejoice thee. The God of peace shall bruise Satan under thy feet
shortly, Romans 16.20. And thy (now) corrupt heart shall then cease from all
sinful motions and conceptions. Thou shall then have not so much as a lingering
desire, or inclination after evil. That unruly corruption that now vexes thee,
intruding into all thy actions, and intermixing it self with all the best of
thy services, shall then be removed as far from thee, as hell is from heaven,
and thou shall be able to serve God perfectly, without difficulty or
distraction. That heavenly service will be so pleasing and delightful to thee;
that thou will never be weary of it, nor find a more pleasing object than God
to set thy heart upon: Then thou shall have no need to watch, pray, or fight
against thy corruption any more. When there is no open enemy against a nation,
nor malignant party within it, there is no need of Sentinels, or Guards, nor
use of Arms; So in Heaven thy spiritual enemies shall be so perfectly destroyed
from within, and so far removed from without, as that thy praying and fighting
shall be turned into triumphing and praising; and thy watchfulness into
perfect spiritual security, and the whole armor of God (as armor) shall
wholly become useless. Thou shall there need neither offensive, nor defensive
arms; and the time of the accomplishment hereof, is nigh at hand. Lift up thy
head then with joy, knowing that thy redemption draws nigh. In the midst of
thy fears lift up an eye of faith, and behold Christ sitting at the right hand
of God, who shall there abide, till he has made all thine enemies thy
footstool. And when thou groanest (with Paul under the burden of thy remaining
corruptions, and criest out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from this body of death? Learn (with him also) to rejoice in Christ thy perfect
Savior, and say, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

CHAP. VII.
HAving thus far spoken of Salvation from sin it self, to wit, in work of
Sanctification, I might here proceed also to handle the doctrine of Remission
of sins, and Justification of the sinner by Jesus Christ, which are also
included in the words of the Text. For as Christ saves his people from their
sins; so also from the eternal wrath of God, which was due unto them for sin.
But of that I have heretofore spoken from another Text: And what I have already
spoken upon this, was that, which I especially intended when I first entered
upon it. Yet it will not be amiss, for the better understanding of the whole
work of man's Salvation, and for your better help against some mistakes of these
times, if I show you in a few Propositions by way of Parallel, how the Lord
carries on the whole work of man's Salvation in both parts jointly from the
first to the last. To which I shall annexe a few Corollaries.

God did at once, and that from eternity, Prop. 1.
decree the whole, and perfect Salvation of all his Elect, both from sin, and
wrath by his Son Jesus Christ. Romans 8.29, 30. Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6, 7.

Corol.
Therefore we can no more argue our eternal Justifacation (because it was
eternally decreed) then our eternal sanctification or glorification. And if
there be any such thing, as the actual Justification of the elect from
eternity, how does the Scripture (that every mouth may be stopped) make all the
world to become guilty before God? Romans 3.19. And to what end should God give
us promises of the pardon, and remission of sins? Promises are of good things
to come, The Promises are outward Declarations of Gods will, concerning good to
be received, and evil to be removed. Leigh on the Promises, p. 5. Promissio
Dei est denunoratio futurorum bonorum nobis dandorum, etc. Polan. Syntag. l. 6.
c. 31.
not of such as had an eternal Being. A Promise of what is already done or
past is a contradiction in terms.

Prop. 2.
When Christ undertook the work of the Salvation of his people, he did at once
undertake both their Justification, and Sanctification, Heb. 10. to v. 19.

Prop. 3. I take Sanctification here in the sense as our Divines usually do, to
wit, for the whole work of grace upon the soul after its first closing with
Christ.
Christ did make one entire purchase of his peoples Salvation, meriting both
Sanctifying, and pardoning grace for sinful, and guilty men, who upon the
purchase made had as much right to the one as to the other, and no more. Isa.
53.5. Gal. 3.10. Tit. 2.14. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Hebr. 10. to v. 19.

Therefore we can no more conclude, Corol.
that we were actually pardoned, and justified immediately upon the price that
Christ paid, then that we were actually Sanctified.

Christ in his Gospell-offer tendereth himself both for our Justification and
Sanctification; Prop. 4.
and commands us so to accept of him, requiring Faith, repentance, and
sincere obedience of all those, that will be his: And he that will not embrace
him for Sanctification, shall not have him for Justification; he that is not
willing to have his sins mortified, shall not have them pardoned: Christ will
be a whole Savior, or no Savior. Acts. 3.19. Repent, and be converted, that
your sins may be blotted out, etc. Luke 13.3, 5.19.27.

Hence that offer Acts 3.19. of Remission of sins upon condition of repentance,
and conversion to God, and all others in Scripture of the like nature, are not
the less, but the more free, because conditional. For the condition that is
required is our privilege. Our turning from God by sin is our greatest misery;
and our conversion, or turning to God in holiness, is our greatest happiness,
(as you have formerly heard) 2. what the Lord requires of his people, he
communicates to them his grace for the performance of, according to the tenor
of the New Covenant, as in the next proposition. So that the condition required
does but injoyne us to accept of a double blessing, and oblige us to mind our
whole Salvation, to wit from sin, as well as suffering; that God may be the
more glorified in the riches of his grace.

They are therefore utterly mistaken, yea they much eclipse, and lessen Gospel
grace, and turn most part of the Gospel into Law, who call all conditional
promises the voice of the Law, and not of the Gospel.

Suppose a King should offer to a poor unworthy subject two most precious
Jewels joined together in a golden link, and tendering them to him freely, tells
him withal, [Thou shall not have the one without the other, but take them both
together, as they are tendered.] Would it be well for this poor man to say [The
gift would be more free, and of greater bounty, if I might break that golden
link, and take one of the jewels without the other? it is a diminishing of the
freeness of the gift, that you injoyne me to take them both.] This is plainly
the case. The Lord has in the Gospel individually linked together both his
pardoning, and Sanctifying grace; but flesh and blood would fain break this
golden link. We are naturally willing to have our sins pardoned, that we may be
freed from suffering: but nature is an enemy to Sanctifying grace.

Christ, as the efficient cause, 5. Prop.
pardons the sins that are past, and Sanctifies the sinner, when he does
actually convert, or bring him home from Satan to God; so that those that come
unto Christ, or believe in him, are then made actual partakers, both of
Justifying* and Sanctifying grace: of Justifying grace by the imputation of
Christ's righteousness; of Sanctifying grace by the real communication of his
grace unto them: That as all the children of the first Adam are subject to sin,
and misery, in the day of their generation, and birth; so all the children of
the second Adam (Jesus Christ,) are delivered from a state both of sin, and
condemnation, in the day of their regeneration, and new birth.

Thus Paul, as Christ's instrument, was sent to the Gentiles, To open their
eyes, to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God;
that they might receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which
are sanctified, Acts 26.18. See also 1 Cor. 6.11. And such were some of you;
but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of
the Lord Jesus. Here the Apostle makes a plain Antithesis between what they
then were, and what they had been formerly. Ye are washed, that is, cleansed by
the blood of Christ (which was signified by the water of your Baptism) both
from the guilt, and state of sin, ye are sanctified, ye are justified. Now make
up the other part of the Antithesis, and it must be this, Ye were unsanctified,
ye were unjustified. And when was that? before they were converted, when they
lived in such sins as are mentioned, ver. 9. and 10. they were committers of
them, and guilty before God, excluded from an actual title to the Kingdom of
God. Such were some of you; but ye are washed, etc. Ephesians. 2. to ver. 10. Romans
4.28. chapter 5.1. Act. 15.9.

Those then, Corol. 1.
that say Faith does but manifest our Justification, may as well say it does
but manifest our Sanctification: for they were both proposed, purchased, and
wrought together.

Hence Sanctifying grace is the necessary sanctifying grace is not
communicated, his righteousness is not imputed, and hereby (even by
sanctifying grace wrought in us) we are to try our actual interest in Jesus
Christ.

Hence those that are perplexed with repentance unto Israel, as well as
remission of sins.

The believing sinner, Prop. 6.
being justified from all the sins that are past, and sanctified inchoately:
The pardon continues good in Law, and the sanctifying grace bestowed, is
conserved by the same Jesus.

Corol.
Hence the Elect of God, though they many times fall to their sore wounding,
from the lively actings of grace, and under Gods just paternal displeasure; yet
they never fall from a state of grace, and their heavenly Fathers affectionate
love. Psalm 89 28. to 34. with Isa. 55.3.

Prop. 7.
Those that are regenerate, being but partly renewed (although in every part)
are subject to many infirmities, and many backslidings Novis peccatis, quantum
in nobis est, abdicamus no a gratia Dei Ita fit ut quotidiana peccatorum
remissione upus habeant Sancti omne; quia baec sola in Dei familia nos retiret.
Bulling. in 1 John 1.7.
: and the same Jesus, who was the giver, and preserver of the forementioned
favors, multiplieth pardons, with renewing grace. Hos. 14.4. I will heal
their back slidings, I will love them freely: for mine anger is turned away
from him. Thus in the salutation of both Peter's Epistles, he prays, grace and
peace be multiplied, 1 Pet. 1.2. 2 Pet. 1.2. And this renewing grace makes the
soul importunate for pardon of sin, and power against sin. Thus David, when he
was restored from his great fall, prayed, Psalm. 51.9, 10, 11. Hide thy face
from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities. Create in me a clean heart, O
God, and renew a right spirit within me. Cast me not away from thy presence,
and take not thy holy spirit from me.

Hence the godly are to pray daily for pardon of sin, and power against it.
Corol.
Thus Christ taught his Disciples to pray, Forgive us our trespasses -- and
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. And here note, that as
in the fourth Petition he teaches them, and us daily to pray for our daily
sustenance, so in these Petitions (which are adjoined with a conjunction
copulative) he teaches daily to pray for daily forgiveness, and for daily
preservation against tentations. And it were far better for us to be a day
without our daily Bread, than without our daily Pardoning, supporting and
renewing grace. It is true, the Lord has promised both, and will perform what
he has promised: yet thus says the Lord, I will for this be inquired of by
the house of Israel, to do it for them, Ezekiel. 36.37. And, because the Lord has
thus promised, his people have the more encouragement, and ground to pray,
Forgive us, etc.

At the hour of death, Prop. 8
the souls of the Saints are perfectly freed both from sin and guilt, and so
translated to heaven. Heb. 12.23. Rev. 21.27.

Prop. 9. Gloria ista inch^atur in hac vita, post mortem corporis fit auctior,
and tandem a resurrectione perficitur. Alst. Qu. Theo. c. 41.
At the general Resurrection, and great day of Judgment, the redeemed of the
Lord shall be sententially justified before Angels and Men, and perfectly
sanctified in the whole man, consisting of soul and body united, to become meet
instruments for the everlasting praises of God their Savior. To whom be glory
for ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

