Matthew Hopkins Witch Finder General
depiction of Matthew Hopkins interrogating witches My Imps names are 1
Ilemauzar 2 Pyewackett 3 Peck in the Crown 4 Griezzell Greedigutt


Holt

Jarmara

Sack and Sugar

News

Vinegar tom



THE Discovery of Witches: IN Answer to several QUERIES, LATELY Delivered to
the Judges of Assize for the County of NORFOLK. And now published By MATTHEW
HOPKINS, Witch-finder. FOR The Benefit of the whole KINGDOM.

EXODUS 22.18. Thou shall not suffer a witch to live.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, at the Angel in Ivy Lane. M.DC.XLVII.

Certain Queries answered, which have been and are likely to be objected
against MATTHEW HOPKINS, in his way of finding out Witches.
QVERIE I.
THat he must needs be the greatest Witch, Sorcerer, and Wizzard himself, else
he could not do it.

Answ. If Satan's kingdom be divided against it self, how shall it stand?

Querie 2. If he never went so far as is before mentioned, yet for certain
he met with the Devil, and cheated him of his Book, wherein were written all
the Witches names in England, and if he looks on any Witch, he can tell by her
countenance what she is; so by this, his help is from the Devil.

Answ. If he had been too hard for the devil and got his book, it had been to
his great commendation, and no disgrace at all: and for judgment in
Phisiognomie, he has no more then any man else whatsoever.

Quer. 3. From whence then proceeded this his skill? was it from his profound
learning, or from much reading of learned Authors concerning that subject?

Answ. From neither of both, but from experience, which though it be meanly
esteemed of, yet the surest and safest way to judge by.

Quer. 4. I pray where was this experience gained? and why gained by him and
not by others?

Answ. The Discoverer never traveled far for it, but in March 1644. he had
some seven or eight of that horrible sect of Witches living in the Town where
he lived, a Town in Essex called Maningtree, with diverse other adjacent
Witches of other towns, who every six weeks in the night (being always on the
Friday night) had their meeting close by his house, and had their several
solemn sacrifices there offered to the Devil, one of which this discoverer
heard speaking to her Imps one night, and bid them go to another Witch, who
was thereupon apprehended, and searched by women who had for many years known
the Devils marks, and found to have three teats about her, which honest women
have not: so upon command from the Justice, they were to keep her from sleep
two or three nights, expecting in that time to see her familiars, which the
fourth night she called in by their several names, and told them what shapes,
a quarter of an hour before they came in, there being ten of us in the room,
the first she called was

1. Holt, who came in like a white kitling.

2. Jarmara, who came in like a fat Spaniel without any legs at all, she said
she kept him fat, for she clapped her hand on her belly, and said he sucked good
blood from her body.

3. Vinegar Tom, who was like a long-legg'd Greyhound, with an head like an
Ox, with a long tail and broad eyes, who when this discoverer spoke to, and
bade him go to the place provided for him and his Angels, immediately
transformed himself into the shape of a child of four years old without a
head, and gave half a dozen turns about the house, and vanished at the door.

4. Sack and Sugar, like a black Rabbet.

5. News, like a Polcat. All these vanished away in a little time. Immediately
after this Witch confessed several other Witches, from whom she had her Imps,
and named to diverse women where their marks were, the number of their Marks,
and Imps, and Imps names, as Elemauzer, Pyewacket, Peckin the Crown, Grizzel
Greedigut, etc. which no mortal could invent; and upon their searches the same
Marks were found, the same number, and in the same place, and the like
confessions from them of the same Imps, (though they knew not that we were told
before) and so peached one another thereabouts that joined together in the like
damnable practice, that in our Hundred in Essex, 29. were condemned at once, 4.
brought 25. Miles to be hanged, where this Discoverer lives, for sending the
Devil like a Bear to kill him in his garden, so by seeing diverse of the
(...) Papps, and trying ways with hundreds of them, he gained this experience,
and for ought he knows any man else may find them as well as he and his
company, if they had the same skill and experience.

Quer. 5. Many poor People are condemned for having a Pap, or Teat about them,
whereas many People (especially ancient People) are, and have been a long time
troubled with natural wretts on several parts of their bodies, and other
natural excressencies, as Hemerodes, Piles, Childbearing, etc. and these shall
be judged only by one man alone, and a woman, and so accused or acquitted.

Answ, The parties so judging can justify their skill to any, and show good
reasons why such marks are not merely natural, neither that they can happen
by any such natural cause as is before expressed, and for further answer for
their private judgments alone, it is most false and untrue, for never was any
man tried by search of his body, but commonly a dozen of the ablest men in the
parish or else where, were present, and most commonly as many ancient skillful
matrons and midwives present when the women are tried, which marks not only he,
and his company attest to be very suspicious, but all beholders, the skilfulest
of them, do not approve of them, but likewise assent that such tokens cannot
in their judgments proceed from any the above mentioned Causes.

Quer. 6. It is a thing impossible for any man or woman to judge rightly on
such marks, they are so near to natural excressencies, and they that find
them, durst not presently give Oath they were drawn by evil spirits, till
they have used unlawful courses of torture to make them say any thing for case
and quiet, as who would not do? but I would know the reasons he speaks of,
how, and whereby to discover the one from the other, and so be satisfied in
that.

Answ. The reasons in brief are three, which for the present he judges to
differ from natural marks; which are* 1. He judges by the unusualnes of the
place where he finds the teats in or on their bodies, being far distant
from any usual place, from whence such natural marks proceed, as if a witch
plead the marks found are Emerods, if I find them on the bottom of the
backbone, shall I ass^^^ with him, knowing they are not near that vein, and
so others by childbearing, when it may be they are in the contrary part?

2. They are most commonly insensible, and feel neither pin, needle, aule,
etc. thrust through them.

3. The often variations and mutations of these marks into several forms,
confirms the matter; as if a Witch hear a month or two before that the
Witch-finder (as they call him) is coming, they will, and have put out their
Imps to others to suckle them, even to their own young and tender children;
these upon search are found to have dry skins and filmes only, and be close
to the flesh, keep her 24. hours with a diligent eye, that none of her
Spirits come in any visible shape to suck her; the women have seen the next day
after her Teats extended out to their former filling length, full of corruption
ready to burst, and leaving her alone then one quarter of an hour, and let the
women go up again, and she will have them drawn by her Imps close again:
Probatum est. Now for answer to their tortures in its due place.

Quer. 7. How can it possibly be that the Devil being a spirit, and wants no
nutriment or sustentation, should desire to suck any blood? and indeed as he is
a spirit he cannot draw any such excressences, having neither flesh nor bone,
nor can be felt, etc.

Ans. He seeks not their blood, as if he could not subsist without that
nourishment, but he often repairs to them, and gets it, the more to aggravate
the Witches damnation, and to put her in mind of her Covenant: and as he is a
Spirit and Prince of the air, he appears to them in any shape whatsoever,
which shape is occasioned by him through joining of condensed thickened air
together, and many times does assume shapes of many creatures; but to create
any thing he cannot do it, it is only proper to God: But in this case of
drawing out of these Teats, he does really enter into the body, real,
corporeal, substantial creature, and forces that Creature (he working in it)
to his desired ends, and uses the organs of that body to speak withal to
make his compact up with the Witches, be the creature Cat, Rat, Mouse, etc.

Quer. 8. When these Paps are fully discovered, yet that will not serve
sufficiently to convict them, but they must be tortured and kept from sleep two
or three nights, to distract them, and make them say any thing; which is a way
to tame a wild Colt, or Hawke, etc.

Ans. In the infancy of this discovery it was not only thought fitting, but
enjoined in Essex and Suffolk by the Magistrates, with this intention only,
because they being kept awake would be more the active to call their Imps in
open view the sooner to their help, which oftentimes have so happened; and
never or seldom did any Witch ever complain in the time of their keeping for
want of rest, but after they had beat their heads together in the Goal; and
after this use was not allowed of by the Judges and other Magistrates, it was
never since used, which is a year and a half since, neither were any kept
from sleep by any order or direction since; but peradventure their own
stubborn wills did not let them sleep, though tendered and offered to them.

Quer. 9. Beside that unreasonable watching, they were extraordinarily walked,
till their feet were blistered, and so forced through that cruelty to confess,
etc.

Ans. It was in the same beginning of this discovery, and the meaning of
walking of them at the highest extent of cruelty, was only they to walk about
themselves the night they were watched, only to keep them waking: and the
reason was this, when they did lie or sit in a chair, if they did offer to
couch down, then the watchers were only to desire them to sit up and walk
about, for indeed when they be suffered so to couch, immediately comes their
Familiars into the room and scareth the watchers, and heartneth on the Witch,
though contrary to the true meaning of the same instructions, diverse have been
by rusticall People, (they hearing them confess to be Witches) mis-used,
spoiled, and abused, diverse whereof have suffered for the same, but could
never be proved against this Discoverer to have a hand in it, or consent to it;
and has likewise been un-used by him and others, ever since the time they were
kept from sleep.

Quer. 10. But there has been an abominable, inhumane, and unmercifull trial
of those poor creatures, by tying them, and heaving them into the water; a
trial not allowable by Law or conscience, and I would faint know the reasons
for that.

Ans. It is not denied but many were so served as had Papps, and floated,
others that had none were tried with them and sunk, but mark the reasons.

For first the Devils policy is great, in persuading many to come of their
own accord to be tried, persuading them their marks are so close they shall
not be found out, so as diverse have come 10. or 12. Miles to be searched of
their own accord, and hanged for their labor, (as one Meggs a Baker did, who
lived within 7. Miles of Norwich, and was hanged at Norwich Assizes for
witchcraft) then when they find that the Devil tells them false they reflect on
him, and he (as 40. have confessed) advises them to be sworn, and tells them
they shall s^nke and be cleared that way, then when they be tried that way and
floate, they see the Devil deceives them again, and have so laid open his
treacheries.

2. It was never brought in against any of them at their trials as any evidence.

3. King James in his Demonology says, it is a certain rule, for (says he)
Witches deny their baptism when they Covenant with the Devil, water being the
sole element thereof, and therefore says he, when they be heaved into the
water, the water refuses to receive them into her bosom, (they being such
Miscreants to deny their baptism) and suffers them to float, as the Froath on
the Sea, which the water will not receive, but casts it up and down, till it
comes to the earthy element the shore, and there leaves it to consume.

4. Observe these generation of Witches, if they be at any time abused by being
called Whore, Thief, etc, by any where they live, they are the readiest to cry
and wring their hands, and shed tears in abundance and run with full and right
sorrowful acclamations to some Justice of the Peace, and with many tears make
their complaints: but now behold their stupidity; nature or the elements
reflection from them, when they are accused for this horible and damnable sin
of Witchcraft, they never alter or change their countenances, nor let one Tear
fall. This by the way, swimming (by able Divines whom I reverence) is condemned
for no way, and therefore of late has, and for ever shall be left.

Quer. 11. Oh! but if this torturing Witch-catcher can by all or any of these
means wring out a word or two of confession from any of these stupefied,
ignorant, unitelligible, poor silly creatures, (though none hear it but
himself) he will add and put her in fear to confess telling her, else she
shall be hanged; but if she do, he will set her at liberty, and so put a word
into her mouth, and make such a silly creature confess she knows not what.

Answ. He is of a better conscience, and for your better understanding of him,
he does thus uncase himself to all, and declares what confessions (though made
by a Witch against her self) he allows not of, and does altogether account of
no validity, or worthy of credence to be given to it, and ever did so account
it, and ever likewise shall.

1. He utterly denies that confession of a Witch to be of any validity, when it
is drawn from her by any torture or violence whatsoever; although after
watching, walking, or swimming, diverse have suffered, yet peradventure
Magistrates with much care and diligence did solely and fully examine them
after sleep, and consideration sufficient.

2. He utterly denies that confession of a Witch, which is drawn from her by
flattery, viz. if you will confess you shall go home, you shall not go to the
Goals, nor be hanged, etc.

3. He utterly denies that confession of a With, when she confesses any
improbability, impossibility, as flying in the air, riding on a broom, etc.

4. He utterly denies a confession of a Witch, when it is interrogated to her,
and words put into her mouth, to be of any force or effect: as to say to a
silly (yet Witch wicked enough) you have four Imps have you not? She answers
affirmatively, Yes: did they not suck you? Yes, says she: Are not their names
so, and so? Yes, says she: Did not you send such an Impe to kill my child?
Yes says she this being all her confession after this manner, it is by him
accounted nothing, and he earnestly does desire that all Magistrates and Jurors
would a little more then ever they did, examine witnesses, about the
interrogated confessions.

Quer. 12. If all these confessions be denied, I wonder what he will make a
confession, for sure it is, all these ways have been used and took for good
confessions, and many have suffered for them, and I know not what, he will then
make a confession.

Answ. Yes, in brief he will declare what confession of a Witch is of validity
and force in his judgment, to hang a Witch: when a Witch is first found with
teats, then sequestered from her house, which is only to keep her old
associates from her, and so by good counsel brought into a sad condition, by
understanding of the horribleness of her sin, and the judgments threatened
against her; and knowing the Devils malice and subtle circumventions, is
brought to remorse and sorrow for complying with Satan so long, and disobeying
Gods sacred Commands, does then desire to unfold her mind with much bitterness,
and then without any of the beforementioned hard usages or questions put to
her, does of her own accord declare what was the occasion of the Devils
appearing to her, whether ignorance, pride, anger, malice, etc. was predominant
over her, she does then declare what speech they had, what likeness he was in,
what voice he had, what familiars he sent her, what number of spirits, what
names they had, what shape they were in, what employment she set them about to
several persons in several places, (unknown to the hearers) all which
mischiefs being proved to be done, at the same time she confessed to the same
parties for the same cause, and all effected, is testimony enough against her
for all her denial.

Quest. 13. How can any possibly believe that the Devil and the Witch joining
together, should have such power, as the Witches confess, to kill such and
such a man, child, horse, cow, or the like; if we believe they can do what
they will, then we derogate from Gods power, who for certain limits the Devil
and the Witch; and I cannot believe they have any power at all.

Answ. God suffers the Devil many times to do much hurt, and the devil does
play many times the deluder and impostor with these Witches, in persuading them
that they are the cause of such and such a murder wrought by him with their
consents, when and indeed neither he nor they had any hand in it, as thus: We
must needs argue, he is of a long standing, above 6000. years, then he must
needs be the best Scholar in all knowledges of arts and tongues, and so have
the best skill in Physic, judgment in Physiognomie, and knowledge of what
disease is reigning or predominant in this or that man's body, (and so for
cattle too) by reason of his long experience. This subtle tempter knowing
such a man liable to some sudden disease, (as by experience I have found) as
Plurisie, Imposthume, etc. he resorts to diverse Witches; if they know the man,
and seek to make a difference between the Witches and the party, it may be by
telling them he has threatened to have them very shortly searched, and so
hanged for Witches, then they all consult with Satan to save themselves, and
Satan stands ready prepared, with a What will you have me do for you, The
Devils speech to the Witches.
my dear and nearest children, covenanted and compacted with me in my hellish
league, and sealed with your blood, my delicate firebrand-darlings. Oh thou
(say they) that at the first did promise to save us thy servants from any of
our deadly enemies discovery, and did promise to avenge and slay all those,
we pleased, that did offend us; Murder that wretch suddenly who threatens the
downfall of your loyal subjects. He then promises to effect it. Next news
is heard the party is dead, he comes to the witch, and gets a world of
reverence, credence and respect for his power and activeness, when and indeed
the disease kills the party, not the Witch, nor the Devil, (only the Devil
knew that such a disease was predominant) and the witch aggravates her
damnation by her familiarity and consent to the Devil, and so comes likewise
in compass of the Laws. This is Satan's usual impostring and deluding, but not
his constant course of proceeding, for he and the witch do mischief too much.
But I would that Magistrates and Jurats would a little examine witnesses when
they hear witches confess such and such a murder, whether the party had not
long time before, or at the time when the witch grew suspected, some disease or
other predominant, which might cause that issue or effect of death.

Quer. 14. All that the witch-finder does, is to fleece the country of their
money, and therefore rides and goes to towns to have employment, and promises
them fair promises, and it may be does nothing for it, and possesses many men
that they have so many wizzards and so many witches in their town, and so
hartens them on to entertain him.

Ans. You do him a great deal of wrong in every of these particulars. For,
first,

1. He never went to any town or place, but they rode, writ, or sent often for
him, and were (for ought he knew) glad of him.

2. He is a man that does disclaim that ever he detected a witch, or said,
Thou art a witch; only after her trial by search, and their own confessions,
he as others may judge.

3. Lastly, judge how he fleeceth the Country, and inriches himself, by
considering the vast sum he takes of every town, he demands but 20.s. a
town, and does sometimes ride 20. miles for that, and has no more for all his
charges thither and back again (and it may be stays a week there) and find
there 3. or 4. witches, or if it be but one, cheap enough, and this is the
great sum he takes to maintain his Company with 3. horses.

Judicet ullus. THE END.

