SOME Necessary and Important CONSIDERATIONS, (TO BE Considered of by all sorts
of People) Taken out of (That late Worthy and Renowned Judge) Sr MATTHEW HALE's
ACCOUNT of The Good Steward. By J. P.

The Righteous shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance.

Psalm. CXII. 6. The Second Edition.

LONDON: Printed by John How, in Ram-Head-Inn-Yard, in Fenchurch-street, and
are to be freely given away.

SOME Necessary and Important CONSIDERATIONS, etc
As Touching my Conscience.
I Have been very diligent to keep my Conscience Clean, to Encourage It in the
Vicegerency that THOU, [the great LORD of the World] have given It over my Soul
and Actions. I have kept It in the Throne and greatest Reverence and Authority
in my Heart.

In Actions to be Done or Omitted, I have always Advised with It, and taken Its
Advice; I have neither Stifled, nor Forced, nor Bribed It; but gave It a free
Liberty to Advise and Speak out, and a free Subjection of my Will, Purposes,
and Actions to It.

If -- I have at any time done Amiss, I have not taken Her up short, or stopped
Her Mouth, or my own Attention to Her Chiding and Reproof; but I have, with
much Submission of Mind, born Her Chastisement, and improved it to an Humbling
of my self before THEE for my Failings; for I looked upon Her as Acting by THY
Authority, for THY Service, and to THY Glory; and I durst not Discourage,
Discountenance, or Disobey Her.

When She was Pleased, and gave me Good Words, I was Glad; for I esteemed Her
as a Glass that represented to my Soul the Favor or Displeasure of GOD
Himself, and how HE stood affected toward me.

I have more Trembled under the Fear of a Seared or Discouraged Conscience,
than under the Fear of a Sharp or Scrupulous Conscience; because I always
accounted the Latter, though more Troublesome, yet more Safe.

I have been very jealous, either of Wounding, or Grieving, or Discouraging, or
Deadning my Conscience. I have therefore chosen rather to forbear that which
seemed but Indifferent, lest there should be some what in it that might be
Unlawful; and would rather Gratify my Conscience, with being too Scrupulous,
than Displease, Disquiet, or Flat It, by being too Venturous: I have still
chosen rather to Forbear what might be Probably Lawful, than to Do that which
might be Possibly Unlawful; because I could not Err in the Former, I might in
the Latter.

I have been careful to advise Impartially with my Conscience before my
Actions; so lest I -- had committed any thing Amiss, either in the Nature or
Manner of the Action, I commonly, every Night, brought my Actions of the Day
past, before the Judicatory of my Conscience, and left Her to a Free and
Impartial Censure of them; and what She Sentenced Well Done, I with Humility
returned the Praise thereof to THY Name; what She Sentenced Done Amiss, I did
humbly sue unto THEE for Pardon, and for Grace to prevent me from the like
Miscarriages. By this means I kept my Conscience Active, Renewed, and preserved
my Peace with THEE, and learned Vigilance and Caution for the Time to come.

Touching THY Creatures.
I have not only looked upon THY Blessings and Bounty, in Lending me THY own
Creatures for my Use; but I have sought unto THEE for a Blessing upon them, in
my Use of them. I did very well observe, That there is by my Sin a Curse in the
very Creatures that I receive, unless THY Blessing fetch it out; an Emptiness
in them, unless THY Goodness fill them: Though THOU should give me Quails and
Manna from Heaven, yet without THY Blessing upon them, they would become
Rottenness and Putrefaction to me; and therefore I ever begged THY Blessing
upon THY Blessings, as well as the Blessings themselves; and attributed the
Good I Found, or was to Expect in them, to the Same HAND that Gave them.

I received and used THY Creatures, as committed to me under a Trust, and as a
Steward and Accomptant for them; and therefore I was always careful to use them
according to those Limits, and in order for those Ends, for which THOU did
commit them to me: 1st. With Temperance and Moderation; I did not use THY
Creatures to Luxury and Excess, to make Provision for my Lusts, with Vain Glory
or Ostentation, but for the convenient Support of the Exigencies of my Nature
and Condition; and if at any time THY Goodness did indulge me an Use of them
for Delight, as well as Necessity, I did it but Rarely and Watchfully; I looked
not upon the Wine, when it gave its color in the Cup; nor gave my self over
either to Excess or Curiosity in Meats or Drinks; I checked my Self therein, as
being in THY Presence, and still remembered I had THY Creatures under an
Account; and was ever careful to avoid Excess or Intemperance, because every
Excessive Cup and Meal was in danger to leave me somewhat in Super and Arear to
my LORD. 2dly. With Mercy and Compassion to the Creatures themselves, which
THOU have put under my Power and Disposal. When I considered the Admirable
Powers of Life and Sense which I saw in the Birds and Beasts, and that all the
Men in the World could not give the like Being to any thing, nor Restore that
Life and Sense which is once Taken from them; When I considered how Innocently
and Harmlesly the Fowls, and Fish, and Sheep, and Oxen take their Food, that
THOU, the LORD of All, have given them, I have been apt to think that surely
THOU did intend a more Innocent kind of Food to Man, than such as must be
taken with such Detriment to those Living parts of THY Creation; and although
THY wonderful Goodness has so much Indulged to Mankind, as to give up the
Lives of these Creatures for the Food of Man by THY express Commission, yet I
still do, and ever did think, that there was a Justice due from Man, even to
these Sensible Creatures, that he should take them Sparingly, for Necessity,
and not for Delight; or if for Delight, yet not for Luxury: I have been apt to
think, That if there were any more Liberal use of Creatures for Delight or
Variety, it should be of Fruits, or such other Delicacies as might be had
without the loss of Life; But however it be, this very Consideration has made
me very Sparing and Careful, not Vainly, or Superfluously, or Unnecessarily, or
Prodigally, to take away the Life of THY Creatures for Feasting and Excess. And
the very same Consideration has always gone a long with me, in reference to
the Labor of THY Creatures. I have ever thought that there was a certain
degree of Justice due from Man to the Creatures, as from Man to Man; and that
an excessive, immoderate, unseasonable Use of the Creatures Labor, is an
Injustice for which he must Account.

To deny Domestical Creatures their convenient Food; to exact that Labor from
them, that they are not able to perform; to use Extremity or Cruelty toward
them, is a breach of that Trust, under which the Dominion of the Creatures was
committed to us, and a breach of that Justice that is due from Men to them; and
therefore I have always esteemed it as part of my Duty, and it has been always
my Practice, to be Merciful to my Beasts; and upon the same Account I have ever
esteemed it a breach of Trust, and have accordingly declined any Cruelty to any
of THY Creatures; and as much as I might, prevented it in others, as a Tyranny,
inconsistent with the Trust and Stewardship that THOU have committed to me. I
have abhorred those Sports that consist in the Torturing of the Creatures; and
if either Noxious Creatures must be Destroyed, or Creatures for Food must be
Taken, it has been my Practice to do it in that manner, that may be with the
least Torture or Cruelty to the Creature; and I have still thought it an
Unlawful thing to Destroy those Creatures for Recreation-sake, that either were
not Hurtful when they Lived, or are not Profitable when they are Killed; ever
remembering that though THOU have given us a Dominion over THY Creatures; yet it
is under a Law of Justice, Prudence, and Moderation; otherwise we should become
Tyrants, not Lords, over THY Creatures; and therefore those things of this
nature, that others have practiced as Recreations, I have avoided as Sins.

Concerning my Wealth.
The more I had, the more was my Care, and the greater the Charge that I had
under my Hands, and the more was my Solicitude to be a Faithful Steward of it,
to the Honor and Use of my MASTER; but my part was the least that was in it:
Indeed I rejoiced in this, that my MASTER esteemed me Wise and Faithful,
committing the Dispensation thereof to my Trust; but I thought it no more mine,
than the Lords Baily, or the Merchants Cash-keeper, thinks his Masters Rents or
Money his.

And therefore thought it would be a breach of my Trust to Consume or Embezil
that Wealth in Excessive Superfluities of Meat, Drink or Apparel, rel, or in
Advancing my Self, or my Posterity, to a massy or huge Acquest.

Touching my Reputation.
Though I have loved my Reputation, and have been vigilant not to lose or impair
it by my own Default or Neglect, yet I have looked upon it as a brittle thing,
a thing that the Devil aims to hit in a special manner, a thing that is much in
the Power of a False Report, a Mistake, a Mis-apprehension, to wound and hurt:
Notwithstanding all my Care, I am at the Mercy of Others, without GOD's
wonderful overruling Providence. And as my Reputation is the Esteem that
Others have of me, so that Esteem may be Blemished without my Default. I have
therefore always taken this care, not to set my Heart upon my Reputation. I
will use all Fidelity and Honesty, and take care it shall not be lost by any
Default of mine; and if notwithstanding all this, my Reputation be soiled by
Evil or Envious Men or Angels, I will patiently bear it, and content my Self
with the Serenity of my own Conscience: Hic murus ahenius esto, (This shall be
as a Wall of Defense to me.)

The aforesaid Author on Changes and Troubles. CONTEMPLATIONS. p. 380.
PEACE, Way-ward Soul; Let not those various Storms,
Which hourly fill the World with fresh Alarms,
Invade thy Peace; nor discompose that Rest,
Which thou may keep Untouched within thy Breast,
Amidst those Whirl-winds, if thou keep but free
Thy Intercourse betwixt thy GOD and thee:
This Region lies above these Storms; and know,
Thy Thoughts are Earthly, and they creep too low,
If these can reach thee, or access can find,
To Bring, or Raise, like Tempests in thy Mind.
But yet in these Disorders something lies,
That Is worth thy Notice, out of which the Wise
May trace and find that Just and Powerful HAND,
That Secretly, but Surely, does Command;
And manage these Distempers with that Skill;
That while they seem to Cross they Act HIS Will.
Observe that Silver Thread, that steers and bends
The worst of all Disorders to such Ends,
That speak HIS Justice, Goodness, Providence,
Who closely guides it by HIS Influence.
And though these Storms are Loud, yet Listen well,
There is Another Message that they tell:
This World is not thy Country, it is thy Way;
Too much Contentment might invite thy stay
Too long upon thy Journey; make it strange
Unwelcome News, to think upon a Change:
Whereas this Rugged Entertainment, send
Thy Thoughts before thee to thy Journey's End;
Chides thy Desires homeward; tells thee plain,
To think of Resting here, it is but Vain:
Makes thee to set an Equal Estimate
On this Uncertain World; and a Just Rate
On that to Come: It bids thee Wait and Stay,
Until thy MASTER Calls; And then with Joy
To entertain it: Such a Change as this,
Renders thy Loss, thy Gain; Improves thy Bliss.
On Solitude. p. 121.
LET him that will, Ascend the Tottering Seat
Of Courtly Grandeur, and become as Great
As are his Mounting Wishes: As for me,
Let sweet Repose and Rest, my Portion be.
Give me some mean obscure Recess; a Sphere
Out of the Road of Business, or the Fear
Of Falling Lower; where I sweetly may
My Self, and dear Retirement, still Enjoy.
Let not my Life, or Name, be known unto
The Grandees of the Times; Tossed to and fro,
By Censures or Applause: But let my Age
Slide gently By, not Over-thwart the Stage
Of Public Action; Unheard, Unseen,
And Unconcerned, as if I never had been.
And thus, whilst I shall pass my Silent Days
In Shady Privacy, free from the Noise
And Bustles of the World: Then, then shall I
A Good, Old, Innocent Plebeian, dye.
Judge Hale's Experience of the Inward and Invisible Guidance of the Spirit of
GOD.
THOSE that truly fear GOD, have a Secret Guidance from a higher Wisdom than
what is barely Humane; namely, The Spirit of Truth and Wisdom, that does Really
and Truly, but Secretly, Prevent and Direct them.

ANY Man that Sincerely and Truly Fears Almighty GOD, relies upon HIM, and
calls upon HIM for HIS Guidance and Direction, has it as Really as a Son has
the Counsel and Direction of his Father. And though the Voice be not Audible, nor
the Direction always Perceptable (or Discernable) to Sense; yet it is equally
as Real as if a Man heard the Voice saying, This is the Way, walk in it. And
let no Man think that this is a piece of Fanaticism, (or Enthusiasm.)

AND this secret Direction of Almighty GOD, is Principally seen in matters
relating to the Good of the Soul; yet it may also be found in the Concerns of
this Life, which a good Man, that fears GOD, and begs HIS Direction, shall very
often, if not at all times find. P. 45.

I can call my own Experience to witness, That even in the External Actions of
my whole Life, I was never disappointed of the best Guidance and Direction,
when I have, in Humility and Sincerity, implored the Secret Direction, and
Guidance, of the Divine Wisdom. P. 323.

[These are Faithful, Weighty and True Sayings.]
THE END.

