A MESSAGE SENT FROM The Lord HOPTON, and Sir Richard Greenvill to the PRINCE,
and a fight in the Isle of GUERNSEY.

ALSO, The King of Portugals Answer to a Message sent unto him by General
BLAKE.

WITH A Speech made to the Lord CROMWELL in behalf of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen,
and Common Counsel of the City of LONDON.

AND The last transactions in Scotland, With a Letter from their declared King,
their preparations for his coming to Edinburgh, and several Acts made in that
Parliament, viz. 1. An Act for re-enforcing the Covenant. 2. An Act touching
what has been done at Breda. 3. An Act for levying of men. 4. An Act for
levying 20000 l. Scots out of the L. Lauderdales Estate. 5. An Act for settling
Officrs about their King. 6. An Act appointing Officers of their Army.

LONDON, Printed for J. C. and are to be sold near the Royall-Exchange in
Cornhill. 1650

The last proceedings of the Parliament of Scotland, and their preperation for
his coming to Edinburgh, etc.
Edinburgh 28. May, 1650.
GReat listening after news, both from the North and South, that expected from
the North is, that the King (as they call him) should arrive there, and come
post to Edinburgh, that which they expect from the South is inteligenc what the
State postur and condition of the English Army is, which they call sectaries,
and were they under the sensure of the Clargy, they would excommunicat them
both out of the Church and Kingdom, for those Clergy have gotten so much the
upper hand that if any one should presume but to dispute upon what they decree
it is sufficent to cause him to be pronounced heritick, and some of them do so
terify the people with the Curse of the Kirk, that the ignorant sort are
perswaided into a belief that if they be excomunicated either their corn will
not grow, or if it grow that it will be blasted before harvest, or if they are
not blessed before it is cut, it will miscarry er'e they get it into their barn.
In the Pulpit the Alarm is already taken, and therefore its time for the
lay-power, to hasten recruits for their Army: In order whereunto the Committee
at Tindall have listed their Officers, and given out Warrants for listing of
10000. men. It is reported they will make up them Regiments of Foot, none are
more active in Parliament, and bitter in expressions against England, then the
Marquess of Argile, but England needs not fear all the force and malice of
Scotland, one Regiment of the English horse being able to fight six Regiments
of these, and there is no doubt but the North of England will assist if need
were, in defense of their Country; for if when they came as Friends, many of
them ravished women, defloured Maidens, and dispoyled men of their goods: what
can be thought on them, that they will not do, if they should come as enemies.
There is a Report here of great losses lately in Ireland, sustained by the
English, before a place called Clonmel; yet that and some other Garrisons are
said to be surrendered to the English, they attribute the loss of Clonmel to
the want of powder and not strength or resolution in the Defendants. Hurry and
the rest of the Officers taken with him who were kept in prison, are now
brought to trial, sentenced, and condemned to dye; he sollicits hard for his
life, and promises to be a conformable Covenantor for the future, if he may be
spared, the likelier to be harkened to, for that although Montross was taken
away on the sudden, yet if the King comes, old grudges must be forgotten
between the malignant party, and one must not be known or distinguished from
the other.

A Letter is come to the Parliament of Scotland from the King, wherein he takes
notice of their proceeding against Montross, and desires to be a moderator in
the business; whereby it does appear, that he had not received the express from
hence which gave him an account thereof, neither had he intelligence that he
was executed; this express will have but a short answer, and less satisfactory,
the Parliament taking little notice thereof; yet are preparations formally made
(as they say) for his Majesty's coming, and much debate has been in the house
about settleing his household, a List whereof was read two days since. They have
also passed several Acts, viz.

1. An Act for re-enforcing the Covenant on all. 2. An Act touching what has
been done by their Commissioners at Breda; yet do we not hear that all things
are ratified, so as that something may not remain to be debated on. 3. An Act
for levying of men which (they say) are for defense of their Country only
against any invasion. 4. An Act for levying the sum of 20000 li. Scots out of
the estate of the Lord Lauderdale, if he depart not the Kingdom at, or before
the tenth of June. 5. An Act of for settling of Officers about their King. 6.
An Act appointing Officers of the Army is brought in, and has been read, with
diverse others which are not yet past.
Exeter 1. June 1650.
SIR,
YEsterday came into this City three Companies more of foot, to continue there
for desence and safety of this place, the like provision is made for all other
Garrisons in these parts which is a thing very needful at this time, for
Hopton, Greenvil, and some others of greatest esteem amongst the Royal party,
and those they say that have the best heads and the stoutest hearts are in the
adjacent Islands of Scilly and Jersey, waiting for an opportunity to get
sooting in England, where they hope to find many friends, and have their
immissaries filled with such a spirit of sedition that there is nothing so good
and profitable for a Commonwealth, which do not contatanimate and subvert; but
I trust such a prudent care will be had that these infusers of poison shall not
have power to molest the Commonwealth. Some Letters were intercepted this week
going for Holland written in figures and ciphers, which I hope to send by the
next when they are uncloaked. Hopton and Greenvil have lent to the Prince,
advising him to take heed how he trusts himself in Scotland, encouraging him in
the affairs of Ireland, etc. But let them know that notwithstanving the L.
Crumwel is come over into England, yet is there one left behind (with many
other very deserving Commanders) that is able to give better Counsel to the
wisest Prince in Christendom. There be two strong Garrisons delivered to the
English since the Lord Crumwel came thence, the chief that remain to be taken
in, is Limbrick, Waterford and Galloway. A ship is lately come into this
harbor which brings us news, that General Blake has sent to the King of
Portugal, desiring to know whether his Majesty does own the protecting of P.
Rupert within his harbor, and if so, then some reasons are given to convince
him of the unreasonableness of such an act, and how far it is inconsistent with
the honor and reputation of Kings to shelter Rebels and Traitors; Therefore his
request to that King is, that a day may be prefixed at which time P. Rupert and
his Fleet may be forced out to Sea. To which the said King gave answer, that he
would take some time to consider thereof, and to consult with his Council
about it. General Popham is now joined with General Blake, and our men want
nothing but opportunity to fight with the enemy; they were at the first going
out victualled for seven months, and have had supplies of money and fresh
victual since they were out, a small Vessel belonging to Jersey Island, was
lately taken by one of our Frigots, the prise is worth little in it self, but
great by way of prevention of mischief, of which she had a great share. The
report goes that the Governor of Gernsey has laid siege against the Castle in
that Isle, which has long stood out against the Parliament; the enemy within
made one salley forth, and were gallantly repulsed and beaten in again, with
the loss of 5. men; the Castle is very strong and well victualled, many
breaches are made in the walls, and it is thought we shall storm it within few
days, I pray let me hear from you by the next, and send me what news you have.
A gentleman which came from London, tells me us that you are listing
Auxillaries, and that the City will raise a Brigarde of horse for defense
thereof; which if so will be good for their own safety, and excel in the
example.

Your assured friend, T. S.

A Letter from a Gentleman in London, to his Friend in the Country.
SIR,
ACcording to my promise I shall send you what news is stirring here. This
week the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, visited the Lord
Cromwell at his Lodgings near White Hall, and the Recorder not being well in
health, Mr. Sadler the Town-Clark of the City, made a Speech, acknowledging
Gods great mercy in carrying his Excellency through so many difficulties in
Ireland, and bringing him victoriously hither again, etc. Unto which his
Lordship made a modest reply, returning the praise and glory thereof to God
alone; after which his Excellency and the Lord Mayor had some short discourse
in private, and so parted with many sweet expressions of mutual love to the
great grief and sorrow of the common Enemy, who loving innovation, dare
interpriss any thing to make them owners of their desires, and resting in that
mind they conspire against the prosperity of good men, cloaking their vice with
the vashness and fury of the people, of which flame if it should not be
quenched in time, might come great mischief.

The Parliament has spent some time in debating the way and time for bringing
in a new and equal Representative, as likewise about an additional and more
effectual Act then the former, for the relief of Creditors and Prisoners, in
which there will be strong provision made, that he that has wherewith to pay,
shall not by yielding his Body, save his Estate, nor he that has not any goods
to satisfy, suffer perpetual imprisonment, which has been the utter ruin of
many a man and his whole Family, which is an excellent work, and no alteration
of Law, but the restoring of it to its original or first institution. And what
can be required more of them, then that the Commonwealth may be preserved in
safety and happiness: and surely every State is happy which has good Laws,
and does abound in all good things as England does, which is the happy fruit of
the late peace we have enjoyed under the present Government.

FINIS.

