THE PAGAN PREACHER SILENCED.

OR, An Answer to a Treatise of Mr. John Goodwin, ENTITLED, The PAGANS DEBT
and DOWRY.

Wherein is discovered the weakness of his Arguments, and that it does not yet
appear by Scripture, Reason, or the Testimony of the best of his own side, that
the Heathen who never heard of the letter of the Gospel, are either obliged to,
or enabled for the believing in Christ; and that they are either engaged to
matrimonial Debt, or admitted to a matrimonial Dowry.

Wherein also is Historically discovered, and Polemically discussed the Doctrine
of Universal Grace, with the Original, growth and fall thereof; as it has been
held forth by the most rigid Patrons of it.

By OBADIAH HOW, A. M. and Pastor of Horne-Castle in Lincolnshire.

With a verdict on the Case depending between Mr. Goodwin and Mr. How, by the
learned GEORGE KENDAL, DD.

((...)) Ducit Evangelio, (scil.) ipsis prophanis tunc demum patefacto, and
Judaeis exhibito, quo respicit particula ((...)) absque Christi verbo,
benignitas Dei potest perducere homines ad peccati sensum, non ad veram
rescipiscentiam.

Beza in Romans 2.4. Quomodo fieri possit ut rescipiscerent si virtutes ut
virtutes tantum considerentur? virtutes qua tales rescipiscentiam non suadent;
necesse est aliquid quo rescipiscentia mandetur aut suadeatur saltem; nam sine
verbo ne fictam tantum rescipiscentiam efficere possunt virtutes.

Acta Synod. Art 4. p. 725. Quantum ad Ethnicos ad quos Christi nomen non
pervenit, illos tali gratia absolute ad salutem aut fidem sufficient,
praeditos non esse, saepe supra diximus.

Corvin. in Mol. cap. 37. Sect. 11. But now is made appear, through the
appearing of Jesus Christ, who has brought Immortality and life to light
through the Gospel,

2 Timothy 1.10. If I had not come and spoken to them, they had had no sin,

John 15.22, London, Printed by Th. Maxey, for John Rothwell, at the Fountain
and Bear in Cheap Side. 1655.

Intelligent Reader,
DEdications and Epistles plead prescription; to commit a Treatise to the wide
world without these phylacteries, would be to thrust it forth seemingly naked,
and so be a Soloecisme both to the present, and the practices of Antiquity,
because many expect I shall say something; but because it is the result but of
second thoughts, I shall say but little. For me to tell thee much of the
persons engaged herein, would be an unseemly Digression; and to tell thee of
the matter of the ensuing Treatise here, would be a too unseasonable
anticipatio^: only of the occasion thereof a word or two.

The Moralists tell us, that Virtutes sunt connexae; virtues are linked in an
irrefragable chain; and so are divine Truths connected and tied together by
such rational sequitur's, that they all point at a concentricity in that unity
of faith spoken of by the Apostle. And as Virtues and Truths are linked, so are
vices and errors; saving only with this difference; Truths are so coupled as
the Hangings and Curtains of the Tabernacle, by the top and the sides thereof
with rings of gold, to the ornament and beauty of the House of God: but Errors
are like Samsons foxes, tied together only by the tails, purposely to set on
fire the glorious harvest of divine Truths.

It is well known, that those flames that did utterly consume the peace of the
Belgic Churches, have miserably of late broken out amongst us; and as it was
then, that Arminius, though he penned a small Tract De componendo Religionis
dissidio, yet he himself was no small Incendiary; even so it is now.

I need not tell thee that the fuel of that fire was the hot agitation of
those five Points, which when the Remonstrants came to declare themselves upon,
at the Synod of Dort, they did not load their Remonstrance with such a
voluminous Title, as to rehearse all and the singular Articles; but this, De
Predestinatione cum suis annexis: granting us gratis, That No absolute
Election, Universal Redemption, Universal Grace, Resistibility of Grace,
Apostacy from Grace were so mutually interwoven, that they must either stand
or fall together. Some indeed, there have been of late of such clouded
Intellectuals, that they have driven on furiously in some, but have imagined
they might relinquish other of the five Points: such I leave, as not worthy an
examen, being men incapable of carrying their own interst, not knowing where it
lies. But Mr. Goodwin, with whom I have now engaged, is something in this more
discreet; for when he comes forth (like Saul) higher by the head then the rest
of his brethren, in that great Body, Redemption Redeemed, he orders this
little Tract to follow him as his Armor-bearer; wherein he does, (or would at
least) prove an Universal sufficient Grace, without which he can never prove an
Universal Redemption. In which, although for the substance of his work, he
does but follow the steps of his Ancestors; yet for the manner of it, he
appears like Goliath, that sets forth in his might to defy the whole Host of
Israel. None (I am confident) amongst the Philistines, has been found to
engage so far, and so singly as he has done. His pen is his spear, and his
voluble expressions, and daring boldness, and polished phrasiologies have made
it swell into the magnitude of a Weavers beam; yet I am confident, some little
stones out of the bag of Scripture and Reason, will smite him down. This I have
(by the divine help) in my ensuing Discourse attempted: for me to say any thing
of it here, would be not so much to satisfy thee, as to prepossesse thee. I
have an adversary that will lose no ground by cowardice; his works are all
along full fraught with such assertions, which have neither the stabiliment of
Scripture, evidence of Reason, patronage of Authority, nor any seconds of the
best of his own side; so we may presume of this advantage, that he will be left
in the combat to manage his own quarrel. Of those Heterodox and impious
passages of his in all his Works, Catalogues are extant by better hands then
mine; yet in this small Tract of his, The Pagan Debt and Dowry, there are some
few that will increase the store.

1. That the patience of God leads men to faith in Jesus Christ, whether he be
known or not known to them. p. 9.

2. That by the light of Nature God is known or knowable, etc. that men may by
it come to gather (...), the effect and substance of the Gospel, p. 9, 10.

3. That the Apostle, Romans 10. shows that by that hearing whereby faith is
wrought, or which is able to produce it, is meant the hearing of the words,
sound of the heavens, the day and the night, p. 10.

4. That the words of the heavens, the day and the night, which they speak in
the ears of all Nations, are the words of eternal life, as well as those which
our Savior himself did speak.

With many others, which it cannot but be as unpleasing to refel, as to repeat;
In all which he does magnify Nature, and exceedingly depreciate Christ, and
his personal discoveries, and so brings him to open shame; which are all of
them called to the test, and examined in the following Treatise, which I
commend to thy candid oversight. First, granting me the civility of passing
over the Typographicall (...), which needs must happen in the printing, by
reason of the non acquaintance of the Printer with my Manuscript. To prevent
the incursions of men of Mr. Goodwin's humor, who rather contend about Words
then Reason, I have hinted some of them in the ensuing page; the rest supply if
thou meetest with them, and I commit thee and us all to God, who is able to
lead us into all truth.

Thine OBADIAH HOW.

ERRATA.
In the Body of the Book.
Page 3. lin. 1. for is not, r. is it not p. 16. l 34. r. figuratively. p. 21.
l. 3. r. Ephesians. 2.12 p. 28. l 18 for challenge r. charge p. 32. l. 3. r.
Willet. p. 33 l. 43. r. of Christ p. 36. l. 5. for heavens r. hearing p. 43. l,
33. for only more r. no more p. 48. l 19. r. omne e^s. p. 50. l. 15. r.
certai^lie he must p. 56. l. 3. r. Impostor p. 52 l. 1. r under sin p 79 l. 28.
r. (...). p. 83 l. 23. r. that God p. 85 l. 31 r cannot be elected p. 88 l. 7.
r. Improvement of abilities p. 106 l. 15. r. in his own circle. p. 114 l. 32.
r. whilst it is, it necessarily is.
In the Margin.
Page 5. (e) pro ad lege and. (f) after sufficit l. ad. p. 12 (b) l. dolere. l.
petere p. 13. (e) l. obediendas p. 23 l. juxta id quod ipsi p. 52. l. sibi data
p. 53. (c) l. ut virtutes. l. quidem p. 62 (c) l. impediri. p. 79 (c) l. (...)
p. 85. l. praestari. p. 93 (a) l. invenit. (b) l. ab iis p. 94 (d) l. ^errenis
A VERDICT In the Case depending between Master J. Goodwin, and Master How,
concerning the Heavens Preaching the Gospel; maintained by Master Goodwin in
his Pagans Debt and Dowry, as well as his Redemption redeemed.
BY GEORGE KENDALL, D. D.
To the READER.
MAY it please him to know, that though J do not presume to look upon my self,
as one whose testimony can add any value to those worthy Discourses, which
are here presented him; yet J esteem it some honor to my poor judgment, that
J have been earnestly solicited to spend it upon them.

Accordingly J shall assume the boldness to say, that the Pamphlet which is
here taken to task, while it flily pretends to sue the Pagans for an unknown
debt, secretly releaseth Christians from a great part of those sweet
obligations; wherein they justly rejoice to be bound, and must in all humble
thankfulness acknowledge, they can never satisfy them. No less then the
honor of the Ministry, the Scriptures, the goodness of God in blessing our
ears with the joyful sound of them, and bowing our hearts quite against their
native posture, to an humble submission unto them, lies at the stake in this
Controversy.

And 1. Master Goodwins n^w licensing the Sun, Moon, and Stars, to Prea^h the
Doctrine of the Gospel, is an apparent encroachment upon the Commission granted
to the Apostles, and us their unworthy successors, in that honorable Office of
dispensing these sacred Mysteries. And who knows, but Master Goodwin (long
noted for a back-friend to our public Preachers) had a subtle design to
obscure the Lights of our Churches, by bringing in the Sun to outshine them?

2. Nor yet have the Ministers more cause to complain of the injuries done them
by those audacious Papers, then have the Scriptures themselves. If the Pagans
may so easily read the great Mysteries of the Gospel, written with the
Sunbeams, the Book of God must be content to be set at a lower rate, then David
was wont even in his time to put upon it. Alas! multitudes of Christians have
much ado, after many years teaching, to read any considerable part of the
Doctrine of Christ, in that Obscurer Volume; while the Pagans in the mean time,
are indoctrinated by Master Goodwin, to run and read all in the Sun.

The Jews had small cause, it seems, to talk of their Privilege, in having the
Oracles of God committed to them, Romans 3. I wis, the Sun proclaimed all as much
to the Heathens, as any of the Jews could, and more then most of them did pick
out of their Moses and the Prophets. And therefore Paul might have forborne to
have told his Countrymen so solemnly of the great advantage they had, above
his new Disciples the Gentiles. There were none of them all, but might have
seen Christ as clearly in the Sun, as ever Moses did God in the Cloud. Nay,
howbeit Christ were pleased to say, that salvation was of the Jews, (Joh.
4.22.) yet Master Goodwin has concluded upon a more serious debate, that the
Gentiles were every way as near to it; and the partition wall was no
considerable inconvenience to them, nor the plucking down of this wall any
visible enlargement of the Courts of Gods house, which were all along of the
same dimensions with the Globe of the Earth.

I fear this short Pamphlet of Master Goodwins, has done much more against the
honor of the Scriptures, then his Bulkier Volume, for the Authority of them
will in haste make amends for; notwithstanding In his Notes on the six
Booksellers, p. 28.
he pleases to tell us of As I am credibly informed, the Reverend Doctor
Whichcote.
one known to be at learned, grave, and judicious, as any English born at this
day; who said it was as good a Book as any was written since the Apostles days.

It had need to be so, to make any tolerable satisfaction for these improvident
pleadings for the pretended sufficiency of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, to
deliver all the chief contents of the Gospel.

3. How does this blemish and sully the singular graciousnesse of our good God
to us poor Christians, and give occasion to too many to slake their
thankfulness to his heavenly Majesty, for his Letters Patents, and the Oral
Proclamations of the Gospel, vouchsafed to themselves? so far is it from
inflaming their zeal in the propagation of it to others. What reckon we so much
upon our being called out of d^tknesse into his mavelous light? (1 Pet. 2.9.)
The Pagans eyes indeed are blind, but the light of the Gospel shines clearly
upon them, and makes no difference between England and India; yea, the Indians
have some advantage, as lying nearer the Sun, whose Sermons it is therefore
probable they may hear somewhat the more distinctly. And if we have so little
to bless God for more then the Pagans, what need we give him too many thanks
for our supposed happiness above the Papists? we in vain dream of too much
felicity in our superfluous Reformation. Heaven is at no greater distance from
Rome, then London. And the poor Popish Laics, though interdicted the
Scriptures in their Vulgar tongue; yet may read enough to save them, in the
Suns Catechism, written in the Catholic Language. What meant our rash
Martyrs to be so prodigal of their blood at the stake? They needed not have
feared any danger of that Egyptian darkness, as long as they might have
enjoyed Gospel Light enough, with a sufficient Gods blessing on their hearts,
in a warm Sun. What an unnecessary quoil did many good men lately make against
some imperious Prelates, for silencing a few settled Ministers? The danger was
none, or very small, as long as the Sun, that grand Itinerant Preacher, was
in no peril of being suspended: Master Goodwins dumb Preachers would have
exercised in spite of them all, and that upon the very house-tops. Onwards,
what a needless quarter do the Adventurers for New England keep about erecting
Schools, and training up Preachers for the Natives? Had they ten thousand
Hiacomesses, they could all say little more then the Sun does every day of the
Gospel of Christ in a Language much like the Universal Character, which the
late Examiner of the Universities, to use his own words, is about to excogitate
as his Responsions do make probation. Si Cloaca esset, magna esset. Nay, what
talk we so much of the vain advancement of Learning at home, in order to
bringing men to be better qualified for the Preaching of the Gospel? All the
Books in the Public Library at Oxford, are not of half the use that Will:
Lillies Almanacks are, wherein the Sun Preaches in his Pontificalibus. Who
would have thought it, Master Goodwins six penny Pamphlet beats down all
Pulpits and Libraries, and affords the Suns Lectures at such a rate, that
most other Books may go for waste paper, and think themselves happy in being
employed to defend Roste Bief from the fury of the fire.

Thus has he made (which who could ever have suspected?) the superior Lights
to Eclipse the inferior; and the Sun by advantage belike of his nearness to
the Church Triumphant in Heaven, to darken all the lower Stars of the Church
Miiitant here on Earth. Such are the consequences of Master Goodwins Discourses.

4. Yea more, whereas all good Christians have ever been wont to bless God for
being pleased to distinguish them from many other professed Christians, who
enjoy the Books of Scriptures, and the Oral Ministry of the Gospel, as far
forth as themselves, but are not so happily breathed on by the Spirit of grace,
which alone makes them effectual to conversion, Master Goodwins Book would bear
them in hand, that there is little more owing to God from the best of
Christians, then the worst of Pagans; and that these have equal means of
salvation, at least in a Geometrical proportion. (Red. Red. P. Vlt.)

The truth is, having taken so much worthy pains in his Redemption Redeemed, to
show that Christ died equally for all men, he was of course to assert, that he
procured equal means of that equally intended salvation of all men; and to make
good these equal means of salvation afforded to all men, he was of necessity to
run on one of these two rocks, either to deny that the Preaching of the Gospel
is necessary to salvation, or to affirm, that the Sun, Moon, and Stars (who
alone visit all the world) are sufficient Preachers of it.

I am so much Master Goodwins friend, (what ever he think of me) as seriously
to advise him, as he tenders his safety, to have a special care, while he lays
himself out for an Universal toleration of all Religions, that he set himself
against Popery to the utmost of his power: For however he speed, through the
highly deserved favor of all other Sectaries, that may chance to get the
moderation of Ecclesiastical causes; yet should ever the Papists rule the
roste, Master Goodwin must look to be cast into the fire: So severely would the
Papists handle him for this piece of new Doctrine, not as a Protestant, but an
Anti-Scripturist. The Pope himself though he pretend to be the Ecumenical
Pastor, would not endure the thought of such an Universal Preacher as Master
Goodwin is pleased to ordain the Sun, to the disparagement of the Scriptures.
And yet that I may give the Sun and his Patron their due, I readily confess,
the Sun Preaches enough to condemn all the world, though not a word to
purpose for the saving of any single soul.

The Sun rarely sets forth the power of God, enabling so vast a body for so
swift a course, and making so swift a course to be all as regular; The Sun
never stumbling nor tripping since his first setting out, as a Giant to run
his race; never stopping but once in above five thousand years, and that only
upon a command to attend the motion of Joshuahs army; never retreating but
once, and that upon a like order, to assure Hezekiah of an unexpected setting
back of the Clock of his days. The Sun displayes the glory of Gods power no
less every year, in reviving plants, and trees, after a whole Winters
Epilepsie; whence we conclude beyond contradiction, that God can raise our
bodies out of the bosom of the Earth, with more facility then the Sun
re-quickens any vegetables upon the face of it. The Sun as openly Preaches
the same power of God in its occulter operations upon Minerals, which it so
curiously works, where we would not think it did look, and does a kind of
stupendous miracles by invisible influences. Shortly, the Sun tells all the
world so plainly, that there is God Omnipotent, that too many Pagans have taken
the Sun for that God. So children are apt to look on a King at Arms, as King
of the Realm. The Sun Preaches, that God in its face, which too too many men
every where deny in their heart; but of Christ the Lord, it had never a word to
say, unless perhaps once, when it muffled its face, as blushing at the
monstrous indignities offered by poor worms on Earth to the great Prince of
Heaven. But even then the Sun spoke so low under its mask, that the Jews
themselves did not hear, much less did the Heathens understand it. And though
one of their Philosophers be said to have cried out, aut Deus naturae patitur,
aut mundi machina dissolvetur; yet I believe that speech of his well examined,
carries more in it against the honor of the Almighty Creator, then for the
glory of our Merciful Redeemer. Alas, they who have been the most diligent and
curious Auditors of the Sun, never learned any thing of that Star which
was a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of his people Israel. God
manifested in the flesh, was a Mystery which the Angels stooped down to look
into, so little could the Pagans discover it in the Heavens over their heads.
It was the Apostles wonder, to hear it should ever be Preached to the Gentiles,
so little did they conceive (what Master Goodwin could have taught them) that
the Sun Preached words of eternal life as well as those which (as Peter
acknowledges) our Savior himself had to speak, Page Debt and Dow. P. 11. Sure
I am, Astrologers the more they have observed the Sun, the less they have
acknowledged our Savior, as not conceiving how he who guides the Sun should
have been carried in the arms, or he who governs that Chariot, suffer on a
Cross. The glory of the Sun made them scorn the obscurity of Christ, which
was to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness. Had not
those wise men which came from the East, had a Revelation of the Spirit,
besides the apparition of a Star, they had never worshipped him as a King of
the Jews, much less as Savior of the world, whom they found so contemptibly
Cradled in a common Manger. In a word, the Mystery of Christ had been hid at
this day all as much as it was in any former ages, had he not sent othergates
Heralds then Sun, Moon and Stars to publish it. It is enough, they proclaim
so much as serves to condemn men for not obeying their Creator; they say
nothing of our being to be saved by the man Christ Jesus. The Pagans are left
without excuse, for rebelling against the Law which is written on their hearts;
As for the Gospel, as they sin without it, so may they justly perish without
it, and have nothing at all to say for themselves, as much as Master Goodwin is
pleased to plead for them, little to the benefit of them poor wretches,
exceeding much to the dishonor of Gods grace.

That which makes his Learned Congregagation, with some others of the same
hair, so readily to swallow this his tough Paradox, is his superficial pretense
of magnifying the riches of Gods general grace and mercy; but whiles the grace
and mercy of God are seemingly advanced, his being gracious to whom he will be
gracious, and merciful to whom he will be merciful, is most insolently
oppugned; and this crotchet is quickly discovered to be deeply guilty of a
desperate design, to unchristen England, while it pretends to Christen the
unknown parts of America. Certainly Master Goodwins talents had been far
better employed in endeavoring to keep Christians from degenerating into
Pagans, sleighting the Gospel both in deeds and words, then in showing how
Pagans may be saved, though they never come to be Christians. It would have
turned better to his account, to have showed what a shame it is for Christians
to live as Pagans, then so industriously to have essaied to prove, that Pagans
may, while Pagans, believe as Christians. But it seems he had so fully
indoctrinated his dear flock in all things concerning themselves, that he had
nothing left to deliver them but such notorious impertinencies. And yet I
cannot think but he might more profitably have spent his labors, in showing
the best Christians their sins against God, then in this superfl^ous displaying
of this pretended goodness of God to the worst Pagans.

Surely there was less need of an Apology for Gods ways, then a reproof of
those of the best Saints; nor was there so much cause to clear God, as to
condemn our selves.

The Learned Author of this Answer, has to better purpose traveled in Gods
cause, may God have the glory, the Reader the benefit, himself the reward of
his labors, that is, a thankful acceptance of them.

And he may challenge it the more, for that he dares appear so fully against
Master Goodwin in this juncture of time, when he is crowned with so many
Laurels, for his late signal Victory, over no less then a double Triumvirate
of (...) Booksellers, whom notwithstanding all the Learning they have in their
shops to defend themselves with, he has laid as low at the feet of his
writings, as ever he did high Presbytery and her sons, though as they lie
sprawling there, their Vindicatour plaguily bites his heels with a stinging
Apology. I doubt not but this glorious Conquest flusheth him in his attempts
against the Synod of Dort, which being once devoured, he may be at leisure to
digest Doctor Owen, and my self, whom he has already thrown down his throat
in his Horn-spoon. In the mean time, he satisfies himself with this, that
Doctor Owen has not answered Master Horn, nor I Master Baxter; to both which,
I humbly reply:

First, for Master Vice Chancellor, that it may be a question, whether he
ever heard of Master Horns Book till I gave him notice of it about some three
years after it was printed, I can scarce say published; but since there is a
second Edition of the Title Page, which I know not, but Master Vice Chancellor
may one day have leisure to consider. In the interim, as I am informed, the
case stands thus; Master Horns Open door was shut up as it were with a Red
Cross on it for some years till it was unlocked by Tho: Johnson at his golden
Key in Paul's Churchyard, who bought it for Lumber; and to make the best of his
bargain, new printed the Posts of it, by which means he hopes to secure it a
while from being dishonored down to men's back-doors.

Next for my self, may it please Master Goodwin to know, that Master Baxter and
I are grown wiser th^n to engage one another any more; not that I mean to spend
my ink (as Master Goodwin will) upon better men, but upon worse. And the truth
is, Master Baxter and I differ not so much as Master Goodwin may chance to
conceive; for there being two points handled in that digression, which Master
Goodwin says Master Baxter encounters with as much facility, and like
success, as fire does the dried stubble; as to the first, concerning the
impossibility of new immanent acts in God, Master Baxter professes to oppose
my Doctrine, not as untrue, but uncertain, Section 5. page 16. And after he
has produced several arguments against me, he is pleased to say, he knows
several things that I may say against his reasonings, p. 19. and that he does
not own all these arguments which he touches upon, p. 29. and that he mentions
them only to show that a full or clear solution of these doubts is not so
facile and obvious as you seem to imagine, p. 29. and again professes, that if
he would be of any side in that Controversy, he would be of Master Kendals
side, p. 29.

Besides, Master Goodwin himself professes the same, if I understand him, (
Red. Redeemed, Chap. 16. Sect. 14. page 425, 426.) though I cannot blame him
for being angry with that passage, which unawares baffled a considerable part
of his Book. And in that respect, I will God willing for his satisfaction,
without breach of the Agreement between Master Baxter and me, handle that point
in Latin (which is the only fit Language for such a Discourse) long before
Master Goodwin shall hang up the least member of the Synod of Dort at the doors
of his Meeting house.

As to the latter, I had no more to do then to show, that the Doctrine of
Justification from Eternity is not so horrible a blasphemy as M. Goodwin was
pleased to brand it for. Whereas he may know, that I look upon that of
Condemnation from Eternity (maintained by no man that I wot of, though jumbled
in by him) to be no less; and therefore I singled out that of Justification,
and let pass the other, saying, that in Gods Decree from Eternity to justify
and condemn men in time, there was somewhat like Justification in opposition to
Condemnation, which is of another consideration. Nor can I be persuaded there
is any absurdity in saying, that in Gods Decree from Eternity to justify and
condemn men in time, there is somewhat that looks like Justification, though
there be nothing that looks like Justification in the Decree which concerns
Condemnation; more then in saying, that my purpose to go to Oxford and return
to London, carries somewhat that respects my going to Oxford, though my purpose
to go to Oxford carries nothing in it that concerns my return.

As for Master Baxter, if in any particular I have misrepresented him, (which
is the main thing he lays to my charge) I shall, as I discover it, willingly
retract it; and it is not unlikely but we do both understand each other much
better then we did. But I desire Master Goodwin to know, that Master Baxter
professed he was offended with me for nothing so much, as joining him with John
Goodwin. And howbeit he please to let fall a word of my inclemency to Master
Goodwin, in one passage twice quoted by him, and accordingly remembered by
Master Goodwin, I believe Master Goodwin desires his Reader should take notice
of that place for the many good words I bestow on him there, (as some others
have conceived) far beyond the proportion of his deserts. In Conclusion, so
far am I from being convinced of offending by my frolicks, that I am resolved
to be as pleasant as ever in my Language, let who will choose to be bitter;
only I shall still pray to God to forgive us all our iniquities of our holiest
things, and to work our hearts to a Christian endeavor of overcoming evil with
good, and to the affecting of no greater Conquest then the captivating of all
our thoughts to the obedience of Christ.

Feb. 6. 1654.
THE PAGAN PREACHER SILENCED.
WHEN I first cast mine eyes upon this Treatise, and the Title of it, which
presents us with the Pagans debt and dowry. I wondered that the match should
be so soon struck up betwixt Christ and his Pagan Spouse; especially
considering, that he had entailed his conjugal affection to his Church which he
loves, and presents as his only glorious Bride unto his Father. And I should
still have continued wondering, but that I found under it the Name of Mr. John
Goodwin, whom I perceive to be a man well underlayed with a stock of boldness,
urged on with the stress of Judgment, led on by the hand of leisure
proportionable to such attempts as these; (viz.) to estate dowries upon aliens,
entitle to the most intimate mercies of Christ, those whom the Scripture
bespeaketh to be without him, to fasten saving grace upon, and to reduce them,
in seriem salvandorum, whom the Scripture says, Ephesians. 2.12.
are without hope; And upon this account, I could well have passed by it: But
the moment of the question being such, and so nearly concerned in that
Controversy, in which I have already publicly engaged, I was provoked to a
more narrow and serious examination of those things which he no less
confidently, then singularly thrusts upon his over credulous reader.

In the pursuance of which, the occasion and matter of this Treatise, are
chiefly enquirable.

I need not insist upon the manner of his writings, which in this as in all
others, is with so much groundless confidence, tart scurrility, smooth
expressions, yet swelling words, which may make us collect, that doctrines of
devils never want Angels voices, which serve as garnished sepulchers, to cover
rotten bones, and as so much grain to allure the simple bird into the snare;
but the Lord will discover the Prophet who is the snare of the fowler in all his
ways.

The occasion of this Treatise, as many others of the like nature, I find
suggested by himself to be in the pursuance of that now much ventilated Article
of Universal Redemption. For in his 60 page I find this Enthymem,

All men without exception are bound to believe in Christ. Ergo, Christ died
for all without exception.

In which Argument, the Major is to be supplied to complete a syllogism, thus,

If all men be bound to believe in Christ, then Christ dyed for all. But all
men are bound to believe in Christ: Ergo, Christ dyed for all.

Which Argument he would have the world believe to be his own, when not only in
this short Treatise, but in that Chaos, Redemption Redeemed, a large Treatise
of his, if every bird should take his own feather, he would be left like
Aesop's Crow; the Argument is both formed and confirmed to his hand by Corvin.
in Molin. in the Acta Synodal. in the conference at the Hague; yet he may know,
they never intended to take so high a flight, Chap. 29.. 14.16. page 337 p.
133. Arg. 5.
as to prove that all men without exception are either bound to believe, or
have sufficient means to believe in Jesus Christ; but only thus far, that all
to whom the Gospel comes, viz. both Elect, and Reprobate; as appears both by
the illustrations and various formations of the Argument, in this manner, when
they propound the Argument thus,

Act. Synod. 337.
Whosoever are bound to believe in Jesus Christ, for them Christ died.

But, all and every one, both Elect (as they call them) and Reprobate, are
bound to believe. Ergo, Christ died for all and every man.

The Minor of which Syllogism, they illustrate and explain thus. [ Fides hac
concipi non potest, nisi supposita prius objecti veritate in se, neque enim aut
dei voluntate aut nostra fide immutatur objectum, sed proponitur et
apprehenditur quale est in se.

Act. Synod, 337.


This faith cannot be conceived, unless the truth of the object be first
supposed; neither is this object changed, either by the will of God, or our
faith, but it is propounded and apprehended as it is in it self. Now the
raciocination herein, is obvious and clear, viz. until there be (objectum) and
(objectum propositum) an object propounded, there is no place for faith; for
true it is, revealed things belong to us, both in [credendis] and [faciendis].
So that that phrase in the Major (Qui in Jesum credere tenentur,) is thus to be
interpreted, (qui habent Christum tanquam fidei objectum propositum;) Those
that are bound to believe, are no other then such as have Christ propounded as
the real existent object of faith: and that they intend thus to interpret the
phrase, I am induced to think, because this very Argument which runs thus in
their Act. Synod. in the Collation at the Hague runs in an other expression,
thus, [Quos ad salutem partam vocat, pro iis Christus mortuns.] And thus,
[Quibus Deus pracipit u^ credant, pro iis Christus morium est] and is not hence
conclusive, that they bespeak none other bound to believe, then those to whom
he gives a command to believe, or else calls to the salvation purchased, which
is all one with having the letter of the Gospel: and further they rest
satisfied with that rule [Lex non lata nec intellecta, cum intelligi non
potest, non obligat,] a law not given nor understood, when it can not be
understood, binds not; yet I think they have carried on the main (...) of
universal Redemption, with as tender an eye to its nearest interest, as Mr.
Goodwin can do.

Besides, it is evident that all the discourses about universal grace are but a
mere Countermine to that Argument which is formed by us against Universal
Redemption: thus,

If Christ died for all, then he would certainly make such discoveries of this
purchase to all, that they may have this salvation purchased, applied, and that
without exception. But be does not the latter, therefore not the former.

And here are all these intricate and winding disputes about universal Grace
hatched. Therefore the subject of this Treatise of Mr. Goodwins, is to prove
that all the heathens have such discoveries of Jesus by the light of nature,
without the letter of the Gospel, as that they are bound to believe in Christ,
and have means sufficient thereunto. And indeed, so naturally consequential is
it, (according to our Argument) that if such a purchase was so universally
made, it would be as universally discovered, without which there is no ordinary
way of having that purchased inheritance applied; this Argument of ours is
founded upon such equitable principles, that the assertors of Universal
Redemption, have all of them, some more lightly, others more sollicitously
beaten out an universal grace, sufficient, and saving, afforded to all men
without exception. And that such discoveries however made, if well improved,
would bring a stock of more grace til they come to be saved. And this is the
subject of Mr. Goodwins whole treatise, and he sweats much in the ventilating
thereof; which demonstratively clears the evidence of our Consequence or
major proposition, which runs thus:

If Jesus Christ died for every man without exception, then he makes to every
man without exception such discoveries of himself, that all men by them might
come to believe in him.

But when they come to the assumptive part, and to make out this universal
call, and general tender of grace; to clear that such discoveries are made to
all men without exception, no men more divided in their sentences, lost in
their own uncertainties (every man contradicting himself and one another, then
these men) as shall appear in these following instances.

First how uncertain and wavering are they in the formation of their assertion,
how unsatisfied are they about the terms of it, to make it to appear to be
universal?

The Remonstrants in their Synodical writings, give the Argument thus, Whoever
are bound to believe in Christ, for them Christ died.

But all and every man as well the Elect as Reprobate, are bound to believe in
Christ; Act. Synod. Art 20. p. 337
Ergo, he dyed for all and every man. Wherein the All contended for who are
bound to believe, is only Elect and Reprobate; but these two notions do not
take in or involve all and every person without exception, and this appears
thus: Those that are Elect, are considered as believers; and those that are
Reprobated, are considered as unbelievers; but there are many that are neither
believers, nor yet unbelievers, as Surdi, Amentes, Infantes, Indi, deaf,
madmen, infants, Indians; being such as to whom God neither does dispense, nor
is ready to dispense his Divine grace; they come not under either of those
notions. And this is evident from their own method of arguing.

Act. Synod. Art 10. p. 6.
But the Collocutors at Hague, propound it with an other face. Those whom God
commands to believe in Jesus Christ, for them Christ dyed, Collat. Hag. p. 133.
but God commands not only the Elect, but other men to believe in Christ, Ergo,
Christ died not for the Elect, but for other men also.

Which is a far different conclusion from the former. For the first way
expressed both Elect and Reprobate, Corvin. in Mol. cap. 29.. 14. 16.
but this does not; for if upon their own principles, some, yea many, as
dease, mad men, Indians, be neither believers nor unbelievers, and so neither
Elect no Reprobate; then these two phrases Elect and Other men, do not involve
reprobates, and so he may die for Elect and Other men, yet not for all.

But Corvinus presents us with it in an other different form, thus; Whom God
commands to believe in Christ, for them Christ is dead; But God commands all
men to believe in Christ, and all are bound thereto, Ergo, Christ died for all.

Now if they cannot more distinctly determine then thus, about the expression
of the persons on whom this universaltie and obligation to believe is laid; we
have reason little enough to expect more positive and settled judgments in the
rest. The first urges, that Elect and Reprobate, the second that Elect and
other men, the third says that All men are bound to believe: and where should
we fix our thoughts to oppose, if they be so unresolved to assert? But to let
this pass, and to examine whether they be less uncertain in the next thing
considerable, Arminius, when he undertaketh, Mr. Perkins, says thus, Omnes
homines aliqua^ vocatione vocantur, Arm. Antiperk 259.
All men are called with some call. And there is nothing more intimate to all
their writings, then this; that God calls to himself all men without exception,
yet the Collocutors at the conference at the Hague, seem to be of an other
mind, whiles they say thus, Omnes irregeniti non sunt ejusdem ordinis, quidam
tanquam extra omnem vocationem positi, ambulantes in vanitate mentis, non
intelligentes viam, veritatis: alii sunt vocati etc. Collat. Hag. Art 3. p 288.
Unregenerate men are not all in one order and place; some there are as being
put without all manner of Call, walking in the vanity of their mind, not at all
understanding the way of truth; others are called, etc. And not only in this,
whether all men be called or no, but also in the title or name whereby they
should call, or denominate this call, they are thus unresolved.

When there was a full Jury of them empannelled at the Synod of Dors, they gave
this as their definitive sentence at that time. Thus, Communi vocatione omne;
evocat ad se Deus Act. Synod. 327
All men are called to God by himself in that general Call; but what must we call
this general Gal, whether nature alone, or grace alone, or grace and nature
mixed? and this is requisite to be known, because they contend for an universal
Grace. Arminius he says it is natural light, thus, Isto loco, Habenti dabitur,
Deus spondet se spirituali gratia illuminaturum eum qui naturali lumine been
utitur, aut saltem minus male Arm. A^^po^k, 218
In that Text (To him that has shall be given) God binds himself to give
supernatural grace to him that shall use natural light well, or at least less
ill But the Remonstrance in their Synodical writings, thinking this notion a
little too short to express, and denotate an universal Grace; they thus say,
Communi reca^ione vocat omnes, non quod secundum stius vocationis ^enorem et
generation is gratiae mensuram v^tam instituentes immediate serventur, sed ut
disponentur^ devangelicae praedicationis id^neo^ reddantur an i ores in qua
sal^^ offenur Act Synodal 327
Thus by this general ^al, be calls all men to him; not that according to the
tenor of this common call, or measure of this more general Grace, they should
be immediately saved; but by this general grace they might be disposed and made
fit hearers of the Gospel, in which Christ and salvation is offered. So that
herein they relinquish the truth of this outward Call, formerly given by
Arminius, and upon better thoughts call it General Grace, and not The light of
nature.

But Corvinus not satisfied in either alone, when he is pressed by Molin his
adversary, with making grace and nature to be of equal extent and latitude, and
so to run ere he is aware, too far into the tents of the Pelagians, he thus
answers, Esto, modo enim naturam ite a gratia distingnamus, ut intelligamus
gratiam naturae superadditam, hoc s^^ficit nos a Pelagio seperandos. Corvin in
Mol cap 38 Section 8
Let it be so, so that we distinguish them so far, as to understand grace
superadded to nature; this is enough to separate us from Pelagius. Some will
have this Call to be the natural light impressed in our minds naturally, others to
be called general Grace, others Grace superadded to nature.

Further, when they come to examine the Minor of our Argument, which is, That
such a discovery of Christ is not made to all men without exception; and so to
strengthen their own assertion, diametrally opposite to it, viz. that such a
discovery is made, and therefore all bound to believe in Christ, what reverst
and intricate motions have, we to admiration?

First the Collocutors of the Hague Confer. roundly say, Proposit^oni isti
prou^ a fratribus concepta est, non omnibus, scil, praedicari Sermonem
reconciliatitionis manifest in Scripturis contradictur ratione temporis novi
Testamenti Acts 17.30 Romans 10 18 Collat. Hag page 180
That Proposition as it is produced by our brethren, viz. that the word of
reconciliation is not preached to all, is contradicted by clear Scriptures; as
Act. 17.30. He commands all men to repent. Romans 10.18 Their sound is gone
throughout all the earth. This in respect of the new Testament, etc. So that
there they roundly, and without any Hasitation pronounce the Gospel, and the
words of the Apostles to be dispensed to all men without exception. And what
can they more desire for the strengthening of their cause? Here is testimony
clear enough if they durst but stand to the award of these Scriptures, but
fearing the issue, they begin to make some cautelous provisoes against a
storm; for lest we should press them with all the times before Christ, which
contains three Periods of the world; the time of the Gospel since Christ, is
but one, and called The last days; and in these last days the experience that
many live and die, and never hear of the Gospel, as if they could not but
contradict and involve themselves with the same breath, they thus grant and
say, Quod item ad populos quosdam attinet qui pro^sus ignorant illud verbum
reconciliationis, respondemus, Desi ab initio mundi etc. toti mundo sermonem
reconciliationis evoluisse and jussisse a generationem propagati. R^g. Col. 180
As for those many people, who are altogether ignorant of this word of
Reconciliation, we answer, God from the beginning of the world, and in the
posterity of Noah, and by his Apostles, did will and command that the Gospel
should be preached from generation to generation wherein not daring to
subscribe to the award of those quoted Scriptures, they retract from their full
mo^th'd assertions, and now do grant that there are many people that are
altogether ignorant of the word of Reconciliation: Here let all the world judge
of these unstable disputers, they prove that the Gospel is preached to every
individual, and thence conclude, that Christ dyed for every individual, and
yet many are altogether ignorant of that word of reconciliation; and now they
salve it by that which is nothing at all to the purpose. And Arminius himself
thus; Primam causam cur Deus non omnibus et singulis hominibus Christum revelat
hanc esse, quod parents illorum verbum Evangelii repu^iavere. Antiper^. 258
The cause why Christ is not revealed to all and every man, is because their
forefathers have rejected the Gospel; for thus I urge it, If he give the cause
why Christ is not revealed to all, surely then they do give it us for granted
that Christ is not revealed to all

Come we 'then to consider the cause, and upon examen thereof we shall find,
they are as much involved into uncertainties in this as in the thing it self.
Corvinus gives the cause to be in the men themselves, thus, Quia su^s peccatis
se ista gratia i^dignos secerunt, in Molin. cap. 28 Sect. 8
Because they have made themselves unworthy of that grace by their sins. But
the Remonstrants in their Antidotum, refer it to Gods prascience, thus, Deus
non curat istud annunciari ii quos praef^actos et contumaces sutu^os vi^et
Antidot 79
God does not take care to reveal Christ to them, because be foresees them to
be incorrigible and contumacious. The Collocutors at the Conference at Hague,
give the cause to be in the preachers of the Gospel, thus, Culpa transcribenda
sit partim ad negligentiam praedicantium qui operam suam satis fideliter non
contu^ereune Col. Hag. 18^
The fault is to be ascr^bed partly to the negligence of the preachers of the
Gospel, who do not faithfully their duty. Arminius ascribes the cause to their
forefathers, thus, Causa est, quod parents little Evangel um repudiavere,
Antiperk. 258
The cause why God reveals not Christ to all and every man, is because their
forefathers have formerly rejected the Gospel. And now they have removed their
foot, they know not where to stay it, and seeing they have granted that the
Gospel is not preached to all, yet they will not suffer the minor of cur
argument to pass without correction: and sometimes they say, Praedicari debet,
it ought to be preached; sometimes, Praedicare potest, it may be preached;
sometimes, In quantum in se est praedicare paratus est, God is ready in as much
as in him lies, to preach it; and this last they much use in all their works,
and think they make all things look upon them with a propitious face; when they
say, Deus aut facit, aut paratus est facere gratiam omnibus et singulis, God
either does or is ready to dispense his Divine Grace; but they snatch the
benefit of such a lenitive out of their own mouths; for in their Synodical
writings upon the Article of election, confining election to be'ievers as the
object of it, and reprebation to unbeleevers as the object of it, they say, Eos
tantum intel^gi posse et cebere quibus gratia Dei aut facta est, aut paratus
est facer^, ne nol is infantium, surd^rum, rabrosorum, Indorum aliorumque
exempla quis alleget. Lex non lata nec intellecta, non obligat. J^^ 15.22. Act.
Synod page 7
Those are to be understood to whom God either has, or was ready to dispense
Divine Grace, lest any one alledg against us the example of Infants, deaf, mad
men, Indians; for the law that is not given, and so not understood, does not
bind, John 15.22. Now from these words of theirs, it more then seems to appear,
that they grant that deaf, mad men, Infants, Indians are such as to whom God
has not, nor yet is ready to dispense his grace: if this be not their meaning,
Eorum verba sale carent, their words want salt; if it be, their own tenent of
universal grace is fallen, and indeed how miserably is that Babel of theirs
fallen? as it arose out of smoke, so it vanishes into it. But what must such
confident assertours, and such a clear cause do in such a Chasme as this is?
They have yet two shifts, the one is that of Corvin, with an ingenuous
confession, to acknowledge they are at a loss, thus, Non dissimulavimusnos
exactam iflius dispensationis rationem dare non posse, et causam a n^bis datam
non esse precisam et adequatam, sed tantum sufficientem, in Molin, cap. 28
We have not dissembled that we could not give an exact reason of his
dispensations in this kind, or that the cause alleged by us why the Gospel is
not preached to some, is an exact or adequate cause, but only a sufficient.
That is not the exact cause why he does, but the sufficient cause why he may
deny the gospel to some; and we accept of this confession: but left this should
too much reflect upon their daring adventures, every where extant from their
pens, the Gollocutors at the conferrence at Hague, as puzzled naturalists
resolve their uncertainties into occult qualities, so do these, not knowing how
to assert their general tender of grace, either by the Scripture or reason,
thus at last say, Fieri etiam posse ut extra ordinem, alio aliquo modo utatur
ad suae voluntatis manifestationem Col. Hag 181
It may also be, that God may use some other extraordinary way to manifest his
will unto them. A very rational Epilogue, but no whit becoming such men; to
suppose, That he may, but no man knows when; Use some means, but none knows
how. They do not consider that hereby they do divest the preaching of the
Gospel of that title and dignity of being the ordinary means to salvation; for
that is the ordinary means which is afforded to the generality of them that
come to know the will of God in Christ: But that which is afforded to them that
hear not of the gospel, is afforded to the generality and the most; therefore
that extraordinary way, what ever it is, and not the Gospel, must be accounted
ordinary.

But it may be thought, that I have too long forsaken Mr. Goodwin. I will
therefore examine whether he be built upon a more plausible foundation of
resolution then his ancestors. Not to commit him and his forefathers together
(as I might instance in innumerable instances where they run cross, and
contradicting each other) the remonstrants in all their writings, by all that
(Call,) whether it be nature alone, or grace, or grace superadded to nature;
this is all that they contend for, that all are called to God, and that they
are afforded some means to arise to the knowledge of God; not that they are
enabled by any common grace to come to the knowledge of, and faith in Christ;
but that by such knowledge of God, they might be successively disposed to hear
the Gospel wherein Christ is tendered. But to let this pass, and all of the
like nature, I shall examine how consistent he is with himself.

In the frontispiece of his treatise, he promises to prove that those that
never heard of the letter of the Gospel, are yet bound to believe in Jesus
Christ; but how many words does he produce, until he proceed to the 29 page of
his Book, that tended to that purpose? How unresolved is Mr. Goodwin, what to
prove or what to assert?

Does not Mr. Goodwin in the first part of his Treatise, contend for an
immediate sufficiency in the Heathen to believe in Christ, and to draw out the
most intimate conclusions of the Gospel, and that by the light of nature, by
the works of providence, and by rain, and fruitful seasons, that there is such
a light darted from these that men have a sufficiency of believing? But here
Mr. Goodwin wavereth; Sometimes it is to-believe in Christ, as in the
frontispiece of his book, wherein he undertakes to prove, that men that never
heard of the letter of the Gospel, are yet bound to believe in Christ, as also
page 9.

Sometimes it is to believe only this, as he says, page 10. That there has
been some mediation or some atonement or other made and accepted by God for
the sins of men. And this is much different from the former; for though God
uses this way of atonement by Christ, yet he was not tied by any natural
necessity to it; so that though the light of nature might discover an
atonement yet it will not hence follow, that by it men may believe on a Christ,
that is, an atonement made by that person, and that way.

Sometimes it is neither of these, but a third, far different from both, Page
13
as he says, They have means of believing; I mean, of believing, 1. That God
is. 2. That he is a rewarder of them that seek him All which does no where lead
to, or discover a Christ, as I shall afterward clearly show.

But does he not again, as not daring to trust all in this vessel, relinquish
his immediate sufficiency, and pleads for a mediate sufficiency in page 15. to
this effect? Not that they can by the light of nature discover a Christ, page
1^.
but they may by nature do those things, and so please God, that he will not
fail to reveal his son Christ; and this he proves from the parable of the
Talents; wherein it is expedient for him to resolve what those Talents are,
which are given, upon the improvement of which, Christ is revealed: but when he
is resolved himself, he will resolve u^. For in page 20. he says thus, The
Talents cannot signify any thing but natural gifts and abilities. Yet in page
21. he says, These Talents or abilities given to men to improve, are more
commonly then properly called natural.

Again, does he not seat his controversy (not in any sufficiency either
immediate or mediate, as he pretends, but) page 23. in a remote capacity,
which is far different from the former two; and in this sense that they are
capable of it, ( viz. the Gospel) as any Nation is capable of the Commodities
that are exportable out of another Nation, by equitable adresses to it. Yea
sometimes thus, that the Gospel is preached to all the world (just the assertion
of his brethren, and in him we may see their fluctuations) In page 23, 24, 25,
26. he earnestly contends that the Gospel is actually preached to the world: But
in page 34. he contendeth not for an Actual, but a Virtual and constructive
preaching, in this sense; The Gospel is preached in some eminent places of the
world, and its interpreted and constructively preached all the world over. For
upon Romans 10.18, he says, How can this assertion stand, but in the strength of
this supposition, that the Apostles publishing of it in the places where they
had opportunity to come, was virtually and constructively a preaching through
the world. But lest this should fail, he is content with a potential preaching
at last, that it may be preached. And this he does page 23. in this sense, It
is preached in some place of the world, and the rest of the world may address
themselves to that place, and so come to hear of it, As the Queen of Sheba
came from the South to hear the wisdom of Solomon.

And are not these fit men to be encountered with reason, whose reason is not
yet so much resolved, as to give a settled ground of dispute? It is the desire
of my heart, and my task, to grapple with the first borne of Mr. Goodwins
strength. But I have this disadvantage that Reuben like, it is as unstable as
water, I have not hitherto annexed any answer to Mr. Goodwins or the
remonstrants, because my task has been historical, not disputative; to show
the rise and progress of this doctrine of universal saving grace: and hitherto
it appears to have had its rise out of a mist, not the clear Sun-light; a mist
of uncertainties and conjectures, not out of the Sun-light of a settled and well
grounded truth. And as to Mr. Goodwin, I say, (Quorsum hae erroris latebra?)
what means these starting holes which truth never seeks? which are
demonstrative, not of a desire to vindicate the truth, but an unwillingnesse to
relinquish an error; these are but the doubles and the retropasses of the
subtle fox to foil the sent, merely to retard the pursuer. And as their
laboring to prove an universal grace is demonstrative of the validity of the
proposition, so their dark and unresolved progress in proving of it, gives
much credit and strength to the assumption of our argument, and lets me see
that their invented method for such an universal grace is not able to abide the
light, or to give satisfaction to any rational scrutiny.

And I am now come to examine Mr. Goodwins assertion and probation thereof, all
along his whole treatise.

That which he asserteth is; that every heathen man to whom the letter of the
Gospel never came, is yet bound to believe in Christ, and that upon this
ground: because they have sufficient means by the creatures, and light of
nature, to discover Christ and the sum of the Gospel, as he says, almost as
often as he has pages: an attempt that none of his predecessors durst ever so
roundly and professedly make.

In the Examen of which, I must propound a few things by way of stating and
right understa^ding of the question in difference betwixt us.

First, when he says, those that never hear of the letter of the Gospel, are
yet bound to believe in Jesus Christ; I suppose by the letter of the Gospel he
understands the commands as well as the promises of the Gospel, the one is
Gospel as well as the other. Hence we find in the Scripture, obedience to the
Gospel, as well as faith of the Gospel: 2 These. 1.8
and indeed the commands of the Gospel are good news as well as any other part
thereof, they being evidences to us that God will again take us into his
service, and give us further work to do, when we deserve to be banished from
his face for ever. Then the question will arise to this, whether those that
never heard the letter of the Gospel, (viz.) neither the commands, nor
promises, nor any other part of that which we call the Gospel, are yet bound to
believe in Christ.

Secondly, he must not think that we confine the discovery of Christ and
salvation by him to the oral preaching of men, or that the question betwixt us
turns upon this hinge. I leave to the Almighty his liberty to use what means
he pleases to discover his holy will to men, I will thus far comply with Mr.
Goodwin, that whether men come to know God in Christ by reading any part of the
written word, or by hearing of it preached, or by immediate revelation of the
spirit of God, or by an angel, as to the shepherds, or by a voice from heaven,
as to Paul, these ways may all lay an obligation upon us to believe; but then
in all these they enjoy the letter of the Gospel. The matter betwixt us in
controversy is, whether those heathen who have only the light of nature and
the creature, and the works of common providence to direct them, have such
discoveries of Christ as that they become bound to believe in him. This is the
purport of Mr. Goodwins whole treatise, as I shall clear in some few instances.
Page 10.
In one place he says thus, [The Scripture intimates that all men by the
light of nature, by such a rational discourse can draw out this Evangelical
conclusion, that an atonement is made.] And in another place thus, [That
hearing by which faith comes, or which is sufficient to produce it, is the
hearing of the found, and those words which the heavens, Ibid.
and the day, and night speak. And the constant course of providence speaks in
the ears of all nations the words of eternal life, as well as those words of
Christ himself when he was upon earth.] And in another page thus, [The heathen
who only have the benefit of the light of nature, together with those
impressions of good and evil which accompany it, are and have been in such a
capacity of having the Gospel.] Wherein it plainly appears that whatever be
the praedicate, yet the subject about which all his whole discourse proceeds
is, A man having only the light of nature: and it needs must be so, because
otherwise what he says will not reach every man without exception: so that now
the controversy appears thus: Whether those stand bound to believe on Jesus
Christ who have no further discovery of Jesus Christ, then the light of nature,
works of providence, the book of the creatures, fruitful seasons afford unto
them? or whether these do make such a discovery of Christ to all men, as that
by it they are and stand bound to believe in Christ? Mr. Goodwin affirms in
both, I deny in both. I therefore address my self to examine his proofs.

It seems he was provoked to this treatise by a discourse written to him by a
Gentleman of worth and learning, so that several pages are spent in complements
and anti-complements, in which for me to trace him would be both irksome and
useless. That which first occurreth worthy to be taken notice of in reference
to the question, we find in the seventh and eighth pages of his treatise,
where in the close I find these words, Page 8.
[When God commands men to repent, certainly he does in the same command
them to believe, in as much as that repentance which he commands is
Evangelical.] Which words seem to carry in them the force of an Argument. But
herein, as all along, I am put to a double task, both to form his Arguments and
answer them: but I am not unwilling to do it, the argument therefore if
syllogistically propounded, must run thus, If God command all men to repent,
he commands all to believe in Christ.
But he commands all men to repent, Acts 17.30.



The proposition is grounded upon this, that no Evangelical repentance can be
without faith in Christ, as he contends. page 7.

The assumption is proved by Act. 17.30. And thus is he safely delivered of the
firstborn of his strength.

Before I answer distinctly to this uncouth and impertinent Argument, I must
premise a few things, that I may be rightly understood concerning Pagans
repentance. There is in every rational creature originally imprinted the love
of his maker, and thereupon the light of nature obliges to love God, which
love will show it self in obedience to his commands, and in case of a fall
into sin, this love calls for sorrow for that delinquency, and a displicancy
with our selves that we should offend our Creator, and incur his wrath; and
this I deny not to be a part of the eternal law of God and nature, lying on
all men, both living on earth, and lying in torments, yea, upon the devils in
their desperate condition, seeing that it is a duty required of every offending
creature as such, and if any shall call this repentance, I will grant that
there is an obligation lies upon all Pagans by the light of nature to repent;
but this is not Evangelical in order to life and salvation, which the Gospel so
frequently calls for, and in that cited text, Act. 17. given by M. Goodwin,
of which saving repentance and Evangelical, Mr. Goodwin directly and all along
speaks: and this is that repentance which I treat of, otherwise I should not
be pertinent to Mr. Goodwins assertions: and I desire to be understood as
speaking of this Evangelical repentance in order to life and salvation. And in
this sense I deny that Pagans are obliged to repent by the light of nature, and
Mr. Goodwins quoted text proves it not, for that text includes not Pagans, but
those to whom the Gospel comes, as I afterward show, neither does it speak of
the light of nature, only an Evangelical command: and if Mr. Goodwin would but
learn to conclude with the question, and make his conclusion thus, as it
should, [therefore all Pagans are bound to believe by the light of nature,] or
make his minor to run thus, [But God commands all men to repent by the light
of nature] his Argument would not be a birth but a miscarriage: and though
orthodox and good, yet impertinent and useless in his business. For to answer
more distinctly, I say,

Goodwin to seek in the rudiments of dispute, one of which is to conclude with
the question? which is not, whether all men be commanded to believe. But
whether those that never heard of the letter of the gospel be bound to believe?
The very conclusion of his Argument expressing a command to repent and believe,
supposes the enjoyment of the letter of the gospel except he will say that the
commands of the Gospel, are not the letter of he Gospel.

Secondly, to the assumption I answer, it is deniable in that sense, which he
must receive, if it do him any good. That is, that God commands all and every
man without exception, yea, those that have only the light of nature and not
the letter of the Gospel dispensed at all, further then by the creatures; but
this is false, and that text, Act. 17.30. speaks not any thing to this
purpose. And therefore Mr. Goodwin might with credit enough have suffered his
Antagonist in that Adage, Quid hoc ad Iphicli loves? with out that scurrilous
retortion of Balaams ass in exchange; but consider how hard a thing it is for
one of Mr. Goodwins spirit not to be at once both tart and impertinent: but in
this it gives us a taste of what we are to expect in the remains of his works.

3. To his Proposition, I have nothing upon mine own interest, but their
principles beget a scruple not easily satisfied, and we may doubt the
conclusive validity of it, it becomes not those of his way to explode a
repentance which is without faith in Jesus Christ; and this I prove many ways.

1 There is nothing more frequent with men of his way then this, to ascribe to
man certain preparatives to faith and regeneration, which will be found to
come little short of repentance; or however, can no more be granted as truth,
then repentance it self. Corvinus says thus, those that are pressed under the
burden of sin, and are weary, and thirst after Christ, and the saving grace by
him, are disposed to those benefits that the Lord conferreth on us by the
Gospel. And he being urged by his Antagonist that the desires of salvation,
the groans of a breathing conscience under the weight of sin, are parts of
regeneration, he thus replyeth, Hoc est (...) sunt effecta spiritus, sed non
regenerantis, at ad regenerantione^ praeparantis. Ibidem.
That is the question: they are the effects of the spirit, but not of the
spirit regenerating, but preparing to regeneration. Now taking this for
granted, as that which the joint suffrage of the Remonstrants declares, thus,
Statuimus e contra, audire verhum, doleri pro peccato commisso, gratiam
salutarem pettere, su^t necessaria ad fidem et regenerationem obtinendam. act.
Syn. page 1
We also determine, that to hear the word, grieve and sorrow for sin, to desire
saving grace, are necessary to the obtaining of faith and regeneration. If
these may be without faith and before it, why then may not repentance,
especially looking upon that definition which Arminius gives of repentance?
thus; It is a grief for sins acknowledged, and sorrow for the debt of death
and servitude contracted by them, with a desire of being freed. Which
definition of repentance has no more in it then those concessions give us
roundly to be found in men before, and therefore without faith.

2 It is ordinary with men of Mr. Goodwins way to affirm; that men may please
God by their works and improvements, before either Christ be propounded, or
they come to believe in Christ, as in the example of Cornelius, Poenitentia est
dolor pro peccatis agnitis, pro debito mortis and servitutis inde contracto,
cu^ desiderio liberationis. Armin. d^sp. priv. These. 43
Act. 10. and many other. And Mr. Goodwin himself Page 15. affirms that a
heathen man (before he have Christ revealed, and so necessarily before he
believe in Christ) may please God by his regular improvements of natural
abilities. But can Mr. Goodwin prove that God is pleased with any man before
repentance? If he did abominate the sacrifices of his people because their
hands were full of the blood of their sins, with whom shall he be pleased for
any improvements whatsoever without repentance? So that if they may please
without faith, and yet not without repentance; then repentance does not include
in it faith in Jesus Christ.

3 It is very usual with them to deny, that faith in Jesus Christ was ever
commanded to the fathers under the old Testament. Armin. resp. ad Art. 31
And this is no inconsiderable pillar of their doctrine, only faith in God was
required, by which they were carried on in all acts of religion and obedience
toward God. Art. 11.
And not the Remonstrants only, but Mr. Goodwin himself does not only
assert, but prove too, that the Jews of old believed on God only, not
explicitly on Jesus Christ, interpretatively only; thus ^e, page 37, 38. and
he proves it also from John 14.1. ye believe in God, believe also in me; whence
he makes it inconsistent with the text, to think that they in times past did
believe in Christ, except virtually, that is as he must understand it, as he is
one with that God in whom they believed; but explicitly as a mediator they
did not believe in him. Now if we consider the Jews not believing on Christ as
mediator, and yet repenting by express command, yea, and the Remonstrants are
angry if we say that Ahab did not truly repent, thus, Nulla ratione probari
possit, Achab^m Hypocritice resipuisse, sed ex animo, quia Deus magno munere
remuneravit cum. Act. Synod. art. 3. p. 1^5
No reason can be given to prove that Ahab did repent in hypocrisy, but rather
from his heart because God rewarded him; until Mr. Goodwin can give us some
competent intelligence of Ahabs believing in Christ, their own principles give
us occasion enough to scruple the consequence of his proposition, (viz) if God
command all men to repent, he commands them to believe in Christ. Thus have I
taken a survey of this first piece of his reason, and I am sorry that a man of
such professes and credit in the world, should assault us with such an argument
at the first dash, whose proposition cannot stand with his own principles,
whose assumption is inconsistent with truth, whose conclusion is nothing to the
question, and therefore I leave M. Goodwin to satisfy himself, whether
repentance be a work of the law, or of the Gospel, or of a third covenant. I am
not at all interested into these intergatories, page 7. it is sufficient for me
that it is not a work of the law of nature, and to prove it, I accept Mr,
Goodwins own grant, which is this, It cannot be the work of the law, for the
law knows no repentance, the tenor of the law is more district and
inexorable, Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not. Very Orthodox
and right; but how this serves his turn, will appear when he gives
satisfaction to us in this demand. If the positive law of God do not know or
admit of such a thing as repentance, Omnium hominum cordibus insculpsit Deus
aliquam sui cognitionem, and aliquam legem ad obediendam perswasiones, poenarum
metum et praemiorum spem. art. Synod. art. 20, p. 327
how can the law of nature bind us to repentance, there being no substantial
difference betwixt the law of nature and the laws of God, save only in the
manner of discovery. The positive law is a law outwardly given and commanded,
the law of nature is the same law inwardly written and imprinted in the heart.
Now if the one be enexorable and admits not repentance, why should the other
discover and command it? Suppose we admit the placita of the Remonstrants in
their latitude, thus, God has inscribed in the hearts of men some knowledge of
himself and a certain law, and persuasions to obedience, and hope of reward,
and fear of punishments, All which they produce as the product of the light
and law of nature, yet all these arise not so high as to command repentance;
for the positive law of God to Adam in integrity propounded all these, and all
these might agree with Adam then in his best condition; but then there was no
obligation lay upon him to repent, nor after, till he received the promise as
Mr. Goodwin himself in so many words professes in his Postscript: which here
(before we pass from this argument) falls under examination, and I find
something in it that will make this case more clear. It seems that the
Gentleman who wrote to Mr. Goodwin had affirmed, that Adam during the interval,
betwixt his fall and the promise, was under an obligation to repent; but who
ever it was, I hope he will not take it ill, if I leave it for him to prove. I
am so far confederate with Mr. Goodwin, as to think it a mistake. And here
comes in Mr. Goodwins postscript, wherein he earnestly contendeth by stresse of
Argument, that during that time he was under no obligation either of the
natural law or positive: I might well pass all this by as not appertaining any
thing at all to my self, yet I shall improve what he here affirms to my
own advantage in clearing the truth; That he was not bound by the law of
nature, he proves thus: If by the law of nature, then was it required in order
to his salvation, then there was a principle vested by God in the nature of man
to recover and save himself, and this principle to be carried over unmaymed
from the estate of integrity to the estate of sin, into which he plunged
himself, and then also to remain in the same vigor in his posterity, and so
every person of mankind to be in a capacity of salvation; and if so, then
Christ must have dyed for all without exception. His intentions in these
reasonings I cannot well divine, but what ever it be, I retort upon him thus;
if they be to overthrow the position of his adversary, as by so many monstrous
absurdities, he must know they are all his own; if otherwise he intend hereby
to gain upon his adversary in these deductions, and draw him by degrees into
his own tent by the ducture of these his own positions, then I thus argue,
Either all these are the genuine and legitimate inferences from his positions,
or not: if not, then he beats the air, and must cast about for another
postscript; if they be, then I demand an account why Mr. Goodwin ownes the
inferences, and yet disclaimes the Position from whence they genuinely flow;
when any one may easily see it to be more congruous to the whole purport of his
treatise to affirm it, then to deny it. Seeing it is his task to prove that
every man by the law of nature only is bound to believe and repent, which is
utterly out irrecoverably lost, if Adam in that interval was not bound to
believe or repent, in which he had the light of nature as much as ever after. I
might here propound an Argument of some considerable strength against his main
position, thus, If Adam was not tied by the law of nature to repent, then his
posterity is not. But he was not, Ergo, his posterity is not: But I shall
pursue this more pertinently when I answer his argument, whereby he proves that
the law of nature binds every man to repent and believe.

Thus having propounded his first Argument, in which he has done nothing in
relation to the controversy in hand, because he has not in it proved, that
God ever gave a command, or laid an obligation upon any such man or men to
repent, to whom the letter of the Gospel never came, either in the commands or
the promises of it. He yet can (before he begin handsomely to combat) triumph
as he does, Page 8, 9.
page 8. 9. where he concludes thus: From the premises it further appears,
that the Gentiles to whom the letter, the written letter of the Gospel never
came, and amongst whom the name of Jesus Christ (happily) was never named, yet in
sufficient propriety of speech, and largeness enough of truth, may be said to
have the Gospel preached to them, though not in that critical formality of the
signification of the word ((...)) and (praedicare) a dialect which the Holy
Ghost commonly neglects.

I wonder Mr. Goodwin does not blush that the world should see so much
weakness, falsehood and boldness come from him in one line.

1. What cause has he to say, that this he has now uttered, plainly appears
from the premises? was there ever mention made of the Gentiles who never heard
of the letter of the Gospel, or of the name of Christ, or of the preaching of
the Gospel to such? Let him, if he think good, form those premises and this
conclusion into an Argument, and I believe it will be of small strength.

2. What is it that does by the premises appear? I fea^ it is some such thing
as that not only, not by the premises, but not by all that Mr. Goodwin can
say, will yet appear. It is this, that they that never had the letter, the
written letter of the Gospel, or the name of Christ named, may yet properly be
said to have had the Gospel preached. But,

1. How cau^elous is he? (the letter, the written letter) surely he does intend
to play with this term (letter of the Gospel) as if we held that none are tied
to believe but they to whom the written letter comes, or as if it were his task
to prove that; more are tied to believe then they to whom the written letter is
come. I say again, it matters not how the discovery be made, by reading,
hearing a voice from heaven, an Angel from heaven, or any, which way God shall
choose, so that it be but beyond what nature discovers, it confirms us, and
overthrows him.

2. How miserably does he praevaricate and change the face of the question?
that which he is to prove, is, that they are bound to believe, to whom the
letter of the Gospel never comes: but he now deceitfully shaffles in an
Heterogenius expression, if he himself divine right, viz. [Or the Name of
Christ ever named:] Betwixt which and the former there is a wide difference; so
much, as that the one may be without the other, as he says, page 9. The Gospel
was preached to the ancient Jews, yet the name of Christ was not named amongst
them. Hereby he has this advantage, that we should think it his task to prove,
that they that have not the name of Christ named, are bound to believe; when
his assertion looks quite with another face: this is nothing ingenuous.

3. Whereas he says, ( they may be said in propriety of speech and largeness
of truth enough, to have had the Gospel preached I demand by what? and if Mr.
Goodwin should do to me as he did to Mr. Simpson in their conference, affirm a
sufficient means of believing; but think it besides the question to state it
what those means were, he might make me seek the preacher: but he is a little
more ingenuous, and tells us, Page 10.11.
that the heavens, the day, and the night, and the providence of God, rain, and
fruitful seasons. These are M^. Goodwins preachers, and that these are
properly said to preach the Gospel he affirms; wherein he excuses a heap of
falsities under the shelter of one intimated and employed truth. For anatomize
his assertion into these axioms; 1. The heavens preach. 2. They preach in
propriety of speech. 3. They preach the Gospel. 4. They preach the Gospel in
propriety of speech. One alone is true, and the rest very false. The first I
will easily grant, that the heavens are said to preach. For as the word (...)
which signifies (enerravit,) and is properly attributed to animate, and
rational creatures, as Psalm. 2. (...) I will declare the decree of God; Psalm. 2.
yet I find that it is also extended to the heavens. (...) the heavens declare
the glory of God So I grant that the word (...) which signifies to Cry, from
whence comes the word (...), and (...) the verb, which signifies to preach,
may also be extended to inanimate creatures, (though examples of it be very
rare:) yet will Mr. Goodwin say, that it is in propriety of speech? This would
cross both reason and interpreters: it is rather by the figure, called
Prosopopeia, as he well enough knows, wherein God in Scripture often produces
inanimate creatures as personating animate and rational; as when God is said to
hear the heavens, Hos. 2 Adhibet prosopopeia, fictionem personae, et ita
loquitur quasi coeli etter^a fuerant anima^a. Ribera in locum.
which intimates that the heavens call to God. Yet we have this Comment upon
the words, the Lord uses a Prosopopeia, (viz.) a fiction of the person whereby
he speaks, as if the heavens and the earth were animate creatures. And
Cornel. de Lapid, Although he be of Mr. Goodwins side, yet he does not help him
in this, for though he say they preach the Gospel, yet he would have it to be
no otherwise then allegorically and symbolically. And if Junius be of any
credit with him, he will read the 4th verse of the nineteenth Psalm which we
ordinarily read, Cornel. a Lapid. in Romans 10.18
there is no voice nor language where their voice is not heard: he reads it
thus; Non est vox nec est sermo, sine his tamen intelligitur vox coru^, Iun. in
Psalm. 19.4
they have no speech, no words, yet without these their voice is heard and
understood. And let Mr. Goodwin examine his reading by the original text, and
he gives us a further account of this his reading in his annotations, thus;
Prosopopeia emollit superiore^, et nobis docet ejus intelligentia^; non
loquuntur quidem ut homines, sed velut loquentes a nobis intelliguntur, ibid
he allayeth the forenamed Prosopopeia, and teaches us to understand it, they
speak not as men, yet they are to be understood by us as if they could speak.
Thus the propriety of Mr. Goodwins language vanishes into smoke; and it is
well he couples those two so handsomely together, (viz.) propriety of speech,
and largeness of truth, for indeed they are both of one size, there is no more
largeness of truth in this, That the heavens preach the Gospel; then propriety
of speech in this, That the heavens preach.

4. Whereas he says, the Holy Ghost neglects such a critical formality of
the word (...), and praedicare. I say again, that the word (...) being used at
large, may formatively be applied to inanimate creatures; but when it is
strictly taken, for (...), to preach the Gospel, until Mr. Goodwin produce one
example wherein the Holy Ghost does not confine it to those animate and rational
instruments whom he chooses for this purpose, and that beyond what the heavens
declare, I shall judge him guilty of gross forgery against the Holy spirit of
God.

But because this disrelishing pill will not down without a due preparative,
he gives us something more in the next words to facilitate our belief of the
former, in this manner.

The Gospel is said to have been preached to the ancient Jews, Heb. 4.26. Heb.
4, 2, 6
yet Christ was not by name preached unto them, nor known amongst them. And as
the rock out of which Moses, or God by Moses gave them water to drink, is said
to have been Christ, (viz.) in type and representation, and spiritually. In
like manner, yea with much more pregnancy of signification and revelation, the
patience and goodness of God vouchsafed to the heathen, may he termed Christ.]
In all which he seems to me to be deserting his first argument, yea, and his
first subject too, which was to prove, that all men are bound to beliave in
Christ; and now he is inclining to prove a sufficiency of means afforded to
all to believe: and this he seemed to assert in his expresses immediately
foregoing, wherein he told us, that every heathen man, though he had not the
letter of the Gospel, yet he might in propriety of language be said to have the
Gospel preached to him. Now these expressions are to make good this propriety
of speech. But then,

2. His ingenuity is blemished, in that he does so notoriously abuse his
readers in this so palpable a delusion, in that he alters the state of the
question to a quite different notion: at the first he propounded it thus, that
those that never had the letter of the Gospel were bound to believe. Afterward
he adjoined an expression of a different nature, and then it was thus; those
that never had the letter of the Gospel, nor yet had the name of Christ named.
And now he has utterly left out his o^iginal expression, and we have it only
thus; they who never had the name of Christ among them named. This is not
tolerable in any method of true argumentation, every line to bestow upon the
question, or assertion that is to be proved, a new face, especially seeing
there is such wide difference betwixt the having of the (letter of the Gospel)
and having the (naming of the name of Christ) as he himself grants, the one
may be without the other: Had he dealt ingenuously and fairly, he should have
expressed it thus; the Jews, who neither had the letter of the Gospel preached,
nor yet the name of Christ so much as named amongst them, yet they had the
Gospel preached to them. For otherwise, if both these expressions be not taken
in, how can they be pertinent to this purpose? viz. to illustrate and clear,
that the heathen who neither have the letter of the Gospel, nor yet Christ
named, may yet properly be said to have the Gospel preached? But the one of
these, and that which was most pertinent to the question in hand, he
fraudulently leaves out, because he knew his conscience otherwise would charge
him with much falsehood, and that from his own text, where it is said, the
gospel was preached to us, as it was to them; that is, to both, in the letter
and oral administration thereof. Heb. 4.2


3. His Divinity is blemished more.

1. In affirming that the Jews had not the name of Christ named amongst them.
And if Mr. Goodwin expect to carry it with such pregnancy of reason, that
because the Jews had not the name of Christ named, and yet were said to have
the Gospel preached to them, therefore these heathen that have neither Christ
named, nor yet the letter of the gospel, may be said to have the gospel
preached, why may not I make claim to this consequence, that seeing they were
said to have the gospel preached to them, and also to have the letter of it,
and Christ by name known amongst them, therefore it is more probable that
those, that either have the name of Christ, or the letter of the gospel, are
only said properly to have the gospel preached? therefore I say, in opposition
to Mr. Goodwin, that the ancient Jews in having the gospel preached, they had
Christ by name preached unto them. And the more am I provoked to a word or two
in this particular, because it will be useful to us in the point of faith in
Jesus, under the old Testament. Now I say, they had the name of Christ in the
due latitude and acceptance of the word (Name.) Mr. Goodwin, I hope, sees a
wide difference betwixt preaching the name (Christ) and preaching Christ (by
name:) as it is in one thing to preach or speak the name (God) and another
thing to preach God by name, for he has many names.

2. I premise this also, the question betwixt us will not be whether they were
well acquainted with the discoveries of Christ by his names; probably they
might not, and yet it be true that he was preached by name. As it was true that
God was preached to the Jews by name when he bad Moses say, (I am has sent
thee,) although they did not so well know him by that name: which being
premised, I thus proceed. As that is a man's name whereby he is known and
distinguished: ( nomen quasi noscimen, or notamen) so is Gods name, not only
the words (God) (Lord,) but the terms, (Almighty) (Jehovah) (I am) are Gods
names. So of Christ, we must not confine the name of Christ to the words
(Christ) or (Jesus,) but Counselor, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace,
Wonderful, Isai. 9.6, 7 Zech. 6.12 Isai. 11.1
Branch. And all these, the Scripture expressly says are the names of Christ,
as we may see in Isai. 9.6, 7. Zech. 6.12. His name is Wonderful, Counselor,
etc. Which last name, Branch, the prophet Isaiah expresses by the rod coming
forth out of the root of Ishai. Isai. 11.1. Now in that his name is the Branch,
we may conclude by the rule of proportion, that whatever expresses his
original is his name. So in that Counselor is his name, we may conclude any
thing that expresses any of his perfections is his name; in that Christ, and
Jesus, are his names, we may conclude that such expression as denote any of
his offices of mediation, are his names also; so that by this we may clearly
prove that the ancient Jews had his name preached upon all occasions, as Genesis
3.17. Genesis 3.17
The seed of the woman, etc. Why may not this pass for the name of Christ as
well as the branch out of the root of Ishai? seeing it is retained in Gods
promise to Abraham and Sarah, in thy seed shall all nations be blessed. Gal.
3.16 Deuteronomy. 18.15
And the Apostle retains this name, and applies it to Christ, Gal. 3.16. to
thy seed, which is Christ. So Deuteronomy. 18.15. prophetically Christ is there called
by the name of the prophet, and that prophet. Rev. 5.5 Genesis 49.8, 9
And why is not this Christ's name as well as Counselor? we read in Rev. 5.5.
Christ is called the Lion of the tribe of Judah; And was not this name
discovered unto the ancient Jews? Genesis 49.8, 9. prophetically? Genesis 49.10
Christ to come out of Judah, is set out to them thus, Judah is a Lions whelp.
And in Genesis 49.10. We find that the Scepter shall not depart from Judah, until
Shiloh come. Let Mr. Goodwin tell me whose name is that? do not interpreters
say, it is Christ's? Whether we deduce the word from Shalah, paciferum esse,
(...)
to be peaceble, or (peace maker,) it is his name as well as that of Isai, (...)
the prince of peace; or as others would have it from the word Shil, which
signifies a son; and the suffix, vau: and so to signify his son, it may pass
for the name of Christ, and is so, Heb. 1.4, 5. Heb. 1.4, 5
He has obtained a more excellent name, and this name is but this, thou art my
Son only. Yet further, Rev. 22.16. Christ is there called the bright morning
star, Rev. 22, 16 Numb. 24.27
and was not this preached to the Jews by Balaam prophetically? Number. 24 27. And
if these serve not, I further say, that not only Christ by name, but the very
name Christ was preached to them of old by David. Psalm. 2. 2. They assemble
themselves against the Lord, vegnal meshicho, (...)
which we read properly, against his Christ. Now Mr. Goodwin affirms and
proves too, page 44. that this Psalm is spoken of Christ, and he must confess
that here his name is preached. For Mashach in the Hebrew, (...).
whence comes Messiah, signifies to anoint, as well as the word (...) in the
greek, whence comes Christ, and these two words are both the same. John 1.41.
This is Messiah, which is by interpretation Christ, John 1.41 Matthew. 1.23 Isai.
7.14
and the time when the holy Psalmist preached this name was but four hundred
years after Moses: again, is not Christ called Emmanuel? Matthew. 1. And is he
not so called by name? Isai. 7.14. And this above a thousand years before
Christ was born? all this Mr. Goodwin had either not the divinity to know, or
not the candor and ingenuity to acknowledge, although it be so clear from the
words of the gospel, that those ancient words did directly and clearly lead to
Christ. As Peter applies the name of the Prophet to him, out of Deuteronomy. 18.15. in
Acts 3.22, and Philip to Nathanael thus spoke, We have found him of whom Moses
and the Prophets do write. John 1.45. Even Jesus of Nazareth. And Christ
himself, had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me.

But had Mr. Goodwin carried it at this turn, so as to prove that the ancient
Jews had neither the letter of the gospel, nor the name of Christ preached,
and yet could produce such a peremptory evidence upon record against us, from
Heb. 2.4. that the gospel was preached to them, what a plausible way had he
found out to make good that in the propriety of language, those heathen might
have the Gospel preached some way or other, although they neither had Christ by
name, nor yet the letter of the gospel preached to them? But he miserably
fails in all; yet let the evidence of the parallel prove how it will, he at a
venture, concludes, that; As the rock is said in type and representation to
have been Christ, in like manner, yea, and with much more pregnancy, and
neerenesse of signification is the goodness, and patience, and bounty of God
vouchsafed to the heathen to be termed Christ.

But why should Mr. Goodwin or any man usurp that licentious way of glossing
upon the oracles of God, that when the Scripture expressly says, the rock was
Christ; but no where says that the bounty and patience of God is Christ, yet
we shall say that the patience of God is to be called Christ in more pregnant
neerenesse of signification then the Rock. Do we not in these methods of ours
irreverently chastise the holy spirit of God, in that he does not call that
Christ, which indeed is so in a greater neernesse of signification, then that
which yet he expressly calls Christ?

2. When he says, (in like manner) can any rational man divine what he
means, that the patience and bounty of God is in like manner to be called
Christ? it must be as the rock was Christ, i e. in type and representation.
That is, the rock was a type and representation of Christ, but is the patience
of God so? I hope Mr. Goodwin shall never see that time wherein these types of
Christ, (viz.) the Patience and bounty of God shall be abolished. How that can
be called Christ in type and representation, which is for the Churches sake to
continue to the end of the world, that all should come to repentance, I leave
to him by his new lights to discover to the world.

Post legem, temporaria and extraordinaria Sacramenta fuerunt transitus per
mare rubrum umbraculum nubis, manna descendens e coelo aqua e rupe profluens,
quorum priora duo baptismo, posterio a duo coenae dominicae, respondent, test
Apostolo. 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4 Tylen. Syntag. 864 1. Cor. 10, 1. etc.
3. Suppose we should grant that the patience of God did signally discover to us
that atonement which is wrought out by Christ; yet will it not follow that it
may be termed Christ, with a more pregnant significancy then the rock, because
the rock, with several other things of the like nature, were sacramental to the
Jews, and so they not only were signs, as bare types, but seals to the
covenant of grace in Christ, as Tylenus tells us, The temporary and
extraordinary sacraments after the giving of the law, were passage through the
red sea, being under the cloud, Mannah coming from heaven, and the water
issuing out of a rock, the two former answering to Baptism, the two latter to
the Lords Supper. And what more clear from the Apostle then this? who reduces
the red sea, and the cloud, and baptism, and Supper of the Lord unto the same
in substance; and the red sea and the rock, to answer to our baptism and the
Supper of the Lord, in that he says, our Fathers were baptized in the sea. So
that what baptism and the Lords Supper are to us, the red sea and the water at
the rock was to them, (viz.) Sacraments, and so not only to sign, but to seal
the things promised in his covenant. Now is it according to the method of Mr.
Goodwins divinity, that the Patience of God, which has neither natural, nor
any instituted relation or tendency to signify Christ, should be called Christ
in more neernesse of signification then those things that were instituted
Sacraments to the Jews; and that in direct reference to Christ?

4. That which he says here, viz. The patience afforded to the heathen may in
a greater neernesse of signification be termed Christ then the rock, is no more
but what he elsewhere utters, and to this effect; that the heathen have more
pregnant means for the believing in Christ, then the Jews, and it is clear
from his constant reasoning; for he holds that [all that the Jews had afforded
them led them but hither, to believe in God, and not in Jesus Christ, except
implicitly and interpretatively, as he does page 37.38. But the heathen have
such means, (viz.) the patience of God, the light of nature, works of the
creation.] They have now sufficient means of beleiving in Christ, and to draw
out thence the very sum and substance of the gospel, as he does 10, 11, 12,
pages of his treatise assert. But will this pass for current in his divinity,
that God has nurtured up the heathen, who are wthout God and aliens, without
Christ, and hope, Heb. 2.12. with as pregnant discoveries of his son, and the
substance of the gospel, as as he did the Jewish church who were a peculiar
people to himself? Let henceforth all their privileges of the circumcision,
mentioned Romans 9.1, 2, 3. vanish into smoke.

But to pardon Mr. Goodwin this slip, and to look upon his words as not making
any comparison at all with the Jews, but only simply and absolutely thus,
that the patience of God, may be termed Christ. I expect that he proves how the
patience of God without the concurrence of the word to inform us of all things
concerning it, can discover Christ so far as that it may be called Christ. He
attempts to prove it by Romans 2.4. Because it is there said, the patience of God
leads us to repentance; but because this Text is produced afterward as a master
proof of the marrow of his discourse soon after produced. I say only thus
much now; the patience of God there spoken of, implies a concurrent word, and
so all ways whereby it may be known to be patience; and without which, it
cannot discover Christ; which word it is praesupposed by the terms of the
question in hand, the heathen have not: But let all go, Yet

Lastly, his reason is much blemished in arguing thus, the Jews were said to
have the gospel preached, therefore the heathen may; seeing that the Jews had
the letter of the gospel, and Christ preached by name, but the Gentiles had
not. Therefore let that propriety be granted to the Jews but denied to the
Gentiles, and the heathen whilst they remain so, and he will do his judgment
and reason a great deal of right.

Thus having toyled himself in proving that it may be said in propriety of
language, the heathen have the gospel preached, although they have not the
letter of the gospel preached, he now is sitting down to reap the fruit of
those labors, and now shows how the heathen come to draw out such Evangelical
conclusions concerning Christ, and salvation by him, without the letter of the
gospel; and indeed, having before broken the bone, here gives us the marrow of
his whole discourse, thus; God being by the light of nature known, or at least
knowable to be infinitely just, and bent in hatred against sin, when
notwithstanding he shall express himself in goodness, and patience, and
long suffering toward those that know themselves to be sinners: Hereby he
declares sufficiently that his justice and severity against sin, have been (and
this must be in reason supposed to have been in a way proportionably to so
glorious an effect) satisfied, and that he has so far accepted an atonement
for them, that in case they repent of their sins, and persevere in it unto the
end, they shall escape punishment, and so be saved; and what is this but (being
interpreted) to have (...), the effect of the gospel written in their hearts.

A very merciful ordinary for a heathen man! he cries legit, when God knows
he cannot spel one syllable. Here is a method cut out by a thread, wherein Mr.
Goodwin is in the right in two things. This is by interpretation the sum of
the gospel; and by this discourse, and regular progress, (if they could make
it) they may come to draw out the substance of the gospel, but if it be his
meaning that a heathen man by the light of nature only, can make this regular
discourse, and discover all these particulars. I fear it will need probation
more then interpretation, and that the world may take a little better notice of
it, they shall have a second view of it thus: Men may know by the light of
nature only, that God is just, and that it is just for him to punish sin
severely, then they may read themselves in the heavens to be sinners, and Gods
suspension of wrath to be patience and forbearance, and so read in the heavens
that his justice is satisfied; and that in such and such a way, and yet by such
a satisfaction that admits something to be done on our part ere we can enjoy
salvation, and then (ex multis possibilibus) out of the endless numbers of
possibles which God might out of his liberty have chosen to be man's duty. The
light of nature can presently fasten upon this duty of repentance, and cull it
out from all the rest, and that in the heavens is so legibly engraven the
doctrine of perseverance, that it must be also upon perseverance to the end. A
very fair progress, if it had but half so much truth as color; but I shall
presently show that no man can discover any one of those by the light of nature
only: this being the foundation of the whole, I shall with the greater
intention bend my self to the work, and take them all into examination in
order as they lie.

First he says, God is knowable by the light of nature to be infinitely just,
and infinitely bent against sin. But we find no such thing from any evidence of
Scripture: that something of God is to be known by the light of nature, the
Apostle allows; but what that is, or how far this is known by the creation,
Romans 1.20
I desire Mr. Goodwin to suspend his vote till we have heard the Apostle speak:
he tells us Romans 1.20. that the invisible things of God are seen by the
creation, viz. his eternal power and Godhead, he goes no further; not that I
think that no more of God is seen then the Apostle mentions; for his wisdom and
goodness, I conceive, is also pregnantly seen; yet he mentions enough to
preserve men from idolatry, and therefore contents himself with so much as is
sufficient to his intended purpose; yet we must observe also what kind of
attributes be mentions, namely, such as will naturally, and without any other
medium be concluded from the creation, by resolving all causes and effects into
their originals, as from creation we may presently resolve all into power, that
can bring a world out of nothing; into wisdom to make all in such a
stupendous order; and goodness in giving to every creature some rays of that
goodness which is in himself. We come now in the state of corruption to
gain the knowledge what God is, by the use of medium's, and they must be
pertinent ones also, as those things declare his power in which his power is
shown. But as for justice, where is that shown in the creation? Justice, and
mercy, and long suffering are such relative attributes that they are not
manifested or exercised in or upon man, except he be in a further capacity then
as merely created. We see God but in vestigiis, in his footsteps in the
creatures; now we cannot make so much as a conjecture of him where he has not
already set his foot: we may see his power in the creation, because in the
creation he has trodden in the path of his power: But how shall we by the
creation or light of nature see his justice, when creation it self cannot
appear, to be an act of justice? If Gods justice, and mercy; and longsuffering
were knowable by the light of nature, why did not God refer him to that when
Moses desired God to show him his glory? or, why needed Moses to ask that boon?
We find that his mercy, Exodus 33.19.34.6, 7
longsuffering, as punishing iniquity, as pardoning sin, was not knowable by
Moses (a man well versed in the creation, as a Historian,) until it was
discovered and revealed by a higher dictator then nature. Justitia Dei est
virtus Dei qua omnia recte juxta eo quod ipso convenire dictat sayientia ejus
administrat.

Arm. disp. Priv. These. 21.

Equitas est secu^dum quam a Deo omnia fiunt juxta non a^ et praescriptum sap
entiae ejus. Episcop. Part. 2. Disp. 9




2. Suppose that a heathen man could know by the light of nature that God is
just, (tanquam in actu primo) yet how can he know that his justice consists in
being infinitely bent in hatred and severity against sin? Let Mr. Goodwin (who
has greater advantages then the light of nature) show us what natural or
necessary rule of justice there is that ties God to be infinitely bent in
severity against sin. It is so generally received, that I may affirm it; his
wisdom is the rule of his justice: Arminius himself being judge, will over
rule this case, and he says, The justice of God, is the virtue of God, by
which he administers all things rightly, according as his wisdom thinks
convenient. And Episcopius (his second) will adjudge the same way, that which
Arminius called general justice, he calls equity, and thus says, The equity
of God is that whereby all things are done according to the rule, counsel,
prescript of his own wisdom. So that what in his wisdom he prescribes to
himself to do, and in his word declares, that he will do it according. Hic
videmus justitiam Dei retribuentem ex oratiosa promissione Dei, and ex justa
comminatione primum locum habere.
His justice binds him to do that, and that is just, and no other thing. So
that the justice of God which we call retribuent, which directly falls in
with the case in hand; retribuent I say, either of mercy upon obedience, or
punishment upon disobedience, takes place upon his declarations of those ways
and methods which his wisdom has presented concerning the sons of men, that
is, either his gracious promises or severe comminations. And this Arminius
himself will award for us, for he says expressly thus; Here we see the
retribuent justice of God, first to take place from the gracious promises and
just comminations of himself. Romans 1.17
And this is no more then what we are forced to by the very dint of Scripture,
the apostle tells us, To. 1.17. That the righteousness of God was revealed in
the gospel, and the wrath of God is revealed from heaven, that is, as the
Apostle there takes it, a reward of mercy for faith, and a punishment of
severity for sin and sinners, yet both these are justice. God having prescribed
this way to himself, and declared it to us in the gospel, that he will so
reward the faith of believers, Romans 3.26
and severely punish the obstinacy of impenitents. So that to justify
believers is an act of divine justice. Romans 3.26. that he might be just, and
the justifier of them that believe. So also to punish sin is divine justice,
hence it is called the just recompense of reward. Heb, 2.2. Heb. 2.2
The justice of God looks not all one way upon sinners; his justice binds him
as well to punish as to pardon sinners according to his own prescribed rule;
that is, to pardon penitent sinners as well as to punish obstinate sinners,
Hence John says, Epist. 1.1.9. If we confess, he is just to forgive; These
premises I would improve thus far.

1. To discover Mr. Goodwins improvident expressions in making Gods justice,
and his being bent upon severity against sin to be terms equipollent, when his
being bent against severity, is equally his justice, if his wisdom prescribe,
and to so many as he is pleased to do it.

2. To prove, that, seeing the justice of God takes place from the
prescriptions of his wisdom, and declarations of the same, I say, that till
such prescriptions and declarations be known, we cannot divine what is just or
unjust for him to do: Therefore until Mr Goodwin can prove that the heathen
which never had the letter of the gospel do yet know those prescriptions and
declarations of the Almighty, whereby he prescribes himself to be bent in
severity against sin, I shall conclude, they cannot by the mere light of
nature come to know God to be either just, or bent in severity against sin. And
that they are not so intimately acquainted with Gods secrets by the light of
nature, I am enduced to conclude, because the Apostle tells us, that his
righteousness is revealed in the gospel, his wrath against sinners is revealed
from heaven; but I am taught to think that the spirit of God was never found so
to daily with his own Oracles, as to say, that that which is discovered by the
light of nature, is either revealed in the gospel, or from heaven.

Romans 2.15.
2. The second parcel of this his rational discourse, is this, they know
themselves to be sinners: I shall not make much stir about this, because in
general sense it may be granted, and that from Romans 2.15, their consciences
excusing or accusing one another: now accusing consciences, imply a guilt and
acknowledgement of some delinquency against the law of God. But yet the
business will be something more difficult as to this pretended discourse of a
heathen man; for it is not enough for him to know, that he is a sinner against
the law of nature, but against some positive law of God, which was attended
with such a severe penalty, as dying the death. He must know that this law was
so broken by him as that he becomes guilty of eternal death, and lies now
concluded under an irrecoverable curse without a Savior, and a forfeiture of
all that he can call good, which can never by himself be regained; otherwise
how shall Gods providence appear to him under the notion of patience, Romans 1,
2, 3, 4, 5
and so the Heathen man must be distinctly acquainted with the history of Adams
integrity, fall, and ruin, Gods law, man's sin, and man's curse, and is this to
be done merely by the light of nature? Certainly then the Apostle took too
much pains to convince them, that both Jews and Gentiles were under sin. In
the first part of his Epistle to the Romans, how he beats the air to read
such superfluous Lectures to them, as he does in the 5th Chapter, that by one
man sin entered, and by sin death, in whom we all have sinned: when all this
and much more is known by the mere light of nature and common providence.
Again certainly, then the words of the Apostle want weight, when he says,
Romans 3.19
What the law says, (that is the positive) it says to them that are under the
law, that all mouths may be stopped, and the whole world become guilty before
God, Romans 3.19. if that all men's mouths may be stopped, and they be found
guilty before God by the dictate and light of nature.

3. The third parcel of this discourse, They see him express himself in
patience, goodness and bounty. I suppose still he intends this by the light of
nature: but then I wonder why he thus fallaciously shuffles in terms of a
Heterogenious nature; that may well be admitted in his sense, underhand to
gain credence to that which cannot upon the interest of truth be received;
goodness and bounty he shows in the creation; Praedestinatio non tantum
facta est ex bonitate simpliciter co^siderata, cujus est seipsu^ communicate
cum creaturis, sed ex modo misericordiae in miseros, and patientiae and
longanimitatis erga reluctantes ex eadem bonitate prodcuntis Armin. examen
Perkin page 16
and by the creation it self only we may come to see his bounty and goodness
in communicating himself unto the creatures: but patience and longsuffering
are gifts of another nature. Goodness simply considedered was reached out to
Adam in innocence, but patience is not extended to any but to sinners: this
Arminius grants, when he treats upon predestination, saying thus:
Predestination is not made out of mere goodness absolutely considered, which
is a communicating of himself to the creatures; but it is after the manner of
mercy issuing from compassion toward men in misery; and of patience and
longanimity toward them that hang back and hearken not to his call. So that
goodness and patience are distinguishable in their own judgment; therefore
it will not follow, that because they may discover goodness, therefore they
may discover patience and forbearance by the light of nature. This has such a
dependence upon the former, that I say only thus much here, that except an
heathen man can see himself a sinner, and so concluded under the weight of
such a cursed death, he cannot see any act of God to be Patience.

4. The fourth step in his pretended rational discourse, is this; This
testifies and delareth that his justice and severity against sin has been
satisfied, and that he has received an atonement. But I say, on the other
side, that let him take all the forementioned particulars for granted: yet how
do they rationally declare a satisfaction or an atonement? There is no small
difference between these two; though patience did argue an atonement, yet it
does not, satisfaction: but I say it does neither. First, not atonement,
execution is sometimes deferd, not because the malefactor is pardoned, but
only reprieved. A provoked master is long ere he take an account, and smite;
not because he has remitted the crime, but rather because he would have the
rounder score, and give the greater stroke. I contractial into this one
argument which I prove by one scripture.

If the patience of God afforded to obstinate sinners does not infer that he
has received an atonement for their obstinacy, then the patience of God
extended to heathens cannot infer that God has received an atonement for
their sins.

But the patienc of God extended to obstinate sinners does not rationally infer
that he has received an atonement for that their obstinacy.

Ergo the patience of God afforded to the heathen does not infer an atonement.

The proposition is ground thus; if patience does of it self infer an
atonement, then it must by the rules of reason follow, that he has atonement
for all those sins and obliquities, in reference to which he is said to be
patient. Romans 9, 22.
The minor I prove by Romans 9.22. where the Apostle says, Vasa irae non sunt
omnes promiscue peccatores, sed ex mii prae caeteros peccatores, qui in omnibus
peccatis iram sibi the saurizant acinde interitui proximi sunt. Corv. in Mal.
Cap, 14 Sect. 11.
what if God willing to show his wrath, and make his power known, endures the
vessels of wrath sitted for destruction with much patience? More then
intimating, that God bears with patience vessels of wrath, When yet he is
willing to make his wrath and power known. Nay, the text seems to incline to
something more, (viz.) that he endures them with the more patience, that he
might make his wrath and power the more remarkable. Which Text I confess is
the seat of much controversy, but I intend not after that manner to pursue it;
I shall only take it as our adversaries would, and improve their gloss to my
intended purpose; Vasa irae sunt qui conditionem transgrediuntur, noc
transgredi desisterent. Arm. exam, Perk. 29 4.

Tum vasa irae a Deo tolerati dicuntur qusi statuit and velit iram suam
potenter in cos effundere. Corv. in Mol. cap. 14. Se. 11. Armin. antiper. 5^


and the rather, because their testimony is something convincing, to that be it
so as they would have it, that these vessels of wrath are, as Corvinus says,
not sinners barely, but such as are in sinning beyond the rest, and by their
enormous courses treasure up wrath against themselves. Or as Arminius, not
only such as transgress, but transgressing persist. Nay, let them be what
they will, who are here called vessels of wrath, the business: will not stick
here: but let us consider further; that he then endures with much patience.
When; Let Corvinus himself speak; Then does God bear with much patience the
vessels of wrath, when he at the same time wills to power out his wrath
mightily upon them. Now this is clear both by testimony of the Scriptures and
our adversaries, that God affords much patience to the vessels of wrath, then
when he wills to power out his wrath mightily. I demand, to what end is that
patience afforded? Arminius will gratify us with what we desired. In
excusability is rather the event then the end of patience and admonitions,
except it be to the obstinate and refractory. So that he grants that to the
obstinate and vessels of wrath, his end is to make them the more inexcusable,
To conclude then, does God will to power forth his wrath mightily at the same
time, and upon the same person, when, and for whom he has received an
atonement? Indeed this often passes for one of Mr. Goodwins Oracles, but
never for an Oracle of Gods. A receiving the atonement, and a will to power
forth his wrath mightily, are inconsistent, but patience and that will to power
forth his wrath may feed and lie down together. By this I prove that patience
does no ways infer an atonement.

But suppose it could infer an atonement, yet could not discover a
satisfaction; there are many ways for God to be attoned to man, and not to
exact or receive satisfaction, as it is strictly taken for receiving the rigor
of the law, either of the surety or of the principal. It is strange to me that
the dim light of nature should so presently discover that God could not be
attoned to man without man's satisfaction, especially considering that this
question, viz. (Whether God could pardon sin and save the sinner without
respect had to the satisfaction of Christ,) has exercised the choicest heads
in the Church of God. And those of Mr. Goodwins own side have given this for
granted, that if the right power of saving be considered absolutely in God,
then God could save a sinner without the satisfaction of Christ. And I desire
Mr. Goodwin, who has more then natural light, so far to patronize his heathen
clyents, as to educe some of those evidences by which the patience of God
infers satisfaction. Nay, so far is it on the other side, that it cannot
appear consistent with reason, that any person should have received
satisfaction and yet be properly said to be patient; if any man have received
so much as justice and equity can require, He cannot be said to exercise
patience: this is a mystery into which Mr. Goodwins doctrine does necessarily
involve him, which I expect he should unfold without plowing with the heifer of
the Gospel.

5. The fifth step to this pretended rational discourse is this, they may know
that he has so far accepted an atonement for him, that if they repent of
their former sins, and in repentance persevere unto the end, they shall escape
punishment, and so be saved. The progress is very high, not only to atonement
and satisfaction themselves, but to their several modifications and
restrictions. Most stupendous riddles that deserve rather to be hissed at then
either to be believed or solicitously refuted. For,

1. Put the case they could discover a satisfaction, yet by what natural medium
could they prove that something is to be done on our part to come to salvation?
Is there any natural import in the term (satisfaction) that may present a
heathen man with his further duty? nay, does it not rather seem to exclude it?

2. But give him this, that something is to be done on our part, yet how does
it naturally appear that this duty must needs be repentance? there is no
natural cognation betwixt satisfaction and repentance. Nay, the command of this
macerating duty of repentance affords some ( Mr. Goodwin knows well whom) an
occasion to attribute an incomplete satisfaction to Christ in his own person:
there is nothing but the free constitution and appointment of God that can lead
to such a duty as repentance; and this the Remonstrants gives us without any
difficulty, thus; Pro liberti^ luo arbitram ex multis possibilibus unam cerra ^
rationem statuit, secundum quam servare velit nullamque aliam causam habuit,
praeter pura^ putam Dei volu^tatem, cut caux seligire ex eo aliarum rerum
ordine, volucrit. Script, Synod. 556
Out of his most free choice from amongst many possibles he has pitched upon
one certain way, according to which he will save men, and for which there can
be no other cause given but the pure freedom of his will. But that is new
divinity, that the light of nature, and the heavens with the rest of the
creatures are become the declarers of the arbitrary and free constitutions of
the Almighty. God may say in this case, as in Isa. 44.7. (who as I shall call
and declare it, and set in order for me the things that are to come to pass.)
but to come to a close, I shall in a line or two engage him with two Arguments
only, to prove that the light of nature cannot discover to the heathen life
upon the duty of repentance

But the duty of repentance, the light of nature could not discover to Adam
after his fall.

Therefore the light of nature cannot discover it to the heathen.



The proposition is grounded upon his own words in his postscript, thus; I see
no difference in this case betwixt Adam and his posterity.

The minor or assumption is also his own; he says in his postscript, that
there was no command to repent, nor any thing of that import until the promise,
and therefore he was not obliged to repent. And if the premises be both his,
the conclusion must be his.

What the Apostle could not discover, who had the advantage both of the light
of nature, and the letter of the Gospel; the light of nature only cannot
discover to the heathen.

But the Apostles by the light of nature, and letter of the Gospel, could not
discover life for the Gentiles upon repentance.

Therefore the light of nature cannot discover life upon the duty of repentance
to the heathen.

The proposition is grounded upon this principle, what a double advantage
cannot do, a single one cannot do alone.

The minor is clear from Acts 11.18. indeed in all the tenth and eleventh
Chapters wholly.

Thus have I touched upon every parcel of his pretended rational discourse,
that a heathen may (as he says) make by the light of nature, and after
examination it appears that without his officious suggestion, he could not
read one syllable of it. I have been the shorter, because I expect the
provocation of his reply, and I have said so much, because it is the foundation
of his whole Treatise.

But because Mr. Goodwin knows that it matters not what negotiating and busiy
heads assert, but how they prove, he gives us a text or two, or some few to
prove all this, which he seems to pretend a serious examination of; I shall do
the like, and thereby be enabled to survey both his understanding and ingenuity
at once. Now this I observe in the superficial survey of them all, that they
are all of them impertinent to this business; for any that has but an
indifferent exercise of his reason, may see that all those Scriptures which are
produced as proofs for his assertion, must expressly point at the want of the
letter of the gospel, and also at the clear tie and obligation particularly to
these duties, (viz.) to believe and repent. But all his Scriptures produced by
him fail in one of these two, either clearly implying the letter of the gospel,
or else not arising so high as believing and repenting, as shall presently
appear.

Romans 10.18
The first text by which he proves his assertion is, Romans 10.18, but I demand,
have they not heard? yes verily, their sound is gone through all the world. By
which he proves, that a heathen man without the letter of the gospel may be
enabled to discover an atonement; and a very futilous and absurd consequence
we have at the first entrance. The text says, have they not heard? and yet
this is produced as a proof, that those that never heard of the letter of the
gospel are yet bound to believe in Jesus Christ. But I suppose this business
will stick here betwixt us, whether this hearing, mentioned in this chapter, be
meant of hearing by the oral administration of the word, or hearing the voice
of the heavens and the creatures? We are for the former, he is strong for the
latter, in these words. Page 10.


The Apostle shows by what hearing Faith comes, or at least what is sufficient
to produce Faith, it is the hearing of that sound, and those words which the
heavens, the day, and the night speak, as appears by those words taken out of
Psalm 19.4. And the Apostle further says, that that sound, and those words
uttered by the heavens, are the words of eternal life as well as those words
which our Savior himself spoke on earth, only not so clearly and plainly
spoken. In all which, we have first his interpretation. S^condly, his
illustrative confirmation. Thirdly, his ground and reason. His interpretation
is thus; the hearing, mentioned in Romans 10. is the hearing of the sound of the
heavens, the day, and the night. His conformation is this; those words and
sound of the heavens, are the words of eternal life as well as those words that
Christ spoke on earth. His ground and reason is, because (the Apostle uses the
expressions of the Psalmist, Psalm. 19.4.) where that text relates to the sound
of the heavens. His interpretation I challenge with insolent forgery. Secondly,
his illustration with impious blasphemy. Thirdly, his reason with weak and fond
absurdity, all these charges I shall make good against him in their order.

1. His interpretation is an insolent forgery against a clear text, and this I
prove. First, by the current of Interpreters. Secondly, by the testimony of the
best of his own side. Thirdly, by the expresses that drop from his own pen.
Fourthly, by the opening of the text and chapter all along.

1. It appears a forgery against a clear text, if we reflect upon the
unanimous suffrage of interpreters against him. It would seem a prodigy in any
but Mr. Goodwin, to obtrude upon a text such an interpretation, to which upon
the least color of reason we are not lead by the least syllable, and neglect
another to which every word almost does safely lead us. What one expression in
the whole chapter gives the least encouragement to this interpretation? as the
heavens, the day, or the night, Reprehendit Iud^orum incredulitatem, et
publicationem evangeclii amplific^t per coelorom sonum. Pet. Martyr in loc.
or any thing to that purpose mentioned in all that subject about which the
Apostle treats, but of the letter of the Gospel in many verses, particularly
in verses 15, 16, upon which this immediately follows, faith comes by
hearing, and this question, have they not heard?

Now it may help much in this difficulty (if there be any in it) to consider
the persons of whom this question proceeds, whether of the Jews, or
Gentiles, or both jointly. Mr. Goodwin knows well that interpreters are very
much divided, and that to dissatisfaction herein, Junius. Beza. Deodato.
Galvin. Paraeus. Cornel. a Lapid.
Some are for the Jews, as Peter Martyr, who says, he reprehendeth the
infidelity of the Jews, and amplifieth the publication of the Gospel by the
sound of the heavens; and many are of his judgment, as Iunius in his
Parallels, Beza, the learned Deodate. Others are for the second, viz. for the
Gentiles. Calvin is very express, and Paraeus leaves it only in doubt, A third
sort are for all promiscuously, Jew and Gentile, as Cornel. de Lapid. and those
that are of his mind. But for my part, I shall not solicitously contend to
extricate my self out of this difficulty, for whether it be meant of the Jews
alone, or particularly of the Gentiles, or both mixed; to me the case seems to
return to the same issues: for if the Gentiles be taken in either junction or
division, it must be understood de Gentibus vocatis, of the Gentiles that were
called, that is, by the letter of the Gospel orally preached, and effectually
moving them to believe, as appears Romans 9.24, wherein he opens a fair way to
what he afterward in cap. 10, utters in these words, even us whom he has
called, not of the Jews only, but of the Gentiles; and of such Gentiles he
speaks, verse 30, who had obtained the righteousness of faith, which
righteousness of faith comes by the word of faith preached by the Apostles.
Romans 10.8. Now if it appear, that it be spoken of either, the Jews, or
those Gentiles that were called by the Gospel, then will it be a very
impertinent proof to fortify his assertion, which is, that those that never
had the letter of the Gospel are yet bound to believe. And by the ducture of
the method of the Apostle I affirm. First, that that hearing by which he says
faith comes, is not the hearing of the sound of the heavens, but of the Gospel
orally preached. And secondly, Laus ministeritrepetitur, loquitur Paulus non de
interno auditu, sed de exteerna praedicatione ad quam apostoli mussi erant.
Pet. Martyr. in loc.
that the question, have they not heard? means not the sound of the heavens,
and the creatures, but the sound of the letter of the gospel. Mr. Goodwin
affirms the contrary in both, I examine whether his judgment or mine has
the best countenance from interpreters; I fear he has but small, for I wonder
that Mr. Goodwin, who is so prodigal of his quotations in matters that no whit
at all concerns him, should not produce one in this, which if he could carry
on with strength and authority, be might presume to build his whole fabric
upon it as upon a sure foundation. Let him consult with Galvin, and though he
be his greatest Patron in that his exposition, yet he shall find him confuting
him sufficiently, Est notabilis locus de efficacia traedicationis, no tandum
enim est Dei doctrim a fide^ fandari, non ex qualibet doctrina fidem otiri, sed
nominatim restringit ad Dei verbum. Haec omnia non obsta^t quin Deus per
hominis vocem efficit ut in nobis fidem creet. Calvin, in loc.
Faith comes by hearing, this is a notable place of the efficacy of preaching,
and it is to be noted that faith does not arise out of every doctrine, but by
name he restrains it to the word of God. And by this he means the word
orally preached, as appears by his adjoining words; These hinder not, but that
God does efficaciously work by the voice of a man, that he might create faith
in us.

Peter Martyr is express against him, the praise of the ministry is here
repeated, and Paul speaks not of the internal word or hearing, but of the
external preaching to which the Apostles were called.

Beza in his annotations is against him thus; faith comes by hearing, that is,
as in Isaiah 57.19. faith is the fruit of the lips. And that he means by it
oral preaching, appears by his after word Fides est ex auditu, hoc est, quod
dicitur Isa. 57 19. fidem esse f^uctum labioru^. Auditus est ex verbo, ie, ex
mandato Dei a qun mittuntur i^ qui illud praedicant Beza in Annot. in loc.
, thus; hearing by the word, that is, by the command of God by which they are
commanded that preach the Gospel.

Bullinger in his comment, says thus; Fides est ex auditurjam quia illu^ per
prophetas abunde habu stis, non habetis quo peccato vestro praetexatis.
Bulling. in loc.
faith comes by hearing, that is, because ye have had this abundantly by the
Prophets, ye have no cloak for your sin.

Deodate expressly refers his interpretation as if he had purposely met
with it, who in his annotations says, Faith is by hearing, not resolved into
natural principles, or discourse of reason, but only by the declaration that
is made thereof to men.

Cornel. e Lapid. though one of his own side, gives his testimony full
against him: Inde sequitur quod fides qua credimus Christo and evangelio esse
exauditu, pura per praedicationem apostolorum cui m^ssi^e^ant ad praedicandum.
Cornel e Lapid in loc.
therefore it follows, that this faith by which we believe in Christ and the
Gospel is by hearing, namely, by the Apostles who were sent to preach as his
Ambassadors,

Rivet amongst the rest, in his Comment on Psalm. 19.4. citing this text of
Paul, Romans 10.18. though he think it meant of the heavens, yet he says, the
Apostle by it proves that they had the Gospel, because Amplificatio gratiae Dei
per coelos amplio. i evangelicae doctrinae praeludisi. Rivet. in loc.
the patefaction of the glory of God by the heavens was but praelude to the
more ample knowledge of the Gospel. What should I produce more evidences upon
such an unequal balance? when he shall prove his interpretation but by the
mouth of two sufficient witnesses, which is as little as can be in a business
of so great importance, I shall say more; but hitherto it does not appear that
that hearing, by which the Apostle says, faith comes, is the hearing of the
sound of the heavens, but of the oral preaching of the Gospel.

And as for that other question, have they not heard? Interpreters give it of
the letter of the gospel: as for the words, that follow ( yea verily, their
sound is gone out through the world, Some, as Calvin and Pareus, with some
others, would have them to relate only to the heavens, and the volume of the
creatures; yet in such a sense as will not serve Mr. Goodwin at all; for those
latter words they say are as an argument to prove, that God had and would
dispense the Gospel to those Gentiles to whom he had from the beginning given
means of the knowledge of himself by the creatures, so that the latter clause
is brought to prove that they had certainly heard the letter of the gospel,
which is the thing which the former question seems to demand, yea, and
vehemently to affirm. Have they not heard? It is as much as (yes verily) they
have heard, and that the gospel orally preached, and thus interpreters
generally give it.

Paraeus thus, Vbsque terratu^ praeconio apostolotum nunciatum est evangel^um.
Paraeus in loc.
[ the gospel is preached by the Apostles all the world over.]

Piscator thus, Apostelus recitat per allusi^ne^ verba Psalmi, quae proprie de
coelis loquuntur, sed Paulus de apostolis usurpat, and evangelii
praedicationem, and sensus est, non minus son^sse per totum orbem quam coeli
praecones. Piscat. in loc.
[ the Apostle recites by way of allusion the words of the Psalmist, which are
properly spoken of the heavens, but the Apostle speaks of the preachers of
the Gospel, that they have sounded through the world.]

Peter Martyr thus, Paulus volens amplificare publicationem evangelii, alt,
nonne audiverunt Dei praecones qu^ sunt instar coelorum? hic habemus, nec
allegoriam, sed metaphoram Peter Martyr in loc.
[ Paul willing to amplify the publication of the gospel, says, have they not
heard the preachers of God, which are as the heavens, and so we have not an
allusion, nor an allegory, but a metaphor.]

Tossanus thus, Simpliciter ai^ in omnem terra^^ exivit sonus eorum, i e.
evangelizantium pacem in montibus de quibus supra egerit, cesensus est, non
minus evangelii quam coelorum sonum sonuisse Tossanus in loc.
[ he says simply, the sound of (them) is gone out through all the earth, that
is, of those that bring the glad tidings of peace, of whom he had spoken
before, and the sense this; the found of the Gospel is no less diffused then
the sound of the heavens]

Millet in his Hexapla, thus; [ The Psalmist speaks literally of the heavens,
but prophetically of the Apostles, and Paul uses those words as denoting the
accomplishment, and though this place be meant of the Gentiles, yet it is also
meant of the sound of the gospel.]

Deodate speaks thus; ["Is it because they have not heard? No, "for like the
Sun, the Gospel runs all over the world.

Junius in his parallels thus; Verbum ipsum De et doctrina^ evangelii fuisse
propositum Iudaeis, non in angu lo, sed in publico in toto mundo and per
apostolorum ministerium. Junius Paral. par. 19.
[ The word of God, and doctrine of the gospel was propounded to the Jews not
in a corner, but in public as before the sun, through the whole world, and
that by the ministry of the Apostles.]

Cornel. a Lapid. thus; [ Nonne de facto auditum haberent? nonnt evangelium
audiverut omnes gentes? imo audiverunt. Cornel. a Lapid. in loc,
Have they not heard indeed? have not all "nations heard of the Gospel? yea,
they have heard.] And if Mr. Goodwin will undertake to use authority in this,
let him address himself to it, he shall be followed: (...); only I desire
him to quote the words themselves, that I may examine their testimonies. And
till he bring more to assert his cause, then I have done to overthrow it; I
must conclude his interpretation a mere forgery against a clear text, and so
adjudged by consent of interpreters.

2. His interpretation appears to be a forgery against a clear text, so
adjudged by the Remonstrants, and the best of his own fide. The Collocutors at
the conferenc at the Hague, in answer to our 5th argument, answer thus;
Propositio ista ut a fratribus co^cepta est (scilicet) evangelium non omnibus
praedicari, apertis scripturis contradicitur. Romans 10, 18. vocem Apostolorum
per totum mundum ivisse. Collat. Hag. 180.
[ That proposition as it is formed by our brethren, viz. the gospel was not
preached to all men without exception, is contradicted by clear Scriptures,
Romans 10.18. the voice of the Apostles is gone out through the world.] In which
text they do confess that this word (them) in the text, (the voice of them)
is to be understood of the Apostles, and therefore they read it not the voice
of (them,) but the voice of the Apostles. Now whether they did use this word as
the text, or as the Comment, let Mr. Goodwin examine, or whether of the two be,
it is sufficient against him. Corvinus upon the same argument says thus; [ How
the Apostles are said to preach the gospel to every creature, as in Col. 1.24.
Romans 10.18. Mark. 16.21. it is necessary for us to enquire, though the words be
clear.] Wherein he grants, that it is clear, that the sound of the Apostles
went through all the world, and that from this very text, Romans 10.18. Therefore
certainly this text is not meant of the sound of the heavens, but of the
gospel, and that as preached by the Apostles.

3. And is not his own judgment as clear? if we may gather his judgment out
of his writings, and it will appear a mere forgery against a clear text
adjudged by the expressions that come from his own pen. To this purpose I
desire Mr. Goodwin to consult the 32, 33, 34. pages of his treatise, page 32,
33, 34.
where he takes occasion to handle this very text, but very unhandsomely for
his purpose, in which pages he makes an abrupt transision from his propounded
business in page 31. page 31.
to the oral preaching of the Gospel by the Apostles, and his intention is to
prove that their preaching of it in some eminent places is virtually and
constructively the preaching of it to the whole world, as he says page 34. Now
to this purpose he models those demands, To. 10.16. How shall they believe on
him in whom they have not heard? How shall they hear without a preacher? Mr
Goodwin says, that the import of those interogatories, is this; That they were
not like to hear of God, or of Jesus Christ in the gospel, had there not been
some one or more to have preached and published it to the world. Thus in page
33. and when in page the thirty fourth, page 33
he asserts that the Apostles had orally preached the Gospel virtually and
constructively through the whole world, he proves it by this very text, Romans
10.18. verily their sound is gone out through the world. But certainly if this
text, page 34. clearly signifies the constructive oral preaching to the whole
world by the Apostles, it is very weakly produced in the 10. page to prove that
the hearing there mentioned is the hearing of the sound of the heavens. And if
he say in one place, that the text is meant of the Apostles preaching; I wonder
he is of such an untamed forehead to forge such a sense against the text, as to
say that by hearing, is meant the hearing of the sound of the heavens, and the
day, and the night.

4. His interpretation is a mere forgery against a clear text, if we look
only to the genius of the whole chapter, which undoubtedly proceeds of the
oral preaching of the gospel, as ver. 8. this is the word of faith which we
preach; and ver. 11 it is the scripture, not the heavens that speak: and thus
till it come to ver. 14. to those interogatories, how shall they believe on him
in whom they have not heard? how shall they hear without a preacher? And that
all these interogatories are understood of the oral preaching of the gospel, if
Mr. Goodwin did not acknowledge it page 31, 32. I should easily prove it. Some
I confess may be so perverse, but none so blind as to think that those words,
(preaching,) (hearing,) (word,) (gospel,) (believing,) so often repeated in
this chapter, are not understood, and relate to the oral preaching of the
Gospel, and in the letter of it. And thus till he produce further proof on all
hands, we shall conclude his interpretation a mere forgery against a clear
text, and so adjudged against him by the current of interpreters, the judgment
of the best of his own side, his own expresses, and the clear genius of the
whole chapter.

2. Having examined his interpretation, I proceed to the confirmation and
illustration of his interpretation: He would establish it by affirming that the
voice of the heavens, and the night, and the day, and the words which they
speak, are the words of eternal life, as well as those which Christ himself
spoke when he was upon earth: which I charged with impious blasphemy, and
proceed thus to make it good. If to affirm any thing from Christ that
derogateth either from the dignity of his person or office, be truly to be
termed blasphemy, then they may be termed so; for herein he does both advance
the creatures into the Chair of Christ, and reduce Christ into the rank of
the creatures.

Christ has received an universal charter and patent to be the publisher of
the Gospel, and that out of his mouth should proceed the words of eternal life,
according to that text Luke 4.18. the spirit of the Lord is upon me, to preach,
etc. We find a dicotomy in Heb. 2:2. of Gods speaking by the prophets, and
speaking by his Son; but of his speaking the things of the gospel by the
heavens, no where. Had such a pregnant suggester stood at Peter's elbow when he
asked this question; ["Whither shall we go Lord? thou have the words of
eternal life, Ioh. "6.68.] he would have told him, that he was not a well
tutoured scholar in the school of Christ. And as the wiseman sends the
sluggard to the ant, so he would have sent Peter to the heavens, the Moon, and
the Sun, and Stars, to hear them preach the words of eternal life. What
futilousnesse and vanity does this assertion of his introduce into the words of
the Apostle? 2 Timothy 1.10. [ But is made appear by the appearing of Jesus
Christ, who has brought immortality and life to light through the gospel.] And
this gospel is that which Paul was appointed to preach in the next verse; what
need the Apostle wrap up all in expressions at such a distance, as to say,
(Now) it is manifest, and that by the coming of (Christ:) and that (He) has
brought immortality and life to light; And that in that (Gospel) which Paul was
sent to preach; if that life and immortality, and the saving grace of God be
clearly discovered by the creatures? Nay, I entreat Mr. Goodwin to consider
whether he does not by this introduce a needlesnesse and uselesnesse of Christ
coming to discover the mysteries of the gospel to the Gentiles, or of any oral
preaching thereof, either to Jew or Gentile, if that in the heavens and the
creatures there be so much seen of the Gospel, as to make men wise unto
salvation. And so good old Simeon must stand charged rather with dotage then
devotion, in waiting for Christ to be the light of the Gentiles. How does he in
this utterly make void the dignity and pre-eminence of the Scriptures, which
are said to make men wise to salvation? 2 Timothy 3.15. and to be the words of
eternal life? Ioh. 5.39. If that both these may be as truly recorded of the
book of the creatures, as of the book of the Scriptures. Lastly, let Mr.
Goodwin upon better thoughts consider, whether the creatures, and the motions
of the heavens be truly and properly said to carry in them the words of eternal
life at all.

1. We find the Scriptures, the words which Christ and his Apostles orally
preached to the world, to be called the word of Life. Phil. 2.16. so Ioh. 6.63.
["the words which I speak unto you are life.] And the words of eternal life, in
many texts. But I entreat Mr Goodwin to produce one text, that either
expressly, or by intimation calls the sound of the heavens so. Me thinks his
reason should bespeak it too great presumption for any man to make the words of
Christ to be no more the words of eternal life, then the sound of the heavens,
which never in Scripture are honored with that dignifying title.

2. The words of eternal life must discover not only God, but Christ, without
the knowledge of both, no salvation, John 17.3. ["This is life eternal "to know
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.] But how long long will it be ere he
prove that the creatures can give the knowledge of Christ. I expect that Mr.
Goodwin give me some pertinent Scriptures to prove it. Psalm. 19.1, 2, 3, 4.
Romans 1.20 Act. 17.27. go no further then the glory of God, the invisible
things of God, and that they might seek after God: but that the creatures of
themselves discover a Christ, the Scriptures say no where.

3. The words of eternal life are the charter and magna charta of the Church.
Hence he knows it is a rule, extra ecclesiam nulla salus: and also that of the
Apostle, Act. 2.47. ["The Lord added to the "Church such as should be saved.]
To be brought into the Church, was to be brought (in seriem salvandorum) and
both by the word of eternal life. Then if the heavens declare the words of
eternal life, either that distinction betwixt the church of Christ and them
that are without, falls to the ground, or else the word of eternal life is
given, as the ordinary means to bring men to faith in Jesus Christ, to others,
besides the Church of God. And then what transcendent love is there in Christ
toward the Church, in washing of it with water by the word? Ephesians, 5.25, 26

4. The words of eternal life must convert the soul, open the eyes, make wise
the simple, otherwise they are not to be called the words of eternal life. But
if Mr. Goodwin say that the creatures and voice of the heavens do convert the
soul, etc. then let him consider whether he does not overthrow that plain
distinction of the Psalmist, Ps. 19.4. 6, 7, 8. where he says, the heavens
declare the glory of God, and the law converteth the soul. He speaks not of
converting the soul, til he passes by the heavens, and speaks of the law of
God.

5. The word of eternal life is the ordinary means which God has appointed to
bring men to life. But if Mr. Goodwin say, that the heavens and the creatures
are the ordinary way to bring men to salvation, then he must prove where God
has so appointed them, and also clear it to us, that we are brought to heaven
and life by the creatures as well as by the Gospel orally dispensed. Till these
things be cleared, I cannot but judge that the creatures cannot afford of
themselves the words of eternal life. And then for Mr. Goodwin to say that the
voice of the heavens are the words of eternal life; as well as those that
Christ himself spoke, is in effect, to say that the words that Christ spoke
are not the words of eternal life at all; which how blasphemous it is against
Jesus Christ the Prophet of his Church, let the world judge.

Thirdly, I charged his reason with weakness and absurdity; it is this, He
means the voice of the heavens, because the Apostle uses this text, Ps.
19.4. which words by the Psalmist are spoken of the heavens. It is very strange
to me that a man of such a searching judgment as Mr. Goodwin, should be driven
upon such a rock by this inconsiderable gust, and if there be (with him) so
much weight in those words, as to weigh down all interpreters, the judgment
of his own side, his own firstborn, the natural genius of the text, he may
by his prejudice cast the scale; but I am confident he cannot give good weight,
especially considering there are so many plausible ways to avoid any such
inference.

Calvin and Rivet, who come the nearest his mind, and think that the latter
clause of verse 15, is meant of the heavens; yet that those words are produced
by the Apostle only to prove, that it is no strange thing that the Gentiles
should have the gospel, because he had done so much for them in the creatures;
and they are so far from excluding the heavens of the letter of the gospel,
that they urge it to be clear that this question, Have they not heard? is to
be understood of the letter of the gospel.

Others there are that are no whit of his mind, and think that the Apostle does
only allude to those words, and adapt them to his own purpose. All supposing
this to be the drift of the apostle, to prove that the gentiles had the letter
of the gospel; the drift also of the Apostle in these words, Oratorio utitur,
and evocat testem ex ipsorum lege. Soto domin. in loc.
their voice is gone out, is to confirm it, and then he uses the Psalmists
words, not as meaning the heavens, or their words, but he speaks of the
gospel in these expressions, that he might convince the Jews the better, as
by a testimony out of their own law; As Soto the Dominican in his Commentary.
Willet in hexapl. in loc.
Others will tell him, that the Apostle used these words, although he be
treating of the gospel in the letter of it, to let them see that in Psalm
19.4. it was the prophecy, but in Romans 10.18. the accomplishment. Thus Willet
in his Hexapla.

Paraus and Soto tell us, that though he be treating of the gospel yet he uses
these words of the Psalmist. either Pari velocitate qua sol totum orbem
permeavit, tuba etiam evangelica per totum orbem praelustravit. Soto and Paraus
in loc.
a pari, from the like, that is, With the like swiftness that the Sun runs his
course, does the trumpet of the gospel run through the world; or else a minori
ad majus, from the less to the greater, thus, if he gave them the voice of the
heavens, he would give them the gospel. And most interpreters part their
thoughts into an allusion, or allegory, or metaphor, as Peter Martyr gives us a
hint; any of which shows the invalidity of Mr, Goodwins inference.

But if these do not satisfy, in the next place, I say it is a hard thing for
him to prove that the Apostle cites purposely these words as the text of the
Psalmist, and not rather only asserts his own business in the Psalmists
expressions. He says indeed, the sound of them, but of whom? here is the
question; but Mr. Goodwin says, the sound of the heavens, but it is with no
color of reason; there had not one word passed of the heavens, and therefore
it is against reason to refer the relative to an unknown anticedent, when
there is one visible. Tossanus, if Mr. Goodwin will accept of reasonable
satisfaction, says something to this purpose; Ait simpliciter sonus eorum
ivit. i. e. evangelizanrum pacem super montibus, de quibus supra egerit,
Tossanus in loc. Hag. Col. in Arg. 5. in Col.
He says simply and only, the sound of them is gone forth, that is of those
that bring glad tidings of peace, of whom he had before spoken. He does not
say, (as it is written) or thus (the Scripture says,) as if he intended to
cite the words of the Psalmist for his own purpose, but speaks them as his own
expresses, the sound of them, that is the Apostles that bring the glad tidings
of peace: thus the Remonstrants themselves give it us; they consent to read the
words roundly thus, in stead of eorum sonus, they read it Apostolorum sonus;
not the sound of them, but the sound of the Apostles: and why they do so, let
him examine at his leisure.

And if all this do not satisfy, let him examine whether his divinity does
not serve him at this turn, to see that the Apostle uses the expressions of
the Prophets; not to prove and assert that in which they were originally
concerned; but that which he is to carry on a new: as speaking of alms, and
contributions for the Saints, 2 Cor. 85.1.
he says he would have all things carried on by an equality, that the
abundance of the one might be the supply of the other, as it is written, He
that gathered much bad nothing over, and he that gathered little had no lack.
Will Mr. Goodwin make this inference, that the Apostle in verse 14. speaks of
gathering and distributing Manna to the Saints, because he uses these
expresses of Moses in the 15, verse, which were originally spoken in relation
to the Mannah? Is it not clear, that those words which Moses uses concerning
Manna, the Apostle adapts them to his own business of alms.

That which David spoke of the outward prosperity and affluence of his enemies
in Psalm 69.22. Let their table become a snare: Psalm. 69.22 Romans 11.8, 9
The Apostle adapts them to prove, that the gospel, their spiritual food, was
become a snare to the Jew, To. 11.8, 9. The many thousands that did not bow
their knee to Baal in the days of Elijah, the Apostle uses to prove the
reserve that God had in the Apostles times amongst the Jews that were not
carried down the general deluge of infidelity, Romans 11.4
Romans 11.4. Those words that were originally spoken of the righteousness of
the law, Deuteronomy. 30.12. Paul applied to the righteousness of faith, Deuteronomy. 30.12
Romans 10.6, 7, 8
Romans 10.6, 7, 8. That which was originally spoken of them that brought the
glad tidings of Isreal's return from Babylon, Isai, 52.7. Isai. 52.7
The Apostle applies it to the apostles that brought the tidings of Christ in
the gospel. Romans 10.15
Romans 10.14. And if so many instances appear near these words in difference
betwixt us, let Mr, Goodwin give us some solid reason why these words that were
originally spoken of the sound of the heavens, may not be by the Apostles
adapted and fitted to express the sound of the gospel in the letter of it.
Thus have I spent much time, and put the reader to much trouble, because I
would detect the forgery, blasphemy, and absurdity that lie hid in this
interpretation of Mr. Goodwin, and that it might appear how weakly and
praeposterously this text, that clearly imports and affirms that the
gentiles had the letter of the gospel, is produced to prove that they are bound
to believe in Christ, that never had the letter of the gospel.

The second text he produced to prove his assertion, is in Acts 14.16, 17. "He
left them not without witness, in that he did them good, "gave them rain from
heaven, and fruitful seasons. In which, if he had been pleased to reduce his
thoughts to any argumentative form, they would more clearly have discovered
themselves: but he puts his reader to a double task, both to find out his
argument, and then to answer it. It seems to be but a wild inference, He gave
them rain and fruitful seasons, and left not himself without witness,
Therefore they are bound to believe in Christ that have not the letter of the
gospel. True indeed, but it is chiefly inquirable, which are the witnesses of
God, and what it was that they witnessed concerning him; if Mr. Goodwin can
prove that those witnesses there spoken of did witness a Christ, and a
mediator, and an atonement made by him, then Mr. Goodwin may carry the cause:
but if not, this place is very vainly produced to prove that they are bound to
believe in Christ that have nothing but these witnesses: To clear the
business, he produces two things under the notion of doubtless; but both
very obnoxious to scruples, not easily satisfied; the first, runs thus.

[ Doubtless he does not speak here of his Godhead, nor power, nor wisdom,
as if God left not himself without witness of these; the works of creation
distinct from providence, are sufficient witnesses of these, according to the
tenor of Romans 1.20.] But here is nothing less out of doubt then this: and to
the due understanding of it, it is requisite, First, to consider the occasion
of these words, which will make a fair way to the discovering the meaning of
them.

The occasion of them was the idolatry of the men of Lystra, who attempted to
worship the Apostles under the notion of Gods; upon this occasion he does two
things; First, lets them see that they ought not to worship them, which he does
in the 15. verse by two pregnant arguments, 1. The Apostles were men of like
passions with them. 2. They were but the instruments of God to turn them to
the living God. Secondly, his task is to prove that they should worship the
true and the living God; now if this be his design, to prove God to be the true
God whom they ought to worship, then all those things there mentioned, must
reasonably be understood of such things as the scriptures give us to evince his
deity, and so by them to prove that he is to be worshipped: And I conceive,
that nothing but that which treats of, and manifests his Godhead is a fit
medium for any to use to take off idolaters from their vanity, to the true God.
Besides, will Mr, Goodwin persist in this, that the Apostle doubtless does not
here treat of his Godhead? What one word is there in the three verses alleged,
15, 16, 17. which may not be called a fit medium to prove his diety?

1. Does he not say in general, that he is (living God?) 2. Does he not say,
(which made the heavens and the earth?) and are not these words an express of
his power? 3. Does he not say, that he suffered all nations? and are not these
an express of his sovereignty and power over the creatures, without which he
could not properly be said to suffer them? And 4, Does he not say, he did them
good, and gave them fruitful seasons? and are not these an express of his
goodness, and that he is, principium et fons omnis boni, the principle and
Fountain of all good? which clearly evinceth his diety. And seeing the apostle
produces nothing but what is very apt and fit to prove the diety and godhead
of the Almighty; it is a strong ^nducement to me to think that he produced all
those particulars for that every end and purpose. And does he not herein keep a
just parallel to ^^mselfe in Romans 1.20. and in Acts 17.23, 24, 25. In all the
three pl^hi the occasion is the same, namely, idolatry; the end the same, to
preserve them from idolatry; that which he presses is the same, namely, God
making the earth and all things therein; the end is the same: Romans 1.20. says,
that they might be inexcusable when they turned the truth of God into a lie.
Acts 14, says, that he left not himself without witness. And Act 17.23, 24.
says, that by groping after him they might find him; now all these three come
to one and the same issue; when men by groping after him, find him in his
works, then he has his witnesses; and when he has his witnesses, idolaters
are without excuse; and then what can be more probable then this, that all
three places tend to evince the the same thing, that is, the Godhead and diety
of the true God? And I entreat Mr. Goodwin to consider the Apostle in. Act.
7.23, 24. and tell me whether he do not purposely in those expressions evince
the diety. In the 23. verse he says, that God which ye ignorantly worship,
him do I declare to you. And in the close in verse 30. that they might not
think the godhead was like unto gold and silver, or stones graven by man's
device; are not these pregnant proofs that the apostle does purposely and
pertinently evince the godhead and diety? But by what arguments does he do it?
not only by his power in making all things, as in ver. 24, but in this, that
he gives to all life and breath (and all things.) And what is this less then
his giving them rain and fruitful seasons? and if it appear that his giving
all things be brought to prove a diety in the 17. chapter, upon what account of
reason is it doubtless, that his giving fruitful seasons is not urged in chap.
14. and to evince the very same thing?

The second (doubtless) that Mr. Goodwin presumes is this; doubtless the
thing that God intended should be witnessed on his behalf, was something more
secret and out of the way of men's common thoughts and apprehensions; and
particularly it was that gracious and good affection that he bears to men in
Christ, his inclinations to peace with them upon their repentance. That it was
something out of the way of men's commen thoughts and apprehensions, I will
easily grant him? but will it be any thing further off from proving it to be
only his deity and godhead? Gods not needing of any thing, receiving of
nothing, but communicating all things to the creature, and so being the author
and fountain of all good, these are as pregnant proofs of a deity and godhead
as any, and given by the Apostle, Acts 17.25. And these also are beyond the
common thoughts of man; for if Israel, who had the clear manifestations of God
in his word, did not yet know that God gave her corn, and wine, and oil, but
that they came from her lovers; Hos, 2.5, 7, 8. how much more may it be beyond
the common thoughts of the heathen; that their fruitful seasons come from God,
rather then from their idols, and so to be more obfirmed in their idolatry? So
that it does not appear that it is not the Godhead, because it is out of the
way of men's common thoughts.

2. He says, It was particularly the good affection which he bears to men in
Christ Jesus, his inclinations to peace upon repentance. But what one
expression in all that Text that necessarily infers this? Let him show it,
and I have done; he uses indeed two reasons to prove it.

His first reason is, because such witnesses are only proper to testify grace
and love, and the desire of the good of those to whom they are given, in him
that gives them. But

1. Will not his understanding serve him to see them as pregnant testimonies of
his deity, and the Godhead? do not rain and fruitful seasons, and works of
providence as clearly hold forth the eternal power and wisdom of God as any
other thing? Let him consult with Job 38.25, 26. Where God expostulateth with
Job about those parcels of the creation and providence, and presses both, as
arguments both of his power and of his wisdom, in the water courses of
heavens, in causing it to rain, and by it the tender bud to bring forth; in
that he was a father to the rain, and begot the drops of dew; and found a womb
of the ice, and binds the influences of the Pleiades, and guides Arcturus
with his sons, and has so set the ordinances of heaven in their constant
course: is there not both power and wisdom seen in that circular providence?
Hos. 2 last. I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth, etc. Let
him consider the Prophet Jeremiah, cap. 14. v. 22. where he says, are there
any of the vanities of the nations that can give rain? Art not thou he?
therefore we will wait upon thee. What will Mr. Goodwin say to this? are not
showers and rain fit and proper testimonies of Gods power, and of his deity,
and so pertinent to call them off from idols to the living God? Why does he
reassume that impious license to charge the Scriptures, and holy penmen
thereof, with impertinent and improper evidences? they frequently produce
rain, showers and fruitful seasons, as evidences of power and wisdom; but
Mr. Goodwin says that they are not proper Testimonies thereof.

2. It plainly appears they always prove his power and wisdom, but where
does he once prove that they are proper to testify grace and love in Jesus
Christ? Let him take the wiseman along with him, and he will tell him, that no
man can know either love or hatred, so neither thoughts of good or hurt by
these outward things. Eccles. 9.1, 2. He causes them all to fall upon all
without exception. Nay, if any difference, most on those to whom he has the
least thoughts of good in Christ Jesus. Psalm. 17.14. Men of the world, whose
belly thou fillest with thy hidden treasures. To use no more but this, those
who are obstinate and incorrigible in sin, and so by God are given up to a
reprobate sense, and by his consequent will are for that obstinacy destined to
destruction, so that God now hates them; yet do these, so long as they live
upon earth, enjoy rain and fruitful seasons. But will Mr. Goodwin say that
they are proper evidences of Gods love, and desire of their good, and
inclinations to peace upon repentance? But now I am by a fair occasion cast
upon a point of some concernement in the controversy betwixt Mr. Goodwin and
us; and that is, the sufficiency in the creatures alone to bring men to believe
in Christ. Mr. Goodwin in his conference with Mr, Simpson was very assertive of
this, that the heathen had sufficient means to bring to faith in Jesus Christ;
but he was very unwilling to discover what that sufficient means of faith is,
and I blame him not; but he is something more daring in this treatise, and
affirms that the rain and fruitful seasons can discover the Savior Jesus
Christ, and bring men to faith in him, they being proper only to testify a
reconcilement and atonement in Christ; but I find not Mr. Goodwin in one
syllable inclining to prove it by good demonstrative reason. I shall therefore
address to accoast him with an Argument or two, to prove that rain and
fruitful seasons are no proper testimonies of the mercy of God in Christ, or an
atonement and satisfaction made by him. Some shall be probable, others more
coercive, and that, both ad hominem, and ad rem, and so I shall prove that this
cited text contains not sufficient means of faith in Christ.

If the Apostle speak as much in all respects elsewhere, and yet not for that
end, or expecting that improvement, that men should discover a Savior and a
Mediator, Then it is probable that in this text Act. 14. he does not expect
such an improvement as to discover a mediator, and so by consequence those
things here mentioned, are not fit and proper testimonies thereof.

But the former is true. Therefore the latter is true.

Certainly the Apostle would have that in his eye as the end, and expect the
highest improvement to which those means afforded are proper and adapted. Now
let us see in Acts 17.24, 25, 26, 27. when Paul met with the idolatry of them
at Athens, he takes occasion to preach the same sermon as to them, at Lystra;
only the place is different, all things else alike; the occasion the same,
their idolatry; the end the same, to restrain them from it, to turn them from
their vanities to the living God; the Sermon the same, in both he preached the
power of God in the creation; in both he preached the power of God in the works
of providence. Nay, in this text Act. 17.24, 25. he goes something further in
expressions of providence then in Acts 14. for herein he says only, [he gives
rain and fruitful seasons, and fills the hearts of men with food and
gladness.] But Act. 17.24, 25. says, [he gives all things;] but what is the
improvement that the Apostle aims at, or any man can rationally expect from
these things! The Apostle tells us, ["That they might seek the Lord, (...).] to
seek the Lord, and by a gr^ping after him to find him. Now Mr. Goodwin laying
the prejudice of his opinion aside, may consider with me, 1. That the person
that these are propounded to discover, is not Jesus Christ the mediator, but
the Lord God the party offended; it was not to discover an atonement or
satisfaction, but a deity; not to bring men in to believe in Christ, or repent
of their idolatry, but only to restrain them further persistence in idolatry.
2. Consider, that it is not clearly to see God, and roundly to draw out the
most intimate conclusions concerning him, but only, (...), levi tactu
pertractare, or palpare, as it is rendered, to grope as blind men. Now if this
text urge as much every way, as Act. 14.16. and yet arises no higher then the
groping after God in his works, as blind men, and by it attaining some kind of
knowledge of him to keep from worshipping stocks and stones; then it is
probable that that text Acts 14.16, 17. speaks not of showers and fruitful
seasons as fit and proper testimonies to discover a Christ and a Savior, and
to enable men to draw out very roundly the substance of the Gospel.



"But the former is true, therefore the latter is true also.

Let not M^. Goodwin seek this subterfuge to evade the validity of the
proposition, by distinguishing betwixt the Gospel and the sound of the heavens;
for he makes the Gospel to carry such a latitude, as that it contains in it
the sound of the heavens, and to hear it by the creatures, is in his sense to
hear it in the Gospel, as he himself affirms thus; [ I grant the preaching
of the Gospel is the only sufficient mean^s of faith in Christ; Dispute with
Mr. Simpson. p. 65.
but then I add, that rain and fruitful seasons do preach the Gospel.] And
so in his own judgment to hear of Christ any way, is to hear of him in the
Gospel, and it is but consonant to reason, because the very hearing of Christ
is Gospel. Now upon this foundation I build my Argument; for, if this be true
that men cannot hear of this Gospel, or of Christ in the Gospel, except one or
more does discover it and be sent for that purpose; then it must follow that
the fruitful showers and seasons do not preach the Gospel. For, these are not
they that Mr. Goodwin would have to be sent to preach in Romans 10.14. Romans 10.14
But the Minor is Mr. Goodwins own, speaking of that text Romans 10.14. How shall
they hear without a preacher? says thus; [ That it is not likely that any man
should hear of Christ in the Gospel, Pagans debt. page 33
if some or more had not been sent by God to publish it in the world.

If that text Act. 14.16, ( who suffered the nations to walk in their own ways)
speaks thus much to us, that God did not deal with men as under the Gospel,
but only give them means to restrain them from their evil ways; then those
fruitful seasons did not preach Christ, nor does that text enforce any such
thing.

"But the former is true, therefore the latter is true also.

The proposition is grounded upon this truth. When God discovers Christ any
way, and a mediator and atonement by him, and enableth a man to draw out the
most intimate conclusions of the Gospel, he does deal with them as with men
under the Gospel. And the Minor or assumption is Mr. Goodwins own, who in
answer to that text Act. 14.16, Dispute Mr. Simpson. p. 63.
says thus; Although he suffered those nations to walk in their own ways,
that is, did not deal with them as with men under the Gospel; yet he gave them
such means as would have restrained them from their evil ways had they been
vigilant. How Mr. Goodwin digladiates with himself sometimes that text is
produced by him to prove that God deals with men as under the Gospel, even the
heathen, and the nations whom he suffered to walk in their own ways, and that
the shows and fruitful seasons preach Christ, and enable men to draw out the
substance of the Gospel; and yet other sometimes it is produced to no other end
but to grant that God deals not with the nations (whom he so suffers) as with
men under the Gospel, and all the means that he affords to such, tends but
hitherto to restrain them from their evil ways, and that but upon this
proviso, if they had been diligent. These do not well consist together.



"But the former is true, therefore the latter is true also.

The strength of this Argument lies in this, for any man to have the Gospel
discovered any way. Christ preached, and life upon repentance brought to light,
is means sufficient to bring men to salvation. Yea, and Mr. Goodwin himself
affirms, page ^5.
that God gives faith to no man but in giving these means to beget faith, in
his conference with Mr. Simpson; and in this treatise of his, affirms, that a
heathen man may quit himself to such a degree of wel-pleasing to God, so as
that he will not fail to reveal Christ to him in some degree or other which
shall be saving. Let Mr Goodwin, if here he do not grant that to have Christ
revealed any way, be sufficient means of believing in Christ, Say what is

The Minor of the Syllogism is Mr. Goodwins own: in express words, he says
thus; I do not mean that the Gentiles, Dispute with Mr. Simpson. page 79.
or any man whatsoever, has an immediate sufficiency to believe in Christ
originally given them of God, but only a remote, that is so much as by the use
of it they may possess themselves of further means, by which they shall have an
immediate sufficient means to believe. I do earnestly desire that Mr. Goodwin
had so much divinity as to reduce himself out of this labyrinth into which he
has improvidently brought himself; for if no heathen man has only more then
a remote sufficiency to believe, which he affirms in one Treatise; And that
remote sufficiency to arise no higher then so much, upon the use whereof they
should not fail of having Christ revealed some way or other, which he
affirms in another Treatise; then how can this be near the truth, that every
heathen man has such a clear discovery of Christ, and satisfaction by him by
the creatures and fruitful showers and seasons, as is a sufficient means to
bring them to faith? which is the subject of this his Treatise. His immediate
sufficiency implies the discovery of Christ, his mediate or remote sufficiency
excludes it as actually done; yet both he contendeth for to be the inheritance
of every heathen man. Is not Mr. Goodwin a fit man to have his mouth opened
against his brethren, for speaking at such a rate of contradictions and
inconsistences as he does in his dispute with Mr. Simpson, in the close of it?
First let him take the beam out of his own eye, and consider whether that
assertion which denies any revelation of Christ to the heathen in any kind or
degree, until they use well that which is originally given them of God. And
that assertion which affirms, That every heathen man in that which is
originally given to him, may with out any further improvement discover Christ,
and draw out the sum of the Gospel, Be not contradictions at a sufficient
rate.

If the Gentiles, til such time as the partition wall was broken down, were
without Christ, aliens from the promises, and without hope; then the rain and
fruitful seasons did not preach Christ and life upon repentance, neither were
they fit or sufficient means of faith in Christ.

But the former is true, therefore the latter is true also.

The force of this Argument lies in this, To have the gospel preached, and
life upon repentance discovered, and so, as men are enabled to draw out the
most intimate conclusions and sum of the gospel, it cannot be rationally
concluded that such are without Christ, and without promise, and without hope:
to be without Christ is, as interpreters give it us, ( Sine Christo, i. e. sine
cognitione, lege, gratia, vita Christi. Cornel. a Lapid in loc.
) to be without the knowledge, law, grace, life of Christ. How those that have
the gospel preached, can be said to be without Christ, and those that by the
showers and fruitful seasons, and the sound of the heavens have the words of
eternal life, can be said to be without the promises; and those that by these
forenamed means are enabled to draw out the sum of the gospel, and to
discover life upon repentance, can be said to be without hope, I shall be an
expectant of some of Mr. Goodwins reason to unfold. It is not the evasion of
Corvinus that will serve his turn, who being by his adversary pressed with this
Text, expounds it thus; ( Gentes fuerunt sine Christo, quia Christum sibi non
sperabant; and spem non habuisse dicuntur, quia non speraverunt in promissiones
Judris factas. Corvin. in Mol. cap. 39.. 4.
) The nations were without Christ, in that they did not hope in Christ; and
they were without hope, in that they did not hope in those promises that were
made to the Jews: but this comes far short of satisfaction. For first, these
words, in that they did not hope in Christ for themselves, are no rational
interpretation of his phrase, being without Christ. For their being without
Christ, did distinguish the Gentiles from the Jews; but it was not the want of
the act of hope in Christ that distinguished the gentiles from the Jews;
because in this they were alike: many among the Jews did not actually hope in
Christ, which was the cause of their final rejection, but that which
differenced them was their being (sine fundamento spei) without the foundation
of hope, that is, the discovery of Christ in the promises, And this will be
more evident, if we consider what it was that made them one, and took away
this difference betwixt the Jew and the Gentile; not the hope of the Gentiles
in the promises that were peculiar to the Jews, this was not pertinent to them
as Gentiles, but as Proselites; but their hope in the promises made to
themselves, as appears in the 13. and 17. verses, where the Apostle affirms
that those that were a far off are made nigh, yea, and made one with them*
but that was by having the gospel preached to them that were a far off, as to
them that were nigh. Now if their oneness with the Jew lay in this, that they
had the same promises of Christ in the gospel, and so the same foundation of
hope, (same, specifically, I mean, not numerically) it will follow that their
difference lay in this, that the Jews had the foundation of hope in the
promises, but the Gentiles none, so without Christ and without hope: without
Christ, because without the knowledge of Christ; without hope, because without
the foundation and ground of hope. But how can those that have Christ preached,
and life upon repentance, and the sum of the gospel discovered, any ways be
said in this sense to be either without Christ, or without hope? Neither
secondly, is this enough to render them in general without hope, because they
did not hope in the promises made to the Jews. What if they did not? yet if
they had discoveryes of Christ and life upon repentance, and the sum of the
Gospel preached some other way, especially in a saving way, it is enough to
bespeak them not without hope; which until I receive further satisfaction,
must prevail with me to think that the heathen have not such discoveries by
the fruitful seasons, because they are said to be without hope.

If the word of faith, and the doctrine of Christ crucified, and the sum and
effect of the gospel be to the Greeks foolishness; then a natural man cannot
by the help of the rain and fruitful seasons arise to any such rational
discourse as to draw the intimate conclusions of the gospel thence.

But the former is true, therefore the latter is true also.

The proposition of this Syllogism I conceive is beyond Mr. Goodwins scruple,
because the same thing, in respect of the same person and time cannot be both a
rational discourse, and yet foolishness; cannot be clearly seen, and yet not
seen at all. F^r so the Critics in that language observe (...), from (...),
both (...), a non videndo, quasi non omnino visum.

The minor I conceive is beyond his scruple, from the Apostles express, 1 Cor.
1.23. 1 Cor. 1.23
we preach Christ crucified to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks
foolishness; and thus it is till they come to be called by the sanctifying and
enlightening spirit of God. I might levy up more Scriptures as distinct
arguments, but I shall refer them hither, which I entreat Mr. Goodwins
thoughts upon, as 1 Cor. 2.6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 2, 6, 7, 8.
wherein the Apostle preached the sum of the gospel to them, he said, he did
not preach the wisdom of the world, but the wisdom of God in a mystery, the
hidden wisdom of God, which none of the Princes of the world knew. Now I hope
that (whatever it be) that is seen and discovered by the light of nature, and
by every one that has but reason and understanding, (as Mr. Goodwin says,
that the sum of the gospel and Christ is) cannot extend it self far beyond the
wisdom of this world, nay it is the very same. And how that Christ, or that
gospel that is made manifest by the rain and fruitful seasons to every heathen
man, can be truly called the hidden wisdom of God, yea, to be hidden from Ages
and Generations, Col, 1.26. I see nor, Col. 1.26.
These and infinite more, do ex diametro oppose Mr. Goodwins fond gloss upon
this text, Act. 14.16.

If every heathen man by the rain and fruitful seasons, and works of
providence have a sufficient means of believing in Christ, and to salvation.
Then all the Evangelical dispensations in the oral preaching of the gospel by
his Son, is no way requisite to faith and salvation.

But his latter is impious and absurd, therefore the former is so also.

The proposition of this Syllogism is thus grounded, upon the true import of
the term sufficiency, which contains in it all requisites to that thing, in
reference to which there is a sufficiency. As to instance; here is no
sufficiency to faith, except all requisites to faith be present; so to
Salvation it self, and this the Remonstrants upon the p^inciples of reason
roundly give us; for speaking of sufficient means to conversion; Acta Synod.
Art. 4o page 91
they say thus; Sufficiens gratia nihil aliud est quam ea gratia qua ad
conversionem efficiendam ita adhibet quae sunt necessaria, ut quod ad actus
praestationem necessarium nihil ultra requiratur. Gratia sufficiens adhibet
omnia necessaria; toll aliquid quod necessarium sit, et non erit gratia
sufficiens. Wherein they grant that nothing can be called sufficient in any
respect, but that which puts forth all requisites and necessaries; then it must
follow, that if the rain and fruitful seasons be sufficient means for faith,
there needs no more. And therefore the Scriptures are not to come under the
notion of requisites to faith and salvation, and so by consequence to be
useless to those ends and purposes. The Scriptures and all Evangelical
dispensations tend but hitherto to make men wise to salvation, and to be but
sufficient means to lead men to faith in Jesus Christ, and by that to
Salvation. But what need any thing to this purpose, seeing every heathen man
has sufficient means of believing, and so of being saved, even by the rain
and fruitful seasons; and stand in no need of the Scriptures to make him wise
to salvation, because the sound of the heavens, are the words of eternal life,
as well as those that Christ spoke, and are sufficient to beget faith in us,
and so to save us? But how would this overturn the whole series of gospel
discoveries, and call the wisdom of the Almighty to the test of humane
presumption? What will Mr. Goodwin say to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.21
1 Cor. 1.21. After that the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by
the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe? Why was all this
waste? why did God use this method and way of foolish preaching? was there no
need of it? Let us hear the Apostle speak, The world by wisdom knew not God.
verse 20. Christ crucified to the Greeks was foolishness. v. 23. It was the
hidden wisdom of God, which none of the Princes of this world ever knew. cap.
2 v 7, 8. Such words as man's wisdom never teaches. v. 13 Such things as the
natural man cannot receive, therefore by the foolishness of preaching he
saves them that believe. Let not Mr. Goodwin then say that the rain and
fruitful seasons are sufficient means of faith in Jesus, least he at unawares
bespeak this ordinance of preaching foolishness indeed. But Mr. Goodwin (I
fear) has given much occasion to the world to think, that he esteems it but a
light thing to prostitute the authority, necessity, weight of the holy
Scriptures to the credit of his own opinion.

Those things that have no cognation or kindred with, or relation at all to a
Savior and Mediator, cannot by their own natural import discover Christ, or
life upon repentance.

But the rain and fruitful seasons have no natural kindred to Christ as
Mediator, or any relation to him.

Therefore they cannot by their natural import preach Christ, or be sufficient
means of faith in Christ.

The proposition of this argument is thus strengthened; there is nothing can
naturally and rationally discover any thing that is not naturally and
rationally contained in it, that by a rational resolution of causes and effects
into their natural principles, we may be led by the one to the other in a
rational process.

But there is no such natural relation or kindred betwixt the rain and
fruitful seasons and Christ. Thus I prove it.

Those things that in a course of providence had their ends and uses, and were
to have their beings, although Adam had never sinned, and so there had been no
place for such a person as Christ; have no natural relation to Christ, neither
can naturally import him. But the former is true of rain and fruitful seasons.

Therefore the latter is true of them also.

Adam was set to till the ground, and after the first creation, Genesis 2.5
the fruits of the earth were to be propagated by the help of the influences of
heaven as well as man's industry, as appears by the text; A mist went up from
the earth to water the face of the ground. Genesis 2.6. True it is, they are
continued to us by virtue of the merits of Christ, but this is not natural and
from their first original. Fruitful seasons are not peculiar to man as fallen,
nor yet to man restored; but were also in common with Adam standing: Now I
demand whether rain or fruitful seasons had discovered such a person as Christ?
Such a work as satisfaction, life upon such a condition as repentance, in his
integrity, in which condition I know Mr. Goodwin will say, he was not capable
either of the work or discovery of a Mediator. If they did not, then, I demand
what alteration is there in their faces now? or how can men make a rational
deduction of Christ from them now, more then in his integrity? I say, by their
own natural import, without the help of further means to acquaint us with all
the transactions betwixt God and fallen man.

Thus I have by a few arguments labored to prove that rain and fruitful
seasons do not, cannot preach Christ, discover life upon repentance; and by
these I conceive I have refelled his first reason whereby he would prove that
the Apostle in Acts 14.16. affirms that God by those fruitful seasons did not
leave himself without witness of his good affection in Jesus Christ to the
world. His reason is, because such things as showers and fruitful seasons are
fit and proper only to testify Christ and mercy in him.

His second reason by which he would prove that the rain and fruitful seasons
Act. 14.16 preach Christ and the gospel, and the good will of God to men in
Christ Jesus, is this as follows:

[ The Apostle being to preach the gospel unto the Gentiles, preached no other
doctrine to them at Lystra but this; we cannot think that he preached only
metaphysical and philosophical sermons concerning the essence and properties of
God, but that which was evangelical and savouring of the gospel. Now the holy
Ghost reports nothing evangelical, if this be not.] But this reason discovers
as much of Mr. Goodwin as any that went before, For,

1. Take notice how he does secretly asperse the Theological and divine Sermons
of the Apostle, concerning the essence, and properties, and providence of God,
with the detracting titles of metaphysical and philosophical Sermons. Will not
Mr. Goodwins knowledge serve him to discern a difference betwixt Theology and
Philosophy? God being supra omnes Ens, and extra omne praedicamentum, above all
Entities, and without all praedicaments. The discourses of his nature, essence,
and properties, are very weakly and absurdly called metaphysical, which
considers ens, quatenus ens, for its object; Metaphisicks consider God no
otherwise then it considers all other beings, as unum, bonum and verum, that
is, as having only an entitive unity, goodness and truth: but to consider God
as a Creator and Preserver; as the fountain of all good, these are above
metaphysical notions and Sermons. Hence it is a rule, Metaphysica parit
scientiam tantum, sed Theologia fidem, that is, Metaphysics beget a knowledge
only, but Theology or Divinity begets faith. I would advise Mr. Goodwin to
retract these notions, lest his Church, who are much led by an implicit faith,
should think that the divine discoveries of Gods nature, and properties, and
providence, comes under the notion of vain philosophy.

2. Suppose they were metaphysical Sermons truly so called, yet in the next
place Mr. Goodwin supposes that the Apostle must not preach such, he being to
preach the Gospel at Lystra; as if the preaching of the gospel, and the
precahing of the nature, essence, and proprieties of God, were not consistent:
But upon what color of reason, I pray you? may not such discoveries dispose
and prepare them to receive the most intimate conclusions of the gospel? Nay,
are not such discoveries necessary to this believing in Christ? and are not
such preparations and dispositions to receive the gospel, the foundation of
this doctrine of universal grace, which the Remonstrants so much contend for?
True indeed, had the Apostle come to preach the gospel to the Jews, who were
well instructed in the knowledge of the true God, there had been no such
necessity; but coming to the Gentiles, who were generally lead away to dumb
idols, as the Apostle testifies, and did not know the true God; it is now
requisite that he begin here to make them to know him. For the saving knowledge
of Jesus Christ does suppose a prevening knowledge of the true God, as in Jo.
17.3. John 17.3
it is life eternal to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent. And in that text so much used in vain by Mr. Goodwin, Heb. 11.6.
Heb. 11.6
he that comes to God must first believe that God is. But let Mr. Goodwin
consider, whether those discourses which treat of the nature, essence, and
properties of God, be not pertinent notions to make men believe that God is;
and that is no more then we must conclude, if our understandings do but go
hand in hand with the Scriptures: for to believe in Christ, is no more then to
believe that God is reconciled to us in Christ, Gods justice satisfied in
Christ, and that God will bless us with all spiritual blessings in Christ,
which naturally imports that there is a God, who is reconciled, whose justice
is satisfied, who was offended, and who is a rewarder of them that seek him.
Hence Divines will tell him, that Christ is but objectum mediatum et
secundarium fidei, Ames. med. Theol. page 7.
the mediate and secundary object of saving faith, and God himself the primary
object of faith, as the Apostle tells us, 1 Pet. 1.21. we believe by him, in
God that raised him from the dead. 2 Cor. 3.4. This trust have we in God
through Christ; so that it appears to me in vain to preach Christ by whom
atonement is made, before we teach the true God, who is offended, and
therefore stand in need of having an atonement made; and also, that these
sermons of the nature, properties, and essence of God are necessary to the
discovery of Christ, and may reductively and dispositive be called the
preaching of the gospel. Why then should Mr. Goodwin thus weakly argue, that
the Apostle did not preach the properties and essence of God, because his task
was to preach the gospel? The Argument would avail e contra.

3. Suppose I grant him these, yet he will be found too light in the balance,
for he says, that this must needs be gospel, because if this be not gospel, he
is not found to preach the gospel at all at Lystra, the holy Ghost does not
discover to us any other gospel preached at Lystra. I know not how to blemish
his understanding so much, as to say he cannot discover so much in the text as
may confute him; neither would I be censorious as to judge him too too willing
to deceive both himself and his reader: but I leave it to the world to judge.
He cannot but know there were many intervening degrees betwixt these words of
the Apostle, and the gospel which he preached at Lystra. These words in
controversy were spoken upon the occasion of the peoples idolatry; this
idolatry was upon the occasion of Apostles healing the criple: and this miracle
was occasioned by the Apostles seeing that the criple had faith to be healed,
and that faith was wrought by the gospel which the Apostle preached, as the
text expressly says, verse 7. by which he converted some to the faith,
although others were yet given to idolatry. Now put the case that the words in
question be not the gospel; yet may we presume to say that they preached the
gospel at Lystra, because the holy Ghost says that they did preach the gospel
there, and therefore that which he produces as a reason, seems to be of the
same validity with all the rest, which is this; the Apostles preached no other
gospel, because it is not recorded. And may we not say by the same rule in ver.
20.21. that Paul preached no gospel at Derbe, because what Paul preached there,
is not recorded? and would not this reasoning help us to give the holy Ghost
the lie? who says in both, that they preached the gospel both at Dorbe, and at
Lystra. By this time any rational man may see what is become of Mr. Goodwins
double doubtless, and I cannot but profess it a tedious task to be tied to
trace him through all his extravagances, and impertinent allegations. And it is
strange to me that he that undertakes to produce such arguments that neither
men on earth, nor angels in heaven, can answer, as he says of himself in his
dispute with Mr. Simpson, I need not cite the page, it is so notorious: that he
(I say) should thus delitate in a matter of so great concernement, and that not
one allegation, nor any particular in any Allegation should have the least
conclusive validity in it, Certainly must produce some more weighty reasons to
prove that the rain and fruitful seasons are fit testimonies of a Savior and
atonement by him, and the sum of the Gospel, otherwise he is not of that
credit with me as to take his bare word for it, and he has no reason to fasten
any blame upon us for not believing his assertions herein, because we find
him declining his own heights very much; for after all these his impertinent
notions we find him giving the sum of all that went before in this impertinent
conclusion, thus; so that it is clear from this Scripture, that all the world,
even those that are most straightened and scanted in this kind, those that have
not the letter of the gospel, have yet the sufficient means of believing, 1.
That God is. 2. That he is a rewarder of all that seek him, Heb. 11.6. which
the Apostle makes to be all the faith absolutely necessary to bring us into
favor with him. How is he suddenly sunk into a degenerous conclusion, that do
^not at all suit with his intended purpose, which was to prove that all heathen
men are sufficiently enabled to believe in Christ, and to draw out the sum and
substance of the gospel? and he proves it by a text which he says proves no
more, then that men may believe, First, that God is. Secondly, that he is a
rewarder of them that seek him. Is not Mr. Goodwin able to see a wide distance
betwixt these two, to believe on Christ, and to believe that God is? Although
every one that believes in Christ must believe in God, yet it follows not e
contra, that all those that believe that God is, Secundum et primo succedaneu^
praeceptum est fidei in Christum non generalis illius fideiqae ante ipsum
oenitentiae actum, et quamlibet legalem obedientiam praerequiritur, qua
credimus Deum esse, et praem^is cultoribus suis largiri, sed specialis fidei in
Christum. Episcop. Disp. 24. These. 1.
do believe in Jesus Christ.

Adam in his integrity did believe that God was, and that he was a rewarder of
them that seek him; but I hope Mr. Goodwin will say, that to believe in Jesus
Christ is no act proper and suitable for the condition of Adams integrity,
therefore he had neither a sufficiency, nor yet an obligation to believe,
Again, the Jews under the old Testament did believe that God was, and that he
was a rewarder of all them that seek him, as is expressed Heb. 11.6. But Mr.
Goodwin himself contends for this, that they did not believe expressly in
Christ, and it is a pillar of the Arminian doctrine, that faith in Jesus Christ
was neither observed nor yet commanded. To believe that God is, and that he is
a rewarder of them that seek him, is a general faith that is requisite to every
legal obedience, even there where Christ has no place or consideration, as
Episcopius one of the prolocutors of his side clearly speaks. Nay, yet
further, let Mr. Goodwin consider whether the devils in hell do not believe
that God is, and that he is a rewarder as well of them that seek him, as of
them that disobey him; but these are neither in a sufficiency or obligation,
nor yet in a capacity of believing in Christ; the faith of the former comes far
short of the faith in the latter. Although Mr. Goodwin is pleased to say in a
second place, thus; Which the Apostle makes to be all the faith absolutely
necessary to bring men into favor with him. But what ground in the text does
he discern for this his assertion? the text says indeed that without faith
it is impossible to please God; and Mr. Goodwin himself, that an evangelical
faith is faith in Christ; and the text further says, that he that comes to
God, must first believe that God is; but it does not say that believing that
God is, is all that is necessary to believing in Christ, or bringing men into
favor with him; he that says, he that ascends to the top of the ladder must
climb up the first step, does not say, that to climb up the first step is
sufficient, and only necessary to the reaching to the top of the ladder. It
may help to illustrate the case in hand.

And if Mr. Goodwin will have no more as probable from this text in Acts 14.16.
then this, that the rain and fruitful seasons are means sufficient of knowing
and believing that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him, he
shall quietly rest with his desire, although it be a non probatum. But then I
must admonish him, that if no more can be forced from this text, not to put any
more the word of God upon the rack to stretch it to his own heights, to make
it speak thus much, that rain and fruitful seasons are sufficient means to
bring men to faith in Jesus Christ, and to draw out the sum of the gospel.
And how impertinent this text is to prove his assertion, let all the world
judge, seeing it does not arise so high as faith in Jesus Christ, or the sum
of the gospel, but only thus far by his own confession, that God is, etc.

The third text by which he proves his assertion, is from Romans 2.4. Romans 2.4.
Not knowing that the patience of God leads thee to repentance, which he
urges thus; that the patience of God leads thee to repentance, because it
does by way of a rational progress, and clear interpretation discover a
readiness to receive such unto grace and favor who repent unfeinedly. The
evidence of which reason looks upon us with the same face of dissatisfaction
with all that went before. Suppose I grant all; yet how will Mr. Goodwin prove
that it is either called patience and longsuffering, however known by that
name, without the advantage of the written word, wherein are contained
admonitions to repent, and so said to lead to repentance? and this he must
prove before he shall carry the cause by the force of this text To decide this
difficulty, let us consider, first, the scope of the Apostle in the former part
of this Epistle, viz. to conclude both Jew and Gentile under him; the Gentiles
he does in the first chapter, Reprehendit Iudaeos, quod ex lege sibi datum
Gentiles quasi peccatores condemnabant, et ipsi eadem patratent.

Cornel. a lapid in loc.


the Jews in this second chapter; and that the second chapter relates to the
Jews, Interpreters generally conclude, as Cornelius a lapide says, [ He
reprehends the Jews, because by their law they would condemn the Gentiles as
sinners, when they conmitted the same things.] But that the patience of God
afforded to the Jew was without the word, I think Mr. Goodwin will not affirm,
which is the cause why the Apostle concludes the Jew under a greater
inexcusability, because the ministry of the word superadded to the light of
nature became not efficacious to restrain them from sin: and from this very
argument he argues against the Jew, verse 17, 18. still supposing that those
persons enjoying the patience of God, had the Jetter of the gospel; which
induces me to think that the letter of the gospel is one ingredient into this
patience that thus leads to repentance.

2 I entreat Mr. Goodwin to examine whether or no in Scripture this term
patience, and forbearance, and hard and impenitent heart, and treasuring up
wrath, do not imply the letter of the Gospel enjoyed, and abused, wherein God
calls, inviteth, persuades, admonishes, wayteth to be gracious, hearkeneth
and hears if men will turn; and thus men continuing obstinate, God is
patient, longsuffering, and men are guilty of hard and impenitent hearts, and
treasure up for themselves wrath against the day of wrath. To give a taste of
these various expressions First, for the term longsuffering, we find it in 1
Pet. 3.20. The longsuffering of God waited upon the old world: but we read not
of this till the preaching of Noah, that preacher of righteousness So also 2
Pet. 3.9. The Lord is longsuffering, which in its very notion implies a word,
and the letter of the gospel, as appears by the words which follow; not
willing that any should perish, but come to the knowledge of the truth. Let him
consult Beza in his Annotations, who says thus; (...) ducit evangelio, scil.
ipsis prophanis, tunc demum parelacto et Iudaeis exhib to, quo respicit
particula (...) ^bsque Christi verbo benignitas dei po^^st producere homi nes
ad peccati se^ su^, non ad veram rescipiscentiam. Beza annot. in loc.
[ That leads, that is by the gospel, at length discovered to the Jews, and
to those profane Gentiles: without the word, the benignity of God may lead to
the sense of sin, but not to the true repentance for sin.] Let him consult with
Arminius, and he will tell him thus; [ Praedestinatio non est ex bonicate
simpliciter confiderata, sed ex modo miserio cordiae, et gratiae, et
patientiae, and longanimitatis, ex eadem bonitate prodeunt^s erga aliquamdiu
reluctantes, et vocationi stutim non parents, ad sustin^ndam moram
conversionis.

Armin. antiperk. page 16.


Predestination is not from goodness simply considered, but from mercy, and
grace in Christ, and patience and longsuffering issuing out of that goodness
toward those that draw back, and do not presently obey their call, that so he
might bear with their delay of conversion.] Wherein he clearly gives us,
that patience and longsuffering have no place until men have the call of God to
repentance, and men deny and resist, and so God sustain and bear the delay of
conversion. So likewise for the term of a hard and impenitent heart, and
treasuring up wrath. Let Mr. Goodwin show me, if he can, where they are used,
and do not clearly intimate the letter of the gospel enjoyed and abused. A
heart that cannot repent, God never lays it to the charge of any man until he
has used all means to bring men to repentance, which he is never said to do
until he give them his word to admonish them to repent. It is true indeed, they
may be non punjtentes, but not impoenitentes, that is negative, but not
privative impenitents. Men are not said to be incapable of being renewed by
repentance before they have had a taste of the good word of God, Heb. 6.5, 6.
And true it is, that the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
unrighteousness; and they that sin without law, shall perish without law; but
to treasure up wrath, to be vessels of wrath fitted for destruction in whom
wrath is treasured up, which is all one with the finding the day of judgment
more intolerable then Sodom, I know the Remonstrants themselves will not admit
without the word. All the works either of the common or extraordinary
providence cannot draw men to repentance, if we may believe the joint suffrage
of the Remonstrants themselves, who say thus; Quomodo fieri posse ut
rescipiscerent aut rescipuissent si virtutes et virtutes tantum considerantur:
virtutes qud t^les rescipiscentiam non suadent: verum aliquod necesse est quo
rescipiscentia mandetur aut suadeatur saltem, nam sine verbo ne fictam quisdem
re^ ipiscentiam. cificere possent virtutes.

Scrip. Synod. Art. 4o. p. 125.


How can it be that they should repent, or be said to have repented? if
miracles be considered only as miracles without the word, miracles cannot
persuade to repentance; it is necessary that the word be added, by which
repentance is commanded, or at least men invited to it, for without the word
men cannot put forth so much as a feigned repentance. And the judgment of the
best of his own side will be a good argument against him; for if miracles and
the works of extraordinary providence cannot lead to repentance without the
word, how then can the works of common providence do it without the word? Now
if this text and all the expresses in it do import a mixture of the word with
all the lenity and forbearance of God, then any man may see how impertinently
it is produced as a proof for his assertion, which is, that the heathen are
bound to repent and believe in Christ, even those that never had the word or
letter of the gospel. And thus we have taken a survey of his clear Scriptures,
which he says he has well examined, and also of the conclusive validity of
them for his purpose. Having discovered all his strength in divine testimonies,
he makes a transision to humane, pretending to the world, he has both God and
man on his side, but as he does with the one; so he does with the other,
abuses them both sufficiently. As he produces a threefold divine, so he
produces a threefold humane testimony in the fourteenth page of this book, the
one is out of Calvin, the second out of Musculus, the third out of the British
divines in the Synod of Dort: but by what color he calls them to the favor
of this cause, I am not able to divine: the dint of their testimony lies in
this, that he calls on all men to repent and believe in Christ without
exception. B^t had he either discovered or considered what call they mean, I
persuade my self he would have waved their testimony. He would make us believe
that they affirm that God calls all to repentance by such a call as is without
the letter of the gospel: otherwise what is their testimony to his cause? But
in so doing he is guilty of manifest subornation, for as for Calvin, he
witnesses no such thing, and that I clear thus;

1. He is so far from testifying to Mr Goodwins assertion, that he says that
no man is sufficiently enabled to the knowledge of the Creator without the
familiar ducture of the Scriptures; it is the adequate subject of the sixth
chapter of the first book of his Institutions; and if he say that man cannot
come to the saving knowledge of his creator without the help of the written
word, we cannot rationally conceive that he whom Mr, Goodwin calls one of the
best of the Protestant Divines, should also say, that a heathen man can come to
the knowledge of his redeemer without the help of the written word; or if he
do, his testimony does not agree with it self, and so I shall lay it aside as
not to be taken in so weighty a cause.

2. A second reason is this, because I find him sometimes treating of that call
whereby he says God calls all without exception; but in a sense far different
from Mr. Goodwins dreams; for in his discourse upon that text, Many called,
but few chosen he says thu^; Nothing is ambiguous if we hold that there is a
double kind of calling, Nihil erit ambiguum si teneamus duplicem esse
vocationis speciem; un versalis una, qua ^mnes pariter ad se invitat deus
perexternam verbi praedicationem, et am quibus eam in mortis odo em proponit.

Ca^v. institut. lib. 3o. c. 24. 8


there is an universal call by which he calls all alike to him in the
external preaching of his word, even them to whom it becomes the savor of
death, and the matter of more severe condemnation. Now this is clearly Calvin's
meaning in his general call, so much relied upon by Mr. Goodwin, viz. by the
express preaching of the gospel orally; not at all any such universal call by
the creatures, without the letter of the Gospel: and until he can produce one
place in all the works of Calvin, wherein he mentions any other call to
Jesus Christ then by the letter of the gospel, he must with me lie under the
censure of a wil^ull and shameless pervertour of men's words for his own
purpose: and if he thus mean by his general call, then what strength this
testimony contributeth to Mr. Goodwins cause, let any judge, who holds that all
have a sufficiency for faith in Christ without the letter of the gospel. And at
the same rate runs the testimony of Musculus. As for the suffrage of the
British divines at the Synod of Dort, I cannot conceive that any who had his
vote in the suffrage of that Synod about the five controverted points, can
produce any pertinent testimony for him; my reason is, because I find them thus
speaking point blank against him. Cap. 4o. of conversion. Sect. 4.
In man there are some remainders of the light of nature, whereby he retains
some principles of God, etc. But so far is he from being enabled by this inbred
light to come to the saving knowledge of God, and to turn himself unto him,
that he does not make use of it in natural things. And again, in that chapter
of conversion, one of the errors concerning that article which they rej^ct is,
as follows, that man can so use the common grace, (the light of nature) that
by it he may receive evangelical grace; and that God has for his part shown
himself ready to reveal Christ to all men, seeing he does sufficiently afford
to every man necessary means for the making of Christ known, and for faith
and repentance. Now if they reject that as an error, which is the adequate
subject of Mr. Goodwins assertion, certainly these are no probable or likely
men to add any strength to his cause; and I expect in his next that he produce
the words and place where any of these men speak of a faith grounded only
upon the sound of the heavens, or that the heathen are enabled by the light of
nature to believe in Christ; or else to judge himself whether it be not an
unchristian course to force such a sense of men's writings contrary to the
stresse and current of their judgment, that so he may have the more plausible
way for his causeless calumny of inconsistencies and contradictions; and when
he has so barbarously broken their heads, so childishly to give them a
plaster, by anking them in the number of the best Protestant Divines, because
he thinks they speak of his side.

Thus have I examined all his proofs both divine and humane, and I cannot but
adjudg them far short of proving his tenent; and therefore I advise him either
to send out new, or to take a review of these in a second and better
examination, for they are all impertinent to the question first propounded;
some of them necessarily inferring the letter of the gospel, the rest not
inferring at all either repentance or faith in Jesus Christ, therefore no
proper testimony for this doctrine, that all men without exception are bound to
believe in Christ, though they never heard the letter of the gospel And thus I
have endeavored to satisfy his own desires, and have taken the weapons out
of his hands, page 6.
by which he thus unhandsomely digladiates against the truth: and I shall
conclude I have done it, until I see in his next how he does reassume them, or
else surrender up to me this his first hold, to which I find him something
inclined, because as suspecting the strength of that which he has all this
while spoken, he retreateth to a second, which has no coherence at all with
this, which I shall examine:

In the 15. Page of his Treatise we find him thus speaking;

[ Suppose we grant, for Arguments sake, that the heathen to whom the gospel
was never orally preached, were not in an immediate capacity of believing it,
in those terms of believing lately expressed; yet this proves not but that they
may be in a remote capacity of believing, such a capacity I mean, which by a
regular and conscientious exercise of those worthy abilities which God has
conferd upon them, might by the ordinary blessing, and by the standing course
of providence of God, in such cases, have risen up to an immediate capacity in
this kind, so that a heathen man who never heard of Jesus Christ may yet by the
effect of the law written in their heart, quit himself to such a degree of
well pleasing to God, that he will not fayl to reveal his son Christ to him
after some such manner and degree as will become saving to him as Christ says,
habenti dabitur, to him that has shall be given.] He grants it only for
argumentation sake, that the heathen are not in an immediate capacity of
believing; it seems then that he has been hitherto proving that the heathen
are in an immediate capacity of believing, as indeed the whole surface of his
discourse tends this way. I say, (capacity) as he here expresses it, because
I hope he has no piece of deceit in his eye, when he for sufficiency puts
capacity. Now M^, Goodwin has not been always of this mind, that the heathen
are in an immediate capacity, or have an immediate sufficiency of believing in
Christ, for in his dispute with Mr. Simpson I find him thus, page 79.
upon the distinction and application of sufficiency mediate, and immediate. [
My sense is of the question in hand, thus: I do not mean that the Gentiles or
any other man has a present or immediate sufficiency of means to believe
originally given them of God, but a remote sufficiency; that is, such as by the
use of it they may possess themselves of further means by which they may be
enabled to believe.] As Mr. Goodwin is a man that professes religion and
earnest contention for the truth, I am sorry; for him, but as he is a scholar,
and received by all as a man of eminent parts, I am ashamed of him, that the
world should see such pregnant symptoms of an imposture upon him; that when he
is forced to say that no man has an immediate sufficiency originally given him
of God to believe, he should now say, that he only supposes for arguments
sake, that the heathen have not an immediate capacity of believing. Mr. Goodwin
knows well, what kind of men they are that stand in need of good memories, and
let him make this one of his first retractations, and let the world know that
it is not the wantonness, but necessity of his genius, that extorts this
supposition from him: for had he not this hold to fly to, there would be no
more occasion left for dispute, the matter is so clear against him, both by
the evidence of reason and his own concessions. But to let this pass, I shall
examine that which he here in the second place urges, although it be utterly
impertinent to the maine business which he undertook to prove; and the
rather, because in this he being one spirit with the Remonstrants, I have the
fairer plea to examine also that which is the fairest plea for an universal
sufficient grace, as it is most plausibly laid down by the best of Mr.
Goodwins way, and that he and the Arminians are of one opinion in this, I shall
make appear by these following instances. The Remonstrants in their solemn
convention before the Synod of Dort make out universal grace thus; Omnibus
hominum cordibus insculpsit aliqua^ saicognitionem, itaque communi vocatione
omnes ad se vocat deus, non eo quidem fine ut secundum istius communis
vocationis tenorem gratiaeque generaliotis mensuram vitam institueates
immediate serventur, sed ut per eam disponantur ut evangelicae praedicationis
qua ipsa salus offertur; and concionis de vita ^terna rescipiscentiae, et
fidei, deque Christi gratia, et justitia qua vita aeterna per fidem obtinenda
et impetrata est, idonei reddantur auditores. Act. Synod. art. 2. p. 327.
God has inscribed in the hearts of all men some knowledge of himself, etc.
and so by this common call he calls all to himself, not to that end that those
that live according to the tenor of this common call or rule of this more
general grace should immediately be saved; but that by this call they may be
disposed and rendered hearers of that gospel wherein salvation is offered, and
that a door may be opened to that sermon of eternal life, wherein the doctrine
of repentance, faith, and spiritual obedience; and the grace and righteousness
of Christ, whereby eternal life is impetrated and to be obtained by faith. And
Arminius also in his examen of Mr. Perkins says to the same purpose thus; [
Dum Christi cognitione destituuntur, tamen se Deus sine testimonio non
reliquit, et in illo tempore aliquam veritatem de potentia et bonitate sua
illis pati fecit, Legem quoque ment^bus insculptam conservverit, quibus bonis
si recte usi fuissent, saltem ex conscientia, majorem etiam gratiam ipse etiam
concessurus fuisset, Secundum illud (habenti dabitur.) Arm. anteperk. page 259.
Even whilst they are destitute of the knowledge of Christ, yet God leaves not
himself without witness; and at the same time makes known to them the truth
of his power and goodness, and does conserve a law written in their minds;
which good things if they use well, or at the least conscienciously, God is
ready to grant to them according to that text, [to him that has shall be
given.] And further in the same page he says thus; [ Omnes homines aliqua
vocatione vocantur, nempe per istam testificationem de qua adduci possunt ut
palpando eum invenient. etc. haec autem vo. a^^o quanqua^ salu a^s no nest,
utp^^e, per eam salus immediat^ obtinenda est, sed praecedanea potest dici
salutari, qua Christus offertur, q^ae i^sam recte usur patam ex Dei
milericordia, sequutura est. ibid.
God calls all men with some kind of call, to wit, by that testification of
God, by which they may be brought to grope after God, and so to find him, etc.
which call, although it be not saving, so that salvation shall be immediately
obtained by it, yet it may be said to be precedaneous to that which is saving,
wherein Christ himself is offered; which last out of the mercy of God is ready
to follow the good use of the former.] And are not all these devised methods,
one and the same with this which Mr. Goodwin excudeth? and do they not lay
their foundation of Universal grace very low, even in the Bowels of nature it
self? and in all, as well in them, as in Mr. Goodwin, it amounts to this,
that God gives to all some natural abilities, with assisting grace, which if
they improve well, God will reveal Christ, and so give more grace till they
come to be saved; according to that text, To him that has shall be given; the
lowest stone of which foundation, I shall endeavor to raise, and to Anatomize
this intricate method of Universal grace: To effect which, I shall make a
little digression not at all from the question; yet from Mr. Goodwin, that I
may exchange a word or two with the Remonstrants in the examination of the said
two things. 1. How they prove that which is given to all to be grace. 2. How
they prove it to be sufficient. The rest I shall examine when I return to Mr.
Goodwin.

It is well known that the Doctrine of Universal sufficient grace, is the
standing Pillar of their Doctrine in the second Article, and hence is it that
all that hold universal redemption, do also hold universal suffici^nt grace,
and their mouths and pens do every where savor of this Doctrine. Let us
therefore see in the first place how they prove that God gives that to all men
without exception, which may truly be called grace And any that are exercised
in them, may see that they do profess this very roundly without hesitation.
True indeed, in their Synodical writings in the forementioned place they give
it the name of More general Grace, but Arminius a little more laxely; in the
description of their general call before mentioned* he says thus quibus bonis
si recte usi fuissent, Deus ulteriorem gratia^ ill^s concessurus est. Arm.
antiperk. 259.
All men have some knowledge of the power and goodness of God, and such gifts,
which if they use well, God is ready to give further grace; where we have it
called grace only by intimation, not expressly; he says God would give more
grace, which phrase More Grace, implies some preceding grace: yet in another
place he says more largely thus Vide mihi. annon isto dicto (Habenti d^bitur)
promissio ista contineatur qua spondet Deus e supernaturali g^at^a illumm^turum
qui lu rine naturali recte utitar, aut saltem minus male. Antiperk. 218.
Consider with me whether or no in that saying (To him that has shall be
given) that promise is not herein contained, whereby God binds himself to give
supernatural light to them, that use the light of nature well, or at least
less evilly. So that now he makes the Talents that are to be used to be
natural light, and the increase to be supernatural grace; when if he had spoken
home to the point of Universal grace; he should have made the Talents as well as
the increase, that which is originally given to improve, as well as that which
is given by way of reward, to be supernatural grace; for the argument is good
against him out of his own words; for thus we may argue, if supernatural grace
be not conferred, but upon the right use and improvement of natural abilities,
then all men have not supernatural grace; and the reason is clear, because they
do not use the light of nature well, which expresses of Arminius when Molineus
undertaketh to Anatomize, and urges against Arminius, thus, God in Scripture
is no where said to bind himself to give increase of grace to them* that use
the light of nature well. Corvinus, who defends him, says thus by way of
reply: 1. Non ab Arminio dici simpliciter a Deo dari incrementa gratiae lumine
naturali recte utenti, sed luce illa recte utenti per ad jutotium gratiae.

(2) Nec dici ab illo Deum teneri incrementa dare; sed tantum quod Deus vult
sine ulla obligatione.


1. It is not said by Arminius simply thus, that God gives increase of grace to
him that uses the light of nature well, but to him that uses nature well by
the help of grace. 2. Neither is it said by him, that God is bound to give the
increase of grace, but only that God will do it without any obligation: But
here Corvinus does not defend, but chastise his Master; and good reason if he
do not express himself in such a fundamental point, (modo decenti) in such a
manner as becomes it; and I must tell also Corvinus, that both th^se replies
are far from truth. For clear it is;

1 That he affirms simply that God gives increase of supernatural grace to him
that uses the light of nature well, without any mention of the least syllable
of assisting grace, as any may judge that revieweth the forementioned quotation
our of him; if any for Corvinus, can extract out of that text, the least
syllable leading to assisting grace, I shall then say that Corvinus defends;
but if not, he shows not what he does say, but what he should have said. Now
if any shall say to this, that Arminius is so to be understood, becuse
sometimes he expresses himself to the su^l; I find him indeed thus in other
places speaking. Anne natura prorsus destituta gratia^ and Spiritu Dei,
instructa est notitia veritatis? etc. non Arbitror ista dona naturae sine
gratia and spiritu Dei tribui posse citra injuriam gratiae divinae. Arm. resp.
ad A. Art. 31. Artic. 15.
[But can nature altogether destitute of the grace and spirit of God, be
instructed with the knowledge of God, etc. I do not think that such natu^al
gifts, without the grace and spirit of God can be granted, without manifest
injury to the grace of God:] But this does not at all reduce him to any clear
discovery of the truth, but rather detect his fraud; for they may have the
Spirit of God, and gifts of it, originally, and yet no supernatural grace given
them, de novo, to use the gifts of nature well; because according to their own
principles, every man has (Reliquias vitae Spiritualis) the Relics of
spiritual life; whereby they know something of God, and are enabled to do the
things contained in the law; which yet the Apostle says, the Heathen do by
nature; and this not only Arminius, but Corvinus himself says, as I shall
show presently: so that seeing his clearest words are liable to this charge of
aequivocation, it savours of too much levity and inconstancy to treat or the
use of natural light, in so many places, without the least hint of any new
principle of assisting grace; and I cannot but judge thus, that because they
cannot make good their Doctrine of Universal grace, without this pretended
assisting grace, he therefore sometimes scatters such expressions carrying a
covert intimation thereof; but because they find the proof of it from Scripture
to be but slender, they most frequently let that pass untouched. But however,
if the question turn upon this hinge, it is very improvidently done of them, to
let the whole credit of their cause hang upon their bare assertions; for they
do not produce one Scripture in all their writings, to prove that God gives
divine assisting grace to enable men to use the light of nature well: and here
the question concerning universal grace sticks betwixt us; They affirm that God
gives to all men assisting grace to use the light of nature well: We, on the
other side deny it, and provoke them to produce one place of Scripture to prove
it, and they have not produced it yet to his day. When Molineus in his Anatomy
of Arminianisme, Quod dicis falsum est. chap. 39. sec. 2.
charge them thus; God it no where said to give to all men supernatural
grace, to use the light of nature well: Corvinus only answers thus, That which
thou say is false, when it had been more becoming him to produce Scriptures,
where it is said, that that which is given to every man is called grace: But he
produces something that pretends toward reason, and therefore I must leave
Arminius, and speak in a word or two to Corvinus. And in the first place, to
tell him that it is much prejudicial to their cause to wave Scripture, and from
reason only to seek for stabiliment in their own obscure deductions, which are
very obnoxious to scruple: which in the next place I shall examine. 1. He
says, Ibidem Neminem relinqui sine testimonio.
none are left without witness; but it is as obscure for us to know what
testimony or witness he means: I suppose he understands that witness
mentioned, Acts 14.16. wherein God is said not to leave himself without
witness, which text is so much insisted upon by them; but then could not
Corvinus his acute reason tell him, that this is no satisfaction to Molineus
charge, except he had also proved that this testimony is supernatural grace:
the testimony there spoken of, is by those fruitful seasons, showers, and
filling their hearts with gladness; but this is far short of that supernatu^al
grace pretended by them. Those that are given over to a reprobate sense, and so
natural as that they are without all knowledge of God, and so certainly without
all assisting grace; yet they had that testimony of the Deity, in showers and
fruitful seasons.

2. He says Secondly, some Talents are given to all men: Omnibus aliqua
talenta dari. ibidem.
And what then? will it therefore follow that assisting grace is given? I think
not. Assisting grace is none of the Talents that God gives so generally, but
rather that natural light, and ( reliquiae and scintillae luminis) the Law
written in their heart. Dantur incrementa gratiae recte utenti lamine naturali
peradjutorium gratiae, (...),
The grace of God is not by themselves said to be a Talent, but (principium quo
utuntur talenta) that principle by which the Talents are used. as Corvinus
says. God gives increase of grace to him that uses the light of nature well,
by the grace of God assisting him. now if the assisting grace of God be not one
of those Talents, it is no plausible argument to urge, assisting grace is given
to all, because Talents are given to all; except he say, that where God gives
natural gifts, he always gives assisting grace to enable them to use them
well, which is not to prove the question in hand, but to beg it. Ista gratia
quae data est ad hoc ut Deum ^olamus non potest non esse supernaturalis, ibid.


3. That which is most plausible is this, That grace of God which is given to
that end that we may worship him, cannot be less then supernatural, This is
true, but nothing to the business in hand, because the question is not this,
Whether that grace given by God, to that end that men may worship him, be
supernatural: but whether that grace be given or no to all men without
exception; this we demand a proof of in all the Scripture: true indeed, the
light of nature and works of providence discover that there is a God, and that
he is to be worshipped; thus far men by groping after God may come to know; but
this is far short of this (ut Deum colamus) for the actual worship of God
cannot be without a rule, by the help of which we may worship him according to
his own will: and this is the height of the Doctrine of Universal grace, They
dare not call nature grace, lest they should come too near the Doctrine of
Pelagius; and that God gives principles of assisting grace, they have not yet
proved, but only by these few infirm arguments, and all the world may yet take
notice, that the proof yet remains to be made on their parts; and till they
give us some Scriptures wherein that which God gives to every man without
exception, is honored with the name of grace; we shall judge them more abundant
in assertions then in proofs, And besides the want of proof, which lies as a
ponderous stone in the way against that Doctrine. There is also the validity of
an argument or two to take away, before they can pass for plausible Defenders
of that faith: I shall therefore address my self to urge them with some few
arguments to prove, that that which God gives to every man cannot be called
grace; neither does God give to every man that assisting grace, whereby they
may, and to that end that they might, use the light of nature well.

(paratus faccre gratiam) ready to give divine grace, then he does not actually
give assisting grace to every man in the world without exception: but it is as
frequent as their pages to use this expression (Deus aut gratiam facit, aut
facere paratus est) God does either give grace, or is ready to do it; which
Salvo they need not so cautelously to provide, if they can prove that God
gives to every man divine assisting grace, to that end that they might use the
light of nature well.



But the grace of Christ is not exhibited to all men without exception.

Therefore no Supernatural grace.

All grace comes to us by Christ, therefore it is called the grace of Christ,
Ephesians. 1.3. John 1.16.
and we are blessed with all spiritual blessings in him, Ephesians. 1.3 and we are
said to receive grace for grace from him, John 1.16. But that the grace of
Christ is not exhibited to every man without exception, I need not produce
Scriptures to prove; for the Remonstrants will surrender it up to us without
any hostile progress: for speaking of the natural law inscribed in the heart
of all men, they say thus, as I have formerly quo^ed from them, Not to that end
that by that only they should be immediately saved, but that by that they
should be rendered fit hearers of the Gospel, wherein there is the Sermon of the
grace of Christ. Whence I conclude, that the grace of Christ has no place,
till that natural light be actually improved, and that so high, as that thereby
they make themselves fit hearers of the Gospel, and so to receive the grace of
Christ: now if any may receive the grace of Christ, to that end that they may
use nature well, and so by consequence before they do use it well, then the
words of these great disputers want weight to ballast them. Cornel. a lapid. in
loc.
Besides, let them consult with the interpreters of their own side, who thus
expound this text, Ephesians. 2.12. wherein it is said, the Gentiles were without
Christ; one says thus, without Christ, that is, without the knowledge of
Christ, the law, the grace, the life of Christ: These two are arguments ad
hominem.

If God suffered the Nations to walk in their own ways, then he did not give
the principle of his assisting Grace to that end, that they might use the light
of nature well.

But God suffered the Nations to walk in their own ways, Acts 14.16. Therefore
he does not the latter. This Argument I humbly conceive has so much weight in
it, that it will deservedly challenge their most intimate consideration, and it
is grounded upon this foundation: For God to suffer them to walk in their own
ways, which the word of God affirms, and yet to do what in him lies to
hinder them from so doing, which this method of the Remonstrants must needs
import, are in themselves very contradictious and inconsistent, and that upon
the principle of Arminius himself, which is, that Permissio est cessat^o ab
omni impediendi actu. Anteperk 2. p. 21
impedition and permission cannot stand together, permission is the cessation
from all acts of impedition; for clear it is, that he that does any thing to
hinder an act, cannot be properly said to permit it, although the thing it self
be done.

Now let us proceed to the business upon Arminius's grounds, that Permission
is the suspension of all efficiency, whereby the action of men may be
rationally hindered; and that God hinders an act two ways, either giving a law
whereby men are not left to their own liberty, but they are so confined, that
they cannot do it but sin: as also by putting to any impediment, whereby the
action may be hindered; both these then must be wanting if there be a
permission; and so by consequence, where there is permission, there is neither
of these, so that by the help of this, we may come to conclude what consonance
the Doctrine of universal grace has with the Scriptures or Reason. Will they
think it rational for us to say, that that father which gives to his son a
great estate, or it may be a lesser portion, to negotiate and trade with, and
also by his counsel and direction, yea and his labor and pains, is ready to
assist him; that he should be said to leave him to himself, and to suffer him
to walk in his own ways? So in this case, they say that God gives all the
heathen a law to circumscribe them, and by that their consciences will accuse
them, and condemn them if they walk not according to that law, and this God
gives them as a full stock and measure of Talents, to negotiate and drive on an
heavenly trade, and with that intent, that they may thrive in a spiritual
estate toward heaven; and not only so, but by the motion of his holy Spirit,
assist, direct, and move, and persuade to restrain them from abusing those
Talents, and to the end they may use them well. If so, then what truth can
there be in that Scripture, that says, God suffered them to walk in their
evil ways? or if there be truth in those Scriptures, what truth then in those
frequent assertions of theirs, that contein such administrations of grace to
them, to hinder them from walking in their own ways? seeing permission and
impedition cannot stand together; no nor your permission and the putting forth
such means, as either they suppose may, or intend should hinder such actions,
can consist and stand together.

And as a further illustration of this argument, I demand Cui fini? to what end
is this principle of assisting grace given to all men. I^ is true, I know, they
tell us in general that it is to assist them that they may use the light of
nature well: Specialem modu^ operationis, non necesse est nobis exponere.
Corvin in Mol. c. 43. S. 5. Etsi dici a nobis actum per meras scastones^n nobis
effici probare non pussi^; lubenter canon concedimus came non effici fine
suasionibus, Ib. see 7 Ponitur Impedi mentum volan tati duplici mo do; vel per
modum naturae, vel per madu^ liber^a^s Prima est physicci ^pellendo. Secunda
est moral^e^ suadendo; in prima voluntas necessario, in secan a certo
impeditur. Armin. Antiperk p 150.
but this does not satisfy. I demand further, what is the work, or the manner
of working in this case? how does this spirit assist the heathen to use nature
well? They deny any infused habites, but it must be in a way that suits well
with the liberty of man's free will, which is by moral suasion, as they say in
all their writings: yet if we charge them with this, they deny it, and that
upon good ground: for if they say it is by a Physical efficiency only, it
destroies their very foundation; and if by a moral suasion only, they cannot
prove it; we may well therefore demand how? but we cannot receive satisfaction
from them in this, for they answer us thus, The special and particular manner
by which the spirit works, it is not necessary for us to explain. How do these
assertors of universal grace delight to lurk in obscurities, and upon every
occasion decline the open profession of the truth? and it will be too much
digressive from the point, for me to engage in this dispute (de modo
operationis gratiae) but to take it as we find it granted by them, thus:
Although thou can not prove that we say the grace of God acts by mere
suasion, yet we grant willingly it acts not without suasion; or to ^ake the
words of Arminius, who treating of permission which he makes to be a
suspension of all impediment, says thus, Impediments are put before the will
of man two ways, either by acting according to the manner of nature, or acting
according to the manner of free choice; the former is by Physical impulse, the
second by moral suasion; in the first the will is necessarily, in the second
certainly hindered. By all which we may conclude, that where the grace of God is
given by way of an assisting principle, it must be either by a Physical
efficiency, necessarily acting the will, or by a moral persuasion, certainly
persuading the will, or both join^ly; and so on the contrary we may say, that
to them whom he neither Physically moves, nor morally persuades, to such the
assisting grace of God is not given to hinder them from walking in sinful
ways, or to enable them to use the light of nature well; by this we may
conclude, that this assisting grace is not given to the Heathen nations,
because he suffered them to walk in their ways; which permission excludes both
Physical efficiency and moral suasion, and that this is firm reason, I shall
present to the world their own grants. First Arminius gives it as the ground
work, thus Perm^ssio igitur qua Deus perm^tat creaturam ra^ionalem perpetrate
actum, est suspensio impedimentorum om^um quibus volantas persua denda erat.
Arm, in Perk. p. 153.
Permission by which God permits a rational creature to commit any act, is
the suspension of all impediments, by which the will is to be moved and
persuaded. Now I thus urge, that if permission be the suspension of all
impediments by which the will is to be persuaded; then I say, the will is
neither to be Physically acted, nor morally persuaded; where either of these
is, there is no permission, and this Arminius himself grants, thus:
Impedimentum quo peccatum qua tale impeditur, est vel voluntatis divinae ^
velatio, vel suasio voluntatis ad obre^nperandum voluntati divinae; unde
constat, permissionem peccati esse suspensionem istius revelationis, vel
suasionis, vel utriusque. page 157.
The impediments by which sin as sin is hindered, are the revelation of the
divine will, and suasions to move the will to obey that divine will. Whence it
is clear, that Gods permission to commit sin, is the suspension of that
Revelation, or of that suasion, or of both joint^y. And as a further testimony
in this case, he says in another place thus; Nam utunum argumentum impedire
potest voluntatem ne velit quod Deus vult impeditum; ita necesse est ut nullo
argumentorum istorum persuadeatur voluntas ad nolendum, secus non est
permissio. p. 153.
For as one argument may hinder the will from willing that which God would have
hindered, so it is necessary that he use no argument to persuade the will to be
unwilling, otherwise there is no permission.

What can be made more clear then this, that where God permits, he uses no
means either Physically to act, or morally to persuade the will? Now to draw to
a conclusion in this Argument, thus I sum up the strength of it, God
permits the Nations to walk in their own ways, according to the Scriptures,
Acts 14.16, 17. and because he permits, therefore we must not say, that
either he Physically acts, or morally persuades the will to use the light of
nature well, according to the Remonstrants own concessions; and then I
conclude, that either the assisting spirit and grace of God is not given at
all, or else to be idle, or to no use, not to assist them to use the light of
nature well; Let them take which of these they please, and till any for them
can prove, that Gods assisting grace and spirit, and permission or suffering
them to walk in their evil ways can stand together, without being at a very
high rate contradictious, I shall conclude that they do but usurp the title of
Universal Grace.



But there is no need of Gods assisting grace to that end: Therefore there is
no such principle given. Corvin. in Mol. cap. 11. sect. 4.


We challenge (and that but in equity) that liberty of arguing which they take
unto themselves: When we urge that Adam in integrity had that grace, which if
we had now unmaimed and not impaired, we might be as able to believe in Christ,
as Adam was to do that which was commanded him; and so by consequence that
grace which Adam had was (principium potestativum credendi in Christum) the
potestative principle of believing in Christ, if his condition had required it.
To this they say, God did not give such power to believe to Adam in his
integrity, because then there was no need of it: and that upon this ground, it
is against the wisdom of the Almighty to give grace to do that, of which there
is no need, or to give grace where there is no need And may not we likewise
say, that it is not suitable to the wisdom of God, to give his special
assisting grace to enable them to use the light of nature well, when they are
enabled without that grace to do the things contained in the Law? Now in this
Argument I shall proceed only upon their principles, and I clear it thus. When
we urge that all men are dead in sin, and so improve this as an argument for
the power of Gods grace, because men are dead, and so cannot further their own
conversion, or prepare themselves to receive regenerating grace, as Molin
presses Arminius; Corvinus, who is the defender of the Arminian faith,
replieth thus Addo quidem cum habere reliquias vitae spiritualis (and explico
me) in intellectu ^ aliquam Dei cognitionem; and in affectu defiderium ad bonu^
cognitum: ideoque licet id quod vere bonum est age e non possit, potest tamen
per illud bonum aliquid agere, intelligare Deum, esse bonum and justum, facere
caquae sunt legis, pagnare cum defideriis licet non vincere, locomotivum
regere, quae talia sunt quae Deu requirit ab eo quem intendit regenerare. Cor.
in Man. 32. se. 2.
Man has the relics of spiritual life; that is, in his understanding some
knowledge of God, in his affections some desire of good being known: so that
although he cannot do that which is truly good, yet he can by it do some good,
understand God to be good and just, do the things contained in the Law, fight
with his own desires, although not overcome them; and to govern his locomotion,
which things God requires in those whom he will regenerate. Now if man by
nature have such relics of spiritual life in him as to know God, desire good,
do the things contained in the Law, fight with their desires; govern their
locomotion, and all this by virtue of the relics of spiritual life; then what
need of a principle of assisting grace, de novo, to enable them to do the
things contained in the Law? for that which is performed by the relics of
spiritual life, need not any assisting principle of grace anew. Again, the
Collocutors at the conference at Hague, upon this very argument, say thus, In
spirituali morte non separantur proprie dona spiritualia ab hominis voluntate,
quia nunquam illa fuerunt et insita. Sed libertas duntaxat agendi been aut
male, quae libertas quamvis vites suas non exerere possit in homine peccato^e
propter tenebras intellectus, and depravationem affectuum, mansit tamen pars
creatae naturae. Col. Hag. 279.
In spiritual death, spiritual gifts are not properly separated from the will,
because they were never in it; for in the will there is only that liberty of
doing good or evil, which liberty although it cannot put forth its strength in
fallen man because of the blindness of his understanding, and depravation of
his affections, yet it remains as part of a created nature. And many of such
like expressions pass in that argument, by all which they affirm death to be
only in the understanding and affections, not in the will; but that in the
depth of spiritual death, the will according to its natural freedom, can act
as the understanding dictateth, and the affections move; all which are very
contradictious to themselves in other places, and the holy Scriptures every
where: yet upon this ground I proceed against them with their own sword, The
will needs no life to be infused anew, it is enough if the understanding and
the affections be rectified; but as for the understanding that has the
knowledge of God, and the truth naturally, which Arminius calls (Lumen
natural) natural light, and Corvinus Scinitilla luminis, sparks of light,
which light is called the law of Nature, and so often by the Arminians and Mr.
Goodwin called natural light: and in the affections there is a desire of good,
fighting with inordinate desires, and by both they come to do the things
contained in the Law, and that by nature; what need then of a principle of
assisting grace conferred anew, to enable them to do any of these? True indeed,
the Remonstrants often use the word grace as Pelagius did, Gratiae vocabulo
invidiam frangens, and offensionem declinans.
of whom it was said (by the word grace he endeavored to break the cloud of
envy, and avoid offenses) so these, merely to serve them at this turn, and to
carry on their own interest, are strong sticklers for the grace of God, to
assist man in doing the least thing toward grace and salvation.

When they would prove man not to be wholly dead, they urge some Relics of
life, whereby he is able to know God, desire good, fight against his lusts,
govern his locomotion, do the things contained in the Law, Textus non dicit eos
dispositos esse a Deo. Coll. Hag. 109.
and so to dispose themselves to grace and eternal life: for thus they say when
they speak of, or rather pervert that text, Acts 13.48. (As many as were
ordained to eternal life believed) they say that (ordained) in the text, is no
more then disposed to eternal life; and that the text says not they are
disposed by God to eternal life. Now not to be disposed by God, is not to be
disposed by the grace of God; for by that we say men are disposed to eternal
life: but it seems they say men are disposed to eternal life, and yet not by
God or his grace, and what can this be but by nature, and the natural powers of
man, and so of themselves without any new principle of assisting grace? And yet
when they come to make out a general and universal grace, then no man must be
disposed to do any thing, or know any thing, but by a principle of assisting
grace, without which, nature is wholly blind; and are now become as absolute
patrons of the grace of God as may be. Oh the fraud and juggling of these
supporters of the doctrine of universal grace! I urge these two things to them;
First, when they urge that man by the relics of life has abilities to all
those things before mentioned, and this to prove man not to be wholly dead. I
demand whether they understand man to have those abilities by the relics of
life, with the assisting grace of God or without it: if they mean with it;
then it is very impertinent to prove man not to be wholly dead; for no man is
so simple to plead man to be so dead by sin, that he cannot do anything,
being excited and assisted by the grace of God; and if they mean the relics
of life without that grace, then I have what I desire, that all men have not
grace; so universal grace falls. Secondly, I urge, if those words in Act.
13.48. (...), which text according to their own gloss is to be read thus [as
many as were disposed to eternal life;] if those words (I say) disposed to
eternal life, do not necessarily import thus much, that men are disposed by
God to eternal life; Then what ground have they to say that no man is able to
do the things contained in the law, or any thing whereby he is disposed to
faith and regeneration, but as he is assisted by the grace of God de novo? How
necessarily is this doctrine inevitably involved? When they would prove man not
to be wholly dead, then we have it only thus, [they do by nature the things
contained in the law;] but when they come to prove universal grace, we have it
with a comment thus; [they do the things contained in the law by nature, as it
is helped and assisted by grace] let them adhere either to the one or other:
either, that man has no such relics of life by which he is able to dispose
himself to faith; or else that a new principle of assisting grace is not
needful, nor given to every man. The one will help in the point of the manner of
working of Gods grace in man's conversion; the other in the point of universal
grace. And until they can reconcile those relics of life in every man, whereby
they are enabled to do those things contained in the law, and to prepare
themselves for faith; and the necessity of the assisting principle of Gods grace
to be imparted to man anew, for those ends and purposes; I shall conclude, that
they do but usurp the name and title of universal grace.

Thus I have endeavored to prove that that which they pretend is given to
every man, cannot be called Grace. In the next place I shall examine whether
that which is given to every man (although it be granted to be grace) be truly
said to be sufficient. Now this must be proved as well as the former, if they
will carry up to the height an universal sufficient grace.

Now that this business may be perspicuously decided, it is requisite that we
first consider the nature and definition of sufficiency, in general, and then
apply it to particular cases.

The Remonstrants give us a general definition of suffiencie, tending to this
result, Sufficiency is a position of things necessary and requisite to that
thing, in respect of which it is said to be sufficient; and this I willingly
receive as rational.

Upon that text, Isa. 5.1, 2.3. They say thus.

Sufficiens gratia nihil aliud est quam ea gratia quae omnia necessaria ad
regenerationem adhibet, ut quod ad actum praestationem necessarium nihil ult a
requiratur. Definitio gratiae s^ffie ent^s hoc habet, ut omnia necessaria
adh^bet; Toll aliquid necessarium, no^ erit gratia sufficiens; pone omnia
necessaria, and erit gratia sufficiens. Act. Synod. acr. 4. page 9.
Sufficient grace is nothing else but that grace which affords all requisites
and necessaries to the effecting of regeneration, so that to the performance of
the act, nothing can be beyond it required as necessary; the very definition of
sufficient grace contains this in it, that it afford all necessaries: take
away any one necessary requisite, and we take away sufficient grace, grant all,
and we grant sufficient grace. And true it is, that sufficiency in general, is
well expressed in other words, thus [Positis omnibus requisitis.] But we must not
stay in generals, if we undertake to clear the truth of this point to
satisfaction. But consider the various ends and purposes, in tendency to which,
this or that measure of grace is said to be sufficient. The Remonstrants do not
affirm that assisting grace given to every man to be sufficient to all ends
and purposes, ^amely to work faith in Jesus, to effect reg^neration, or
sufficient to bring men to eternal life; as Mr. Goodwin fondly dreameth.
Corvinus says thus, Omnibus aliqua m^dia ad^ibentur ad salutem; quae licet non
semper sufficient ad fidem ingenerandam immediate, tame^ ad actiones aliquas
suffic^unt, quibus Deus vult homines ad fidem praeparari. Corv. in Molin. cap.
39. Sec. 1.
Some means in tendency to salvation are given to all, which although they be
not sufficient to work faith immediately, yet they are sufficient to those
works by which God will have men prepared to faith and regeneration. And again
the same Author thus, Quantum ad athnicos pertinet ad quo^ Christi nomen non
pervent, eos taligrat^a absol te ad sal^tem et fidem sufficient praeditos non
esse, saepe supra diximus; quare po suimas^, radum suffic^en^iae ac men uram
diversam ^alem quae fit pro mensura vocationis, c 37 s. 11 Act. Synod. art. 2.
p. 237.
So much as appertains to the heathen to whom the name of Christ never came,
we have oftentimes said that they are not endued with a grace sufficient,
absolutely, either to faith or regeneration; therefore we have put diverse
degrees and measures of sufficiency, according to the measure of their call. So
that we have clearly discovered negatively, what the general and common grace
is not sufficient to effect, namely not sufficient to salvation, not yet to
faith in Christ: but affirmatively, to what it is sufficient, something more
dubiously. Sometimes we have it thus, It is sufficient to those actions by
which men are disposed to faith and regeneration. Other sometimes we have it
thus, that by it men may be disposed to become apt and fit hearers of the
Gospel, as the Remonstrants in a forementioned place: which must be things very
different. Now here we must look for the height of the doctrine of Universal
Grace, thus, God gives common grace to all, by which they are sufficiently
enabled to do such acts or works by which they are disposed and prepared for
the hearing of the Gospel, and for faith and regenerating grace. The next thing
enquirable is, what those works or actions are by which they are disposed to
faith and regenerating grace, and to which they have sufficient grace? and
these cannot b^e otherwise then confusedly taken up from the pens of the
Remonstrants. In that chapter which by Corvinus is set apart to treat of this
very subject, viz. of that grace that prepares men for faith, we may find
various actions mentioned: as first. Quae legis sunt faciunt; ista opera, licet
talia non sint qualia iam regeniti praestant, sed valde exigua, tamen ea Deus
requirit in eo quem intendit regenerate, and iis utitur ad homine^
regenerandum. Corv. in Molin. cap. 34. sect 2.
The doing the things contained in the law, Romans 2.14. of these he says, that
they are such as God requires of those whom he intends to regenerate, and
uses them in tendency to it. Again in the next Sermon we find another, viz.
thirsting after Christ, and a desire of grace, and this he urges from Isa.
55.1. and expressly says thus, Cupiditas salutaris gratiae, and gemitus
conscientiae anhelantis sub pondere peccatorum sunt effecta Spiritus; sed non
regenerantis, sed ad regenerationem praeparantis, s. 3.
The desire of saving grace, and the groans of a conscience breathing under the
weight of sin are effects, not of the regenerating spirit, but of the spirit
preparing to regeneration. In another place we find thus, Homo in peccatis
mortuus, habet in intellectu Dei cognitionem, and in affectu ad bonum cognitum
aliquod desideriu^, quibus sacere potest ea quae sunt legis, pugnare cum
desideriis, and locomotivum regere, quae talia sunt ut ea exigat Deus ab eo
quem intendit regenerare Cir. in Mol. c. 32. se. 24.
A man that is dead in sins, has the knowledge of God in his understanding,
the desire of that known good in his affections, by which he can do the
things contained in the Law, fight and strive with his desires, govern his
locomotion; all which are required of those whom God wills to regenerate. So
that by these we may gather up a catalogue of those actions to which man has
sufficient means, and by which he is disposed to faith and regeneration;
namely, knowledge of God, desires after God and saving grace, groaning under
the burden of sin, fighting with inordinate desires, government of the
locomotion. These and such like are those actions they mean of. Now I must
examine these two things. First, whether these actions be dispositive to
regeneration, or that men be thereby properly said to be prepared to conversion.
Secondly, whether (though this be granted) all men may be truly said to be
sufficiently enabled for such actions.

For the first of these, I urge two ways. First to examine whether these
actions be truly said to be the effects of regeneration, or the preparations to
it. It is the grand question betwixt Molincus and Corvinus. Molineus affirms
them to be effects; Corvinus contends for this, that they are but preparations
to it, and may be where conversion is not. I shall not use any elaborate
discourse in this business, only to put them, or any for them to consider,
whether to grieve for sin, and groan under the burden of sin, and to fight
with inordinate lusts and desires, and from those to desire and thirst after
the saving grace of God, be not parts of conversion: Is there not a change in
the affections when we desire good, and the saving grace of God, and are so
far estranged from sin, as to groan under the burden of them; and from that
change in affections we come to fight against inordinate desires? which phrase
intimates a reluctance, or aversation in the mind from sin, contrary to that
condition wherein our minds are set upon evil works; Col. 1. In conversion there
is a double term, A quo, and Ad quem, from which, to which we are converted;
in these actions there is both from sin, to God and his grace, and that both in
desires, affections, and execution: and is it not yet conversion with the
Remonstrants? We may wonder by what color of reason they can imagine, In Actis
dicitur ^e plaritus, qui ante ipsam conversionem Deum timuerunt, and religiosi
fuere, ut de Judaes, co^nelio, Lydia Corvin. in Mol. cap. 34. sect. 5.
that when men are so far turned from sin as to grieve for it, groan under
the burden of it, and so to strive and fight against it; and so far turned to
God as to desire and hunger and thirst after his grace, they should not yet be
partakers of conversion; shall we see a piece of their reason? we have it in
Corvinus, who says thus, It is said in the Acts of the Apostles, that many
before they were converted, were religious, and feared God, as Act. 2 5. and
10.2. and 16.14. of the Jews, Cornelius and Lydia. And it will be an excellent
proof, when they prove that these mentioned in these Scriptures were not
converted before the preaching of the Apostles, which I believe will be ad
Gracas Calendas, Let any Arminian tell me what one syllable in those texts,
import that those there spoken of, were then unconverted: or where do we find
any footsteps of their conversion afterward, or that the Apostle was sent for
to convert Cornelius; and where he did it? til this be done, I shall conclude
their proof very infirm and weak. For the Apostle did not go to Cornelius to
convert him to God, but to instruct him in a more particular and distinct
knowledge of Christ; which I hope they will grant many had not in those days,
and before that yet were converted to God.

A second piece of their reason, we have from the same Author, and in the same
place, from this, that the fear of God is said to be before the revelation of
the divine wills and his Argument is this; Ille timor convenit nondum
credentibus, qui praecedit revelationem divinae voluntatis; talis est timor de
quo sermo est, Psalm. 15.12, 14. Ibid.
That fear agrees well to those that yet believe not in Christ, which goes
before the revelation of the divine will: But such a fear is that spoken of,
Psalm. 25.12, 14. Ergo. But when this argument is reduced to a right and
legitimate formation, it will appear to be of the same size with the former.

First, for that phrase, believes not in Christ, he should have inserted, are
not converted; now it is ill confounding these two, because according to them,
many before Christ (of whom this text is spoken) were converted to God, and yet
did not believe in Christ: so that the proposition should have run thus, [That
fear agrees well to men unconverted, which goes before the revelation of Gods
will.]

Secondly, That phrase, Revelation of the divine will, must be distinguished,
and we must know whether he means, all the discoveries of Gods will, or only
a further confirmation or increase of knowledge of his will. If they understand
it in this last sense, I deny the Proposition; if in the former, the
Assumption: for the fear there spoken of does not precede all knowledge of the
divine will. God may well be said to show his covenant, and to teach in the way
that he shall choose, and to tell his secrets to them that are already
converted, and have had some discoveries of his will; otherwise David so often
as he prays to God in Psalm. 119. to teach him his word, his will, his ways,
his statutes, so often he should bespeake himself without the knowledge of Gods
will, and yet unconverted. And by such arguments as those they attempt to prove
that those actions are but preparative to conversion and regeneration. I shall
only come against them with their own sword in one Argument, thus: they grant
us in express terms, that Homo in statu peccati nihil boni ex se and a se
potest aut facere aut velle, aut cogitare; sed ne cesse est ut in intellectu,
voluntate, affectibus, and omnibus viribus renovetur. Script. Synod. Art. 3. p.
1.
Man in the state of sin, can do no good, nor think good, nor desire good of
himself; but to these it is necessary that he be renewed in his understanding,
will, affections, and all his powers. Now upon this ground they will be reduced
to this dilemma, either these actions are not good, or else they are not done
as preparative to, but as effects, or as parts (as some would express it) of
regeneration. Now to examine which of these two they take: We find Corvinus
thus salving the business: speaking of those re^icks of life in man, he says
thus, Ideoque licet illud quod vere honum est agere non possit, potest tamen
per illud bonum aliquid agere.

In Molin. cap. 32. Sect. 24.


Although by this he cannot do that which is truly good, yet by this good he is
able to do something. A very learned decision, and well becoming such a man. Who
ever yet feigned to himself man so destitute of power that he could do nothing?
But with him it seems man has such a sufficiency of grace, that he can do
something. But I hope this is not the height of the doctrine of universal
sufficient grace; he should have shown what it is that they can do, whether
bonum, or malum, or nec bonum, nec mulum; that is, whether good, or evil, or
indifferent; Good he denies, Indifferent he does not say, and Evil he cannot
prove. Neither is that any clearer satisfaction which we find in another place,
though upon the same subject; who being pressed with this, Whether those works
that men did as dispositive to regeneration, were good, or no? he answers thus,
Si vere bona ea intelligantur quae habent quicquid secundum evangelium ad
essentiam boni operis pertiner, non sunt vere bona: sed si verum opponitur
ficto ac apparenti, c^tra substantiam, suo modo etiam vere bona dici possunt
qua in illis est sinceritas and integritas. c. 34. s. 7
If truly good be understood of that which has those things which according to
the Gospel appertain to the essence of a good work, so they are not truly good:
but as truly good is opposed to feigned and appearing, without substance, so
they are truly good, because there is in them integrity and sincerity. But he
that can reduce this elaborate distinction to right reason, he shall be with
me great Apollo. How willing, and yet unwilling is Corvinus to affirm these
actions truly good, and that because pressing inconveniences attend him on
either hand? And therefore he will speak at a high rate of inconsistency, but
he will reconcile the business, and affirm them good, and truly good, as
they have the substance of good; but not truly good, as they have not the
essence of good; as if the substance of good can be present, and yet the
essence of good be absent: as if when the question was put concerning this or
that thing, whether it be a true man or no, we should say, as (true man) is
taken for that which has the essence of a man, so it is not a true man: but as
the phrase true man is taken for that which is a man, not in appearance, but in
substance, so it is a true man; would not this be exploded as very ridiculous?
the terms are so coincident, that one cannot be without the other; for it
cannot be truly said to be a man quoad substantiam, unless it has the essence
of a man. Quicquid est homo habet essentiam hominis. Yet this is the best
satisfaction that we receive from these great assertours of universal grace,
and in this distinction they have a double disadvantage. The members thereof
are coincident, and so no legitimate members of a distinction; and also the
last member, which he grants, serves our turn; for then those actions which
they produce, which all men have sufficient grace to perform, (as they say)
are by Corvinus his own confession such as have the substance of good, and are
not feignedly but truly good: then how can such things be done before
regeneration as pre-dispositions thereunto, seeing they are truly good? and
because they are so, according to their own concessions, they cannot be done by
any man until he be regenerated in all his p^wers: how are they in their last
refuge implicated and involved?

Secondly I urge. Suppose they he proved to be antecedents to regeneration, yet
how will they prove they are true and proper dispositives thereunto? I demand
some ground, either from Scripture or reason to prove that by these, man is
disposed to conversion. What place in Scripture intimates either these or any
other things as dispositions to conversion, or how in all their writings do
they clear these expressions to satisfaction? Those words by which they most
declare their minds in this point, I find in Corvinus, who says thus, Men's
nostra est, Hominem communiori ista gratia recte utentem, ideo esse aptum and
idoneum ad credendum Evangelio; quia tal bus evangelium ^um fi^ctu revelat, and
ut evangelio credant in talibus efficit, Corvin. in Mol. c. 33.. 11.
Our mind is, that man using common grace well, is therefore apt and fit to
believe the Gospel, because God does reveal the Gospel to such with fruit, and
does work faith in such. And in another place speaking of these very actions,
says thus, God requires them of him whom he will regenerate. And many more to
this purpose; whereby they in stead of proof from Scriptures, being deductions
of their own, which are very obnoxious to scruple; and their reasoning is
this, they deduct men's aptness and fitness to be converted by such acts, from
Gods dispensations, and his actual converting of those in whom are seen those
acts. And may not I retort this Argument with as great strength thus? Man using
common grace well, is not disposed to converting grace, Ea praeexi, it Leus ab
eo quem intendit regenerare. c. 32. Sec. 14.
because God does not always give converting grace to such, and does often
give it to others that do not use the light of nature well; or at least as
Armanius says, minus male: And the Argument is of some strength; if there be
no unbended method for Gods dispensing converting grace, then what will become
of their dispositions to conversion? Many of the Corinthians are recorded to be
Idolaters, Adulterers, buggerers, thieves, and what not? they did not use the
light of nature well, and yet they were blessed with the Gospel, and did
partake of the regenerating grace of God; but let any man show me the
dispositions to this grace, by which they were fitted to receive it. Paul was a
persecuter, blasphemer, injurious, abusing not only the Gospel, but the light
of nature also; which (if Mr. Goodwin divine right) teaches men to search out
and yield to the best discoveries of Gods will and pleasure; and so was without
all dispositions to receive converting grace, and yet he found mercy in the
height of his obstinacy, which is recorded as a demonstration of the power of
Gods grace to reduce him, when there were no probable apparent dispositions to
receive converting grace; but Tire and Sydon, who were so well disposed and
fitted to receive further grace, and had used the light of nature well, as that
Christ says of them, they would have repented in sackcloth and ashes, if they
had enjoyed that word, and these miracles; and yet to them God gave neither the
outward means of the Gospel, nor yet converting grace: but what need I cast
about to produce proof? The Remonstrants own concessions are enough to
confirm us against themselves, who upon the same point thus say.

Novimus enim Deum saepe evangelicae praeditationis gratiam iis facere qui
nihil minus curae habuerunt quam ut communion vo^ation respond^ant, and qaum
tal^bus eam facit, eandem non facit ii^ qui nihilo sunt pejores; and si
ulterius consideretur mediorum ad salutem dispensatio, agnoscimus Deum omnis
boni largitorem tali ut^ liberate, ut paribus impa^em, imparibus parem gratiam
conferendo, minus malos non vocando, pejores vocando, ut ex usu vel abusu
donorum generalioru^ exactam ejus rationem red^i non posse, libenter
a^noscimus. Act. Synod. Art. 2. p. 528.
For we know very well, that God has given evangelical grace to them that take
care for nothing less then to use common grace well; and also does not give it
to others that are nothing worse then they: and if his dispensations of the
means of salvation be truly considered; we acknowledge, that God who is the
giver of all good, uses such a liberty in giving unequal grace to equal men,
and equal grace to unequal men; in rejecting those that are less evil, and
calling worse; and that he makes such a various administration of his grace,
that we willingly acknowledge there can be no exact account given thereof by
the use or abuse of general grace. And what more clear then this, to cause all
that doctrine of dispositions to conversion, which God requires in all them to
whom he intends to give converting grace, to vanish into smoke? There are no
such congruities in men, or dispositions to determine the will of God to give
them converting grace, but according to their own judgment he uses such a
liberty, that as Jacob, he lays his right hand upon the youngest son, and
reserves his left for his eldest, which makes us oftentimes to admire the depth
of the power and the wisdom of God. Now if any shall demand of me, what I have
gained in all these allegations? I answer, thus much, that those actions which
they pretend all may do, are no way dispositions to converting grace or
regeneration, and therefore they have no color of reason to pretend men are
sufficiently enabled to do them, and that in reference to salvation; making all
to ha^g in this method, All men have grace to enable them to use nature well,
and do things contained in the law, etc. which are dispositions to conversion
and faith, and those to eternal life. Hence they infer, that that common
grace is mediately saving; but I herein break the chain, and have proved, that
they are not dispositions to regeneration, but many of them effects of
regeneration, to which they themselves grant all men have not sufficient grace;
and therefore not to those invented actions, and so by consequence to nothing.

Secondly, I shall further examine, whether (if we granted that such works were
dispositions to converting g^^) they can prove, that all men have a sufficiency
of means to do a^l those particulars mentioned, viz. to know God, desire good,
thirst after saving grace, grieve for sin, strive against in ^r^inate
desires, etc. Whether have all men sufficient mea^s to do ^hes^? And this is
most directly pertinent to our purpose: They must affirm it, I may deny it; and
to clear it I thus proceed. Corvinus treating about sufficient grace, thus
says, Monemus iterum qu^cquid de suffic^entia dicimus, assistentiae Sp^ritus
tribui a n^bis. C. 8. sect. 2.
This I give as a Caution, that always when we speak of sufficiency, we intend
it to be attributed to the assistance of the Spirit of God. Out of which words
I can draw out no other meaning but this that they do not hold any
sufficiency, where there is not the actual assistance of the Spirit of God.
Then I p^sse to another expression of his in the same Ch^^ter, ^hus, Non
statuimus, Gratiam habitualem omnibus communem; sed ac^udem ^piritus
assistentiam ad singulos actus; quae lice omnibus praesto sic, quaterus ag^t
secundum rationem pri^^pii praevenientis; pe^ialis tamen est cum in actu
adjuvat and cooperat. Ibid. sect, 8.
We hold no habitual grace common to all, but only the assisting grace of God
to every act, which although it be common to all, as it is prevenient; yet it
is but special as it is adjutant and cooperant with them in doing. In all which
I will not inculcate the palpable implications of that accurate Remonstrant;
whereby he must grant the same grace both common to all, and yet special to
some; common to all because sufficient, and yet special, because assisting: We
must note also, that assisting grace is (in agendo) in doing. Sufficient is (ad
agendum) to the doing any act; and (adjuvant) and (Cooperant) and (assistant) I
take to be terms equipollent. Therefore to let the mplication die, by the help
of these two places of Corvinus, I thus arue, which will bring me to a fair
issue in this point. My Argument this.

If all men have not the assisting grace of God to do all those actions, then
they have not a sufficient grace.

But all men have not the assistant grace of God, to and in those actions.
Ergo, Not sufficient grace.

The Proposition of this syllogism is grounded upon Corvinus his first
expression. Whatever we speak of sufficiency, we ascribe it to the assistance
of Gods Spirit.

The minor proposition is grounded upon his second, Which grace is common to
all, as it is prevenient; but special as it is adjuvant and cooperant, which
are all one with assistant. But I further prove the minor thus: If all men do
not actually do those actions, then all men have not the assisting grace of God.
But all men do not, etc, Therefore they have not, etc.


The Proposition of this argument is grounded upon this truth, The assisting
spirit of God is only had in doing; God then assists, and helps, and
cooperateth, when we actually do: assisting is properly only in doing.
Improperly (ad agendum) to the doing.

The minor is clear by experience, and many Scriptures. Now I have waded so
far in this Argument, because it so fairly leads me to a business of very
great concernment, touching the nature of sufficiency; and that is, whether any
thing can be truly said to be sufficient to the working of any good in man, but
what is efficient. And seeing we are so fairly led by the hand of their own
concession, I shall assume that liberty at this time to deny it, and to say,
that no grace is sufficient to conversion, or to work any good but what is
efficient, and does actually work it. And to prove it, I shall in the first
place make use of their definition of sufficiency in general; which was, that
it is a position of all things that are requisite and necessary to that action
to which a sufficiency is granted.

Secondly, I must also adapt the Question to the particular state and condition
of man, as he is now corrupt and fallen; and by reason of that corruption many
impediments and hindrances lie in the way to his conversion, or doing any
thing that may be called good; which I hope (all will grant) must be removed
before he can be said to be sufficiently enabled to be converted, or to do
any good; as the woman in the Gospel could not be said to be sufficiently
enabled to enter the sepulcher, till the stone was rolled away from the door.

Thirdly, I must premise also, that amongst other impediments, the depravation
and aversation in the will of man, John 5.40. 2 Pet. 3.5. Weems in Portraiture
of Image of God in man. p. 98. Act. Synod. Art. 30. p. 1.
to convert or do any good, is one of the main, as Christ said to the Jews, I
would have gathered you, but ye would not: and again, Ye will not come to
me that ye might have life. And the Apostle, Your minds are set upon evil
works; which will of man has such a reflexive influence upon the understanding,
that it is kept off thereby from giving in a true dictamen; and as the Apostle
says, for the most part men are willingly ignorant: and this the Remonstrants
grant, when they say, That no man can do any good until the will be regenerate
as well as other faculties.

Fourthly, I must also premise this, that when the will is regenerate, and men
of unwilling are made willing, (whether it be a physical efficiency of Gods
spirit, or by moral suasion only) it mattereth nor, then is the grace of God
truly said to be efficient; for velle convertere est converti, velle credere
est credere; this is my method by which I use to prove that there is no
sufficient grace, but that which is efficient; and it is so plausible, that it
has some assertours besides my self. Singularis illa gratia qua reipsa salvos
and justos efficit, promiscue dari omnibus negatur. quae quia sola eatenus
efficax est, quatenus hominem in peccato immersum non modo evocat, sed excitat;
sola etiam respectu eventus, and hominis jam corru ti dici possit.

Conrad. Vorst. Antibellarm. page 555.


Conradus Vorstius gives his judgment thus, That singular and special grace by
which he indeed makes men just, and saves them, is so far efficacious as it
not only calls, but also excites man drowned in sin; so also in respect of
the event, and of man now vitiated and corrupted, it only can be called
sufficient. True indeed, I acknowledge there are very elaborate disputes about
this very distinction of sufficient and effectual grace. And the Remonstrants
thus bound either, Sufficient grace they say is such as is able to produce the
effect; and efficient is that which does actually produce the effect; and this
distinction is good, if taken in the general: but as it is applied to man in
his corrupt estate, it will not pass; and that upon the forementioned ground.

Learned Mr. Perkins urges this also, That no grace is sufficient, but what is
efficient, and then proves it; he first asserteth it, but Arminius he denies
it, and maintains the distinction of sufficient and efficient grace, and
holds that grace may be said to be sufficient that is not efficient: and he
attempts to illustrate the business thus, Deus sufficit multis mundis
creandis; sed tamen efficaciter non fecit: Christus sufficit ad omnes homines
salvandos, sed efficaciter non fecit. Antiper. p. 245.
God was sufficient to have made many worlds, but he did not make them
effectually; Christ was sufficient to save all men, but he does not effect it.
Which Instances satisfy not for several reasons.

1.) Because there is no due Analogy betwixt creation and conversion in this
particular. In creation there are no impediments to hinder this work; the
Chaos rises not up against the plasticall power of the Creator; but in man,
and that according to their own principles, there is a strong resisting power,
and so as to make the the work of God altogether null and void, as to the act
of conversion; no impediments in the one, but such in the other that can not be
removed without being efficient.

2) His arguing is fallacious, for when we treat of sufficient means, we
presuppose them to be actually put forth and administered; and hence the
definition of sufficiency is the Position or adhibition of all requisites;
nothing can be said to be sufficient to produce any act except it be applied,
and put forth. And I may say (I suppose) with a holy reverence, no not the
divine power, except it by his holy will be put forth to create; so that the
divine power may be considered either as put forth and set on work by the
counsel of his will, or not; if not, then I see not (I speak with submission)
how it can be called sufficient. His omnipotency we are taught thus to
conceive of, it is that by which he does whatsoever he will; and if that power
be by his will put forth, it is efficient, and so the cause returns to us
again.

But Mr. Perkins does not only assert, but prove also, that now in man's
corruption nothing is sufficient to conversion, but what is efficient, and that
by an argument which I shall follow a little, and it is this,

But the former is true, therefore the latter.



This argument is grounded upon this method. Sufficiency implies a position of
all necessaries. Now if all those be necessary, then all must concur to make
a sufficient grace to conversion; and if all concur, that grace is efficient;
then what is more connatural then this, that no grace is sufficient but what is
efficient? And Mr. Perkins proceeds only upon Arminius his own concessions;
yet Arminius answers thus,

Consequentia ista nulla est, dicere, nulla datur sufficiens gratia, quia null
illoru^ sola s^fficiat. Antiper. p. 246
The consequence is not good, to say, there is no sufficient grace because none
of these five alone is sufficient; but this is a mere trifling and
misallegation of his adversary. Perkins did not say that there was no
sufficient grace; but no sufficient but what was efficient, because none alone
except a^l concurred could be called sufficient; and if al did, then it was
efficient: and is not the consequence good? I conceive undeniable. If all be
granted to conversion, before a man can be said to have sufficient grace to the
working of regeneration; then sufficiency and efficiency must needs meet in
one; for where all are, there they are certainly efficient; the cooperant grace
of God always implying efficiency. But Arminius answers further, Omnes illae
gratiae, praeveniens nempe et praeparans, aut suffientes sunt, aut efficaces;
Deus praevenit sufficienter and efficaciter, praeparat sufficienter and
efficaciter, and quaeri possit an non sic de reliquis. Armin. Antiperk. ibid.
All those graces, namely, the prevenient, and preparant, are either sufficient
or efficient; God preveneth sufficiently and effectually, he prepares
sufficiently and effectually; and it may be enquired into whether it holds
not in the two last graces But what rational answer these expresses are to the
Argument in hand, I am not able to divine, nor the congruity of them with
themselves; The making those graces in one clause to be either sufficient or
effectual; in the second clause to be both: couplatives and disjunctives, do
not well in the same sentence, referred to the same thing, in the same respect.
Besides, here is a gross misunderstanding of his adversary: he did not say,
there was not a sufficiency in any of those graces alone to their proper ends
and actions; as that there was not a sufficiency in the prevening grace alone
to prevent, so not in preparing grace alone to prepare: But he said, not in any
alone to convert. If he understand him otherwise, he thinks amiss: and if he
judge of his adversary aright, his answer is very impertinent.

But further then this, Arminius is his own greatest enemy. Arminius
contendeth for a sufficient and efficient grace distinct; so that he should
have produced a sufficient grace that had not been effectual, then it had
been to his purpose; but this is no probable way to make both sufficiency and
efficiency to concur in every grace. And I conceive it is an undeniable
argument against himself, that if no grace be sufficient and not efficient,
that (viz.) God prepares both sufficiently and efficiently; and so in
preventing, operating, cooperating grace; It will appear that no grace is, or
can be said to be sufficient to any end or purpose, but what is also efficient
in the same design. And of this I shall make a good improvement, to bring to a
fair issue out of this engagement with them, thus, If no grace, no not so much
as prevenient and preparant, but they act both sufficiently and efficiently,
and not sufficiently prepared and disposed until they be efficiently so; then
is my Argument strengthened; which is this, All are not sufficiently enabled
either to convert, or to do those things by which they are disposed to convert,
until they do actually do those things which all do not, and therefore are not
sufficiently enabled; and then what becomes of the doctrine of universal
sufficient grace? let all the world judge. Thus I have (according to my small
talent) endeavored to refel the groundless doctrine of universal sufficient
grace, and have discovered the rise, and progress, and growth of it, how high
it amounts, where it sticks, and where the proof remains on their part
very short and imperfect, and that it appears not that either all men have
that which is truly called grace: or if it might be so called, yet they prove
not that it may truly be said to be sufficient to any end, no not to the
enabling of men to work those things by which they say men are enabled to
conversion; and if neither, then universal sufficient grace must needs fall.
And by this engagement with the Remonstrants, whom I now leave, I am the better
enabled to engage Mr. Goodwins notions, which are of a far lower flight: and
to him I now return after this long digression.

He being something doubtful of carrying on his assertion the first height
with strength of reason, viz. a sufficiency of means afforded to all men of
believing in Christ, immediately by the creatures, and the sound of the
heavens; he is now traversing his ground in the lower road, and would make out
a sufficiency to believe in Christ upon improvement of natural abilities
according to the standing course of providence, (Habenti dabitur) to him that
has shall be given: in which I shall engage with him, and now only mind him of
his changeing the expression; his task is to prove a sufficiency in all men to
believe; but here we have it only thus, that all men are in a capacity of
believing; for thus runs his expression, Page 15.
Suppose that the heathen etc. were not in an immediaie capacity of believing
the Gospel; yet this proves not but that they are in a capacity of believing
it. But by the term capacity, I hope he means sufficiency, not only because
this expression is suitable to his purpose, but also because in his dispute
with Mr. Sympson, treating about the same business, in stead of a remote
capacity (as he gives it here) we have a mediate sufficiency, and a remote
sufficiency. Now seeing he attempts to make out a sufficiency of believing in
Christ in this his second, and (as he thinks) a more safe and plausible
method, I must have a word or two with him about the term sufficiency; for in
that discourse wherein men litigate about sufficient means, it is requisite to
determine first what sufficiency is.

Mr. Goodwin in his writings, I find excuding a double distinction of
sufficiency. First, In this place covertly, into Mediate and Immediate near
and remote; Page 78, 79.
but in other Treatises more express. In his Dispute with Mr. Simpson,
treating about the same business, he says thus, There is a double
sufficiency, mediate and immediate: Immediate, by which a man is enabled for
the doing of such a thing, without the having or doing of any thing else but
what he then actually has or does. Mediate is such by which he is not enabled
to do the thing for the present, but he is enabled to do such things by which
he may compass farther means, and so possess himself of an immediate
capacity. And this distinction has some apparent footsteps in the
Remonstrants. But I conceive, it is no fair and plausible distinction, because
the last member thereof seems to carry a contradiction in the face of it; for,
says he, A mediate sufficiency is that whereby a man is not for the present
enabled to do a thing. A rare discovery! an insufficient sufficiency. How that
man can be said to have a sufficient means for that to which he is not at the
present enabled, let other men divine, for I cannot. Sufficiency if expressed
in other terms, is thus, Positis omnibus requisitis; and thus all of his own
side define it, to be a position of all things necessary and requisite; Now if
he be not enabled without the doing and having a further supplement, there is
no kind of sufficiency. He seeks to illustrate it, and his very
illustration discovers the vanity of this his pretended mediate sufficiency;
it is thus: Though we have not a sufficiency at present, to speak in an
unknown tongue, as Spanish, or the like, yet we have a remote sufficiency,
because we have the principles of Reason and Understanding, by which we may
come, etc. Wherein

1. His own expresses overthrow him; he says, Though we have not a sufficiency
at present, yet we have a remote: By which I perceive, that by his remote
sufficiency, he means a possibility of a sufficiency. But this in its very
notion implies that a sufficiency is not in act; and then the heathen have
not a sufficiency: but only are in a capacity of having it: if he intend it
thus, it serves him nor, neither will I contend with him.

2. This makes me think that there is some fraud in Mr. Goodwins changing his
expresses, using sometimes sufficiency, sometimes capacity; but this is not
ingenuously done: for these are very far distant, and so far that the one does
no whit imply the other. Nay, so far are they distant one from the other, that
the one does exclude the other; for Capacity implyies only a power or
possibility to receive; but sufficiency intimates the present position or
enjoyment of such means: Those things which we have already, we are not
properly said to be in a capacity of them; and so e contra.

3. Sufficiency is such a thing as is determined to an individual position of
all necessaries, otherwise no sufficiency; and where that is, there is a
sufficiency. But a capacity is such a wild and undetermined notion, that we
know not where it should fix its foot. True, a man is in a capacity of learning
the Spanish tongue, when he has the use of reason and his understanding; but
may we not say he is in a capacity of learning it when he is born, because he
may come to have the use of his understanding, and so further? and why must we
stay here? May he not be said to be in a capacity, though somewhat more remote,
when he is begotten? for then is he in a capacity of being born, and so of
coming to the use of his understanding; and may not this capacity thus run in
infinitum? Thus we may affirm, that Adam had a sufficiency to believe in
innocence, because he was in a remote capacity, he had understanding and the
use of his reason; nay thus may he indeed assert all men to have a sufficiency
of believing in Christ without any means tending thereunto, because they have
the use of these faculties: But this is but mere trifling; so that in his next
he may leave out this distinction. I grant his Capacity, but deny his
Sufficiency: and his mediate sufficiency is none truly so called.

A second distinction I find in the same Dispute with Mr. Simpson where he
distinguishes thus; Page 64.
There is a sufficiency by which a man is enabled the more easily to do a
thing; and a sufficiency, that is, such a thing without which he cannot do the
thing, viz. the act of believing. And this is more confused and impolite then
the former. In the first member there is an entire distiction couched; and if
he had spoken scholastically, he should have said thus, There is a sufficiency
ad rem, and another ad modum rei; one sufficiency to the thing, and another to
the manner of doing; for that which is sufficient to the thing barely, is not
sufficient to this or that manner of doing. An ordinary power had been
sufficient to have barely cured Peter's mother of a fever, but none but an
extraordinary miraculous power served to cure her in an instant. But he
immethodically gives it us thus: That is a sufficiency by which we are enabled
more easily to believe. As if that grace by which men are only enabled to
believe, were not as truly sufficient to the act of believing, as that which
he speaks of to the more easy way and manner of believing. That which
excludes an entire distinction, is not providently produced as one member of
an imperfect distinction.

The second member of his distinction is such as was never heard to come out of
any man's study; it is an uncouth and illiterate description of sufficiency,
which agrees to many things that cannot be called sufficient. He says, That
is sufficient, without which it is impossible for the action to be done. It is
strange that he did not consider, that without his legs he cannot be an
integrall man; but I hope he will not say, that his legs are sufficent to make
him an integrall man, there will be something else required. A man cannot see
without his eyes; but his eyes are not sufficient to make him see a thing;
there must be a visible object, a well disposed medium, a fit and
proportionable distance. A man cannot ascend to the top of the ladder, except
he ascend the first steps; but I hope the ascending up the first steps is not
sufficient to make him attain the top of it. In a word, of every or any one
requisite it may be said, that without it a thing cannot be done; but a
sufficiency is not till all requisites be present. And yet these are the most
perspicuous notions that Mr. Goodwin sets before us. If he can distinguish
about Sufficiency no better, we have small ground to hope he will determine
about it any better.

But to proceed to what he says in the several following pages in his
Treatise.

All that I find of moment in the 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22 pages of his
Treatise is reducible to these four Heads.

1. That every man can use the light of Nature conscientiously and regularly.

2. That every heathen man may, and that in so doing be does quit himself to
some degree of well-pleasing to God.

3. That there is a standing course of providence whereby God has tied himself
not to fail to reveal Christ, and give further grace to such as improve
natural gifts, from that Text, Habenti dabitur, To him that has shall be
given.

4. That upon this ground all men have a remote sufficiency of having Christ
revealed, and believing in Christ.

A very fair and plausible way (as Master Goodwin thinks) to make out his
pretended Sufficiency. And upon these four Pillars stands the whole Fabric
of this his second pretended Method, whereby by he proves his universal
sufficiency. Now a full and clear Answer will be made to him in
counter-arguing in every one of these; and therefore I deny all these
particulars, and in these following pages prove,

1. That no heathen man can improve the natural gifts given him well (as
Master Goodwin expresses it) regularly and conscientiously.

2. That if he could, yet he could not at all please God.

3. That there is no such standing course of Providence of giving the increase
of his grace, as Mr. Goodwin pretends.

4. Though all were granted, yet will it not follow, that a man has a
sufficiency of believing in Christ. And when I shall have performed my task in
all these, I hope Mr. Goodwin will be seeking about for another Method to
prove his Assertion.

For the first, viz. That no heathen man merely by the light of nature can
improve natural abilities regularly and conscientiously, I need not spend much
time to prove it; those of his own side will prove it for me. The Remonstrants
never yet contended for an improvement of natural gifts without the assisting
grace of God; and but only so much as to do the things contained in the Law:
But this is far short of improving natural abilities regularly and
conscientiously. And if the Remonstrants did purposely use the term of
assisting grace, to avoid the charge of Pelagianisme, how can Mr. Goodwin avoid
it, when he urges this, that men can improve natural abilities; yea, more
then that, believe in Christ, only by the light of nature?

But to drive on this business to some fair issue: Mr. Goodwin must know,
That for a man to improve abilities regularly, is beyond the materiality, and
includes the very formality of a good action; and that a good thing be done in
a good manner, according to rule, and conscientiously; Corv. in Molin. cap.
34.. 7.
which the Remonstrants affirm to constitute the reality, and truth, and
substance of a good action: And can the heathen man do this without the
renewing and regenerating grace of God? The Remonstrants yield ingenuously
thus; That man can do nothing that is good, without he be renewed in all his
faculties. Script. Synod. Art. 3. page 1.
Then certainly not improve natural abilities in a regular way; for that,
according to them, is a saving good, because it is tending to, and directed to
salvation.

But when Mr. Goodwin says, A heathen man can regularly improve natural
abilities; he implies, that that improvement must be according to rule; which
rule must either be the rule of Nature, or the law of God, or the law of the
Gospel, or the rule of Conscience. To examine all these.

1. A heathen man by the light of nature cannot improve abilities according to
the rule of Nature, or law of Nature; for to do thus, Non dicit Apostolus,
Gentes legem implere; sed ea quae sunt legis facere; sc. faciliora aliqua. Qui
legem imple^t, totam et integram facient, quod fieri non possit sine gratia
Christi, and fide in Christum, Cornet. a Lap. in locum.
is to fulfill and perform the law of Nature, legem Naturae implere; which none
of the Patriots of that Cause durst ever claim. Cornelius a Lap. says thus
upon Romans 2. They do by nature not fulfill the Law, but do the things contained
in the Law; that is, some of the most easy precepts: for to fulfill the Law,
is to perform it wholly and integrally; which cannot be done without the faith
and grace of Christ. And the Remonstrants themselves (as Corvinus says
expressly) Non enim contendimus, Ethnicos legem Dei perfect implere; sed in eo
acquiescimus, quod probamus eos saltem aliquid legis f^cisse. Corv. in Molin.
cap 34. 2,
We do not contend, that the heathen do perfectly fulfill the Law of God; but
we rest in this, that we prove that they do something that the Law commands.
And this the Text it self evinceth, because they have their consciences both
excusing and accusing. But there is no place for accusing consciences, where
they improve all abilities according to the rule of the law. The worshipping of
God Si per rectitudinem intell^gas, (...), verum est, neminem posse recte Deum
colere citra fidem; sed quaeritur, an non possit citra fidem, quanquam non
(...), aliqua tamen ratione, and imperfecte Deum colere. ^39 sect. 2.
(...), according to the rule. Says Corvinus, It is most true, that in this
sense, it is not possible, that any man can serve God without faith: But it is
questionable, whether without faith a man cannot worship, although not
according to the rule, yet in some way and manner, although but imperfectly.
Then certainly Mr. Goodwin walks in a very unsafe and difficult way in
contending for an ability in the heathen to improve their natural abilities
according to the rule or law of nature.

Beside, to walk according to the light and law of Nature, is to walk according
to the rule of Conscience; for the law of Nature is nothing but the law of God
engraven in the hearts and consciences of men; and here Master Goodwin joins
them together, [regular and conscientious improvement:] But then I hope, he
must mean a rightly guided and informed conscience: else how should it be a
rule? A crooked rule will never bring men to the straight way of holiness. I
hope, that neither Master Goodwin, nor any Arminian will say, that the use of
Naturals according to the dictate of a misguided and erring Conscience, leads
either to a further degree of grace or glory. But then consider also, That men
not having their consciences rightly informed and disposed, cannot be said to
walk so regularly, as to fetch from God increase of grace; but such is the
case of all men by nature without the grace of Christ.

To consider this a little more distinctly. Mr. Goodwin (I hope) well knows,
that to the regular improvement of every heathen man, there is required both a
Rule and Practice; and they are to afford both, not only to do those things
contained in the law; but they are to be a law to themselves, Romans 2. Now
seeing that they are to afford the law and rule within them, I hope, they will
say, it must be a right and straight rule; a rightly disposed and a good
conscience; otherwise, to walk after the rule of an evil conscience, will not
be found an improvement or use, but rather an abuse of natural gifts. An evil
conscience is such from which we are to be cleansed, Hebr. 10.22. But from an
improvement of natural gifts, or from the right rule leading thereunto there
is no need of being washed. Now where is this rightly guided and good
conscience amongst the heathen? All men are divided into two ranks by the
Apostle; into the Pure and Impure: the pure have all things pure, the impure
and unbelieving all things impure, Tit. 1.15.
having their minds and very consciences impure, Tit. 1.15. Hence the Casuists
tell us, that Amesius Cas. Cons. p. 102.
Conscience is but a subordinate rule, as it is directed by the Word of God.
Men have not improved their abilities by walking according to their
consciences: Paul was a persecuter: and many come to kill and put to death the
tru^ disciples of Christ, John 16.2. John 16.2.
and both by the dictate of their conscience; they thought they did God good
service. And as for the light of the heathen, whereby they may be directed to
the observance of God in a way of obedience, Alas, what is it? Well may the
Remonstrants say, it is relics of life, and sparks of knowledge, and that they
have aliquam cognitionem Dei, some kind and measure of the knowledge of God: but
alas, what is it? not so high as to be a rule of an acceptable improvement of
their Abilities.

I would that Mr. Goodwin had put forth some Discourse of natural light, that
we might examine the subject of it, and the penetrative vigor thereof. True
indeed, the Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Invisible things of God
are to be seen in the visible creatures. But here the glory of God is in the
creatures, but as light is in the Sun; which yet is not actually seen by blind
men. To the act of sight there is not only required a visible object, but there
must be a well disposed organ; and the eye must be open. Now true it is, that
the heavens declare the glory of God, as the Sun displayes his light; but the
heavens do not open the eyes, or give light to the simple, Psalm. 19.4, 5, 6, 7.
What improvement can Mr. Goodwin produce that ever was made by the rule of
natural knowledge? The Apostle tells us, that the Gentiles are alienated from
the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18. 2 Pet. 1.9
and that through the ignorance that is in them; having their minds darkened.
Man now in the state of corruption, whatever the light be that shines in the
creatures, he is but (...), a purre-blinde man, and their height is but to
groape after him, palpare Deum, Acts 17.27
as blind men; by which they are capable of so much as to render themselves
inexcusable, if they fall to idolatry, and forsake the true God, but that
thereby they may know how to worship the true God, and serve him, or that their
light is or can be a rule of a right and true Improvement of natural ability, I
leave as Master Goodwin's task to prove either by Scripture or good reason;
especially such an Improvement, upon which all the administrations of God to
men tending to salvation shall proceed. Now until that Master Goodwin clears
these two things; First, that the Heathen can afford within themselves the rule
of a right Improvement of their abilities: or, Secondly, that suppose they have
the rule within them; yet that they can exercise such a regular Improvement
according to the rule in a perfect Obedience: (for he that fails in any one
thing, walks not according to rule, and makes not a regular Improvement) I
shall conclude that no Heathen man can make a regular Improvement of his
abilities, that is, neither according to the rule of Conscience or Law of
Nature, and as for any Law of the Gospel or Positive Law of God: there is no
need that any dispute proceed upon these, because in the very foundation of
this discourse, it is supposed that those are not revealed to the Heathen. But
ere I pass, I shall urge one only argument to prove that a Heathen man cannot
make any regular Improvement of his natural abilities, and it is thus.

If the natural man be enmity against God, and neither is nor can be subject to
the Law of God, then he cannot make a regular Improvement of his natural
abilities.

But the former is true, Romans 8.6, 7, 8. Therefore the latter in true also.

Now to this Argument, I for the present conceive, that two things chiefly may
be replied.

First, he may say, that text, Romans 8.7. speaks of the Positive and Moral Law
of God; but we are treating of the Law of Nature. Now to the Laws of Nature we
yield Obedience by Nature, but to the Positive Law of God by Grace. If Master
Goodwin please to urge this or any thing like it, then I refer it to him to
prove that the Law of Nature and Positive Law of God be different in substance,
and not in that respect one and the same, save only in the manner of discovery:
the one internally inscribed, the other externally manifested. Again, he must
consider, that the dint of the Argument is in this, that the natural mind is
enmity against God: the enmity of natural men is originally against God: and so
by consequence against any Law of God, whether internally inscribed, or
outwardly given: the Law of Nature is as well the Law of God as any of his
Positive Laws, and so equally occasions the enmity of a natural man; For (Quae
convenient in aliquo tertio convenient inter se:) both these Laws being the
Laws of God, and the natural man's Enmity being originally against both these
Laws, agree in this, that the natural man cannot be subject to them.

Recte quidem concluditur, hominem qui mere naturalis est and omnis divinae
cognitionis expers, qui instar brutorum naturaliter and secundum sensum vivit.
Corvin. in Molin. c. 33.. 1.
Secondly, I find Corvinus thus replying to us, [Rightly it is concluded that a
natural man cannot be subject to the divine Law: but that is such a man as is
merely natural, void of all the knowledge of God, and that lives according to
sense, like to brute beasts.]

Be it so, then we must enquire whether the Heathen men be not so, Ephesians. 4.18.

Secondly, their gloss overthrows their doctrine, their gloss supposes many
Heathen to be without all knowledge of God. When yet their whole Doctrine in
this point urges so much of Divine Knowledge in every man, that they may
improve their natural abilities, and are sufficiently enabled thereunto.

Thirdly, they would have man considered in his mere corrupt estate, that is,
without all knowledge of God and assistance of the Spirit; so that in their
doctrine to have the knowledge and assisting Spirit of God, is to reduce them
from the corrupt and natural estate, which knowledge and grace they pretend
that every man in the world has without exception; and hence we come to see
that this is the sum of their Doctrine, that now no man is in his corrupt
estate, or can be called a natural man, which will render the Apostles words
very vain and empty.

Fourthly, this answer is grounded upon that exotic tripartition of the World,
which we find in all their works: They say (man is either merely natural; or
natural, yet disposed to regeneration; or thirdly, regenerate:) it matters not
what our corrupt minds may suggest to us to the maintenance of our opinions,
when Molin says, that (The fear of God does not agree to those that are
unregenerate;) Corvinus thus replyeth, Si per irregenitos intelligis eos qui
animum plane a Deo aversum habent, verum dicis, sed si per irregenitos eos
intelligis qui nondum sunt regeniti, erras. cap. 34. 4.
[If by unregenerate thou meanest those that have their minds altogether
averse from God, thou say true; but if by unregenerate thou meanest those
that are not yet regenerate, thou errest in so speaking.] But can the acuteness
of Corvinus discover a way whereby a man unregenerate may not be taken for a
man not yet regenerate? as if a man unregenerate, and a man not yet regenerate,
be not terms equipollent, and of the same signification; or where can he in
Scripture give us the least testimony of Scripture, that presents us with a man
not yet regenerate, that has not his mind wholly averse from God? we should
be glad to see any of those proofs; or will they enable us to find such
Distinctions in the Scripture, as of natural men, such as are merely natural,
and such as are disposed to regeneration? and so likewise of men having the
Spirit; Some are such as are by the assisting Spirit only prepared to be
regenerate: Others are by the Spirit regenerate and born again. Let them make
it appear, that these notions are not the issue merely of wanton and luxuriant
brains; the Scripture thus only divides, All man are either born of the flesh,
or born of the Spirit, Joh. 3.6. either live after the flesh, or after the
Spirit, Romans 8.4, 5, 6. Either carnally minded, or spiritually minded, Verse 6.
and it says in general, [As many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the sons
of God,] Romans 8.14. that is, so many as are led by the sweet ducture of the
Spirit of God, to do any thing in tendency to salvation, are the sons of God,
and so born again: and of such it cannot be said, they are unregenerate. But
more shall be said to this purpose, when I see Master Goodwins, replies to this
argument, and till I see them, I shall conclude a Heathen man cannot improve
his abilities regularly, because the natural man is enmity against God, and
cannot be subject to his Law.

In the next place, I am to consider the second main Pillar upon which this
pretended method stands, and that is, whether a Heathen man by the light of
nature, can by his Improvements, or any other thing, quit himself to a degree
of well-pleasing to God. Master Goodwin affirms it, I in this second particular
counter-argue him thus:

That no Heathen man can please God by any such Improvement as he is able to
make of his natural abilities, If it appear that man cannot by nature improve
his natural gifts, upon that defect I know Master Goodwin himself will grant
that man cannot please God; so that till he can make good the first particular,
we are safe enough here; but I shall go a little further: Suppose man could
improve his natural abilities, yet could he not be said to please God; what
complacency can any man discover from Scripture, if God takes in the
performances and persons of men without faith before they be born again, and
become his sons in Christ? the Apostle says, Ephesians. 1.6.
He has made us accepted in the beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. Now I shall give the
Remonstrants leave so far as to be the interpreters of this and the rest the of
like expressions in this Chap. In the fourth Verse he says, He has elected
us, (in Christ;) now say the Remonstrants (us in Christ) that is, (...),
elected us being (in Christ) that is, believing in act; and hence they contend
that none are Elected but such as are believers either in act or in the divine
prescience, then I hope they will not repine if I say here, from this text (He
has made us accepted in the beloved) that is, we being in Christ actually
believers, with whom and by which faith he is well pleased with us, and that
none are accepted of God, or he well pleased with any, but those that are in
Christ; me thinks they might have so much foresight as not to give such
glosses upon any expression in one place that will strangle their own sense in
another text. But again, the Remonstrants willingly confess, that no man can
fulfill the Law of nature perfectly or worship God according to the rule, and
then will they say that God is pleased with lame and imperfect performances? He
that fails in one point, becomes guilty of all. Nay, but suppose they could
improve the light of nature to the height of the rule of nature; yet how would
they please God by so doing? All the obedience to the Law of God Positive and
Moral, cannot please God without Christ. The people of God have confessed,
Isaiah 64.6.
that their righteousness is as menstruous rags in his sight: then certainly,
the natural performances of the Heathen, though never so regular, cannot please
God. Paul with all his moral righteousness, though in relation to the
righteousness of the Law he was blameless, yet accounted that but dung (which
is not acceptable to man) in comparison of the righteousness of Christ, that he
might be found in it, but certainly he would not account any thing dung that
was acceptable to God, or with which he was pleased. Now the Apostle speaks
here not comparatively, that is, his righteousness of the law was dung and loss
in comparison of Christ, but absolutely he accounted his own righteousness
dung, that he might win Christ: or such conceits that our own righteousness
pleases God, hinder us either from the seeking or obteining the righteousness
of Christ. Now if the moral righteousness of Paul, though to the law he was
blameless, could not please God; How can the natural Improvements of the
Heathen please God?

Again, the Heathen (let their Improvement be never so high and eminent) are
but unregenerate, and not born again, and therefore but yet in the flesh, Romans
8.6, 7, 8.
But those that are in the flesh cannot please God. But I shall reduce all to
one perspicuous Argument, and that is this.

Heb. 11.6.

But the Heathen with their Improvements are without faith, so long as they
have the light of Nature only.

Ergo So long as they have only the light of Nature, they cannot please God.)

Molinaeus in his Anatomy of Arminianisme, I find forming the Argument thus.

(If a man cannot perform those actions by which he may please God, without
faith which is the gift of God, then he cannot of himself please God.

But the former is true: Therefore the latter is true).

The formation of which Argument made the answer of Corvinus to be so ready at
hand, which was, That the conclusion of the argument is nothing against them,
they pretending the assisting Spirit of God, they hold not any man can of
himself without the grace of God do any thing to please God.

Yet notwithstanding this argument is valid enough against Master Goodwin:
because he is not so express in the point of assisting grace, as the
Remonstrants are, but is all for the light of nature only; but because I will
make it firm against all parties, I desire to form it thus: (If no man without
faith can please God, then no man can by all his Improvemements please God
before faith.

But the former is true: Therefore the latter.)



And to this Corvinus has an answer at hand, such an one as we find it, thus:
[Heb. 11.6. does not well prove, Heb. 11.6. Male probat nullam actionem quae
Deo placcat praefari posse, quia ibi agitur de tali beneplacito quo quis placet
Deo ad gloriam. Corvin. in Molin. c. 33.. 4. Agitur de tali beneplacito quo
Enoch Deo placuit, quando cum e mundo sustulit. Ibid Acta Synod. Art. 1. page
211.
that no action can be done to please God without faith. Because that text
means such a pleasing whereby a man pleases God to glory] how they sweat at it
to strangle a clear text?

First, I demand how that appears from the text? that it means such a
pleasing, whereby a man pleases God to glory, he gives the reason why thus, in
the same place, [because it speaks of that pleasing, whereby he pleased God
when God translated him;] but this is a manifest forgery: for, says the text
(before he was translated he had this testimony, that he pleased God: but
without faith a man cannot please God.) If then the Text speak of such a
pleasing, whereby Enoch pleased God before the translation of him, then it is
but a mere shift of diversion to confine it to such whereby Enoch pleased God
when he translated him.

Secondly, it is not because of the long interval, that Corvinus cannot at his
turn remember, that he was one of that full Jury of Remonstrants who urge this
Argument to the clearing of their doctrine, in the first article from this very
place thus: That without which we cannot please God, without it we cannot be
elected to life.

But without faith we cannot please God, Heb. 11.6.

Therefore without faith it is impossible for any one to be elected to
salvation.



Now, I shall make use both of this argument it self, as also their reply to
our answer; to refel their futilous gloss, first, the argument it self
overthrows them, if this text be to be taken in such sense as whereby a man
pleases God to glory (that is, actually to give glory) then their Proposition
or Major, must be corrected and run thus: That without which we cannot please
God to glory, without it a man be elected to glory.

And let any Arminian look upon the face of this Proposition, and tell me if it
please them, and whether this be like their doctrine, that no man can please
God so far as to Elect him, without that by which he will so far please him as
to give him glory; and so by consequence he shall give glory to so many as he
elects. What will then become of their doctrine of falling away, and that those
that are now elected may afterward come to be reprobated, and never so please
God, as to give them glory? and if the case be such then, what egregious foul
dealing are they guilty of, to forge such a gloss against the clear text at
this turn; when yet they are forced to relinquish it in another?

Secondly, to consider the Answer of the Contra-Remonstrants to this argument
thus: [Faith is taken two ways, either for faith present, or for faith
foreseen; the text runs upon faith present, but the question upon faith
foreseen, therefore the text cannot agree with the question.] To this Answer,
although very pertinent and plausible, yet the Remonstrants with an open mouth
reply thus.

[ Quis non videt quam Contra-Remonstrant haere^t, quia Apostoli pronunciatum
est absolututum and universale. Sine fide nemo potest Deo placere? Act. Synod.
ibi.
Who sees not the Contra-Remonstrants to be at a stand here, seeing the saying
of the Apostle is universal and absolute without faith a man cannot please God]
but (mutato nomine de Remonstrantibus narratur fabula;) or the Remonstrants may
well bear with us, it is better sometimes to be at a stand, then always in a
precipice, falling downright upon the truth in wilful contradictions: for if
the Apostles words be universal and absolute, Without faith no man can please
God, why then I pray must it now be confined and determined to such a pleasing
(viz.) to glory? Is it such an offense for us to distinguish of the word
(faith) because the words of the Apostle are universal and absolute? and may
they take the license to distinguish of the word (please?) by what law, I pray?
or what reason? for according to their own sense (placere Deo) to please God is
immanent in God; but (to give glory) is external to God; the question is not,
what follows our pleasing of God, but what goes before it; not what he does
by our pleasing of him, but what we do whereby he comes to be pleased with us:
and their gloss to this purpose is altogether heterogeneous and impertinent.
(Pleasing to glory?) then it seems there is one degree of pleasing, to give
the Gospel; another, to give faith; a third, to give glory; and so that which
is in their doctrine immanent in God, shall be capable of intension, and
remission: where shall they find proof for these notions? I shall expect it.

I have said thus much in this business, because if Mr. Goodwin having
consulted with them, shall reply these things, I prevent him, and ease my self,
in putting things as far as I may: or if Mr. Goodwin please to interpose other
replies, I am ready to receive them.

Or if this place or phrase do not please Mr. Goodwin, I shall give him
another, and so let him take both together thus: If no man that is in the flesh
can please God, then not the Heathen by all their improvements, only by the
light of nature:

But no man that is in the flesh can please God, Romans 8.6, 7.

Therefore the heathen cannot please God, etc.



This argument is grounded on this: All men till regenerated are in the flesh;
and so long as they remain only with the light of nature, they are
unregenerated: till these arguments be answered, I shall conclude, that no
Heathen can by his improvements please God.

Thirdly, in the next place I am to make good, that suppose man could both
improve his naturals well, and thereby please God, yet there is no such
standing course of providence, whereby God does proceed to the revealing Christ
and working faith and so give salvation, which course Mr. Goodwin affirms: I on
the contrary say, there is no such, neither does that text (Habemi dabitur) To
him that has shall be given, import any such thing: If M. Goodwin take a
survey of the Scriptures, he shall find that there is no standing course of
providence in any of his dispensations whether natural or spiritual.

We shall find in Scripture most frequently, that much is given to them that
had the least in possession or in improvement or in disposition; sometimes God
is found of them that seek him; hence that command is given, and a promise is
annexed, (Seek, and ye shall find;) but there is no standing course for this;
For sometimes, yea, very often he is ( found of them that seek him not; Romans
10.20.
) the Apostle seems to apply that saying to the Gentiles, but his
dispensations of mercy to the full crop and harvest of Gentiles, are more
Catholic and general then to the handful of the Jews; any standing course
of providence, or this grounded upon this method, would prostitute the
unsearchable wisdom of God to every common capacity, and fill up that ((...),
or depth) that the Apostle affirms, yet admires, Romans Romans 11.33.
11.33. And what is that depth he tells us in the 30. verse, that they who
have not yet believed (the Gentiles) no nor yet were disposed to believe,
should yet receive the Gospel. It is remarkable, how the Gentiles all along are
branded with the black mark of all unrighteousness, and a reprobate sense, the
Gentiles are made the standard and measure of all laciviousnesse, excess,
revellings, and all kinds of Idolatry, to commit these is to work the will of
the Gentiles. 1 Pet. 4.4, 5.
1. Pet. 4.4, 5. what dispositions or improvements are there found in these,
now when we shall consider, that God takes away the Gospel, from the Jew and
gives it to these Gentiles? true it is, there is some cause why he might take
it away from the Jew, but what was there that he should give it to the
Gentiles? was it (To him that has shall be given?) what had the Gentiles, or
did they, to fetch this discovery of the Gospel from the Almighty? Where as
this standing course of providence? seeing here is nothing but that (...), that
admirable depth of goodness and wisdom. Nay, let me go a little further, when
God chose Israel to be his people, and to discover his Word and will to them,
what standing course of providence was there seen in that? what improvement was
there? if any, let Mr. Goodwin, reconcile them to Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. There was,
Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8.
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.1. Such Fornication amongst the Corinthians as was
not named among the Gentiles; the Corinthians who had the Gospel abused the
light of nature so far, as to commit and allow of that sin; the Gentiles that
had not the Gospel used the light of nature so well, or at least less evilly
(as Arminius) that that sin was not so much as named amongst them; But God gave
the Gospel to the Corinthians, denied it to the other, where is this standing
course of providence in all this?

Again, Ahab humbled himself, Herod heard John gladly, Agrippa was half
persuaded to become a Christian, Judas repented, and Tire and Sidon had so
quitted themselves that God testified this of them, that if they had enjoyed
the means that Corazin had, they would have repented, and that long ago,
without any such delay. All these are accounted by the Remonstrants to be as
preparations to regenerations, and improvements and abilities: but I expect
that Mr. Goodwin give me as fair an account of the increase of saving grace
given to any of them according to this standing course of providence so much
pretended: whereupon Mr Goodwin either does or may know that the best of his
own side have (verbis disertis) declined this standing course of providence in
a text before cited, the conclusion whereof is this [We freely acknowledge that
God the giver of all good uses such a liberty in giving, Script. Synod. Art.
2. Page 528.
inequall grace to equal men, and equal grace to inequall men, calling those
that are more evil, and passing by those that are less evil, that we freely
confess that there can be no exact account given of his dispensations of grace
either by the use or abuse of more general gifts] and yet Mr. Goodwin will
needs have a standing course of providence; whereby God fails not to give
grace to him that improves naturalls well. And yet although by these clouds of
witnesses they are forced to confess that there can be no exact reason given
of Gods dispensations of grace either by the use or abuse of natural gifts, yet
they can (to make out that intention in God to save all) affirm that [ Nullus
little quos communi vocatione vocat quem non ex prima intention ideo vocet ut
eos specialioris gratia vocationis afficiat. Script. Synod. Art. 2. Page 327.
No man that enjoyes that general and common Call (which is the same with the
general gifts they before spoke of) but God calls them out of his primary
intention, to endew them with the grace of his more special call;] how
miserable is the division of that house, that the strengthening of one part is
the confusion of another? true indeed if they did grant any such standing, or
exact rule for Gods dispensations of grace, then they might thus evade us, all
things propounded and intended by his primary and antecedent will, fall not out
so in execution by his consequent, because man is wanting to himself; there is
the intervening peccancie of man's free will; but they take this evasion out of
their own mouths, for if no such exact or standing rule be, so that we cannot
tell how grace shall be dispensed either by the use or abuse of general gifts,
then how God may be truly said to give general gifts intentionally that by
improvement of them he might in dew men with more special grace; let them that
can, divine: for I profess my self unable to do it.

Again, one thing more if there be such a method (which out of the fluttering
expresses of our Adversaries may be made out) that general gifts are given to
every man with an intention that they might improve them, and upon the
inprovement of them be compensated with the revelation of Christ, and the
improvement of that with more grace, till they come to be saved, and that all
this method from nature to glory (by the reason of the irrefragable
contignation betwixt all the parts thereof) be but one entire way to Heaven and
eternal glory, then I demand of Master Goodwin, whether those that believe in
Christ are more truly said to have life then those that have only the gifts of
nature, and how Christ is said to be the way? When yet the Heathen are in the
way, and yet are without Christ; and how the Heathen are said to have gone out
of the way, and not to have known the way of peace, when Mr. Goodwin can tell
us they have the light of nature, which is a part of that way that leads to
life, what does he think is the difference betwixt the believers in Christ, and
the Heathen Gentiles? Does he think them alike in this, that they are both in
the way to life, and only this difference that the one has gone further in
this way then the other. Those that are believers may (in Mr. Goodwins
judgment) finally fall away and perish, and the Lord Christ has not promised
to preserve them from their voluntary defections; and their faith in Christ may
yet so fail them, as that they shall not come to life: and yet on the other
side, a Heathen man has general gifts given to him with this intention, that
he might improve them, and improving them have an increase of grace till they
come to be saved, how shall we herein discry any difference betwixt them: and
that the one shall appear to be more truly in the way to life then the other?
his decisions herein will be acceptable, and provoke me to further explanations
in this particular; only I must advise him to be casting about for sufficient
proofs for this, that those Heathen men that have only the light of nature, can
be said to know the way of peace, and to be in the way of eternal life;
otherwise I shall not yield to this standing course of providence, so much, and
so confidently urged by him.

But then in the next place, he will urge us with that text, Matthew. 25. the
Parable of the talents, in which it is said (To him that has it shall be
given:) from this text they deduce this general or standing course of
providence: and hence, say they, it appears, that God binds himself to give
increase to him that uses those gifts well, that he has received, nay, Mr.
Goodwin says expressly, that here by talents are meant natural gifts, and in
that saying (To him that has shall be given) God promises to give an increase
of grace to him that shall use the light of nature well.

Now because this text is the whole proof, by the strength of which the whole
fabric of Universal Grace seems to stand, I shall a little expatiate upon
it, and truly were it so that either Mr. Goodwin or the Remonstrants were but
at unity with themselves, it would be possible for us in sometime to shape them
out some answer looking toward satisfaction; but the intricacies and
uncertainties of our adversaries render our work herein very difficult. If this
text prove their pretended method, they must prove that these talents are
natural gifts and abilities, or at least necessary to take them in. But to take
a survey of their constancy in this particular, Arminius would have the talents
be the (light of nature) he says thus. [ Vide mihi annon isto dicto (Habenti
dabitur) promissio ista contineatur, qua Deus spondet se gratia supernaturali
illuminaturum eos qui lumine naturali recte utuntur. Antiperkins. page 218.
Does not that saying of Christ (To him that has, shall be given) contein the
promise by which God binds himself to give supernatural grace to him that
uses the light of nature well?] But Corvinus tempers the text to a greater
latitude thus: [ Quod attinet ad proverbialem illam sententiam, Habenti
dabitur, confirmemus sententiam nostram de remunerando recto usu prioris
gratiae per majorem subsequentem. in Molin. Cap. 41.. 5.
For as much as appertains to that proverbial sentence, (To him that has,
shall be given) by it we confine our sentence of rewarding the right use of
former grace, by the increase of a greater following grace.] So that now those
talents must be grace; and yet this does not please, but in the words
immediately following another spirit possesses his pen thus: [ Sententia est
generalis, and nihil aliud Dominus dictum vult quam hoc, quod Deus compensat
rectum usum donorum majori liberalitate. Ibidem. Page 20.
The sentence is general, wherein the Lord speaks nothing but this, that he
will compensate the right use of gifts received with greater liberality.] Here
the talents are so laxly interpreted, as that we may make them either nature or
grace or both, or, if such could possibly be, neither. Sometimes the talents
are natural light, sometimes grace, sometimes either or both, and may we find
Master Goodwin any thing more certain to his principles? In the 20th. page of
his Book he urges (that the talents are natural gifts, and can be understood
of nothing else by any color of reason,) and yet in the 18th. page, he gives
himself a little more room, and says, that that text avoucheth that, [That
whatsoever a man's stock or endowments is in one kind or other from Gods hand,
yet by a careful improvement it may arise to a spiritual estate.] and in the
21th. page further says quite contrary, that [Those abilities that are given
to man, are more commonly then properly called natural,] and is it not likely
that we should give satisfactory answers to them, who cannot yet make any
settled and satisfactory demands? but it seems I must do it as well as I may.
And because Mr. Goodwin touches upon these things I shall examine: First, what
we are to understand by the Talents; Secondly, who by servants; Thirdly, what
by increase. Fourthly, what by the reward; and when this is done, this text
will be sufficiently cleared.

First, what is meant by talents, the true examen of this will help us to
decide all the rest, and I shall proceed upon this ground, if these words make
any thing for their invented or standing providence, they must either by
talents understand natural gifts, or else at least take them in: but because I
am to deal with Mr. Goodwin, I shall consider his own words in this case:
[There is no ground nor color of reason to think but that all the talents
mentioned in the parable, the five, the two, and the one, were all of one kind
and nature, and signified not any supernatural or saving grace, but only
natural abilities, and such as men unregenerate as well as regenerate are
capable of.] But then,

1 How inconstant is he to himself? for in the 21 page he says, that these
talents and endowments are more commonly then properly called natural, and yet
here he is so assertive of this great Impropriety, as to say, that it cannot
upon any ground or color of reason be taken for any thing but natural
endowments.

2 I answer by concession, and grant all the talents to be of one kind and
nature; yea, and the increase to be of the same nature with the talents, but
this is no favorable plea for Mr. Goodwins cause, which would have nature to
be the talents, and grace the increase: but of this more presently.

3 Supppse they be all of one kind, must that needs be natural? what color of
reason is there for this inference? may they not be supernatural, and yet be
all of one kind also? but he has one expression that seems to carry in it
the force of a reason; and that is this: [Such as men unregenerate have as well
as the regenerate,] and his reason seems to be this, [Those talents were
given to that sernant that was cast into utter darkness, and so to the
unregenerate, therefore it must be understood of natural abilities:] but this
is very miserable reasoning, as if supernatural grace was not given to the
unregenerate, how then should they come to be regenerate? or if it be such as
the regenerate have with the unregenerate, it must be more then natural, except
he will say, that men become regenerate merely by nature; but if he have here
mistake a word, unregenerate (putting men) for (men that shall perish) as I
think he has (because in the foregoing page, I find him molding the
expression so:) I shall not take the advantage, but consider it running thus,
and yet I say, who ever has said that God may not give supernatural grace to
them that shall perish? or that this is good reasoning (such means are given to
men that shall perish, therefore they are only natural gifts.) Many shall say,
We have prophesied in thy Name, of whom he shall say, I know ye not; the
incredulous Jews were men that should perish, yet I hope they had supernatural
grace of the Gospel. Now if he shall demand of me to what end God gives
supernatural grace to them that shall perish; I present Arminius himself giving
an Answer: Armin. Examen Perk. 154.
and I say to the same end, that he gives and affords sufficient impediment to
hinder men from walking in their own ways, when yet he certainly knows it
shall not take effect: Let him consult him at his leisure, so that there is but
small reason on his side, to prove that by the talents are meant natural gifts.

But we have a very fair flourish, and because reason is but slender, authority
must carry it: for he says, That there is not one of our best Interpreters,
but they adjudge the case for him, and that they are unanimous for natural
abilities. I am sorry that I am the messenger to tell him that either he has
not read those Interpreters, or else that he has too great inclinations to
cousen the world, he either knows or may know that Expositors are very much
divided here, and are far from being unanimous in the case in hand.

Marlorate and Stephanus in his Gloss upon the Evangelists, assert the talents
to signify Election; and the increase to be saving knowledge, and their
interpretation runs thus: [ Habentibus electionis donum dabitur scientia ad
vitam. Marlorate. Stephanus, Gloss. in loc.
To those that have the gift of election, shall be given the increase of saving
knowledge.]

The learned Deodati in his Annotations, understands by those talents the
operation of the Spirit in regeneration, or regenerating, and quickening grace,
and the increase to be the Word and Spirit of God as food of the new men, and
his interpretation is this: To him that has the talent of spiritual life,
shall be given the increase of spiritual food, and in this he has his
followers.

Piscator by the Talents understands the offices in the Church, and he
interprets the text thus: [ Dominus est Christus, servi sunt Christiani,
praesertim ii qui officium gerunt, talenta sunt dona spiritualia, praesertim
officia ipsa. Piscator in loc.
The Lord is Jesus Christ, the servants are Christians, chiefly those that bear
office in the Church, the talents are spiritual graces, but especially those
offices in the Church.] Neither does he lead the way in this, but follows the
steps of many Interpreters.

Jerome by the talents understands the preaching of the Gospel, and he
interprets the text thus: [ Pater-familias est Christus, post resurrectionem
ascendens vocatis doctrinam Evangelicam tradidit. Jerome. in loc.
The Master of the Family is Christ, who after his Resurrection ascending to
heaven, his servants being called, communicates to them the Gospel.] And this
way run Erasmus in his Paraphrase, and Tossanus in his Commentary; so that any
may plainly see that Interpreters are not unanimous in any interpretation. Some
think these talents to signify Election, others the regenerating grace of God,
a third sort the offices in the Church, a fourth, the preaching of the Gospel;
but none of them says any thing for natural abilities; and yet Mr. Goodwin
would persuade the world that Interpreters are unanimous for natural gifts and
abilities. But he produces a testimony or two, which because I will not be
guilty of strengthening the authority of his cause by my silence, I shall
examine them, and see how clearly they make for him, he brings a fourfold
testimony, one from Chamter, a second from Calvin, a third from Musculus, a
fourth from Ambrose.

First, Chamier he quoteth saying thus: Talenta cuique distributa non possunt
significare vita^ aeternam, quia dantur servisomnibus, frugi, and nequam; sed
necesse est referri ad gratias temporales, quas Deus commun^cat non tantum piis
and electis, sed impiis and reprobis. chamier. in loc.
The talents cannot signify eternal life, because they were given to all the
servants both good and bad, but they are referred to temporary graces, which
God gives to good and elect, as also to the bad and the reprobate.] And does
not Mr. Goodwin well to begin with this clear testimony? But whether for us or
for him, there is the Question; what one syllable is there extant in all this
testimony that gives the least hint, that by talents are meant natural gifts?
it is not that part of it, wherein he says, (by talents cannot be meant
eternal life) for there are intervening graces betwixt natural abilities and
eternal life; hence Mr. Goodwin says, that natural abilities are not
immediately saving, so that it may not be eternal life, and yet not natural
gifts: nor yet is it that expression wherein he says, that (these talents are
given to all the servants;) for the supernatural graces of God are given to
reprobate as well as the elect, as before I showed. Now besides this he says,
Dominus indies locupletat, and novis suae gratiae dotibus servos suosaccumulat,
quia opus quod in illis coepit, gratum habet and in illis invenire quod majori
gratia prosequatur: atque huc pertinet sententia illa (Habenti dabitur) and
fateor expectandum esse fidelibus, quo melius usi fuerint superioribus gratiis,
ut novis majoribus augcantur. Calvin. Instit. lib. 2. c. 3.. 11.
they are (gratiae temporales) temporary graces, now in that he calls the
talents graces, he overthrows Mr. Goodwin, who will have them to be natural
abilities; and in that he calls them temporary, he helps him not, for
supernatural grace being afforded promiscuously (ad tempus) for a time only,
may be called temporary; but such is given to the Reprobates, so that this
Quotation, though it grace the margin, yet it dishonors the text.

2 The second Protestant Writer whom he suborneth for his Cause, is Mr. Calvin,
but we do not hear Calvin speaking. From Mr. Goodwin therefore I shall produce
his words upon this very text, he says thus: [ The Lord does every day enrich
with, and accumulate upon his servants new gifts of his grace every day;
because he accepts the work which he has begun in them, and finds that in
them, which he will follow with more grace, and hitherto does that sentence
belong (Habenti dabitur) To him that has, shall be given; and I profess this,
That believers may hence expect that the more they use the grace that is given,
the more they shall be endewed with further grace.] And is not Calvin a
probable testimony for Mr. Goodwin, who in even express words calls the
talents graces, not nature? I would not have Mr. Goodwin to injure the living
works of dead Interpreters.

3 The third testimony is out of Musculus, and in this he would have us acted
by an implicit faith, for he does not produce his words, and because he does
not, I will. This Proverb (Habenti dabitur) is used in in two places, Matthew.
13. and Matthew. 25. To the first text he says thus. [ Quod mudus facit male,
hic fit been and merito: and ii qui gratiam regni Dei oblatam suo vitio
repudiant, and a^feretur ab ii, and dabitut aliis qui sunt magis cupidi ut
fiant abundantiores. Musenlus in Matthew. 13.
What the world does badly, is here done well and deservedly, that those who by
their own fault refuse the grace of the Kingdom of God, it should be taken
away from such, and given to those that are more desirous of it, that they be
more abundant.] And upon Matthew. 25. says thus: [ Per talenta significari
officia illa quae servi sui gerunt in Ecclesia. Musculus in Matthew. 25.
By these talents are understood any of those offices which his servants do
bear in the Church. And can he think Musculus his testimony can stand him in
any stead, except he will say that natural abilities may be called the grace of
the Kingdom of God.

4 The sourh Writer whom he produces for his Cause, is Ambrose, whose words
indeed he produces in the margin; but in that Edition those works, which pass
under the name of Ambrose, which I have by me, I find not the words which he
inserteth, but take it as it lies. The dint of the testimony lies here, in
that he says, The servant that hid his talent in a napkin, was he that hid [
Rutionem quae nobis data ad imaginem and similitudinem, studio voluptatis
obruit and quasi fo^ta carnis abscondit.
That reason which is given to us, according to the similitude and image be
burieth it in the study of pleasure, and hides it in the pit of the flesh.]
Now here is the difficulty what is meant by this, (Ratio data nobis ad imaginem
and similitudinem) how will it be proved, that by these words is understood
this light of nature and natural abilities? it is not (corrupta ratio) corrupt
reason that renders us according to the image of God, but our right and
perfect reason, in integrity, or renewed in the state of regeneration. Hence
the Apostle says, ( Renewed in knowledge according to the image of him that
created us, Col. 3.10. And hereby we are changed into the same image, 2 Cor.
3.18.) so that this is not reason, as it is by nature or abilities merely
natural; but as they are elevated by the supernatural grace of God, and I am
induced to think so, because I find other Fathers speaking of the same
business, to the same purpose, as Chrysostom, though not in his original
language, yet, as Anianus, and other uncertain Interpreters lay it down thus: [
Abscondit autem talentum in terra, qui accipiens notitiam Christi contemnit
vitam spiritualem, and in tervenis actubus and deliciis conversans obruit illam
in carne sua, and mundi solicitudinibus quasi spinis suffocat suaefidel bonum
and fructum non fert. Chrysostom. Anian Interpr. in Loc.
He hides his talent in the earth, that has received the knowledge of Christ,
and yet contemns a spiritual life: and being conversant in earthly actions
and delights, overthrows it in the flesh, and choaks it by the cares of the
flesh as so many thorns: so that he brings forth no good fruit of his faith.]
And why may not that (Ratio data nobis ad imaginem,) which Ambrose speaks of,
be all one with that (notitia Christi) which Chrysostom gives us: but however,
how weakly is Mr. Goodwins assertion fortified with authority, when in the
midst of many flourishes there is not any thing that so much as looks toward
him, but one testimony excepted, which is yet left in a dubious sense, and may
be fairly carried quite another way? And this is the height of his authority.
But because he seems to look also at color of reason, and pretends that
there is neither color nor ground of reason for any man to think that the
talents signify any thing but natural abilities; I shall in the next place
produce several particulars, which to my understanding carry some color of
reason; by them I intend to prove that by the talents are not meant natural
abilities.

1 To understand the talents of natural abilities, takes away all pertinency
and aptness, either to the persons spoken to, or the occasion of speaking, from
the words of Christ: which yet we are upon very necessary principles to grant
to them: the persons to whom these words were spoken, were Jews, who had the
letter of the Gospel preached to them; and the occasion of speaking these
words, was immediately upon the preaching that parable of the sower, the seed
being the Word, it fell on all grounds good and bad, the stony, thorny, highway
ground; but these mysteries our Savior spoke in Parables, the reason being
asked, he returns this answer in both places, (To him that has shall be given,
but from him that has not, shall be taken away that which he has.) Now let
Mr. Goodwin show the pertinency of this answer in his sense either to the
persons or occasion for taking talents for natural abilities, then this is the
sense of the place: Because the unbelieving Jews have not (that is) use not the
light and abilities of nature well, therefore they had not the clear
understanding of the mysteries of heaven, given to them; but our Savior gives
the reason in the Parable, because the Gospel in its glorious discoveries fell
upon their hearts as upon stony, highway, thorny ground: therefore he spoke to
them in Parables, and therefore advises them to take heed how they heard
(viz.) the letter of the Gospel; For to him that has shall be given, etc. now
to interpret the talents by the light of nature, is very much irrelative to the
occasion of Christ's words, which was their not using of the Gospel Light in the
letter of it, and what an incoherency does it introduce into Christ's words,
Luke 8.18. [Take heed how ye hear: For to him that has, shall be given, etc?]
for then the sense must run thus, Take heed how ye hear the Gospel, for from
them that use not the light of nature well, shall be taken away the light of
nature, even that which they have: the very words of (taking heed how they
hear) seem to carry it hither, that the talents did signify the preaching of
the Gospel.

2. This very sense destroys his standing course of providence, for clear it is
that as Christ applies this proverbiall sentence, the Jews did not use their
talents well. Now if by talents be to be understood natural abilities, then
the unbelieving Jews did not use their natural abilities well, and yet they
had the letter of the Gospel, and God did not fail to reveal his Son Christ to
them, else how could they be unbelieving? and if he revealed his Son to such as
did not use their natural abilities regularly, where is Mr. Goodwins standing
Course of providence, of revealing or hiding his Son Christ, according to men's
exercising or not exercising their natural abilities regularly.

3 Their talents that were given were (...), his own goods, that is, the proper
goods of their Master, which he had in dispose to distribute to his servants,
and that as Mediator; but where shall we find that he received natural
abilities to bestow upon his Church; or that he is said to give such as
mediator? True, he is that light that enlightens every man; to wave all other
commodious interpretations that are given, how will Master Goodwin prove that
those are spoken of Christ, as Mediator, but rather as Creator? John 1.9, 10.
the text says not, he is the true light, but he was the true light, yea also,
he was in the world; and the world was made by him. He was that enlightening
light when he was in the world, creating the world, and so endewing them with
the light of reason, and this way has much countenance from Interpreters, When
Christ ascended on high, Ephesians. 4.9, 10, 11, 12.
he distributed those gifts that he had received? but what were they? shall we
so far mistake as to judge them natural abilities? the text will explode such a
sense, because they are not pertinent for the perfecting of the Saints, the
work of the Ministry, the edifying of the body of Christ; the Apostle says,
Ephesians. 1.3. John 1.16.
That in him we are blessed with all spiritual blessings, and that of him we
receive grace for grace: but where shall we find that his Church receives
from him the abilities of nature, and that from him as Mediator? Now he must
prove this before it can be clear that these talents signify natural
abilities.

4 Those talents that were given, were in a various degree to diverse men, some
five, some two, some one talent; but how can Mr. Goodwin make his to agree with
the light of nature, if he consider his own words, Page 10.
Page 10. [That all men by the light of nature may make out the conclusions of
the Gospel, and that an atonement is made for sin;] if all men can do thus
much, and no man any more, where is this variety that the Parable speaks of?

5 These talents were given to every man (...), according to his abilily, which
Junius renders in his Annotations, [( Secundum prudentiam and peritiam in
negotiando qua praediti erant. Junius in loc.
) According to his prudence and skill in trading, with which they were
endewed:] which indeed may take place, in the grace of the Gospel which any one
is to improve for the edification of his Church; he may betrust us with so much
as we by that measure of natural abilities or other endowments bestowed on us,
be in a capacity of improving; but how this can be made good of natural
abilities, I see not; for what prexistent or prevenient abilities and
endowments to those which we call natural, according to the proportion of
which, natural abilities shall be measured out to us, (...)? I fear this will
not easily be reduced to right reason.

6 These talents are such as that the improvement of them is immediately
saying, the person that improved and gained other five, the Lord said to him,
Enter thou into the joy of thy Master; but this cannot be affirmed of the
abilities of nature, and that neither upon the principles of Mr. Goodwin, nor
yet of the Remonstrants jointly, for in all their endowments, the improvement
of the light of nature to the height is not immediately saving.

7 These talents were given to his servants at his going into a far Country,
and is not this generally interpreted, at his Ascension? but can it be reduced
to right reason and evidence of Scripture, to say that Christ distributed
natural abilities at his Ascension? what needed he stay till his Ascension for
the bestowing that boon, had he not done it long before? What did all men long
before? if he gave not natural abilities till his Ascension? whether will not
this Gloss depretiate those Princely Donatives, with which he solemnly honored
his Ascension, to bring them so low as the abilities of nature?

These things I lay down, as having afforded much color of reason, if no more,
and till these be cleared, I cannot think that by talents are meant natural
abilities.

Thus having discussed the talents, I shall examine whether he speak right upon
the servants to whom these talents were given. Mr. Goodwin describes them very
suitably to his purpose thus: [ By the servants who received these talents, as
in a glass we may see the condition and state, not of believers only, or those
that shall be saved, but of the generality of mankind, or at least of them
that shall perish as well as of them that shall be saved. Now indeed, if by
talents be meant natural abilities, he had need make the servants to be all
mankind, and no other interpretation will serve his turn handsomely, and
therefore Mr. Goodwin would have us believe, that by the servants in the
Parable, is meant the state and condition (or more properly the persons) of all
mankind. But how does he prove it? he thinks he proves it thus: [Not of
those that believe only, or such as shall be saved,] as if because those
servants were such as might perish, as well as those that believed and were
saved, therefore they are all mankind in general; an inference like the rest.
The servants may represent the Church of Christ on earth, in which are those
that shall perish, as well as those that shall be saved, to whom God may
dispense many of his supernatural abilities for the good and edification of
his Church, though their persons perish: and this I hope may well be, and yet
not all mankind come under the notion of his houshold-servants. For we may
know from Scripture that Christ has a house of his own, and a retinue of his
own, the government and edification of which house, he has transmitted to
servants of his own, so run the words, (...), He called his own proper
servants, the consideration of which is no propitious glass to present to us a
gloss of such latitude: and until Master Goodwin prove that Christ as Mediator,
has received the economy over the whole World, as his house and family over
which he is master and head: I must conclude that the servants in the Parable
do not signify all mankind in general, but only those that are within the
Church.

Thirdly, to consider a little the improvement, or rather the increase upon
that improvement, it is evident it is in the same kind, the increase was of
the one talent that was given to him that had gained five to his five; that
which was promised to him that has, was not variety, but abundance in the same
kind: so that look what the increase is, we may conclude, such was the talents
improved; but then suppose we should concede to Mr. Goodwin all he desires,
that talents signify natural abilities, and the servants all mankind in
general: yet what would this contribute to his cause, which is (that God gives
increase of supernatural grace to him that uses natural abilities worthily
and regularly) wherein the use and the increase, the thing had and the thing
given are (in diverso genere;) the one is natural, the other supernatural,
which is against the current of the Parable; for if the talents given, and the
increase given; upon improvement, be of one and the same kind then, if the
talents be the abilities of nature, Page 20, 21.
then the increase must be natural also, which Mr. Goodwin likes not, for he
says expressly (it is not an increase of natural abilities, but of more saving
grace) or else if the increase be spiritual grace, then the talents cannot be
natural abilities, contrary to his present doctrine. To sum up all then
together, we may see how unhandsomely his assertion and this Parable of the
talents meet; his assertion pleads that the talents originally given are
natural gifts, the Parable seems to carry it for supernatural graces; his
assertion urges that these servants are all mankind in general, the Parable
confines them only to his Church which is Christ's house, and over which he is
head and Master, and for whose use he bestows his goods to his servants. His
assertion contendeth for a gift and an increase to be (in diverso genere) in a
diverse kind. The Parable makes both the improvement and increase to be (in
eodem genere) in the same kind.

Quam been convenient? Which being considered, we may come to see that that
Parable of the talents (indeed it upholdeth such a course of providence as to
bless the improvement of grace with more grace, but) holds not forth such a
course of providence as Mr. Goodwin pretends, which to make an increase of
grace to them that use nature well, because in this course of providence, the
improvement and the increase are of diverse kinds, but the Parable holds forth
that only, wherein both are in the same kind; and as I have proved there is no
such course of providence: so I have also cleared that he has not proved any
such course, no not by the strength of that text [To him that has shall be
given.]

But fourthly and lastly, suppose we grant him all these three, that man could
improve naturals regularly, and so please God, and so procure increase of grace
according to that standing course of providene; yet will it not so roundly
follow, as Mr. Goodwin pretends, that all men even the Heathen are in a
sufficiency of means to believe in Jesus Christ, and that upon the ground
beforementioned, sufficiency to believe requires all requisites to the act of
believing; now believing the revelation of Jesus Christ is a requisite, which
revelation of Christ is not made but upon the actual and regular improvement
(according to the doctrine of Mr. Goodwin;) therefore we must not insist upon
suppositions, if man improve naturals well, God will reveal Christ, and so
raise a Chymericall sufficiency of believing; for there is no sufficiency of
believing in Christ till he be revealed, whom he will reveal (says Mr.
Goodwin) (not upon the capacity of Improvement) but upon the actual
Improvement according to the rule; and that standing course of providence, so
much urged by Mr. Goodwin, implies no more then a not failing to reveal Christ
upon the actual regular improvement of natural abilities; they will not say
that God has promised to reveal Christ to those that are able only to improve
nature, except they do actually improve it, therefore it must needs follow that
the revelation of Christ, and the actual improvement of natural abilities
leading thereunto, are requisites to believe in Christ; and therefore if both
be not actually present, there is no sufficiency for believing, otherwise why
should the Remonstrants trouble themselves in framing out a various measure and
degree of sufficiency? And grant that till men do use naturals well, and so
have Christ actually revealed, Corvin. in Molin. c. 37.. 11.
there is no sufficiency of believing in Christ? And to come to some close in
this point, let us grant all they urge, that man can improve his naturals, and
to please God, and by both according to that standing course of providence have
Christ revealed, and so believe, and that it were also true that if he did all
those things beforementioned, he should have Christ revealed, in all this the
question is not of a sufficiency (ad posse credendum,) but a sufficiency (ad
actu credendum.) Now to this the actual revelation of Christ is necessary, and
to this actual revelation, the actual improvement of naturals is rquisite
(according to the course of providence, as Mr. Goodwin describes it) what more
roundly follows then this, That those that do not actually improve naturals
regularly, have not a sufficiency to believe in Christ, because such have not
the revelation of Jesus Christ, for if they had, the standing course of
providence is also broken? and now there is a fair way thus to argue, If no man
does actually improve naturals regularly, then all men have not sufficiency of
means for believing on Christ.

But the former is true: Therefore the latter. The Minor is proved by Romans 3.
Romans 3.




So that except Mr. Goodwin can prove that all men do actually improve natural
abilities, and so do that, upon which those things that are requisite to the
believing on Christ, are granted, he has not yet, no nor ever can prove that
all men have a sufficient means to believe in Christ, if he will but adhere to
the rules of his own pretended course of providence. And now to close up all,
until Mr. Goodwin can prove that every man can improve natural abilities well,
or can please God well by so doing, and that there is such a standing course of
providence, as he pretends, and that upon the grant of all these all men may
be said to be in a sufficiency of means for believing in Christ; until these be
done. I hope, I may say, I have beat him from his second strong-hold, by which
he expects to fortify his doctrine of universal sufficiency for faith in
Christ: and that he suspects the safety of this plea, I am induced to think,
because I find him casting about for a third reserve, and to recede a little
further, which makes up a third part of his Treatise, and it is thus as
follows:

[Suppose we yet further for arguments sake, that the Heathen wanting the
letter and external administ^ation of the Gospel by men, and also were in no
capacity of coming to the knowledge of it, eitherly the works of Creation or
Providence, nor yet by any improvement of natural abilities, yet it must needs
be acknowledged that they are in such a capacity, of being made partakers of
them, even of the oral administration thereof in such a sense as all nations
are in a capacity of having and enjoying such Merchandise and Commodity, as
are exportable out of any Nation under heaven, and may be had by equitable
addresses to them,] Parturiunt montes: but they bring forth a very ridiculous
birth. I hope Mr. Goodwin intends not his Treatise to be like those flying
lying Phamphlets that bespeak bloody fights in the title page, but not so much
as a slight skirmish in the body of them; in his title page he tells us of a
sufficiency to believe in Christ, and now he is sunk so low, as to a remote
capacity; does he think that he deals with such adversaries as hold that the
Heathen are not in a remote capacity of believing in Christ? whom has he yet
ever known to hold so? Let Mr. Goodwin enjoy his remote capacity, and what will
it avail him in the argument about which all their invented methods of
universal sufficient grace are formed? our Argument is this, we conceive it not
consonant to the wisdom of the Father and Christ to provide a way to procure
life and salvation for all men, and that such a way as the blood of his only
Son, and Christ's own blood, and this price to be actually and completely paid;
and so the purchase fully and actually to be made, and that out of a real
desire and intention to save them eternally, as Mr. Goodwin and the
Remonstrants grant, and yet that God should not use some proportionable means
that they might according to this purchase have life and salvation applied,
this is that which is the obstruction that hinders our concentring with Mr.
Goodwin in his doctrine of universal redemption; now if he shall satisfy us,
and solve the scruple by saying, he brings all men into a remote capacity of
believing, the business remains as much involved as before; for what
proportion is there betwixt in actual and full purchase, and a remote capacity
to that on which the application depe^ds? or what probability is there that
Christ would by his blood actually purchase, and yet leave them but in a remote
capacity (yea, such as is never likely to be reduced to act, as I shall
presently show) of the application?

But to consider this remote capacity, that is his last refuge [It is such as
any nation has of receiving those commodities that are exportable out of
another Nation, and to be had upon equitable addresses to them.] Let us proceed
upon the right stating of this instance, and I will transmit it to the
judgment of the wise: we must consider a Nation altogether ignorant of the
merchandise of another country, and in no probability of hearing thereof by any
means by which they may be moved to make equitable addresses to that Nation,
what capacity is that people in to partake of such commodities? it must
certainly be (Potentia remotissima) the most remote capacity that can be, which
indeed is just nothing; the case is just alike; for Mr. Goodwin supposes that
they want the orall preaching of the Gospel, and are not in any capacity of
coming to the knowledge of it by the creature or providence, or by improvement
of natural abilities; that is, of having it discovered in any kind or other,
yet these Heathen must have a capacity of being partakers of the orall
administration of the Gospel, because they may by equitable addresses to these
places, in which the Gospel is preached, come to know: but where lies the
capacity of these addresses, so long as they are ignorant of it, nor yet in a
capacity to come to know it by any means?

He seems to drive on this design in Page 23, to 29 and I apprehend him,
clearing it thus, Those addresses may be made, because God places his oracles
amongst the Jews, for that end, that they might by them be made known to the
Gentiles, and therefore probably would so order, it that they should come to
hear of them, that they might come to make addresses to them for them, for I
find him thus speaking:

[God discovered his gracious counsels in Jesus Christ, under types and shadows
to the Jews, not that it was any part of his mind that these discoveries, or
the great blessings thereby accruing unto men, should be confined to this
people; but that all the world and all Nations round about them, might (if they
pleased) have part in that fellowship, as many had who became Proselytes.] Now
if he could but half as easily prove as assert, he would drive on an unexpected
work. If it was Gods mind, that the Gentiles should have part in that
fellowship; what means that of the Psalmist, ( He gave his Word to Jacob, but
with every Nation he has not so dealt?) Psalm. 147.20.
Was it no part of Gods mind, that those discoveries and benefits thereby
should be confined to the Jews for a time? Why did Christ say so long after,
that he was not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel? Matthew. 10.5.
and accounted all others as Dogs and Swine, and strangers? Why did he forbid
his Disciples to go into the way of the Gentiles? If it was the mind of God
that the Gentiles should always partake of that fellowship with the Jews, how
came Mr. Goodwin to know it? the fellowship of the Gentiles in the mystery of
the Gospel, was hid from all ages past, and but of late made manifest. The holy
Apostles were not so well nurtured and schooled in the fellowship of the
Gentiles, Ephesians. 3.7, 8, 9.
as Mr. Goodwin, they wondered that the Gospel should be preached, and
repentance to life should be granted to the Gentiles: Acts 10.45.11 r 18.
but what need they wonder, if they had known as distinctly as Mr. Goodwin,
that it was no part of Gods mind that the Oracles of God, and benefits
accruing to men thereby, should be confined to the Jews? Ephesians. 2.14, 16, 17.
What was that wall of partition set up betwixt them? Ephesians. 2.14. which Christ
took away, and so came and preached peace to them afar off. The Gentiles were
aliens and strangers to the promises, Ephesians. 2.12.
without Christ and hope; Let Mr. Goodwin so arbitrate the business betwixt his
assertion, and these particulars, that if he can, he may reconcile them; if it
was no part of Gods mind that the Oracles of God should be confined to the
Jews for a time, why does the Apostle say, (The fellowship of the Gentiles was
bid in God, from the beginning of the world,) and but now made manifest; if it
was no part of Gods mind, but that the Gentiles should have part in that
fellowship? How comes it to pass, that this was not of so long discovered to
the Gentiles; considering that God can raise up Saul amongst the Prophets, and
Saul amongst the Apostles to perform his own work, Ephesians. 3.9, 10.
and he it is that sends faithful laborers into his harvest? How could Mr.
Goodwin pitch his thoughts on such an Anomalous assertion as this, as if he did
purposely endeavor to level and destroy the whole method of the sacred
Scripture at once? But he seems to pretend a piece of Reason, and that from
the law of the Proselytes. How narrowly has he consulted with the Remonstrants
in this case? For thus we find them reasoning: [ Neque unquam Gentiles a
communione Israelis absolute exclusisse, sicut patet ex legibus latis a Deo in
causa Proselytarum. Hag. Collat. 180.
The Gentiles were never excluded from the communion of Israel absolutely, as
appears by those laws that are given by God concerning Proselytes.] But I
conceive, that in this case, their reason fails them much; for what needed men
become Proselytes to the Jews, if that as Gentiles they were to have a
fellowship in the Gospel, and that by the appointment of God? and that the Jews
were betrusted with the Oracles of God, that they might communicate them to the
Gentiles, the Gentiles might challenge them as their due without becoming
Proselytes to the Jews; and the argument is valid against them: For if they
were not to have any fellowship with the Jews in the things of God, until they
became Proselytes to the Jews, then it roundly follows that they were not to
have any part in that fellowship as Gentiles; for in having it as Proselytes
that had it not as Gentiles, but as Jews.

He further says also, that [the Mosaical and Ceremonial rites were of God
delivered to the Jews by Moses, for the training and nurturing up of the world
in the knowledge of God, and the things of their eternal peace.] Which seems
strange to me, that the Lord should intend the training up of the Gentiles by
those Mosaicall rites, when he never intended the Gentiles, should be brought
under that yoke of Judaisme. How can he prove that God intended that the world
should be trained up in the knowledge of God, Deuteronomy. 14.21.
when the Nations and Gentiles were not to observe those rites, as God says of
those unclean meats forbidden to the Jews, yet they might give it to strangers,
and sell it unto aliens, and they might eat of them; and in many places we
might show that the Gentiles were not tied to observe those rites, and so could
not by them to be nurtured up in the knowledge of God.

But he seems to be carried on with vigor in this, merely by the impulse of
one Scripture wherein Mosaicall rites are called (...), Col. 2.20. Gal. 4.3, 10.
the elements of the world; and hence he inferres they were appointed for the
training up of the world; but if he would peruse Expositors, he may easily
reduce himself out of this snare, and that many ways: but I am led to
interpret this text thus, it is a frequent Hebraisme to put the abstract for
the concrete, as children of disobedience for disobedient children; house of
rebellion, for rebellious house, the examples are many: So here, elements of
the world, for worldly elements; neither do I this alone, but by the ducture of
the Scriptures, the Sanctury and the Ordinances of Divine service spoken of by
the Apostle, Heb. 9.1. Heb. 9.1.
are some of those elements of the world, which the Apostle calls in one
place the elements of the world, but he calls the tabernacle, (A worldly
Sanctuary,) the Sanctuary was as much an element of the world as any of those
Mosaical observances, but the Apostle calls it (A worldly Sanctuary) (...),
as if it were explicative of the former. Some indeed who amongst Interpreters
go by themselves, but in judgment take Mr. Goodwin along with them, they give
this reason why this is called a (wordly Sanctuary,) because it was open to all
the world both Jews and Gentiles, bringing it up to the height of Mr. Goodwins
thoughts; but Cornel. a Lapide thus answers, Hoc non videtur verum, quia
Gentes ut prophanae a^cebantur ab atrio Judaeorum, sed genuine per Sanctuarium
mundanum intelligitur temporaneum, caducum, terrenum, and evanidum. Cornel. a
Lapide in Heb. 9.1. Gal. 4.3, 4, 5. Col. 2.20, 21.
[This seems not true because the Gentiles as profane were driven from the
temple of the Jews, but more genuinely by this worldly Sanctuary is understood
an earthly, fading, temporary, vanishing Sanctuary;] therefore called wordly,
because it was vanishing, and not to continue, like the world: and this
receives some life from the context; The last verse of the 8th Chap. to the
Hebrews, the Apostle had said, That which is old, is vanished away; and
immediately follows this expression of a (worldly Sanctuary) as an instance of
that which vanishes away; and is there not this or such like reference in all
those places where we find mentioned the (elements of the world,) as in Gal.
4.3.4.5. where he says, As a son in his minority is under Tutours, till the
time appointed of the father: so we, says he, whilst children, were under the
elements of the world, till the fullness of time, and therefore reproves them
for thinking to turn again to those beggarly elements, where it may well
receive this sense (elements of the world) that is, vanishing like the world,
and to continue but till the fullness of time, therefore not now to be kept on
foot: as also in Col. 2.20, 21. the Apostle blames them for being subject to
the elements of the world and ordinances that are to perish with the using;
which base, earthly, and vanishing nature contracts the titles of weak and
beggarly elements, Galath. 4.3.4. and carnal ordinances, Heb. 9.10. Heb. 9.10,
11.
as they were opposed to and compared with the more perfect tabernacle not made
with hands, Heb. 9.11. and that which is more exellent, spiritual and abiding.
And thus there is some pregnancy in the Apostle^ argument. The Colossians and
others were blameworthy to keep those elements of the world, seeing they were
to continue but till the time of reformetion; Christ was the body; they but the
shadow; they were to vanish, and were but weak and beggarly and carnal,
therefore they should not stay and rest in them, being imperfect like the
world, and neglect Christ, in whom they might be complete; but, as Mr. Goodwin
glosses upon the words, where is the pertinency of the Apostles argument? it is
no motive to them to relinquish those beggarly rudiments, if by (elements of
the world) he mean such as were given to the world, to train the Heathen up in
the knowledge of God; for they might say, Do thou, Paul, reprove us Gentiles
for adhering to these rudiments? are they not our own? and given to us to
nurture us up in the knowledge of God; and therefore called the (elements of
the world?) this would rather move them to adhere to them then relinquish them.

Many other occurrent expresses I find in this part of his treatise, which I
should not pass, did not I fear being too voluminous; but much time and paper
is taken up in proving that God has done much for the Gentiles in this case;
but all that discourse is very impertinent to that main question which he first
propounded, viz. (that those are bound to believe, that never enjoyed the
letter of the Gospel).

So that I have to some satisfaction to my self anotomized these three
strongholds, to which he flies to secure himself against all assaults of
Scripture and reason, and have so taken them to pieces, that they appear not in
any capacity of defending his confident assertion; and notwithstanding all
which he says, it does not yet appear that those Heathen that never heard of
Jesus Christ, are in any rational capacity, much less in a mediate
sufficiency, least of all in on immediate sufficiency of believing in Christ.

But should I grant him all that he has attempted to prove, yet would it not
hit his intended mark. I wonder that Mr. Goodwin, so devoted to the rules of
exquisite dispute, should spend the bigger half of his Treatise, and never
conclude with his question. In his Frontispice he promised to show us, how
far those that never heard of Jesus Christ are ye bound, to believe in
Christ; but in all that part of his Book, Obligatio ad credendum in Christum
non est ex lege, sed ex Evangelio; ex eo puta verbo, quo Christus proponitur,
quia ex eo praecipitur ut in eo credamus. Corvin. in Molin. c. 11.. 7.
which I have examined, he only proves that they are in a remote capacity, at
the highest but a sufficiency, but this comes short of an obligation or being
bound; we are not always obliged to those things to do which we are
sufficiently enabled; all obligation comes from a command; no man is obliged
without some such command as that, (Repent and believe the Gospel) this the
Remonstrants give us for granted. Corvinus says thus: [ The Obligation to
believe in Christ, is not from the Law, but from the Gospel, namely by that
word in which Christ is propounded, because in that word we are commanded to
believe in him: but I need not urge them, Mr. Goodwins own testimony is strong
enough in this case; for he says in his Postscript thus: [Adam was under no
obligation to repent, as is evident, because there was no Positive Law given to
him, or anything of that import, during that time;] now if this be a good
argunent which Mr. Goodwin urges. (viz) that Adam was not bound to repent,
because there was no Law given to bind him to repent, it is grounded upon this
truth, that there is no obligation to any thing without a command.

Now indeed in the following part of his Treatise he addresseth himself very
handsomely to prove that all are bound to believe; but it is not without much
provocation from his adversary, and it is not till much labor has been spent,
as if he intended to let the world see that it is one of the last things he
intends, to be pertinent.

It is urged against him by an unknown Adversary, thus: All men are not bound
to believe, without the letter of the Gospel, by which men are obliged and
bound to believe, which argument is firm and good, and makes him cast about for
an universal obligation to believe, without the letter of the Gospel, and he
affirms, that all men are bound to believe on Christ by a double law; First, by
the Law of Nature. Secondly, by the Positive Law of God. I shall examine both
in their order.

First, to examine whether all men by the Law of Nature be bound to believe on
Christ: He lays down his method thus: [Nature requires of men, 1 That they
seek after God, that is, the knowledge of his attributes, and perfection of his
being. 2 After the best and richest discoveries of his will, where they are to
be found. 3 To submit to every part of that will and pleasure being made
known.] And then, as the accomplishment of his invention, he says, that the
Gospel is the richest discovery of his will, and they are bound to subject
themselves unto it. But though I grant all these things, yet thus I answer,
There is no obligation to believe on Christ yet extant except the l^tter of the
Gospel come, and then the true state of the question is destroyed; true it is,
the Gospel is the richest treasures of his mind and will, but how is this made
known to them that never come to enjoy the letter of the Gospel? I further
argue thus:

1 Adam in innocence was bound to do all these, to seek and enq^uire after God
and the richest treasure of his will, etc. but I hope he will not say that Adam
was bound to believe in innocence; if he do, it is not without the positive
dissent of the best of his side.

2 It is strange to see the ways of these men, to assume that to themselves as
Orthodox, what they explode in others as vain and impertinent; when Molin
urged thus upon the question, whether Adam had power to believe [the law
commands us to assent to, and obey what ever the Lord says or commands,
Corvin. in. in Molin. cap. 11. 7.
then it must follow that if Christ was propounded and preached, by the same
law he should be accounted to stand bound to believe the Gospel;] this
reasoning is rejected by Corvinus as vain, and impertinent, but is not Mr.
Goodwins the very same?

3 He says, nature binds to obey the discoveries of his will being known;
true, but then being unknown, no obligation to believe; then it must be
enquired into, how men that never he the letter of the Gospel can come to the
knowledge of the mind of God concerning faith in Christ. Still here is little
proof, but mere trifeling.

Now such an assertion as this his adversary lays upon him (That the light of
nature cannot discover that ever there was such a man or Mediator as Christ
Jesus;) but he is pleased to say that it is not pertinent to our purpose, but I
think very much. For let this be granted, then I urge, though the law of nature
bind us to do all the three forenamed particulars, yet it does not oblige us to
believe in Christ; because the light of nature cannot discover Christ; and if
not, how can it oblige men to believe on Christ I see not, because according to
himself it binds men to obey no further then is known; but he says further
thus: [Though it be not sufficient to discover Christ, yet it is sufficient to
teach them that it is their duty to inquire after the best discovery of his
will, and being known it can tell them it is their duty to believe in Christ,]
how he has lost himself on his own circle? true, it may teach them to inquire,
but how to believe on Christ I see not, because they are not bound to obey,
further then it is known: and nature cannot discover Christ, nor any way left
for knowing him otherwise. For the question supposes them not to have the
letter of the Gospel.

2 He is much mistaken, the law of nature (upon that supposition that faith in
Christ was discovered,) could not be said to be the dictator of that duty, but
the positive law that is newly discovered; nature commands general obedience,
being a general law, but a special law must be the ground of a special
obedience: if he consult with Corvinus he will grant this to pass for good
divinity, as I may illustrate it by this instance:

The Law of nature binds me to obey my Superiors and so us all, this is a
general law; but as a ground of special obedience there is required a law
positive, that I may know wherein to obey them; as to say, Our Superiors for
Politic ends forbid us to eat flesh in Lent, shall he hence conclude that it
is a dictate of nature not to eat flesh in Lent? then it is against the law of
nature to eat flesh in Lent, but who can understand this? therefore we must
necessarily distinguist, thus, nature binds us to obey, but their Positive
law to obey in this or that particularity; neither could the law of nature ever
dictate to any man that he is bound not to eat flesh in Lent, the case is much
a like, the law of nature binds us to obey God as our Maker, but the law
positive comes and bids us to obey him in believing Christ: This obligation as
it is particularized comes from the Positive law of God, not from the law of
nature; for the law of nature could never dictate such a particularity of
obedience, as to believe in Jesus Christ. And thus far I can improve the
smile he preduceth in Page 31, 32. but how far further it tends I see not:
for it vanishes into smoke if we consider that the legislative power in any
nation or kingdom does not confine the discovery of their laws to the
Metropolis, but as for those Laws by which men's daily and weekly transactions
are to be guided, they take such course that they shall be published at the
Market Towns of every Shire or County where it is to be supposed, that all
respectively are led by their occasions; or in a Sessions quarterly, Justices
of the Peace are in their charges to acquaint them with all those Penal
Statutes, and other Laws requisite to the regulating of our lives, which he
can no ways prove God does by the Gospel in any proportionable discovery.

But he undertaketh to prove by a twofold Argument, that nature binds all men
to believe on Christ; if reduced to form, it would run thus: (If nature binds
us to use the best means for our welfare and peace, then it binds us to
believe, it being the only way to life:

But nature binds all men to use the best meant for their welfare: Therefore,
etc.) The Argument is plausible enough, if he had not himself laid the ground
of its confutation, the same notions will answer it that I gave before: nature
teaches no man to use any means for his welfare, but what he knows to be in
such a tendency; but the question presupposes that they do not yet know, and
when they come to know, true then they are bound to observe it, but the state
of the question is altered.

A second Argument which he uses is deduced from Acts 4.12. where the Apostle
says, that (There is no name under Heaven by which a man can be saved but
Jesus Christ,) but how the Argument must be formed or where the strength of it
lies, he puts us to the labor to seek it out. He says, that this text
crosses two main Pillars of his Adversaries doctrine, the first I own with a
little correction, thus: [ That the law of Salvation, viz. (He that believes
shall be saved) respects those that are Evangelized only, that is, such as
have the discovery of the Gospel by some way and means, beyond and above the
light of nature.] So that this be understood of Adults; for as for Infants, how
God deals with them, whether they be saved by faith, or whose faith, or what
faith, or how; I leave it to Mr. Goodwin to determine. Let him understand me
thus, and then I challenge him to prove how that text, Acts 4.12. overthrows
this; it seems Mr. Goodwin thinks that this Law of Salvation (as he calls
it) (He that believes shall be saved) does not respect men Evangelized only,
I know not what sophistical sense he may retein of those words (does not
respect) he may know that the point in hand is about obligation to believe, so
that he ought to have expressed it thus; That Law of Salvation respects not
only men Evangelized as a bond or obligation to believe; but thus it is very
liable to scruple: for this Law of Salvation, as he calls it (He that
believes shall be saved) must be considered as conceived in God only in his
mind, and purpose, whereby as the Remonstrants say he did (certam rationem
statuere) appoint a certain way by which he would save men; and thus considered
it is not to come under the notion of an obliging principle, because thus it is
hidden in God, and so nothing to us. Secondly, it is considerable as discovered
and pronounced to the world, whereby the Lord acquainteth us with his gracious
award concerning us; and thus will Mr. Goodwin say, that it respects not only
persons Evangelized, when the very discovery of this to us is Evangelization,
and the discovery of the Gospel; and it becomes an obligation to none but them
that have it discovered to them. But in his next I expect that he produce his
argument in form, that I may know what he intends, and I shall return answer.

But he proceeds in his magnificates of the light of nature thus: [My
principles will not allow we to gratify you with my bel^efe of your position,
which is, that the light of nature cannot discover to mankind that there was
or ever would be such a Mediator or man as Jesus Christ.] What principles they
are which thus obstruct his faith, or belief of the truths of God, are best
known to himself, the principles of saving truth will tell us, that we may read
of a natural Theology, but of a natural Christianity no where. This is
revealed by a new way; hence the Jews stumbled at it, and the Greeks derided it
as inconsistent with their Philosophical and natural principles; the World by
their wisdom knew not God, how then can the light of Nature discover a
Christ? it is not by wisdom of the world, but the foolishness of preaching
that he saves men, and that the preaching by men, not the heavens; for this
last preaching involves the wisdom of the world.

But because he will leave no stone unturned, he by way of concession, thus
says: [Suppose it cannot discover a Christ in such particularities as now
under the Gospel, yet it cannot be denied but that it may so far discover him,
as that a man may be rationally persuaded through him to depend upon God for
the pardon of his sins and salvation.] But this is mere trifeling, for we say,
that the light of Nature alone is unable not only to discover a Christ in
particularities, but at all, and upon that ground no man can be persuaded to
depend upon God through him; for thus, suppose that a man know that Christ is,
it is strange that he should recede from the first position; and suppose that
the light of nature did not and could not discover that such a man as Christ
ever was, and yet to suppose that by the light of nature a man may be persuaded
to depend upon God for life through Christ: but he attempteth to prove, that
the light of nature does discover so much, as that men may be so rationally
persuaded to depend on God through Christ for life; and this he proved by two
Arguments.

1. His first Argument is from the Jews, who he says, [The sum of what they
believed concerning Christ was this, that God had found out a way, and pleased
himself in a means how to show mercy and forgive sins, and save their souls
that put their trust in him, and live righteously, yet they believed to
salvation, though Christ not discovered to them in such particularities as
now;] wherein he does egregiously prevaricate; for,

1 That which he is to prove was this, that men by the light of nature can so
far discover Christ, as that they are rationally persuaded to depend on God
for salvation through Christ: but in all this abstract which he produces, what
syllable is it that gives the least hint of Christ? It is only thus, (that they
believed that God pleased himself in a way, and means to show mercy, forgive
sin, to save the souls of them that trust in him and live righteously) now let
the World judge, whether any or all of these do infer a dependence upon God for
life through Christ.

2 Suppose it did so, what pertinency has this instance to the case in hand*
He instanceth in the Jews, who had the written Word or vocal discoveries of
Christ proportionable to their faith in Christ, a general and indistinct
knowledge of Christ being every way proportionable to a general and indistinct
faith; Now suppose they had a general and indistinct faith in Christ, yet if
this faith came by a general and indistinct discoveries, either by written
Word or vocal dispensation, then this instance is very vainly produced to prove
that the light of nature without other discovery can discover Christ in
particularities or in general.

2 His second Argument by which he proves it is this, and it is by the
complication of three Propositions thus:

[ Jesus Christ is in such a faith, whereby men are enabled to come to God with
acceptance, John ^4.6. Again, by such a faith, Page 39.
whereby a man believes that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that
seek him, he is enabled to come to God, Heb. 11.6. and further, the Heathen by
the light of nature, without the advantage of the Gospel, may come to believe
that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him;] by which he
proves that a Heathen merely by the law and light of nature may discover
Christ so as that by him he may come to God with acceptance; and a very
plausible plea it were, if it did not favor too much of the windings of the
subtle serpent. I shall consider them in order apart, and then leave them to
Mr. Goodwin to improve jointly and together,

1) His first Proposition is, [That Christ is in that faith whereby men are
enabled to come to God with acceptance;] this I assert for a truth, but all
together contradictious and inconsistent with the words of the Remonstrants and
Mr. Goodwin himself; it is son thing remarkable to consider that when he would
magnify the light of nature by making it to run parallel with that which the
Jews enjoyed, he then reduced the object of faith to a low scantling; and in
the Page immediately foregoing, affirmed that the Jews believed to salvation,
and yet believed nothing but this, [that God had pleased himself with a way
and means of mercy and saving men that trust in him and live righteously; Page
36.
] where is there the least intimation of Jesus Christ in all that and yet they
believed to salvation, Page 37, 38.
and therefore came to God with acceptance; and again speaking of the faith of
the Jews of old, he says, [That they did not believe on Christ (except
interpretatively and virtually) but only expressly in God, and yet none could
deny but they believed to salvation,] but now needs must Christ be in such a
faith; without any such limitation and restriction, as (interpretatively or
virtually); and how is it averred, and that both from reason and Scripture, as
the Remonstrants pretend, that faith in Jesus Christ was never exacted, nor
performed by the Fathers under the Old Testament?

2 His second Propositition is this: [ That by such a faith, whereby a man
believes that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him, a man
is enabled to come to God, Heb. 11.6.] which proposition is false, and by it he
suborneth a text for his cause, that text, Heb. 11.6. says indeed that he that
comes to God must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of thim that
seek him, but it says nor, neither will it follow, that all that believe those
things are enabled to come with acceptance; the Devils in hell and many
reprobates may and do believe these, and yet they are not enabled to come to
God with acceptance; I wonder that any man of that way, who, to that text, Joh.
6. (No man comes except my Father draw him;) say, that it does not follow,
therefore that all that he draws do come, should thus prevaricate for their own
ends in this text.

3 His third Proposition is this: [That every man by the light of nature can
come to know that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him;]
which I do not only bring into question, but do affirm also to be false; true
indeed if we speak in general terms, by the light of nature a man may discover
that God is, and that he is a rewarder, etc. but if we make a particular
application to man in his corrupt estate, then I say that no man without the
letter of the Gospel can come to know this; the Law concludes us all under an
eternal curse, now who can know or what way is extant to believe a reward upon
any terms, but by the Gospel and more then nature can discover? So that
taking this short survey of the Propositions apart, if any please let him put
them together, and judge what solid argument for the truth can be drawn out of
one inconsistencie and two falsities, and if this my answer please him nor, let
him in his next bring them into better form of arguing, and I shall say more;
it is as methodicall an answer as I thought good to give to such a confused and
indigested argument. And now I have seen the strength of his arguments whereby
he has attempted to prove that the light of nature does oblige a man to
believe, I shall urge one or two to prove that the law of nature neither does
nor can, and thus I urge: Adam before such time as the promise was given, was
under nor such obligation as to repent and so to believe, then the law of
nature does not, can not bind men to repent and believe in Christ: But the
former is true: Therefore the latter is true also. The Proposition of this
Argument is grounded upon this, that Adam had the law of nature, and more
quick-sighted into the creatures and common providence of God, then any of his
posterity: and he equally bound to take the best course for his own welfare;
and yet he was not bound to repent and believe; then certainly his posterity
are not obliged by the mere light of Nature: I desire some proof why the fame
Light and Law of Nature, that was no bond or obligation to Adam, could be so to
his posterity. If Adam had the light of Nature, and yet was not bound to
believe or repent, it was either,

1 Because he could not discover such a thing as satisfaction, or a Mediator,
or Christ; he saw only a reprieve, no pardon or satisfaction: and if thus, how
can his posterity merely by the Law and light of Nature discover a Savior?

2 Or else if he did discover, then it was because he had no command to believe
or repent, as he intimates in his Postscript, because the obligation depends
upon a command; and if so, then how can they who never had the letter of the
Gospel, be said to be obliged to believe and repent? Thus the Major is
strengthened.

Minor is his own in so many words in his Postscript.

If men cannot here believe without hearing, nor hear without preaching, nor
preach without sending, then men cannot believe without a further discovery of
the Gospel, then what the light of Nature affords: But the former is true,
Romans 10.14. Romans 10.14,
I choose this argument founded upon this text, because Mr. Goodwin seeks to
temper and take off the edge of this text. Now I hope he will not say, that
this hearing and preaching is by the heavens; for then the heavens must be sent
by God to preach in order to faith, but how will he prove that* but thus he
answers to this text and Argument, Page 32.
in the 32 Page of this Treatise: [The meaning of these Interrogatories is not
as if no man could possibly believe the Gospel, but he that heard it personally
preached by a Minister, but implies these three things. 1 That man having
corrupted himself, was in no probability to believe on God by Jesus Christ,
without the advantage of some report of the Gospel made in one kind or other.
2 That there was no likelihood to hear of God or of Christ in the Gospel, had
there not been some one or more to have preached the Gospel in the world. 3 It
was not likely that any man or men should or would have preached the Gospel, had
they not been sent and received instructions concerning the publishing of it.]
In which answers,

1 He prevaricateth and halteth manifestly; for his first particular comes far
short of truth, as he intends it, viz. that it is any part of the Apostles
meaning, to affirm that we could not believe without Christ was discovered in
the Gospel by some way, and in one kind or other; as if he purposely left such
a latitude, as that he might take in the light of nature, as one kind of
discovery of Christ sufficient for faith, which is evidently false, for that
hearing without which he says, we cannot believe, is confined to the hearing
the letter of the Gospel, which men are sent by commission to preach, and that
to beget faith, and in that Apostolical Induction the last, and the first have
as strong a dependence as any two: and it is as true that no man can believe
except some be sent, as this, No man can believe except he hear.

2 But I desire no more then he gives, for solution to confirm us, he grants
three things. 1 That none can believe without the report of the Gospel, in one
kind or other. 2 That we are not likely to hear of Christ in the Gospel,
without some preach. 3 That it is not likely that any should preach, except
they be by Commissions and Instructions sent. Now what need we more then this,
to confirm us, that men cannot, nor are bound to believe merely by the light of
Nature, without some further discovery thereof in the Gospel? Thus I have
traversed all Mr. Goodwins steps, and yet it appears not that man is either
enabled or bound to believe in Christ merely by the law and light of Nature;
and yet having done with the law of Nature, he proceeds further to say,

That all men are bound to believe on Jesus Christ by the Positive law of God,
and this he does in Page the 44th. and he gives two Scriptures to prove it,
Page 44. Psalm. 2.12. 1 John 3.23.
Psalm. 2.12. ( Kiss the Son. Be wise, O ye Judges of the earth. And, 1 John
3.23. This is the commandment that we believe on his Son Jesus Christ.) From
these Scriptures he would prove that all men without exception are bound to
believe on Jesus Christ by the Positive law of God; but to this I answer,

1) How impertinent is all this to his purpose if he could prove it to be
truth? that which he is to prove, is that even those that never heard of the
letter of the Gospel, and so by consequence, not of the commands thereof, that
those are bound to believe; and now he proves that all are bound by a Positive
law, that is in effect thus, that those that never heard of the letter of the
Gospel, have yet a Positive law to bind them to believe; it seems he does not
so well consider as he might, that for any man to have such a Positive law, is
to have the letter of the Gospel.

2) I hope henceforth the Remonstrants will never say, that faith in Jesus
Christ was never commanded to our fathers of old under the time of the Law; Mr.
Goodwin will teach them better Divinity and tell them they were all commanded
to it by a Positive law.

3) Mr. Goodwin himself affirms that the faith that was required of the Jews
to justification under the Law [had Christ in it only virtually, and
interpretatively, and explicitly none but God himself, and therefore God
would accept such a faith much more in the Gentiles] Page 38. Page 38.
and yet now they were all commanded by a Positive law to believe in Christ; I
hope Mr. Goodwin will reconcile all these together.

4) But to examine the truth of his assertion, whether that command was a
sufficient obligation to all men to believe; how will Mr. Goodwin prove that
this was any obligation to any man until it be revealed to them? Let that
stand which Musculus says upon the text (Quisnam mortalium ab hac submissione
excipitur cum ipsis regibus imponitur?) true, no man is exempted from this
submission, when this command shall come greeting; yet not obliged until they
hear the command.

But Mr. Goodwin drives on these general commands thus far; upon 1 John 3.23.
he says thus, [he cannot be conceived only to speak to Saints or such who are
believers already, as if these were the men whom God commands to believe in the
Name of his Son; for then it will follow that those that did believe before the
command did supererogate; nor can it be meant of them only who have the letter
of the Gospel for then such as believe without the letter thereof, do also
supererogate; and therefore it must not be understood, we Saints, or we that
have the letter of the Gospel, but we men;] wherein Mr. Goodwin lays many
feeble snares as easily broken as spiders webbes.

1 By the face of his expressions I find that he supposes it irrational, that
this or any command should be given or asserted to any that do already believe;
but many expresses of Scripure will rescue such a practice from all the charges
of impropriety, had he not so much time or leisure to look upon the foregoing
verse, where he says, We receive what we ask, because we keep his
commandment, 1 John 3.22, 23
and this is the commandment that we believe in his Son,] and yet in his
divinity it must not be we Saints, or we that have the Gospel, but we men, as
if it might be said of all men, that (we keep the commandment;) in 1 John
2.12, 13, 14, 15. the Apostle says, I write, to you fathers, young men, 2.12,
13, 14, 15.
children, because ye have known him from the beginning, and are strong, and
the Word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one; Love not
the world, neither the things that are of the world, must we reason thus? he
writes not to those that love not the world already, for otherwise, they
observing that piece of Christian practice before this writing to them, did
supererrogate; and if this instance please him not, let us see a little
further. 1 John 5.13. (I have written to you that believe on the Name of the
Son of God, 1 John 5.13.
that ye may believe on the Name of the Son of God.) But will Mr. Goodwin say,
that in believing on Christ, before the Apostle wrote, this they did
supererogate? therefore he must know that this mentioned, 1 John 3.23. is no
new command, but a repetition of a command before given, and it is evident from
the text: this is the commandment that we believe in him, and love one
another, as he gave us commandment,) and this command may be on several
occasions revived to believers for many ends, as to let them see and know their
obedience in believing, as also to stir them up to continue in believing, and
many other things of precious concernment, the consideration of which frights
away that bugbear of supererogation, and encourages me to say, that this text
is spoken to, and of those that had the letter of the Gospel, and did actually
believe, and so by consequence, this text does not furnish us with any positive
law, whereby all men without exception, are bound to believe on Christ,

2 This method of reasoning supposes that some may come to believe, and yet
not hear of the letter of the Gospel (that is) having only the light of nature;
but he knows that (suppositio nihil ponit) he may suppose by the help of his
compounding and dividing fancy, golden mountains and strange Chymaera's; but
this supposition, says he, is not unsound, because it has been proved
sufficiently, that those that have not the letter of the Gospel are yet in a
capacity of believing, but herein he must not play the Sophister with us, if he
mean in sensu diviso, that is, he that is now a Heathen and a Gentile without
all discovery of the Gospel, may in time by change of his condition come to
believe in Christ. Thus he need not prove it, and if this has been his task
hitherto, he has spent much time to little purpose, but if he mean (in sensu
composito) that is, whilst he remains so without any farther discovery then
what nature affords him, he is in no capacity of believing, and it is
impossible he should whilst he so remains, Romans 10.14. How can they believe
on him of whom they have not heard? Now if he mean this capacity, I think he
neither has, nor ever will prove, although it is the intended mark in all this
his Treatise. But he gives a taste of his Logic, to prove that it is not
impossible such a man should believe, and it is this: (Possibile est quo posito
nihil sequitur impossible;) That is possible, upon which no impossibility
follows; but this, I conceive, fitteth him not handsomely, but rather the
contrary: (Impossible quo posito, aliqua alia impossibilia:) that is,
Impossibility supposes all things impossible: for thus his own words direct
us: [If their belief be impossible, then it includes some other thing
impossible also.] Yes, it does so: Quicquid est, dum est, necessario est.
for take it in sensu composito, and two impossibilities follow. 1 That they
should ever know or hear of Christ, for (What ever is, whilst, it is
necessarily;) and it is impossible for any man to come to Christ whilst he
remains without all means to come to the knowledge of him. 2 It is also
impossible that they should be saved. But this will not be well digested by Mr.
Goodwin, and that upon this Argument, he produces it thus: [In case men
destitute at present of the letter of the Gospel should not stand bound by some
Law of God to believe, then in case the letter of the Gospel should afterward
be vouchsafed to them, they must either be supposed to stand still as much
disobliged from, believing as before, or else that there is some new
Commandment imposed, which was not imposed on them before by God.] But may we
not demand,

1 If they have the Command and Law of God already laid on them, obliging them
to believe; what need they have a further Ministry of the Gospel, as to the
obligation to believe in Christ?

2 But to suppose that men should not be bound by any Law, and yet come to have
the letter of the Gospel, it might fall out that they should neither have a new
Command, nor yet remain disobliged; I hope, he knows well to distinguish
betwixt a new Command and a new Imposition; for in those expresses of his, [Or
else there is some Commandment imposed by God;] that word (new,) he may refer
either to (Commandment) or (Imposition;) now the Commandment may be old, and
yet the Imposition new, so it may be new to the persons to whom it is at
present imposed; hence the Apostle calls, 1 John 2.7, 8.
that command of love, an old command, and yet a new command. The command in
substance was old, but the imposition upon them was new.

3 Admit the division to be full and good, yet what inconvenience will arise
from hence, if we say that there is a new command imposed by God, which was not
imposed before?

1 I know Mr. Goodwins will say again, that there was no command to our fathers
of old, to believe on Jesus Christ expressly in the particularities of his
person, but we are now commanded to do so, and this I think is a new Command.

2 He urges thus, there is no new Law imposed, [Because in him there is not
the least shadow of change,] a very conscientious plea, and I am glad to find
Mr. Goodwin thus tender of Gods Immutability if it come not (ex labi is
dolosis) out of deceitful lips. It is usual with men of Mr. Goodwins judgment
to affirm God first willing to save all men by his antecedent will, but in
regard of Infidelity intervening, to be resolving to condemn those men whom
before he willed to save; and Mr. Goodwin himself, holds that a person whom God
electeth; may yet by God be reprobated, and this without the least sense and
tenderness of his Immutability, when there is however equal, if not more
cause. But, secondly, How does this new Command imposed on men, introduce a
change into God? True indeed those things that are in God cannot be changed (to
which it behooves the Arminians to look;) but those things that are without him,
may without prejudice to him for God to entertain a change in his actions as to
create and destroy the World, this agues no change in him; Hag. Coll. page ad
argumentum primum de perseverantia.
the Remonstrants will not stick to say, that God promises one thing, and does
another, and that all his promises do not come to pass, and yet they are well
acquainted with that text that says, There is no variableness of change with
him. Adam had no obligation to repent and believe in the estate of his
Integrity, nor after the fall until the promise, and that because there was no
law to bind, nor any thing of that import given to man; if Mr. Goodwin deny
this he contradicts himself; if he grant it, he either introduces upon God
variableness and shadow of change, contrary to this text, or else discovers
the weakness of his own Argument.

3 He urges, that it no new Law imposed, because (Affirmative precepts bind
always, but not to always.) Affirmativa proecepta obligant semper, sed non ad
semper.
And therefore he says that (Gods Laws were imposed upon men, before any new
emergencie of condition;) to which I say, that Affirmative precepts do bind
always, but then it presupposes them to be imposed, otherwise they are not
precepts; all those precepts imposed upon the Jews, were not precepts unto the
Gentiles; he says, That a poor man that is very poor is bound to distribute,
and to be rich in good works; but who will believe him? the text says, Charge
the rich that they do good, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. but no where, Charge the poor that
they be rich in good works, that is impossible: neither is a poor man concluded
by that command to do good, and be rich in good works, and to distribute.

A third Scripture, by which he attempteth to prove that all men are bound to
believe on Christ by a Positive Law, Acts 17.30.
is out of Acts 17.30. (Now he commands all men every where to repent.) but,

1 True, suppose all without exception were admonished to repent; then, what
became of all those that lived in the time of that ignorance spoken of, wherein
God suffered the Nations to walk in their own ways without admonishing, and
directing them how to walk, as he now does in the Gospel; as he says in the
11th. page of his Treatise? Now I expect that he show me the difference betwixt
the admonitions before, and now, whether that before, was not orall by the
Ministry of men, at it is now?

2 For this (all) he says, it cannot be confined to such persons or places to
which the Gospel is actually sent; (and that not with that honor and reverence
that is due to the Scripture.) O how tender Mr. Goodwin is of the honor of the
Scriptures, where they (as he thinks) speak of his side! but all is not truth
that Mr. Goodwin says, because he says it; how (I pray) does it derogate from
the honor of the Scripture, to interpetret (all men) in the text, by (all both
Jews and Gentiles) where this word of admonition shall come?

3 The Antithesis seems to carry it our way (but now he admonishes all men to
repent;) it seems to infer that all men, that is, both Jew and Gentile, were
not admonished to repent; we urge not that there was no admonition to repent at
all before, but not so large as at that time there was; that is, both to Jew
and Gentile: the Apostles wondered that repentance to life should be given, and
preached to the Gentile; But now, says Peter, I know that of every Nation, he
that works righteousness is accepted; and that is one, and the same with this
text in hand. Now he admonishes every one to repent, but the argument from the
Antithesis does not please Mr. Goodwin, but I fear it is more prejudice then
reason that disaffecteth him to it; for clear it is, that this Antithesis
argues such a thing as was not at all before: as first it argues an admonition
and leading to repentance by the orall administration of the Gospel, for the
Apostle has relation to his own preaching the Gospel. 2 It intimates a
general and universal Admonition to all, Jews and Gentiles, which there was not
before; as for the first, Mr. Goodwin grants that it was not before; and will
easily yield, that during that time, wherein he suffered them to walk in their
evil ways, he did not deal with them as men under the Gospel; Page 63.
this he is willing to grant in his dispute with Mr. Sympson; as for the
second, it rests upon him to prove where God did admonish all men, even the
Heathen, to repent in this way; this text does not prove it, because he
grants that God did not deal with the Heathen as men under the Gospel, which
this text chiefly hinteth, which clearly shows that this text is weakly
produced to prove, that all men, without exception, are bound by a positive Law
to repent, because this speaks of such an Admonition, as in his own judgment
was not afforded to them whom he suffered to walk in their own ways.

But he would have this the sense of the Antithesis, [Not as if his
dispensations were so different, as that under the one men were left free from
all manner of command to repent, and only under the other they should stand
charged with that duty, Page 51.
but it imports that the obligation to repent under the former was faint and
obscure; and with little authority under the times of ignorance, in comparison
of that tie and obligation which God by an express command imposes upon the
world under the Gospel; and this import of the said Antithesis, appears by
frequent usage of Scriptures, and the condition of the Heathen throughout the
world, before the times of the Gospel.] What pains will a man's interest provoke
him to, even to the infatuation of his own understanding in clear texts? For

1 How fraudulently does he proceed (on these words?) [As if he had left men
without all command to repent before these times, of which the Apostle speaks)
leaving the expression so indefinite, and general, as if we held that men were
not under the Law commanded to repent.] When I grant it all along, and only
deny that the Heathen were under such a command, who enjoyed no more then the
light of nature: and I may as justly deny this as he denies that Adam had no
obligation to repent till the promise was given, because there was no command,
nor any thing of that import until that time.

2 How weakly and trivially does he argue? he produces this text, (as he
affirms) to prove that an obligation lies upon all men (without exception)
to repent; and when it comes to the scanning; whether this text speak of all
men in all ages and times, or all where and when the Gospel comes; instead of
proving, Page 54.
he answers and says. [It does not necessarily imply, that God never till now
commanded the same thing.] But where is his proof? his proof cannot be fetched
from this phrase, (He now admonishes all men) because this is meant of the
oral administration of the Gospel, which he grants all have not, and if he
have any possibility of proving his doctrine by this text, it lies in that
expression, (The time of that ignorance God regards not;) and then let him
form his thoughts into an argument, and it will be a miserable one.

3 How contradictiously does he proceed? his tenent to be proved, is, that all
men without exception are obliged by a positive Law to repent and believe; and
he proves it by this text, the sense whereof is this: [That the obligation to
repent in former times was but faint and obscure, and without authority, in
comparison to that obligation which God lays upon the world to an express
command under the time of the Gospel.] As if there were such a difference
betwixt an express command, and a positive command; and now it seems, all men
without exception, and all ages were obliged to repent by a positive Law- and
proved by this text, that shows that the express command to repent is given
but now in the times of the Gospel, and is not this handsomely proved? it seems
that positive Law that breeds in all men to repent, is not an express command.

4 How injuriously does he proceed? injuriously to God himself, for he is to
prove a positive Law of God by which man are bound to repent, and does it by a
Scripture, that shows no command or obligation, but what is weak and faint
and obscure, and without authority in comparison of that command in the Gospel,
as if that Law that is positively given by God, should in its obligation be but
weak, and faint, and obscure, and without authority, in comparison of that
which is but positive; let him produce such commands positive that are so weak,
obscure, and without authority; are not all the commands positive of God of
equal Authority?

5 How slenderly is he backed with proof? he says the obligation to repent in
former times was but weak, and faint, and obscure. I believe it, so obscure as
that he cannot produce one Scripture to prove it, I shall be glad to see one
Scripture, which cleerby evinceth any obligation at all, as lying on the
Heathen that never had more then the light of nature,

6 For his Scriptures which he produces to fortify his temperature of this
Antithesis in the text, they are all of them impertinent, because they have not
any of them such direct and full terms of an Antithesis in them, no not that
text, Luke 24.44. which he alone produces under the notion of an Antithesis.
For Christ does not at all oppose his being present with them before, and that
after his Resurrection, nor speaks he any thing at all in that Verse of his
being then present, but barely tells them that when he was with them, he told
them that all things must be fulfilled, which were said by Moses and the
Prophets.

7 Whereas he says, that his is the genuine sense of the text from the
condition of the world and all mankind, under the times of ignorance, and
before the days of the Gospel, which was this, that the world was generally
under the command to repent; he here does but beg the question, and repeat what
he had asserted before, and so proves nothing; for I say on the other hand, it
is most clear they were not under any command to repent, but he proves by
several expressions, which seem to carry the face of Arguments.

1 [Then their impenitency and obduracy in ways contrary to the Law of God and
Nature had been no sin in them, nor obligatory to punishment.] But does he
think this any way coercive? I say, that their sin comes not under the notion
of impenitency; again, that such as have only the light of nature cannot be
said to have any positive Law of God. Thirdly, I also say, that the sins of the
Heathen (though they have no command to repent) are yet sins against the law of
nature, and they are a law to themselves, and shall be judged by that law of
nature, and so without any positive law, as the Apostle says, which helps us
to understand the Apostle in that text, Romans 4.15. The law works wrath; if we
will take it thus generally, Every law works wrath proportionable to it self,
the law of nature works wrath proportionable to it; the law of God positive,
to it; the law of the Gospel, to it; not that by every law men shall incur
wrath for non-repentance, except Mr. Goodwin can prove that all men without
exception are condemned for not repenting (as a transgression of a command)
which proof I demand: therefore that does not affright me; for it is easily
answered, although they be not under a command to repent, yet they are not
therefore left lawless, and may commit and do what they list, without any guilt
or punishment; this is fondly alleged, for the solution is easy, they have a
law of nature, and are a law to themselves, and so having a law they may sin,
and their consciences shall condemn them, yea, and God shall condemn them also,
these I know Mr. Goodwin could not but consider; therefore how he could think
of men's being lawless, or Gods not taking account of the Heathen for sinning,
although we do grant and prove it too, that the Heathen are under no obligation
to repent, for that law may conclude us under sin, that cannot command us
repentance for sinning, the one is a privilege of the law, the other of the
Gospel, which makes way for his second Reason, which is this:

2 Because to all, even in the times before the Gospel, he gave so much means,
that they might seek the Lord and find him, Acts 17.26, 27. Therefore all men
are under a command to repent. But this is far from binding; for we seek the
Lord. 1 In obedience, 2 In repentance for not obeying. Adam in his integrity
was bound to seek God, but not to repent; now that God does so much for the
Heathen that they might seek him in a way of obedience, and so far as to serve
and worship him as the true God, I grant; but that God intends, that by that
which God does for every man, they should seek him in a way of repentance, I
put him to prove.

Thus have I followed him step by step, and if I have run into unpleasing and
extravagant notions, I have this fair excuse, that I was necessarily led
thereinto, and I have considered and examined every parcel of his Treatise: and
to close up all, this is the result of all, All men are not bound by any Law
Positive, or of nature to repent and believe: neither are all the Heathen in a
capacity of believing, much less in a mediate sufficiency, but much less in an
immediate sufficiency of believing in Christ, and so by consequence the whole
and adequate subject of this his Treatise rendered dissonant both to Scripture
and Reason.

And before I close up this my work, and make my due and legitimate claim, I
cannot but let him and his Church know, that I take notice (as all the world
may) of their Improvident boldness in that Book entitled (...), or (The
Agreement and distance of Brethren) wherein they undertake to excude and thrust
into the world their indigested thoughts upon the five controverted Articles.
In the third Article, they pretend they cannot agree with their brethren in the
confinement of the grace of God in the intendments of salvation to the small
number of Gods elect, because they judge the Scripture clear in this, that God
gives to all men sufficient means whereby to be saved; thus they say, Page 34.
of that Treatise; it will be something digressive and irrelative to my present
task to engage with them in that confinement of divine grace, and so to state
it truly how we would have that grace to extend; the task I have in hand is
only to answer Mr. Goodwin, who would extend that grace as far as nature, or
else make the grace of God to be no grace, and so I am fairly led to look upon
their first Argument that moves them to dissent, which they express to be
this, That God gives all a sufficiency of means whereby to be saved; a position
which few before them have asserted and proved, yea, the best of their side
have and do expressly deny it; but Mr. Goodwin and his Church think they have
Scriptures clear for it. And what Scriptures, I pray? we read them from their
pens, 1 Timothy 2.4. Who will have all men to be saved, and to come to the
knowledge of his truth, 2 Pet. 3.9. Not willing any should perish, but should
come to repentance. But,

1 Are these Scriptures produced to prove an actual bestowing of sufficient
means for salvation? and why not of actual salvation too for they run in
equipage, and he wills that all men be saved as well as that they should come
to the knowledge of the truth. So that by these texts they may as well prove
that God actually saves all men.

2 Have neither the Pastor nor people of that Church, this in consideration,
that these texts are expounded by the best of their own side, of the antecedent
will of God, which in respect of men's malice and wickedness does not always
come to pass? and they will grant that God by his Antecedent will intends to
give sufficient means; but because they use not nature well, or God fore-seeth
them incorrigible, or their forefathers have refused the Gospel, therefore God
does not reveal Christ.

3 These texts favor not Mr. Goodwins one whit; if they think that God gives
sufficient means to be saved, to those that never had the letter of the Gospel;
for these texts presupposes the letter of the Gospel, so runs the text,
(And come to the knowledge of the truth;) No sufficiency to be saved until they
have the knowledge of the truth; and as not by these Scriptures, so neither by
any other or any color of reason do they prove that daring assertion (viz.)
That God gives to all men sufficient means whereby to be saved.

And thus to conclude with his own expression, I have in the midst of many
pressing occasions in my Pastoral Charge, impartially endeavored to ventilate
the truth; whether any thing I have said will turn to so happy an account as
satisfaction, I cannot prophecy. However, until (in case he receive not) he
give satisfaction to the premises, I must put in a Caveat against his Claim,
which he makes, Page 61. and I shall make a legitimate Claim so far, as that he
surrender up the cause, until he prove that all men are bound to believe in
Christ; for till that be proved, or at least that Christ has made some
proportionable discoveries of that purchase made, that so men may be enabled to
believe, and so have that purchase applied; I shall conclude that Christ did
not lay down the price of his own blood to purchase life and salvation for all
men without exception.

Soli DEO Gloria.

