Quaking Principles dashed in pieces by the standing and unshaken TRUTH.

Being an Examination of the Tenants held forth by certain Northern People, viz.

1. Slighting of the written Word. 2. A speaking to that within Man. 3. Denying
the use of Reason in the matters of God. 4. A denying of the Ascension and
Being of the Body of Christ. 5. A denying of all the Ordinances of Christ. 6. A
denying Honor to Men. 7. Affording absolute perfection at one instant.
By Henoch Howet.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, and are to be sold at his House near Py-corner
at the Sign of Sir John Oldcastle. 1655.

Quaking Principles dashed in pieces by the standing and unshaken Truth.
THe God of the whole Earth now being about to declare his glory to the
Gentiles in such a manner as that the Isles that have not heard of his fame
should be brought in to see his glory, and and the Kingdoms of this world
being about to become the Lords and his Christ's.

Satan at such a time is doubtless standing at the right hand of our Joshua, to
resist him.

At the right hand, not at the left, for he will take the better hand that he
may be more eminent in show, and be preferred, in the view of the world, before
the Joshua's of God, they must come in a lower place, on the left hand, in a
more carnal way in the eye of the world, and in the report of those that speak
by swelling words of spiritualness, calling the God of this world that blinds
the eyes, a God of light, and all this darkness, spiritualness; at this time I
say appears those times that if it were possible should deceive the very
elect, whereby the stars are drawn from Heaven and cast unto the Earth.

Whereupon I have thought it my duty to serve the Land of my Nativitie, or
rather men fearing God in this Nation, in singling out certain specious Deceits
of Satan's; and as Christ my Master did to Satan, reproving them with this
infallible authority, It is written; a speech that can hardly be endured with
these pretended spiritual men, for that Satan being overthrown by it by the
Savior of men, is now fain to fly to unwritten notions, consisting, 1. A
slighting of the written Word. 2. A speaking to that within you. It is their
phrase. 3. A denying of the use of Reason, and consideration in matters of God,
calling it Serpent and Adam, etc. 4. Denying of the Ascension or Being of the
Body of Christ. 5. A denying of all Ordinances of Christ. 6. A denying honor
to men. 7. Absolute perfection at one instant.


For the first, they oppose the Word [Christ] to the written Word, and will a
Word that is a Discovery spiritual to be the Word. But whatsoever it is that
they call the Word, it is perfectly false and not the truth, although it be
conceived in the soul of a Paul, except the Scriptures will approve of it, or
it be so in Scriptures, that is to say, the same that is recorded in Scripture,
Acts 17.11. Paul counts it true Nobility to be daily conversant in Scripture,
for the proof of revealed truths, and (as they count) is carnalness and
lowness; for a man at one of their meetings pulling a Bible out of his pocket,
one of them asked, What does that man with that Book there?

2. Again, it is not only the being of the body of Christ, but the actions
and undertakings of Christ also that is profitable to us. And of these the
Scripture keeps a record, therefore gloriously to surmise any thing of
Christ, which Scripture records not, is to stand at the right hand of our
Joshua, to resist the work of God, and to be more excellent and more glorious
than plain Scripture. Christ himself says, I come to fulfill whatsoever is
written in the Law and the Prophets, and the sayings concerning me. Being the
Apostle charge the plain simple sheep of Christ, saying, Let no man persuade
you above what is written.

3. Again if ignorance of the Scripture be the ground of error, Mark 1^.24.
Matthew. 22.29 how do these men drive the people in darkness, that works upon the
people to cause a disesteem of the Scriptures, and yet forcibly persuade them
to receive their Doctrine? Consider, do not the Papists deny us the Scriptures
in our mother Tongue that their unwritten verities might take place? And now
the same spirit in another appearance persuades us to the uselesness of the
Scriptures, that his spiritual delusions might take place though in another
form.

O subtle Devil! Will nothing serve thy turn but to disarm us and take away
that weapon that Christ fought and overthrew thee with? But as he had the
victory, so must all his members in their overcoming strength obtain it, (I
mean with this authority, It is written.) Then thou might sleep quietly in
the hearts of thine, in thy lusts, in thy envy, in thine idolatry, in thy
pride, in all luxury and uncleanness, if there were not an [It is written] to
disquiet thee. Men could not know lust but by [It is written] Romans 7.7. If thou
can do this thy seven spirits shall dwell quietly, and thou may exalt thy
self above God. And thy Angels may appear more glorious than plain Preachers of
the Gospel without control.

Again, 2 Timothy 3.17. The perfect furnishing the man of God to all good works is
the end that the Scriptures were given for, and the use of them is to reprove,
to correct, to instruct in righteousness. The Author of them is God, by the
inspiration of God, (that is to say) in the hearts of the Prophets and
Apostles. For the Prophesies of old, that are called Scripture, are the movings
of the Spirit of God in the holy men of God: 2 Pet. 1.20. And our foundation is
laid upon the Prophets and Apostles, (which is their Doctrine) Christ being the
head-corner-stone. So that if Satan could take away or vilify Scripture, he
would hinder man exceedingly from being thoroughly furnished, etc. Take away the
profitable means of this Doctrine, viz. reproof, correction, instruction. O!
how would he bring in a flood of destruction, by filling mankind with
ignorance and lustful pleasures, in taking off the Bridle that checks Lust. It
brings in a Night of Darkness, that men might take their pleasure in sin
without any Light at all to shame them for it, if he could make the Scriptures
useless. To shake us in our foundation, I mean the Doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles, would make the whole building of Religion and Godliness fall. O
subtle Serpent! the Lord rebuke thee. If wisdom to salvation through faith in
Christ be contained in Scripture 2 Timothy 3.15. Then what a sweet conjunction and
harmony do we find here betwixt the written Rule and the active life of a
believer; Who but Satan or his instruments dare slight the one, and affirm he
regards the other?

Again, if the Scriptures are the means of comfort and hope, Romans 15.4. How
exceedingly were we wronged if any man's of our comfort or hope should be taken
from us? For comfort and hope they are in two respects. First, what cause of
comfort is there when all our experiences are the same that have been of old
declared in Scripture. And if Satan in the time of Gods withdrawing should go
about to persuade us that our experiences were false, and we would say they
were revealed from God, and the same that were written in the Scriptures of
truth, Dan. 10.21. What a comfort would that be to us? Note here in this place
of Daniel when the Angel would comfort him, he does it not only by touching
his lips, by lifting him up, by speaking to him, but also that he might seal up
all his experiences; he says, I will show thee what is written in the
Scriptures, of a truth there is none that holds with us but Michael your
Prince.

The second respect wherein we are comforted by Scripture is, in respect of our
exspectation, when we hope for nothing but what God has in Scripture promised;
this makes us come boldly to the Throne of Grace, Dan. 6. I Daniel understand
by Books, etc. and I set my face to seek the Lord by prayers and supplications,
etc. and when things come to pass that God has promised, it fills the heart
with praises, and will make all that have David's spirit to say, In God will I
praise thy Word.

But now lest some should say, that I make the Scriptures the sole cause of
knowledge, which the Saints are to look unto for Life and Salvation.

I answer No, I mind them to be but the testimony of Christ, but yet such a
testimony as is able in the hand of the eternal Teacher to make the man of God
wise to Salvation; yet if we come not to Christ by the drawing of the Father we
can have no saving life nor light, although we have the whole outward knowledge
of them in the written letter, John 5.39.

Sure it is, they that were instructed by Moses had the outward teachings of
the now written letter, and so still; for the organ of the ear or eye lets
into the understanding whilst God applies it to the heart; and by this means
the Saints in the hand of God are humbled at his feet to receive of his Word,
as in Deuteronomy. 33.3. Though Moses spoke these words of Christian experience, yet
they administered to the ear that sweet dropping oration in Deuteronomy. 32.33. which
by the Spirit of God applying, is made powerful in operation, and is now left
also upon record for our instruction according to that of Christ, who says,
They have Moses and the Prophets, when they had but the words which Moses writ.
The Scriptures prove the work of the new birth, counsels us to buy of God milk
and wine, and teaches us to bear the hand of the Lord patiently, till he bring
us forth to the light, and show us his righteousness, Micah 7. from the 7. to
the 9. v. It teaches us perseverance to the end, and he that hears and
knows this, except he do it, it avails nothing, in Ezekiel. 33.31, 32. And
diverse sweet directions and promises together with records of Saints former
experiences, all which applied by Gods spirit to the believers heart is able to
make the man of God wise to Salvation.

And now I come to the second of their mistakes, that is, A speaking to a thing
within thee. I would fain know what can be meant by the thing within men; for
there is nothing in man to be spoken to but man; if it be Light it has
enlightened man, and then man is to be accounted and spoken to as enlightened; so
then they cannot speak to his Light as distinct, but to man enlightened; for
Christ and his Apostles always spoke to man. It Is true Satan that has sent
forth his Angels, transforming himself into Angels of Light, to publish his
delusions and deceits, may and it is likely has therewithal sent forth a
spirit in men to persuade the receiving that his dark and delusive Light; and
hereupon the Angels of Satan without may speak to the spirit of Satan within
under the notion of Light: but unless they speak unto Satan or some of his
Legion in man, I know not how they can speak unto any Light in man distinct
from him. It may be his language, but it is none of Gods, for it is no form of
sound words which we are commanded to hold fast, 2 Timothy 1.13.

And now I come to the third of their mistakes, that is, The denying the use of
reason or consideration in the matters of God, calling it Serpentine and many
other terms of contempt: and upon this ground they will not do as the Apostles
of Christ, and Christ himself who did dispute or reason with the gainsayers of
the truth. Christ disputed with the Jews, 6, 8. chap. of John, and Stephen,
Acts 6.9, 10. There arose certain of the Synagogue called Libertines, and
Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, and of Cilicia and Asia, and disputed with
Stephen; and they were not able to resist the wisdom and spirit by which he
spoke. And why was it, but because of the strength of demonstration that was in
it? The Spirit of God makes use of reason, or wisdom, and tongue, in man, and
all the faculties of body and soul in a godly man to honor himself, and to
resist unto blood, striving against sin, and to contend earnestly for the faith
once given to the Saints. So that ye see how far different these men are from
the words and practice of Christ and his ministry. As for reason carnally
implied we justify it not, which has this character, it is pitying it self;
and therein Satan is conversant; for when Peter said to Christ, Master, pity
thy self, none of these things shall befall thee, etc. for this Reason where it
rules, will not let any follow God or Christ further than they can carry their
own things, viz. their own honors, pleasures, ease, worldly beloveds, that
their worldly lusts may have life and delight, and so throw by the things of
Christ, his Cross, his afflictions, etc. and consequently his Crown too; this
made the Apostle complain, All men seek their own things, and none the things
of Christ. We allow and honor reason in considering the works of God, Eccles.
7.13. As thus, in so much that God has made one creature, I mean the Air that
is present in all places at once, and without it no creature that has life can
live. And another creature to give light to the whole frame of nature, I mean
the Sun; How easy a thing then is it by reason to conclude this God to be in
all places at once viewing wickedness, and creating new hearts, and giving
light to all, though they sit in darkness and in the shadow of death? Like to
this David reasons, Psalm 94 9, 10 11.

2. In so much that God is the Author of all memory and wisdom, whereby all
things in the earth may be remembered, some things by one, some things by
another, some things by a third, etc. and all this is by the virtue of Gods
working, etc. How easy a thing it is for the wicked sinning wretch to his
conviction or terror to believe from reason God is able both to remember and
take account of all his sins, and to set them before him at the day of judgment?

3. Considering that God has created the whole world in six days; how easy a
thing is it, conclude that he is able to send down the new Jerusalem from
above, according to the Word, Rev. 21. And let those be silent that ask, where
shall there be room at the Resurrection for all to stand? for as they are not
able to comprehend what was spoken of before, till it was brought to pass; so
neither are they able to comprehend how there shall be room more than they are
able to create room for those that shall appear to judgment. But we allow not
that Reason that will not let the Word run and be glorified, but reproach it
and speak against it, as those that believe not Election but stand questioning
the justice of God, as if God could be no further just than they could see him
just. These do in effect deny his Name, Wonderful; for they would have him so
little and narrow a God, that they are able to defend him; or else they would
think it their part to stand still and wonder, when they cannot see through his
justice, and not ask how they should defend his justice, when any thing exceeds
the compass of their reason. Paul thought these persons not worthy of an
answer, Romans 9.19, 20. and therefore he takes them off short, saying, Nay, but
who art thou, O man, that reply against God? etc. Neither do we allow of
that reasoning which will take a Text of Scripture and raise an argument from
it, and thereupon conclude their own salvation, and so get a conclusion instead
of Christ for their assurance, when as the Scripture tells us it must be
wrought out, saying, Work out your salvation with fear and trembling; for
Christ is to be noted for to be manifested to his, John 14 21. revealed in Gal.
1.16. And therefore let us know that there is a day to dawn, and a day star to
rise in our hearts, 2 Pet. 1.19. all which we are in prayers to be violent for,
and wait patiently for. This is the good use of reason, to resist the gain
sayers of truth, in disputes, to be ready always to give answer to every man
that asks a reason of the hope that is in us, 1 Pet. 3.15. and to taste of
the goodness of God till we have lost our selves in it, and to cry out with
Paul, O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? Romans 11.33.

And now I come to the fourth of their mistakes, viz. Their denying of the
Ascersion or the Being of the Body of Christ; under the pretense of this
Scripture, Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. It is true
that flesh and blood without the Spirit and Life of God cannot; but he that is
joined to God is one spirit; so if we should say, This bulk, or lump, or form
of man or man's flesh could not continue upon the earth, it were true, (meaning
without life) for it would rot, putrefie and stink, etc. But we shall prove
first the burial of that Body of Christ, John 19. at the later end of the
Chapter; his Resurrection, chap. 20. his showing his hands and his side to his
Disciples, and after to Thomas; but to prove this fully, that it was the body
that walked upon earth, he says himself, Luke 24 39. Handle me and see, for a
spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. And that it is the same
Jesus, it is proved in Acts 1.1, 2. The former Treatise have I made, O
Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both to do and teach, until the day in
which he was taken up: which proves that the doing and teaching Jesus was taken
up: and I affirm it was the body; for when he was upon earth he did no actions
but with his body, nor spoke words but with his tongue that is a member of
that body, and that the same Jesus was taken into Heaven is plain in Acts
1.11. Ye men of Galilee, Why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? This same Jesus,
which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have
seen him go into Heaven. [This same Jesus] must be he who is spoken of in v. 1.
who is not without the body, being the things that he spoke and did were
spoken and done with his body.

And now it follows that I prove he is in Heaven, in Heb. 4. Seeing then that
we have a great High Priest that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of
God. And it is proved that this High Priest is not without the body, because
he is called a man, and I hope all men will say the body and soul is the man.

And that this man continues for ever is proved in Heb. 7.24. But this man,
because he continues ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood. And in Heb. 8.3.
It is of necessity that this man have somewhat also to offer. And v. 4. For if
he were on earth, etc. which proves that the manhood is in Heaven. And in Heb.
9.24. For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are
the figures of the true, but into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence
of God for us. And if any doubt whither it is the man there spoken of, look in
Heb. 10.12. for the speech is continued, and there it is said, But this man
after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down at the right
hand of God.

And if any man doubt whither the man be now in Heaven, let him look into Acts
3.20, 21. And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you,
whom the Heaven must receive, until the times of restitution of all things.
Now Christ was preached a crucified Christ, so that the body must needs be in
Heaven. 1 Cor. 1.23. We preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling
block, and unto the Greeks foolishness. It was the greatest stumbling block
that could be to the Jews in the world, to think that he that should come to
deliver Israel should first be crucified.

These things thus proved, let no man hereafter say, that that body of our
Lord which was crucified without the Gates of Jerusalem is not in Heaven.

And thus you see how these men deny the Lord that bought them, if they deny
that body that was crucified for them, for he bought Lordship over all things
by his death; and so by that body that bled and suffered on the Cross, and by
that death became their Lord, Philip. 2.7, 8, 9, 10. they deny the Being of it.

And also they deny the Lord that bought them in the fifth mistake of theirs,
wherein they deny all Forms or Ordinances. There is nothing that Christ
commanded as Lord over his inheritance, that is to say, the Rules of Government
that he appointed to govern his chosen generation, his peculiar people, his
royal Priesthood with, but they deny: it and therefore these are they that
stumble at the Word, 1 Pet. 2.8, 9. Also they deny the love tokens that he
left, the one that follows repentance from dead works, and faith toward God,
as the first act of faith, building upon the foundation, I mean Baptism. The
other the token of his death to be a remembrance of him until he come, I mean
the Lords Supper. And now let these that are Christ's Enemies, that deny both
Body and Rule of Christ, hear one loving reproof out of [It is written] which
their Predecessors (I mean the Papists) would have taken from us in the English
Tongue: and these men would take from us the virtue of it, that is to say, the
sharpness and sweetness of it, by working upon us a dislike of it. I say a
reproof in love that if it be possible they may be healed: the Scripture I
reprove them by is Luke 19.27. But those mine Enemies which would not that I
should reign over them, Bring hither, and slay them before me. O that they
would consider the written Word that they despise, and examine themselves
whither they were not once Citizens, Luke 19 14. that is, whither they were not
under the Government of the City that had for its Charter the written Word of
God, when his Word and his Spirit that writ it had command of their souls. It
is written is enough to humble a poor soul, to reprove a tender conscience, to
be a light to our paths, and a Lantern to our feet, to make known sin, and to
command the Devils absence; and has it no power over you? Have you a spirit to
guide you without a written Word? It is out of Gods government then if it
cannot be brought to the Law and the testimonies to see whither it speak
according to that Word or no, Isai 8.20. Ye may be familiar spirits for ought I
know. Do ye not weep and mutter? as Isai 8 19. What muttering and uncouth
howling is ammong ye, which we cannot but impute to a spirit contrary to the
Word, if ye will not come to the Word to be tried? we are commanded to try the
spirits whither they be of good or no; and alas, how shall we do it, if ye
deny both the written Word that is our Rule and Reason too, for you appeal
from both? Alas, alas, what shall we do for you? we fear you will perish
eternally. And now that he is ascended and gone into a far country, Do you not
send messages after him, and say, Ye will not have this man rule over ye? for
indeed ye deny both his Person and Word, that is to say, the written Word that
was from God by Moses and the Prophets, even the written Word which is the Rule
of Life and Love, sealed and approved of by Christ; as also the Commandments of
Christ, that he and his Apostles ordained, I mean Baptism to accompany
conversion and the whole order of communion in the Gospel of God: to follow I
mean those Commandments that were not before Christ's time and given out by none
but himself and his Apostles, spoken of in John 15.10. If ye keep my
Commandments, ye shall abide in my love, even as I have kept my Fathers
Commandments, and abide in his love. Now I demand what distinction could Christ
make here betwixt his and his Fathers Commandments, but that his were the
Ordinances and Laws to govern his Church by: and in John 14.21. See what sweet
promises follows the obedience to Christ's commands. And if they will cavil at
them still because they are written, as if it were but the Letter, that which
is written in 1 Cor. 14.37. If any man think himself to be a Prophet, or
spiritual, let him acknowledge, that the things that I write unto you, are the
Commandments of the Lord. By which Word in the Name of God I proclaim, that
those men that disown the written Word are not spiritual men, I mean, have not
the Spirit of Christ; they may have the bewitching spirit of Antichrist, that
may make them deny the use of their own Reason, because they have not faith in
the Root, as in 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. And that we may be delivered from unreasonable
and wicked men, for all men have not faith: where the Apostle braves those men
that have not the use of Reason, to be wicked and void of faith.

Who but the spirit of Antichrist durst not only set their posts by Christ's
posts, but also countermand the Commandments of our Lawgiver the Lord Jesus
Christ?

There were never any men appeared in the world so like those that Peter
speaks of in his second Epistle, chapter 2.17. to the end of the Chapter, I pray
you read those Verses considerately; in v. 17. he says, They are Clouds
carried with a Tempest: What greater Tempest than so much spiritual violence as
to carry all down before them, without consideration either of the written Word
or the use of Reason. In v. 18. he charge them with speaking great swelling
words of vanity: he charge them also to allure through the lusts of the
flesh: The Flesh lusts or desires against the Spirit. These desire to
overthrow the Writngs of the Spirit of God: he charge them likewise with much
wantonness. What more wantonness than to shake off all Rules, that their own
imaginations may have the full sway: and if Mr. Pope does not belie them, they
use unseeemly kissing in heir open and public Assemblies at Glasstiers Hall:
and Peter in the same Verse makes the case dangerous to live in error, (that
is, for want of knowledge of the Scriptures as aforesaid) although men have
clean escaped the pollutions of the world through lusts. In v. 19. he says,
While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of
corruption. None ever promised to themselves so much liberty as these and the
Ranters in being freed from the power and trial of the Word. And how greatly do
they serve corruption in this their liberty when they disclame the written
Word, which is the check and bridle of corruption being overcome by liberty,
and brought in bondage to that wicked liberty. In v. 20. The later end is
worse with them than the beginning: because now they do that upon a religious
account that before they did upon an ungodly account. The Lord bless every one
of his from the condition of Chandler, who formerly was the Head of a Company
of Shakers, whose condition I dread to speak of, it is known to almost all
persons hereabouts. And in v. 21. the same Apostle charge them with falling
from the way of righteousness, and a holy Commandment given unto them: which
way of righteousness standing by a command of Christ must needs be the order of
the Gospel of God.

Their spirit will persuade them that they are not fallen from righteousness,
and therefore would justify them.

But he cannot justify them in denying the way of righteousness that was
commanded by Christ and his Apostles.

And it is apparent before God and Angels to all knowing men in Religion but
themselves, they or some of them are fallen from that. But I shall write no
more at this time about the denial of Ordinances, being I have writ more
largely before in a little Treatise called [Disobedience detected.]

And now we come to the sixth of their mistakes, which at the outward or overly
looking upon it, one would think it were a small slight thing, but when we come
to weigh it with [It is written] it is an heavy and sad offense, I mean the
not giving honor to men: which is contrary to the examples of good men and
command of Scripture.

First, for the example of good men: Sara called Abraham Lord. The Angel of God
which would not from God mistake his message, counseled Hagar to submit her
self to her Mistress, Genesis 16.9. Abraham's servant when he prayed to God and was
heard, called Abraham his Master, Genesis 24.11. And when his soul was in a
spiritual frame, and his heart filled with praises to the living God, called
him Master, v. 27. And to man also when he was declaring his message he called
Abraham Master, v. 34.35. Jacob when he had been newly wrestling with God for a
blessing, bowed himself seven times to Esau, Genesis 33.4. and all his family did
obeisance. Joseph's brethren by revelation of his Dream, and that from God,
which after came to pass, did obeisance to him, Genesis 44.14, 15, 16. David a man
after Gods own heart, that had the Kingdom given him, but not yet in
possession, called Saul My Lord the King, 1 Samuel 26.17. So that if these men
should tell us, honoring one another will vanish away in the restoration of all
things; I let these men with David tarry their time, that is, till they be in
possession of the restoration: and this did Christ, though he prophesied of the
downfall of Jewish Ceremonies, and was that Christ that fulfilled them, yet he
worshipped in the Temple whilst they received Paul after him. And by the way
here is one note for the non-churches, though it be true that Forms and
Ordinances shall cease, yet let them tarry their time and worship in them till
Christ become. David calls himself Saul's servant, 1 Samuel 17.23. and David's
wife by the counsel of the Prophet Nathan 1 Kings 1.15. called My Lord the
King. And Nathan the Prophet speaking to David called him My Lord the King in
v. 24. And Daniel the Prophet of the Lord speaking to a Heathen says, O King.
So did the three Children at a time when Nebuchadnezzar was in the height of
his wickedness, Dan. 3.17, 18. And Daniel at a time when he had received the
greatest mercy from God of salvation from the Lions said, O King live for
ever, Dan. 6.21. And Paul called Agrippa, O King, Acts 26.13, 19. and called
Festus, Most noble Festus. So that we may see what was the practice of holy
men, Angels and Prophets and Apostles, and that upon remarkable times, upon
serious occasions. How far are these men from following the examples of holy
Writ? Surely as they deny the virtue of [It is written] so they are very
careless in reading and observing what is written. And they that are their
Proselytes will be less knowing being that their converters or rather
perverters cast an odium upon what is written.

But now to come to the commands that they disobey in this their practice.
First the Law that Gods finger writ, Exodus 20. Honor thy Father and Mother.
Lev. 19.31, 32. we find these words, Regard not them that have familiar
spirits, neither seek after wizards, to be defiled by them; I am the Lord thy
God. Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old
man, and fear thy God; I am the Lord. Now the speaking against familiar
spirits, etc. immediately before the giving honor to men may intimate that
wizards and such as have familiar spirits use not to honor men; but I am sure
these two are linked together, being both sins alike; for the command of
honoring and fear thy God are joined together in a sentence; and these men by
this Scripture denying to honor men in their several relations, do also therein
deny to fear God. And you cannot say this command was abolished since Christ's
time, for the Apostle still approves of it, Ephesians. 6 2. And Peter whose spirit
of Prophecy was much opposite to these kind of men in 1 Pet. 2.16, 17. has
these words, As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness,
but as the servants of God. Honor all men, Love the Brotherhood, Fear God,
Honor the King. Which may prove that the malicious Libertine fears not God,
nor cares for man. I could here bring a cloud of witnesses, but let this
suffice; as Jude speaking of persons, I hope more filthy than these, Jude 8.
v. adds this to fill up their Ephah of wickedness, They speak evil of
Dignities, and despise Dominion. Also Paul says, Give honor to whom honor
belongs. And in giving honor, Go one before another. But you see there is
enough in [It is written] to reprove those that care not for [It is written] if
they be not incapable of reproof:

And now I come to the last of their mistakes, in admitting of none but perfect
men into conjunction. In the first place we are sure that John writes to
children, young men and fathers, and minds degrees of attainment, 2 John
12.13. but these at one time wrought upon say that they are perfect, not
minding such a perfection as is spoken of in Phil. 3.12. where a gradual
attainment is spoken of; not as though I had already attained either, were
already perfect; but I follow after, if I may apprehend that for which I am
also apprehended of Christ, where he seems to state the matter thus, it is
true I am confident of Gods mercies, the act of Christ is done for me, he has
apprehended me, but I am not perfect, but I am a follower after perfection, and
desire and labor earnestly to apprehend him. And in v. 13, 14. he says,
Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended; but this one thing I do,
forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things
which are before: I press toward the mark for the price of the high calling of
God in Jesus Christ. In which Verses for fear any should think he spoke in the
person of another in the way of teaching, in v. 12. he avers it solemnly of it
self. In v. 12. as if he should say, The price is great of that Calling of God,
in which only is perfection (the Calling he had but the price he wanted) but I
have it not, yet I press after it; and it is true, I must hit the mark for it.
In which arguings of his he seems to engage the labor of all the faculties of
the soul, as his consideration, etc. lest he should shoot beside the mark: I
weigh things (which is an act of reason) I esteem all things as loss. In v. 8.
and his desires, forcing labors, and gradual earnest motion forgetting that
which is behind, and reaching out to that which is before. And in v. 15. he
says, Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded: as if he should
say, There is no other perfection attainable, and this is perfection; and let
none say they are perfect, and affirm they are past this earnest suit and
pursuit after the things of Christ. God will reveal this unto him, that is, he
will make him know it either here to his conviction or hereafter to his
judgment; for it shall be revealed, viz. that there is no perfection that
disengages the man from pursuit with his labor of mind to attain in this life
that which shall be enjoyed when Christ shall appear, for then we shall be like
him: 1 John 3.2. And to back Paul's judgment Peter agrees with him, 2 Pet. 3.
from 5, to v. 11. where he puts the living Christian that has received all
things that appertain to life and godliness; as in v. 3. upon his pressing
after perfection, namely, that they give all diligence. In v. 5. and v. 10.
again, make their Election and Calling sure: and when this is done, it is true,
he promises them an entrance abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, but no more but an entrance in this life, as if
it were said, It Is but an entrance; and there will be always work for the
pressing motion of the mind, reason to consider and desire, and prayer to
attain, etc. and to have a threefold witness, in Cant. 1.4. Draw me, we will
run after thee. And v. 7. Tell me (O thou whom my soul loves) where thou
feedest, where thou make thy flocks to feed at noon; for why should I be as
one that turns aside, etc. where it appears that the Spouse with an engaged
reasoning mind that she may not turn aside wrestles with Christ, to draw her,
to teach her; which implies, that no such perfection so as to take off a
laboring to be perfect, is a life attainable here: but in their perfection they
deny any man being under frailty or capableness to sin to be of their
communion; it may be they do it from that place 1 John 3.6. Whosoever abides
in him, sins not; whosoever sins, has not seen him, neither known him.
But they must view this whole Epistle, and they may easily understand him
otherwise: as 1 John 1.7, to the end, If we walk in the light, as he is in the
light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his
Son cleanses us from all sin. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess our sins, he is faithful,
and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If
we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his Word is not in us.
Where it is proved, he that is in the light and has fellowship with God is at
that time under cleansing from sin by the blood of Christ, which is far from
their perfection. It proves John writing in the present Tense that he and those
in communion with the Father and the Son were not freed absolutely from sin
when he writ this Epistle, v. 8. In v. 9. In v. 9. that John and those that
have communion with the Father and the Son are forgiven their sins after their
confession, this is far from their perfection. It may be said then what was
John's meaning in chap. 3.6. I answer, he explaineth himself in 5.18. We know
that whosoever is born of God, sins not; but he that is begotten of God,
keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not. That wicked one is the
sin unto death, that must be there meant, for it is spoken of before, then
John's meaning must needs be, that he that is born of God sins not unto death;
for in v. 16. he does acknowledge that a brother may sin a sin that is not unto
death, and yet obtain life. Their Speaker told me in their meeting, (that which
had sinned could not be saved) I told them, nothing could be saved but that
which is capable of damnation, which was man, who without salvation as under
sin he must be damned: and now I say there is nothing can be in man but it must
be a part or a member of man, except it be God or the Devil. And it is absurd
and incongruous to think that will save God, he cannot receive salvation, for
he is eternally happy. And I answer, the Devil shall not be saved, he has
sinned the unpardonable sin. And by the way behold and consider the vanity of
that speech to the thing within man; but further that their Doctrine may appear
to be utterly against what is written, add another witness, Romans 7.23. I see
another Law in my members, warring against the Law of my mind, etc. O what a
conflict in a believers heart is here whilst sin appears? yet let not them
think that we by this Doctrine nourish sin; for when the Spirit of God and [It
is written] has discovered sin in the soul it has such a conflict that it
laments his wretchedness, and is violent for deliverance; and then there is a
running to God by the Advocate to propitiate: the poor convinced sinner needs
none to pursue sin unto death but himself by Gods movings, pardon, cleansing
from sin, killing of sin that it never rise again, is then earnestly implored
at the Throne of Grace; and then the sin-sick soul can never be healed nor
quieted without a smile of his heavenly Father in Christ Jesus.

The denial of Christ's Body is no where in the Word. The denial of his
Ordinances is no where in the Word. These men must needs then persuade above
what is written. These two Doctrines cannot be preaching Christ crucified, etc.
For the knowledge of them if they were true serves not for conversion, nor for
building up, not making the man of God perfect. Therefore there is no service
done for God nor his Church in these Doctrines. But there may be much service
done for Satan and disservice to themselves, when they deny both Body and
Ordinances of Christ; What greater denial can there be of the Lord that bought
them? when they leave him neither Body nor Laws extant. When he has no Laws
he is no King; if no Body, no Being, but as he may be resolved into the
Father. So then there is none but God, there is no Son to give up a Kingdom to
the Father; and when he has done to be subject to the Father. The commands of
Christ are those that he gave, that is, which were not given before he came,
that is to say, setting a Government for Jew and Gentile to worship him in, and
who so ever denies this though an Angel from Heaven let him be accursed. And
Satan may let these be pure and holy in regard of outward holiness or justice
between man and man, freedom from the pollutions of the world through lust, if
he can make them be of those that deny the Lord that bought them, this Error
is sin enough to hold them fast close in his claws to eternal damnation, they
need not any more, (if mercy belong to them, the Lord give it them) and keep
his elect that cannot be drawn away by the deceit of these evil times. Now if
it be said, These men are spiritual and full of light: it may be said, There
may be deceits by spirit as well as in word or letter, 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. And to my
knowledge, these men's forerunners the Ranters did speak as spiritually as they,
with words more like a spirit than a man, terrifying and disturbing the hearers
minds. I hearing Frankling was not able, nor durst go on to hear him, lest he
should bewitch me; for though his words were piercing, I knew he spoke not the
truth according to Scripture, which is our Rule of Trial, to prove Paul's, or
Satan's Doctrine. These things being set home upon my spirit, and being freely
persuaded not only of the truth thereof, but of the heinousness and sad
consequence of these great Errors and Mistakes, wherein ye are detained by that
spirit of delusion; I was constrained out of my love to ye, many of whom I have
known for some years, to communicate these lines to ye, not of any prejudice to
your persons, for my hearts desire is that the Lord will deliver ye from this
spirit; and if there be any thing that may seem unacceptable, or more than once
repeated, know it is for several purposes, but all for the good of your souls.

FINIS.

