THE ROYAL, AND THE ROYALLIST'S Plea.

Showing, That the Kings Majesty has the chief Power In this Realm, and
other his Dominions, [1 Pet. 2.13.] And to him the chief Government of all
Estates of this Realm, whether they be Civil or Ecclesiastical, in all
Causes does appertain. Artic. 27. of Religion concerning Magist.

We Confess and Acknowledge, Empires, Kingdoms, Dominions and Cities, to be
distincted and ordained by God, for the Manifestation of his own Glory, and
for the singular Profit and Commodity of Mankind, [ Prove. 24.21.22.] So that
whosoever goes about to take away, or confound the whole State of Civil
Policies, now long established; We affirm the same men, not only to be
Enemies to Mankind, but also wickedly to fight against Gods express Will.
Confess. of the church of Scotland, concerning the Civil Magistrate.

And the first thing We Covenant is, to defend and maintain the Doctrine of
that Church.

Ano. Domi. 1647.

READER,
BEFORE I treat of the differences between the King and the Parliament, Of
the constitution of the kingdom of England.
and set forth the Grounds and Intents of the War on both sides (either Party
charging the Other, with a Design to overthrowe the established Government of
the Kingdom) I shall promise something concerning the Constitution of the
Kingdom, and Parliament of England.

And, whereas there are three kinds of Government, Three kinds of Government.
The first Monarchical, by One; The second Aristocraticall, by the Nobles; The
third Democraticall, England a Monarchy, it consists of a head and a subject
body.
by the People. The Government of England is of the first sort, Monarchical.
And the Monarch is the Head, And (with us) tho Barons and the People, are the
Subject-Body of the Kingdom.

The King governs the Church by Archbishops and Bishops, And the Civil State
by Temporal Officers: And to enable him for that his Administration and
Government, Sundry Political Powers in the Monarch for governing the kingdom
in it self, and in order to other Princes and States.
the King is invested with sundry political Powers as of Treaties of War and
Peace, of making Peers, of choosing Officers and Counselors for State, Judges
for Law, Commanders for Forts and Castles, giving Commissions for raising Men,
to mako war abroad, or to provide against invasions or insurrections at home,
benefit of Confiscations power of Pardoning, and others of the like kind: The
necessity of these Powers in the King.
And by this Power and Authority he draws a respect and relation from the
Nobles, and fear and reverence from the People, and thereby prevents division
faction in the one; tumults, violence and Licentiousness in the other, and so
preserves Peace and unity amongst us: as also by the Authority and Power
aforesaid, The King is enabled to discharge his Office and Oath, to preserve
the Laws of the Land in their force, and the Subjects in their Properties and
Liberties.

The Parliament consists of a Head and ^subject Body.
And as the Kingdom, so the Parliament of England, is constituted of a Head,
and a Subject-Body; The King being the Head, and the two Houses the
Subject-Body of the Parliament.

The King calls the Parliament and dissolves it.
He calls each Baron by a peculiar Writ.


He sends forth Writs into the several Counties, and into the Cities and
Boroughs for electing Knights, A Proxy acts for another by assenting and
dissenting for him but has no superiority or authority over him for whom he
acts.
Citizens and Burgesses to serve for them: and the people meet and choose
accordingly, and send up the persons so chosen, as their Proxies, to sit and
Vote for them by way of assent and dissent, upon all occasions in Parliament:
and so the King and the whole Kingdom (by their Representatives) convene in
Parliament.

As the Barons swear fealty to the King at their Creation so the Law requires
the Members of the House of Commons to take the oath of Allegiance and
Supremacy, The Lords and Commons swear fealty and allegiance to the King.
before they are admitted to sit there.

The principal Power and work of the Parliament is in Law making: and our
Laws are made thus, Bills are framed and agreed on by the Lords and Commons
and afterward presented to the King, How our laws are made.
and by the Royal assent they become Laws. And this is that which the King
swears to at his Coronation, and it is well expressed in the form at the
Coronation of Edward the sixth in these following words. The Oath at king
Edwards Coronation.
Do you grant to make no new Laws, but such as shall be to the honor of God,
and to the good of the Commonwealth, and that the same shall be made by the
consent of your People, as has been accustomed?

Liberty of vote an essential privilege of Parliament.
And in passing of Bills, The King and the Lords and the Commons are to Vote
freely, and this liberty of Vote, is the most essential privilege of
Parliament, yea, The King and the Lords and Commons, Of their Negative Votes.
have every of them their Negative Vote in this Case, thereby to preserve
themselves and these Rights and Privileges one against another: And so to
keep the Constitution of the kingdom inviolate.

And it is a peculiar Privilege of the house of Commons, to make the first
Propositions for the Levies of Money, The privilege of the House of Commons.
which is the Sinews both of Peace and War. Also that house takes notice of
the violating of our Liberties, and impeacheth those that have oppressed and
grieved the Subject.

And the Lords proceed against them in a judiciary way, The Judiciary power of
the house of Lords to remedy misgovernment.
and punish them.

But in this Case the Law says, The King can do no wrong. And if any thing be
done amiss in matter of State, the Council: If in matter of Justice, The King
can do no wrong.
the Judges must answer for it, as themselves have declared, May 19. Husbands
Collect. page 199.

The House of Lords has also a judiary Power upon Writts of Error brought
against Judgments in inferior Courts.

Also, either House has Power over their own Members: But over the Subject at
large and in General (without the Kings Concurrence) neither house has Power,
nor both of them joined together.

Much less have they power over their Sovereign Lord the King, They ought to
support the king and the Crown, and not to invade and null them.
who has no Superior under God (25, Hen. 8.) and much less over the imperial
Crown (which has been free at all times, and in no earthly Subjection, but
immediately to God in all things touching the Regality of the said Crown 16. R.
2.5.) And which was never invaded by any Parliawent before, and there is
nothing of Power extraordinary in the present Parliament, but of cantinuance
only, being not to be dissolved but with the consent of both houses of
Parliament. The privileges of the Members of Parliament.


Lastly, touching the privilege of the Members of Parliament themselves (in
their Petition to his Majesty at the beginning of his Reign, in the Case of
the Earl of Arundell) have declared thus. We find it an undoubted Right and
constant privilege of Parliament. That no Member of Parliament, sitting in the
Parliament, or within the usual times of the privilege of Parliament, is to
be restrained or immesoned, without Sentence of the House, unless it be for
High Treason, Felony, or for refusing to give Surety for the Peace.

And so in Q. Elizabeth's time, when Wentworth made those motions that were,
Wentworths Case.
but supposed dangerous to the Queens Estate; He was imprisoned in the Tower,
notwithstanding the privilege of the House, and there dyed.

Thus whereas there is in every of the three kinds of Government some good (as
Unity in Monarchy; The equal and happy constitution of England.
Counsel in Aristocracy; Liberty in Democracy) and some evils, (as Tyranny in
Monarchy; Division and Faction in Aristocracy; Tumults, Violence and
Licentiousness in Democracy.) By the Constitution of the Kingdom we have the
good of all these without the evil of any. And hence, for so many hundred
years has the English Nation been famous and happy to admiration and envy:
Pro. 24 21.22
Even from this Ancient, Equal, Happy, At present the Lords and Commons shake
off the yoke of subjection, and affect the chief Power and Government; ^or do
they Act as our fellow subjects and Proxi^s, but as our Lords and Masters, nor
do they study Liberty with us, and for us, but Sovereignty over us.
Well-poized, and never enough commended Constitution of this Kingdom: From
which receding, all these Political Evils have overtaken us. Even Tyranny and
Oppression, Division and Faction, Tumults, Violence and Licentiousness: And
what will or can be the end of this but Anarchy, Confusion and utter
Destruction of the King, of the Parliament, of the Kingdom, of the N^tion?

Oh that they were wise, that they understood, that they would consider their
latter end. Deuteronomy.32.29.

THE ROYAL, and ROYALLIST'S PLEA.
THAT the chief Promoter of the present war had a design against his Majesty
and against Monarchy, is now manifest to all the World, The Vote for sending
the king to Warwick Castle.
by the last vote for sending the King to Warwick Castle; and by Mr. Prideux
his speech in October last, for, Mr. Prideux his speech, for abandoning
Monarchy.
abandoning Monarchy (now they have gotten the power of the Sword) and for
settling the government of the Kingdom in the two Houses of Parliament.

But our Plea is grounded upon former Evidences, The ground of this Plea.
from the very summoning of this Parliament, unto the taking up of arms.

For how did they stickle in the Counties and Buroughs, They Stickle about
Elections.
for such to be elected into the house of Commons as were of their opinions and
inclinations? And no sooner did they meet and sit in Parliament, but they
ratified and damned Elections at pleasure, in Order to their Design. A Bill
against Bishops, and the Militia.

Seditious Lecturers and Pampleters.

The Protestation protested, and To thy Tents Oh Israel.

Tumults.




The Members thus prepared: They bring in two Bills The one to take away
Bishops, Root and Branch, The other to take the Militia, by Sea and Land from
the King; the later being preferred by Sr. Arthur Haslerigg.

And failing in this way, thee send forth factious and seditious Lecturers,
which inveigh against the present Government of Church and State, and they
License Pamphlets, that deprave the Government of the Kingdom.

The people thus prepared, They raise tumults in London, to force and compel
the Parliament to join with them, Tho^^ accused Memb^^^ protected
in the prosecution of their Design; and his Majesty charging them with high
Treason for these attempts against himself and against the Parliament: They
get themselves protected under the pretended privilege of Parliament: from
verbal they fall to reall-Treasons; and they possess themselves of the Forts
and Castles, after that his Majesty had promised for their security, that they
should be only in such hands as they should have cause to confide in. Jan. 27.

The Forts and Castles, and the Militia* with the Navy Royal taken from his
Majesty.
And they dispose and execute the Militia of the Kingdom, altogether excluding
his Majesty, after that for their farther security, he had accepted of the
Lords Lieutenants in the several Counties recommended by them Feb. 28. And
after he had condiscended touching the Militia of the Corporations April. 8.

What reason they pretended for the Militia
In the last places they seize on the Navy-Royall. And (in their votes of March
15.) she reason pretended for the Militia, was to defend the kingdom against
Enemies from abroad (when we had none) and against the Papists at home (when
they were naked and without Arms) and against a discontented party amongst us
(i.e.) against the King and his party, whom they had discontented and highly
provoked by their late proceedings.

See the opinion of the judges in the Case of the E. of Essex.
And as their seizing their Forts and Castles, etc. was needless in the two
former respects, so in the later was it Rebellious, being not for the public,
but for their private security and advantage: not to defend the Kingdom
against danger, but to protect themselves against justice: not to put us into a
posture of defense against a common Enemy, but to put themselves into a posture
of power and strength against his Majesty, thereby at once enabling themselves
to force him and disable him to resist them in the prosecution of their design
against him.

And no sooner had they got the full strength of the kingdom, but they
actually and professedly set themselves against his Majesty.

Sir John Hotham keeps him out of Hull April. 23. Sr. John Hotham.
And the two Houses justify his Traiterous Act April 28.

Not long after Mr. Martin says openly in the house of Commons, and
unreproved. Mr. Martin.
That the Kings Office is forfeitable. And that the happiness of this
Kingdom, They strike at Monarchy, as at Episcopacy, root and branch.
did not depend upon his Majesty, or any of the Royal branches of that Root.

And Sy^ Henry Ludlow. That he was not worthy to be King of England, Sr. Henry
Ludlow.

Both Houses tacitly imply the deposing of the King.

They make attempts upon the Imperial Crown.

The Kings Negative vote. The 19 Propositions.


which doubtless was the sense of the Parliament. For May 26. both houses
declare. That they should not want modesty if they followed the highest
Precedents of other Parliaments.

The Crown it self cannot escape them, nay they aim at that ultimately:

For in the same Declaration they deny the kings negative Vote in Parliament.

And to deprive the King and the Crown of their power, not only in Law-making,
but also in Governing, They offer to his Majesty 19 Propositions, destructive
of Regality and Monarchy June 2.

And they enforce them as absolutely necessary to the public safety; whereas
to the Kingdoms security, The Forts, and Castles, and the Militia, and the
Navy, alone are sufficient, in case of danger: and so the particulars are
proposed and imposed on his Majesty, only by way of design, to undermine
Kingship and Monarchy. And his Majesty's former condiscentions touching the
Forts and Castles, and the Militia, and the Navy, Note.
being more then sufficient against their pretended dangers, at present, they
also are demanded, not for necessity, but merely of design and policy: They
claim an absolute power over the Subject, in Order to their Cause, and to the
present War.
And they take up Arms in prosecution of these Propositions and demands, June
10. After they had in the forecited-Declaration of May 26. claimed a power over
the people of the Land, to dispose of their persons and estates, in Order to
their Cause, and to compel them to serve in the present War.

The whole Series of Occurrents discover their Design.
Thus the entire Series of Occurrents (from their Summons to their Arms)
plainly discovers the malice of their hearts, and the Reality of their Design,
against the King, and against the Crown.

The several particulars show how they have moved from time to time.
And the several particulars show clearly how they have moved from time to
time; first in a Parliamentary way by Bill, then by Pamphlets, in a seditious
way; afterward in a Tumultuary way, against the Parliament; Next, under the
pretended privilege of Parliament, against the king; Then by usurping the
strength of the Kingdom, and with insolency against his Majesty, and not
without attempts upon the Crown it self; And lastly (other means being
ineffectuall) by force of Arms, Why they raised their Arms and continue them,
and when they will lay them down.
raised at first to maintain and make good whatsoever they had preferred,
published acted, usurped, spoken, declared, proposed; and to drive on their
Design against the King, and to alter the Government of the Kingdom, and to
this day continued to perfect that alteration (begun in part already) and not
to be laid down, till it be completed and settled, to the utter overthrow of
Monarchy; and consequently to the Ruin and destruction of his Majesty and his
Posterity, who are the only Rub in their way, and to be necessarily removed,
before their dominion can be established.

I shall omit all other Particulars before rehearsed (leaveing them to the
further consideration of every private man) and insist only on the
Propositions, Why the other particulars were omitted, and the Propositions only
insisted on.
which are the very drift of all the former proceedings, and a lively
Portraiture of the whole Plot, and the reason of the first Arms, and the
constant Argument of their Treaties, and consequently the ground and end of the
War.

The true state of the War, on the Kings side and on the Parliaments.
THE Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament allege, That there was a
Design by Papists, The Allegation of the Lords and Commons for taking up Arms.
and by an ill-aff^cted Party, to overthrowe our Religion, Laws and Liberties,
and to introduce Popery and Tyranny, and that they took up Arms to defend our
Religion, L^wes and Liberties.

The King alleges, That there was a Design by a factious, seditious,
anti-Monarchicall Party, The Kings Allegation for his taking up of Arms.
to overthrowe the established government of Church and State, and to settle
the chief Power and Government in the two Houses of Parliament: And that upon
their Allegation aforesaid, and in Order to their Design aforesaid, the two
Houses have claimed and exercised a Sovereign Power over the Laws of the
Land, and an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Power over our persons and Estates, and
have levied war, and compelled us to serve in the war, as was pretended to
keep out Tyranny and Popery, and so to carry on their Design against
Regallity and Monarchy. And his Majesty took up Arms, as he alleges, to
maintain the ancient Government of the Kingdom, and our established Religion,
Laws and Liberty.

Now the true cause of taking up and continuing of Arms on each side, The true
Cause of the war, on both sides.
is best known by their Propositions offered before, and treated on since the
war,

The Parliaments Propositions. The Parliaments Propositions.

THAT a Bill be passed for the utter abolishing and taking away Archbishops,
etc. For abolishing Bishops.


For nominating the Officers of State, and the Judges in England.
That the Lord high Steward of England, Lord high Constable, Lord Chancellor or
Keeper of the Great-Seale, Lord Treasurer, Lord Privy Seal, Earl Marshall,
Lord Admiral, Warden of the Cinque Ports, Chancelour of the Exchequor, Master
of the Wards, Secretaries of State, two Chief Justices, and the Chief Baron,
be nominated by both Houses of Parliament.

The like for Ireland.
The like for the kingdom of Ireland, as touching the Deputy, or chief
Governor, or other Governor there, and the Presidents of the several
Provinces, the Chancellor or L. Keeper, L. Treasurer, etc.

The Educating of the Kings children.
That he or they unto whom the Government of the kings children shall be
committed, shall be approved of by both Houses of Parliament, and their
servants likewise.

For marrying them.
That no marriage shall be concluded, or treated, for any of the Kings children,
with any foreign Prince, or other person whatsoever, abroad or at home,
without consent of the Parliament.

For the Militia
That the Militia be settled, and the Subjects of the Kingdoms of England and
Ireland, be appointed to be Armed Trained and Disciplined, in such manner as
both Houses of Parliament shall think fit.

For the Admiralty and Navy.
That the Admiralty and force at Sea, and power of raising Money for the
maintenance of those Forces, and of the Navy, be settled in the two Houses of
Parliament.

For the Forts and Castles.
That the Forts and Castles of the Kingdom shall be put under the Command and
Custody of such Persons as shall be approved of by both Houses of Parliament.

For the votes of Peers to be made hereafter
That no Peer made hereafter, shall sit or vote in Parliament, unless they be
admitted thereto by both Houses of Parliament.

For concluding of Peace and war
That the Concluding of Peace and War with foreign Princes and States be
with the advice of the Parliaments of both Kingdoms. A quere upon the
Parliaments Propositions.


Now the Question is, Whether (these Propositions considered) The two Houses of
Parliament do truly take up Arms and continue them, for the defense of our
Religion, Laws and Liberties, against Popery and Tyranny, as is alleged by
them; or not rather for the overthrowe of the established Government of Church
and State, and of Reg^llity and Monarchy; and for settling the chief Power in
the two Houses of Parliament as is alleged by his Majesty.

There are I know other Propositions concerning Delinquents, but subordinate to
those that tend to the alteration of Government. Their Propositions concerning
Delinquents.
Their Delinquents being only such as are enemies to their Cause, and have from
time to time opposed their proceedings against the King, and against the
present Government, as appears plainly by their Ordinances concerning
Delinquents, and by the Catalogue of Delinquents delivered in at the Treaties,
and inserted amongst their Propositions: And they prosecute them not in a
Judiciary and Parliamentary way, as Legal offenders; but in a Military and
Hostile way, as an adverse party, Opposite to them and their Design.

Now, whether these Gentlemen be Delinquents or no, shall be showed afterward,
upon stating the war on both sides; Delinquency being not where the Cause is
just, and the war lawful; but where the Cause and the war are unjust, and
unlawful, that is the Delinquent Party.

Their Propositions concerning Papists I have omitted, Their Propositions
concerning Papists.
because the King assented to them. (And how did they take up Arms for the
defense of our Religion against Popery?)

Concerning our Liberties they proposed nothing, No Proposition concerning our
Liberty.
all the Grievances set forth by the Lords in their Petition presented to his
Majesty at York, being remedied by several Acts at the beginning of this
Parliament. And how then did they take up Arms for defense of our Liberties,
against Tyranny?

Also there is nothing proposed concerning our Laws; their whole proceedings
being against Law; An observation of the Kings Commissioners at Uxbridge.
either against the twenty fifth of Edward the third, in point of Treason
against the King; Or against Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, in point
of oppression of the Subject. As also by their Orders, The two Houses and each
House, and their Committees stop the proceedings of the Courts of Justice, in
Suites of Law, between Man and Man.

And so the Kings Commissioners at the Treaty at Uxbridge observed, That after
a war of near four years for which the defense of the Protestant Religion,
The liberty and property of the Subject, and the privileges of Parliament,
were made the cause and ground, in a Treaty of twenty days, nor indeed in the
whole Propositions, upon which the Treaty should be, there has been nothing
offered to be Treated concerning the breach of any Law, or of the Liberty and
Property of the Subject, or Privilege of Parliament; but only Propositions for
the altering of a Government, established by Law, and for the making new
Laws, by which all the old are, or may be cancelled.

The Kings Propositions.
The Kings Propositions.
For his Revenues Magazine etc.
THAT his Majesty's own Revenue, Magazine, Towns, Forts, and Ships, which have
been taken or kept from him, by force, be forthwith restored unto him.

For maintayning the Laws of the Land, and the kings Legal Power and Right.

For the Liberty of the Subject against illegal Power.


That whatsoever has been done or published contrary to the known Laws of
the Land, or derogatorie to his Majesty's Legal and known Power and Right; be
renounced and recalled, that no seed may remain, for the like to spring out
for the future.

That whatsoever illegal power has been claimed and exercised over his
Subjects; as imprisoning their persons without Law; stopping their Habeas
corpus, and imposing upon their estates without Act of Parliament, either by
both or either House, or any Committee of both or either, or by any persons
appointed by any of them, be disclaymed, and all such persons so Committed
forthwith discharged.

That as his Majesty will readily consent, having done so heretofore, to the
execution of all Laws already made, Against Popery.
and to any good Act to be made for the suppressing of Popery, and for the
firm settling the Protestant Religion by Law established; So he desires that a
good Bill may be framed, for the better preferring of the book of
Common Prayer, from the scorn and violence of Brownists, For the book of
Common Prayer.
Anabaptists and other Sectaries, with such clauses for the ease of tender
Consciences, as his Majesty has formerly offered.

That all such persons as upon the Treaty shall be excepted out of the general
Pardon, shall be tried per Pares, For the trial of Delinquents
according to the usual course and known Laws of the Land, and that it be
left to that, either to acquit or condemn them.

Now the question is, A quere upon the Kings Propositions.
whether (these Propositions considered) the King does truly take up Arms,
and continue them, to maintain our Religion, Laws, and Liberties; against
Popery and Tyranny, as is aleaged by his Majesty, or to overthrow them, as is
alleged by the two houses of Parliament.

But the Lords and Commons plead for themselves finally. That they took up
Arms, and continue them, The final Plea of the Lords and Commons retorted:
to prosecute their Propositions, only in Order to the defense of our Religion,
Laws and Liberties. Or rather they took Arms, and continue them, for the
defense of our Religion, Laws and Liberties only, in, Grder to the prosecution
of these their Propositions, and of their Design; Seeing they will not
acquiesce in his Majesty's, which are directly and apparently for the
establishing of our Religion, Laws and Liberties, against Popery and Tyranny,
but offer and press their own Propositions, to the overthrow of our Religion
by Law established, and of the established Government of Church and State.

Besides, before Arms were taken up, his Majesty was pleased to recede from
his Right touching Forts, The King recedes from his Right, and from the^ rigor
of his Propositions.
and Castles, and the Militia; and he condiscended to them in diverse other
particulars, touching their nineteen Proposititions; thereby (if possible) to
have prevented the War amongst us. And after that Arms were taken up, and
the kingdom embroyled in War (to prevent the further mischiefs thereof) his
Majesty was pleased to recede from the rigor of his Propositions; and at the
Treaty at Uxbridge, by his Commissioners, he would have complied in several
particulars touching the Bishops and the Deans and Chapters: and he would have
trusted them with the Militia for two years, and afterward by a Message from
Oxford, he graciously condescended:

1. That all who are Protestants should have the free exercise of Religion
according to their own way.

The Kings Message from Ozford.
2. That the two houses of Parliament should have the Militia for 7 years.

3 That they, pro hac vice, should choose the Lord Admiral, and Officers of
State, and the Judges.

4. That the business of Ireland should be referred wholly to them.

5. That he would join with them in an Act for the payment of the public
debts.

6. That he would pass a General Act of Oblivion.

I say the King was pleased, in favor to the Parliament, and the Subject, to
recede from the Rigor of his Propositions: But the two Houses would never
abate one jot of their Propositions and demands, They will not recede one jot
from the rigor of their Propositions.
in favor of his Majesty or Monarchy; but rather have scrued them up from time
to time, and heightened them against both. Nor will they now be satisfied with
the establishing of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, unless it be by way
of their Propositions thus heightened: And so they encroach upon the Crown
daily, more and more, until at length they invest themselves in the full Power
and Rights of the King and of the Crown.

And at first they pretended the defense of our Religion, The defense of our
Religion, L^wes and Liberties pretended, and why
Laws and Liberties, in policy only (that they might more effectually prevail
with the people, and more colourably seize the Militia, and raise an Army) for
by their Arms, they do not only, not defend our Religion, P^^testatio
contraria facto.
Laws and Liberties, but (taking upon them Sovereign authority over our
Laws, and an Arbitrary Power over our Persons and Estates) they abolish our
Religion, by Law established, By their Arms they do not only not defend our
Religion, Laws and Liberties, but invade and violate them.
in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government (to comply with the
Independents, Brownists, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries, to make them of
their party to carry on their Design against Munarchy) And they trample under
foot our Laws, and invade and violate our Liberties, in prosecution of their
Design, against his Majesty, and in him, against Monarchy: O^dayning, contrary
to the Petition of Right, That we bear Arms, billet Soldiers, pay Moneys and
take Oaths, not imposed by Act of Parliament; And upon our refusal,
Sequestring and Imprisoning us, without more ado; and proceeding also against
some by Martiall-Lawe, and Condemning and Executing them: Whereas by Magna
Charta, no man should be disseized of his Estate, nor Imprisoned, nor suffer,
but upon trial by his Peers.

But who would have believed, that our Religion, Liberty and Laws, which for
so long a time have endured Opposition and Assaults from foreign Power,
envying our happiness, would have been Opposed, Oppressed, and Trod under
foot by the Crafts and Cruelties of our own Natives and Countrymen? As is
declared by both Kingdoms joined in Arms for pursuance of the Covenant Janu.
30. 1643.

This a most dangerous precedent. The true state of the war, on the Parliaments
side.

There is not Law warranting the Lords and Commons to take up Arms.

Romans 3.8.

Their present War is, First unnecessary as pretending the defense of our
Religion, laws and Liberties against Popery and Tyranny. Secondly, unjust as
contending for the King and crown. Thirdly, wicked, as intending the overthrowe
of the Constitution and Government of the kingdom and intimating the
destruction of the King and his Posterity in order thereto.

No privilege in Case of treason.

Having got the power of the Sword, they may rule and overruled the king and
people, and invade his other Rights and their Liberties at pleasure.


And Oh! the unstable and miserable Condition of the English Nation, if the two
Houses of Parliament or a prevayling factious Party there, may at pleasure
alter our Established Religion, Laws, Liberty, Property and Government.

And so (the Premises considered) the true state of the Question concerning the
War on the Parliaments side, is clearly this. Not whether the Lords and
Commons may seize and deteine his Majesty's Forts and Ships; Nor whether they
may settle and dispose the Militia and the Navy, and raise an Army for the
defense of our Religion, Laws and Liberties (though to do any of these
without the Royal Authority, upon any Pretenses, or to any Intentions
whatsoever, whether to expulse Strangers, to remove Counselors, or against any
Statute, etc. be to levy war against the King? because they take upon them
Royal authority, which is against the King, Cook 3. part Institut. Cap. de
High Treason. And I know no difference between the Lords and Commons in
Parliament (in this Case) and others out of Parliament, all being in the
condition of subjects to his Majesty, and there being no privilege of
Parliament in Case of Treason: But whether they may put themselves into the
strength of the Kingdom, and raise forces, and employ them to the intents and
purposes expressed in their Propositions, viz. For taking from the King and
from the Crown the Government of the Church by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. and
the Government of the State likewise, whilst they would nominate the great
Officers and the Judges, and would dispose the Militia, and the Navy, and the
Forts and Castles, etc. And for settling the chief power and Government both of
Church and State, at present in themselves, and in the two Houses of Parliament
hereafter; yea for Subjects (and such are the Lords and Commons in the present
Parliament assembled) to put themselves into such a strength as the king shall
not be able to resist them, and to force and compel the King to govern
otherwise then according to his own Royal authority and direction is manifest
Rebellion, It is manifest Rebellion.
according to the opinion of the Judges deliveeed at the arraignement of the
Earl of Essex.

How much more in our present Case, Their Rebellion aggravated.
when they would take away the power and government from the King and Crown?

Again, The premises considered, The true state of the war on the Kings
side. The war on the Kings side is vindicatory and defensorie, in respect of
the Kings power and righ^, and of the Laws of the Land, and of the Liberty and
property of the Subject.
The true state of the question concerning the War on the Kings side is
clearly this. Not whether he may raise an Army against the Parliament (though
if he should, I know no warrant for resisting him,) But whether the King may
not raise an Army, and fight against the Parliament, for the reasons expressed
in his Propositions. viz.

For the recovery of his Revenue, Forts and Castles etc.

For vindicating the Laws of the Land, and his Legal power and Rights etc.

For Redeeming the Subject from illegall-power, and from manifold oppression.

For preserving the established Liturgy etc.

For bringing Delinquents to a Legall-Tryall. The Lords and Commons in
Parliament, as well as other his Subjects, being liable to his Majesty's
displeasure, whenever they keep not themselves within the circle of the Law,
and Custom of Parliament. Cook lib. of Jurisdiction of Courts. Note.
Cap. High Court of Parliament. And themselves have declared, That all forcible
practices, Malignancie, Delinquencie, and Covenanting, etc. The true state of
the question concerning the deposing of the King.
much more such Rebellious proceedings against the King, are inconsistent with
the Nature of the Council, being the Body whereof his Majesty is the Head.
Husb. Collect. of Remonst. page 100. And from those express ends in the
Propositions on both sides must we judge, as of the war, so of the incidents
thereto; Malignancy, Delinquency, Covenanting, etc. And of the consequents
thereof, the bloodshed and spoil in England, and the loss of Ireland, and
the blood and treason to be expended in the recovery thereof, and the deposing
of the king (though no protestant Parliament ever did so, and Protestants
generally abominate the doctrine of Deposing of Kings. Dan. 2.2^. Dan.
4.17.25.32. Romans 13.14 4.
The Observator himself says, That never was any King deposed in a free
Parliament:) But whether the Parliament may depose the King, because he has
taken up Arms and sought against them.

For recovery of his Revenues, etc.

For vindicating the Laws of the Land, and his Legal power and Rights.

For Redeeming the Subject from illegal power, etc.

And because he will not assent to their Propositions, and renounce his Cause,
and ruin his friends, and betray the Crown, They cannot in justice or in
gratitude depose the King.
and depose and degrade himself and his Posterity.

Also whether they may depose him, after he has by several Acts of
parliament asserted our Liberties, and offered to pass whatsoever is desired
against papists. And after his gracious condiscentions touching the Forts and
Castles and the Militia, The depriving of the King, a consequent in every
Rebellion.
for our security; and after his other condiscentions declared in his answer
to the ninteene Propositions. And after his gracious Messages from Nottingham
and Oxford, both that upon the Treaty there, and the other about a year since,
which see before.

1 Samuel 26.9. How we must judge of their after proceedings with his Majesty.

The true state of the question on the Parliaments side, in referrence to the
Liberty of the Subject in general, and more particularly of the Royal Party.


But this is an ordinary consequent in every Rebellion, The Rebels not suffering
the king to live or Reign, which might punish or take revenge of his Treason,
as is evident in Ed. and Ki. both the second. And this also the Judges
delivered for matter of Law, at the arraignement aforesaid,

And in this case must we ground our judgment of their after proceedings with
his Majesty, on the Sentence of the Law, and on the Evidences of Histories,
and not on their Declarations, alterable at pleasure, as themselves aver.

Lastly (the promises considered) The true state of the Question on the
Parliaments side, in referrence to the Liberty of the Subject in general, and
more particularly to the Royal party, is clearly this; Not whether the Lords
and Commons assembled in Parliament, have power over our Laws, Lives,
Liberties and estates, in Case of defense, as aforesaid; But whether they have
power to compel us to serve with our persons and estates in the present war
against his Majesty? and in Case of refusal, whether they may proceed against
us, and whether each house has power in this Case to sequester and imprison us.

As also his Majesty's taking up Arms for the reasons above mentioned, and
requiring us to assist him in this war, whether they may question and punish
us for such assistance; These legal Oaths obliege us rather then our late
vows and covenants.
seeing we are bound by the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, to assist and
defend all Jurisdictions, Preheminencies, and Authorities belonging to the
King, his Heirs and Successors, or annexed to the Imperial Crown.

And for such Deed and Service, we are utterly discharged of any vexation,
trouble or loss. 11. Hen. 7. cap. 10.

And whereas the Parliament in their answers hereto grant it to be duty of
allegiance, Ob.
to serve the King in war for the defense of him and of the Land, but not in
wars against the Land or the Parliament, the Representative body thereof.

It may be replied and truly; Sol.
That the greater part of the Lords and Commons, and consequently of the people
of the Land, taken collectively, and in Parliament joined with the King before
the Tumults; as did the greater part of the people diffusively take part with
his Majesty before they called in our brethren of Scotland, Upon (...) what
terms they called in the Scots
whom they invited by several Messages, Declarations, Protestations,
Attestations, Asseverations and Oaths, They profess declarations alterable at
pleasure.

See the Scots papers printed at Edinborough June 1646.


in testimony of their unshaken, Resolved and constant Loyalty to his Majesty
and to his Posterity: But now they have Notoriously and professedly revolted
from both: and when the Scots-Commissioners urged those Declarations and
attestations against them and their proceedings, they answered that Returns
should not be made against England, upon their former Declarations, as if they
were obligations, whereas they were alterable at pleasure.

And now, that by the help of our Brethren, they are Conquerors, and absolute
Masters of all; see how they fall again upon their design against his
Majesty, and against Monarchy: and drive it on with all might and main, and by
all ways and means now, as at the beginning; and what was Treason before is
Rebellion now.

Their Proceedings after the War, the same as before the War.
They stickle about the Elections.
1. Then they stickled for such men to be elected into the House of Commons, as
were of their opinions and inclinations: and so they do now.

Bills against Bishops, and for the Militia.
2. The Bills against Bishops, and for the Militia, were in the first place
insisted on then: and so they are now.

3. Seditious and Traiterous pamphlets were published then, Traiterous
Pamphlets.
as now, by Mr. Lilburne, by Mr. Chaloner and his vindicator, by the author of
the book called The unhappy game between the Scots and English, and by
others, professed enemies to his Majesty and Monarchy.

Tumultuary Sectaries.
4. Tumultuous Sectaries were raised and countenanced to force the votes of the
Members of both Houses of Parliament then: An Independent Army.
and an Indepentent Army is raised and continued to force the Kings vote now.

Of the Forts and Castles.
5. They seized on the Forts and Castles, and the Militia, and the Navy then:
and they detayne and dispose them now, as then; for securing, not the kingdom,
but themselves and their Design. Of deposing the King. S^e the premised
opinion of the Ju^ges concerning the deposing of kings and the Histories of Ed.
and Ric. both the 2


6. Then Mr. Martin said openly, That the Kings Office was forfeitable, and Sir
Henry Ludlow, That his Majesty was not worthy to be King of England, and the
two houses Declared, That if they followed the highest precedents of other
Parliaments, they should not want modesty or duty: and now they tell us in the
answer to the Scots papers, That the King is not in a condition to execute the
duty of his place, or to be left to go or reside where and when he pleases.

And here sticks the Design at present, Where the Design sticks. See the
Scots papers, and the Lord Low^dns three several speeches of disposing of the
Kings person.
the Scots dissenting and interposing and pressing for his Majesty's return to
his Parliament, with freedom, honor and safety.

But whatsoever they shall attempt and act, against or upon his Majesty
hereafter, 'twill be (not as is pretended) a due guerdon for his war against
the Parliament (for he has contracted no guilt thereby) but as an effect of
their conquest, and an accomplishment of their Design, agitated before, Their
after proceedings against the King not his due guerdon, but in efect of their
Conquest, and an accomplishment of their pretended Design.
and pursued and consummate by the present war. And whatsoever their after
proceedings be, his Majesty will still be Innocent: And whatsoever their
pretenses are, They will be Rebels still.

(7) They Declared against the Kings Negative Oath, in Law-making then: and now
they give Laws without him.

(8) Then they tendered to his Majesty Peopositions, to take away the chief
power of Governing from the King, and to settle it in the two Houses of
parliament: And at this day they insist on the same, Of the Kings negative Vote.
with full resolution to overthrowe the Regal, and to establish a
Parliamentary Government. And this is the utmost of their Design, Their
propositions for the chief power in Governing.
and the ultimate end of their War, and it concerns not the King only, but
the Imperial Crown also.

I know these Propositions are obtruded upon the King and upon the people at
present, The utmost of their Design and the ultimate end of the War.
as the only means of our preservation and safety against the common enemies
of the Kingdom.

But I have showed how some of the Propositions are useless in this kind, and
how the others are at this time needless in respect of the kingdom, Of these
Propositions, some are Civil, others Military. They take from the King the
disposal of all Places of Honor, and Judicature and Power, and consequently
all depend ney; in these Respects, foreigners may come in to rescue the King
and Crown, and not to invade the Kingdom.
having no professed enemy at all, though by their disloyal, illegal, violent
courses they have created to themselves many Enemies, both at home and abroad,
who also may bring in foreign forces against them (if we agree not suddenly
amongst our selves) and yet not to invade the kingdom in a hostile manner: the
like of late having been done by others once and again.

Besides, they demand these Powers not for a time only, but for ever; See the
several papers of the Scots Commissioners concerning the Propositions of Peace.
and so not as a remedy against present danger, but as a foundation of another
Government: Under the pretense of providing for the public safety,
endeavoring to overthrow Monarchy, and to set up and establish Aristocracy and
Democracy. And as by the Act of continuation they may sit for ever, so they
intend doubtless by their Propositions to Govern for ever.

And the upshot of all is, Who shall Govern? whether the King, or the Lords
and Commons assembled in Parliament.

(9.) Lastly, before they took up Arms, they claymed an absolute power over
our persons and estates, in Order to their Cause, Their absolute power over the
people in order to the present war.
and to the present war: and to this day they exercise it accordingly,
disposing our persons, and imposing on our Estates at pleasure. And this their
arbitrary and boundless power, our boundless and unsufferable slavery is like
to last for ever, as their Cause and the War are like to be everlasting; It
is like to be everlasting. See Mr. Martins speech of the Royal branches.
not only against King Charles, but also against prince Charles, and against
his Heirs and Successors likewise, and against the whole succession from time
to time, as long as any of the Royal seed shall remain; and so in
maintenance of their Design against Monarchy, the people will be engaged in
Rebellion, and embroyled in War, from succession to succession, and from
Generation to Generation, unless some speedy course be taken for composing the
differences, Our Rebellion war and misery endless.
and ending the war amongst us; which seeing his Majesty cannot effect, by
the justness of his Propositions, nor by the reasonableness of his Messages,
nor by the graciousnesse of his Condiscentions, neglected and rejected from
time to time, An Apostraphe to the people,
I think it may be, not improperly undertaken by the people themselves, who
are also concerned in the differences, and in the war, not only in point of
duty and conscience in respect of the King; but also in point of Liberty and
civil Interest, in regard of themselves.

And I would have them in the first place to petition his Majesty for a
General Act of Oblivion to be kept inviolably by himself and his posterity.
To petition the King for an act of Oblivion.


Then I would have them, now they understand the falsenesse of their pretended
dangers, and their falsenesse touching our Religion, Laws and Liberties, A
Sum of the whole business offered to the people
the nature of their Propositions, and the ground and end of the war (under
the pretense of defending our Religion, Laws and Liberties, against Popery and
Tyranny, endeavoring themselves and engaging us, with our lives and fortunes,
Jerem. 17.3.
to make good their Propositions against Regalitie and Monarchy) I say, I would
have the people of the kingdom Generally, both in the City, and in the
several Counties, before they part with any more moneys, either by way of Tax
or Loan (out of just indignation for the many frauds and falacies obtruded on
them, To petition the Parliament.
and out of a piercing sense of their bypast sufferings, and out of a pious
sense of their Allegiance to the King and Crown, Isai 32.17.
and out of providence to their own good and quiet, and for the good and quiet
of posterity) unanimously and vigorously to Petition the two houses of
Parliament for the disbanding their Armies, Pax, quo aequi or, co^firmior.
and dimantling their Garrisons, and for inviting his Majesty to his
Parliament, and for a sudden Accommodation between them, with due and equal
regard to the Kings legal Rights the just privileges of Parliament, The Kings
right taken from him without hearing his Council.
and the legal Liberty of the Subject, to be determined and settled in
Parliament, and to be so stated that hereafter they do not enterfeire one
against another, and to be bounded so, that they do not encroach one upon
another.

Of Magna Charta, and of the Petition of Right.
In particular, Let the people take care, That (if it be possible) those
Muniments of our Liberties Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, be not at
any time hereafter subjected either to the King, or to the two Houses of
Parliament, and that we be Governed, not by Ordnances and Votes, and
Committees; but by the known Laws of the Land only, and by the Ordinary
Ministers of justice, as well in the time of Parliament as out of it.

When and how Religion to be settled.
And when all the differences between the King and the Parliament and the
Subject are quietly composed, and his Majesty, and the Parliament, and the
people quiet and comp^sed in themselves, then (and not till then) would I have
Religion settled, Our Religion abolished without hearing the conformable Clergy.
in a full and free convention of Parliament, after a full and free debate by
Divines on all sides.

And above all, I would have the two Houses of Parliament and the People, to
lay aside prejudice and partiality, and incline to Truth and Justice, Stand not
in evil things. Eccles. 8 3.
and not to look after their own private advantages or Interests, but to
intend and endeavor the public Peace and Common happiness of the Kingdom;
Also I would have them not carried away with Humor and Faction, The parliament
and the people to lay aside prejudice, partiality, selfe-interest, Humors and
Faction, and to be, guided by sound princples
but to be regulated and guided by sound Principles of Policy, Religion,
Loyalty; of LiLiberty (Parliamentary and Common) of Order and Government, and
of Peace and Unity. And I advise them to seek and pursue these things, not
severally and apart, but jointly and together; Policy with Religion, Religion
with Loyalty, Loyalty with the privilege of Parliament, privilege of
Parliament with Liberty, Liberty with Order and Government, See the premises
concerning the fundamental constitution of the kingdom.
Government with Peace and Unity: For in the due Harmonicall conjunction of
all these, consists our Civil Happiness. And they all Concenter in the
fundamental Constitution and Government of the Kingdom, as before.

Also let them remember that they have Covenanted expressly, with their Estates
and Lives, to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority in
the preservation and defense of the true Protestant Religion and Liberty of the
kingdoms; Let the world judge whether these Propositions do not diminish his
Majesty's just power and greatness.
so that the world may bear witness, with their Consciences, of their
Loyalty, and that they have no thoughts or intentions to diminish his Majesty's
just power and greatness.

And how his Majesty has endeavored to preserve and defend the true Protestant
Religion, against Popery; and the Liberty of the kingdom, against Tyranny, let
all the world judge, and see by his Propositions.

Lastly, As their design is against the constitution of the Kingdom, so their
proceedings are against the constitution of Parliament.
whereas the Covenanters have now turned their Propositions into Bills, and
seek by violent courses to compel the King to pass them, they must know that
hereby they overthrow the constitution of the Parliament, and make their
Propositions of none effect also, Liberty of Vote being an esseentiall
privilege of Parliament, and no act being valid and obligatorie which is not
free and voluntary, as is fully declared. 15. E. 3.

Thus they conceive Chafe, and bring forth Stubble. Labor in vain
Ec. 33.11.

And why do we spend our Money for that which is not Bread, and our Labor
for that which satisfyeth not. Es. 55.2.

Who so is wise will ponder these things Psalm. 107.43. Now he in whose hands
are the Hearts of Kings, and the Inclinations of Kingdoms, grant that the King
and his Parliament, and the People, may have now and ever upright hearts and
good affections one to another.

And that under his Majesty and his Posterity We, and our Childrens Children
may lead a quiet and peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty:

Amen. Amen.
Not any among the people is like unto him whom the Lord has Chosen.

And all the people shouted and said God save the KING.

1. Sam. 10.24. Love the Truth and Peace.

Zach. 8:19.

