THE VOTE, OR A POEM ROYAL, PRESENTED TO HIS MAJESTY for a New-yeares-Gift.
By way of Discourse 'twixt the Poet, and his Muse.

Calendis Januariis 1642.

London, Printed by Thomas Badger, 1642.

POEMA
Strenetikon.
THe world's bright Eye, Times measurer, begun
Through watery Capricorn his course to run,
Old Ianus hastened on, his temples bound
With Ivy, his gray hairs with hollie crowned;
When in a serious quest, my thoughts did muse,
What Gift, as best becoming, I should choose,
To Britains Monarch (my dread Sovereign) bring
Which might supply a New-yeares offering.
I rummag'd all my stores, and searched my cells
Where naught appeared, god wot, but bagatells:
No far fetched Indian gemme, cut out of rock,
Or fishd in shells were trusted under lock,
No piece which Angelo's strong fancy hitt,
Or Titians pensil, or rare Hyliards wit,
No Ermines, or black-sables, no such Skins,
As the grim Tartar hunts, or takes in ginnes:
No Medails, or rich stuff of Tyrian dye,
No costly Boules of frosted argentry,
No curious Land-skip, or some Marble piece
Dig'd up in Delphos, or elsewhere in Greece,
No Roman Perfumes, Buffs, or Cordouans
Made drunk with Ambar by Moreno's hands,
No arras, or rich carpets freighted over
The surging Seas from Asia's doubtful shore,
No Lions cub, or beast of strange aspect,
Which in Numidia's fiery womb had slept,
No old Toledo blades, or Damaskins,
No Pistols, or some rare-spring'd Carrabins,
No Spanish Ginet, or choice stallion sent,
From Naples, or hot Afrique's continent,
In fine, I nothing found, I could descry
Worthy the hands of Caesar or his eye.
My wits were at a stand, when, lo, my Muse
(None of the Quire, but such as they do use
For laundresses or handmaids of mean rank
I knew sometimes on Po and Isis banks)
Did softly buzz.
Muse. Then let me something bring,
My hansell the New-yeare to CHARLES my King,
May usher in bifronted Ianus --

Poet. Thou fond foole-hardy Muse, thou silly Thing,
Which amongst the shrubbs and reeds do use to sing,
Dare thou peck up, and the tall Cedar clime,
And venture on a King with gingling rhyme?
Though all thy words were perle, thy letters gold,
And cut in rubies, or cast in a mould
Of diamonds, yet still thy lines would be
To mean a gift for such a Majesty.

Muse. I Will try; and hope to pass without disdain
In New-yeares-gifts the mind stands for the maine,
The Sophy, finding 'twas well meant, did daigne
Few dropps of running water from a swayne,
Then sure 'twill please my Liege, if I him bring,
Some gentle dropps from the Castalian spring.
Though Rarities I want of such account,
Yet have I something on the forked mount.
Nor is it the first, or third access I made
To Caesar's feet, and thence departed glad.
For as the Sun with his male heat does render
Nile's muddy slime fruitful, and apt t'engender,
And daily to produce new kinds of creatures
Of various shapes, and thousand differing features,
So is my fancy quickened by the glance
Of His benign aspect and countenance,
It makes me pregnant, and to superfaete,
Such is the vigor of His beams and heat.
Once in a Vocal Forest I did sing,
And made the Oak to stand for CHARLES my King,
The best of trees, whereof (it is no vant
The greatest Schools of Europe ring and chant)
There you shall also find Dame ARHETINE,
Great Henry's daughter, and Great Britains Queen,
Her name engraven in a Laurel tree,
And so transmitted to Eternity.
For now I hear that Grove speake's besides mine,
The language of the Loire, the Po, and Rhyne,
(And to my Prince (my sweet Black Prince) of late,
I did a youthful subject dedicate.)
Nor do I doubt but that in time, my Trees
Will yield me fruit to pay Apollo's fees,
To offer up whole Hecatombes of praise
To Caesar, if on me he cast his rays.
And if my lamp have oil, I may compile
The modern Annals of great Albion's Isle,
To vindicat the truth of CHARLES his reign,
From scribbling Pamphletors, who story stain
With loose imperfect passages, and thrust
Lame things upon the world, t'ane up in trust.
I have had Audience (in another strain)
Of Europes greatest Kings, when German maine
And the Cantabrian waves I crossd, I drank
Of Tagus, Seine, and sat at Tybers bank,
Through Scylla and Charybdis I have steerd,
Where restless AEtna, belching flames, appeerd,
By Greece, once Palla's garden, then I passed,
Now all ore spread with Ignorance and wast.
Nor has fair Europe her vast bounds throughout
An Academe of note I found not out.
But now I hope in a successful prore,
The Fates have fixed me on sweet Englands shore,
And by these various wanderings true I found,
Earth is the common Mother, every ground
May be one's Country, for by birth each man
Is in this World a Cosmopolitan
A freeborn Burgess, and receives thereby
His denization from Nativity:
Nor is this World, at best, but a huge Inn,
And men the rambling passengers, wherein
Some warm lodgings find, and that as soon
As out of Nature's closets they see no one,
And find the table ready laid; but some
Must for their commons trudg, and shift for room:
With easy pace some clime Promotions Hill,
Some in the Dale, do what they can, stick still.
Some through false glasses smiling Fortune spy,
Who still keeps off, though she appears hard by:
Some like the Ostrich, with their wings do flutter,
But cannot fly, or soar above the gutter,
Some quickly fetch and double Good-Hopes Cape,
Some never can do'tthough the same course they shape:
So that poor mortals are so many balls
Tossd, some over line, some under Fortune's walls.
And it is Heavens high pleasure Man should lie
Obnoxious to this partiality,
That by Industrious ways he should contend,
Nature's short pittance to improve and mend.
And Industry never failed, at last, to advance
Her patient sons above the reach of Chance.

Poet. But whither rov'st thou thus?
Well; since I see thou art so strongly bent,
And of a gracious look so confident,
Go, and throw down thy self at Caesar's feet,
And in thy best attire thy Sovereign greet,
Go, An auspicious and most blissful year,
Wish Him, as e're shined over this Hemispheare,
Good may the Entrance, better the middle be,
And the Conclusion best of all the three,
Of joy ungrudg'd may each day be a debtor,
And evry morn still usher in a better,
May the soft gliding Nones and evry I Would,
With all the Calends still some good betide,
May Cynthia with kind looks, and Phoebus's rays,
One clear his Nights, the other guild his days.
Free limbs, unphysick'd health, due appetite,
Which no sauce else but Hunger may excite,
Sound sleeps, and sanguine dreams, which represent,
Symptoms of health, and the next days content;
Cheerful and vacant thoughts, not always bound
To Counsel, or in deep Ideas drowned:
(Though such late traverses and tumults might
Turn to a lump of care the ayriest wight)
And since, while fragile flesh does us array
The humors still are combating for sway,
(Which were they free of this reluctance
And counterpoys'd Man would immortal be)
May sanguine ore the rest predominat
In Him, and their malignant flux abate.
May his great Queen (in whose Imperious eye
Raigne's such a world of winning Majesty)
Like the rich Olive, or Falernian Vine,
Swell with more gemms of Cions masculine;
And as Her fruit sprung from the Rose and Luce,
(The best of stemmes Earth yet did e're produce)
Is tied already by a Sanguine lace
To all the Kings of Europe's highborne race,
So may they shoot, their youthful branches over,
The surging seas, and graffe with evry shore.
May home-Comerce, and Trade increase from far,
That both the Indies meet within his bars,
And bring in Mounts of Coin His mint's to feed,
And Banquers (Trafique's chief supporters) breed,
Which may enrich his Kingdoms, Court and Town,
And ballast still the Coffers of the the Crown,
For Kingdoms are as ships, the Prince his chests
The ballast, which if empty, when distress't
With storms, their holds are lightly trimmed, the keele
Can run no steedy course, but toss and reele.
May his Imperial Chamber always ply
To his desires, her wealth to multiply,
That she may prize his royal favor more
Than all the wares fetched from the great Mogor,
May the Great Senate with the subjects right
Put in the Counter-scale, the Regal might
The flowrs of th'Crown, that they may propp each other,
And like the Grecian's twin live, love together.
For the chief glory of a people is
The power of their King, as Their is His.
May He be still within him self at home,
That no just passion make the reason rome,
Yet Passions have their turns, to rouse the Soul,
And Stir her slumbring Spirits not control,
For as the Ocean besides ebb and flood,
(Which Nature's greatest Clerk never understood)
Is not for sail, if an impregning wind
Fills not the flagging can vas, so a mind
Too calm, is not for Action, if desire
Heat's not it self at passion's quickening fire,
For Nature is allowed sometimes to muster
Her passions, so they only blow, not bluster.
May Justice still in her true scales appear,
And Honor fixed in no unworthy sphere,
Unto whose palace all access should have
Through virtues Temple, not through Plutos Cave.
May his true subjects hearts be his chief Fort,
Their purse his treasure, and their Love his Port
Their prayers, as sweet Incense, to draw down
Myriads of blessings on his Queen and Crown.
And now that his glad presence, did assuage,
That fearful tempest in the North did rage,
May those frogg-vapours in the Irish sky,
Be scattered by the beams of Majesty,
That the Hibernian lyre give such a sound,
May on our coasts with joyful Ecchos bound.
And when this fatal planet leaves to lowre,
Which to to long on Monarchies does power
His direful influence, may Peace once more
Descend from Heaven on our tottering shore,
And ride in triumph both on land and maine,
And with her milke-white steedes draw Charles his waine,
That so for those Saturnian times of old,
An age of Pearl may come in lieu of Gold.
Be all his thoughts borne perfect, and his hopes,
In their events fall out beyond their scopes,
Virtue still guide his course, and if there be
A thing as Fortune Him accompany.
May no ill Genius haunt him, but by's side,
The best protecting Angel ever bide.
May He go on to vindicate the right
Of holy things, and make the Temple bright,
To keep that Faith, that Sacred Truth entire
Which He received from Solomon his sire.
And since we all must hence, by th'Iron Decree,
Stamped amongst the black Records of Destiny,
Late may his life, his Glory never wear out,
Till the great year of Plato wheel about.

So prays The worst of Poets, to The best of Princes, yet The most loyal of
His Votaries and Vassalls, James Howell.

a Arthetine, id est, Virtuous. Anagram of Henrieta. b The Parliament. c
Hippocrates. d King James.

