THE HORN OF THE He-goat broken: OR AN ANSWER to a lying Book called, The
chasing the young Quaking Harlot out of the City.

Published by a scorner of the Truth, called Thomas Winterton.

His Deceit and Ignorance laid open, his lies reproved, and the Quaeries
answered, for the sake of the simple.

By a lover of Righteousness, called, Richard Huberthorn.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black-spread-Eagle at the West end of
Paul's, 1656.

TO THE READER.
READER,
THE time is come and coming, wherein the God of Heaven is setting up his
Kingdom, which is not carnal but spiritual, and establishing his Throne in
righteousness, and the day is appeared and appearing, wherein all that oppose
him shall be ashamed. Now when he is declaring his righteousness and his
saving health in the Nations, and now the Man of Sin and Antichrist is
discovered, and the hidden things is brought to light: and now when his enemies
cannot hide themselves any longer, but their shame must appear who are
covered, and not with the spirit of the Lord. Therefore I say, because the Lord
in his mercy has caused his mavelous light to arise in the earth, the Prince
of darkness is angry, and all his subjects, because their judgment draws
nigh, and their strength must be thrown down: And as the Lord has made
manifest his light more than in some generations past: Therefore the rage of
the old Dragon is greater, and his Angels and Instruments who are to be taken
with the Beast and the false Prophet, and shut up in the pit, and sealed in
utter darkness for ever, and therefore he is come forth in his power and his
strength, and all his subjects every one with such weapons as they have, some
with clubs, some with prisons, whippings, reproaches and mockings: some with
their corrupt sensual wisdom, to oppose some with lies and slanders; but all
is at work to defend their Masters Kingdom, and would not have the man to rule
(Christ Jesus) who will judge all their unrighteousness, and bring down the
Beast out of his seat: amongst whom thou may see Tho. Winterton sitting near
his Master, unto whom he is fallen upon the throne of unrighteousness. In a
former Book he denied any thing above nature to guide man; and in this his last
book would judge of us by his evil consequence, and he has denied that he
has any thing that is infallible; but he says he judges by his imaginary
faculty, and he judges us in the 15. page to be Harlots, because we speak plain
language, as Thou, and so has made all the holy men of God, Harlots and
adulterers, who used the same; and so blasphemously against the spirit of truth
has set him self, and makes lies his refuge, as the rest of the Dragons Army
do: and therefore these few things mind, wherein his shame is laid open, and
his lies denied, and his sensual Quaeries answered, which rose from his
imaginary faculty. And so take heed Reader thou come not in the way of the
liers, nor lend thy ear to the wicked, but mind the light of Christ Jesus,
which will show thee men of corrupt minds and corrupt things, and seeing in the
single eye. In vain does the Fowler spread his net in the sight of the Bird.
Try all things by measure of the Spirit, hold that which is good. A friend to
righteousness I am, and a lover of thy soul.

R. H.

An Answer to Tho. Winterton his Book, which he affirms to be a Chasing of
the young quaking Harlot out of the City; which if those that he writes
against be not by it chased out of the City, then all may take him to be a
false Prophet, which reads what he has affirmed by his book to be brought to
pass.
IN thy former Book thou have been proved to deny the Father, Son, and Spirit;
and denied that there is any thing in thee above nature: And in this book also
thou have made it manifest to be guided only by the natural senses, and so to
be sensual, having not the Spirit: and so in this thy sensual wisdom without
the Spirit of God, thou go about to prove us to be the Harlot, and to be
upon two dangerous designs; the first by our Doctrine, the second by the Sword
First as from our Doctrine, to prove it, thou bring four particulars, as
first, that we say;

That the peoples senses, understanding and reason, were carnal, fleshly and
unto condemnation.

To which I answer, All people which hate the light of Christ as thou do, and
set up reason and imagination to be their guide, and knows nothing above nature
in them, their senses are reprobate, and their understandings darkened, and
their reason carnal and fleshly, which is for condemnation with the light: And
to those thar were sensual, whose reason was carnal and fleshly, did the
Apostles minister condemnation, as thou may read in the Scriptures, and yet
that proved them not to be harlots; but their design in their doctrine was, to
exalt Christ, which is the true light, and lightneth every one that comes into
the world, and our design is the same, against which no inchantmens, lies, nor
false accusations from Priests nor Atheists can prevail.

The second particular wherein thou would prove us to be the Harlot, and our
design to be dongerous is, because we say, That Christ lightneth every one that
comes into the world. And to this thou thy self in the fifth page of thy Book
confessest to be a truth clear from Scripture; and that this light discovers to
every one (that will) both good and evil: and in the fourth page thou call
this particular, That Christ has lightened every one that comes into the World,
a pure truth; and yet thou would make the people believe that we were the
Harlot for holding forth the pure truth; and so thy own breath as fire shall
devour thee. And hereby the pure truth of God which we hold forth, is cleared,
and thou broken to pieces by the stone upon which thou fallest. But all thy
Atheism, and all the Priests doctrine cannot make the people so blind as to
believe, that holding forth the pure truth of God, will make us to be an
Harlot, or our design dangerous: and here thou have manifested thy spirit, that
all may see what we are accused for, and by whom, being accused to be harlots,
heretics, deceivers and deluders, blasphemers and dangerous, because we hold
forth the pure truth of God according to the Scriptures; yea so far has God
turned the wise backward, and made their wisdom foolishness, that even our
enemies and accusers are forced to confess, that it is holding forth the pure
truth according to the Scripture, for which we are accused, as T. Winterton
has done, to his own shame and confusion.

The third particular from which thou would prove us to be the harlot, and our
designs dangerous, are in these words, which thou say thou gathered from our
Doctrine.

That who so believes in this light, it is as a fire and a hammer to break and
cousume all carnal lust, and sleshly and selfish desires whatsoever, that now
they cannot sin.

Ans. Here thou have gathered that which we have not strewen, and in thy
imaginations thou have gathered thy evil thoughts, conceiving of that which
never was spoken from us as thou spakest it, and now they cannot sin: But this
I say, that he that believes in the light, and follows Christ who is the light,
shall have the light of life, and shall never come into condemnation, if he
abide in the light which comes from Christ, the Word which is as a fire and a
hammer, which where it dwells consumes all carnal and fleshly lusts. And hereby
it is easily known who have the word from them, who have but the letter. And
whereas thou say that light is but to discover, and not active at all; here
thou have showed thy self to be ignorant both of the light and of the
Scripture, which says the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and it shall
burn up and devour his thorns and briars in one day. And this light was
witnessed to burn and consume that which is contrary to it: and whereas thou
say, that if we will be purged, we must seek something else, for light will
not do it. I answer, God is light, as in 1 John 1. 5. and Christ is the light,
John 8. 12. and if God and Christ who is the light, will not do it, then what
else must people seek unto to be purged? And again thou say, thou deniest
that light or any thing within man or without man, does or ever did so cleanse,
purify and make perfect the souls of men: and then thou addest, to make up thy
dark saying, as that it were safe and convenient to allow them no other guide
or director but the dictates of their own light and spirit within them: As for
the later, thou may take it as thine own, for we deny all those which walks
after their own, whether thou call it light or dictates, for that which is
their own is darkness and not light; but those that follow the light of
Christ, and deny that which is their own for his sake we own. And as for thy
former, to deny that light, or any thing within or without man, does or ever
did cleanse or purify and make perfect the sons of men; let all here take
notice of thy Atheism, who has denied Christ and his light either within or
without men to do it.

The fourth particular by which thou would prove us to be the Harlot, and our
design dangerous, is in these words, That now the Scripture is no more a guide
for us to walk by, nor nothing without them, but the light within them, and he
that seeks after any other guide but that within him, is in the flesh still.
Which words are thy own, and was not so spoken by any of us.

But to thee. I say, that the Scripture which did foresee that which we now do
see, we own to be one with the light which was before the letter, and to be our
guide in the way of truth: and this guide is within us, but by the Scripture
letter without thee; thou neither sees nor foresees the things which belong to
eternal life, which if ever any come to see, it must be by the light of Christ
within them, and all who own this light, and with it is guided, cannot deny the
Scriptures which was spoken sorth from the light within.

Again, thou would accuse E. B. to be changing in his doctrine from one thing
to another, because he said, that all strife and contention, and revenge, was
of the flesh, and of the Devil, and to be condemned with the light: which
testimony is also true, and this testimony can we never deny nor change from.
And whereas thou bring his salutation to contradict that, where he says,
Make war in righteousness against Gog and Magog, and prepare for the Lord.
Herein thou have manifested thy blindness, which cannot see the war which
stands in righteousness, from that which proceds from the lust: but as thou
have imagined carnally of all the things of God, which was spoken from the same
spirit: and so as well may thou make lies, and pervert our words, as thou do
the Scriptures: and now having published many lies against us, thou make a
profession of thy own condition, that all people may see from what thou judge
us to be in delusion, thy words are these: Now forasmuch as I have not an
infallible spirit, infallibly to interpret what may be intended in these
revengefull expositions, notwithstanding my imaginary faculty might find ground
enough of bad consequence in them, yet I shall leave them to better judgments,
as in the ninth page of thy book.

Ans. Thy now leaving of us to better judgments, or to them that have the
spirit of truth, will not excuse thee for what thou have done already, that
has had nothing to judge us by all this while, (that thou have spoken and
written against us) but evil consequences out of thy imaginary faculty. How
art thou fallen from what thou seemedst to pretend against us in thy books; as
if thou had known that we had held forth false doctrine, or intended a
carnal war, because we speak of a war in righteousness. But now thou speak
plainly, that thou have not the spirit of Truth, truly to interpret what we
intend in our expressions; but leaves it to better judgments: Here thou have
manifested thy self a soolish builder, it had been less shame for thee if thou
had not begun, then having begun in thy imaginary faculties and bad
consequences, and now confessest thou want the spirit of Truth; here thou
have proved thy self to be the Harlot, and fit to be chased out of the City,
who does raise strife, accusations and lies against the truth of God from thy
imaginary faculties and bad consequence, being without the spirit of truth.
Again, in thy answer to E. B. salutation, thou boasts from thy imaginary
faculty, and say in thy 11. page, O thou proud, presumptuous, ambitious
Quaker, whence is thy original? thou art not yet seven years old, and art thou
the only people of the whole creation, in the favor of the Almighty;
therefore woe be to them that live to see thee prosperous to a manly age.

Answ. Our original is before all ages, or the number of years, and before any
imaginary faculties (which is thy rule) was, and this in time being brought
forth, which before all time was, they who are found in their imaginary
faculties, as thou art, the woe comes upon them; and thy woe and torment will
increase, as the truth increases; as it was from Christ to the Jews, Scribes
and Pharisees, in the days of his flesh, who questioned the truth of his words
from the youngnesse of his years, as thou do his truth now, having nothing to
judge with but thy imaginary faculties, having not the infallible spirit, and
yet thou goes on accusing us, that we deny all matter and form of worship. I
say, where the spirit of truth is, which thou say thou have not, there is
both the matter and form of the true worship owned, and not denied; which
spirit we have, and know both the matter and form: but in thy imaginary
faculties there is neither. And whereas thou say, that we deny actual
obedience, and the authority of the Scriptures; that is false: for by that
authority that gave forth the Scriptures, are we daily in actual obedience to
the Lord. Again, thou bring several particulars, which thou call the
marks of the Harlot by which she may be known: as first, in her language,
which is to speak the word Thou to a particular person in stead of You, thou
would make the language of the Harlot; then all the Prophets, Christ and the
Apostles, did speak the language of the Harlot; and then the Scripture is
translated in the language of the Harlot, which does not use the word You to
any particular person. But here thou have made it more manifest to be without
the spirit, and to speak from thy imaginary faculties.

The second mark is her weapons, which is, saying, that people is carnal, and
in the flesh, and that they know not the light of Christ, but stumble at the
stumbling-stone, and are in the cursed ground, and that they cannot believe
though the truth be declared unto them, they having not the spirit, but are in
their sins, And this thou say is the weapon of the Harlot.

Ans. Now these words were all used by the Ministers of the most high God
against the Harlot, as thou art manifest to be, who stumbles at the
stumbling-stone as it is written, Romans 9. 32. John 11. 9, 10. Here thou may see
they which were no harlots told them they stumbled at the stumbling-stone, and
told some that they were carnal, 1 Cor. 3. 3. and the Prophet told them they
had eyes and could not see, ears and could not hear, and hearts and could not
understand, Isai. 44. 18. and this was no mark of a Harlot in the Prophet; but
they whom he said was so, was harlotted from the Lord, and Christ told them,
that they were yet in their sins, and told them they should die in their sins,
John 8. 24. if they believed not, and told them they were of their father the
Devil, and had not known God, but was from beneath, John 8. And these things
in Christ was no mark of a harlot, but they were harlots whom he so judged, and
so thy marks disprove thee.

The third mark, Her presumption, attempting to share with the Almighty: And
this which thou calls presumption, is to be guided by God; and hereby thou does
accuse all the Saints of God, for they all did so far presume, as to be guided
by God and by his Spirit, and to say that all the chldren of the Lord should be
taught of the Lord, and this was no presumption, nor no mark of the harlot; and
they said, as he is so are we in this present world: and this was no
presumption, nor the mark of the harlot, but humility; if thou were not blind
thou would see it.

The fourth mark is, pretending to own the Scriptures, and speak much of
Religion, and yet has nothing in matter, form or essence.

Ans. This has marked out thy condition, that pretends to own the Scriptures,
and prosesseth them, and has not that Spirit which gave them forth, being
guided by thy imaginary faculties, and so without the power and effect of that
which thou professes: but we by that spirit which gave them forth, do them
profess; and have the form, power, and effect, of what we do profess; and so
the mark of the harlot returns upon thy self, which in to presume without the
spirit.

The fifth mark, her attendance; the ignorant and the lewd.

Answ. If this be the mark of the Harlot, try thy self; for who is more
ignorant than he that wants the infallible spirit, as thou confesses thou
do. For this mark of the harlot thou clears us from in the sixth page of thy
book, who there accuses us of subtilty: and in the 16 page, of ignorance; and
so thou multiplies thy confusion and ignorance And for lewdness, thou may own
the guilt of that thy self: for if thou were not both lewd and mad in thy
divinations; thou would not have so falsely accused those that have the spirit
of God, confessing thy self not to have it; but that it is that thy folly may
more speedily be made manifest unto all men, that the Scripture upon thee may
be fulfilled.

The sixth mark, her kindred, and that is the Ranters, which thou say is the
mark of the Harlot.

Herein thou have numbered thy self, thy own testimony being a witness to it,
and thy guide which is thy natural senses, and corrupt reason, knowing neither
light nor spirit of Christ within, and therefore no restraint thou knows from
thy diverse lusts, but both the Ranters and thou in your sensual liberty is
found, and by us you both are denied; for from that kindred we are redeemed,
and from all harlots marks.

The seventh mark is, she is the youngest of all Harlots, little above five
years old.

Answ. If thou would prove us to be the Harlot from the youngness of years, as
little above five, then thou must deny that which thou have asserted against us
in the 13 page; for there thou would prove us to be false Prophets from those
fruits that Christ spoke of, Matthew 7. 15. And if thou prove any thing against
us from that in Matthew 7, then it is not from the youngness of years; for that
is above five years since: so these confusions I return unto thee again, that
thou may see that blindness and confusion is the sign of the harlot.

Now as in answer to thy Quaeries.
Quaerie 1. Whether if it be not lawful to presuppose things that are not, to
find out the truth of things that are? and if so then,

Ans. It is not lawful for thee to intrude into things which thou have not
seen, vainly puffed up in thy fleshly mind. Thou that goes into things that are
not, to find out the truth of things that are, goes from God, the truth that
is, into a lie, and thy presupposing things there, is not lawful, neither
can thou find ought there; for naught brings forth its like, being gone from
God that is.

2. Whether there had been any need of Christ's coming in the flesh, if Adam had
stood in his created estate?

Ans. Christ's coming in the flesh is that everlasting Covevant in which the
Creation stands, and in wbich Adam had his created estate, and so there was
need of that which gave Adam his being and recovery.

3d and 4th Whether Christ restored to believers any more than Adam lost? And
whether there be any ground to believe that any in this life has more
communion with God, or are more pure or perfect than Adam was in Paradise?

Ans. Art thou got above the Innocence in thy imaginations, and have the
ground of thy belief to seek? First come down out of thy imaginations, that
thou mayes feel the ground of Faith; till then thou art no believer, and
thereby be led up into a persect state, to have communion with God in Paradise,
till then thou art in that which Adam lost, and cannot understand an estate
above, nor believe it though it be told thee, that which now enquires must lose
its life ere thou come into Paradise. Gods secrets must not feed Serpents.

5. Whether Adam in Paradise did not partake of that light with which Christ
lightneth every one that comes into the world?

Ans. The life of Adam in Paradise is the same that is the light of the word
wherewith he lightneth every one that comes into the world, and of this Adam
did partake in Paradise, which gave him light and understanding; which when he
went into the selfish knowledge, he became brutish, and this a witness
against him.

6. Whether this light of Christ, and all other lights (within man) if any
there be, are not seated in the understanding and mind? and whether all men's
surest light is not conveyed through the senses to the understanding? and
whether this will not more clearly appear, if considered, that the stopping of
the current of the senses, the understanding becomes totally dark as unto
certainties, it having nothing there to nourish it but imaginations?

Answ. In this thou shows thy confusion with thy many lights, but have lost
the knowledge of the true light, and so utters thy darkiness. First asks if the
light be not seated in the understanding, and then asks if it be not conveyed
through the senses to the understanding; but the surest light is conveyed by
faith thereof born in the understanding and not by thy sense, and to thy wits
end that is carnal must thou come if this thou learn, for the mystery is held
in a pure conscience, and not in thy sensual understanding; and who knows
this, has their understanding enlightened by faith, and not by the current of
the natural senses.

7. and 8. Whether it argues not darkness in the understanding to determine
any thing real or certain, which was not conveyed by the senses to the
understanding; whether for want of this consideration, many has not been
possessed with as strong a confidence of a certainty, as all their powers both
of soul and body could procure, yea to the laying down of their lives, and yet
a mere imagination.

Ans. To determine any thing before the Lord, argues darkness in the
understanding, but what he reveals in the spirit of faith, and leads into by
his light, and not by the sensual understanding; and for want of this
consideration have many been possessed with a strong confidence of a certainty,
and not having found their ends therein, have turned back again into deceit,
ready to conclude there is no God, because he would not answer their
imaginations, who determined things in their own wills before the guiding of
his spirit; and see if hereof thou be not guilty.

9 Whether John Lilburn was not as confident that God own^d him in his Religion
opposing the powers of this Nation, as Saul was in his design to Damascus? and
whether Saul's conversion to a Christian, and John Lilburns resolving to a
Quaker, be upon one and the same ground?

Ans. That Jo. Lilburn was confident in his Religion, is plain, else had he not
so long been deceived, and that God owned him in opposing many of the unjust
powers of the Nation, is as plain, else had not he lived to have been
converted, and that the ground thereof, is the same wherewith Paul was
converted, is as evident as the rest, to them that are in the light, and out of
the immaginations; and your envy to him since he owned the truth is no small
testimony of it, and so all things testifying together, the tree will be known
by its fruits, to them that are not blind.

10. Whether God did not convey this new light or dispensation to Saul's
und^rstanding through his senses^, in that it is said he heard and saw, as a
sure ground to build his faith upon, and also whether he did not give him power
and authority by signs and wonders, to convey to the understanding of those to
whom he mas sent to convert, a sure ground of faith also.

Ans. Here thou have manifested that thou art blind and in confusion; for the
ground of faith is but one in Paul and those that were converted, and this
ground of faith is not of Man, nor conveyed from one Man to another, but it is
the gift of God, and Christ is the author of it. In thy Quaerie thou art
speaking of the light in which he heard and saw, being the ground of Paul's
faith, and the signs and wonders wrought by Paul, being a sure ground to
convey faith to the people: if thou were not blind thou would see, that in Paul
and the People the ground of faith is but one; and they that believed because
of the Miracles, their faith as thine does, stands in that which is changeable,
and is not from the true ground: but those which Paul preached unto, he told
them that the Word of Faith was within them: the word which he preached, and
the light was in them, and so he was to turn them, to the light and to the word
which was within them: And whereas thou asks, whether it was not conveyed
through the senses to the understanding, first learn to know where it is, and
what it does enlighten in thee, and then thou will know what it is conveyed
through, for as yet in thee thy senses is ignorant of it, though it shine in
darkness.

11. Whether if Jo. Lilburne have received the same ground of faith, so
conveyed to his understanding immediately from God, as Saul had, or by some
other whom God has endued with power and authority, to convey a ground of
faith as Paul did, then far be it from me for blaming of J. Lilburne for being
a Quaker: otherwise, whether if he have not received the ground of faith
aforesaid, whether it be not easy to discern that Jo. Lilburnes Resurrection
is but a mear immagination or Quaking Delusion.

Ans. Faith is the gift of God, and not the gift of Paul, and herein thou art
blind, and Christ says believe in the light, while ye have the light; but he
did not bid them believe in that which was of Man, nor conveyed by Men to one
another: yet thou confesses that it was conveyed to Paul immediately from God:
Therefore seeing thou makes a difference, show who did ever receave faith, or
the ground of it, and not from God: and what was the ground of Abraham's faith
and Enochs, before the Scripture letter was written, but the ground of Jo.
Lilburns faith is immediately from God as Paul's was, and therefore thou may
cease blaming of him for his being turned to the faith.

12. Whether it be not easy to find out whether the Quakers doctrine be a
dispensation of God, or a dispensation of man's will? whether if it be of God, he
will not take the same care for the devulging of it as he did of his former
dispensations? that is, by such evidences as no falfe Minister could procure:
as when he commanded his Apostles to preach to the world, and to baptize them
that believed, and to teach them to observe all things, etc.

Ans. Although our Doctrine be of God, yet to thee and all in that nature, it
is not easy to know, nor find to be so, for none knows our Doctrine, wherher
it be of God, but he that does the will of our Father, and walk in his
obedience, and it is manifest that thou yet hates the way whereby our Doctrine
is known, for thou having not the spirit of truth, how art thou like to know
that Doctrine which is of God, from immaginations, that which thou tries
withal being thy immaginary faculty, but that the Lord takes the same care for
his Ministers now as ever he did, is manifest even by such evidences as no
false Minister can produce; for never any of the false Ministers which the Lord
did not send, did turn any from their iniquity, nor from darkness to light, nor
from the power of Satan unto God, which now many do witness from the Ministry
which God has now raised up in this age; which is the torment of the false
Prophet, for if it had not been evidenced in power and by the spirit of the
Lord, to be contrary to the false Doctrine, especially in turning people from
the wickedness which your Doctrine keeps them in, then it might have found
favor amongst you, and would not so much have been despised; but to us it is
an evident token of salvation, and that from God, though to you of perdition.

FINIS.

