THE IMMEDIATE CALL To the Ministry of the GOSPEL, witnessed by the SPIRIT:
With a true Declaration of the persecution and suffering of Richard
Hubberthorne James Parnell, Ann Blaying, by Will Pickering, who is Mayor of
CAMBRIDGE.

Also an Answer to diverse Letters and Mittimusses, against the said Prisoners,
answered;

By them, who are sufferers for the truth, and for the testimony of JESUS,
RICHARD HUBBERTHORN, JAMES PARNELL.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-Spread-Eagle at the West end
of Paul's, 1654.

The immediate Call to the Ministry of the Gospel, witnessed by the Spirit.
WIth a true Declaration of the persecution and suffering for the Gospel, under
the tyranny of the Mayor of Cambridge; which Gospel of Jesus Christ, wherever
it was made manifest, the testimony of it was ever sealed with blood,
persecution and sufferings, and it is the same now, working the same effect,
and bearing the same seal, as is witnessed.

And also an answer to several false reproaches given forth in writing, in
three Letters under the hand of Will Pickering Mayor of Cambridge: which herein
is discovered and laid open, that so the truth may be cleared, and all
Magistrates, Priests and People may discern truth from scandals, and that all
simple hearts and minds may be informed to receive the truth freely, without
stumbling at reproaches, through which the Prophets, and Apostles, and Servants
of Jesus Christ did bear witness to the truth, Isai. 51. 7. Heb. 11. 26.
esteeming the reproaches of Christ greater riches than the pleasures of the
world, and the Apostles were to go forth to him without the Camp, bearing his
reproach, Heb. 13. 13. If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are
ye, for the Spirit of God, and of glory, rests upon you, 1 Pet. 4. 14.

From one whom the Lord, by his eternal Spirit, has called to bear witness to
his Truth, and to his Word, and Gospel, made manifest in me by the revelation
of Jesus Christ, whose life and conversation has been blameless in the world,
whom no outward Law did ever take hold upon for evil doing, but was strict and
zealous in an outward profession of God and Christ, exceeding many in wisdom
and knowledge in the letter of the Scripture, and had a form of godliness, but
the power of it I was ignorant of, and was a stranger to the life of God, which
the Saints lived in, which spoke forth the Scripture according to their
measure, and the Word of God, which the Saints spoke from, I was ignorant of,
though I knew the letter, and was a Minister of the letter before I knew the
power of the Word of God; but when the living powerful Word of God was made
manifest in me by his mighty power, then I was made silent from speaking any
thing of God from that knowledge and wisdom, which was natural, and did arise
out of the earth, in which stood my zeal, and profession, and form of
godliness, which was all without, in words, and outward appearance, and
outward righteousness, and outward holiness, and the earthly nature standing,
which all outward profession and forms lodge in: but when the Word of God by
his mighty power was made manifest within me, spoken from his own mouth, which
word was in my heart as a fire which did burn up corruption and uncleanness,
and work out the defiled nature, and by it was all the powers of the earth
brought down, and the earth it self shaken, by it the deviss were made to
tremble, and were cast out, and in that day did the keepers of the house
tremble, and the strong man cry bitterly, and the just Judgments of God did
fall upon that nature I lived in, and the terrors and wrath of the Lord took
hold upon me, till the flesh was wasted off the bones, that I could number my
bones day and night, the terrors of the Lord was upon me, revealed from heaven
against all unrighteousness, against all my own rightcousnesse, and all my
familiars and acquaintaince stood afar off me, for I was a wonder to all them
who lived in that nature that I had lived in, for they knew not the judgments
of God against sin, which then was upon me, because of disobedience to the
light which did make manifest sin and evil; but hearing the Word of the Lord
in power spoken within me, did confound all my wisdom and knowledge, and made
me to be a fool to the wisdom of the world, and to deny the wisdom, and to
deny my self, and my own will, and by this Word was I called to come out of my
own country, kindred, and fathers house, to do the Lords work, in obedience to
his command, and to stand in his will out of my own will, for I knew the voice
of God which called me; and for this cause did I leave father and mother, lands
and living, earthly honor, and earthly riches, which I had, and might have
lived in, if I had been disobedient to the command of God, but the Lord called
me forth by his mighty power to bear witness to him in the world, and to
declare and preach forth the Gospel of the Son of God, according to my measure,
as it was made manifest within me, and by his Word to declare against all sin,
and iniquity, and unrighteousness of men, and in obedience to him who called me
did I go, as I was moved by his eternal Spirit, into several parts of this
Nation, Towns, and Cities, and Countries, in the North and West part of
England and Wales, bearing testimony to the truth, and in some parts sealing
the testimony with my blood, and by imprisonments, in persecution, in perils,
often under trials of cruel mockings, scourgings, and revilings, enduring the
contradiction of sinners, and do not account my life dear unto my self, that I
may render to the Lord a good account of my faithfulness, in obedience to him
who has called me into his work, and vineyard, and this is all the wages that
the Ministers of the Gospel receive from the world, being accounted as
deceivers, yet true, as having nothing, yet possessing all things, as poor, yet
making many rich, The servant is not greater than his Lord, John 15. 20. who
has suffered the same things, and has left a good example, and if it be the
will of God that we suffer with him in the obedience to him, are we made
willing, not only unto bonds, but unto death, who do now bear his reproach;
and by the Spirit of the Lord was I moved, in obedience to him, to come to this
Town, where some did receive the testimony of the truth, where I stayed certain
days, and we had certain meetings publicly from house to house, and the hands
of the persecutors was then bound by the mighty power of God, and they limited
from acting the persecution which was in their hearts, which now they have
acted so far as their power does reach, but the Sea must keep its bounds, and
cannot break them. Then I passed forth of the Town, as I was moved of the Lord,
to another people, till again I was moved to come into the Town, not knowing
when I came in whether I should stay two days in the Town, but waiting in the
will of God, out of my own will, I came, as I was moved, and labored in travel
night and day in the Lords work and service, to make the Gospel of Christ
without charge: And coming into the Town upon the 21 day of the six month at
night, and lay at a friends house in the Town, and in the morning, as I went
into the street in the market place, two men followed me, and commanded me to
go with them two before the Mayor, who when I came before him, came unto me,
and violently took off my hat and threw it upon the ground and asked me whence
I came, and where I had lived, and of what calling I was, and what I came
thither for? unto which I gave an account, and said, that if I had broken any
Law, or if any man can lay any thing to my charge, let them prove it, and act
the Law upon me according to the offense, but none could prove any thing. Then
the Mayor asked me, if I would go out of the Town, else I should be whipped
out. Then I answered, when the Lord calls me out I shall go, for I stand in
obedience to the will of God, not to the will of man, and if thou can prove
any thing against me worthy of stripes, prove it, and act it upon me, but I
have wronged no man, nor am I guilty of the breach of any Law. Then the Mayor
said, I have a Law against thee, I will make thee a wandering person, and a
rogue; which I denied. Then the Mayor wrote a paper to send me to prison, and
then read it unto me, which was full of lies; which I denied. Then he wrote
another, which I denied like wise: Then I said unto him, make not lies thy Law,
but write that which is true; and then he threw by that, and wrote another.
Then I was moved of the Lord to say these words unto him, Thou that makes laws
in thy own will, contrary to the Law of God, the plagues of God is thy portion.
Then the Mayor answered, now I have a Law against thee, thou curses me, and
said to them that stood by, if any of you will but take your oath that he has
cursed, we have a Law to punish him; but none took their oath. Then I answered
and said, look in the Law what cursing is, if thou can prove it to be a curse
by the Law, is the Scripture language a curse? Then he bid me hold my tongue,
for he could not endure to hear me, and said, that I should either pay 3 s. 4 d
or sit three hours in the stocks: I answered, first prove the Law broken; but
he being in a rage, sent me to the stocks for three hours, and then sent me to
the dungeon: And upon the next day, being the third day of the week, one friend
coming out of the North, who came to see me, and had traveled 300 miles before
he came to me, lying but one night in the Town at that time, as he was coming
in the morning to the prison to see me, one Constable took him in the street,
and had him before the Mayor, he giving no offense at all, the Mayor fell a
beating of him, calling him a wandering rogue, and presently made a Mittimus
and sent him to the dungeon, commanding that none should come at him, though no
offense was proved against him, and there continued till the seventh day of the
week; then being set free by a Warrant, according to law, we came into the
Town, and upon the first day of the week, being met together to wait upon the
Lord, the Mayor sent two Constables with a Warrant to bring us two before him,
that we might be sent out of the Town, as was expressed in the Warrant; the
Constables having served the Warrant, Justice Blackley coming in at the same
time, did show them an Act which they had broken, and so had broken the Law;
and the Constables then went away, and did prosecute the Warrant no further at
that time: the next day in the morning one Constable and the Jayler came to the
house where I lay, and commanded me to go with them to the Mayor; and when I
came before him, having nothing against me, asked me, if I would go out of the
Town? I answered, when the Lord calls me out I shall go, for I stand in the
will of God, not in the will of man. The Mayor said, thou do not follow the
examples of the Apostles, for when they were persecuted in one City they fled
into another, but we cannot get thee out by no means; and so owned himself to
be of the same generation that persecuted the Apostles. I answer, I have done
no wrong, no guile, nor violence to any man, nor broken any Law, if thou have
any Law against me, read the Law unto me, and if I have wronged any man, I
shall make restitution four fold, according to the Law of God, but proving
none. The Mayor said, this is the Law, thou shall choose three things: First,
whether thou will quietly depart out of the Town: Or secondly, go to prison,
and be kept close, that none shall come at thee, nor have any thing but what
thou earnes to lie upon: Or thirdly, to be whipped and sent out of the Town.

And here let all people consider how contrary he acts to the Law of the
Nation, for if by the Law he could prove me to be a rogue, or guilty of any
other breach of the Law, then here he breaks the Law himself, in giving me
liberty to go away without any punishment according to the offense: and again,
here he has broken the Law, and acts contrary to it, in imprisoning me, and
putting me in the dungeon, having no Law against me, but because I will not go
away out of the Town when he does command me to go; and here all people may
see, that he who pretends to be a Minister of the Law, has imprisoned me
contrary to the Law. And again, there is no Law in the Nation that offers
these three conditions unto rogues; as either to depart quietly out of the
Town, or be imprisoned, or whipped; let all who know the Law judge: And so
contrary to the Law of God, and the Law of the Nation, do I, and others of the
Servants of the Lord, suffer, under a law made in the will of man; as one Ann
Blacklain has been kept in prison above three months for declaring against the
deceipts of a Priest publicly in the Steeple-house: And James Parnell has
been kept in prison almost three months, and is now put into the dungeon, for
setting up of a paper publicly in the market place, that thereby both Priest
and people might see the truth cleared, and their deceipts discovered, that so
coming to own the truth of God, they might keep the peace, which all the world
has broken by disobedience to the light of Christ, in the conscience, and so
for declaring the truth, and publishing it forth in writing publicly, is
imprisoned, and no breach of the Law proved against him; and so they both
remain in prison under this pretense, of bringing in sureties for good
behavior, when as they are not guilty, nor no mis-behaviour proved against
them, but all who suffer as Christians, in the obedience to the will of God,
need not be ashamed.

And under the same tyranny and law, made in the will of man, do I now suffer,
only because that at the command of Will. Pickering Mayor of Cambridge I did
not go out of the Town to fulfill his will, and so have disobeyed the command
of the Lord, did he send me to the dungeon, and commanded the Jailer that none
should be suffered to come to me, nor bring any thing unto me, nor that I
should have any thing but what I earned: and since I was first cast into this
hole, there is several reproaches, and (...), and false accusations cast upon
me and the rest of my brethren; and I am not suffered to have my accusors face
to face, that the law may take hold upon the guilty, and that the truth might
be cleared, and my accusors known, for since I was first put into this place,
there are three several papers of lies and slanders published forth by Will.
Pickering Mayor, under his own hand, the first dated August 23. the second Aug.
28. the third Aug. 29.

1. Accusation. That we are idle wandering persons, and rogues, living upon
poor silly people, which some of them are now kept by the parish themselves.

I answer, this Accusation is false, for from the Lord are we sent, to declare
against all deceit and unrighteousness of men, and against all those who lay
heavy burdens upon the poor by deceit and oppression, and against all who
live in pride, and idleness and fullness of bread, by whom the creation is
devoured, and many made poor by your means, and you who are rich, who live at
ease, and in pleasure, you live upon the labors of the poor, and lay heavy
burdens upon them, grievous to be born, and you may the poor complain of, but
they who do receive our testimony there is the heavy burdens taken off, and
the poor is cased, and whosoever do receive the truth in the love of it, which
we freely declare from the Lord, and has this worlds good, he cannot see the
poor in need, nor want, nor beg their bread, but the truth where it is received
opens the bowels of compassion, and takes off oppression and the heavy burden
which the poor groans under, but we are not chargeable, nor our Gospel, not to
the rich, nor to the poor, neither does any who have received us complain, nor
is chargeable to the parish, is neither kept nor maintained by it. Therefore in
the presence of the living God I do charge thee to cease from falsely accusing
the innocent, who can neither prove us to be rogues nor deceivers, as the fruit
of our ministry shall bear witness in them who have received it, who can
witness, that they are led out of much deceit and ungodliness which before
they lived in, and we have not been burdensome nor chargeable unto them
through idleness, God is our witness, we have coveted no man's gold, nor
silver, nor meat, nor drink, nor apparel; and here we are falsely accused for
the Name of Christ, and for the Gospel sake, which we freely do declare as we
have freely received it.

2. Accusation. The Mayor says, that the Law makes idle wandering persons to
be rogues, those that will not work if they have not any thing of their own to
live upon, those that use deceit full ways to get maintenance by, these by
the Laws of the Land are all rogues, and such are these in my judgment, and in
my soul and conscience I am troubled that I have done no more to them then I
have done, to rid the Town of them.

I answer, here thou have showed thy judgment, and made it manifest, that this
persecuting will is thy law, and have acted contrary, which thou have here
declared to be the Law of the Land concerning rogues, who does keep us here in
prison, in the dungeon, under the pretense of rogues, and has not proved any
of these things against us, which thou say makes rogues, not to be idle
wandering persons, nor have not proved us to have nothing of our own to live
upon, nor have not proved that we have used any deceiptful ways to get
maintenance by, and here by the Laws of the Land we are cleared, who are not
guilty of any of those things, ^d so the Laws of the Land will take hold upon
thee and all our accusers, who has imprisoned us for rogues, when there is no
witness against us to prove the breach of any Law of the Land, for by the Law
of justice and equity we desire to be judged.

And thou who say, in thy soul and conscience thou art troubled that thou
have done no more to us then thou have done, that in thy conscience shall
witness against thee for what thou have already done, and will let thee see,
that thou have acted contrary to that in the conscience, the light of Christ,
and that in thy conscience will condemn thee, and have acted contrary to the
Law of the Land, as by that in thy conscience thou shall be judged, which will
let thee see, that thou art not a doer of the Law of God, nor a Minister of the
Law of the Nation, but a maker of laws according to thy judgments, and acting
them upon the righteous, whom the Law was not made for, that thou may rid
the Town of those who come to witness the Law of God to be fulfilled in them,
and to establish righteousness in the earth, and to bring people from under
the transgression of all Laws, to witness one Law giver, Jesus Christ who is
our Law giver.

3 Accusation. The Mayor says, that one of us told him when he desired him to
go out of the Town, that he would not, for he was sent to destroy the Town.

I answer, this Accusation is false, for there was not such a word spoken,
neither can any such thing be proved, for we came not to destroy men lives, but
to say them, and to preach Jesus Christ the Savior of the world, and do
speak from the Lord to that in the conscience of every one, the light of
Christ, which will let every one in particular see, that his destruction is of
himself, and by the light of Christ, unto which we are made manifest in every
man's conscience, are we cleared from all such slanders and reproaches, which
are falsely cast upon us for the Name of Christ, who was reproached as we are,
and his reproaches we bear daily, and are not ashamed of, as the Scripture
says, which by us is witnessed daily; and the Laws of the Land, being executed
in justice and equity, will take hold upon our accusers, and clear us.

4. Accusation. That we have left our honest Callings, one being a
Husbandmanservant, and another a Shooemaker, and now living upon the labors of
other men.

I answer, we are in our Callings whereunto the Lord has called us, and do
abide in our Calling, and he that does abide in his Calling abides with God,
and this I witness, who am called from father and mother, lands and livings,
and from the cutward employment which I lived honestly in, but was never
servant to any man in that Calling, that accusation is false; and my call is to
the work of the Lord, to labor in his vineyard, who once had a vineyard
without to labor in, as you have, who live in your earthly possessions and
habitations, and that calling was lawful in its place, and I did abide in it
till the Word of the Lord came and called me from it into his work, who now
cares for me, and provides for me, without taking thought or care what to eat,
or what to drink, or wherewith to be clothed, for after all these things do
the heathens seek, who knows not God, and my call is from God immediately, not
from man, and in the Scripture I have a cloud of witnesses: who were all called
by God, and left their callings: Elisha was called from the plough as he was
following the plough, 1 Kings 9. 10. and David was called from keeping the
sheep, who was a Shepherd, 1 Samuel 16. 11, 12. and by the Word of the Lord was
Jeremiah called to be a Prophet, who said, he was a child, and could not speak,
but the Lord said, that he would put his Word in his mouth, and that he should
go whithersoever the Lord commanded him, and that he should not fear the faces
of men, for he would deliver him, and that he should speak whatsoever he
commanded him, Jer. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. And by the same Word was Amos called,
as he was following the flock, who was a herdsmand, and a gatherer of Sicamore
fruit, Amos 7. 14, 15, 16 And the Apostles were fishermen, and tradesmen, and
Paul a Tentmaker, and those all left their honest callings to do whatsoever the
Lord commanded them, some to prophecy, and some to preach the Gospel, and the
same Word of God, and the same Call, and the same Spirit I do witness, by
which I am called from my outward calling; and by the same Law, by which I am
accused for leaving my honest calling, and commanded to it again, by the same
would Elisha be accused, and commanded to go to the plough again; and Amos for
leaving the flock and vineyard, to go to prophecy in the Kings Chapel at
Bethell; but Amasiah the Priest was offended at Amos, for leaving his calling,
and for prophesying at Bethell, and commanded him to go away, that he should
neither prophecy, nor eat bread there, though he was commanded of the Lord:
And the same Spirit does appear in you, both Priests and Magistrates, in
Cambridge, with them who are sent of the Lord, and commanded as Amos was: And
you say this is the Unversity, and you have Teachers enough of your own, but
none of them can witness, that the Lord ever called them, or commanded them:
but they who are called and commanded by the Lord, and in obedience to him do
come, them you command to go cut of the Town to follow their callings again,
and so by the same Law command the Prophets to their callings again, and the
Apostles to their netts again, and Paul to make Tents again, and Matthew to the
receipt of Customs again, which they were all called from; but Amos did not
go to Bethell to be a herdsman, but to declare the Word of the Lord; nor the
Apostles did not go to fish, and to their netts again to get their living, but
they were made fishers of men: And were persecuted from City to City, and
threatened, and straightly charged to speak no more in that Name, and to depart
their Coasts, as I am commanded to depart from Cambridge to teach in my own
Country; but they obeyed God rather than man, and were not idle wandering
rogues, though they had left their lawful callings, and had no certain
dwelling place, but did go whithersoever the Lord commanded them, to preach
the Gospel to every creature, and to all nations, and took no thought what to
eat, or what to drink, nor wherewith to be clothed, and did eat no man's bread
for naught; and the same I witness; and the Prophets, nor the Apostles, when
they were put into prisons and dungeons, you do not read, that they were
forced to work to fulfill the will of their persecutors, nor that ever Paul,
nor the rest of the Apostles, nor Servants of Jesus Christ, when they were cast
into prison, or dungeons, that for the testimony of Jesus, that ever they were
charged or commanded to beat hemp, or else not eat, as the Task-master of
Cambridge does command, but their labor and work was to beget into the truth,
and some were begotten in their bonds, as Paul witnessed in the Epistle to
Philemon, 10. verse. and the Apostle Paul suffered trouble, as an evil doer,
even unto bonds, but the Word of God was not bound, 2 Timothy 2. 9. This is a
faithful saying, If we suffer with him we shall also reign with him, if we deny
him, he also will deny us: And for his sake, who has called me, do I suffer
all things, and endure all things, and am not ashamed of his sufferings, but in
obedience to the will of God, do I deny the will of man, and suffer by the
will of man, God is my witness, and my conscience also bearing me witness in
the presence of God.

And this of the Lord I was moved to publish forth, that the truth may be
cleared from scandals, and the persecution and tyranny of unreasonable men made
manifest to all sorts of people, who come to see, and to read with
understanding* and here have cleared my conscience, being free from the guilt
of the blood of all men, and have laid thesin to the charge, and to the door of
those who are guilty.

From a Servant and a Prisoner of Jesus Christ in Cambridge, RICHARD
HUBBERTHORNE.

A Copy of a Mittimus made in the will of the Mayor of Cambridge.
To the Keepers of the Touleboth in Cambridge.
Whereas James Parnell has been brought before me, and has been examined,
and has confessed, that he was sent to this Town to set dissension in this
Town, in many particulars, as by his examination may fully appear, and further,
has confessed that he set up a paper in the Market, the last market day, in
this Town, which is a Libell against the Ministers and Magistrates of the said
Town, and further misdemeanors is proved against him: these are therefore in
the name of the Lord Protector of England, that you receive him into your
custody, and him safely keep, that he may be forth coming to answer the
premises the next Sessions: fail not at your peril.

Given under my hand, 3d July, 1654. Will. Pickering Mayor.

A Reply to the foresaid Mittimus.
AS for my coming before thee, it was by thy Authority, for I was in a friends
house, called Justice Blackley, and there was a man, called a Constable, in a
shop over against the house, waiting for my coming forth, and as I was going
over the way, with some writings in my hand which concerned the truth of God,
the Constable, so called, came and met me, and told me I must go with him, and
I said, if he had authority I should go with him, and he said he had; and so
in obedience to the Authority I went along, and he brought me before thee, and
thou came violently and took off my hat, and cast it upon the earth, calling me
rogue, and other such like terms, which was in thy will, and not in thy law,
and therefore thou art not fit to be a Magistrate, for he that is guided by his
own will is not fit to be a Magistrate, for he makes his will a law, and the
law is not to be made by the will of man; and then thou came and caused my
pockets to be searched, and thou took my writings from me, and said, there
might be some treason in them, and I said, if there was any thing under the
Law, let me suffer by the Law; and thou came violently once or twice as if thou
would have smote me, calling me rogue, and witch, and the like; and I said,
if thou could prove me either a rogue, or a witch, let me suffer as a rogue
or a witch; but whether this be in thy law or no, I know not, so I shall leave
it to those who knows the Law to judge of it; but I am sure it is contrary to
the Law of God, and so to that thou art a transgressour, and by him thou must
be judged: And then thou asked me, why I came to the Town to make division: And
I said, Christ came for the same, to set at variance father against son, and
son against father, as the Scripture makes it appear, Mat. 10. 35. and I
witnessethe same fulfilled, and this thou sets as an article against me. Now
let any one consider, if thou would not imprisoned Christ if he was
personally here, but in as much as thou do it to one of his, thou do it
to him, Mat. 25, 45. and here thou have manifested thy self to be a Tyrant, who
imprisons the Servants of Jesus Christ for confessing him, who begins the war
wheresoever he comes, his first appearance is with the sword to that which is
for the sword, and bring peace and deliverance to the captives, and to lead
captivity captive, Luke 4. 8. and this we witness fulfilled, and for this end
are we come to the Town of Cambridge, which is one of the devils strongest
holds, from whence he sends forth his messengers into the world to deceive the
Nations, but the Lord is come to beat up his quarters, and now the war is
begun, and the devil has cast some of us into prison, but still the war
goes on, and the Lamb will get the victory, and the Beast, and the false
Prophet, and all that have the mark of the Beast, must be cast into the lake
that burns, etc. Rev. 20. 10, to the end. Rev. 19. 20.

And then thou examined me if I owned a paper, which thou showed me, and I said
I did, and thou set that down as an article against me, for putting up a paper,
which thou say is against the Ministers and Magistrates of Cambridge, and
here thou accuses the Ministers and Magistrates of Cambridge, to be corrupt
and heathenish, for the paper only declared against corrupt Magistrates, and
heathenish Priests, wheresoever they are, and so if there be any Law
transgressed here, it is thou that have transgressed it; and so for these
things thou sent me to prison, and thou say, for other misdemeanors, and
not one of the Town of Cambridge can tax me for any misdemeanour, for I am
redeemed out of the generation of misdemeanors, and was bound to good
behavior, by a stronger bond than man can make, before I came at the Town of
Cambridge; but let any who has understanding judge, whether thy behavior or
mine was the more like misdemeanour; but for this cause thou sent me to prison,
but I know not by what Law, but thou say in the name of the Lord Protector
of England, but I believe him, whom thou call Lord Protector, would deny to
own it, for if he should own it, he would own tyranny and oppression, and would
show himself to be an oppressor of the truth of God, and a Protector of
tyranny and oppression, and the Lord Protector of heaven and earth would cut
him off, and if he wink at such Tyrants as thou art, the Lord will smite him
with his sword, and will cut him off from off the face of the earth, and set
another in his room, as he has had examples before him: And thou bragged to me
of a tyranny done by thee, and said, thou caused two of my sisters to be
whipped the third day, 1653. but I tell thee, the Lord God of all power will
whip thee with a rod of vengeance, and him too, whom thou call Lord
Protector of England, who has the power of England in his hand, if he uphold
or suffer such tyranny, or any punishment to be acted against or upon any
tender consciences, contrary to the Law of God; and so I leave him without
excuse in the presence of the Lord, and judgment at thy door, who call thy
self

WILL. PICKERING.

A Reply to some Speeches objected against Ann Blacklane, called Quaker, in
Touleboth, by one Phillip Johnson, calling himself a Minister of the World, and
calls these sayings dangers, and damnable doctrines, errors and heresies.
Object. 1. THat she said, the Scriptures written by the Prophets and Apostles
are not the Word of God, but Christ, and that the Scriptures are not sufficient
light and means to find Christ, and for us to rely upon, contrary to these
places of Scripture, Mat. 1 24. 2 Pet, 1. 17.

Thou enemy of all righteousness, how dare thou call thy self a Minister of
the Word, and art ignorant of the letter which witnesses with the Word, and
says, the Word became flesh, which is Christ, and in the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was God, John 1. 1, 14. and this the Prophets and Apostles
witnessed; and thou, who sets thy self to witness the contrary, art no
Minister of the Word, nor of the letter, which witnesses with the Word; but
art shut out from both, and art for condemnation, by the Word: And thou that
call this damnable doctrine, call the doctrine of the Apostles damnable,
who preached Christ the Word; and here I openly declare against thee to be a
blasphemer of the Truth of God, and the Scripture, which thou talks of relying
upon, will witness against thee to thy condemnation, and all that takes thy
part: and he who has all the Scripture in notion, and wants the life, is
without, feeding upon the husk, with thee, who puts the shadow for the
substance, who has the form, but denies the power; but the Scripture is
serviceable in its place, and is a true witness for the truth of God against
such liers and blasphemers as thou art, who takes the letter to talk of, and
would destroy the Life; and so these Scriptures which thou have set down, may
stand and witness against thee, who art a sayer but not a doer.

Object. 2. That she said, she has attained to the Light of Christ, without
the help of Scripture, by an immediate call from God, and thou say, contrary
to these Scriptures, Romans 10. 14. John 5. 39.

Reply. Those Scriptures which thou bring to witness against the Light,
which was spoken from the Light, shall stand and witness with the Light,
against thee, who art an enemy to the Light, and who witness the Light of
Christ does witness it by Christ, without the help of Scripture, and the
Scripture does witness the same, that Christ is the Light of the world, and
does enlighten every one that comes into the world, John 1. 9. without the
help of Scripture; but thou that hates the Light art for condemnation by the
Light, which is the life of the Scripture, but the Scripture is serviceable in
its place, but thou who lives in darkness takes it out of its place, and so
wrests to thy own destruction.

Object. 3. That she said she is without sin, and that she cannot sin, nor
break the Commandments, but keep them all, and all other are in condemnation,
that are not like her.

Reply. Here thou art a false accuser, and a lier, for this she did not say,
but thou that pleadest for sin live in sin, and art in the fall under the
curse, upholding the devils kingdom, which is sin, and so art no Minister of
Christ, who comes to destroy sin, but a Minister of the devil, who comes to
uphold sin, and he, who was a Minister of Christ witnessed, that he that is
born of God sins not, neither can be sin, because his seed remains in him,
1 John 3. 9 and all the Ministers of Christ witness the same; and thou, who
art a Minister of the devil, pleads against the Ministers of Christ, because
thou art a drunkard, and live in sin, and so must have the wages of sin, which
is destruction, and all who lives in this generation, pleading for sin, for he
that cannot witness cleansing here, shall never be cleansed, for as the tree
falls so it lies; and thou that calls this damnable doctrine, art in the
damnable estate of the devil, blaspheming the truth of God, and denies Christ
come in the flesh, and so art Antichrist, and who have the image of God are
like one another, and who are not like, they have the image of the devil, and
so are in the state of condemnation.

Object 4. That men ought not to acknowledge Superiors, nor to give reverence.

Reply. Before the fall there was no Superiors, only man Lord over all
Creatures, Genesis 7, 28. but not man to be Lord over man: and amongst those who
were redeemed there was no Superiors, only Christ the head, and the rest
fellow Servants, and here who would be the greatest should be the least, and he
that respects persons commits sin, Jam. 2. 9. and here thou and thy Superiors
are in the fall, lording over one another by your corrupt wills, and as for
reverence, I say, reverence to whom reverence belongs, he that can receive it
let him.

Object. 5. That she said she is perfect in this life.

Reply That is false, but thou that pleadest against perfection in this life,
wast never in this life which is perfect, nor art no Minister of Christ, but of
the devil, who pleads for imperfection; whereas Christ said, Be ye perfect,
even as your heavenly Father is perfect, Luke 5. 48. and the Minister of Christ
witnessed and said, as he is so are we in this present evil world, and he that
has this hope purifieth himself, even as he is pure, 1 John 2. 3. and here
thou art found in the kingdom of the devil, which stands in imperfection, and
all who witness with thee; for the Kingdom of God is pure, and nothing that
is impure can come therein.

Object. 6. That she knows and can judge of men's hearts, and that Christ in
her judges others, and all others, that are not such as she, are carnal,
heathens, vagabonds, children of the devil, enemies of God, and murderers, and
in the gall of bitterness.

Reply Here with thy serpentine wisdom thou have mingled truth and falsehood
together, that all might go current for truth, but the day has made thee
manifest, and thy heart is known to be Judas heart, who professes Christ in
words, and in thy heart murders him; and thou art discerned and judged by the
Spirit of the Lord in Ann Blacklane, I being of one Spirit with her witness
it, and this thou shall witness to thy woe and misery, and here thou have
razed thy self out from being a Minister of Christ who art a natural carnal
man, and knows not the Spirit of God, which searches the heart and tries the
reins, Heb. 4. 12, which the Ministers of Jesus Christ witnessed, and said,
the spiritual man discerns and judges all things, 1 Cor. 2. 15. and
witnessed and said, it is no more I but Christ in me, and without are dogs,
whoremongers, adulterers, carnal, h^athens, vagabonds, children of the devil,
enemies of God, and in the gall of bitterness, and drunkards, and here art
thou, and all that joins with thee to persecute the truth of God, and must be
cast into the lake that burns, for the new Covenant is but one, and the way
is but one, and the truth is but one, and they that are not with us are against
us, and here art thou in the damnable estate of the devil, who calls this
damnable doctrine.

Object. 7. That she and such as she are only enlightened, and sent of God to
reprove the world of sin.

Reply If thou wast a Minister of Christ thou would witness the same, for
all who are sent from him are sent from one, and are guided by one, as they
abide in one, and are all of one heart and one mind, Act. 4. 32. Epistles
written in one another hearts; and thou that call this damnable doctrine
art of one mind with the devil.

Object. 8. That she said there is no outward Christ according to his manhood,
but that Christ is only within us.

Reply. This is false, and here thou art a lier of thy father the devil, but
we witness Christ come in the flesh, but this thou can not witness but art
in the state of reprobation, who knows not Christ within; and those who knows
Christ no nearer than the heavens above the skies, has no profit by him, but
is in the state of reprobation, as the Scripture witnesses, 2 Cor 12. 5

Object. 9. That she said, they that have the Spirit cannot fall into
sickness, diseases, distempers of the body.

Reply Here again thou art taken with a lie in thy mouth, for what she said as
concerning this, was concerning her own condition, since she witnessed the
Spirit of the Lord.

Object. 10. That she does not seek to lead men to the Scripture but from them,

Reply This is false, for they who witness the life of the Scripture cannot
deny the Scripture, for it is their own; but thou, and such swinish natures as
thou, must be shut out of the Scripture, who takes to talk of, or to make a
trade of, and are ignorant of the life, and would destroy the life, who have
the form, but deny the power, 2 Timothy 3. 5. such must be shut out of the
Scripture, for what should swine do with pearls, Mat. 7. 6. whose life is in
husks, and there thou feeds, and all who have the letter and wants the life.

Object. 11. That she said, no man ought to swear before a Magistrate, and that
no Magistrate ordained of God will cause men to swear; and thou brings the old
Covenant to maintain swearing, Genesis 24. 3.

Reply Hear every way thou Serpent pleads for thy life, which is sin, but
Christ the new Covenant, who is the end of the old Covenant, said, that it had
been said in the old time, thoushalt not forswear thy self, but shall perform
unto the Lord thine oath, Mat. 5* 33, 34. but I say, swear not at all; yet the
devil in thee runs into the old Covenant to maintain swearing, and so would
have Scripture to maintain his Kingdom; but the day has made him manifest,
and those who puts any to swear, are still in the old Covenant, for in the new
Covenant no swearer can come.

Object. 12. That she said, men ought not to pray, and that I my self ought not
to pray.

Reply. Even now thou wast pleading for swearing, and now thou art pleading for
praying but the prayer of the wicked are abominable, Prove. 15. 8. and thou who
art a drunkard art wicked, and has nothing to pray, but Cains generation,
murdering the righteous, whose Sacrifices the Lord will not accept; but he that
can witness Christ risen can pray.

Object. 13. That the Scripture does not try the Spirit.

Reply. The Spirit was before the letter was, and thou have the letter, but
can not try the Spirit, but those who have the Spirit of the Lord, have
tried thy spirit without the letter, and has found it to be the Spirit of the
devil, who has ever reviled and persecuted the truth of God, which calls
the doctrine of Christ damnable doctrine.

And thou say thou will justify, that all these her sayings are false, and
will be ready to maintain them by this power.

Reply I do testify and witness by the Spirit of the Lord, that thou art a
natural carnal man, and knows not the things of God, 1 Cor. 2: 14. therefore
thou Serpent be silent, and talk nor meddle not with the things, least he come
with a bigger power then thine, and cut the asunder, and cast thee into the
lake that burns, then shall thou know what thou have done, and all who plot
and lay their heads together, devising how to shed the innocent blood, it were
better for them they had never been born, Mat. 23: 35, for upon that generation
shall come all the righteous Abel, even until now, and this I witness by the
Spirit of the Lord, who am chosen out of the world, to be a faithful witness
for the truth of God against all who do oppose it.

JAMES PARNELL A Prisoner for the testimony of JESUS at Cambridge.


