CLAVIS (...): THE KEY of ORDINATION. OR, MISSIO POTEST ATIVA. (...):
MINISTERIAL POWER: OR, Authoritative Separation of men to the work of Christ, a
Ministerial privilege.

A SERMON PREACHED At the Ordination of Mr. Thomas Porter Master of Arts, Mr.
John Wilson, Mr. David Jenks, Mr. George Burraston, and Mr. Tho: Soley, at
Whitchurch in the County of Salop.

By Aylmor Houghton, Minister of the Word at Prees in the said County.

Romans 10.15. How can they preach till they be sent?

John 10.1. He that comes not in by the door, the same is a thief and a robber.

Mat. 9.38. Pray the Lord of the harvest, that he will send forth laborers into
his harvest.

Festus Hominus Disp. 30. These 6. Potestas Ecclesiastica circa bonum spiritual
eversatur cujus officium est, verbum Dei predicate, Sacramenta administrate,
disciplinam ecclesiasticam, exercere, ministros Ecclesiae ordinare, etc.

London, printed by R.I. for Tho: Parkhurst, over against the Great Conduit in
Cheapside. 1656.

To my Reverend brethren, Thomas Porter, Andrew Parsons, William Gower, Tho:
Wright, John Malden, Rob. Bemy, all of you Masters of Arts, my Brethren of the
Classis of Bradford-North, in the County of Salop.
Aylmar Houghton prays, that grace, peace, and spiritual prosperity, may be
multiplied unto you, from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, the
Son of the Father, by the Holy Ghost, That ye may be abundantly abounding in
the work of the Lord, that it may prosper and be successful to your own
spiritual advantage, and the advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.
Reverend Brethren,
THese meditations acknowledge themselves yours, as drawn from your command and
call.

They were commanded to your ears, and now are commended to your eyes.

I beseech you receive them as your own again, although not such as you
deserve, or as I could desire, yet such as I am able to bestow. I am conscious
of my own insufficiencies, but withal, of your candid ingenuities, especially
to them who love the truth of Christ insincerity.

I throw this child of old age, into the arms of your pious Patronage: I
beseech you let it find a room in your hearts, and a word from your lips,
either to defend it, or at least to excuse it from the murmurings of any Momus,
or the cavils of any Critic that may check, or chide it, or with black-mouthes
blame it in your hearing. And this I beseech for his sake, that does promise,
what I am, or may be (Christ strengthening me) shall be Gods, and yours, and his
people.

There are very many daily sending in their presents to the Church of Christ,
of their profitable labors: I thought it not amiss to send in my mite into this
Treasury, as a testimony of my equal desire; which in Gods account, goes for
current coin, and is accepted: And I hope shall find favor with some, although
it may be contemned by others.

But if it may at all, or in the least measure, bring any glory unto God, or
good to the Church of Christ, I have my end and aim: it is all I look for, and
it is abundantly enough.

For which purpose, I send it unto you my reverend Brethren, with prayers for
to accompany it, and follow it; humbly requesting that I may have a portion in
your assidual prayers for him, who will retaliate them, with heart-panting
petitions to the throne of Grace, that yours, and mine, and all the labors and
layings out of the Ministers of Jesus Christ, may prosper in the hearts of our
people, which is and shall be, the constant prayer of Your weak, unworthy
Brother,

Prees, from my study, March 26. 1656. Aylmor Houghton,

CLAVIS (...): THE KEY of ORDINATION.
Acts 13.2, 3. As they ministered to the Lord and fasted, the Holy Ghost said,
Separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them.

And when they had fasted, and prayed; and laid their hands on them, they sent
them away.


Acts 20.1.
MEn, Brethren and Fathers, the words of my Text spare me the labor to acquaint
you with the business we are this day come about: They speak for me, and tell
you, it is to separate these our brethren, for the work whereunto the holy
Ghost has called them. And therefore, according to the Rule of the Holy Ghost,
held forth in my Text, when we have spent some time in prayer and fasting, to
seek God for a blessing on them, we shall lay our hands on them, and send them
forth to the work whereunto they are called.

The words agree in themselves: I desire that no busie-body may be here this
day, to make a breach about them; for as face answers face, so does my Text,
like a loving Master commanding, and faithful Servants obeying, so runs my Text
this day before you.

First, The Holy Ghost commanding a duty; The Holy Ghost said, Separate me
Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them.

Secondly, Here is obedience returned by those commanded: And when they had
fasted, and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away.

I shall speak the most I have to say, to the first of these, which is to the
Command, The Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul, to the work
whereunto I have called them.

I shall refer the most of the second branch of my Text, which is the obedience
returned to this Command, to the eyes and ears of all (this day) here present,
to be fulfilled before you, by us who are (at this time) appointed to this
Office, to separate these our Brethren, for the work whereunto they are called,
by prayer, and fasting, and laying on of our hands; and so shall send them
forth, to the work whereunto they are called.

1. In the Command we have the person commanding: The Holy Ghost said, Separate
me Barnabas and Saul.

2. The persons commanded, those that were then ministering to the Lord,
Prophets and Teachers, a College of Preaching-Pastors.

3. The duty commanded, Separate.

4. The persons to be separated, Barnabas and Saul.

5. The business they were to be separated for; and that was to work.

6. The work, what it was, for which they were to be separated; and that is,
the work whereunto the Holy Ghost had called them.

7. The time when this Command was given; and that was, when as they were
ministering to the Lord.

These are the parts my Text falls into. Here is both the tree, and the
branches that issue and grow from it.

I shall not take up much time, in explicating the sense of the words; but sum
them up in a brief Paraphrase, according to the several readings both of
Ancient and Modern Writers, such only as I have traced on this Text, and as
they and my self understand the meaning of the Holy Ghost in them.

As they ministered to the Lord. Calvin, Erasmus, and others, understand here
nihil aliud, quam fuisse in action publica; that they were in some public
action of Divine Worship before the Lord.

And fasted. Addit Jejunium, fasting is fixed to this duty, Ut sciamus eorum
mentes omni impedimento fuisse solutas ne quid obstaret. Calvin. To hold forth
their firm resolution, that nothing should obstruct the business they were
about.

The Holy Ghost said. That is, by some prophetic spirit of Revelation to one
or more of them, with the consent of the rest. Diodate.

The Holy Ghost, that is, spiritus sanctus; God by his Spirit, or God the third
Person in the Trinity.

God said separate me (...), sever them, set them apart from other men, and
from all other employments.

A Ministers Calling is not of men, yet by men.

The Author of all holy Calling, to the Ministry, is only the Holy Ghost
exclusively to all men, but not to the other two persons in the Sacred Trinity.

They all equally concur in this external work.

It belongs to the Lord of the Harvest to call in Laborers into his Harvest,
but now by his Servants.

Nothing should be done in spiritual undertakings, of such high concernment as
this in my Text, and as this day we are come about, without this separation.

In the first plantation of the Church of God, Moses and Aaron had a special
charge given them, to separate the Levits from among the Children of Israel,
and their clothes must be washed, and then presented as an offering to the
Lord, Numb. 8.14, 21.

And their separation was twofold.

First, Their initiation to their office, at a month old, and afterward the
second time, at the age of 25 years, Numb. 8.24.

And this laudable and approved custom, of severing, and separating of men
from the rest of the multitude, for the work of Christ, has been the practice
of the primitive times of the Gospel, and is still continued, as the practice
of the Church of Christ, in these Gospel days, and kept up as most suitable to
the mind of Jesus Christ.

For this was the practice of the Apostles, Acts 6.6. The Apostles set them
before them, and prayed, and laid their hands on them, and these prospered in
their Ministry.

The Holy Ghost said, separate me Barnabas and Saul, that is, to be held in
equal degree, and to go forth with equal authority with us to the work of
Christ.

Barnabas (...), filius Consolationis: See Act. 4.36. the Son of consolation.

Jerome gives the interpretation of this name, filius prophetae, the Son of a
Prophet, com^ositum est, of the Hebrew word Bar et nabi, Prophetae munus, so
Pafor.

And Saul, an Hebrew word. Schaul, hoc est petitus, and Paul, that is,
pusillus, and so called in verse. 9. of this Chapter.

Paul signifies little, to hold forth, ut deus voluit ostendere per pusillum
hunc, et per vas hoc infirmum, splendidam hujus mundi potentiam infracturam, et
per contraria agere.

That God would by this little, and infirm weak instrument, break the seeming
power and greatness of this world, and work by contraries.

Paul little, to set forth the humility, and lowliness of him, whom the Holy
Ghost had here called forth to the work of the ministry.

He was little in his own eyes; God raises Workmen to his work out of the
dust.

He plows, and sows, in low grounds; these are they, that oftentimes prove most
fertile and fruitful.

Paul signifies also to cease: thereby intimating, he had now ceased to
persecute.

He was now called to work for Christ, that formerly had been a persecutor of
Christ.

He was now ceast, and stopped from raging against Christ, and now was to work
for him.

Austine observes upon this Text, that these two in my Text, had bina nomina,
two names given them, to hold forth, the success that should accompany their
Ministry in the Church of Christ.

Their natures were changed with their names.

For the work whereunto I have called them.

(...): Ad opus seu officium, ad quod eos vocavi, To the work, or office, to
which I have called them.

Work, labor: (...). The word signifies such work, as wears, and wastes out
all, 1 These. 5.12. we beseech you brethren, know them which work among you,
who waste, and wear themselves away, with work among you.

Gods Ministers are separated, and sent to be (...), workers together with
Christ, 2 Cor. 6.1. whereunto I have called them.

This call in my Text, was different, from the call of others to this work, it
was not ordinary, but extraordinary, it was an immediate call, which is not
required in the call of others of Gods special servants.

It is not to be expected: ut nobis e coelo inclamet Deus, That God should
call from heaven, to tell us who are to be separated for this work.

He who calls them, does enable them to the work, they are called forth to
work.

God: Ministers now must have a mediate call: The Holy Ghost sends and calls:
and the call of the Holy Ghost is twofold. 1 Immediate. 2 Mediate. 1 Immediate,
as these in my Text. 2 Mediate by his servants.

But some there are, who have no call, either from God, and his Spirit, or by
men his servants, but run on their own heads, and on their own errands. The
Spirit of God complains against these, Jer. 23.21. non mitebam prophetas, et
ipsi currebant, non loquebar illis, et ipsi prophetabant. I have not sent them,
yet they ran, I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied; but he that
set them on work, must pay them their wages.

And our Savior says, that he that comes not in by the door, the same is a
thief, and a robber, John 10.1.

2 Some are called, and sent of men, but not of God, as when Jeroboam made
Priests of the lowest of the people, 1 King. 12.31.

So Jason, and Menelaus, was ambitiously affected after the Priesthood, and
sought by all unlawful means, to procure it of Antiochus.

And so by favor, and some indirect means or other, heretofore many of bad
learning, and baser living, have been thrust into the Ministry, to the
dishonor of God, grief to the godly, and ruin of many souls.

But blessed be God, there is now care taken, and God has put it into the
hearts of the supreme Authority of this Church, and Commonwealth, not only to
prevent this evil, but to purge this evil, not only to cast out, but to keep
out, such buyers and sellers out of the Temple.

3 But some are sent, and called of God, and by men, as these in my text, and
so Timothy, and Titus, and others, by the Apostles, for; how shall they preach,
till they be sent, Romans 10.15.

And when they had fasted and prayed: This was the form, and order of the
Church of Christ, in such high undertakings, in matters of such moment, to
address themselves to God in these duties.

Calvin, Erasmus, and others observe, it was not so much, for imploring God, to
give them prudence, and wisdom, to rule their judgments in this business, as
to seek God, in behalf of those called, and to be set apart, that the Lord
would give them spirits suitable to their work, and bless their labors, and
make them effectual, for his own glory, and the spiritual advantage of his
Church, and people.

They laid their hands on them, that is, for a sign of consecration, and of a
blessing Diodvte.

This was an ancient Ceremony in the Church of Christ, when any were separated
to this work. And it contains the species of their consecration, and so ye have
it, Act. 6.6.

This Ceremony has been continued from the manner of their consecration, in
the time of the law; and retained by the Apostles; and still of use in the
Church of Christ, as a decent Ceremony, holding forth the offering of such to
God, for the work whereunto the Holy Ghost has called them.

It is observed by Calvin, and Erasmus, and some others, that prayers were
fixed to this Ceremony.

Quia per se inanis esset Ceremonia, because the Ceremony in it self was
ineffectuall, and it referred to the Apostles, and nor to the people.

But when they had prayed, and laid their hands on them,

Tunc alii sua vota addiderunt, Then did others, that were present, help by
their prayers, and devotions.

In a word, it is agreed, by the best, and soundest both of the Fathers and
modern writers, yea by Calvin and Grosius, who though they may seem to dissent,
in other circumstances, yet in this agree with us, that it is a decent rite,
which although it has no efficacy in it self, Sed vim, et effectum, a solo Dei
spiritu pendere, that the power and efficacy do wholly depend upon God by his
spirit, in blessing it, yet is approved of God, and is commendable in the
Church of Christ.

Erasmus, and some others with him, gloss thus upon this text.

That they were earnest with God by prayer, and fasting, to turn the office of
these men which they took upon them, to his own glory and the Churches good.

And that those, who were present, and the most eminent among them, laid their
hands on them, and so sent them away.

And he exacts this Ceremony of laying on of hands, as taken from the practice
of Christ himself, who was wont to lay his hands on them he blessed.

So Gods Ministers, following the example of their Lord and Master Jesus
Christ, in this duty have their warrants from him.

And Erasmus seeks to remove an objection then made, and still made by some
against this Ceremony.

Some object and say, what needs such Rites, to the sending forth of Ministers
to the work of Christ.

He answers: it is very requisite, for it is a putting them into Authority.

And this Authority is meet for them, that all others might the rather obey the
Ministry as fellow laborers, with other of Gods ministers in the work of
Christ, whereunto they are called.

And thus you have a brief summary of the sense, and meaning of the words.

The Holy Ghost said separate me Barnabas, and Saul, for the work whereunto I
have called them.

This is the main errand of the Holy Ghost this day, to my Reverend Brethren,
and my self.

And of my self (at this present) to this reverend, and religious assembly.

Which I shall make out in as compendious terms, as the fullness of the matter
will give me leave.

I presume I shall this day, find in this throng and multitude, piety seasoned
with prudence, pity attended with patience, and parts without partiality.

I am worthless, weak, and wanting, I therefore pray your patient attentions,
your prudent intentions, and your practical improvements of the errand I shall
bring from Christ unto you.

This is all I beg of you, but your heart-prayer with me, and for me, unto
God, that I may both begin and conclude this work in the strength of Jesus
Christ; and so I come unto it.

I shall gather up all I have to hold forth from the words of my Text, to this
one doctrinal Thesis.

That, whom God calls to the weighty work of the Ministry, must be separated
by an outward call from other persons; and employments, by prayer and fasting,
and laying on of hands, and so sent forth to the work they are called unto.

Or, Thus.
That it is the ordinary way of God in sending forth workmen to his work, to
give them an outward call unto it, by a ministerial power of those, who are
authorized unto it.

Or, Thus.
That the call of God, and of his servants, are not to be separated, in
sending forth of Ministers to the work of Christ they are called unto.

Act. 6.6. And they set them before them, and when they had prayed, they laid
their hands on them, 2 Timothy 2.2. Haec commenda fidelibus hominibus, qui idonei
sunt et alios docere.

These things commit thou to faithful men who shall be able to teach others.

Who are (...), apt to teach others, Heb. 5.1. Every high Priest, taken from
among men, is ordained for men, in things pertaining to God.

And the rather,
First, Because those who shall go without this separate me, without a call,
goes without his errand, and without his Commission, and climbes in at the
window.

And such as creep in by such a way, come not with an errand from Christ.

Et qui ingreditur per fenestras ejicietur e foribus, such as climb in at the
window shall be thrown out at the door.

And this day it is in fulfilling: God only crowns the approbation of the
Churches call, with success, 1 Cor. 9.2.

Secondly. The rather, because those who run before they be sent, in matters
of this ministerial concernment, they are usurpers of that calling, which is no
less desperate, than dangerous; as in civil affairs and matters of state, if
any one should usurp and take upon him the office of an Ambassador, without a
call, or Commission, it were death for any so to do, much more in this: for
such intruders upon divine ordinances, orders, and offices, without this
separate me, without a call, may justly meet, with his Quomodo huc introisti?
friend, how came thou in hither without a call?

The rather,
Thirdly, Because such as rashly, and rudely venture upon ministerial
employments, and improvements without this (...): without this separation, and
a call from God, and his servants, without this divine ordination, and
institution, do but rifle the ark, or at best, too busily pry into it, and may
justly meet with Vzzah his sad doom, who did but touch the Ark to keep it from
falling, to a good intent, yet because he had no call from God, to that
service, was smitten with sudden death, 2 Samuel 6.6.

To meddle with these Arcana religionis, these secrets of Religion, is not a
work for every one to deal with.

Alas the best, and most able, may cry out with the Apostle, who is sufficient
for these things? 2 Cor. 2.16.

Ah dear Christians, I could desire, with the Prophet, Jeremy 9.1. That we all
had our heads wells of water, and our eyes fountains of tears, to bewail the
great reproach cast (by some men) upon the Church of Christ in this English
Nation, by their bold and boundless adventures, in daring to stand before God,
as dispensers of his word, and Sacraments, that not long ago (some of them)
were Mechanics, and Trading in their Shops, with the men of the world, and
others of them Husbanding the earth, and plowing up the furrows of it, for
bread and sustenance.

And now are cried up, as the only men sent of God, to preach his word unto the
people: as if there were some near Relation betwixt the plowstaff, and the
pulpit, betwixt a peddler and a preacher.

But I could desire, that such as these would look home to what they are called
to, and every one abide in his own calling, which is the rule of the Apostle. 1
Cor. 7.20.

It is the advice of a godly man, that he gives to such: let not the Cobbler
outgo his Last, nor the Tinker his Budget,

Sed Tracient fabrilia fabri. Let them look to their Trading. For, Non ex
quolibet ligno fit Mercurius, Every one is not fit to make a Minister.

The rather,
4. Because those called of God, must also have a call from man: for the usual
livery of Gods special Servants, are twofold, 1. Missio. 2. Vocatio.


Christ by his Spirit sends, and calls, and those he imploys in his service, he
calls; and whom he calls, he clothes; gives as well ability of doing, as
authority to do. And where both these meet, they are sweetly fitted, and
graciously furnished for this Separate me, for this work whereunto they are
called.

I shall stand no longer upon the confirmation of the Doctrinal part of my
Thesis.

I have four terms in it, that I must first explicate, before I shall come to
the Applicatory part of it, which is the chief business I have from my Text, to
every soul here this day.

I must of necessity but touch upon each of the terms of my Thesis.

For I must not leave my Errand undone: I have a message from Christ, a
threefold Errand.

The first to my Reverend Brethren, and my self.

The Second, to these our Brethren, who are this day to be separated for this
weighty work.

The Third, Errand I have, is to all of you, who are our Auditors, and
Spectators of the work we are met about.

And to each, a seasonable and suitable word, when I come unto them.

The first term in my Doctrinal Thesis, is what the work is whereunto these are
called.

I answer, It is 1. A difficult work. 2. It is a desperate work. 3. It is a
Dead work. 4. It is a destroying work. 5. It is a different work. 6. It is a
daily work. 7. It is a despised work. 8. It is a dying work. 9. It is a divine
work.


First, it is a difficult work, and that in four regards: for, 1. It is a
seeking, work. 2. It is a searching work. 3. It is a spiritual work. 4. It is a
spacious. work.


First, it is a difficult work, for it is a seeking work, to seek out lost
sinners, lost sons, lost sheep, lost souls, lost in hell; and this is that
which makes the work hard.

2. It is difficult, for it is a searching work, to search out hidden things,
and hidden mysteries, the mysteries of a hidden kingdom, of a hidden life, Col.
3.3. and this makes the work difficult.

3. It is a difficult work, for it is a spiritual work, a supernatural work, a
work above nature; it is soul-work, it is work about the soul, work about the
inward man, soul-saving work, and this is difficult.

I confess Gods Ministers are but the Instruments in the hand of Christ; for
all internal work, is Gods work, this in-work is Gods work, Job 23.16. It is
God that makes the heart soft; but yet the Ministry is an instituted means,
and therefore should accomplish this so difficult a work, because instituted by
Christ.

4. It is a difficult work, for it is a spacious work; it calls the whole man
to the work, soul and body, head, heart and hand; soul and sense, eyes and
ears, all parts and powers are called forth to this work, and that to
weariness: Much study is a weariness to the flesh; and therefore a difficult
work.

Secondly, this work is a desperate work, we are called to work not only works
of pain, but peril. We fight, and often faint in fighting, for it is against
enemies that are not only wily and witty enemies, but are wilful and wicked
enemies, that are headstrong enemies, and heart-strong enemies, and
hand-strong enemies, that except Christ come by his Spirit to help us, in this
desperate work all our labor is lost, and longings lost, and layings out lost,
and all our strength spent in vain to most of our people; our work is to fight
against Principalities and powers, the Rulers of the darkness of this world,
Ephesians. 6.12. and therefore a desperate work.

Thirdly, This our work is a dead work: we are to preach to dead souls, to dead
hearts; that are dead in sin and trespasses, Ephesians. 2.2.

Our work is to fetch dead souls to life: To raise Lazers out of their graves,
our work is about the life and death of the soul.

Fourthly, This our work is a destroying work; for it will either destroy sin,
or the sinner; it is the destroying pain of our work, that all we do, is as if
it were almost destroyed: It is a destroying work, for it turns hearts into
stones, and makes many worse than they were.

Oh what a destructive condition are those souls in, that our work shall prove
their destruction, by their wilful neglect and contempt of it.

Fifthly, This our work is a different work, from the work of all other men, in
the world no one is called forth to such a work, as a Minister of Jesus Christ:
for the effects of our work is far different from all other works of other men:
for our work makes a difference, 1. Of men. 2. In the manners of men. 3. In the
hearts of men. 4. In the heads of men. 5. In the hands of men.

It works in different places, and in different persons, and in them
differently, making some better, and some worse.

It works in places as far different as heaven and hell, and in hearts that are
as far different as light and darkness.

Sixthly, This our work is a daily work: its our every days work, the Lords
daywork, and the laborers day-work.

May conceit, that the work of a Minister is but a little, on the Lords day,
and then he may rest; but alas these men are mightily mistaken, for our work
hardly admits of any intermission.

Our work must smell of the candle, we must have our night studies.

When you are at your rest, we are at our work, when you sleep we are awake,
our work is a vigilant work, we wax white with work, and watching.

We are commanded to be (...) vigilant; 1 Timothy 3.2. our work is either reading,
or praying, or else meditating, or sighing, or groaning, or mourning, or
studying your good, and your life becomes some of our deaths, with our daily
and continual working.

Seventh, This our work is a despised work, it is the greatest work under
heaven, and the least regarded in the world, subject to the scorn of wicked
men, and contempt of the world.

Eighthly, This our work is a dying work, we like Rachell, dye in travel, to
bring forth Sons, and Daughters to Jesus Christ.

It is our death, that our work dies in any of our people.

Ah Christians, how much of our work is like water, spilt upon the ground.

It is heart-dying to us, that our work dies in your hearts.

The Apostle Gal. 4.19. tells the Galaetians, that he traveled in birth, till
Christ were formed in them: but alas how many false births, and abortive births
are produced by our work, that has wrought in some of our people, only a form
of godliness, but not the life, and power of it? and this is a dying work both
to them, and us.

Ninthly, This our work is a divine work, It is the work of God in us, by his
Spirit. Christ rules, and calls our men here and there to this work, to
minister to the souls of men: It is a work of divine, and spiritual
concernment to the souls eternity.

This is the first term, in my doctrinal Thesis, I shall be briefer in the
rest.

The second term is, what the inward call is by the Spirit.

The Holy Ghost, said, separate me Barnabas, and Saul. I Answer. This call is
from God: by his spirit, and only known (as I Humbly conceive) by these three
Requisites, which if found in these our Brethren, or in any else called forth
to this work, we may with an humble confidence be persuaded, that they have
this inward call: and that the Holy Ghost has said, Separate me these men for
the work, whereunto I have called them.

The first Requisite is, Pure intentions. 2 Pious affections. 3 Personal
qualifications.


First Pure, and zealous intentions: The first and highest Attractive, that
draws the thoughts and intentions of any to undertake this burden, must be the
glory of God, and the edification of his Church, to bring souls to Jesus
Christ. There must be no consulting with flesh and blood, about this weighty
work

If either profit or preferment, honor, or ease, have any thing to do in our
intentions, (as they have in too many) then we may conclude, that such are not
called by the Spirit.

Second Requisite is pious, and cordial affections; a godly affection to do
good, with our abilities we should have mountains of love in us, and wear them
all, and wast them all away in love to Christ, and to his people, 2 Cor. 12.15.
I will gladly spend, and be spent for you, though the more abundantly I love
you, the less I am beloved.

He whom love calls to this labor, is called of God, and his work shall
prosper.

Third Requisite is personal qualifications; and those are threefold.

1 Humanity. 2 Humility. 3 Honesty.
First, Humanity; God sends not headless, or heartless, or handlesse men, to
this work, for he either finds them fit in some measure, or makes them fit for
this work.

And that First in Person, Second, in Parts, both in life, and learning.

They must have the indowments and the perfections of both natures, the outward
man, as well as the inward man; one called of God by his Spirit, must be not
only peritus in religione, sed castus moribus: not only skillful in the Doctrine
of Religion, but also regular in all civillities of humanity: grace takes not
nature away but regulates it, refines it, and reforms it.

Religion does not throw civilities out of doors, (as some of the quaking
faction do) but entertains it, as a suitable ornament* to grace, and as a
necessary qualification for Ministers, which requires they be of a civil
deportment to all men, so far forth as may stand with the honor of their
persons, and places.

Secondly, Humility. Such as are called of God, by his Spirit, are humble, they
check, and chide their own abilities, by their own undervaluing of them.

They take this office and calling upon them, cum timore, et reverentia,
suscipere, et se excusare, with fear, and reverence, and excusing of
themselves, as unworthy, and unable for it, thus Moses, Jeremy, and others.

Thirdly Honesty. Whom God calls by his spirit to this work, must be of an
upright life and conversation, toward all men, both toward those without, and
within, to good and bad.

Such as are called of God, must not only (...), sed (...): not only talk
aright, but walk aright, he must not only teach the way to heaven, but tread,
and trace the way to heaven.

His Doctrine must be (...), A speech quickened with the actions of an upright
life.

For there is no life in Doctrine, where there is not Doctrine in the life.

Gods Ministers must teach the eyes, as well as the ears of the people.

For we have not so much, nor so great a work to do with their ears, as with
their eyes; for their eyes are more intent upon what we practice, than upon
what we preach:

Boni mores praedicantium, sal eorum Doctrinae. The honest and upright life of
a Minister, is the salt that seasoneth all his doctrine.

The sins of Teachers, are the Teachers of sin; and a Minister of a dishonest
life, is the vilest creature in the world.

A Turk, or Tartar, a Jew, or Jesuit, Popish, or Profane, are not so vile as
such a one.

It is a fearful speech of Chrysostom, of a wicked Minister, Quis unquam
Clericum lapsum penitentem vidit? Who ever saw a Minister recover himself,
after his fall, by repentance? some, not many, and but very seldom.

But those who walk unblameably, are called of God, even those that have these
pure intentions, these pious affections, and these personal qualifications of
humanity, humility, and honesty: we may with an humble confidence be assured,
that the Holy Ghost has said unto us, Separate me these men, for the work
whereunto I have called them.

The third Term in my Doctrinal Thesis, holds forth the outward call by
Separation.

Presbyterial Separation is an external call of persons to the work of Christ,
and a Ministerial privilege: It is (...): Ministerial Power.

And this Authoritive Separation, is in the Ministry, Acts 6.6. The Apostles
prayed, and laid their hands on them: which we call Ordination, or Clavis
(...), The Key of Ordination.

Election may belong to the people, but in Ordination, Pastors have been still
actors and ordainers, as Acts 1.26. and 6.6. Tit. 1.5.

In this business, there is only required, the silent approbation of the godly.

Election follows Ordination, and is but an approbation of a called person to
his Ministry, to such a particular Congregation.

The Juridical power is in the Presbytery, to judge of, and examine those who
are to preach the Word of God, that so false Teachers and Unworthy men, might
be kept from creeping into the Church of Christ.

For wicked men, such as are merely natural and profane, or hypocrites in
heart, would never consent to the call of a holy Minister of Jesus Christ.

And besides, these are not capable in their choice, to judge of such, but may
either out of prejudice, or ignorance, or out of a profane heart, deny consent
to his Ministry, whom God has called, and said, Separate me such a one to the
work whereunto I have called him.

For my part, I cannot be persuaded or satisfied in this one thing, that ever
any one not called by the Church, and that is out of office and orders, and
intrudes upon this holy calling, should ever convert souls, or bring any to
heaven.

Dissenting judgments there are of some of our Brethren, about this, Separate
me, even concerning the form of this Separation, and Ordination. But I intend
not to wade into this business, or meddle with this Controversy: Our practice
is approved, and sufficiently cleared to the satisfaction (I hope of all here,
or of the most) that desire unity and order in the Church of Christ; and
therefore I shall leave it, with this one additional requisite belonging to it,
which is, Probation, 1 Timothy 3.10. Hiprobentur, let them first be proved.

And this has been our form of proceeding, in setting apart, and separating
those, whom hitherto we have laid our hands on, and sent forth to the work
whereunto they have been called, and that both of their abilities and
deportments.

And the rather,

For as a wise Master of a Family, will not commit matters of moment, to any
one Servant, till he has first made proof of his ability to do it, and also of
his faithfulness in doing it,

Multo magis necessarium est eos probari quibus comittenda est cura sanctae
Congregationis. Hiperius. Much more fit is it, that those be tried and proved,
to whom is committed the care of souls in the Church of Christ.

A word of the fourth Term, which is the form of this outward call by
Separation.

And when they had prayed. Prayer is a duty for all undertakings of Christians,
especially in an undertaking of that nature, and high concernment, as this in
my Text, and as we are this day come about.

2. By fasting: This was a duty for extraordinary undertakings, and more than
ordinary occasions, such as this is we are now about.

3. By Imposition of hands: which contains the species of their Consecration.

In conferring of holy Orders, a double posture has anciently been observed:

First, (...), the Imposition of hands, in token of Consecration, Acts 8.17.

2. (...), the holding up of hands, in sign of confirmation, Acts 14.23.

And in this Ceremony is held forth the offering of them up to God, for the
work whereunto the Holy Ghost. has called them.

And this outward call, though it be not of men, yet it is by men, and
necessary to so holy a function.

And all such as come not in by this door, are but (...), new illuminates,
lately dropped out of heaven, that yesterday were but Dolts and Dunces, but to
day are Doctors and Divines.

Yesterday, with Saul, were seeking their fathers Asses, and to day are gotten
among the Prophets, 1 Samuel 10.16. like the Nightingale, Vox, and preterea
nihil; a voice, and nothing else: or like the Camelion, all lungs, and no heart.

All their learning is by Revelation, they pray, and preach, and all by the
Spirit; whereas all are but the visions of their own hearts, the fancies of
distempered spirits, and mere chymera's of sin-sick brains, which they rather
feign than know, and foolish unstable souls rather follow, than believe, or
trust.

But those called of God, and by men, are such as know God, and themselves, who
have a feeling of that spirit, who teaches them to know God, and God to know
them, and them to know themselves: Of these the holy Ghost has said to us,
Separate me these men, for the work whereunto I have called them.

I have now done with the Doctrinal part of my Thesis, and shall fall upon the
Applicatory part, and be brief in it.

I hava a threefold Errand from Christ, to all here this day, suitable to your
threefold Stations, Relations, Places and Persons.

My first Errand is to you, my Reverend Brethren, and my self, who have this
Command in my Text enjoined us, To separate these our Brethren, for the work
whereunto they are called.

My second Errand is, my Brethren, to you who are this day to be Separated from
other persons and employments, to this weighty work.

And my third Errand, is to all of you Christian Auditors and Spectators to
this Religious crowd and throng, who are this day Spectators, to behold; and
Auditors to hear, how this work is performed both by them and us.

In all of which (I hope) you will be both Approbationers, to approve it; and
Petitioners with us to the Throne of grace, and help us by your prayers, for a
blessing on them.

And pray all your Amens unto it.

Reverend Brethren,
My first Errand and Word I have from Christ, is to you, and to my self: All
the excuse I shall now plead is, I must be faithful to my Lord and Master Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor 4 2.

You have called me forth to this work; therefore give me leave to be plain and
impartial, in delivering the mind of Christ to us in this weighty business.

My first word to you, and to my self, is only that which this Apostle gave to
his beloved Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.22. A charge that he gave him, to keep himself
pure, and to lay hands suddenly on no man, lest he be partaker of other men's
sins.

To prevent this evil, two things are required of us before admission of any to
this weighty work.

1. Circumspection. 2. Sincere Affections.
First, Circumspection: That such only be admitted, as are in some measure
fraught and furnished with the sufficiencies of both men, the inward, and the
outward man, clad and clothed with the indowments and perfections, both of
nature and grace.

Secondly, Sincere affections: That we be not transported with by-respects,
either of profit, or of partiality: If we neglect either of these, we may make
our selves partakers of other men's sins, of the sins of others: And that, 1. By
consenting to such. 2. Or, By concealing of such. 3. Or, By contriving for
such. 4. Or, By commending of such to the work of the Lord, who are not called
of God to this work by his Spirit, to this Ministerial Function.


I Remember a passage of Erasmas, who stories of the Bishop of Utretcht, who
was son to the good Duke of Burgundy, who had at one time three hundred; who
came to him for holy Orders.

He was resolved he would examine them himself, and made trial of their parts,
and found but three of the three hundred, fitted for the business they came
about, and so refused all but three of the three hundred, and denied admittance
to them: But his Officers were displeased, as making against their profit. But
he returned a sharp, but sincere answer, and told them, He would not admit of
Asses into holy Orders, instead of men, and Christians.

I beseech you therefore, let it be our care, that we lay our hands there
only, where we are persuaded God has first laid his heart; and that those
whose heads we touch, those their hearts God may touch, in reference to this
Separation.

And this will be our Comfort.

My second word to you, my Brethren, is, that those we lay our hands on, may be
(as one observes) qui sunt compositi, ad mores.

Probati, ad sanctimoniam.
Parati ad obedientiam.
Subjecti, ad disciplinam.
Catholici ad fidem.
Fideles ad Dispensationem.
Concordes ad pacem.
Such as are composed to humanity,
Who are of approved sanctity.
Who are prepared to obey sincerely.
Subject to godly discipline submissively,
Sound in the faith purely.
Faithful in the dispensation of the Gospel, freely, willingly.
And of a peaceable behavior, desiring to in peace, and unity.
And I pray with Bernard, that those whom we lay our hands on, may be.

In jubendo discreti.
In loquendo modesti.
In professione devoti.
In zelo sobrii.
In misericordia non remissi.
In otio, non otiosi.
Et qui Ecclesiis non spolient, sed emendent.
That in their judgments they be sound.
In their commands discreet.
In their speeches modest.
In their professions devout.
In their zeal sober.
In mercy and compassion not careless.
In their recreations not vain and idle, but may be such, as shall not hurt,
but help the Church of Christ.
And then this Separate me, will advance Gods glory, and our comfort.

One word more to you my brethren and my self.

First, Let us pray for them.

Secondly, Let us praise God for them, that in these d stracting and
discouraging times, he has inclined their hearts unto this work.

Thirdly, Let us prize them, as fellow laborers with us, and esteem them
highly for their work with us.

Fourthly, Let us press them forward, to this weighty work, and that 1 By our
president. 2 By our pattern. 3 By our practice. 4 By our painfulness, by which
they may be encouraged with all alacrity and cheerfulness.


My second word, is to you my brethren, who are to be separated by us at this
time to this great work, on whom we are to lay and our hands, send you forth to
the work you are called to.

My word to you is, and it is my errand from Christ to you, that you seriously
lay to heart this fourfold consideration.

First, I pray consider who it is, that calls you forth to this work.

My Text tells you, and I tell you, it is he that will require it, and also
requite it, if faithfully performed, Dan. 12.3. Mat. 25.21. 1 Cor. 15. last.

Secondly, consider I pray you, what the work is that you are culled, and
called forth from other persons, and from all other employments to work, and to
which we are to send you.

I have (in part) told you already, and now again further tell you. 1 It is a
high work. 2 It is a low work. 3 It is a broad work. 4 It is a long work. 5 It
is an inwork. 6 It is an outwork. 7 It is a light work. 8 It is a night work.


First, It a high work, for it is heaven work, you must fetch your work from
heaven, as high as heaven, for your work lies in heaven, your Rule, you are to
work by is from heaven, the Spirit that must help you in this work, is from
heaven, and you must fetch all your work from heaven, and that by prayers,
tears, reading, meditation, etc. And if the work be too hard for you at any
time, you must then send prayers to heaven, to untye that knot, and to make it
easy, and to enable you to do it, according to the mind of Christ.

Secondly, This work is a low work, as low as hell, you must fetch, and snatch
brands out of the fire of hell, fetch souls out of hell, out of their hellish
estate and condition.

Thirdly, This your work is a broad work, a very spacious work; it is not
confined to this place, or that place, to this soul, or that soul, to this or
that sin, to this or that sinner, to this or that Saint. 1 But go teach all
nations. 2 Reprove all sin, and all sinners. 3 Deliver the whole and all the
Council of God.


Fourthly, This your work, is a long work, a work that runs the line of your
lives, you are now putting your hand to the plough; and you must not look back,
your work is so long, as to reach every sin, and every sinner, and every
Saint.

Fifthly, This your work is inwork, it is heart work, soul work, it is to work
upon the mind, the inner man, all parts and powers of the soul, and upon all
the affections.

Sixthly, This your work, is outwork, it is not only a work of conviction, but
also of conversion, and outward reformation.

To wash the hands of sinners, as well as their hearts, Jam. 4.8. the outside
as well as the inside of the platter must be cleansed.

Seventhly, This your work is light work, it is to turn men from darkness to
light, Act. 26.18.

It is a light shining work in the soul, it is a light burning work in the
soul. It is a work that is a leading light to the soul.

Eighthly, This your work is night work, it is to work in benighted souls, Ephesians.
5.18. It is a work about dark souls, it is to bring a candle to dark souls, to
flark blind souls, that are in the dark night of sin and ignorance.

Thirdly, I beseech you consider your Titles, and walk suitable to them in your
places, and the rather for these two respects.

First, Consider the greatest Princes in the world; have not such high titles
of honor, as the poorest faithful Minister of Jesus Christ: As Angels, stars,
lights.

Secondly, Consider, That the greatest in the world, have not so many several
titles, and styles of honor, as a minister of Christ.

I cannot stand to enumerate them, you have them in the holy Scriptures, only
let it be your care to live up to them.

Fourthly, Consider the exhortation of this Apostle to his beloved Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.12.

Let no one despise your youth, but be all of you, examples to Believers in
word, in doctrine, in conversation, in charity, in faith, and in purity.

And take notice, what the same Apostle says to the same Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.15.

How he exhorts him to show himself approved to God, a workman, that need not
to be ashamed.

And for that end, I shall only lay down this one caution, and that is, that
you will be diligent in, and about this work, whereunto ye are called, and to
which we are to send you.

And to make up this composition of diligence that it may be such as to show
your selves workmen, that need not to be ashamed

These four ingredients, are to be put into it. 1 Studiousness. 2 Sincerenesse.
3 Seriousness. 4 Speediness.


First, You must be studious: In this diligence study is attended, for no good
work can be well done, without study.

You cannot pray well, without study nor can you preach well without study;
study is the labor of the mind, and we must be intent upon it.

Idleness is not allowed to any, no not to the greatest personages.

Quo major sum, magis laboro, was the saying once of a great man.

The greater the person, the greater his study, care, and pains for the public
good.

He that will not work in the vineyard, must not look for his penny.

And it must be our own work, our own study, our own labor: we are called to
labor, not to loiter.

We must not live upon the sweat of other men's diligence and labor; not upon
their work, but our own.

It is not diligence to have a great study of books, but to have a great book
full of study.

Our best Library is in heaven, and if we trust only to a full study of Books,
and rest upon the labors of others, done to our hands: this is not diligence,
nor study nor labor, nor the work we are called forth unto: But we shall prove,
like the Drone in the Hive, or like the Bird, that made her self fair with the
feathers stolen from other Birds, that were none of her own.

Gods Ministers may go into their study, as to a Garden, and here and there
gather a flower, to sweeten and beautify their work, and for spiritual
advantage to their people.

But for any to spend precious time idly, or in impertinent worldly
occasions, till the latter end of the week, and then huddle up some notes, out
of other men's works, and get these into his hand; but neither into head, or
heart; into his book, but not into his bosom: this is not diligence or study,
or to show our selves workmen, that need not be ashamed.

A second Ingredient is sincereness: In this diligence there must be sincerity.
It must fetch life from love, and our diligence in this work must be drawn from
warm affections, to our peoples spiritual advantage.

All the negligence that ever accompanies this calling, is through want of
love, and sincere affections to the salvation of the souls of our people.

Lacrimae auditorum Lauds tuae sint. Their tears should be our greatest praise.

We should endeavor with Peter, to prick our people at the heart, and make them
glad to cry out, What shall we do? Acts 2.37.

A third Ingredient to this diligence, is Seriousness: Diligence in this work
is seriousness in it.

And that in three things, 1. In looking up. 2. In looking in. 3. In looking
out.


First, In looking up; and that to God, Psalm. 121.1, 2. I will lift up my eyes
unto the hills, from whence comes my help: my help comes from the Lord.

Gods Ministers must be serious in this work, in making out unto Christ, and in
looking up unto him for help, beginning and ending all their work with Christ.

Christ must be the Alpha, to begin it; and the Omega, to end it.

They must begin and end with a Deus adsit, Christ still present.

Secondly, They must seriously look in; that is, into their own hearts.

This is diligence indeed, and with a sweet witness, when the Ministers of
Christ are serious in bringing their own hearts into conformity to those saving
truths they hold forth to others.

Vocem Virtutis dabis si quod suades prius tibi cognosceris persuasisse.
Bernard Thou shall make the Word become effectual, if what thou perswadest and
exhortest others unto, thou know thou have first persuaded thy own heart to
it.

Si me vis flere dolendum est prius: If thou would have others mourn for sin,
thou must first begin thy self that cup unto them.

If thou would be a curb to others, thou must first bridle thy own
corruptions.

Validior est vox operis, quam oris, The voice of works is of more force than
that of words.

It is a foul incongruity, when words and works do not agree, especially in a
Minister of the Gospel.

Gregory Nazianzen says to a Minister, (...), Either teach me not at all, or
let thy holy life teach me.

I shall therefore send you, therefore Brethren, to a pattern for your and my
imitation.

I shall spare to speak of any here present, although (it may be) I might: But
I shall give you a relation, as I had it from a Religious Gentlewoman, one in
my own Parish,

Concerning Mr. Samuel Hildersham of Welch-felton, in this County of Salop, who
is said first to do, and then to say; first ^ea^s the Roll, brings his Precepts
to others, into his own practice; learns others, by his own religious life and
conversation.

This relation, since I heard it, has been often working upon my spirits, and
I hope not in vain to my self, nor to others.

It cannot be supposed, or once suspected, that this should be a speech of
flattery; for I know not the flattering style, nor dare I, or will I flatter
any.

But that I may give you, my self, and others of my Brethren, encouragements to
take up such Presidents for our imitation.

Thirdly, There must be a serious looking out to the state and condition of our
people, to know how it is, and what it is: we are to watch their souls, Heb.
13.17. 1 Pet. 5.21. Acts 20.28. And accordingly apply and suit our labors for
their good. 1

The fourth Ingredient to this diligence, is speediness: The diligent are full
of Celerity and Alacrity, 1 Pet. 5.2. with willing minds.

And the rather,

1. Propter Temporis brevitatom; for, and from the shortness of the time we
have to work.

2. Propter operis bonitatem; the work is a good work we are about.

3. Propter muneris quantitatem; the reward will be great for our work, Dan.
12.3. Gal. 6.10.

This is all I have to say unto you, my Brethren, who are to be separated for
this work, whereunto ye are called.

I leave the rest to a Reverend Brother, who has a word of Exhortation for you
by and by.

My third and last word and errand, is to you Christian friends, who are this
day our Auditors and Spectators, of the work and business we are come about.

I have a few petitions to put up unto you, in the behalf of these our
Brethren, and of our selves, that are workers together with Christ, in the
great business of your souls salvation.

1. I beseech you pray for them and us. 2. Praise them and us. 3. Praise God
for them and us. 4. Prize them and us, 5. Pity them and us. 6. Practice them
and us. 7. Pay them and us.
First, I beseech you pray for them and us, and for the increase of faithful
Ministers, that their number may be increased, and continued, Mat. 9. ult. 2
These. 3.1, 2.

Ah dear Christians, we all pray for you, nay, the Lord forbid that we should
ever cease to pray for you, 1 Samuel 12.23.

Therefore pray for them and us: alas, all the unfruitfulness of your hearts
under all our toil and travel in our Ministry, is because you do not pray for
us: you do not pray for your Ministers, that their work might warm your hearts,
and make it saving for your salvation.

Secondly, I desire you, praise them, and us: I tell you Christians, that Gods
Ministers do deserve from you their due commendation.

All the encouragements that you are able to give them, is little enough to
hold up their spirits, in this weighty work.

You will encourage the creature, or a servant, or a child, when they do well,
and will you not do it to a Minister?

Oh! do not vilify them, nor blemish them with reproaches.

Constantine the great, was wont to say, That the failings of a Minister should
be covered from the knowledge of others, and himself would rather cover them
with his Purple Robe, than have them known.

Thirdly, Praise God for them, and us; this is my next request, praise God,
that he is pleased to hold up a Gospel-ministery amongst us, by his daily
calling in of laborers into his Harvest, Matthew. 9. last verse.

Fourthly, I beg of you, that you will prize them and us, and that for our work
sake, 1 Timothy 4.17.

Oh! How beautiful, should the feet be of those that bring glad tidings! And
those who labor in the word, and doctrine, are worthy of double honor, says
our Apostle.

Oh! Do not undervalue them, those who are the Ministers of Jesus Christ, nor
do you account them,

(...). The offals and off-scourings of the world.

Fifthly, I entreat you pity them, and us; I tell you Christian friends, that
none in the world should have such a plentiful portion of your pity, as the
Ministers of Jesus Christ.

Especially if you would but seriously lay to heart these four things. 1 Their
great care, they are daily in. 2 Their great cost, daily at 3 Their great
account they must give. 4 Their great contempt they lie continually open to.


But I cannot stand upon these things; only let me tell you, what Chrysostom
says, that their care, cost, count, and contempt is such, that the Angels
themselves would tremble for to undergo their burden, so great it is.

Sixthly, I earnestly crave, that you will practice them and us, I mean, theirs
and our preaching: It is the Apostles advice, Heb. 13.17. that ye obey them,
that rule over you in the Lord, as those that must give an account.

I beseech you, let not your fancies, sit above your judgments, but let your
judgments guide your opinions, and let your opinions, being guided by some
judgment, lead your zeal, if not, you walk preposterously in all duties of
Religion.

Oh! Hence it is, that the spiritual yoke of obedience, and practice, is cast
off to all Gospel Ministry, and so many live above our ministry, and some
below our ministry.

Some above our Ministry, even above that Ministry that begot them, if ever
they were spiritually begotten, and born of God.

And if it be vile for a child to contemn the natural father of his body: oh!
how much more vile is it, in the sight of God, for any to revile, and contemn,
the spiritual fathers of their souls, 1 Cor. 9.2.

Alexander the great, a Heathen Emperor, was wont to say, That he was more
beholding unto Aristotle his Master, than to Philip his Father: for he had but
his being from his Father, but his well-being from his Master.

Hence it is, that we have so many new Ruptures, bred in the bowels of the
Church, which are indeed, but the gray hairs of old errors, which long since
were worm-eaten, and dusted with antiquity.

And now taking the advantage of liberty of conscience, and the allowance of
that tolleration, which was only intended for tender consciences, have new
brusht up their old erroneous Tenants, and put fair flourishing, and
hypocritical colors upon them: And these now fly abroad in the eyes of some of
our people by which many of them, are almost blinded, and wilfully refuse to
see the truth.

I beseech you therefore deer Christians, take heed of these: and resolve to
practice the preachings of your faithful ministers: oh be not like Israel,
loathers of your spiritual manna.

Harbor not nice appetites, nor coy, and curious stomachs: some are so dainty,
that hardly one of a thousand, can long please them, or any dainty dish, long
relish with them.

I remember I was once, at a Bishops table in this land at dinner; and I heard
him call for brown bread, and said his stomach was grown wanton, he knew not
what to eat, he was well, but his stomach was wanton.

So we have many, whose spiritual appetites and stomachs are grown wanton, they
are well and have good spiritual food, but their stomachs are grown wanton

Nay, in the time that I can remember, and since I have been a Minister of
Christ, Gods people have thought themselves happy in the enjoyment of far
shorter spiritual commons, and fared well, and were fat, and well-liking, with
far less than we now enjoy, and with courser diet, and yet were truly thankful.

Seventhly, and Lastly, I pray you pay them and us; this is my last Request,
and I fear will be the least regarded: yet the laborer is worthy of his wages,
and the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn, should not be muzled.

But if a Minister of Christ do but look for that maintenance, which the Law of
God, and of Nature, and Nations, do allow him for his work, Oh then, and not
till then, The Hubbub is up in the mouth of the multitude, Away with him, he is
but Mercinary, and a hireling.

All their work is for gain, for Tithes and Tenths, and for nothing else, this
is that they work for.

I beseech you give me leave (Christians) to tell you, that the tithe and tenth
of your profits is none of yours, but theirs to whom God has alloted it for
their maintenance; and the Law of the Nation has established it unto them, for
sowing unto you spiritual things, for the furthering of your salvation. I pray,
let me tell you, what Augustine says to this point in hand, That Tithe is too
little for a Minister of Christ: And he gives his reason; Because (says he) if
you give no more but your Tithe, you do not then exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, who paid Tithe of all, even to Mint and Cummin.

It was wont to be said, What shall we give to the men of God? 1 Samuel 9.7. but
now it is common in the mouth of the most, What shall we take from the men of
God, Psalm. 83.12.

And it may justly be feared, that if a Ministers allowance for his
maintenance, were but what some please, and have been driving at, it would be
after the rate of Cratis, in his Ephemeris, 10 l. to the Cook, and ten talents
to the Parasite, and three half pence to the Philosopher: Every little is
thought too much for a Minister.

But I hope better things of all you here present, that you are better molded,
and better minded, better grounded, and better graced; and that you will now
with winged zeal, willingly join with us in your prayers for these our
Brethren, now to be set apart, for the work whereunto they are called.

That they may be instruments in the hand of Jesus Christ, to advance his
glory, and enlarge his Kingdom; for which I entreat the assistance of your
prayers with us. Amen.

(...). Sacrae Trinitati Gloria.
FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the sign of the Three Crowns, over
against the great Conduit, at the lower end of Cheapside.
DR. Richard Sibs his Commentary upon the second Epistle to the Corinthians,
published for public good by Tho. Manton. in Folio.

Mr. John Cotton, his Exposition on the First Epistle of John, with Doctrines,
Reasons and Uses, in Folio.

The Journal or Diary of a thankful Christian, wherein is contained directions
for the right method of keeping and using, according to the rules of practice,
a Day-book of National and Politic, personal and private passages of Gods
providence, to help Christians to thankfulness, and experience. By John Beudle
Minister of the Gospel a Barstone in Essex.

Cathechizing Gods Ordinance, or a short treatise concerning that ancient,
approved and soul-edifying Ordinance of Catechism, by Mr. Zach. Crofton,
Minister of the word at Buttolphs without Aldgate London in Octavo.

Quakers principles quaking, their pretended light proved darkness, and
perfection proved to be the greatest imperfection, by Ralph Hall, whereunto is
prefixed an Epistle of Mr. Zachary Crofton.

Courteous Reader.
THou may expect within a short time to see published some new pieces of Mr.
William Fenners, who was so famous when living, and his works (though he is
dead) such a sweet (though silent) voice.

There is in the press several excellent treatises of Dr. Samuel Bolton, never
before Printed, written by his own hand, published by Dr. Turkney, and Mr.
Edmond Callamy.

T. P.


