POEMS, viz. 1. A PANEGYRIC to the KING. 2. SONGS and SONNETS. 3. The BLIND
LADY, a COMEDY. 4. The Fourth Book of VIRGIL, 5. STATIUS his ACHILLEIS, with
ANNOTATIONS. 6. A PANEGYRIC to GENERAL MONCK.
By the Honorable Sr ROBERT HOWARD.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his shop at the
sign of the Anchor on the lower Walk of the New Exchange. 1660.

TO THE READER.
IT has been the usual custom of Epistles, to give the Reader an account of
the causes that brought those writings into public, that were only intended
for a private Closet; and commonly it has been at the request of friends,
perhaps with mingled truth and design, to prae-engage the judgments of many,
by telling the opinion of some, so to preserve their modesty as much in the
pretense, as they could have done in the concealment of their Writings.

Though I cannot pretend such a cause as this, I can yet free my self from that
vanity that others would avoid, by assuring the Reader, I had not stock of
confidence enough to show these things privately to many friends, much less to
be furnished with enough, to make them public to all indifferent persons, had
not the desires of the Bookseller prevailed with me: to whose civilities I
believed my self so far engaged, as to deny him nothing that he thought a
kindness, which could not be severely prejudicial to my self: Yet I doubted
not, but that I should receive the censures of many; which, upon the granted
principle of prejudice, appeared not a reasonable argument to prevail with me
to deny his request, since the same should as well persuade me not to live, for
life and conversation r^nder man in Print more than letters can do; and is made
more public by that way, than he can be by this. His life is mingled more with
his defects and passions, than probably his writings are; and whether they are
equal, or exceed others, need not trouble him that writes: He may be
satisfied, the production of retired hours are the best of himself. I had no
great reason then to deny his request, that imagined he asked his own
advantage, when he desired nothing that I believed contrary to mine.

Yet I wish that it may so far give satisfaction to all, that they may as
little repent the r^ading, as I did the writing; whilst in these gentle studies
I found a diversion from greater follies; and by that comparison they received
obliging natures. Perhaps, there is few that read them, may not as well be
conscious to themselves, to have spent some time not so (...); and for that
cause forgive that, which for its own sake they cannot admire.

For the several subjects which here make one bundle, there is not any of them
that have not layn by me these many years (two or three copies of Verses only
excepted); and had been wholly perhaps laid aside, but for the reasons given,
applying my self now to more serious studies, according to the several seasons
of increasing age, as the earth produces various fruits to the different
seasons of the year. By this short account of time, the Reader may discern in
what clowdy days my Muse spread her wings, as little contributing to her flying
a noble height, as to show a just subject: He that most deserved it was most
denied it (as he was indeed his right in all things) either from private fear,
or public power, though I equal not the crime of faint thoughts in passive
submission, to the guilt of bold profession in public action. It Is now to be
hoped, that the praises of our Prince, who so much merits it, may be received
willingly by all, since nothing can be said of him, that has not been done by
him; and man's largest invention has been excelled by His actions, there being
nothing capable ^o make him appear more excellent than himself; unless it had
been our want of him, when by experience we found his miseries were ours, and
all that we inflicted on him returned in double measures on our selves; l^ke
stones madly tossed into the air, and forced from their proper center, that fall
back with increased weight upon their heads that flung them. We are now
presented that in him, which this world sparingly produces; in one composure,
an object for our Consciences and Interest, in whose preservation, our
Temporal and Eternal states have equal shares. Yet I should a little be
dissatisfied with my self to appear public in his praise, just when he was
visibly restoring to power, did not the reading of the Panegyric vindicate the
writing of it, and, besides my affirmation, assure the Reader, It was written
when the King deserved the Praise as much as now, but separated farther from
the Power; which was about three years since, when I was Prisoner in
Windsor-Castle, being the best diversion I could then find for my own
condition; to think, how great his Virtues were for whom I suffered, though in
so small a measure compared to his own, that I rather blush at it, than believe
it meritorious.

For the other Verses and Songs, I must profess they were never directed to
any particular Beauty, which may (to the Amorous Reader at least) be a just
excuse, if they want Perfection, to remember I wanted Passion, and had only my
own warmth, unassisted by the influence of a Mistress. Nor shall I envy him
that writes better, by being much in love, if he must purchase the advantage of
Wit by the loss of Freedom.

For the Translations, the Authors have already received those Characters from
the world, that they need none of mine, especially Virgil, of whose works I
have only published this one Book, that lay finished by me; not judging it
convenient to perfect those other Books of his Aeneid's, which I have rudely
gone through, having long since laid aside all designs of that nature; and
this little of it rather grew public from accident, than design, the Mingle
it had with my private Papers, was the greatest cause, that it received its
share in the public Impression.

For Statius, he had received commendations enough, had he been alone commended
by Juvenal in his 7 Satyr. but Alexand. ab Alex. also, lib. 6 chapter 14. relates,
that he thrice received the Victor's Laurel in the public reading of his
Verses, and was once vanquished; as unjustly perhaps as Agelli lib. 17. chapter 4.
Menander was judged to be overcome by Philemon, whose faction was greater,
though his wit less; insomuch that meeting him afterward, Menander desired
him to confess ingenuously, if he did not blush when he vanquished him. For
this piece of his, I confess I chose it as most pleasing to me, I wish it may
be so to the Reader; though there wants not (...) in una Achilleide ita surgit
ut illic multo sublimi^s ferri v^deatur, quam quo potuerit toto ^ hebaide
perveniter Demit.
ingenious men, who preferred it before his other Poems. The Annotations may in
some places perhaps be judged too large; yet, had I omitted any thing, it is
probable that the same persons would have censured me for ignorance: so that
being equally sensible of these extremes, I judged it the testimony of the
greatest modesty, By omitting little, to show my self not at all secure in the
world's opinion.

I have thus, ingenuous Reader, given you a clear and true account of my Self
and Writings, not oppressed with apprehension, nor raised by neglect; but
preserved by an indifferency, that destroys not my civilitie to others, nor my
own content; desiring not to engrosse, but share satisfaction. If in any thing
I justly need, or design to ask pardon, it is for Errors that probably the
Reader may meet with; having been reduced to the strait of neglecting this, or
business. I confess my Interest prevailed with me though, not wholly to
neglect the Reader, since I prevailed with a worthy Friend to take so much view
of my blotted Copies, as to free me from gross Errors. Having thus set down
all my design and reasons, I leave the Reader with as little Concern to use
his, as I have showed him mine.

To my Honored Friend, Sr ROBERT HOWARD, On his Excellent Poems.
AS there is Music uninform'd by Art
In those wild Notes, which with a merry heart
The Birds in unfrequented shades express,
Who better taught at home, yet please us less:
So in your Verse, a native sweetness dwells,
Which shames-Composure, and its Art excells.
Singing, no more can your soft numbers grace
Then Paint adds charms unto a beauteous Face.
Yet as when mighty Rivers gently creep,
Their even calmnesse does suppose them deep,
Such is your Muse: no Metaphor swelled high
With dangerous boldness lifts her to the sky;
Those mounting Fancies when they fall again,
Show sand and dirt at bottom do remain.
So firm a strength, and yet with all so sweet,
Did never but in Sampson's Riddle meet.
It Is strange each line so great a weight should bear,
And yet no sign of toil, no sweat appear.
Either your Arthides Art, as Stoics feign
Then least to feel, when most they suffer pain;
And we, dull souls, admire, but cannot see
What hidden springs within the Engine be:
Or it is some happiness that still pursues
Each act and motion of your graceful muse.
Or is it Fortune's work, that in your bead
The curious Rete Mirabile.
Net that is for fancies spread,
Let Us through its Meshes every meaner thought,
While rich Idea's there are only caught.
Sure that is not all; this is a piece too fair
To be the child of Chance, and not of Care.
No Atoms casually together hurled
Could e're produce so beautiful a world.
Nor dare I such a doctrine here admit,
As would destroy the providence of wit.
It Is your strong Genius then which does not feel
Those weights would make a weaker spirit reel:
To carry weight and run so lightly too
Is what alone your Pegasus can do.
Great Hercules himself could never do more
Than not to feel those Heavens and gods he bore.
Your easier Odes; which for de^ight were penned,
Yet our instruction make their second end,
We Are both enriched and pleased, like them that woo
At once a Beauty and a Fortune too.
Of Moral Knowledge Poesy was Queen,
And still she might, had wanton wits not been;
Who like ill Guardians lived themselves at large,
And not content with that, debauched their charge:
Like some brave Captain, your successful Pen
Restores the Exiled to her Crown again;
And gives us hope, that having seen the days
When nothing flourished but Fanatique Bays,
All will at length in this opinion rest,
"A sober Prince's Government is best.
This is not all; your Art the way has found
To make improvement of the richest ground,
That soil which those immortal Lawrells bore,
That once the sacred Maro's temples wore
Elisa's griefs, are so expressed by you,
They are too eloquent to have been true.
Had she so spoke, Aeneas had obeyed
What Dido rather then what Jove had said.
If funeral Rites can give a Ghost repose,
Your Muse so justly has discharged those.
Elisa's shade may now its wandering cease,
And claim a title to the fields of peace.
But if Aeneas be obliged, no less
Your kindness great Achilles does confess,
Who dress^d by Statius in too bold a look,
Did ill become those Virgin's Robes he took.
To understand how much we owe to you,
We must your Numbers with your Author's view;
Then we shall see his work was lamely rough,
Each figure stiff as if designed in buffe;
His colors laid so thick on every place,
As only showed the paint, but hid the face:
But as in Perspective we Beauties see;
Which in the Glass, not in the Picture be;
So here our sight obligeingly mistakes
That wealth which his your bounty only makes.
Thus vulgar dishes are by Cooks disguised,
More for their dressing than their substance prized.
Your curious Annotations on Statius.
Notes so search into that Age,
When all was fable but the sacred Page,
That since in that dark night we needs must stray,
We are at least misled in pleasant way.
But what we most admire, your Verse no less
The Prophet than the Poet does confess.
Ere our weak eyes discerned the doubtful streak
Of light, you saw great Charles his morning break.
So skillful Seamen ken the Land from far,
Which shows like mists to the dull Passenger.
To Charles your Muse first pays her dutious love,
As still the Ancients did begin from Jove.
With Monck you end, whose name preserved shall be,
As Rome recorded Hic situs est Rufus qui pulso vindice quondam, Imperium
asseruit non fibi sed Patriae.
Rufus memory,
Who thought it greater honor to obey
His Countrey's interest than the world to sway.
But to write worthy things of worthy men
Is the peculiar talent of your Pen:
Yet let me take your Mantle up, and I
Will venture in your right to prophesy.
"This Work by merit first of Fame secure
"Is likewise happy in its Geniture:
"For since it is born when Charles ascends the Throne,
"It shares at once his Fortune and its own.
JOHN DRIDEN.

A PANEGYRIC To the KING.
THE true Parnassus (Sir) which Muses know,
Are Subjects which they choose; to whom they owe
Their Inspirations, differing as the times,
Unhappy Virtues, or successful Crimes.
The greatest Choice is, where the most Success
Makes Fears as great, nor their Ambitions less.
With the Usurped Crowns they strive for Bays;
Those readier not to Act than These to Praise.
My Muse (Great Sir) has no such fears, or knows
A better Impiration than your Woes.
To sing those Virtues which are all your own,
Not brought you by Successes (...) a Throne;
But by the malice of the world withstood:
So much it is easier to be Great than Good.
Which knows no end, or change by human things,
But like the world (Eternal) whence it springs.
Greatness is, as forbidden Pleasures are,
Reached by th'impious hands, that will but dare
Attempt all Crimes, still scorning a retreat:
Only the Bad can be unjustly Great.
By Falls from Thrones, such, and the virtuous know
What Fate to them, or they to Fortune owe.
By courage nor by virtue can be staid
Fortune, which tired grows by lending aid.
So, when all Thrones on Caesar were bestowed,
Not Fate to him, but he to Fortune owed,
And paid her back the vastest Principal
She ever lent, in his too-wretched Fall;
To whose successful Courage once she gave
The Rome, called by Livie, Totius Orbis D^minatri^.
Mistress of the World to be his Slave.
To fair days, storms succeed; to storms, the fair:
We know but what we are by what we were.
And Man's condition's valued more or less,
By what he had, not what he does possess.
For no Extremes could ever gain a Height
From their own natures, but each other's weight.
So -- Sed longi poenas Fortuna favoris
Exigit a misero, quae tanto pondere famae
Res premit adversas, fatisque prioribus urget.
Lucan. Phar. lib. 8.


Lucan made the flying Pompey blame,
Not present Woes, but his too-early Fame.
Great Hannibal, in his excellent Speech to Scipio between their Armies, then
ready to fight, set down by Livie; among other motives to Scipio for peace, by
his own example, advises him to be secure from the Ingratitude of his Country;
which afterward was too largely evident by their reducing him to Privacy as
great as his former Glories, and rendered themselves unworthy of his Ashes,
which to this day lie in an unknown Grave.
Scipio, whose too happy courage made
His Country free, and Hannibal's enslay'd,
Had been more happy, had he been but less,
And not feared want of glory, but excess.
Whose Countrie-men's ungrateful fears were more,
For his success, than Hannibal's before.
So much Plebeian Souls from Nature's School,
Are fitted more for Servitude than Rule.
Would such Examples had been only known;
But we have felt a greater of our own,
In your Great Father seen; whose Sunshine-days*
Deserves not more our wonder than our praise:
Nor did his days of Tempests less proclaim,
But taught us more of Miracle and Fame.
And equaled all the miseries it brought;
By virtues, which unequaled sufferings taught.
Frailty affliction brings; and yet a friend,
In giving those afflictions too an end.
Yet immortality can no blessing give,
But make that perfect, which must ever live.
His soul, refined so by Celestial heat,
One could not hurt; and the other has made great.
He paid his scores of Frailty, and of Joy's,
To live, where nothing that is enjoyed destroy's.
And sell, lest this frail World like Heaven might be,
At once admitting Him, and Constancy.
Happy were we, had we but understood,
None were too great, nor we out selves too good!
Within our selves, and by our selves confined:
One by our Ocean; the other by our Mind.
Whilst the obliged World, by War unsought,
Was willingly by gentler Traffic brought.
Secure and Rich; whilst every swelling Tide,
That brought us safety, brought us Wealth beside*
Above the reach of the World's power grown,
And had been safe, had we but feared our own.
What the Grave Spaniard, and the Belgian too,
The active French, by power could not do,
Our passions did; and quickly made it known,
We could be Conquered by our selves alone.
And acting that which others could not do,
Are now fit for their Scorn, and Conquest too.
How just, and sure Heaven's revenges are!
We slighted peace; and grow despised by War.
Like Mad men then, possessed with Lunacy;
We now must find a Cure in misery.
And by our suffering, to our wits redeemed,
Our long-lost peaceful temper grows esteemed.
For man does most, by the Comparative,
At the true knowledge of Extremes arrive.
And in affliction's ready to adore,
That which he hardly could endure before.
How fatally this Nation proves it true,
In mourning for our banished Peace; and You!
To You, Great Sir, Fortune's in debt alone,
Who can be no way pai'd, but by your own.
Your Virtues have not more made Crowns your due,
Than sufferings taught you how to use them too.
Strokes upon solid bodies do provoke
A secret brightness free, unmixt with smoke:
No grossnesse mingled; but bright sparks declare,
What mighty firmness their Composures are.
So whilst the strokes of Fortune on You light,
Your mighty frame appears more firm and bright.
Affliction often by its powerful weight,
Is the Case-shot of Destiny and Fate.
Routing faint principles together brought
By prosperous virtues; not by hazards taught.
Whilst the weak man is too much understood,
His frailty more, than his substantial good.
As in the low declining of the day,
Men's shaddows more enlarged show, than they;
So in the worlds great, last, adversity,
When every Element their power must try;
To dissolution they must all retire,
And leave but one pure Element of fire.
All that was gross, which from weak nature flows,
In your great trialls, so expiring shows.
And all unto your Nobler Soul resigned,
Nothing seems l^fe in you, but what is refined.
No longer, now, subject to what is frail,
But have from Nature, cut off the entail.
Nor yet could Fortune with her pow't or frowns,
Ravish your Father's Veroues, though his Crowns;
So little was the esteem of human things,
To that once best, and now most blessed, of Kings.
One that in all his time, was never known,
Greedy of Lives, though weary of his own.
Peace Crowned his thoughts, though not his wretched time,
His Nature was his fate, his Crown his crime:
Despised by his own people, first; because,
He stoop't below his power, and their laws.
His easy gifts seemed all but debts; when they,
Had nothing left to ask, nor he to pay.
Yet that he might unjust, or mean, appear,
For what his nature gave, they thank't his fear.
All the fair virtues of his Halcyon-times
Instead of gratitude contracted crimes
In those, who from the fears he ever had,
Of being ill, took boldness to be bad.
Such as on peace, the name of [idle] fling,
And make their Prince a Tyrant or no King;
So fell that Prince, too good for such bad times,
By his own Virtues, and by others Crimes.
Now against you, Great Sir, their swords are turned,
And joy in what the World besides has mourned.
Still constant in their Crimes and Cruelty,
All Conscience turned into Necessity.
Which by the view of acted sins before,
Does safe appear, only by doing more:
As those who quit firm shores, when the wind raves,
Must not retire, but bustle still in waves.
The wandering Needle so can never stay,
Till it finds out the Point it should obey.
Our Constitution touched by Monarchy,
Till it rests there, must always wandering be;
And that must fix in You: None could convay
True light, but He that ought to rule the day.
When Phaeton did to that height aspire,
He brought not influence to the world, but fire:
So those led by Ambition to your Throne,
Have brought us ruin, and have found their own.
Whilst thus our Sphere is over-cast with Clouds,
You (the bright Sun) their envious darkness shrouds,
As ready to break forth, when Factions here
Divide, as when dark clouds part in the Sphere,
The Sun can be. No offer you neglect,
To warm us with your luster, and protect
From such foggs of mean Souls, which still will fly
Over us, till all is dispelled by Majesty.
Once for your Kingdome's sake you durst oppose
Your Laureled Enemies with your Coming in with the Scots, who were before
Conquered by the English at Dunbar.
conquered foes.
Yet Heaven from your assistance then was staid,
Lest the ill Act the good had over-vveigh'd;
And in the Victory those Scots had found
Their Crimes together with your Virtues crovvn'd.
Then 'twas You did attempt your debt to pay
To Us or Nature, by a noble way.
The bold Stat casus renovare omneis, omnemque reverti Per Trojam, et rursus
caput objectare periclis. Virg. lib. 2. Aeneid.
Aeneas so, having left Troy
In its own funeral flames, scorned to enjoy
Safety alone; but, led by Virtues great
As were the Dangers he was to repeat,
Returned among his ruined Friends and State,
To bring them safety, or to fetch their fate.
Whilst our dull souls all nobler warmth denied,
The Covvard and th'Insensible divide
Our vvoes made habits by the use, or dare
Not think we know how great our sufferings are.
Like those who dvvell in still-resounding Caves,
Where Nile sends headlong down his rapid waves,
Are deaf, because the Clamors constant are,
The Water not out-thundered by the Air.
So, still oppressed, Custom at last denies
Unto our Souls the use of Faculties.
Thus is Your case in forlorn habits dressed,
Robbed of your friends by fear and interest.
Whilst Princes little think (since change is sure)
To pity others is to be secure;
Like those, who neither dying men deplore,
Nor have more thoughts of frailty than before.
But HE above, to make his Power known,
What exceeds ours, has fitted for his own;
And can by those bad Instruments restore
Your Crowns, that were their ravishers before.
By Jealousy, and their ambitious Pride,
Which may their Crimes among themselves divide;
Till in each others guilty bosom too,
They sheath their Svvords more justly than they drew.
Like Cadmus children that were born with strife,
Their quarrell's not less ancient than their life,
Which never in successive mischief dies,
And factions still on other's ruins rise.
So a svvell'd VVave in all its pride appears,
Whose certain fate the follovving billovv bears.
In Storms, ruin on ruin still depends,
Till want of giddy waves the quarrel ends.
So Justice your returning Throne prolongs,
Till they upon themselves revenge your wrongs.
That without Victory you may Conquest find,
And without Blood your peaceful Brows may bind
With all those Crowns, which are as much your due
As Birth and Virtue can contribute to.
Thus the great Power of all, having first chose
To make your Virtues great and safe by Woes,
Will, by as unexpected ways, restore
Your ravished Crowns, as they were lost before.
To AMARANTA. The Fate of Scorn.
IF you the world could Conquer one by one,
You Would then want Trophies for your boundless mind;
Like that ambitious Alexander the Great, of whom Juven. 10. Aestuat infelix
angusto limite mundi.
Prince, who wanted room,
In the strait circuit of the world confined.
Then like the Tyrant Suetonius, in the Life of Nero, reports, that in his last
extremity, when he sought for Spicillus the Fencer, or any, to dispatch him:
And equally wanting Friends and Enemies to afford him that last favor; Ergo
ego (inquit) nec Amicum habeo, nec Inimicum?
Nero you must fall;
Such fate's as his due to such cruelty,
Unpittied and unminded too of all,
At once without a Friend or Enemy.
The Soldier that joins Conquest to his name
By Victories, when overcome with years,
(As you must one day be) preserves his fame,
Not by those wounds he gave, but those he bears.
So when your Charms in Age's furrows lie
Lost, and forgotten, they had once so moved;
One Wound amidst your heaps of Victory
Would better tell, that you had been beloved.
Then like a Tyrant ravished from his Throne,
You Will wish, that you had gentlier used your own.
Song at AMARANTA's Command,
set to the Tune of ARCHIBELLA.
FAir Amaranta, if thy Eyes
Could force some feigned tears to rise,
It might my easy thoughts suffice.
And joined with mine, perhaps might prove
Enough my Sorrows to remove;
I do not ask they should my Love.
But mine, I fear, thy tears will fright;
And like those The Sava and Danubius, whose streams never mix in threescore
miles together, as Sir Henry Blunt in his Travells affirms.
Rivers that take flight
In the same Banks, yet never unite.
Those streams from springs like ours might flow,
The tears can never united grow,
Of feigned grief and real woe.
Should you too weep, though 'twere for me,
I should be so concerned for thee,
To beg again thy cruelty.
No, there is no way to cure my pain,
But paying Truth and Love again,
Such, and as great as feeds my flame.
To the unconstant CYNTHIA. A SONG.
TEll me once, Dear, how it does prove
That I so much forsworn could be?
I never swore always to love,
I only vowed still to love thee:
And art thou now what thou were then,
Unsworn unto by other men?
In thy fair Breast, and once-fair Soul,
I thought my Vows were writ alone;
But others Oaths so blurred the Scrole,
That I no more could read my own.
And am I still obliged to pay,
When you had thrown the Bond away?
Nor must we only part in Joy,
Our tears as well must be unkind:
VVeep you, that could such truth destroy;
And I, that could such falseness find.
Thus we must unconcerned remain
In our divided Joys and Pain.
Yet we may love, but on this different score,
You what I am, I what you were before.
To the Same.
YOu are not, Cynthia, better pleased than I,
That you first led the way
Through this dark night of blind Inconstancy,
And first found break of Day.
To freedom now we will sacrifice dreams past.
'Twas my good fate to cry Good Morrow last.
Perhaps so soon I could not dis-engage,
Having a greater score.
Some Birds will longer hover round the Cage,
Though 'twas their Jayl before.
Yet sure I meant not long to sit about
The ashes, when the fire was quite burnt out.
Since now my Jailer has my Chains untied,
I Will hold my hand no more
Up at Love's Bar; he is condemned untride,
That has been burnt before.
Now that heart-sickness which she gave, protects;
It Is seldom that the same plague twice infects.
Breasts that have known Love's cruel slavery,
Are better fortified
By that experience than they ere can be,
By reason or by pride.
Then blush not that you quenched this amorous flame,
But blush with me, if we two love again.
To the Same.
TEmpt me no more (fair Cynthia) it is as vain,
As was the hated Action when you lost,
What you unjustly fancy now to gain;
Though at the same repeated vice's cost.
For he you loved more than your Constancy,
Must suffer now as then you injured me.
Such punishment attends that hated sin,
That the repentance of it, is a Crime:
And you to gain my heart must act again
The vice which lost it first, from being thine.
How justly does Love's-god his power show,
In making the unconstant ever so?
That Cleop^tra, whole beamy gained her as absolute an Empire over Julius
(...); as he had over others, by his victories and virtues. After him, this
Queen as various in Love, as in Ambition, extended her Conquests over Marcus
Antoni^s, to whose power Octavius Caesar put an end, overthrowing the Lovers in
a Batrell, and designed Cl^opatra to adorn his Triumph, who by death prevented
a shame, so contrary to her former glories.
Queen whose charms on Caesar all could do,
He did to others by his Sword and Mind,
Making the World his Slave and Lover too;
Had she as constant been as fair and kind.
Octavius would have blushed at thoughts to have,
Romes conquering Caesar's Mistress for his slave.
Nor did one Caesar justlier think his Love,
Paid to her charm's, whilst equal flames she feels,
Than to other when she did unconstant prove,
Designed those beauties for his Chariot-wheels.
So you may fall unpitti'd as she did,
Unconstant unto all things but her pride.
Those beauties which in your fair face and eyes,
So long have rendevouz'd in Constant pay,
Like Armies still attempting victories,
And alway's kept on duty, must decay.
Then when those troops of beauties once decline,
You Will feel the want of your lost Truth and Time.
To CELIA. Who desired to have Verses, that were written on Her in a glass
Window, to be given Her in a sheet of Paper.
YOur praises which the vvounded glass did bear,
By your Command this paper now must wear;
Both's due to you, it is just all praises meet,
Of Women, in a glass, or in a sheet.
To AMARANTA. The Confession.
Now I confess, I am ore'come,
Though the out-vvorks were stormed before,
Yet they seemed slighted and not vvonne;
Whilst I had a Reserve in store.
But she that Conquers not in part,
Stormed then my heart;
Which famish't reason kept before.
She had corrupted so my Spies,
And me to that Condition brought,
I durst not send abroad my eyes;
But like a Covvard vvink't and fought.
For when I did those helpers use,
They brought me nevv's;
She had fresh troops of beauties got.
See what is unrestrained desire,
And to give leave to vvandring eyes,
Like that fond fool that plays with fire;
Where all the Ammunition lies.
And to attempt retreats is vain,
When the laid train.
Had taken fire from her eyes.
Now my blown flame can fuel find,
Of every thought I have, and knows
How to digest my peace of mind;
For in distempered breasts Love grows.
Well did the ancient Poets feign,
That from the Main,
And troubled Waves, Love's goddess rose.
Yet though condemned, I blush to grieve,
As much as once I did to love;
I Am pleased his Laws grant no reprieve:
He that to Fate would slowly move,
Has lost his courage with his heart,
And that mean part
May make her scorn a justice prove.
To Mrs. Mor. on the Birth of her First Son.
THus Heaven does you and us from fears redeem:
At once gives Joy; and to that, Joy Esteem.
Those relish Ease that first have tasted Pain;
By knowing what we want, we value gain.
So great and perfect now your blessings are,
You seem in more than what is frail to share;
Whilst you renew your lease of life and fame,
By living thus in virtues and in name.
It Is just this child should be in all your heir,
And equally of life and virtues share.
For whilst he lay within his living Tomb,
How could he but contract what was your own?
So water, poured into a vessel, owes
A relish to the cask through which it flows.
Thus you give virtues and give life away,
Yet not less good, nor suffer by decay.
One flame unto a thousand may give light,
Yet has not less, nor does remain less bright.
But thus whilst life and virtue you bestow,
Think to his happy passion what you owe.
Had you left unrewarded his pure flame,
You must have lost your share in time and fame.
So in the Chaos before Love made way,
Both Time and Glory unregarded lay.
But see what mutual obligations past,
You gave him Joys, and he thus makes them last.
The Dream.
STay thou still, dearest Shape, O do not fly!
Why do those charming looks appear so strange?
In the other world there is no inconstancy,
Nor has my Love in this admitted change.
The Joys in the other world the gods bestow,
Do from enlarged love and knowledge flow.
Since then you needs must know I have been true,
And my faith tells, you cannot but be so;
What cruel unknown Law obliges you,
By this reserv'dness, to increase my woe?
Like Tantalus, who always is denied
Those streams which by his longing senses glide.
Is it as wise men often tell us here,
Though love and knowledge shall have an increase,
They Will have no partial applications there;
Knowledge resolves in Praise, and Love in Peace.
As Sunshine equally on all reflects,
Yet to one object most no beam directs?
Or are you now forbid to own a fire,
(Though kindled by the blessed shape you bear)
Whilst raked in living ashes? This desire,
You sure may own, and sure the gods will hear.
In pity of my woes this blessing give,
That I may die, or unconcerned may live.
A DIALOGUE.
Thirsis. Charon. Their. CHaron, O gentle Charon, bring thy Boat.

Char. Who Is this that calls with an unusual note?

Their. Hither thy Vessel, gentle Charon, drive.

Char. Thou speakst as if that thou were now alive.

Their. And may I still be so, unless to me
Thou tell large joys of your Eternity.

Char. Why would thou know? since those that bodies have
I seldom row, or those that want a grave.

Their. Ep^^ thee why?

Char. A sinful Soul will sinck
My patcht-up Bark almost below the brink.
Should Bodies too with their offenses go,
'Twould sinck me quite.

Their. By that then thou do know
If any Soul has past these fatal streams,
Whom good or ill has governed in extremes.

Char. Perhaps I may.

Their. Then, gentle Charon, tell
What I shall ask, and I Will reward thee well.

Char. Ask quickly then, for here I never wait,
Souls crowd so fast; Ambition, War, and Fate
Send custom still.

Their. Did not thy fatal Boat,
But lately, as if lost in tempests, float?
If thy Boat feels the humor of the Soul
It bears, sure it did lately strangely roll.

Char. I carried such a one, a Woman too,
Who then I guest had been too much untrue,
My Boat so tottered still. Would go where she
Now lives?

Their. Not I, but rather tell to me,
What she does there?

Char. She fickly wanders now,
And ever must, in glo^my shades below.
It Is just they never should directly find,
Or know their way, that never knew their mind.

Their. I should have wandered too, it seems; had I
But thought it fine to whine, and grieve, and die.
Nor yet her falsness, nor the cruelty
Of one more fair and good, could work on me,
To break my heart; perhaps it did my sleep.
Did thou not carry, over this fatal Deep,
One that appeared severe, yet strictly good?

Char. My Bark did then but gently kiss the Flood;
She was no weight, for virtue was her guide,
And helped me too as much as could a Tide.

Their. She sure sits always still; but should I find
Her in your World, Might she at last grow kind?

Char. No, Never now; for there may grow a crime,
Where there can be a change in thought or time.
But if to go to her thou do desire,
Thy joy must be, at distance to admire.

Their. I thank thee, gentle Charon; now I Will stay,
Since I must either dote, or lose my way.
I Will back to our dull World again, and find
A Mistress, if I can, both fair and kind.
For since at last we hither all must throng,
It Is good, I see, to bring one's heaven along.
I hope the gods too will with this dispense,
To be unconstant in one's own defense.

Char. Why then farewell.

Their. When I return my scores
I Will pay in virtues which shall be thy Oars.
Back to my World I Will go,

Char. and I to mine.

Chor. That Breast has heaven's light where Virtues shine.
Heaven dwells in breasts, kept free from crimes and hate;
The place does but preserve from change and fate.

The Resolution.
NO Cynthia, never think I can
Love a divided heart and mind;
Your Sunshine love to every man,
Appears alike as great as kind.
None but the duller Persians kneel,
And the bright god of Beams implore:
Whilst others equal influence feel.
That never did the god adore.
The riches of your Love's put forth,
And every man retains a part,
You cannot called in, to make you worth
The purchase of a faithful heart.
Hope not to be mine, or your own;
You cannot your self to me restore,
The Nest is left, the Birds are flown.
And bankrupt-Love sets up no more:
Your kindness which at random flies,
Makes your Love-patients all secure,
But they will find your Emp'rick eyes;
Can only palliate, never cure.
Though I resolve to love no more,
Since I did once; I will advise.
The love of Conquests now give over,
Disquiets wait on Victories.
To your much injured peace and name,
Love's farewell as a tribute pay,
Grow now reserved and raise your fame;
By your own choice not your decay.
She that to Age her charms resignes,
And then at last turns Votary;
Though Virtue much the change inclines,
It Is sullied by Necessity.
The Opinion.
LOng have I thought, It was in vain,
To seek to purchase Love or Fame:
For both alike would slide away,
Or by my own, or her decay.
For Love and Fame, crowned with success,
Do from enjoyment both grow less.
Had the god's so, but been content,
I would have lived indifferent.
Not to have feared extremes of fate,
Or Cares, that from lost Joys take weight;
Indifferency all safety keeps,
There Is none unhappy whilst he sleeps.
But strangely wak't, she did surprise,
My bliss and reason with her eyes:
So lazy Princes wanting aim,
To seck to purchase love and fame,
Are by some slighted power overcome,
The scorn of others, and their own.
Now she too much her power knows;
So some resisted stream o'reflows
More than its usual banks; nor I
Dare longer her just power deny:
That must above the Common rate,
Not reward passions but Create.
To AMARANTA, doubting his Constancy.
AS from a neigh bouring rock, afflicted eyes
See their loved object, tossed by threatening waves,
Rude messengers of angry destinies;
Their swelling wombs grown fertile too with graves.
Safety and joy, their nature lose; whilst he,
Share's with the others, fears and destiny.
So from the height of all my happiness,
Whilst I see storms of fears oppress thee so,
I wish thy justice more, though kindness less;
My grief is far more gentle then thy woe.
Though both ways led unto my fate, yet I
Would as thy Martyr, not thy Traitor, dye.
Seldom, its true, the mighty stock of Love,
Meets in one mind, with such refined sense,
As to preserve that which it cannot improve,
Only by paying its own just expense.
Not all those taxes which vain eyes design,
To many beauties, and decaying time.
Yet there is Love, like mine, can know no end,
Above the reach of any change or fate,
I Will smile at beauties too, that would pretend
A reformation in my happy state;
Be but as kind, as I will constant prove,
And make my Joys as perfect as my Love.
Upon hearing Mrs. M. K. sing.
OUr vain Philosophy can only teach,
But not command, when sorrows make a breach
Upon the heart: but to thy voice we pay
Obedience, whilst we slight what wisemen say.
Thy charming breath through our enchaunted ears,
Possession takes, where once our hopes and fears
Raised storms before, and the becalmed breast,
No longer now by cruel care's oppressed.
'Twere Heaven protected thus from all extremes,
Were but thy breath Eternal, and our Dreams.
So Orpheus, led not by his fate but choice,
To the dull world of shades his charming voice;
Brought Heaven there, and made the torments cease,
The infernal business all locked up in peace.
His voice, the busy Furies could compose,
And thine our passions, Furies great as those.
By Lethe's streams, which brought forgetfulness,
Souls were secured of present happiness.
So thy Loud voice, not only Joy procures,
But, by oblivion too, our cares secures.
We, whilst you Sing, in state of bliss remain,
And when you cease, shrink to our selves again.
AMARANTA, to the god of Love.
AH, mighty Love, what power unknown,
Have thou now used more than thy own!
It was thy conduct and design,
But not thy power that Vanquished mine.
As a great Captain to his Name,
Of every Conquest joins the fame;
Though 'twas not by his power got,
But Army's, by his Conduct brought:
So when thou could not do it alone,
Thou lead'st his troops of Virtues on.
And I now feel by my surprise,
Thou have not only darts but eyes;
Just god! now take again thy Arms,
And rally all I have of charms.
What power and conduct cannot do,
Make his belief contribute to.
So, when the earth some promise shows,
That she does greater wealth enclose;
Believing men search her rich veins,
And crown their hopes with unknown gains;
May he, but at the first, incline to Love,
Then by my Faith, and Time,
His Justice, after the surprise,
Shall be more fettered than his eyes?
THE BLIND LADY A Comedy.

The Persons.
SIgismond King of Poland. Albertus Vaivvode of Ruthenia. Phylanter his son.
Mironault Vaivvode of Lithuania. Hippasus, Pysander, friends to Mironault.
Lycespes, friend to Phylanter. Symothacles, General to the King. Peter,
servant to the Blind Lady. Messengers, Huntsmen, Tenants.
Mirramente, the Princess. Amione, sister to Mironault. Philena, a great Lady
attending the Princess. Coeca, a Blind Lady. Quinever, her Maid.
The Blind Lady.
ACT 1.
SCEN. 1.
Enter Albertus, Phylanter. Alb. BUt upon what injury, Phylanter?

Phy. Love and Ambition, Sir, those two great injuries
Of men's seduced minds, which fill the thoughts.
Full of Revenge, not with the justness of it.
What Mironault has done, moves not my hate;
But what he may, my fears. By her, a Kingdom, Sir;
And, with her self, a World --
Falls in my arms. How slow you are to crown
Me and your self with happiness?
You can love neither, and deny.

Alb. But are you sure he comes?

Phy. I am certainly informed so.

Alb. Yet consider, son, how will the King resent,
That whilst he is paying his duty to the Princess,
He should be there surprised?

Phy. That is your part for to prevent, Sir,
Telling the King, (such minds are ever jealous)
That his designs were to surprise the Princess.
'Twill appear service then, and may destroy
My Rival's interest, if not advance my own.
Those, Sir, that traffic in these seas,
Fraught not their Bark with fear^:
Besides, there needs none now.

Alb. Yet think again, though, as you are my son,
I can deny you little; and it is more just
You should, deny your self, and not obey
These hasty passions. He never injured you;
Or if he had, there were a nobler way
For your reven^e than this. You are angry
That the world's pleased with him, and that he may
Enjoy a bliss you wish for; or, at least,
Because he wishes it as well as you;
A Quarrel which Mankind must lay aside,
Or all be Murderers.

Phy. You told me, I did obey my passions,
To those you give your reasons then:
As much you may expect from them,
As if you told the winds they blew. too hard.
Think of the Cause, then judge of the Effect.
It Is Love -- Love for the Princess too,
For whose fair sake, Who'd not attempt
The angry billows swelled with horrid storms,
The Sea-gods Pyramids, when every wave
Bears too, like those, within its womb a grave,
Or dangers yet unheard of? Determine, Sir,
For I resolve to act; and let the story then
Come to his unprepared ears.

Alb. Well, that I may proserve you
From some more unadvised course, (if more can be)
I Will do it; but take heed
Of letting violence be offered to him:
Preserve thy self free from so foul a crime.
Love's way lies not through blood. Consider too
What we now go to act; nor blush
To think thou did do ill, or that 'twill throw
Aspersions on thy judgment, to dislike
The folly thou had dotingly embraced.
He Is wise that sees his error at the last,
Who weighs all these in perfect scales,
Shame of his crime, and not his wit, prevails.
Farewell, I leave you to your thoughts.
-- I Will on my way to night.
Heaven direct and prosper you.

Exit. Phyl. How nice his conscience was -- now to my business.
And thou, great god of Love, that rul'st my heart,
Attempt but Fortune with as kind a Dart;
That whilst I reach at what can scarcely be,
Fortune as madly too may dote on me.
-- Now all things but design
Leave me -- and yet -- it looks but odly,
To put off all this honesty at once,
And to have none about me.
Or was it ever mine? sure I borrowed it,
And it is a thing that is taken up on trust;
I owe the world so much; I Will think on it
When I can pay it. Lycespes, welcome,
Enter Lycespes. I was resolved just now to seek you.

Lyces. You would have found me still prepared to serve you.

Phyl. You are my noble friend, nor will I say,
That I shall try it now; this only can
Preserve it. But words are wasters of our time,
And robs us still of action. As fast then as you can
Get all our friends in readiness, as many
As possibly you can, well armed and mounted.
Return with all the speed your Love can make.
As we go you shall know all,
The rest must live in ignorance.
What Power now to invoke I hardly know,
Yet every god has felt what Love can do.

[Exeunt. ACT 1. SCEN 2.
Enter two Huntsmen. 1. COme, the Princess is hard at hand:
And if we haste not, she may overtake us.
To night too, we must lodge the Deer.

2. We need not care for that; this Forest
Is so well stored, that Game's in every Thicket.
It causes the Princess constant progress
Into these parts -- But who are these?

Enter Mironault, Hyppasus, Pysander. 1. It Is the brave Mironault.

Mir. Well overtaken, Huntsmen,
Is the Princess
Yet far behind?

2. No, my Lord, he is almost in sight.

Exeunt Hunts. Mir. I thank you --
-- Whither does Love thus hurry me?
A Tyrant that denies the smallest hopes,
Where he gives largest wishes!
The greatest Beauties are like greatest Wealths,
Subjects for all men's wishes, not their hopes.
Fears share with Love the Empire of the heart,
Rendering alike the Lover and the Coward.
Danger's the awful Mistress of the one,
Who fears to tempt her, lest he should endure
That fate too quickly, which he knows is sure.
So, whilst the other's Mistress too is ignorant,
Only more slow, the pining Lover dies,
And that sure fate but hastes, if she denies.

Hyp. Dear Sir, let not grief thus torment you.
You should have there a nobler Guest, your Reason;
And were that there, there hardly could be room
For such disorders. Passions are like Thieves,
That watch to enter undefended places,
And rob you too of all that put's a difference
Between Wild-beasts and Man. Yet, mistake not;
Your grief, if not despair, is the fond passion
I speak against, and not the love they spring from:
That were her injury, to whom alone
All is due, as Rivers to the Ocean.
Yet Nature has decreed, that she must love:
Believe your worth and your devotion then
As great as any --

Mir. O Hyppasus --
It Is easier far to counsel than to act;
And every one's provided with the wisdom,
That has not interest in the misfortune.
And those that in Feavors, though it is their ruin,
Wish Rivers of drink; the standers by,
That then advise, and, may be, wonder at them,
Would, in the same disease, do just so too.

Pysan. You know not, Sir, but this great goddess
May be a little merciful: by this hand,
If she be not, I Will be revenged,
On half the Sex at least, by proving rigorous
To those poor Wenches I have prated to;
That Is every one almost that e're I saw -- Then forsooth
Will the poor creatures wish their amorous heads
Filled with Romances, pine, and die,
With Willow-garlands under Myrtle-shades:
And grief for them will kill the Mothers too.
Your Princess shall not have many Female Subjects.

Mir. I thank thee, good Pysander, for attempting
To mix thy mirth with my opposing griefs.
But they are contraries, and cannot meet in one.
-- but let it perish withme -- I must again
Desire your secresies.

Hyp. Nay that is --

Mir. Pardon me, Hyppasus --
I know it is needless to repeat
A wish of mine to either of you:
But what men's thoughts are full with, issue forth,
With too much haste and freedom.

Pysan. Will you take my advice, Sir?

Hyp. Nay pray, Sir, hear him.

Mir. Come, what is it, Pysander?

Pysan. Wholesome extremely! For the kind constitution
Of a decaying Lover; this is the short Receipt.
In the first place, make your self -- very -- drunck.
Nay, nay, you need not wonder; by divine Bacchus,
It Is a rare expression of passion to court disorderly,
To make a mere Chaos of one's self, and then give her*
The honor of Creating you; then, besides,
All truth and all good nature will appear.
If this be not the way to be considered, I Will be judged --

Hyp. How do you like it, Sir?

Mir. There Is kindness in it to me, I know, Hyppasus;
And were I capable of mirth, it might produce it.
But Grief and Love are thronged together,
And have scarce room enough.

Hyp. Have either Joy or Grief, we will share with you;
Nor was it our fears of having part
That made us wish you none; we value you
And our own lives at the same rate:
We wish them free from all misfortunes,
Yet share all willingly rather than part.
But we must alter now that show of trouble
Which we have given our selves; for the Princess
Must needs be near.

Mir. See Hippasus --.
I had forgot the subject of my thoughts,
How greedily I wish, yet fear to see her!
Like some poor Votary, whose holy thoughts
Sets off so much, the joys of Paradise,
That it employes as many fears as wishes.
-- Hark she comes! You Powers above,
Lend Love and Fortune now their eyes,
To help, or see at least, their sacrifice.

Prin. You 're well met, my Lord,
Was it a chance,
Or your design that brought you?

Enter Princess Philena and followers. Mir. It Is all I have about me of
ambition,
And of large wishes, that I may often
Have leave thus to present my service.

Prin. Your service, Sir, has been so much considerable,
That I should be alone guilty of folly,
Did I not value it at such a rate,
As the whole World have set upon it.

Miro. If I had such a power, to oblige
As much, as you are pleased to say I have;
The World's applause, could not so much reward
My services, as your receiving of them.

Prin. My interest, next to my Father's,
In this obliged Nation by your valor,
Has made it gratitude ever for me,
To avow that and more.

Mir. I have then much of my best wishes crowned,
Yet should you know all that my heart conceals,
Though it be much like this, you would be displeased
With what you have pretended to allow.

Prin. I cannot find this guilt about me, and can less guess.
How you should have a thought that should displease me.
You cannot but oblige, and I as hardly
Can tell what is injury, if you should do it.

Mir. This is a kindness, still admired Princess,
That I must never ask the meaning of;
But to my flattered fancy, so interpret
As you would never do: yet it is unjust,
That I should use, the least kind word from you,
With an advantage to my self.

Prin. Sure, I may give you leave to do it,
For such a confidence I justly have
Of your great virtues, that you ever
Pursue your own advantages with others.

Mir. It Is true, to the undeserving World,
I can perform all this, only to you
I am unjust, that never wish
A good to you, when I desire most.

Prin. I hardly understand you: if I do,
The world is more obliged to you than I.

Mir. Such a strange Character, my fate
Has thrown upon me, yet my self,
And all that World, which seems so much
Beholding to me more than you,
Are as much less in my esteem,
As are the sands unto the mingled jewels,
The Negro brings up from the Deep together.

Prin. Is there a possibil^y to know,
Your meaning then?

Mir. You should, if I were sure you would forgive it,
Yet thus much take in guesses. Could Shades be sensible,
And wish the embraces of the Sun, were not that Lamp,
Injured by that which loved it, could rude beasts
Be passionate for Empire, and not injure
The Throne because they loved it. It Is I
That am more dark then all those shades,
You brighter then that Sun; It Is I
That am that Beast robbed of all reason.
And you above all Empires; I have acknowledged
My unsuspected guilt, because it was so,
And though I cannot leave my Love,
I may my Life. --

Prin. You have done more than given me leave to guess,
And since I have my self been guilty too,
In giving you the occasion I shall forbear
Such a displeasure as is due, and let you know.
It Was easy too for me to err, that could so little
Imagine you to be so guilty: I shall add
Only thus much, that as you value
My presence or esteem, repeat no more
Any thing of this nature -- Come let us on:

Exeunt Princess and Attendants. Mir. So Merchants for a tempting venture
Bankrupt themselves; yet what wealth had I
Before I knew my poverty from her?
It Is nothing I have lost, the difference is,
That I have something now I wish to lose,

Hyp. She is not, Sir, a greater enemy,
To your content, than you are to your self:
It Is you enlarge her frowns by fancied fears,

Mir. Those that are free from danger, my Hyppasus.
May look and wonder at another's fears,
That is environd with it: it is Concern
That is the excuse for Passion; were you my Rival,
The Counsel would be juster if you gave it,
-- Come we must not stay behind, --
There Is nothing but a Lover pleased with sufferings.
All other rigors of this World,
Our wishes and endeavors still oppose,
The Prisoner hates his bolts, whilst he remains
Pleased not so much with sreedom as his chains.

[Exeunt ACT 1. SCEN 3.
Enter Phylanter solus. Phyl. TRust me a little, Fortune, with my self,
I do not ask thy aid grow big my hopes,
And swell unto a Throne,
To Crown my Love, and my Ambition on;
From thence I Will view the thing called Honesty,
And grieve it is so contemned, and ought to be.
-- Man is like pliant Wax,
That yields unto a fair Impression,
Though sent not from the noblest Metal:
And, in this world, it bears an equal show
To seem but only honest, or be so.
And when the Crown's once gained, there needs no fears:
Crimes change their natures then, or Men change theirs.
-- Dye -- Scruples -- in my thoughts,
And let my mind be a preposterous grave,
That bore you first, to bury you again:
-- and your base issue -- Fear --
Dye too, when Beauty and a Crown's so near.
-- Lycespes welcome; what news?

Enter Lycespes. Lyces. All as you would have it, Sir:
The Troop is marched, and stays you in the VVood,
Between this and the Castle.

Phyl. Let Us follow then;
For Time's a busy Offerer of our Interests
To every check of Fortune.

Lyces. We make some threescore Horse,
Which will be three Divisions; one for each Port.

Phyl. Let Martianus command the last.
As we go, I Will give you perfect Orders.
I wish they had some means to cherish a Resistance,
That he may help to his own ruin;
He must not live to plead his innocence.
But Time, that never will be staid,
Calls us to act what we have scarcely waigh'd.

[Exeunt. ACT. 1. SCEN. 4.
Enter Princess, Philena, Mironault. Prin. YOu're welcome now, my Lord, and I
desire
No clowd may dwell on any brow;
Let no such prejudice happen amidst our sports.

Mir. If you be not obeyed, admired Princess,
Where you command, it is extremely strange;
And yet, I fear, it is possible.

Prin. As possible it is I may suspect my power.
But, my Lo^d, I had forgot to put you in remembrance
Of perfec^ (...) story you began,
As you (...) it, of unhappy Lovers.

Mir. The Princess, Madam,
Was taken by Phylanter, whose great valor,
Shown in that day, deserved all Prisoners:
To whom he nobly offered Liberty,
Without a Ransom, or Acknowledgment
Unless to you. Before she thank't him,
She made enquiry for the Prince, my Prisoner;
As if she knew not how to use
Freedom nor life without him; and by reason
That he was full of wounds, Phylanter
Waited upon her to my Tent; at the first sight
Of him she so much loved, covered with wounds,
She stood amazed, perhaps too wished her self
What she appeared, but a dead Statue.
At the same time he raised his feeble eyes,
Which seemed to take unkindly her delay.
At that she came, and kneeling by him,
Made such expressions of unfeigued grief,
That though we understood not what she said,
Yet that was plain enough. He now grew speechless,
(And she almost) yet still with signs,
That seemed expressions of more trouble.
For leaving her then all the world
Within her arms, he died; she but stayed
To be assured that he was dead. Then with a haste,
That showed a willingness to follow him,
She drew a Vial from her bosom,
And drank it off, before that we could hinder her;
Whose violence, on an enfeebled heart
By so much grief, with unbelieved haste,
Wrought Execution.

Prin. Poor Princess! 'twas her hard fate to love;

She had been else no more concerned,
Than those that now survive.

Mir. And she perhaps as unconcerned to dye.

Nothing but a deserving Love
Could have taught her a way so glorious
To end all cares. She now enjoys him too,
Or else insensible that e're she lost him.

Prin. Did that young Prince command that day the Army?


Mir. Yes, and, as we learnt, he was the Heir

To the Tartarian Empire.

Prin. It Is nothing but a Prince
Could have been so unhappy to lose at once
His Love, his Life, his Empire.

[Enter hastily Hyppasus, Lysander. Hyppasus takes Mironault aside. Hyp. My
Lord --


Mir. Ha


Hyp. Let not the Princess see it:

The Castle is surrounded by a Troop of Soldiers,
Commanded by Phylanter; I fear you are their aim.

Mir. I?


Hyp. You may guess the causes, Jealousy and Baseness.

Think, or you are lost.

Mir. Ha -- it is very happy.


Pys. I don't understand that.


Mir. I Will press them nobly: Are they many?


Hyp. They are divided, as we guess. The gates are yet kept shut.


Pys. I Will go view, and ins^antly return.


[Exit. Mir. The Devil on the mischief! if their aim

Be toward me, it must be for my life.
A Parley cannot save me, I am resolved
To sell it.

Phil. Upon my life, Madam, there is some disorder.

View but the eyes of Mironault.

Prin. My Lord, why are you moved?


Mir. I, Madam?


Prin Pray, Sir, let me entreat of you the cause.


Hyp. Nothing that ought to give you trouble, Madam,

There Is something that requires
The presence of my Lord without.

Prin. If there be any that would speak with him,
They shall be here dispatched.

Hyp. That cannot be, Madam.

Prin. Come, my Lord.
There Is something I can guess at (if I be not deceived)
That does assure me, I may command you.
What business breeds this alteration?

Mir. I dare not disobey you;
The Castle is surrounded by Phylanter
With Troops of Soldiers; and, as we guess,
My life's their aim.

Prin. The Castle surrounded! and your life their aim?
It is impossible: they dare not think it.
I will go see their rudeness.

Mir. Not for the world, they know that you are here:
And their intents they will act unto their power.

Prin. Is there a better way?

Mir. Yes any, rather than dye tamely,

Pysa. For heaven's sake, Sir, resolve: Phylanter's now,
Enter Pysander. Forcing the gates, being denied entrance
For all his Soldiers, who loudly now
Call you, A Traitor. Upon one side
Which I Will conduct you to, it is most probable
You may escape --.

Prin. Ah me!

Mir. May I believe, (fair wonder of your Sex)
That though your cruelty designs my fate,
Yet you're displeased, that these should be
The Executioners? I shall then dare
To oppose all their furies, that my Life
May be Love's sacrifice alone; forgive me too,
If I dare own that Love, you frown upon.
You need not scruple to grant this --,
To any that must ask no more.
And may that peace, you give my dying thoughts,
For ever live with yours --.

Prin. Pray say no more, think of your safety,

Mir. See, she weeps --.
With pity ever dwells forgiveness too,
My wishes then are crowned, and I can have
No greater, unless that it were possible,
I might hope more and live.

Prin. O Mironault! --
So much confusion mingles with my thoughts,
I know not what to say; and yet I wish
That you might live, and cannot be displeased,
Though hope should be the cause.

Mir. So Sailors in a sinking vessel,
May see a calm begin --. This treacherous world,
Never wants mischiefs to prevent
The greatest blessings that are near-approaching,
To crown man's greedy wishes. --
But I mistake, to doubt that Life
Which you have given leave I should enjoy.
Who only have the power of it. This shall witness,
[Draw. How much I covet to preserve,
What you wish safety to; nor is it possible,
That I should unsuccessfull prove,
That have no other use for life but love;

[Exeunt. Prin. The gods protect and guide you, O Phylena,
What Is to be done?

Phy. Collect your self, dear Madam, all may be well,
Let Us to a window, that o're-looks that side,
Where they intended to break forth.

Prin. I dare not see him fall.

Phy. Fear not Madam, Heaven will preserve.
So fair a Life, that has your prayers too.

Prin. Hark, they are engaged, lets see if it be possible,
A noise of fighting. To give him more assistance than our wishes.

[Exeunt. ACT 1. SCEN 5.
Enter Mironault wounded, [A noise. Mir. STay hasty drops, not to preserve
The life that does pursue you.
But the blessed shrine, where Mirramente dwells,
See, it is not my wishes stays the purple current:
Man's still most near to dye, when he would live,
And live when he would dye; calamity,
And, the more dangerous extreme, prosperity
Commits this violence upon men's wishes.
Yet since the gods denied for either cause
To destroy life, or to protect;
In stead of Choice, we should oppose Neglect.
Hark, the noise increases still.
[Noise. -- sure they are lost --
They fought it nobly, though, if my ears
Deceive me not, I hear some coming.
Enter Hyppasus and Pysander. Ha Hyppasus and Pysander!
Then I am happy in spite of all misfortunes.

Hyp. Dear Sir, you cut your way so nobly,
We should have reached you sooner else.

Pys. And so we had Sir, but two or three goodfellows
Still s^aid us upon conference --

Mir. Well, here is no staying, we must forward;
But whither, Heaven knows; 'twas an unworthy action.

Pys. For the honorable part of the story,
We Will, if you please, comment upon it hereafter.
In the mean time, it is more needful to observe
What a condition we are in to help one another.
Hyppasus would make dainty whistles,
My bones are already rattles:
The best house of receipt I know would be an Hospital.
A noise again -- On, good Sir.

Hyp. The most by-ways must guide us.

Mir. Heaven direct us --

Pys. O what a speech could I now make
Of this frail world. But however,
I Will not stay now to do it.

[Exeunt. ACT 1. SCEN. 6.
Enter Princess, Philena. Prin. HE cannot sure escape.

Phy. Rather believe he must, there is a better fate
Reserved for so much worth. Our hopes are now
The policy as well as justice of our hearts.
You know we did discern, how over the plain
Some hasted single, and Pylander said, they were divided.
At first you saw how fast he made his way,
Triumph and Danger waiting on his Sword.
The villains too, like dull opposing clouds,
Gave way to the fair Sun; And then Phylanter
Was on the other side.

Prin. Alas, Phylena, Fears are so powerful,
That in concerned breasts they govern all.

Phyl. It is our follies that enthrones them so;
And to just wishes hopes are much more due:
Use them, dear Madam --

Prin. I need not blush, Phylena, to confess,
(And yet I shall, whilst I am doing it)
That I have more concern for him
Than others have. When you know this,
You will not judge your counsel then
So easy to be followed --

Phil. Pardon me, Madam, if I confess,
That I believed as much when I advised you.
I have had many reasons for such thoughts
From yours, though greater from his virtues.

Prin. O Phylena, advise me how to do, not how to grieve.
I see I must be forced to a hard exigent,
To let him perish, or in his relief
To appear too concerned, though not too just.

Phyl. Your reason, Madam, will not have leave
To decide that; it is Love will be the judge
Of all his dangers. But now, Madam,
What is the next thing we must act?
Or must we suffer too?

Prin. Nay, Heaven knows; I sent one to enquire.
Now -- what is the matter?

[Enter a Servant. Ser. They say, Madam, they came for Mironault,
Who had designs upon your Highness.

Prin. And have they taken him?

Ser. No; but we hope they will.
He has left abundance hurt and dead.

Prin. Go, be gone you fool; you are all suspicious rascals,
Fain would be thought State-wise.

Ser. Madam.

Prin. Be gone, you hoping Coxcomb.
There Is something more in this, Phylena.

Phyl. I cannot guess, unless it be Phylanter's jealousy,
Urged by your constant favors unto Mironault.

Prin. Its possible. Hark, a noise; we shall be more informed.

Enter Phylanter, and, being half entered, speaks Phyl. -- Escaped --
Now by the gods your lives shall pay for all.
You dogs and Cowards --
-- Madam, I humbly crave your pardon,
My passion makes me hasly, when your Cause
Gives the just anger.

Prin. My cause, Sir?

Phyla. Excellent Princess, Yours; for this foul man
That seemed to pay his duty to you,
Bore in his breast a traitorous design
Here to surprise you; which I hearing of,
Straight hasted to prevent it, though my fate
Was too unhappy in the loss of him.

Prin. Ha!

Phyl. But let --

Prin. Do, thou not blush, or blush for me at least,
That I have let thee injure Truth thus long*
And wronged an innocence, which never dwelt
Within thy infant breast? Stay not to reply,
But leave me with your tumults.

[Exit. Phyl. Then I am lost; my last stroke now I Will strike,
And strike it bravely too -- Despair,
Thou has the noblest issues of all ill,
Which frailty brings us to, for to be worse
We fear not, and who cannot lofe
Is ever a franck Gamester.
Nor will I fall alone, should he enjoy her,
I should repining dye. Envie's the vice
That never leaves us till we fall from that,
The best ompanion of a hasty fate:
I Will cherish it as others would a Virtue.
He that declines himself --
-- when Chance or Fortune has declined him first,
He learns of those mean helpers to do worst.

[Exit. ACT 2.
SCEN. 1.
Enter King, and Albertus. Alb. IT was this day, Sir, that he intended the
surprise;
And, notice given my son, with such few men
As he could get in readiness, he hasted thither.

Kin. It Is well; but take heed there be no foul play in it.
For Mironault has ever appeared
A subject fit to ruin mean suspicions.

Alb. Love, Sir, can alter all; none more than I
Did hear (and wonder, with a pitying thought)
This error of his hopeful Youth; but when I think
He is a Man, and Youth dwells in his veins,
That still pr^pares for Beauty and Ambition,
The easy heart. Then look upon the Princess,
And see in her the pain and pride of Nature,
Her fresh unsullied beauty, that would tempt
The gods to gaze and love; I could almost forgive --
-- but must believe.

Kin. Ha!

Alb. To add unto the power of Love, and alf those joys
Her heavenly beauty brings a Kingdom too:
Crowns the ambition of his high-fed youth,
That makes all dangers less, from whose high top
They see it lessened in the common vale, and only fit
To tame the spirits of the meaner minds.
-- he that dares do,
Will act what his ambition tempts him to.

Kin. I know not; I would see just to all, and would be safe;
And Injuries are as unpleasing to me as Injustice,
I would not bear the one, or act the other.
When malice spreads a rancour in the breast,
That needs a policy to bear it forth,
The minds of Kings most think to fit with jealousy,
As ever apt for that; believing still,
That all such fears dwells with their height of glory.
Take heed, my Lord, that this so loose opinion
Leads not your tongue, and casts that brand on me.
I believe well of all. On farther proof
I shall think best of you.

Alb. Would I were well off.
[aside. We have not yet (Great Sir) so little left
Of kindness to our selves, to play with Thunder;
Nor yet so mean --
A thought of you, to let you live in danger.
Heaven knows all the ambition that now rules our thoughts;
And all we hope for that should crown our wishes,
Is to appear loyal to you, we are as free,
(Whilst you are so from danger), as a young Lamb
From hate or malice.

King. Nay my Lord, you do mistake, if you believe
You suffer in my thoughts, I am prepared
Still to reward your care, equally so
To punish or preserve his crime, or innocence.
When Kings do fall from this, and let each wind
Conduct them with its giddiness;
Their Kingdoms at the last, must suffer shipwreck.
Perhaps your innocence, may once as well
Suffer unheard, from some malicious tongue:
I never yet harbored an ill opinion,
Raised from suspicion, or a meaner thought
From others envy, nor yet forget
To cherish those, whose loyalties are greatest.
Justice is still impartial, and all Kings,
Should only hold her scales: he that strives
To weigh down one with power, is unjust
To that Great King, that put him first in trust;

Alber. I Am lost --
[aside.
King. But my Lord; we give you thanks now for your early care,
We would have none discouraged, to be loyal,
It Is that which will adorn you here,
And help you to Eternity hereafter,
Whilst men are just, pleasing rewards will live
Within their breasts; greater then I can give.

[Exit. Alber. He Is gone. --
-- I would his honesty were too,
That sits upon him like so fit a garment,
The workman's paid, to have the credit of it.
He Will help the gods to many cu^^omers.
How now!

[Enter a messenger. Mes. My Lord; --

Alber. From whence come thou, -- Ha, --
What news? my mind mis-gives. --

Mes. From your Son.

Alber. Why, what is the news?

Mes. But ill, -- when that your son
Had round beset the Castle, and all thought sure,
The gallant Mironault, in his fearlesse mind
Weighing the bonds of death, and of an enemy,
In perfect scales; the first appeared the lightest,
And through one Port, bravely with his two friends,
Issued like Lightning which foretells a Clap,
And Thunder followed too: whilst in despite
Of their resistance, through their lives
He forced his way and safety. --

Alb. And so escaped?

Mes. Yes, but they are still pursuing; the Princess too,
When that your son appeared, as if her eyes
Had borrowed, rage from the afrighting danger,
That Mironault was in; upon her brow
Enthroned it with revenge, and so with threats,
Left him unto his fears, who by me
Desires you to retire straight from Court,
Whither the Princess now directs her haste,
And march with all your forces; no other way
Is left to make Conditions. In the mean time,
He Is still pursuing Mironault.

Alb. It Is unhappy.

Mess. Necessity has left no other means:
Without this, he bids me tell you,
You may dye tamely.

Alb. Well, I must go; it is the fate of guilty men,
That such should seek at safety through more crimes.
Men are unhappy when they know not how
To value Peace without its loss;
And from the want learn how to use,
What they could so ill manage when enjoyed.
Ambition gives this blindness, yet permits
The eyes to gaze upon her tempting baits;
But in attempting, not what dangers are,
They see the Throne, and not the blazing Star.
Thus foolish his ungoverned youth
Has made us both alike,
Who, rather than to share a common good,
Ventured through danger at uncertain glory:
Nor could my power or prayers persuade him from it.
With such a grief the Ruler of the day
Shook his illustrious tresses, when he heard
The ambitious Phaeton make his bold Request,
-- who did prefer --
Before the counsel of the god himself,
The longed-for glories of his glittering Throne.
Yet Phoebus mourned, the bonds of Nature tie
Faster then our own good or honesty.

[Exit. ACT 2. SCEN. 2.
Enter Princess, Phylena. Prin. THat I had wings, Phylena; this revenge
Justice it self will follow.

Phyl. Pray heaven, Madam, no designer
Has been before us.

Prin. It is my fear.

Phyl. But yet,
You may be confident of your father's temper,
Which does dispense Justice with deliberation
Besides your interest.

Prin. Would we could learn what were become of him.
They still pursue him, sure; and heaven preserve
His noble life from an untimely fate.
How the State-rascalls too were pleased
With the suspicion of a treacherous danger;
And grew as busy as a new wak't Fly,
At the first news of Summer.

Phyl. There is a baseness runs through all their veins,
And ranckles in their bloods, which to their children
Descends; a loathed Inheritance.

Prin. But who are these?

Enter Amione and Follower. Phyl. A very handsome person.

Prin. Extremely fair, I swear; she bends this way.

Amio. Excellent Princess --
[she kneels. Pardon the rude griefs of a distressed Maid,
That throws her at your feet; for your clear eyes
(Which sends a comfort upon pleased beholders)
To see and pity; you, that nature gave
Perfections above all; it is you alone
We must believe excells in goodness too.
Nothing that is ill can have so fair a dwelling.
You shall have still a Virgin's prayer,
That yours may never successlesse fly
To those above, that those fair blossoms
Never have cares for to disturb their calmnesse,
Or force a wrincle on those snowy plains;
But may the beauty of a peace within,
Preserve and equal those your outward lustres.

Prin. Rise, pretty Maid, you should have asked and tried,
Whether at first I had been worth these prayers.
She must be very good that does deserve 'em*
See, Phylena, flowers, I swear,
she rises weeping Receive not so much sweetness from fresh drops,
As she from those. Her grief adds to her sweetness.
What is it, gentle Maid, you would desire?
Promise your self, if I can help you in it.

Amio. The gods reward you. Let me but blush,
And I will say, the act may too; he is too near
That I should tell you more. And yet, methinks,
He does deserve as much as I can say;
And his cause named to my poor heart,
Seems eloquence enough to move a pity.
Pardon my disturbed passions.

Prin. Nay, fairest Maid --
You injure me and your own hopes together,
To keep me in suspense: I would as willingly
Yield you my aid, as you could haste to ask it,
For the ble^^ subject of your fair opinion.

Amio. I do not doubt your goodness; pardon the throng
Of all my tedious griefs. Know then,
You best of Princesses, for sure his name
Has reached your ears, the unhappy Mironault,
That much deserved to live, is like to fall
By bloody and unworthy hands.

Prin. O Phylena! I Am lost.
[aside. In that beauty is all my comfort buried.

Phyl. Madam, what do you mean?
Madam, for heaven's sake; why, Madam?

Prin. I prithee let me go, thou art too cruel.
I shall enjoy peace undisturbed hereafter.

Phyl. But hear her out, and do but search the truth,
Then I will let you die. I would not for the world
Any should guess the cause.

Prin. Alas!

Phyl. Why, if they do, they cannot condemn the grief.

Prin. O Phylena, when Love has entered in the outward Forts,
Yet there is still a small reserve of Reason,
Which Love laughs at, rather than thinks it worth
His rage or storming; for he knows it must
Perish and starve, when the relief
Of all the nobler Faculties are kept out
By the insulting Conqueror, who contemns
All the attempts I fain would make against him.

Amio. I see I am decreed to all misfortunes,
she speaks as no minded. That I should now disturb you too, who, heaven knows,
I willingly would please. Why do you turn
Away your head? How often have I heard
His prayers sent to heaven for your joys,
That now denies to look upon his woes?
I Will kneel again, for in such a cause
It were impiety to rise successelesse.
Nothing but Seas and Winds are deaf to prayers,
And Beasts to mercy; who would expect
A hidden form in undisturbed skies?
Or in that clearer breast a cruelty?
If you deny, I Will grow a fixed Monument,
Still to upbraid your rigor.

Prin. O Phylena, why do you let me languish?
In her beauty dwells an undoing luster.

Phyl. What mean you, Madam? can you believe
The world can show a subject for your jealousy?

Amio. I see I grow a trouble, I durst have sworn
You had been more charitable. How often have I heard
The now unpittied Mironault affirm,
You were the treasure of this world's perfections;
And wondered any thing but your fair self
Should know what joys were. Perhaps you too
Believe as much, or else you could not think
All his unpittied miscries are just. Had Nature
Given you a Brother, and your early loves
Blessed undisturbed from Nature's fruitful Cradle,
You would have begged -- as now --
His hopeless sister does.
But sure I should have pitied more.
And yet perhaps our interests makes us partial:
Yes I could wish I had your power to try.

Phyl. Now, Madam --

Prin. Forgive me, gentle Maid; it was the power
Of thy told griefs that seized my faculties,
And left me able to do naught but grieve.
Forgive the time I lost to share with thee:
You may forgive the injuries of kindness.
And though my self were witness to the action
Thy griefs made it a new afflicting story.
Each storm renews in Merchants minds
The story of the shipwreck. Nor do I blush
To avow this, since I must not lose
The justness of my breast, that does believe
His innocence above suspicion.

Amio. May heaven inspire you to wish well,
And grant your wishes too, you might have then,
Perhaps, a joy as great as he would have,
Did he but know you pity him.

Prin. In the performance then of what I say,
He will have more; which I so much wish him
That you shall witness all pursued with haste.
Nor shall you be a stranger longer to me.
Yet I shall blush, although I give you leave
To see the partiality: but more time
Now spent in grass or leaves, would be his injury.
And we may ruin, what we would relieve,
Should we without attempting succor grieve.

[Exeunt. ACT 2. SCEN. 3.
Enter Mironault, Hyppasus, Pysenor. Pys. WOuld I were a Dog, and could lick my
self whole.
I shall be as fly-blown, as a ruin cheese,
How is it Hyppasus!

Hyp. But scurvy, would we might rest.

Miro. O me;
It Is an unhappiness, that I should bring
You into these misfortunes, you have deserved
Better of me, and yet you may forgive me,
I would have shared as much with you.

Hyp. We would not make such an excuse then, Sir.

Miro. You chide me nobly, I find, I need some rest.
And yet by all those powers, that caused these mischiefs,
My life shall end them, e're I Will be his prisoner.

Pys. Nay, we will all dye; I hope it is no offense
To talk of saving our sweet lives;
In order to that, this next fair house
Must be our Garrison, it is ten to one,
But there we find some three or four brown loaves,
To victual us for a day; perhaps a sample
Of good seed-Corn, lies in the parlour Cubbard;
We shall eat moderately, come we must advance
And storm it.

Hyp. You have no other way Sir, we are so weak,
There is no refuge else, and we are still
Hotly pursued, if they intend our mischiefs,
We may hold out against that petty number*
If they raise more, we too shall have relief
By the Princess, or your friends; if not,
We may make some Conditions. --

Miro. A wretched shift, and yet it may preserve us,
But let us use it nobly: Heaven guide us.

Pys. I Will advance, and knock: Within there*
Ho!
[knock. He struck so hard, the basin broke, --
Enter Peter. Ho! what a Tarquin's here,

Pet. Who have we here?

Pys. Two or three strangers that have lost their way.

Pet. And you would be directed.

Pys. Pox on your nimble Charity;
[Aside. We have been set upon by thieves, and hurt,
And must desire some small refreshment.

Pet. Why, this it is; The age is grown so perfect now,
That all falls in the way of Begging,
And by the word Refreshment.

Pys. Nay, Sir, none of your moralities on the age,
Help us to the speech of the Master,
Or Mistress of the house, It must be so, Sir;

Pet. Here Is neither.

Pys. What the Devil is it.

Pet. A Lady.

Pys. Plague on your formal Coxcomb.
Lets see your Lady then,

Pet. That Is more then she will do you.

Pys. By this light, but she shall.

Pet. Had she sworn so, she had been for-sworn;

Pys. Sir, we would willingly be Civil,
Pray let us receive your Lady's answer,
But no more of yours:

Pet. You shall have it. --

[Exit. Pys. This Rogue has bagg pipes in his Lungs.
A mere Land-Remora, we wanted but the plague
To have heard his pedigree;
He had learned the policy of the old Roman,
To ruin by delays; we might have fainted
Under his wise Cunc-tator-ship.

Hyp. 'Twas a rare Scene, be sure, Pysenor,
You shall have none of the best drink.

Miro. When she comes, you shall be chief,
And we your humble servants.

Pys. And I Will be insolent enough: now Sir,
For such a Bird as the Princess.

Miro. Nay Pysenor. --

Pys. Hang it, this love, 'twill make your wounds ranckle.
There Is nothing like a merry plaster.
Hark, I hear them rusling,
Enter Caeca, Ruinever, and Peter. Mercy on us, what have we here,
December, with the too scurvy months at her heels?
She has dig'd up all her ancestors;
And wrapped their winding sheets about her,
I Will advance.

Caeca. Where stands he, Peter*

Peter. Straight on; now must not I proceed
For fear I should discover, she were blind.

Pys. VVhither a devil will she march
She goes straight on. Hippasus, lie down in the way,

Hyp. And be hanged, put on your serious face,

Pys. Save you sweet Reverence.

Caeca. Are you the Gentleman? Peter, is this he?

Pet. Yes, forsooth.

Pys. Slight, she would have her man make affidavit of it,
[aside. We are those Madam, that would fain obtain
Some pity in your eyes, -- why, -- she is blind,
[aside. Blind, as an old Do-Cunny. --
We want a Charity, and we hope
That your grave years, has taught you that fair story,

Caeca. From whence come you?

Pys. We are Gentlemen, and have been hurrby thieves.
You need not fear to help our hard misfortunes,
Our weak Conditions cannot threaten danger,
You may believe, we would deserve your kindness,
And our lives, which if you preserve,
Shall wait upon your beauty.

Hyp. What a dissembling tongue the rogue has,
[aside.
Pys. We went as long, as we could gain a leave
From weakness, as unwilling --
To be a burden to any, but our fates
Threw us on you, for which we dare not chide them.

Hyp. This rogue would court a bitch --
[aside.
Pys. Sirrah, I Will fit you. --

Caeca. A fine well-spoken gentleman.

Pys. For if we did, we should be too unjust
For you must needs be good, because the gods
Let you so long live to instruct the world,
-- Or else afraid of your blind company --
[aside. But at your feet --
We throw our selves and all our miseries,
And cancel fear, whilst we exp^ct to hear
Our doom from your fair lips.

Caeca. Quinever.

Quin. Madam.

Caeca. Is It a handsome man?

Quin. Yes indeed, as e're I saw.

Caeca. I feel just such a Qualm, as I had
When I was still falling in love, he has a sweet tongue.
Noble gentleman, you're very welcome;
You shall have all you want, pray come near:
Indeed, I am much taken with your speech,
It Is very courteous, once in my youth
I understood these complements,
And have not yet forgot them;
I shall remember them more fresh
If you repeat them.

Pys. Why so, I shall be engaged to tell tales
[aside In the chimney-corner.

Caec. Peter, Go in, get the best chambers ready;
Let them have something presently to eat.
Pray come ^n, you are very welcome.
Your hand, good Sir.

Pys. We are your servants. Now do I walk
Like the great Turk, that newly has put out
The eyes of an old kinswoman. Here we shall find
Good Fortune sure, for that whore too is blind.

[Exeunt. ACT. 2. SCEN. 4.
Enter King solus. Kin. HOw much unknown is real happiness?
And all are cheated with the name of thing?
Or we are all deceived, or else the joy
Grows poor by the enjoyment; to me
A Crown's a glorious misery,
Suspicion waits on all our appetites,
And sleep not pleases but affrights.
Kings have hard ways for to preserve a Crown,
To give to others fears, and hide their own.
The way's but narrow between frowns and smiles,
To avoid both Contempt and Tyranny.
For either is a Rock to split upon
This glorious and frail Bark of Majesty;
When-People do not ask, and yet Kings give,
Content and safety with them both may live.
But when they venture to reform the State,
Princes must suffer then
By their own fears, or by their people's hate.
They hide still what they mean in a redress,
And know ill acts are buried with success.
Seek peace in storms, and in disorder safety,
-- Till in a Chaos they have felt
Constraint and Freedom undistinguisht dwelt.
Their first fond way to reach at Liberty
Is, to assault those they believe too high.
And had the gods not Thunder, sure there are
That would attempt --
-- to light a Candle at a Star.
But Kings, like Suns, that at some time must pay
Their lustres in another Sphere, must leave
Stars fitted with influence to direct this night.
-- Yet, like the Queen of Night, to know,
That to his beams their luster they do owe.
O Symathocles, you are welcome; Did you dispatch
Enter Symathocles. What I directed you?

Sym, I did, Sir; and the Troops were marching,
But the arrival of the Princess prevented.

Kin Is she come, then?

Sym. But now arrived, Sir.

Kin. It Is well, Symathocles.
You have heard sure of the late accident:
It Is odd; What think you?

Sym. It Is hard to guess, Sir, easier far to doubt.
The Princess must inform us all.

Kin. I have suspended too my thoughts in this.
Haste is an ill companion still to Justice.
And whilst we hear at distance things unprov'd,
The story of their lives prevails still most,
That has been fair in Mironault. Yet our frailty
Guides us to unsuspected acts, so may the best of men
Fall to the least suspected crimes; that weakness
Crows with our years, and alteration^s still
By Nature nur^.

Sym. You have weighed, great Sir,
Things in so just and serious a scale,
That whilst thus evenly you preserve your mind,
You Will need no other Oracle; mean hasty fears
Still tyranny begets, non can deserve
Their safety, that attempt it that way
That poorly tells the world, he fears the reach
Of common hands; none but the Eagles gaze
Upon the Sun, unless it shrinck in clouds.
Nor do the common eyes attempt your glories,
Till shrouded in your fears. He Is still most safe
That tells the world, He cannot be in danger,
For they will believe it then, and it is most just,
If they will borrow fears, that he should trust.
Justice will then be ripe, when every thought
Takes its slow birth neither from fear nor passion.
And 'twill be fruit worthy a King to bear,
And bless the appetites of them that gather.

Kin. You have hit my thoughts; See,
Enter Princess, Pylora, Followers. Here comes more Information.
I Will see if she will begin.
-- Rise, you are welcome.
[Prin. kneels.
Prin. I must not, Sir, till I receive
-- more then a common Blessing --
Your Justice is enough to case my fears.
Yet pardon me, if so much of Woman rules me,
To tell you all I suffered.

Kin. What mean you?

Prin. Great Sir, you might believe indeed
I should be undisturbed, where you procure
Peace from your careful thoughts. And sure it was
The child of Insolence and high Contempt
That cursed attempt the ruden^sse.

Kin. It was so, but to the matter.

Prin. When at my journey's end I was arrived,
Thither came Mironault in his own language
To pay a duty which he owed your child;
Where being scarcely rested, and resolved
With the next rising Sun to seek our sport,
But word was brought, the Castle was surrounded
By Soldiers, commanded by Phylanter;
Their business was for Mironault, w^o they said
Went to surprise me there, who only came
With two brave friends, and I dare swear with thoughts
As innocent as Infants; when he heard
The Castle was be-set, seriously weighing
Not Justice sought his life but Treachery,
Disdained to fall upon so mean a score.
As an ungoverned Torrent issues forth,
Bearing down all before it, and in the action
Finds its unknown power, when its streams
Are with a stop resisted, o're-whelming
What was believed beyond its power before.
So from resistance his disdaining rage
Achieved a victory, which his thoughts
Would never have hoped nor aimed at; still Philanter's rage
Pursues his noble life. This is enough
Whilst you are just, nor need I to repeat
The injury to me.

Kin. But they perhaps
Might have a secret message of the intent
Of Mironault, you would be loath I see
To have one testify as much.

Prin. You cannot find one so extremely bad,
So far from being to himself a friend;
His story in the world has nobler truths,
Than to be fouled by any base accuser.
If all were true, it is your justice sure,
And not their fury, that should punish.

Kin. For farther satisfaction of you; Who waits there?
Go call the Lord Albertus hither.

[Exit Messenger. Prin. In this petition too, Sir, oyns with me
This Maid, who from one womb
With the unhappy Mironault took her birth:
You will have many knees as he has hearts;
And yet none needs to beg, for you are just:
Yet you must pardon those loves that mix with fears.
We oftener then we need wipe precious Jewels.
His value makes us foolish.

Kin. He is beholding to you --
How now --

Enter Messenger. Mess. The Lord Albertus, Sir, is fled
As soon as he came from your Majesty,
He instantly took Horse.

Kin. He was in haste -- Symathocles --

Sym. Sir.

Kin. Gather the Forces in a readiness
That were to meet my daughter, then wait
For further Orders.

Sym. I shall, Sir.

[Exit Syma. Kin. Your pardon, fair Maid, that I seemed so to forget you;
It only was my care, you shall have justice
And should have had without an Advocate,
Your beauty though's a great one.

Amio. The gods preserve your Majesty, with your years
May peace still grow, that give it unto others,
Till you shall go to have eternal rest.

Kin. Thanks, gentle Maid, the rich Arabian Fumes
Are not so sweet to the delighted gods,
As thy calm prayers from thy harmless breast.
Come hither, Mirramente, I have not been
At leisure yet to bid thee kindly welcome.

Prin. Pardon me, Sir, that I must once again
Trouble your ears, nor think too lightly, Sir,
Of my request, it is the child of gratitude.
I would in person, Sir, relieve
Him, that has suffered for my sake,
And in my sight contemned.

Kin. Symathocles, would you not take it ill
To have a General put over your head?

Sym. Not, if it may serve you, Sir.

Kin. Look here, Symathocles, this Amazon has begged it.

Sym. She does the better, Sir, if there be danger
From her fair name we all shall fight in safety.

Kin. Well, take your course, on more intelligence
Move as you please.

[Exit King. Sym. Excellent Princess,
-- How happy I am now to be your Soldier,
Let those be judge that would be sure of victory.
So fair a Cause fought by so fair a General,
-- Can never be forsaken
By Victory or Fortune --

Prin. I thank you, Sir, nor can I think my self
Less happy in so brave a Soldier; if you please
For to dispatch before for some intelligence,
We Will instantly away.

Sym. With all speed, Madam.

[Exit Syma. Manent Princess and Amione. Amio. Excellent Princess;
Which way to tell you all my heart returns
I know not, the gods in blessings thank you,
Who still assist the innocent and mean,
Because they made them so;

Prin. I thank you gentle Maid, from hence my friend,
You cannot cheat my confidence, you will deserve it,
So does your Brother all my best assistance,
I reckon it my happiness, to procure
Your joys and safety; that I may then
Have mine more perfect.

Amio. Now all the powers defend, they should not be:
You never sure broke yet an hours repose
With a dis^urbing dream; in that calm harbor,
All thoughts have been secured from storm,
May they be ever so. --

Prin. Thy brother's cause deserves as much as that.
-- A thousand blushes stop me, --
[aside. Besides thou may be much deceived: the shipwreck past,
The calmest waters may conceal the fate,
As well as the insulting waves,
Amione weeps. -- Why do^st thou weep. --

Amio. To hear, you have been sad, O Madam,
^ardon me, to say an undiscerned power
Ioynes my affliction to your grief;
Forgive me that, I cannot choose but dare,
To accompany you in any thing.
There Is something tells me, that I ought to love you
More then the world does, yet that is very much.

Prin. When I first saw thee, dearest maid,
I could have sworn as much,
And yet thou did not please me then,
Come, I shall disturb thee, it is an unkindnesse
Not to be pardoned, to let thee share my griefs;

Amio. Now you afflict me more: Is there a way,
To be a friend and stranger to your breast,
Though it is ambition, to be an humble one?
It Is virtue, not your greatness crowns my wishes,
And I shall fear, that you will think me only
A friend to that, or else not worth the other.

Prin. I do not doubt thy Love, the story will
Disturb me, when I tell it, perhaps thee,
And yet it must return to me unhelpt.

Amio. How do you know? the meanest thing in nature,
May bring an unexpected aid; Giants that pass,
And lets the obstacles alone, do less
Then dwarfs that do remove them: as they are
Shut in your breast, fed with that precious food,
How can they ever starve? they may at last
Consume your stock of joys, he does like you,
That would defend, within a fair built Fort,
His enemies against his pressing friends
And patiently destroyed by those he saved,
If you believe me worthy, the gods have then
Finished their parts; for they decreed us most
To one another aid: So to increase
Our joys that way, and lessen all our cares,
For still imparted comforts do increase,
And grief divided to a friend grows less,
Our natures too are like o'rec^arged springs,
Willing to vent themselves, and so are you,
Had I but as much worth, as you have trouble.

Prin. I am not proof against thy perfect kindness,
I will keep nothing from thee, but be sure
You quickly understand me, my blushes too
Will tell t^ee half the story, what dos't guess?

Amio. That you should have no cares --

Prin. Can love have any?

Amio. What in this world shall ever be so happy?
I hope it is not that --

Prin. And why?

Amio. A thousand times I have heard my brother pray
That day might never be, I wish as he does too.

Prin. Your Brother would not have me then?
-- How innocent she is! --
[aside.
Amio. He thinks it were unreasonable
That one alone should make the world unhappy.
Weighing their own misfortunes from his joy's
I hope it is not that:

Prin. It Is that I swear. Love has caused all my trouble,
And if thy brother thinks me such a blessing
Why does not he then wish it?

Amio. Alas he dares not welcome such a thought
He only dares to wish none else should have you;
But who must be so happy?

Prin. Your Brother.

Amio. Madam?

Prin. Wonder no more, I could have told
When I first saw thee that me-thought I loved thee
As I would do a sister; yet I was jealous too:
Nay I shall blush, as much as thou can wonder,
Yet he deserves my Love; sure you did then
Read a confusion in me; and I am still,
Disorderd by my fears;

Amio. O Madam, --
-- Pardon me to say the gods have justly so
Decreed that it should be: for I have heard
Him sit and please himself with stories of you,
Till he has made his griefs too monstrous,
And I thought then too prodigal of comfort,
Yet now I think it was all but due to you;
And though I am turned of his religion too
And can think nothing superstition in it,
Yet you may spare the sacrifice.

Prin. Sweetest maid,
I have some reason to believe he loves me,
He cannot sure dissemble; Were thou never yet in love?

Amio. Never;

Prin. Pray that thou never may, or that it never
Have fears for it is Companions, night will wear
Disturbing blackness and not quiet shades,
The light will be too cheerful, whilst you fare
Like an impatient Seaman that would fain
Attain the Port, the gentlest calm
Makes mad, and crossing storms disturbs
But from our own experience thus we raise
Advices that are chid and and scorned by Fate
Who oftnest sends what we least wish, and makes
What we most covet most unfortunate:
But now to his relief, for time
Persues his course with an impartial haste
And my revenge must sit upon his wings.
You Powers above what now is just assist:
Their thoughts were poor, that trifled time and wished.

[Exeunt. ACT. 3.
SCEN. 1.
Enter Mironault Solus. Mir^. TO be still subject to calamities,
We all must bear: yet not esteem it hard
Our frailty sets this odds from higher powers,
And their dis-orders are appeased by ours,
It is a hard injunction of the gods
To set our natures and our selves at odds
When they afflict though due unto our crimes,
Yet they give to the nature that repines
Though if we use it well, none but they give
That blessing, that we are displeased to live
'Twas life first cousned man, and did entice
By knowledge its fair gift to cheat him twice;
Man was a happy stranger to himself,
When he believed his ignorance his wealth;
Did these Extremes our knowledge never employ
We should have less of cares, though less^ of joy,
For in the mind, they never gain a height
From their own natures but each others weight;
Thus truly man has either more or less,
From what he had, not what he does possess.
As if the god's would give us nothing here
Worthy of our affections, but our fear,
For should we fall from happiness the store
Makes us more wretched of those joy's before.
Such a disease is life we hold so dear,
Health's in the other world, our Physic here;
-- O -- Hypposus -- what is to be done
Enter Hyppasus. Fortune has strangely jaded us --

Hyp. Heaven knows: I am confident we are persued,
The house is strong, had we but any men
We might resist their numbers, and by that time
They have supplies, we may have too relief.

Miro. Where Is Pysander?

Hyp. Shifting from the old blind Lady, who follows him
As if he were her dog and led her,
And as the devil would hav'it, her reverend blindness
Is at a venture ^am in love

Miro. We must resolve of some thing, and what is most hard
In ignorance, and without any aid: so may a ship,
With wounds in pieces torn, expect as well
To sail or fight; --
-- And yet me thinks there might be made
Some use of this Pysander's fooling.

Hyp. By the Mass it is true, she has Tenants
That were obliged, without all doubt to assist her
In the holy War; they live here till they dye
Of the infection of old age; see Sir,
Where Pysander comes marching with her maid.

Enter Pysander Quinever. Mir. Let Us conceal our selves a little, and observe.

Pys. Nay, by this light I Will never lie for the matter.
If thou have no faith ^hou'lt be damned.

Quin. Say you so, Sir?

Pys. How could thou choose but guess it? did thou e're know
A dunghill without a Cock upon it. Mere sympathy
Guides me to love thee, do thou not find
Some such kind of thing for me?

Quin. Indeed I have a grudging toward you.

Pys. The devil take up the quarrel.
[aside. Nay it is grown to that I dream on thee,
Me-thought last night I rode a Flanders Mare,
And every night I dream of a fresh Beast,
And then I think on thee.

Hyp. What means the Rogue?

Mir. Peace, on my life he has some farther purpose.

Hyp. Lord how she I wells, hold a stick of fire to her
And she will piss.

Pys. But since I love you so, you must assist me
In what I told you, for I should be loath
Now to be taken from thee; and I know
The rascals will attempt the house for me.
This can be brought about no other way,
But by report that I should marry
Thy Lady, for then all her Tenants
Will be the willinger to assist me.
But all this while thou shall be dear Lindabrides,
Thou shall rule and govern; and for thy comfort
Above pragmaticall Peter; and, by this hand,
If he at all cross us in this design,
I Will hang a thousand crackers at his britch,
Then throw him off from some high Tower,
In a high wind, hung between bladders;
And all this for thy love.

Quin. And will you still be constant?

Pys. As a Bell, still in one Tune:
And that we may be sudden, and I safe
To follow our Amors, persuade thy Lady
And instantly conduct her this way.

Quin. I Will take my leave first --
[she kisses him.
[Exit Quin. Pys. Slid, her lips are lined with Cosier's wax,
She kissed me in a full Career.
Sure she has hoarded up a store of onyons
In her dry chaps, to butter against winter.
The Devill's troubled but with one Dam, I have two
-- And there is a formal Weathercock,
They look which way the wind sits by him,
That from deliberation fetches wisdom;
And when he gapes at bedtime, it is a clinch
For my blind Mistress now, whose chaps are mewed
Of all their teeth, which yet she hopes again
Will spring like a felled Copice, and from the gums
New sprouts shoot up, she is almost deaf,
Would she were dumb too, for her tongue's obliged
To supply other organs, and tells us all
Her life, perhaps the History
Of twenty years a time -- This thing
Must I make love to, with brevity and ease.
I Will go through all the scenes of Courtship with her,
She shall have Serenades on an old Jews-trump,
That was Pirk-abboths, an emblem of antiquity,
And all my little Oaths shall be
By Cupid's Eye and hers, the Devill's in it
If I am then forsworn -- O how now,
Mironault and Hippasus appear. What are you bolted? Come Gentlemen,
What Is to be done? Hyppasus, thou were wont
To be nimble at sudden chances.

Hyp. How insolent the Rogue is? now he thinks
We know not his design.

Mir. Nay, Pysander, we referred all to you,
We only are your poor friends.

Pys. Well, a Mathematician would not have breath enough
To tell the kindness of my Stars --

Mir. But for this rare fortune --

Pys. Why my old vessel is sailing this way,
When she appears, stand close
And you shall hear it.

Mir. Come I conceive, and did over-hear
Some of your policy, and believed
There is no other way to save us now.
If we can get but men, it is but throwing
A work up in two places, the other parts
Are strong enough.

Pys. That shall be my care too, but when you see
The old Beldam coming, be sure you vanish.

Mir. We must be quick, our time has straightened us.
As soon as they can have intelligence
They will be here.

Pys. What if we could send away to Court?

Mir. I Will rather perish than believe I can
Be worth her care.

Pys. Why thanks then to Pysander
That believes himself --
Worthy his own --

Hyp. Would her Ladyship were come.
Prithee Pysander let us have no time delayed
In asking how she does, and what is a clock.

Pys. Thou have reason to be more confident of my wit.
-- See where they come --
Enter Caeca and Quinever. And like the Graces leading one another.
Let Us over-hear a little.

Caec. Indeed he is a proper Gentleman,
And it is great pity he should suffer.

Quin. It is indeed, I would not for my Maidenhead
It should be in your house.

Pys. Nor I by this light.
[aside.
Caec. I think as much; indeed he speaks as well
As any that I knew these six King's Reigns:
Where is he, Quinever?

Quin. He said he would be hereabouts.

Hyp. Now Pysander uncouple them.

Pys. So I may be hunted, but I Will advance.
-- Save your sweet Ladyship --
I took the boldness, urged by my love,
To trouble your kind ears with a petition.

Caec. You Are very welcome, I shall be glad to hear it;
And though I am old, and people think decayed,
I can tell how to judge a worthy Gentleman.
Hey ho, in my time I have heard many complements,
And blessed was he could gain but a good look.

Pys. He shall be damned now that does.
[aside.
Caec. The world and I am altered.

Pys. A Carthusian swear the world is,
-- I Will swear for thee.

Caec. And yet I have warm blood now in my veins,
And it will beat sometimes: I have heard men say,
That age has vigor lies within.

Pys. She Will tell me by and by she can fart fire.
[aside
Caec. And so indeed --

Pys. I must interrupt her; But you forget
To hear what your poor servant asks.

Caec. I pray what is it?

Pys. First I must beg you, that you will have the confidence
To believe, I love you; old Lutes
Still sound the sweetest; many a man
Has travailed many miles, and tedious ways,
To see a lesser monument, and since I love you,
I would preserve my happiness, sure you ought then
To return equal kindness.

Caeca. By my troth, but justice, and indeed, I will,
I shall not be so cruel to grieve you long
So worthy a kind gentleman; I esteem
A tedious coyness vice, you put me in mind
Of my old principles, in my Grand-mother's time.

Pys. That Is according to a new account,
Three hundred years before the world begun.
[aside.
Caeca. And as I was saying in her time
Matters were quickly ended, I am still
Of the old fashion.

Pys. In short, then, since you see I love you,
I must beg your assistance; for these rogues
That hurt us, as I hear, are now hard by.
Your Tenants, and a few servants would with ease
Defend us from these wanderers, that I may
Enjoy my happiness with safety. This your Commands
With ease may finish, and I bless
The fate that brought me hither.

Caeca. I pray your self command them,
You shall have full power, that in time
Must be my husband.

Pys. Plague on your nimblenesse, how she mumps, --
[aside.
Caeca. When my last husband Sir Percivall died,
I little thought to have had another suitor;
But you men have the power to winn us,
And I can tell you, such a tempting Gentleman.

Pys. For ought she knows, a Sign-post
With Friar Bacon's brazen head upon it, --
[aside. -- If you please Madam, I will attend you,
When your Commands have settled us in safety,
I shall presume to tell you my Love's story.

Caeca. I shall be glad to hear it, pray lead on,
What you Command, shall be a law. --

[Exeunt. Manent, Mironault and Hyppasus. Mir. Yet Hyppasus, we breathe; and
safety now
Begins to wear an easy shape.

Hyp. The rogue has work't them finely. --

Mir. By Heaven, he is the best composed man,
I e're yet knew, for in the worst extremes,
His cheerfulness, and judgment is the same;
We are prepared; if they find us now,
Phylanter's bold to bring them on to action,
Fortune but guide, an equal sword to mine,
And borrow frowns from all the destinies
To hang upon thy then contemned brows.

Hyp. But I believe, they never will attempt us
But seconded with more, for they will fear
What may proceed from Court.

Mir. Never believe, he would attempt this action,
But with some feigned story to my prejudice.

Hyp. But the Princess, Sir, seemed to resent the injury,
She is too noble, meanly to suspect.

Mir. Alas, Hyppasus, they before corrupted
His goodness that should incline to her,
These flatterers beset the thoughts of Kings,
As an ill enemy besieges Towns,
First poisons the fair springs.

Hyp. These are the worst of fears, we may as well
Hope, that his judgment scorns unlikely stories.
But let the worst that fortune can prepare
Fall unregarded on us, the least defense
Will help us to the noblest fare.

Mir. Nobly resolved. --

And when we fall so brave,
The world will find more loss, then we can have.

[Exeunt. ACT 3. SCEN. 2.
Enter Peter, and Quinever. Pet. NAy, you had best teach her to beat a drum,
Do you think to make her now an old blind Amazon.
We shall have the Sheriff to send warrants for u^,
Thus to raise Forces, and not se d^fendo;

Quin. Lord, how wise you are good Peter, at least
You would fain s^em so, I can tell, I Am sure,
Where you have all your wisenesse.

Pet. Where, good Quinever?

Quin. All your law, out of the two old leaves
That lie behind the parlour-cupbord;
Piece, they say, of an old Stature book,
Which has been rotting there these twenty years.
And for your other talk, it is taken out
Of your old Erra-pater; and you, forscoth,
Must seem to be more wise then all of us.
I Am sure, when you made love to me,
And once were out of these two trodden roades,
You could not speak a word, but just, How do you.
And that repeated over with variety,
Of scurvy tones, nay. --

Pet. Why, art thou mad, or do thou think it fit,
My Lady, should defend all wandering strangers,
And enter into wars? I am resolved
To change my station, they are digging up earth
Before the Gates, I cannot pass by,
But I must think of graves, men too brought in,
I think, to fill them.

Quin. Hang your sheep's face, I see that now it is fear,
That your wise worship with your wonted ease,
Should not at leisure drink your morning draught,
And at the Alehouse for two pots
Hear your self praised,
And bribe a man to come to you for counsel
That never had need of any, you have worn your Gloves out
With biting your thumbs ends, to appear wise.
All this put together, got from my Lady's purse,
Thou have been as chargeable as a Regiment.

Pet. Why, Mrs. Quinever, sure you once had
Better opinions of me, though you now
Wash every day your best handkerchief
With yellow starch, and your laced quoiff,
Till it now hangs as if the devil
Had srighted you through quicksetts, not a post
But must be beaten for the rotten powder
To make your hair sit well, and all in hopes
That some of these should fall in love with you.
I vas once thought worthy, then I was honest Peter.

Quin. Marry come up, what, love that transparent nose of thine
That gives the Serenades when thou sleep?
Or thy wide mouth like a dead Lobster's claws,
Or thy starcht ruff like a new Pigeon-house,
Your garters tied above your boots; as if you feared
Your leg so well provided would be gone.

Pet. Why I thank you sweet Mistress Quin^ver go on
And be all mad whiles I lament you sober:
Nay you shall fight by your selves for Peter,
You Will make an excellent ammunition-Girle
Get a bottle to carry hot water in, in time
You may arise to be a Sutler's wife.

Quin. I Will have your wise head fitted for all this
Enter Pysander. And here comes one shall do it.

Pet. O sweet Mistress Quinever

Quin. No fawning now you whelp.

Pys. Mrs. Quinever well met, I was seeking you.

Quin. I am happy I have found you.

Pys. How go matters? we have got some 50. men.

Quin. All goes well: but this wise Gentleman
(Whose wit lies in his breeches, for it is all
He has to know when he has need)
Is much displeased at our preparations,
And asks me if you mean to make
My Lady a blind drummer

Pys. And cannot you convert him?

Quin. No indeed.

Pys. Why thou ungrateful piece of wise formality,
How often have thou had warning to be wise?
I have threatened thee thou should never go
Without a rime-pind at thy back
Which should be thy own grievous Chronicle.
I told thee too that I would have thee painted
Riding upon an Ass and reading Seneca,
I thought this might have tied thy tongue.

Pet. Good Sir:

Pys. Nay hear and mark me, if thou do ^r'e again
Seem to be wiser than thou art, and cross
What now is done, nay if thou dos't not help
And put thy assisting hand to it, thou shall ride
In a hot day upon a well lined sadle
With soap in thy new grogram-breeches, till it work
Like new tunnd beer, and every day
When thou sitst down to dinner one or other
Shall pull away thy stool, I Will spoil thy gravity,
Or anoint thy feet with butter, whilst a dog
Shall lick and tickle thee, and if any comes
Here to oppose us thou shall seem a stratagem:
For on the walls we will set thee, like a thing
Stuffed up with straw, only to make them spend
Their shot upon thee, and in thy turn
Thou shall do duty too, and every night,
Be sure to have alarmes. Speak what you will do.

Pet. I did but utter my opinion: I shall conform.

Pys. It Is well said, and I forgive you,
But take heed you err no more.

Pet. You need not doubt me.

Pys. Come wench, now we breathe in safety,
And thou proud Peter's conqueror.

[Exeunt. Pet. The Devil go with you; he has conjured me.
Did ever Turk think of so many torments,
And in what order too he marshaled them?
I am not yet out of a chilling sweat;
Nor shall I get now of enchanted Quinever
One drop of good hot water, God deliver me
From this strange hurly-burly; and yet I dare not fancy
A good strong halter and a handsome beam
I Will go to sleep, for I am now
Afraid of all things.

[Exit. ACT 3. SCEN. 3.
Enter Phylanter, Lycespes. Phyl. THe intelligence is certain they are here,
At an old Ladies, and all hurt; we cannot miss them.

Lyc. Those that I left preparing now come up
Make us 400. strong, your father too
Follows with more.

Phy. We must attempt them (though) before relief
Can possibly arrive from any place,
And if we take him we are sure to make
Our own conditions, the best we can expect:
Our resolutions arm us for the rest.

Lyc. We are prepared and I believe there is few,
That serve you, question policy or danger.

Phy. Ye nobly all oblige me, and for your sakes
I could even wish I never had attempted
What I must scorn now meanly to repent of
But ill intents when they least prosper
Then mu^t be most persued, to reach again
Our first condition,

Lyc. Nay Sir, I think it were no harm,
To wish us fairly off.

Phyl. I would we were, but I am armed;
To dye I fear not, and yet I would
Fall with some pretty character about me,
At least I Will make the Kingdom joy
It had so brave a spirit, and like Rome glory
(In spite of fame) in Catiline who died
At once men's envy, and her pride,

Lyc. We must loose no time Sir, the night
Conceales us, and as yet perhaps
They have had no intelligence,
The house is near at hand -- shall we parley?

Phyl. It Is the best way to find their confidence
Nor can it be a prejudice to us; we traffic now
Only for what we'ave lost: "If we survive
"We Will find at least a nobler way to thrive.

[Exeunt. ACT 3. SCEN. 4.
Enter Pysander, two or three with him. Pys. SO that work's now finished.
Let all the guns be brought into the Hall,
It Is to defend the good old Lady
From the rudeness of Rogues; 'twill be casie work.

1. Yes, yes, we will tickle them.


2. I Will sweep 'em with my father's old Fouling-piece.


Pys. Bravely resolved; but perhaps.
There may be yet no need on it, however
It Is wisest to resolve against all dangers.
Well, my good Lads, be in a readiness, if any come,
We Will ring 'em a peal shall make 'em forswear
Such Holi-daies: they all die rather than wrong
Sir Percivall's widow. Now all unto your places.

1. 2. Agreed, agreed.


Pys. Now could I hug my genius, that through all
Has brought me to this harbor; and yet to think
If we should escape, what my engagements are,
Imprimis -- To marry this old Lady Cow,
And play at Blindman-buff, it is as good lying
With Bulrushes or penny Faggots; she is mortality
Beyond a Death's head and Memento;
And yet she bridles as if she were but now
To be new-back'd and ridden; I have heard
Of a dead body that has long been so,
And yet retain its form, but when once touched
Crumbles to dust; for ought I know she may do so too,
And I be hanged for embracing Mummie.
But certainly I shall touch her gently,
For it is a remedy to see her dressed
Against all carnal thoughts, beyond bathing
In Rivers in a frosty night.
She follows me, and asks a thousand questions
Among the rest
Enquired what I was making at the gate?
I answered her, a Curtain: then she mumpt,
And asked, If 'twere not for her wedding-bed.
She made the truest Hieroglyphick
That ever blind Egyptian hit upon,
For 'twas of earth, and I most fairly hope
'Twill be her wedding-bed; bar death,
The devil cannot find another Rival.

Mir. Pysander come, we must to action.

Enter Mironault Pys. As how and how?

Mir. Phylanter's here hard by already,
And without doubt knows we are lodged.

Pys. Why -- then -- he will knock us, or we shall knock him.

Mir. It Is worth no greater care, my brave Pysander.
Fortune and you have done your parts,
To give us something to employ your valors,
They now shall buy us bravely.

Pys. Nay, I Will not sell my self at any rate,
I begin to have a wondrous value
Of this small composure of Pysander, if you mark it
It Is very lucky to see an old blind Lady
-- should fall in love with it,
One that runs her nose against posts.
But come, Sir, since these Lads will never leave us,
Let Us in and provide for them, they may have
A better welcome than they dreamt of,
Unless Gunpowder lay last under their pillows.

Mir. They shall hear us --
In louder language then they do expect.
The gods but lent us life, and we still pay
Them interest, as casualties and sickness;
Death is the Principal, which when we restore,
We owe the world and gods no more.

[Exit. Pys. Why, its exceeding well; we shall be all
Clean out of debt in the other world then;
Our Creditors are strangers there, so are they here
To me, I Am sure; and in the other world
If I should want, and thither must,
There Is store of faith, and I Will take up on trust.

[Exit. ACT 3. SCEN. 5.
Enter Phylanter, Lycespes, Others. Phyl. THis is the house sure it should be
By the description -- How -- Works thrown up?
All Is quiet though; we must be cautious,
There may be else some trick in it.
-- Summon the walls --

Lyc. Within there, ho -- ho --
Sure they lie buried in security.
As confident of power and success,
As if the Destinies slept with them too,
And wak't at their command.
Let Us wake them all -- and yet it is hard
To rouse an innocence to disorder,
It Is that I fear is their security.

Phyl. O Lycespes!
It is as great a crime (when past) to think
Of things ill done, as it is unthought to act
The ill before; he that does one first cheats himself,
The other cousins him: now to be nice
Is vain, for us that have been cheated twice.

Lyc. Within there, ho --

Phyl. They are dead.

Mir. No, we live, Phylanter,
Mironault, Hyppasus, Lysander, and others, appear above. And far less fear
that fate than you,
That have so many crimes to sinck your thoughts.
Spare your pains of asking us to yield,
We Will sooner find the worst of all extremities;
Danger will lose its nature when you bring it.
-- Nay do not stay --
In expectation to hear me ask
Why you have thus unworthily thrown off
The name of Honesty: Some may fall
Not worth men's pity, but their scorn,
And so do you.

Phyl. You Are very high, so let your actions be,
Your crimes will need it. But I see words
Displease you, you shall have louder Rhetoric.

Mir. Fear not, thy baseness has taught us to understand
That language.

Pys. You, Lycespes, you Treason-hunter,
How, I wonder, did it happen, we did not meet
Your storming worship at the gate?
Pox on you, you were untrussing a point,
The old fighting looseness.

Lyc. You Are merry still Pysander, and very brisk,
Are you so well already of your inlets.

Pys. Hang you, if you bleed as much
As a staid man would let out from a witch
To save himself from enchanting,
The Physicians, Pothecaries, and Surgeons
Must stand about thee, like Pensioners;
If Hyppasus and I, can but get a willing curre,
We are lick't whole, a dog's our only Mountebank.

Lyc. Very well Sir, when I visit you,
I Will bring a spaniell in my hand.

Pys. Hang the couple of currs, say I,

Phy. Your resolution's heard, I Will urge no more,
But leave you to your fates, only thus much,
By me the Princess sends this punishment.
The danger now grows bigger sure, --

Mir. This is mean Phylanter, and you still trifle honesty,
And I time and honor: let the storm come,
-- And he that seems to fear,
Exeunt above. May he unpittied fall, without a tear.

Phy. His Courage still is excellent, great power of love,
That made me give so much to her,
I left none for my self. Lycespes draw round the house,
We^'l storm it instantly, dye all you lesser thoughts,
That at a distance tell your formal tales,
Or else come nearer, and wear noble shapes,
The distance makes you mistier, the dice are cast,
The event will punish or reward what is past,

[Exeunt. ACT 4.
SCEN. 1.
Enter Caeca, as to dressing, a Table set out, and glass, Quinever attending,
Pysander following. Caeca. IS my Captain here?

Quin. Now entered, and like your Ladyship.

Caeca. Very well, leave us then: Come near good Captain.

Exit. Quin. Pys. Mercy defend me. A dressing, or setting up a Barber's shop,
Here the teeth lie, what is this an old head?
A lecture for the best Anatomist; like a rusty Clock,
Taken a pieces to cleanse all the devices,
Set them together some engineer for me.

Caeca. Pray sit near me, Captain,

Pys. I do.

Caeca. O Captain, what a hideous noise
Was there ene now of bouncing, pray what is it?

Pys. Only some wandering Raskalls at the gate,
They Will have their errand suddenly.

Caeca. I would they were gone, truly at the first noise,
I brake one of my pots of Mit^ridate,
With Dragon-water, good for the head and stomach.

Pys. Was there ever such an old Almanac,
[aside At the end of the year Medicines set down?

Caec. Besides the great disturbance from your company.

Pys. Nay, you see when I have freedom
I use into my own advantage,
Visit you before you are ready --

Caec. I shall be ready presently, the time will come
You shall be welcome to me quite undrest.

Pys. The Devil of thy young bones
[aside. Locked in thy old Cabinet.

Caec. I shall unparrell then faster than now I dress me;
You Will help to pull out pins I Will warrant you.

Pys. Rather drive in wedges --
[aside. Why you know we men must court,
You would be bashful else, and it were pity
To loose that time which should be better spent.

Caec. You say true indeed.

Pys. Come Madam, pray dress your self
I Will serve you instead of a better chambermaid
God's Death would she were once furnished
[aside. One may dress and undresse Long-lane as soon.
What want you now, Madam?

Caec. My night-rale, good Captain.

Pys. I shall give her a sheet instead on it,
It lies about her like a casting net
'Slid I have given her never a wascoat,
And now will she call for her farthingale,
I must make haste but cannot go without her;
For her wise tenant's now before they fight
Will see their Land-Lady

Caec. My farthingale, good Captain.

Pys. I thought so, now is she like an old Camel
With that hideous mount on her unfurnisht body.
Mercy how have I set her out! she may make
Good harmony; for she is composed of different notes
She would yield a man more money to show
Than an outlandish beast; my sweet Quinever
I have employed to stave off formal Peter
From making tenants seem as wise as he.
What want you now, Madam?

Caec. My Perriwig, good Captain.

Pys. Which way to set this on now, is the question:
It Is no matter I cannot mistake now
More than I have done.

Caec. I thank you Captain, I hope you and I
Shall live happily and comfortably together.
I was told, my seventh husband
Should be a wondrous honest and an able man.

Pys. That, experience will let you know: I shall tell you
A merry tale toward bed time that will cure
The cough of th'lungs.

Caec. And make one dream huge pleasantly
And that is a sign of youth I can assure you.

Pys. That and your toothlesse Chap's are main ones.
If surious Medea had thrown thee
[Aside. Into her age-renuing Kettle, thoud'st have lept out
With a medley of years upon thee.
Hark, a noise! by heaven it increases still, hark
[Noise
Caec. O Captain, a noise!

Pys. Nay there is two now in the Devill's name:
It still increases, come Madam you must down.

Hyp. 'Sdeath, Pysander, they are falling on
Enter Hyppasus. The men stand all at gaze
And swear they will see their Land-Lady,
We are all lost without some help.

Pys. Madam, you must needs walk
And encourage your tenants, to send these fools away
'Twill defer our Marriage.

Caec. Pray lead and I will follow.

Pys. Come Hyppasus, how fares the noble Mironault?

Hyp. As a brave Ship hemmed by a raging storm
Resolves to throw the balance ore,
Lose all and perish carelessly:
But come, we trifle time.

Pys. Along then, and for your blind Ladyship
If you had no tongue
You should make signs to your tenants.

[Exeunt. ACT. 4. SCEN. 2.
Enter Phylanter, Lycespes. Phyl. COme Lycespes, is the alarm given
To amuse them on the other side?

Lyc. Yes.

Phyl. What resistance does appear?

Lyc. As yet all is wrapped in silence.

Phyl. Where did the messenger say my Father was?

Lyc. At hand Sir with 5000 men; were not best
We should defer the storm till then?

Phyl. By no means; we will attempt it first,
For by that time they may have relief
Come from the Court, my father's sudden flight
Confirmed the least suspicion, helped by the Princess too.

Lyc. It could not choose, you have thrust your self
Into a troubled Ocean.

Phyl. I know it, and now must sink or else go on,
There is no choice in Crimes but of our Fate,
The affrighting freedom of a wretched state.
We cannot hope ere to return again
Back on our fancies to our first conditions,
What tob'd us of the safety we enjoyd
First made us to contemn it;
It Is a stayed gamester too, that would give over
Upon the losing-hand; the most metl'd, or let it be
The maddest one, would stake on all his wealth,
Venture to tire Fortune or himself.
We have bargained now, and chopped a Peace for War
'Twere foolish to d^pend on ought but Victory;
For that will change our acts, or others natures:
The vanquished wear the crimes, and all will fear
To judge or question what they too must bear.
This slender gloss I know must startle thee
That has so much of honesty and courage;
And if we fail I Will quarrel with my self
That cousend thee to follow what thou once
Did love with'honour: fearing to be unjust
To friendship, made thee more unto thy self:
I have used thee as some that have seduced
Young men into bad company, thou have found
Things much unworthy of thee --

Lyc. It Is true, dear Sir, I will not face a lie:
Our acts have given me both amaze and trouble,
The last I threw behind me, may the World
Forget the rest, there is a Fate hangs over all
That shows it is force when it resolves to strike
When we can act at once, at once dislike,
And it is the sad necessity that we must
Persist in crimes again to reach the good
That you intend; this nobly does deserve
My friendship now, and if we fail
-- The world may yet believe*
Our thought's were better, let them choose to grieve.

Phyl. Set on then, brave Lycespes, danger not found
Women frig tchildren with, and perils met
Uncheat us of our lives, that rendered us
But an unhappy treasury for our cares,
Made monstrous by our joys, the hopes and fears
That spring from them, only the stock we spend on.
This cannot add, I know, to thee; and I should blush
If it could ought to me. But it is men's pleasure
To undervalue what they think will go,
And they must loose -- the world's fond nature's so;
And it is the bravest scorn ill men can have,
To change this world, as freely for a grave.

[Exeunt. ACT. 4. SCEN. 3.
Enter Pysander hastily, the Blind Lady following, Peter directing. [Alarm.
Pys. NOw the Devil raise a Barricado, I am stormed too;
I have peppered the Rogues on my side,
I must go see how the other fares.

Caec. Is he here, Peter?

Pet. Straight on, an't like your Ladyship.

Caec. Pray stay, sweet Captain; Oh, oh,
All my corn's a-fire, good Captain.
Straight before still, Peter?

Pet. Yes Madam.

Pys. By this light, Sir, I Will direct your nose to the wall,

Caec. Good Captain, all, all, my corn, oh, oh;
The great Barn's on fire, look how it burns.
Is this your kindness? pray, your hand.

Pys. Pray take this for interposition.
he lays something in the way. It will not do, she will run her head
Against something or other, and beat her brains out.
-- I must place her in here --
What Is this, a Corn-house -- Here Madam.
Give me your hand, rest your self a little,
And I Will be with you presently: and for you, wise Sir,
he places her in the Vault. Let her alone, til I, like a good Midwife,
Come and deliver her: This, Sir, you had best observe.

[Exit. Pet. Why its very well, I thought at least I might have given her
A hot fire-shovell to have baked a cake upon.
Nothing troubles me --
But that the Rats and Mice may play with her nose.
I thought she would be brought to this, Mrs. Quinever
Is employed in casting bullets with a face
Like fiery Sol in Leo, if this hurry hold long,
My poor old Lady may wish she had lost
All senses as well as seeing; for god knows
The employment for the rest are miserable.
Hark, a noise, they are at it, much good may't do them;
[a noise. To run away it is impossible, and from my chamber
I can see all the shooting; it has made me wish a thousand times
I were as blind as my old Lady, I Will to her in the Vault,
I never thought my self too safe, he that did,
Let him leap Towers for Peter.

[He descends into the Vault. ACT 4. SCEN. 4.
Enter Mironault, Hyppasus, Pysander. Mir. BRave Hyppasus, how to forgive my
self I cannot tell,
For all that you have suffered.

Hyp. Still on that strain, Sir!
We could not serve you thus if we repined,
Or feared to suffer for you; wrong not our honesty
And courage both.

Mir. They are too excellent, I swear it were a pleasure
To share in danger with you, were it not a pain
To see you there -- Gallant Pysander,
You brought us timely aid, and from our sinking fates
Raised us again; but you had quickly done
On the other side.

Pys. O mine were pitiful rascals,
Yours came to their business handsomely.

Mir. They did indeed, Phylanter first
Advanced before his men, bold in despite
Of all his crimes, and careless both alike
Of honesty and danger.

Pys. He was the wiser; To what purpose
Should any one be thrifty of, that the world
So little cares for, this trifle Honesty.

Hyp. Come Pysander, you must get the Soldiers dressed,
That have been hurt, we may have more need of them.

Pys. Yes, yes, as far as her Smocks will extend in Lint.

Mir. I find I need a little dressing too.
-- Let Us in, and there --
Provide for after-claps of treacherous Fortune.
We must not fear a Frown, or court a Smile;
One may the Wise, the other the Brave beguile.

[Exeunt. ACT. 4. SCEN. 5.
Enter Albertus, and Others* Alb. HOw far is it to his Quarters now?

1. A little way, Sir.

Alb. Be sure that all the Soldiers march in order,
And on their lives no outrage to the Country.
Let all be done in silence. No Scouts returned yet?

1. Not any, Sir.

Alb. I am jealous of this Court, the King inclined
But little, suspicion could not mingle with his nature,
The Princess has confirmed him sure; we act
On the uncertain'st Stage, the strangest parts
That ever yet were played, I would the world
Would take it so. We have now stepped
Beyond the power of Retreat or Fortune,
The one's too poor for us, and we for the other.
We are like tired Gamesters with ill Cards
Weary to hold the game, and yet play on
To save if not to win; perhaps
If we prevailed, Ambition would as well
Play on the game as now we do,
Though from a modester design.
How little ought man to be trusted then
With power in this world, when even the things
He aims to thrive by are the crimes of Kings,
Good Princes, like best Juglers, still find first
The lesser sleights of others. How now,
What news?

Enter Mess. Mess. As we were scouting on the way,
Which leads unto Cracovia, we espied
The Body of an Army moving within
Two hours march.

Alb. Ha, it must be so -- she has don't.
Bid instantly Botiscay march with haste,
[exit Mess. For fear we are hindered joining with my son.
Amidst these crimes a little policy does well,
It must be so, all we can hope for now will be to make
But good conditions --
-- To put it to the venture of a day were madness,
We can have no supplies, they may have more.
And yet -- I know not what to think,
Distractions mingle with my thoughts,
And we still lose our judgments with success.
Our resolutions waited on us then
Like servants wanting wages. All Mankind
Is one of those two Cowards,
-- Either to wish to die
When we should live, or live when we should die.
Some fear, some wish, too early, or too late
Most fall, yet none must choose his Fate;
Those that prepare for every storm, do seldom cast
Themselves away,
It is but bravely sinking at the last.

[Exit. ACT. 4. SCEN. 6.
Enter Princess, Amione, Phylena, and others. Prin. No news yet?
1. Not any Madam.

Prin. Leave us, and give notice when any comes.

1. I shall --

[Exit. Prin. We have not now sure far,
And yet me thinks it is along while
Ere we are there, time is thought
The fastest undiscerned flying thing
That is, but yet Love's wings are swifter,
Swift wishes impe his ragged plumes
And pull the feathers from the wings of Time,
-- And every houer bears
Double proportion from our hopes and fears.

Phyl. This pretty way of account Madam, will rise
Unto a sum of ages, added
To what now Mironault's a heaping,
'Twill make a new Chronology,
But we still reckon on the old account.

Prin. You Are merry still, Phylena, when your day comes
You Will give me leave to do the same.

Phyl. Yes Madam, we both agree,
And yet you shrewdly once suspected it
Of this fair maid,

Prin. You make me blush, she way forgive me though
For she deserved it,

Amio. O Madam, --
Could you fall so much below
The power of all your beauties in such fears
That you could justly let suspicion dwell
Where you pretend an interest? The Rose as well
May drooping hang it is fragrant head
Jealous of meaner Flowers, and the Sun
Suspect his light when mortals kindle fires.

Prin. Nay Amione you court me now
I will not call it flattery, whilst it comes
From thee, for that is a crime
That dwells with crooked natures, yet it was
Mistaken kindness.

Amio. 'Twas you mistook it sure, for none will find
Themselves deceived that love you,

Enter Mess. Prin. How now, what news?

Mess. Just now for certain, Madam
The Lord Albertus joined unto his son
With a great Body,

Prin. They have not yet attempted ought.

Mess. Yes Madam, before his Father's coming,
Phylanter stormed the house.

Prin. Ha: have thou learnt no particulars?

Mess. Yes all, for before the Lord Albertus coming
The smallness of their numbers gave us freedom
To enquire near the place of all particulars,
-- And thus it was,
Soon as Phylanter had found out
The house they stayed at, presently he ghest
That wounds had caused their stay, by reason
They strove to reach no place of more security
And so indeed it was; ghessing besides,
They should have small resistance: upon these thoughts
Phylanter draws about it, then summons them.
But in the midst the gallant Mironault
Hinders the parley with a hasty scorn,
As if he meant to drive no bargain,
But sell at his own rate, at which
The bravely bad Phylanter sweld with rage
Prepared to give the assault, and in the head
Of all his men advanced (some distance) first,
To bring on ruin great as was his crimes,
Or else to perish with them, and seemed half willing
To be forgotten on a noble score;
So equally divided, or to hide
His mischiefs in their Fates, or in his own.
The storm grew hot, yet still Phylanter urged
Beyond belief, now out of Love with safety,
Because his foes in spite of him enjoyd it
(With an unlookt for power to resist him)
Branded the name of Fortune with a whore,
As if they had begot supplies upon her;
On the other side his men sees shrinking from him,
When mad with rage he easily retires
With such a look as longing Lovers send
When they must part, so much he coutted danger,
And now retreating with his drooping forces,
The gallant Mironault like a bright Sun
Broke from the smoakie storm, and issues forth,
Acting new Tragedies, till, being jealous
More forces might come in,
In order they retreated, and for certain
Phylanter both and Mironault are hurt.

Prin. O me!

Phyl. Madam send off the messenger, Let not him see
The least disorder.

Prin. Go instanly, and bid Symathocles
Let all the Army march in readiness to fight.

Mess. I shall.

Prin. And acquaint him with all you know
Exit Mess. Nay do not hide thy tears Amione
They cannot displease me, wench, nor shall I think
That there is grief enough for him,
Though I am fully stored.

Amio. Alas, what a condition Fortune throws him in?
Did he but know by whom he were lamented
He could not have so much of joy,
As grief to think how he was ravished
From the loved mourner;

Prin. I prithee peace; not that I fear
To have more grief for him, for I have that
Within me has made that impossibility,
But to enlarge thy own, it is true too
That I should give thee counsel not to grieve,
But I shall grieve the while, yet if thou think
I wrong thy kindness then we will mourn together
And join our stock of tears, for no one store
Is worthy of him.

Amio. Though nature made me partial, it robbed me not
Of so much reason, to be so impudent,
The Fates perhaps, or some great power
That has a special care for you, or kindness,
Preserved you for themselves, and lent you to the world
As the S^n was, not for the happiness
Of one alone but all.

Prin. May we not yet amidst our greatest grief
Believe it is not dangerous; for after he was hurt
They leisurely retired.

Amio. Would I could so be satisfied --
And yet that clearly justifies we wish
Our own contents, then when we raise
Our fears to equal power in our thoughts
Of what we doubt, yet what we wish to have;
None e're yet wished a life, but feared a grave.

Prin. It Is true Amione, those torturing ^ivalls
Hope and fear are ever whispering,
And they that have most need of one,
Have ever most of the other. When I think this,
Though I would willingly pretend to counsel,
Or any thing would ease thy grief, I must
Believe it both impossible and needless.

Am. Were it not just to linger then no longer
In all these doubts, since we might give them ease.

Prin. As how can it be done?

Am. I would attempt to see him, I only want your leave.

Prin. It is impossible, the ways are all shut up.

Am. I do not mean to go concealed.
They say Phylanter is so much a Gentleman,
He will not certainly deny a woman.
Fear not, Madam, it is but two hours time,
And I am there, or here again.

Prin. I can deny thee nothing, not this I Am sure;
If thou see him, tell him, that Love and Constancy's rewarded
In the other world, and will be so in this.
Tell him, I wish his happiness
And mine own together. And be sure
You take a Surgeon with you.

Phyl. My service, Madam.

Am. I will not fail, Heaven keep you.
May I return with such a blessing
As I now bear to him.

[Exit. Prin. Farewell, dear Maid. Phylena, now
The time draws near of joy or misery,
-- We live at an uncertain rate,
Or flattered still, or else displeased with fate.

[Exeunt. ACT 4. SCEN. 7.
Enter at one door Albertus and Others, at another Phylanter, Lycespes, and
Others. Alb. I Should chide now, but the condition of your fortunes
Cannot be that way helped, nor are you fit
For a disturbance, I hear you have succesless
Stormed the house; Why stayed you not till I arrived?
'Twas folly to attempt it with so few.

Phyl. But that has happened now which I then feared,
For I did guess supplies would come to them
As soon as you to us. Besides, who would have ghest,
Or now can think, how they come by their aid?
Had we proved fortunate, we might have made
Our own conditions.

Alb. In that you have hit my thoughts, for now we must
Not lose our selves by fear or folly;
The one's too mean, the other but a madness.
And we must look on these we have
Without a hope of more, and on them
As an increasing body; by this we are constrained
Upon the nick to make our compositions,
Or put it to the venture of a Day;
The first's the better, were the last the likelier.
For I believe that, passion laid aside
That first incited these rash thoughts and actions,
You look upon it as not to be pursued,
But fairly to be le^t. Men may err,
It is the influence of Chance and Nature,
But to pursue it, is their own -- Lycespes --
There is much due to you, you were still honest,
And most a friend in danger,
Who are in safety only are their own.

Lyc. My Lord, I always owed your son as much,
And did resolve to pay it, till I had cause
To leave, or feared to avow it.

Alb. You are still noble. But Phylanter,
What certain intelligence have you?

Phyl. We know, Sir, the Army of the King
Is hard at hand, they say the Princess too
Is with them.

Alb. I ghess'd as much, and for that reason
I left the Court, for I heard
That she was big with rage -- Well,
The time's now short, and something must be done:
Let all be in a readiness, and prepare
Nobly to reach success, or ill to share.
In the mean time we will presently advise
The honorablest way for composition.
For to be safe and good is better far,
Than trust our crimes unto the chance of War.

[Exeunt. ACT. 5.
SCEN. 1.
Enter Phylanter. Phyl. HOw have I thus been cousened! how monstrous too
It seems, still to pursue the crimes I loved before:
To be uncousened, though it is just, seems poor,
When danger gives the wisdom: how low we sinck
When we once fall below our selves!
We still must fear what others ought to do.
In crimes none can be wise and gallant too.
All this besides for an uncertain Beauty,
Nor yet possessed or gained, the Persian so
Spends all his wealth and prayers on the Sun,
That equally dispences unto those
Which never adored him, his warm comforts too.
Farewell to all your Sex, that cannot be
Beloved, but with unthrifty misery.
The Lover that is unlov'd, like me, must waste
His store of Love, the Loved may longer last.
They that join Stocks, with ease our-spends
Him that runs on unpaid and lends.
Farewell: I will uncheat my self and you,
For when I loved you first I cousen'd two.

Sold. My Lord!

Phyl. How now?

Enter Soldier. Sold. A woman at the door
Desires admittance to your Lordship.

Phyl. Thou ravest! a woman?

Sold. So I told you.

Phyl. Nay, I might wonder, for such and I
Have now so little business with each other,
That by my troth it is strange.
Seems she a person of any quality?

Sold. Yes.

Phyl. Handsome?

Sold. To a miracle.

Phyl. The Devil on the wonder! business with me?

Soul. So she earnestly expressed.

Phyl. Bring her in.
[Exit Soldier. Curse on the Sex, Civility must wait upon 'em,
Their weakness makes us fools, or else their beau^ies.
Ha! it is that indeed that charms us from our selves,
And all the handsome actions that we do
Seem offerings to their powers, as if the Sea
Should send a tribute to the little Brooks,
Such a preposterous thing is Love, it is like
The folly and the crime to make a god
One's self to worship -- Now for a trap
I shall be shy of these fair baits.
-- What subtle trick --
Must this fair Instrument bring about? --
-- I will be deaf to charms -- She comes.
Enter Amione and Soldier. Ha -- extremely fair --
Come perhaps for to revenge
The scandal of her sex upon me -- Is it on me
Fair maid, that you would lay commands?

Ami. A comely man, pity that form
Should harbor so much baseness.
[aside. It is you, Sir, I must petition; for commands,
Though they might seem fair attributes to our sex,
Yet when you know, to whose much hated name,
Nature has made my Love a debt,
You will believe, Thardly should petition.

Phyl. I rather shall consider this fair thing,
To whom a hated name can owe an interest,
-- But you have heard --
Stories perhaps, not much becoming me,
Made up of others envies and my crimes,
Nor can I tell a good one of my self,
But that I love an innocence like yours,
And only that, for you to have a confidence,
I hardly shall deny you.

Ami. The world has sure belied him,
[aside. -- Nay, Sir,
Nature commands, that I should ask,
Your fair encouragement has given me hopes*
Not to be quite denied, and I am sorry
That I must now beg a civility,
And dare not own requital; it is the first time,
That justice and ingratitude were friends.

Phyl. You still believe me too unworthy: they that do
An act that does deserve requital,
Pay first themselves the stock of such content,
Nature has given to every worthy mind,
If others should be bankrupt --
Pray torture me no more but ask.

Amio. He would deceive me strangely,
[aside. Know then, the sister to wronged -Mironault must ask:
Does it not startle you?

Phyl. You see it does not.
He that has injured Mironault, will grant it,
Trifle no more.

Amio. It Is only then your leave that I may see him,

Phyl. And happiness attend you, you shall have
A conduct with you; -- I did not think
That I should find so much of joy,
In that small time I have to bustle here,
As your loved power has given me,
Pardon me, if I dare attempt
To have a little peace within me,
Still to remember you, I fear I must,
Though both should be unwilling.

Amio. I shall promise Sir, I carry no intelligence.

Phyl. Urge it no more, I do not fear,
Nor am I ignorant, of what a storm
Is falling now upon me, only grieved
That I durst bring it to it, and yet now pleased,
That I dare bear it: choice in crimes,
Is the worst part in man, and good from fear,
The meanest. But I have said to much, only thus,
The last of all my thoughts, shall be of you,
They may be good: Nay, do not wonder,
Nor be so much concerned for one so lost,
To frame an answer from a smile or frown,
I will conduct you on your way, as you come back,
Others shall wait you, for your eyes
Shall not be injured with an hated object.
Here in this world, my fate, the quarrel ends,
-- In the other sure, we may meet friends.

[Exeunt. ACT 5. SCEN. 2.
Enter, Mironault, Hyppasus, Pysander. Hyp. NAy, for certain, Sir,
We saw a body marching, which cannot possibly
Belong to the other Army.

Pys. Why, I did always believe,
My dancing days were not quite done.

Mir. I know not what to guess, nor do I wish;
For in extremes, less cares give noblest thoughts,
Designs of wishing, are the cheating joys
Of fearful men, it were foolishness beside;
A careless hope looks handsomely.

Hyp. We shall so justify our selves, but I believe,
It Is not unreasonable, to think our innocence
Should merit some protection, the Princess sure
Will not be last in justice.

Mir. Urge it no more, nothing is worth her care,
It Is some as bad as those, come to assist them.

Enter servant. Serve. There Is one without, Sir, that would desire
Admittance to you.

Mir. Who is it.

Serve. A woman.

Mir. A woman? I cannot guess, --
Exit. servant. -- Let her come in.
What should this mean, deceive me not too much,
Fond hope, nor puzzle me, for if you do, -- at last,
I shall grow careless of my joys and you;
Ha! Amione, -- welcome,
Enter with Amione. Welcome, above all joys but one.

Ami. Perhaps, welcome as that, I have much to say,
But I must first be civil. Brave Hyppasus,
May you nere know extremities, but if you should,
May you find such a friend, as you have been.

Hyp. Were I not nobly paid in his desert,
I were in this?

Ami. The same to you Pysander, for to thank you
In any other Language, were too poor,
And much unjust, for to divide,
What you so nobly joined in.

Pys. Now have I forgot, what Hyppasus said,
Pray take his answer in good part for us both.

Ami. You'ar merry still, Pysander.

Pys. I confess, nothing went ever near my heart,
Unless it were your Love, but what avails sighs and tears?

Ami. Very well, Sir.
Dear Brother, pardon this injury of gratitude,
That kept me so long from you; forgive me too,
If joy disorders me, I have enough
To see you safe.

Mir. Dear Amione, how long we shall be so,
Heaven knows, yet 'twas a great advantage
To live thus long to see thee: but how wast possible
You could get hither, or from whence now come you?

Ami. Why, Phylanter's great civility,
Brought me safe hither.

Mir. But from whence?

Ami. From the Army.

Mir. From whose Army?

Ami. The Princess.

Mir. Ha! --

Ami. I will defer your joys no longer
From the Princess, who bid me tell you,
That faith and constancie's rewarded
In the other world, and will be so in this?

Mir. Thou would not mock me sure.

Ami. I do not.

Mir. O* Amione, Did thou but know the joy of every heart,
That at this hour, has its wishes crowned,
Thou might then guess at mine.
And is she there in person?

Ami. Yes, attended with a gallant Army,
Much stronger then the enemy, you might
Discern them sure; and resolved as soon as I return
To offer battle. Is Phylanter,
Prepared to fight?

Mir. With any thing in spite of all his crimes,
Resolves to perish bravely, so great a villain
Never bore so brave a mind, -- it is a question,
Whether he thinks, there is such a thing as danger.

Ami. We heard indeed, he stormed it bravely,
And that your hurts were of more danger
Then I perceive they are; 'twas the report
Of that which brought me hither.
Nor must I stay, the Princess laid commands
Of my immediate coming back; at more leisure,
You shall have all my story, in the mean time,
I must needs tell you, you are like to be
Extremely happy; O Brother, never was so much sweetness
Guarded so sure from crimes, if ever breast
Were Sanctuary for virtues, it is here is:
She will deserve your love I fear much more,
Unless its possible, men should be constant.

Mir. This is not kind Amione, her value
Will make me wise still to preserve my riches;
And benefit is man's design.

Ami. Man seldom though pursues his own advantage,
Women like Towns, once won are slighted:
What we already have within our powers,
Has less esteem then unatchieved things.

Mir. Urge it no more, one may as well be weary
Of the Sun's constant shining, as her influence:
He never rises, but he seems to bring
Fresh glory from the East* and every day
Will add a new discovery of her virtues,
That she will never seem enjoyed enough.
Besides, though man's composed of faithless matter,
The Soul of one may be of nobler use
Than others are, and with that Soul
Man had not been so nobly put in trust
Had he not means left free to be unjust.
Come, so much eternity as my love must have,
Must not be told in such a little moment
As you have now to spare, nor will I injure
The little time I have with thee,
When we shall meet again heaven knows:
For friends once pawned to distance there is a danger
To bankrupt hopes.
You must expect but poor besieged welcome
-- Who such relief as Anchorets have
At least shall find in an expected grave.

[Exeunt. ACT. 5. SCEN. 3.
Enter Phylanter, Solus disguised. Phyl. WHat is the next thing how that must
be done?
How weary all the World and I
Am grown of one another? I should be friends
With this disguise, could it but hide my crimes:
But night it self that great disguifer,
Wants power to conceal the least of crimes
From any troubled breast, when man would fain
Be unacquainted with himself again:
It Is just too, when we have our selves betrayed
That we should be then of our selves afraid
Ambition only is our nature's folly,
That robs us of that little stock of reason,
We have at temperate and idle hours.
If we but take the inventory of our selves,
There we shall find such perished stuff
By rage and passion, that it is just
We should be once forgotten in the dust;
-- But for my new design -- ha -- it is odd
To throw my self into the power of them --
As if 'twere meannesse, or something poorer; fear --
-- Yet -- let it dye
[Studies. Enter Amione. Hyp. Pys. Ha -- she comes --
-- A Persian's cold devotion thus,
Receives new warmness from the rising Sun
-- It must be so --
He that would hide Love kindled once within,
Rakes but his fire up to keep it in.

Hyp. We take our leaves now Madam, for we see
There Is one attends you from the
Exe. Hip. Pysan. Lord Phylanter,

Phyl. Madam, my Lord Phylanter sent me hither
In his own language to present you Safety
Great as you merit.

Amio. I thank you Sir, he has obliged me nobly:
Had he forgot his crimes, I should forget
He were an enemy.

Phyl. He bid me tell you farther,
That he had waited on you here himself,
But that he feared to injure your fair eyes,
That should be only pleased with welcome objects.

Amio. Ha: perish you easy thoughts, that start
[aside. At hearing of that name, yet when you think of him
I may forgive you, if you then
Frighten your selves, --
And yet it may be Love; ruins of Love
And lightning are alike --
For, what would willingly resist
They both consume; I shall attend you Sir,
If you please to lead the way --

[Exeunt. ACT 5. SCEN. 4.
Enter Albertus, Lycespes. Albert. COntinue still worthy Lycespes,
To let him know repentance needs no blushes.
Or that it is necessary for Fate or us,
To pursue cruel actions, yet with a gentle hand
That no distraction mingle with his nature;
For he is young, and youth's unsettled fury
Is ready still to act,

Lyc. I have Sir, with a gentle hand
Touched all the story of this madness,
And find him too, like an experienced gamster,
Ashamed to have been cheated, but resolved
Wisely no more to venture at that game:
Our whole designs must needs therefore now
Aim, but to bring us off, and yet prepare
Not to want courage in the meanest Fortune.

Albert. It Is all that can be said in our Conditions,
In order therefore to our sad affairs,
We Will instantly dispatch a Trumpet
To offer fair conditions, or any thing
That may not sound like mercy from another:
That Is an unworthy way to add
To other's fames, in ruining our own;
And yet our whole desires shall be low,
Indeed they must, for the extremity
Of every unresisted Fate makes poor
Their thoughts that were as rich before.

[Exeunt. ACT. 5. SCEN. 5.
Enter Phylanter, Amione. Amio. YOu have now, Sir, performed that civil part,
That alwies shall enforce me to esteem
The Lord Phylanter, and may this Sir
She offers him money. Tell you my thanks.

Phyl. Madam, reward can not be due
To this small service, though I may do
What may perhaps seem to deserve
Something of that nature, but I must first
Desire you to prepare for to believe
Not ill of him, that thinks your wrongs
Deserve devotions, greater than his trust.

Amio. What mean you Sir?

Phyl. Would it not be worth a reward at least?
That you might have within your power
The ease of all your hard misfortunes?

Amio. Certainly 'twere; the sound bears greater joy
Than possibility.

Phyl. I know sometimes, that Treason seems
But ugly in the justest cause;
Though I believe that never yet,
A power like yours commanded it.

Amio. Still I understand you not, pray to the matter.

Phyl. To be short then, know Phylanter loves you,
Your seeming kindness will have power
To draw him where you please, for to my breast
He has committed all his thoughts,
And bid me judge when I should see you,
Whether he had not cause for all his passions,
(Indeed he has) so much his crimes are greater;
Nor is it more injustice to his trust
Than due to you to tell you, if you please,
That I may bear some feigned kindness from you,
I Am sure 'twill bring him any where,
That you may easily surprise him.

Amio. But do you think he has lost his reason so?
To trust himself without his guards,
And his surprifall then will not be easy.

Phyla. Alas, his reason's like an helpless friend,
Left and forsaken, and nothing but your name
Must be forgiven, that would attempt to lessen
His thoughts from what he has done, you need not fear
He can be over-wise that loves so much,
Nor will his reason tell him that it is due
To all his kindness.

Amio. Nor is it sure.

Phyl. But to his former story it is, and present actions;
For though repentance only at your name
Has power in his thoughts, yet he contemns
To have that Virtue on a meaner score,
His crimes to all the world besides continue.

Amio. And they may better be the punishers.

Phyl. I grant you, were it in their power
As it is in yours, and they would then
Do sure as much for you.
It Is but the least command from you,
My life on it, I bring him where you think best
He may be with most ease surprised.

Amio. But should not you consider?
That though this punishment be due from me,
The treacherie's unjust in you.
How much it is the business of mankind
[aside* Whilst she turns away and speaks, he throws off his disguise, and
lays his sword drawn, with the hilt toward her. To make a bargain for their
honesty,
And yet not think how little that will yield
To others, which they make so cheap,
Man's like a barren and ungrateful soil,
That seldom pays the labor of manuring.
How has Philanter injured him, or I obliged him?
That I could at first upon a lesser score
Share with his crimes, and on a meaner now
Basely dislike, as if his choice were just,
Whose equal ease accepts and forfeits trust.
^'le tell him too it is base, how fain would Love
Tell his own story, through a nobler cause,
And blushes sure as well as I.
-- It should be for Phylanter --
Ha! Deceive me not fond eyes, it cannot be
she turns and sees him. I owe amazement now so much --
-- It must arrest me.

Phyl. Wonder not, fair Amione, nor fear
I Will beg your pity, that contemn my own,
And yet for many reasons think I love you;
Though I believe my time will hardly give
Me leave to reckon them -- Only consider,
That I durst here avow it, I could have fallen,
Its true, as nobly with my fellows,
But much more happier here; I would have weighed it too
More leisurely in reason's scales, till a thought
Of you broke in, and ended the dispute.
I have at my own rate procured my happiness,
Nor have I done less sure for you; it is the first service,
And likely too to be the last I e're shall do you.

Amio. O Phylanter, you should not trust
Revenge, and all your crimes at once
In any power, though I perhaps
Shall fear to be a murderer, so to make
My self as bad as you.

Phyl. Why I confess, I willingly
Would be as good as you, but that is a lesson
Hardly to be learned, and yet it looks
Much like the way to read it often;
As I have done your virtues.
I say not this to tempt a mercy,
I have deserved a great deal of unkindnesse;
But not so much as now to fall
A sacrifice to any but your wrongs.

Amio. I know not what to say --
You may repent, perhaps grow good;
Pray try.

Phyl. It Is true, I think I might;
But it is a question still, whe're you would grow kind.
And indeed, the fear of that great danger
Made me contemn the rest. But I trifle time,
By all that is charitable, let me not fall
By meaner hands. Hark, some Soldiers.
[a noise. Use this for pitty's sake.

Enter Soldiers. Amio. Alas! ah me!

1. How now? who have we hear, Philanter?
Treason!

2. Treason, treason!

Phyl. Nay, then I must use it.
[fight. Villains, I have a little business here,
one falls, the other flies. I might have spared the reason though to you
They have raised the alarm; yet, Amione,
Free me from this mean ruin.

Amio. Pray put on your disguise again,
You may yet escape.

Phyl. I Am glad it is impossible, you see it is,
O Amione; had I but loved you at a lesser rate,
I might have found a soberer expression.
But yet remember, a madman seldom loses
His kindness with his judgment.
A noise again! hell on their yellings!
[alarm.
Amio. By that love you bear me,
Put on your disguise.

Phyl. Never, till my safety be worth your care.

Amio. O Phylanter, though your condition needs it,
It Is too soon for me to say it, yet I will tempt my
To tell you, I would have you safe.

Phyl. That now my fate is unavoidable, the gods blushes
Perhaps provided, lest I should surfeit
Of joys in this world; yet I shall have
Enough, if you believe, no dying mind
Can have more joy, or living love.
'Twas my grief at first to love you, and now
My fear at last you should not know it.
'Twas all my business too before my end.
I could wish one thing more, to be resolved,
Whether in the other world (where wisemen tell us,
There is such store of love) our joy shall be
Greatest, to meet those friends we loved best here.
-- but I shall be resolved. In the mean time,
What e're becomes of me,
Let your kind thoughts
-- admit sometimes this minute's memory.

Amio. Alas, think of your safety; Hark! they come! yet
[noise. Let your disguise and me protect you.

Phyl. When I have your protection -- I need need not this disguise,
Nor will I wear it. They come.
My dear Amione,
Enter Soldiers. For ever live as happy as I die.

1. 2. Here! here! on! on! on!


Phyl. Villains, you shall buy me bravely.
[fight.
Sym. Hold, on your lives; how, Phylanter?

Enter Symathocles. Phyl. The same, you need not bid me welcome,
Nor tempt me much, Symathocles.

Amio. O Phylanter, be yet more temperate;
Pray, Sir, let me obtain a little hearing.

Sym. You may command it. The Princess!

Enter Princess, Phylena, Followers. Amio. O Madam, let me beg
That no amazement dwell upon your eyes,
Nor any thing but mercy.

Prin. I have both ready for thy sake -- How --
-- Phylanter -- What Riddle's this --?

Phyl. I owe that name indeed, but with less blushes
Than I did once.

Prin. I promised not to wonder, my Amione;
But this is strange.

Amio. You promised mercy too.

Prin. Have you an interest in his pardon then?
Blush not,
I Will ask no more -- Phylanter --
This story shall be perfect at more leisure,
And all things else shall be deferred
But my forgivness. I do believe
(You came to fetch your pardon in so much danger)
You can repent or any thing, but deserve
The happiness preparing for you.
he kisses the Princess hand. Come, Amione, thou have brought back
An unexpected friend. May this success
To every one bring equal happiness.

[Exeunt. ACT. 5. SCEN. 6.
Enter Albertus, Lycespes. Alb. HAs no one yet brought any news?

Lyc. Not any, Sir, O misery!
Betrayed by some slight. How now?
Enter a Messenger. From whence come thou?

Mess. My Lord, your son desires to meet you;
And withal you would not wonder,
That with the Princess he waits your coming.

Alb. Stranger yet! some farther mischief sure!
Lycespes Draw up the Army instantly.
[Exit Lyces. We must not be thus cousened.
Came you from my son?

Mess. But now, Sir.

Alb. And is he with the Princess?

Mess. Yes, Sir.

Alb. Where?

Mess. Now coming to the House.

Alb. With all her Army?

Mess. Only with a small Guard.

Alb. There may be something then.
Fortune I Will think if now thou show thy care,
Thou can redeem as well as bring despair.

[Exeunt. ACT 5. SCEN. 7.
Enter Princess, Phylanter, Amione, Phylena, and Others. Prin. IS this the
house, Phylanter?

Phyl. Yes, Madam.

Prin. Pray summon it.

Phyl. 'Twill now be yielded, Madam,
Far easier than 'twould once. Within there, ho!

Pysander appears above. Pys. How now, what news, O Phylanter?
Is your troublesome Worship there again?
-- how now, the Princess too?

Prin. The same, Pysander.

Pys. Now truly Madam, do I think
I had best call Mironault to unriddle this.
-- The labor's saved.

Mironault appears above too. Prin. Mironault.

Mir. Ha. --

Prin. Do you not know me?

Mir. Yes, and others too there.

Prin. This is injustice Mironault,
Can you let wonder keep you thus from me?

Mir. I had forgot, it is true, it is Mirramente,
And serupulous thoughts were sins unpardonable,

He descends. Pys. If I should stay to consider what this means,
I should be the last should know it;
He comes down. I Will e'ne descend too.

Prin. Mironault,
-- Though these strange objects might deserve a story,
Enter Mironault. 'T would take up time, and I shall think it cruelty
To rob thee of one minute's joy, if I can give it.

Miro. If you can give it? have I thus long
Loved you, and loved you religiously, now to have
All my devotion questioned?
Can sick men joy in health? or liberty
Be pleasing unto captives? In your kindness
Lies all my health and liberty.

Prin. Nor will I fear to avow it, dearest Mironault,
No thoughts of crossing danger e're shall fright
My Love or me.

Miro. It Is true, I am unworthy of you; but so are all,
And he that parts me from you,
Must join me to a colder Bride.

Phyl. And more than you, gallant Mironault,
Wonder no more, nor think on stories past,
But that to come, Phylanter will appear
As worthy of your friendship,
-- As he was once of hate -- but stay
I had forgot to ask your pardon. Indeed
He takes Amione by the hand. Here Is one may better do it, whose fair opinion
-- Will promise for me. --

Miro. Brave Sir, I hated still your crimes not you, so did she,
And if she love your Virtues, pray believe
I am her brother too.

Phyl. Madam, I see
Enter Albertus. A little honesty will make one impudent
That I must now beg pardon for others,
That scarsly should have hoped if for my self.

Prin. Rise my Lord, you need not now
Of any doubt your pardon.

Alb. Excellent Princess, I shall deserve hereafter
What an unjust necessity made me shun to testify.

Kisseth her hand. Prin. Hyppasus and Pysander, I must not now
Forget your share in thanks,
That did receive your part in danger.

Pys. Nay your Highness cannot be better pleased than we
That all the danger's past, to say truth,
Hypasus and I were clearly your Platonicks,
And made up the Romance.

The blind Lady hearing his voice, calls from under the vault where he put her.
Caec. Captain.

Prin. How now, what is that?

Pys. Why nothing Madam,
Only an honest fellow killed in the storm,
And now his ghost walks; in his life time
He was a talking fellow, Hyppasus you know it.

Hyp. Hang you, what do I know?

Caec. Why, Captain, Captain?

Pys. Plague on you, would you were gagged.

Prin. This is strange!

Pys. Nay your Highness need not be troubled,
I Will have a Scholar shall lay it at my own charge.

Hyp. Well Sir, if you will be at that cost, I Will be the Scholar,
To raise it at my own.

Pys. Pox on your conjuring fools-head,
Hyppasus takes her out of the vau't with corn upon her farthingale, Peter
following. By this light she rises --
Like Ceres with Plenty about her,
Lord, how Peter stares!

Caec. Captain, Pray, your hand
[She goes on.
Pys. Here forsooth.
He goes behind the Princess. Now have at the Princess, la, ra, ra, ra
Your Highness may be pleased,
She runs against the Princess. To pardon her usual exercise,
She was the best tilter in her time
That ever ran.

Mironault whispers to the Princess. Caec. O Captain, pray your hand,

Pys. Now have I ague: what tends
This whisperig to?

Prin. Come Pysander,
The god of Love himself is blind,
She, or her estate (I hear) is very fair.

Pys. Why, is your Highness in earnest?
And please you she is some sourscore,
A dog were as good a husband for her
To lead her up and down.

Prin. Madam, Will you consent to have this Gentleman?

Caec. I have already yielded.

Pys. And be hanged 'twas before you were stormed.

Prin. Come it shall be a match, she will make you her Executor.

Pys. Well, we will all be married then. Hypassus
If you please, you shall have Quinever.

Pin. We are all happy then; we need not fear,
Unless my Father frown.

Phyl. We shall unwillingly throw off again
Our Loyalty to him, and yet we shall
Be very ready to embrace a witness,
That we dare dye for Mironault.

Mir. You nobly all oblige me, and I must tell you
My dearest Princess that I cannot fear,
Whilst I enjoy your Love, for that has raised me
Above the power of Fate or danger,
Nor have I leisure to think on any thing,
But of those joys are falling now upon me,
Which neither time or age can ever lessen;
For still your Virtues like Medea's charms
Shall bring fresh beauties to my happy arms.

[Exeunt. Pys. We Bridegrooms disagree, for every day
Will oblige most that adds to your decay.

[Exit with the Blind Lady. FINIS.
The Fourth Book of VIRGILL. Of the Loves of DIDO and AENEAS.
The Argument.
In Love's ungentle Flames Dido
Eliza fries,
With her Resolves a guilty Storm complies.
Aeneas, warned by Joves Mercury
Cyllenian Mate,
Prepares for flight, and Dido for her fate.
A Funeral Pile she raises, and bestows
At once a Fate upon her self and woes.
BUT, long before, the Queen had in her veins
Nourished Love's wounds, and fed concealed flames.
Much on his person, and his generous kind
She thought, much on the virtues of his mind.
His charming Image fixes in her breast,
And cares now banish once-enjoyed rest.
The Ensuing day, when Phoebus newly spread
His beams, and moist shades from Aurora fled;
The Lovesick Queen thus to her Sister said:
My Anna, of what dreams am I afraid?
What guest is this with unaccustomed charms?
How noble in his Soul? how brave in Arms?
I'think (nor vainly) he is of heavenly kind;
It Is fear that argues a degenerate mind.
What various fates he told, with Battles mixed!
Were it not in my breast for ever fixed,
Never the Marriage Fetters more to prove,
Since so deceived by fate of my first Love;
Did I not loath those Rites a second time,
I might perhaps yield to this tempting crime.
For I confess, since (slain by fratricide)
Sichaeus fell, whose blood the Altars di'd, Her husband slain by her own
brother Pigmalion.

This only has inclined my thoughts; again
I feel impressions of an ancient flame.
But may the earth first snatch me to her womb,
And to the shades Jove's Thunder whirle me down;
To Hell's dark shades whose night admits no fate,
E're shame and virtues rites I violate.
He who first made my heart Love's sacrifice,
Still has it, in his grave it buried lies.
This said, a shower of falling tears appear.
Anna replies, Dear sister, and more dear
Then Light it self, shall grief thy youth destroy,
Without the Crown of children, or the joy
Which Venus for her Votaries prepares?
Can dust shut up in graves, or Ghosts have cares?
Grant you were she, whose cold breast did disdain,
The Lybians and the great King of the Numidians.
Hiarba's flame,
And Africans made rich by vanquished foes;
Will you as well, all Love's soft charms oppose?
Think where we now inhabit, who dwells round;
Getulians here with conquest always crowned,
Here savage deserts your Dominions bound,
There the wild Barceans; what need I relate
The Wars, that on thy Brother's fury wait?
Sure the kind gods upon our shores at last,
By an obliging storm these Trojans cast.
What City shall thousee? thy Kingdom too
Shall to this match enlarged fortune owe,
When Trojans with our Arms their Swords shall join,
In what rich glories shall the Punicks shine!
Go, and oblige the gods by sacrifice,
Thy guest by kindness; all delays devise,
Whilst Winter rages, and the stormy Star
Their Navy shakes, the sky disposed to war.
"These words the sparks of love now kindled more,
"And enthroned hope where blushes dwelt before.
First, at the Altars heaven's peace they sought,
With Sheep selected, slain as custom taught,
To Ceres, Phoebus, Bacchus, above all,
To Juno, careful of the Marriage thrall.
The fair Queen's hand a full-crown'd Bowl adorns,
Who pours the Wine 'twixt a white Heifer's horns.
Still on the fatted Shrine an Offering lies,
And day seems young renewed with Sacrifice;
Consulting scarce the life-forsaken breast,
Which panting entralls faintly yet expressed.
"Unknowing minds of Priests! alas, what ease
"Can Temples bring? Can frantic Vows appease
"A flame, which life and blood still fuel gives,
"And in whose breast the wound in silence lives?
Unhappy Dido burns, and wanders round
The City, frantic, as a Hind, whose wound
From a far off the unsuspected Swain
Gives ignorantly, who strives to fly her pain,
Through the Dictaean Forests, winged with fears,
Yet still her side the fatal Arrow bears.
Now with Aeneas round the walls she goes,
Her City and Sidonian-treasure shows.
About to speak, her words stick in the way;
Now Feasts prepares to end the wasting day.
Again (distracted) asks to hears Troy's fate,
And on his moving lips her eyes still wait.
All now take leave, and the Moon's paler light
Shines out, declining Stars soft sleeps invite;
Whilst she alone her sorrows entertains,
And flung, on his forsaken bed remains;
Thinks still she hears him speak, and in despite
Of absence, always fancies him in sight;
Or in her arms his son and likeness takes,
To try if Love could lessen by mistakes.
Now the late-rising Towers neglected stand,
The youth and fortresses alike unmanned.
All great beginnings interrupted lie,
And walls before which promised to be high.
When Juno saw her languish in a flame,
Whose fury shrunk not at opposing fame,
Venus with haste she finds; and thus then says,
You, and your Boy, will purchase glorious praise,
And spoils as ample as your powers, when fame
Shall tell; Two gods one woman overcame.
Nor am I blinded so, but it appears,
The walls of rising Carthage cause your fears.
But why these quarrels? rather let them cease
In Hymen's bonds, wrapped in eternal peace.
Your wishes all are crowned in Dido's flames,
Which fill, instead of blood, her burning veins;
With equal power and kindness let us sway,
These several Nations, let her too obey
A Phrygian Lord, and unto thy desire,
Submit the Tyrians, and the wealth of Tire;
To her, (for she perceived a crafty mind
Sent all these words, by which she had designed
To Lybian shores the Italian crown to join)
Venus replies, Who is it will decline
What you propose? or is so void of sense,
To choose to have with you a difference?
If the fates yield to your proposed intents,
(But varying fates I fear) if Jove consents;
That Troy and Carthage should as one be joined,
The mingled Nations too by leagues combind;
You that enjoy his breast, it is just that you
Attempt his mind, I Will second what you do.
The Queen of Heaven then replies, That toil
And labor shall be mine; A little while,
I ask you now to hear, whilst I lay down
The means; which our designs at last may crown.
Aeneas, with the wretched Queen prepares,
In woods and hunting to divert their cares;
When the next rising Sun gives day a birth,
And with his rays shows the unvailed earth;
Upon the Hunters, whilst the game's pursued,
A storm, sweld big with hail, in blackness brewed,
Its fury shall discharge; at the same time,
The Heavens to the storm shall Thunder join.
The affrighted Hunters all shall take their flight,
Confused in darkness, as if lost in night.
The Prince and Queen shall fly for shelter too
Into one Cave, if we receive from you
Your promised aid, there Hymen being by,
We Will make her thy perpetual Votary.
Fair Cytherea, finding her designs,
Smiles, and, in show, to what she ask't inclines.
In the mean time, the Sun the briny streams
Of Neptune leav's, the youth rise with his beams.
And forth the toyl's, and well-nos'd hounds are brought,
With spears, whose tops were round with Iron wrought.
Next marching forth, Massylian troops are seen,
The Punick Princes all expect their Queen.
Who, slower than the rest, forsakes her bed,
Whilst her proud horse stands r^chly furnished
In purple; on which Gold in windings flow's,
Champing his bitt, in foam his metal show's.
At length, attended by a noble train,
Clad in a rich Sydonian robe she came.
Her quiver gold, her hair too weaved lies
In gold, and gold her purple garments ties.
The Phrygians next advance, and before these
Ascanius came, whom youthful hopes did please
Of promised sport; with these Aeneas joins,
And all the troop in charming looks out-shines.
As when cold Lycia, and where Xanthus flows,
Apollo leav's, his visits now bestows
Upon his native Delos, where again,
The Driopes and Cretans fill his train.
With Agathyrsians, whom strange colors dye,
And in wild motions round the Altars fly,
Whilst he upon the top of Cynthus goes,
His flowing hair, soft laurell-wreaths enclose;
Through which the weaved gold its luster flung,
And at his back, his rattling Quiver hung.
"Nor did Aeneas looks admit an odds,
"But with his luster equalled the gods?
When new these troops unto the hills arrive,
And beat the unfrequented shades, they drive
VVild goats from their high holds, and winged with fear,
On the other side rush down vast herds of Deer.
But young Ascanius in the vales employes
Himself, and in his horse's fierceness joys.
Now vi^s with these, now others leaves behind,
And wanting beasts to chase, wishes to find
A chasing Boar o're-spread with rage and foam,
Or from the hills to see a Lion come.
Whilst thus he wished, loud murmurs fill the sky,
Followed by storms of hail, the hunters fly
For several shelters, whilst amazed sight
From mountains tops sees Rivers take their flight.
The Queen and Trojan Prince, seeking to save
Themselves from storms, meet in one fatal cave,
The earth first shook, and Juno gave the sign,
And at such rites ungentle flashes shine.
While, through the conscious air, the Marriagesong,
Was howls of Nymphs, which from the mountains rung.
This day first ushered death, and from this day,
Misfortunes took their birth, nor did she weigh
Her present act, or think of future fame,
Nor could this amorous theft beget a shame;
She called it marriage, with a fond design,
Believing in the name to hide the crime.
But quickly now that slighted fame took wings,
And all the news through Lybian Cities flings.
Unto ill fame compared, swift things are sloth,
For as it flies, it gathers strength and growth;
Fear keeps it low at first, but free from dread,
Quickly in clouds, hides its aspiring head.
To Caeus, and Enceladus, the earth
Brooded on by the rage of gods gave birth
Unto this sister last, than winds more fleet;
Swift in her wings, and not less swift in feet.
A horrid and strange monster as she flies,
Under her feathers hides an hundred eyes,
As many mouths, nor furnished less with ears,
As many tongues to tell the tales she hears.
When night has spread her shades through heaven she flies,
Nor has soft sleep the power to close her eyes,
By day; where poor and great men live she sits,
And with her tales gives Cities shaking fits:
The false and true alike to people brings,
With equal joy things done and undone sings.
Of Troy's great Prince she quickly did report,
How entertaind in Dido's breast and court,
Unmindfull of their Crowns, ruld now by lust,
The winter spent in passions too unjust.
Among the rest to whom she spread this Fame,
It quickly unto King Hiarbas came.
The story raised his fury, who was son
To Jove, from ravished Garamantis sprung.
An hundred Temples he to Jove had raised,
As many shrines where constant fires still blazed.
The Gods perpetual watch, th'enriched ground,
With blood, th'entrances with garlands crowned,
The bitter news rage and distraction brings;
To fill his breast, who in his fur^e flings
Before the Altars of the gods, and there
With raised hands sends this disputing prayer;
Great Jove, to whom, on beds that richly shine,
We Moors indulge our feasts with sparkling wine,
See thou these things? or shall we free from fright
See the dark air with sudden flashes bright?
And dreadlesse at thy winged lightnings flame
Or slighted Thunders, find our fears were vain?
A wandering woman on our shores that paid
For leave and place to live on, and obeyed*
Our laws, dares now despise our marriage bed,
For one Aeneas to her Kingdom fled.
This Paris with his troop that scarsly are
Like men, in their soft robes and perfumed hair,
Enjoys my passion's object, whilst we raise
In vain to thee our offerings and our praise.
Whilst thus expostulating-pray'rs he fent,
Holding the Altars still, the Omnipotent
To Carthage turns his eyes, where passion's flame
Had in the Lovers burnt the thoughts of Fame.
Then calling Mercury he thus begins,
Go son, call Zephyrus and on thy wings,
Haste to the Trojan Prince, who idly s^ays
In Carthage, and contemns in his delays
Crowns which were promised him by Fate and Time,
Swift as a thought bear him these thoughts of mine.
His beauteous mother never promised me
Such things as these, nor for this cause was he
Twice from the Grecians freed, but that there may
One spring from Teucer, Italy to sway
So big with War and Empires; and to give
Laws, under which th'obliged World should live.
But if such praise cannot his mind inflame,
Nor toils be poised with weight of endless Fame,
Why does he hinder from Ascanius brows
The Roman Crown? What is it hope allows,
Whilst thus with foes (delaying) he remains?
Neglects Ausonia, and Lavinian plains?
Bid him to sea, go tell him what I say.
The ready god prepares straight to obey
His mighty Father's will, and first he ties
Wings to his feet; born upon which he flies*
Through air, and over the earth, and liquid plain,
Swift as the motion of a rapid flame.
Then takes his rod; whose call ghosts from below
Obey, by the same power others go
Unto those dismal shades, sleep comes and flies
As he appoints; and closes dying eyes.
The Enraged winds swell as he dies along,
And drive the troubled clouds into a throng.
Now Atlas views, as on his wings he fled,
Approaching heaven with his aspiring head,
Battered with winds and storms, with tall Pines crowned,
And still with sable clouds envellop'd round:
His shoulders pressed with undissolved snow,
And from the old man's Chin swift rivers flow
In rushing cataracts, in frozen ties
His horrid beard bound up severely, lies.
Here first with equally unmoving wings
Cyllenius stays himself, thence headlong flings.
Along the shores a bird thus swiftly glides
Close on the surface of the swelling tides;
So from high Atlas-top Cyllenius flies
'Twixt heaven and earth, where sandy Lybia lies.
When first on Carthage-plains his winged feet
Took rest, his eyes as soon Aeneas meet
Raising new Towers; on his thigh there hung
A shining sword, a Tyrian garment flung
Over his shoulders, where the gold did wave
In glittering rings, which Dido made and gave.
When with these words the god invades his car,
Do thou for Carthage lay foundations here,
And rai^est Cities, now uxorious grown,
Seeking strange Crowns, unmindfull of thine own?
He who over all the immortal gods bears sway,
And whom the people of the earth obey,
Commanded me to ask, What vain design
Stays thee in Lybia, idly losing time?
If so much glory cannot thy mind inflame,
Nor toils be poised with weight of endless fame;
Let not Ascartus suffer by thy crime,
To whom the Fates th'I^alian Crown design.
Thus having spoke Cyllenius takes his flight,
And in the air slides from enquiring sight.
Amazed Aeneas stands, in h^rror ti'd,
With stifned hair, his voice and words denied,
Now burns to leave the place but lately prized,
So by the god commanded and advised,
What should he do? how venture to relate
This change to her that was so passionate?
His mind travails through-thoughts as in a trance,
And snatched with every various circumstance,
Till every thought to this submission gave.
Then Mnestheus and Sergestus, with the brave
Cloanthus, he does call; with silent care
Bids them the Navy and their Arms prepare,
And draw their Forces to the Ocean side;
But with a feigned cause the true to hide.
In the mean space (whilst Dido little thought
Their loves were to so near a period brought)
He pays his visits, and neglects no time,
All his addresses fits for his design,
With all the art of softest words, whilst they
With gladness do their Princes will obey.
But the fair Queen (for who can long deceive
A Lover?) quickly did the fraud perceive,
And from the present makes her future guess;
What ever seems most safe, fears not the less.
The same ungentle Fame the news now brings
To sad Eliza, who now madly flings
Thorough the City, passion so excites
The wretched Queen, like Thyas at those Rites
When first the Orgyes stir, and Bacchus name
Cythaeron loudly does in night proclaim.
At length unto Aeneas thus she says,
Have thou designed all these dissembling ways?
Could there, false man, be so much ill in thee,
In silence to have fled this place and me?
Cannot my love, that love, which I so late
Plighted to thee, nor my approaching fate,
Oblige thy stay; but among Winter-waves
To thrust thy Navy, whilst the North Wind raves.
What if you never sought an unknown Land,
And ancient Troy did in its luster stand;
Must needs that Troy, through Billows swelling high,
Be sought with Navies? Is It not me you fly?
By thy received right hand, and by these tears,
(Now nothing else at my command appears)
By our young Loves, if ever I was thought
To merit, or to thee a pleasure brought:
Pity a falling state, change thy hard mind,
I beg, if prayers yet a place can find.
For thee, the Lybians, and Numidian King,
With Tyrians, will on me their malice fling.
For thee, my early and unspotted fame
Is lost, which once to Heaven bore my name.
To what am I now dying left? Ah guest,
In that, all Hymen's Titles now must rest.
But why do I delay? Is it to see
My Brother ruin all? or till I be
Led captive by Hyarbas? If I might
Have had a young Aeneas ere thy flight,
That only might to me present thy look,
I should not fancy I were quite forlook.
This said, forewarned by Jove within his breast,
With eyes still fixed his troubles he suppressed.
At length replies, Fair Queen, I cannot deny
Your words or merits, nor shall ever I
Unwillingly admit Eliza's name
Unto my thoughts, whilst life inspires this frame.
Thus much I only say, I never tried,
Or hoped dissemblingly my flight to hide.
Nor did I promise ever to be thine,
Or hither came with such a fond design.
Would Fate permit, my will should now dispose
My life, and as I pleased my cares and woes;
Troy and its Princely Palaces should shine,
As once it did, raised by this hand of mine.
But Phoebus now and Lycian Lots decree,
That I should fix my love on Italy.
If you, that from Phoenicia took your birth,
Affect this Carthage, and the Lybian earth;
Why should it now appear more strange, that we,
Though Trojans born, should seek for Italy?
The justice is the same. As often too,
As the dark night its humid shades does throw,
Over the hid world, and Stars begin to rise,
My Father's Ghost does threaten and advise.
Unjust to dear Ascanius too I prove,
He wants a Crown, whilst here I idly love.
Now Mercury from Jove was sent (I swear
By both our heads) who through the yielding air
Brought his commands, apparent light and clear,
Showed me the god, and I his voice did hear.
Cease then to wound with these complaints of thine,
Since, though I go, 'twas not my own design.
This said, she turned her long averted sight,
Fixed upon him, her eyes then took their flight,
And silently on every object gazed;
At length she spoke, to height of passion raised.
Per^idious man! Nor Dardan could begin
Thy race, or could thou from a goddess spring;
But bred on rocky Caucasus, thou first
Wast by Hir^anian Tigers udders nursed.
For why should I dissemble? should belief
Betray me to more woe? See if my grief
Has raised one sigh, or does his eyes incline
To be o're-come in tears to pity mine.
Where should I first complain? my miseries,
Nor Jove nor Juno sees with equal eyes.
Faith is unstedfast still, fond woman's haste!
In want I found what I in plenty placed.
His Friends and Navy did by me return
From death to life, Ah in what flames I burn?
Now Lot's, Apollo now, now from above
Cyllenius brings the harsh commands of Jove.
It Is likely that the gods should from our cares,
Receive such trouble, and proportion theirs.
I neither stay you, nor your words deny,
Seek through the waves and wind for Italy.
I hope (if gods be great as well as good)
That thou shall drink (drowned in the rocky Flood)
Revenge's draught, and calling still on me,
Though absent, yet in flames I Will follow thee.
And when cold death shall cease this vital heat,
My ghost unwelcome visits shall repeat.
And all thy woes obliging Fame shall tell,
To my pleased ears when I with shadows dwell.
At this abruptly stops her words, and flies,
Sick of the light, and weary of men's eyes,
Leaving him fixed with fears, and in delay,
Confused in all, preparing much to say.
Whilst she sinks to the earth on which she fled,
Carried by servants to a Marble-bed.
Though the just Prince inclined to give relief,
And to divert with words her powerful grief,
Shook in his breast, where sighs and love did meet;
Yet he obeys the gods, and views his Fleet.
The Trojans throng, while launched from the shore's side,
The 'nointed Vessels now on Billows ride;
Carrying their Oars aboard, and Oak not quite
Brought into form, so careful in their flight.
All from the City throng, as toyling Ants,
Treasure a Heap, remembering Winter's wants.
The black Troop through the verdant grass makes way,
And in a narrow road their stores convay;
Some bear the corn, the laziest of the Swarm
Others excite, and every place grows warm.
What were thy thoughts now Dido at this sight,
And what sad sighs did from thy breast take flight?
Hearing such noise, and seeing from above
The shores grow warm with crowds. (Ungentle Love!)
What is it thou can not us compel to do?
Again she is forced in tears and prayers to woe.
No thought to Love obedience now denied,
Left dying, she had left a way untri'd.
See thou not, Sister, how they all repair
Down to the shores, and the ungentle air
Seems too to court their sails, the joys resound
From Seamen, all their Vessels ready crowned.
Had I but thought that such a woe could be,
I might have born it then; for, wretched me,
This one thing do, (for that false man alone
Seemed kind to thee, to thee his thoughts made known
The time, and how to soften words you know,
Go and petition this insulting foe.
I never swore the Trojans to destroy,
Or did assist, or sent my ships to Tray;
Or yet disturbed his Father's dust and ghost,
Why are my words to his clos'dears thus lost?
Ah! whither does he fly? let his hard breast
Grant but a wretched Lover's last request.
Let him but stay till he may safely fly,
Till neither winds grow loud, or waves grow high.
I beg not now again his broken vows,
Or of the Latium Crown to rob his Brows:
I beg but time my passions to reprieve,
Till my hard fate has taught me how to grieve.
This last request I make, if pity find
A power in your breast; my grateful mind
Shall only lose the memory in death.
Whilst tears she spent with this imploring breath,
To him, and back again, the woeful tales
Her Sister bears, but nothing now prevails;
Soft charming words had lost their power, opposed
By Fate, the god his gentler ears had closed.
An aged Oak so long had stood the blast
Of Alpine Boreas, now is this way cast,
Now that, whilst with the clamoring winds he strives,
Which to the earth th'assaulted branches drives;
The root yet fixed, for what above appears,
So much below the earth's embraces bears.
So every way her words the Hero pressed,
Shook by her cares within his mighty breast.
But his firm mind unshaken still appears,
And she, in vain, now spends her stock of tears.
The unhappy Queen, whom all these fates affright,
Now wishes death, and hates to see the light.
That too which added to these sad desires,
Whilst on the Altars in perfumed fires,
She paies her gifts, the sacred wine no more,
Retains its looks, but turns black clotted gore.
This horrid change was to no eye revealed,
And from the trusted sister too concealed.
Besides, there stood a marble Temple, made
To her first love, to which she always paid
An honored kindness, always too decked round
With verdant wreaths, and snowie fleeces crowned;
From whence she thought, she heard Sichaeus call.
And when the night had spre'd her veil over all,
The fatal Owl that perching place still seeks,
And sends out long and death-presaging shreeks.
The Priests before had threatened sad extremes,
The cruel Prince still visits her in dreams.
Always she seems alone, and wandering strayes,
Seeking her subjects in forsaken ways.
So Pentheus saw with his distracted sight,
Furies in troops, at once two Suns gave light.
One Thebes two Cities showed, or on the stage,
As wild Orestes flies his mothers rage.
With blazing brands, and with black serpents armed,
Whilst in the gate, revenging furies swarmed?
Vanquished with grief and passion in extremes,
She now resolves to dye, the time and means
Closely designs, nor could her thoughts appear,
Her looks were all composed serene and clear.
To her afflicted Sister then she goes,
And with these words, her mind seems to disclose.
Come share with me the joy of my design,
That shall restore his love or banish mine.
Near to the setting Sun and Oceans end,
A part of Aethiopia does extend.
Where mighty Atlas on his shoulders bears
The glittering load of all the starry spears.
Thence, (a Massylian born) a Priestesse came,
That kept the Dragon and th'Hesperian Fane;
Who also did the sacred branches keep,
With honey and with poppy causing sleep.
She could with charms enthralled minds set free,
And others bind with the same cruelty.
Stars would retire, swift streams no longer run,
And from the graves, the called up spirits come,
The earth men's frighted ears with howlings fills,
And the tall Oks seem walking from the hills.
Witness you gods, and my dear life, that now
Unwillingly to Magic arts I bow.
Go, in the inner Court erect a pyle,
Bring the man's sword, and garments, now his spoil.
Lay all the Impious left upon that bed,
Where I to ruin was by passion led.
For so the Priestesse every thing designed,
Of a false man should dissolution find.
This said, on her still lips a palenesse rose,
And yet her sister did not then suppose
Under pretense of charms she meant to find
Her fate, or that such fury ruled her mind;
Or feared a crueller effect, or cross,
From any cause, than from her Husbands loss.
She therefore hastens to obey; the while,
The Queen within the Court does raise a pile
Of pines and cloven Oaks, adorned round
With lights; with wreaths and funeral Cypress crowned.
And on this pile the fatal bed convaid,
On which his garments and his sword she laid.
With these, placed his effigies too, Alas,
Too knowing now of what would come to pass!
All this begirt with Altars, with loose hair,
The Priestesse sends to many gods her prayer
To Spirits, and inhabitants below,
To Cynthia, and to triple Hecate too.
Sprinkling feigned dew, as from Avernus brought,
Herbs cut with brazen Sythes, by Moonshine sought.
With poison brewed, from the Colts brow they tare
The much loved bit of the prevented mare.
The Queen with gifts, hard by the Altar stands,
Her garments loose, one foot releast from bands.
And dying now, her last appeal does send,
To Gods and Planets, conscious of her end.
If any Power most with care survaies
Loves too unequal bonds, to them she prays.
It Was night, and wearied limbs with toils oppressed,
Did in becalming sleep's embraces rest.
The winds were hush't, the waves no longer sweld,
And time the equal scales of midnight held.
The earth's and air's inhabitants, in dreams
Were locked, and scaly troops affecting streams.
All in obliging sleep received their shares,
Their hearts insensible of toils or cares.
But the unhappy Queen sleep's charms denies,
Passion possessed her breast, and tears her eyes.
Her cares increase, her love to fury grows,
And storms of anger with her passion rose.
Then to her self, raises this sad discourse;
What shall I do? shall I go seek remorse
Of slighted lovers? or beg to be prized,
By that Hiarbas whom I once despised?
Or shall I fly after the Trojan sails,
With whom the sense of kindness so prevails?
Or were I willing, would they give me leave;
Or a scorned thing in their proud ships receive?
Lost wretch! see thou not falsenesse fixed upon
The perjured race of false Laomedon?
What then, shall I alone these men pursue,
Or let the armed Tyrians follow too?
And those which hardly once from Tyrus came,
Shall I persuade to go to Sea again?
No, no, it is only death is fit for thee,
Let his sword end thy life and misery.
Thou sister, first (yet with my weeping pressed)
Did help this enemy into my breast.
Why might not we like wild beasts always live,
And know no cares that love and passion give?
Then, not obliged, I had not been unjust,
In forgot-kindnesse to Sichaeus dust.
Such great and sad complaints denied her rest,
In troops assaulting now her broken breast.
Sleep then did on the Trojan Prince prevail,
Who in his tall ship lay prepared to sail.
To whom, Jove's messenger appears once more,
Repeates the warnings that he gave before;
(In voice and every thing like Hermes showed,
His youth the same, his shining hair so flowed.)
Thou heavenly-born, Can thou soft sleep admit,
Not sensible what dangers threaten yet?
Nor yet discernest how the prosperous gales,
With gentle invitations court thy sails?
She now, since death is her resolved design,
Guided by rage, stops at no fraud or crime.
Fly whilst thou may, left thou see vessels swarm,
On troubled waves, and shores with flames grow warm
If by this Land, you wait approaching day,
Then put an end unto this dull delay.
The minds of women never yet were fixed:
This said, with nights dark shades himself he mixed.
No sooner now this mighty Vision ends,
But straight Aeneas, roused himself and friends;
Urging them on, to hasten from those shores,
With haste to spread their sails, and ply their Oars.
A God sent from above came to exile,
And with Commands, to hasten too our flight.
Which of the gods so e're thou art, we fly
As thou direct'st, ob^ying cheerfully.
Be thou still pleased to guide us and protect,
And every star propitiously direct.
This said, his shining sword draws from his side,
And cuts the Cable which his vessel tied,
The rest with equal haste repeat his deed,
And quickly from the shores their vessels freed.
Much of the Sea with ships was covered now,
Forcing white furrows on its bluish brow.
Now on the earth, the first bright message fled
Of fair Aurora's leaving Tithon's bed.
When first the Queen saw the approaching light,
With it the empty port, the ships in flight:
Her breast, where yet so many beauties were,
She fills with strokes, and tears her shining hair.
Then cries, O Jupiter, shall he thus fly,
And fix on us so great a mockery?
Are none yet armed, no Ships yet thrust from shores?
Pursue with flames, bring sails, employ your Oars;
What do I talk of, or where am I now?
What rage, and impious fancies I allow?
Unhappy Queen, these thoughts should have born sway,
Before thy Scepter thou had it flung away.
Behold his faith, who yet they say before,
His Countries gods through all his travails bore!
Who on his shoulders bore his fathers weight,
Pressed too with age, declining to his fate.
Cannot I throw his scattered limbs to waves,
And give his friends too such unpittied graves?
Might not Ascanius perish by my sword,
Then dish the Boy up to his fathers board?
The event of War is doubtful: be it so,
The dying sure never needs fear a foe.
Swift flames among their ships I should have flung,
In which at once, the father and the son
Should have been lost, and in the same design,
With their sad fates, I would have mingled mine.
Thou Sun that see all things, that mortals do!
Thou Juno, conscious of my passions too:
And Hecate, whose howls fills night and ways,
You furies too, hear what Eliza pray's
The last her dying lips ever designs!
Let your revenge be great, as are their crimes.
If such an impious man, must safely find
Through seas, places and Lands for him designed,
If this be fates unalterable doom,
Let him among a warlike people come
Vexed still with such, driven from place to place,
And snatched from his Ascanius loved embrace.
Still begging aid, let objects for his eyes
Be still his wretched friends sad obse^uies.
And when dishonored peace shall all unite;
Let him enjoy neither his Crown nor Light:
But fall before his day, the sand his grave,
The god's these prayers with my blood shall have.
And you, O Tyrians, in your hate be just,
Let that be still a tribute to my dust.
Never let Love oblige, nor League make ties,
And from our loins may some revenger rise,
That on the Dardan race, may pay these scor's,
With fire and sword; may shores contend with shores,
Billow's with waves, and armies against arms,
And all his race parish in civil harms.
This said, her crowdes of thoughts were now at strife,
Which way to rid her self of hated life.
Then to Sichaeus nurse her self addressed,
(Here Is in her native grave enjoyed rest)
Thus said, Dear nurse, my sister hither bring,
First having hath'd her body in a spring,
And with her bring the Sacrifice designed,
And you your head with sacred fillers bind.
For Pluto's rites I Will end, with them my woe,
Whilst on the Dardans funeral pile I throw
His Image, to the flames ungentle rage.
This said, the nurse's gate showed haste and age.
But winged with horrid fancies Dido flies.
Unto her fate, rolling her bloody eyes.
In her sair cheeks, sad looks possessed the room.
And palenesse of that death that was to come.
Thorough the Inner Court her stops she bends,
And furiously the funeral Pile ascends.
Then draws the Dardan' sword, never designed
For such a horrid use; her eyes next find
His bed, which only now his garments bears.
A little while she paused, by thoughts and tears
Shar^rs in time delayed, her self then cast
Upon the bed, and thus she spoke her last.
Dear spoils, whilst gods and fate did so agree!
Receive my life, from cares now set me free.
Here I have lived the slave of Fortune still,
Now under earth my shade some place must fill.
A City I have built, revenged the fate
Of a lost Husband, and a Brother's hate.
Happy, ah too much happy I had been,
Had never Trojan-Sails my Carthage seen.
This said, she kissed the bed, then cries, Must I
Thus poorly fall, and unrevenged die?
But die I must, death only can give ease,
The thoughts oft'other world alone can please.
Let my last flame blaze in his cruel eyes,
Shook at the Omen, whilst Eliza dies.
This said, she thrust the sword into her breast,
And flowing blood the wretched act expressed.
The lofty Palace ecehoes now with cries,
And fame through all the shaken City flies:
The roofs resound with women's houls and moans,
And ecchoing air affected seems with groans.
So it had been, if to an armed Host
The ancient Tire or Carthage had been lost.
And the impartial flames showing no odds,
On sinking dwellings both of men and gods.
Her Sister hears, who with a shaking pace,
Beating her breast, arrives unto the place;
Thorough increasing crowds she rushing came,
Still calling on her dying Sister's name.
Was this thy cruel fraud, was I so pressed
For such a Pile? for this were Altars dressed?
What should a wretch so much forsaken do?
Did you scorn, Sister, I should die with you?
Death should have had on both an equal power,
We should have shared one grief, one sword, one hour.
These with my hands I raised, my prayers fled
To gods, did I compose thee for the dead
To live behind? Thy fate now ruins all,
Thy Sister sinks, and Kingdom in thy fall.
Some water bring that I may bathe the wound,
If any wandering breath may yet befound.
To hers my lips so closely shall be laid,
That it shall find no way but me. This said,
She mounts the Pile, and in her bosom took
Her Sister, yet by breath not quite forsook.
She grieves, yet still attempting all she could,
And with her garments dries away the blood.
She strives to raise her eyes, by weakness pressed,
Her eyelids sinck, the wound gapes on her breast.
Thrice she attempted from the bed to rise,
Thrice roles upon the bed with wandering eyes.
She makes saint s^arches now for heavens light,
And groans, when found by her impairing sight.
But Juno pitying the punishment
Of struggling life, from heaven Iris sent,
To set at freedom he^r delaying breath,
Since neither fate, nor a deserved death
Had caused her end, but fell before her time:
Love's passion was alone her fate and crime.
Nor yet had Proserpine took from her head
Her hair, and entered her among the dead.
From heaven then, Iris with dewie wings,
On which the Sun a thousand glories flings,
Flies to her head, This to the dark abode
I bear, and free thee from thy body's load.
She said; then with her right hand cuts her hair,
And her enlarged breath slides into air.
P. PAPINIUS STATIUS, His ACHILLEIS; The First Book.
The Argument.
The Rape's committed. Thetis begs in vain
Of Neptune a rough storm to swell the Main.
Then to Aemonia through the Sea she goes, Thessaly

And visits the loved cause of all her woes.
THe great Achilles, called Aeacides, from Aeac^^ his Grandfather.
Aeacides, my Muse, now sing;
An Issue feared by Heavens thundering King.
Much of his acts, though in admired strains,
Great Homer sung; yet much untold remains.
We his first deeds relate, and how concealed,
In Scyros by a Trumpet's sound revealed.
Not of dragged Hector to his Chariot tied,
I sing, but how the Youth to Troy arrived.
Thou, Phoebus, (if deserved in former lays)
Give me fresh streams, and now with second Bays
Adorn my brows. For I the hallowed ground
Have known before, with sacred Fillets crowned:
Witness those Theban fields, for which my fame
Shall last, whilst Thebes records Amphion's name.
But Domitian the Emperor, to whom the Poet addresseth this Complement.
Thou by Greeks and Romans all renowned,
Both with the wreaths of Mars and Phoebus crowned.
(Who lately griev'dst from thy contended brow
To lay the gentler one) permit me now
To guide my fearful pen a little while,
And on the great Achilles acts to toil,
Till I sing Thine, yet wanting confidence,
And for thy Prelude with his name dispense.
The Trojan Swain, from the Laconian Shore
Sailed, and from unsuspecting Sparta bore
A prey, and in his guilty journey shows
His mother's dream fulfilled, presaging woes.
Upon those streams they sail, where Hell found
Her fate, yet now among the Sea-gods crowned.
When Thetis (never yet, alas! in vain
Were parents prophesies) through the clear Main,
Affrighted saw the Phrygian Oars, she fled,
Withal the Sea-Nymphs, from her watery bed.
The almost-meeting Shores heat with the swarm,
And from the throng the crowded waves grew warm.
When Thetis through the parting Billows rose,
To me she cried, This Navy threatens woes.
What Proteus told, alas! appears too true.
See Priam's kindled flames; the daughter too
Bellona brings! a thousand Ships appear,
Which Ionian and Aegean Billows bear.
All the sworn Greeks whom the Atrides got
Must not suffice: Land, Ocean must be sought
For my Achilles. To what purpose then
Was he on Pelion bred, in Chiron's den?
There with the Lapithites (unless I fear
In vain) he fights, and tries his father's Spear.
Ah me! this fear upon my heart prevails
Too late. Why could not I, when first these Sails
Swelled on my Streams, act what I now would do,
And make a storm the lustful Thief pursue,
With all the Sea-Nymphs helped? Storms now will come
Too late; the Rape and Injury is done.
Yet I will go, and all the remedy,
That Is left, attempt; I Will move each deity
That rules in Floods, and beg the Ocean's King
By Tethys, on the waves one storm to fling.
No sooner said, but she the god espied,
Who from Oceanus crowned boards arrived.
The chearing Nectar in his looks yet shined:
At whose approach, the storms, with every wind,
Were all in silence hushed; and round by him,
Sounding their wreathed shells, the Tritons swim:
The shoals of Whales, like moving Rocks, make way,
And round their King, the crooked Dolphines play.
He, raised above the quiet Ocean, rides,
And with his Trident his yoked Horses guides:
They with their crooked tails the Chariot row,
And from their breasts the foaming surges throw.
To whom sad Thetis said, Great Ocean's King,
Do thou not see thy waves assistance bring
To strange designs? The guilty safely go,
Since Sea's reserved rights were slighted so
By the bold Jason: His example left
See by these followed, both in crime and theft:
And from the friendly shores an unjust prey
By the rash Judge of Ida's born away.
Ah me! what mournings shall this cause to be
In heaven and earth! and what, alas, to me!
Is this a Foster-child's return? This way
Will Venus for her Phrygian Garland pay?
At least o're-whelm these ships, (for in the throng,
No Heroes, nor our Theseus goes along)
If any justice yet in waves can be;
Or else commit the power of storms to me.
Nor is it ungentle, while it is just that I
Fear for a child. Let the mad waves swell high:
Nor suffer me from Floods to take my leave,
Only by his affected Tomb to grieve.
Thus begging, she before the Chariot stood,
With scattered hair. The Ruler of the Flood
Invites her up, and strives such words to find,
As might appease her sad afflicted mind.
Ask not their ruin, Thetis: it is in vain,
The gods and Fates do otherwise ordain.
Sad years to come with slaughters are decreed
By Jove, Europe and Asia both must bleed.
What triumphs shall thou have in Phrygian plains,
To see thy son there feed the funeral flames?
When he the Trojan fields shall stain with blood,
And with like slaughters cram the blushing Flood?
Great Hector's weight shall make his Chariot slow,
Those walls we raised his hand shall overthrow.
Nor grieve that thou have stooped to Peleus love,
The Son thou have by him is worthy Jove.
Nor shall thou unrevenged for ever mourn,
When they return thy power shall raise a storm:
False flames by night, shall Caphareus then show,
And joynt-revenge we will on Ulysses throw;
At this, she hung those looks that did incline,
To raise a storm; and changing the design
With laboring arms to Thessaly she swims,
And on those shores she rests her snowy limbs.
The mountains joy, with that much loved place,
Where Peleus did the goddess first embrace;
Above his banks the swelled Sperchios rose,
Joy'd whilst his stream about the goddess flows.
She took no joy in all, but still oppressed
With the sad fancies of her careful breast.
Thus filled with busy thoughts the goddess then,
Approaches to the aged Chirons den;
Under the rock, where Pelion does incline
Like a bent bow: so wrought by Art and Time.
Still here the signs remained, where, at their feasts,
The beds were pressed by the immortal guests,
Which in the stables of the Centaur stood,
Not like the rest of the prodigious brood.
His darts unstained with human cruelties,
Never did he with vast subverted trees.
Or massy bowls, disturb the geniall crew,
Only at Beasts, his guiltless arrows flew.
But now by age disarmed, with herbs he tries
To restore life her tired faculties:
Or to Achilles, all the glorious things,
Farn'd Heroes did, upon his harp he sings.
Against whose return from his pursued game,
The boards are crowned; and with the kindled flame
The cave grows bright, whilst thus he did provide,
Looking for him, his Mother he espied.
To her he hasts, (while strength his gladness yields)
And trots upon the long unused fields.
To her he bows his aged Limbs, and then,
Leads the sad goddess to his humble den.
Her busy eye, that would not be delayed,
Quickly views all, as soon to Chiron said;
Where is my pledge! or why do you thus trust,
My child alone? Are my sad dreams then just?
Those dreadful visions which the gods have set
Before mine eyes, I wish as vain as great.
My breast seems wounded now; my hands, to bear
The signs of strokes; wild beast's, my bosom tear.
And many times I fancy in my dreams,
Again I dip my child in Stygian streams.
With Magic art, at last a way I Have got,
To cure my fears, by the kind Proteus taught:
The Youth must be to those fit parts convay'd,
For such desig^^s, in secret billows laid.
Where horrid sacrifices are to the hid,
And unknown gods, But more I am forbid.
These rites demand him now: Thus Thetis said:
The aged Chiron else had not obeyed,
If he had known what garments once should hide
The youth. But ignorant he thus replied;
Pursue, kind goddess, this unknown design:
With humble vows the ungentle powers incline.
Not thy ambitious prayers can succeed,
To please the envious gods, nor would I breed
New fears in thee; but I confess my share,
Nor yet deceived by a Father's care:
It Is his vast strength, that thus procures my fears,
Which shows too early for his tender years.
At first, my threatening words he would obey,
Nor would too far about the mountains stray.
Not Ossa now, nor Pelion can contain
His wanderings, nor Thessalian feathered rain.
To me the Centaurs often make their moan,
Forced from their Herds, pursued by him alone,
Who singly dares with all their troops engage,
Whilst force and fraud they threaten in their rage.
Lately I saw Alcides on this shore,
And Jheseus, whom the Argive ship then bore.
But see, he comes, -- At this abruptly staid,
The expecting goddess chilling fears invade.
The Youth arrived, loaded with dust and sweat,
And wearied with his arms and labors; yet.
His snowy looks, the rosy blushes stained;
His hair the shining Gold with glittering shamed.
Upon his cheelis no Down yet seemed to rise:
A gentle luster in his sparkling eyes
Still shined; his face those charming beauties wore,
Which his admired Mother had before.
So shows young Phoebus, when he does retire
From Lycia, and for shafts assumes his lyre.
By chance he came in pleased, (O how much more
It added to what was so well before!)
For under Pholoe in a Cave he slew
A Lioness, and took the young ones too,
Which in his arms he bore. But the loved prey,
At his dear mother's sight he threw away;
By Chiron now embraced, and then again
Does in his mother's jealous arms remain;
When straight his dearest friend Patroclus came,
In love and age his equal; and the same
Assayed in generous Arts to imitate,
Yet short in strength, but shared an equal fate.
The next adjacent stream Achilles seeks,
And with the River cleans'd his sullied cheeks.
So tired Castor in Eurota's streams
Restores his looks, bright as his new Star's beams.
Pleased Chiron on his fair proportion stares.
The joy that Thetis took made great her cares.
The Centaur then invites them to his Feast,
And fills Lyaeus to his troubled guest.
His Harp to welcome Thetis he prepares,
Whose charming notes lessen the weight of cares.
And having gently tried the warbling strings,
He gives it to Aeacides, who sings.
The acts of Heroes; how great Juno's spleen
Vanquished so often by Hercules had been;
The Victories of Pollux; and how too
The monstrous Minotaur famed Theseus slew.
Lastly, great Peleus, and his Mother's love
He sung, the Marriage graced by those above.
At this, sad Thetis seemed to force a a smile.
Night now laid on her heavy charms the while.
Achilles the kind Centaur's shoulder took,
And his affecting Mother's breast forsook.
ANNOTATIONS On the first Book of STATIUS his ACHILLEIS.
2. AN issue feared by heaven's thundering King.] When Jove sought the marriage
of Thetis, he was told by Proteus, that the issue that came from Thetis should
exceed the father who begot it: At which, mistrusting his own Omnipotency, he
left his Love to keep Heaven. The Fable is thus rendered by the incomparable
Sandys, Metamorph. 11.

For aged Proteus thus foretold the truth,
To wave-wet Thetis, thou shall bear a Youth,
Greater then him from whom he took his birth
In Arms and Fame. Lest any thing on earth
Should be more great than Jove, Jove shuns the bed
Of Sea-thron'd Thetis, though her beauty led
His strong desires: Who bids Aeacides
Succeed his Love, and wed the Queen of Seas.
6. Scyros.] An Island of the Aegean Sea, one of the Cyclades, over against
Peloponnesus, (as Strabo, l. 10. relates) having a Town of the same name;
famous most, in being the place where Achilles lived disguised. See Servius and
Sabinus on Virgil's Aen. 2.

7. Not of dragged Hector, etc.] Statius here proposes his design, to sing
the acts of Achilles only from his infancy, which Homer had omitted, justly
presenting the death of Hector for all his Victories; whose fate was Troy's
ruin. Senec. Troad. v. 185.

Aut cum superbo victor in curru stetit,
Egitque habenas, Hectorem and Trojam trahens.
Or when the Conqueror did his Horses guide,
And Troy which Hector at his Chariot tied.
For Achilles having killed him, tied him to his Chariot, and dragged him
thrice round the walls of Troy, as Homer, Iliad 22. Which unwelcome sight
Aeneas saw painted at Carthage, Virg. Aen. 2. 487.

Ter circum Iliacos raptaver at Hectora muros,
Examinumque auro corpus vendebat Achilles.
Tum vero ingentem gemitum dat pectore ab imo,
Vt spolia, ut currus, utque ipsum corpus amici,
Tendentemque manus Priamum conspexit inermes.
About Troy's walls Hector's dead body thrice
Achilles dragged, and sold it for a price.
Then from the bottom of his breast he drew
A grief-expressing sigh, his friend to view,
His Spoils and Charior, and how Priam stands
Begging with his erected aged hands.
12. With sacred fillets bound.] These were Ornaments for the Priests heads; in
Latin, Vittae. Hence Juvenal Sat. 4. of the Vestall Virgin, Vittat^ Sacerdos.
And Virgil thus presents Anius, Aen. 3. 80.

Rex Anius, Rex idem hominum Phoebique Sacerdos,
Vittis and sacra redimitus tempora lauro.
Anius a King and Priest, his Temples bound
With sacred Fillets, and with Laurel crowned.
The Title of Priest was anciently conferred on Kings, as Casaubon, on
Su^tonius in Augusto, delivers from Aristotle, Polit. 3. and Synesius, Epist.
121. by reason that the Government of all Commonwealths consisted in
Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, and Political Laws; the care of both which
belonged to Kings. Hence Augustus was created chief Priest, that all kinds of
power might be in him. And as Servius observes (on Aen. 3. 80.) the style of
Pontifex Max. was still assumed by the succeeding Emperors; as may also be seen
in the Inscriptions of the Caesar's at the end of Suetonius, set forth by
Schildius 1651. Poets called themselves Phoebus Priests; so Tibullus and
Protertius frequently. Hereupon Statius here dresseth himself with Priestly
Ornaments.

13. Witness those Theban fields, etc.] Our Poet here intimates his Poem of
the Theban-War: So that hence, and by the ensuing Complement to Domitius it is
clear, that this was Statius his second Work, and his Silvae the last. To his
Thebans, with confidence enough, he here prom^seth as lasting a fame, as Thebes
could give Amphion the son of Jupiter and Antiope, who having (as Pliny says,
l 7. c. 56.) found out the use of the Harp, handled it so harmoniously, that he
made stones come of their own accord to raise the Walls of Thebes. Senec. Theb.
act. 4.

-- nulla quas struxit manus,
Sed convocatus vocis and citharae sono
Per se ipse turres venit in summas lapis.
Raised by no laboring workman's hands, but brings
With his harmonious voice and charming strings
The willing stones together, which compose
Themselves, and into lofty Towers ^ose.
Some join his brother Zethus with him in the business. So Palaephatus, who
reducing the Fable to a seeming truth, says, The two Brothers admitted their
Auditors to their Music, on condition, that every one should afford his
assistance to the Building. A far truer Mythologie is glanced at by Horace, De
art Poet. v. 391.

Silvestres homines sacer interpresque Deorum
Caedibus and victu foedo deterruit Orpheus,
Dictus ob hoc lenire Tigres rabidosque Leones.
Dictus and Amphion Thebanae conditor arcis
Saxa movere sono restu^inis, and prece blanda
Ducere quo vellet.
Orpheus inspired from gods, first rude men brought
From loving blood and slaughters; hence was thought
Fierce Lions and wild Tigers to have tamed.
And so Amphion with his Harp was famed
To raise the Theban walls, and at his choice
To move deaf stones with his admired voice.
So perhaps the Fable arose, from his reducing a savage people to live under a
form of Government; and for their safety (than which, no argument can be more
prevalent) persuading them to compass in their City with a Wall. And herein,
in my opinion, he was much more judicious than Lycurgus and Agesilaus, who
believed the breasts of valiant Citizens defense enough. And so also thinks
Plato, l. 6. De leg. For these reasons, Orpheus was said to have made wild
beasts gentle, and Amphionto have moved stones, that is, men of savage lives
and obdurat natures. Macrobius in Somn. Scip. l. 2. c. 3. keeps closer to the
Fable; for setting f^rth the excellencies of Music, he says, That from it,
the Univer^all Soul of the world took its original; and that by it therefore
all men, not only the civil, but the barbarous also, are either animated to
ver^ue, or dissolved into pleasure; quia anima in corpus defert memoriam
Musicae, cujus in caelo fuit conscia; Because the soul, though in the body,
still retains a memory of that harmony which it enjoyed in heaven. And hence
he conceives the Fables of Orpheus and Amphion had their Original. See
Clemens Alexandr. Admonit. ad Gentes, p. 2. Amphion's excellency proved his
ruin: For contemning Latena, by her revenge he saw all his children slain, and
at the last added himself to the number. Sandys Ovid's Metam. l. 6.

For sad Amphion wounding his own breast,
Had now his sorrow with his soul releast.
13. Trojan Swain] This title is usually given to Paris, by reason he was
brought up among the shepherds. The story is thus, Hecuba being great with
Paris, dreamed, she should bring forth a flame that should consume Troy, Cic.
l, 1. de divinat. Whereupon Priam consulted the Oracle; and being told, his
Queen should bear a son, who should be the Incendiary of his Country, he gave
order the child should be destroyed. But Hecuba desirous to preserve her
Infant, conveyed him to mount Ida to be bred up among the shepherds. Where at
length, being grown up, he pretended love to Oenone, and made every Tree
witness of his Amors; as the Nymph is made to complain by Ovid in her Epistle
to Paris.

Incisae servant a te mea nomina fagi;
Et legor OENONE falce notata tua.
Et quantum trunci, tantum mea nomina crescunt:
Crescite, and in titulos surgite rite meos.
Populus est (memini) fluviali confita ripa,
Est in qua nostri litera scripta memor
Popule, vive, ^recor, quae consita margin ripae
Hoc in rugoso cortice carm^n habes.
CUM PARIS OENONE POTERIT SPIRARE RELICTA,
AD FONTEM XANTHI VERSA RECURRET AQUA.
Xanthe, retre propera, versaeque recurrite Lymphae:
Sustinet Oenonen deseruisse Paris.
My name's preserved on every wounded Tree:
Their bark OENONE bears engraved by thee.
Whilst they increase, my names enlarged grow;
To bear those titles may they still do so.
A Poplar grows, where crystal billows glide,
And shows those Letters carved on its side.
Long may it live unprejudiced by years,
Whose rugged rind this false Inscription bears,
If Paris leave Oenone, yet not die,
Xanthus shall backward to his fountain fly.
Haste back, ye charged Streams, for Paris flies
His loved Oenone once, and yet not dies.
His casting off this Nymph was occasioned by the three goddesses repairing to
him, about determining their controversy, as Oenone in the following Verses
complains. Each goddess endeavored to bribe the Judge, Juno, by promising
him Empire, Pallas, Wiscom; Venus, Pleasure. This last was pronounced the
fairest, and went away with the golden Apple: And in requital, she directs
her Umpire to receive his promised reward in the fair Helen: Whom having seen
he loved, and ravished from Sparta, where he had been kindly entertained.
Coluthus and others say, He had her consent; b^t Seneca, Troad. v. 917.
brings her on the Stage excusing her self, by pleading Enforcement: And
Gorgias, in his defense of Helen, says, Venus commanded her to suster the
Trojan to enjoy her. Others say, that Paris being sent to demand Hesione, the
daughter of Laomedon, whom Hercules had carried from Troy, had order given him.
That, in case the Greeks refused to deliver her, he should ravish from them
whatsoever considerable Lady he could light on. So Dares Phrygius, who
reports also, That Antenor was first sent to fetch home Hesione, but returned
without her; and that all the Grecian Princes denied to make any satisfaction.
Yet that Hector's advice was not to revenge the Rape, by warring against their
potent Confederates. And that afterward Paris having received that
encouragement from Venus, undertook the Voyage; and, by chance, arrived at the
Island Cythera, at a time when Helen was there, in a Town bearing her name: Who
had no sooner heard of the Trojan Prince's arrival, but she had a desire to
see him: And so they being both enamoured of one another, Paris took her that
night after his arrival, out of Venus Temple, and brought her with him to
Troy. And thus he proved that Firebrand his mother dreamed of, kindling a
flame that burnt Troy to ashes.

24. Laeonian.] The Poets word is Oebalio, from Oebalus a King of ^aconia, a
region of Peloponnesus, bordering on Messenia, Argia, and Arcadia, Strabo lib.
8. Pausanias, in Arcadicis, says, it is divided from part of Arcadia, by the
River Alpbeus* In this Country, stood Lacedaemon, on the West side of Eurotas,
beneath the Mountain Taygetus: Strabo, l. 8. Polybius, lib. 5. But the proper
name of the City was Sparta; Lacedaemon being more commonly used for the
Province, so called from a King of that name, who sometimes reigned there, and
married Sparta the daughter of Eurotas, whose name the City received. To the
Lacedaemonians, Jonathan High Priest of the Jews wrote a Letter; saying, It was
found in writing, that the Lacedaemonians and the Jews were brethren, and that
they were of the stock of Abraham, 1 Macc. 12. 21. Joseph, Antiq. l. 13. c. 8.

27. Upon those streams, etc.] i. e. the Hellespont, which is not past eight
furlongs over, as Pliny testifies; About thirty miles below Gallipoli, it is
not above half a mile over, as Sir Henry Blunt in his Travels relates. This
Strait parts Europe from Asia: On Europe's side, stands Sestus; on Asia's,
Abydus, Towns famous by the Loves of Hero and Leander, sung by that sweet Poet,
whom Virgil gives the preminence to, in the Elysian fields, Aen. 6. Leander
perished in these streams, yet having his wishes Crowned; as Martial
represents him in this Epigram.

Cum peteret dulces audax Leandrus amores,
Et fessus tumidis jam premeretur aquis:
Sic miser instantes affatus dicitur undas,
Parcite dum propero, mergite dum (...).
When bold Leander through the billows sought,
Love's joys, his arms now almost over-wrought
With waves, he cried, Now spare me gentle Main,
And let me sink as I return again.
But his Hero survived but a while; For the next morning, seeing his dead body
floting on the Waves, from the top of her Tower, she threw her self into them.
Nor less memorable is this narrow Sea, for the bridges of Boats, that Xerxes
made over it: The former of which being broken by a sudden tempest, the vain
King scourged the disobedient waves, and cut off the heads of the Workmen; and
then caused another to be made with stronger ties, Heredot. P^lymnia. The same
Author reports of Xerxes, that taking a view of his Land forces, that filled
the shores and the plains, and of his Navy, that covered the Hellespont; He
sadly wept to think, that within an hundred years, not a man of all that
multitude should be living. So many they were, that Juvenal scoffingly said,
Sat. 10.

-- Credimus altos
Defecisse amnes, epotaque flumina Medo
Prandente, and madidis cantat quae Softratus alis.
Ille tamen qualis rediit Salamine relicta,
In Little atque Eurum solitus saevire flagellis
Barbarus, Aeolio nunquam hoc in carcere passos?
Sed qualis rediit? nempe una nave cruentis
Fluctibus, ac tarda per densa cadavera prora.
We have believed deep Rivers could not find,
Liquor for Xerxes army, while they dined;
Things sung by Softratus, well drenched with wine.
Yet he that so returned from Salamine,
Once scourged the winds, because they rudely blew:
Which in the Aeolian caves they never knew.
But how was his return? In one small boat,
Which could but slowly for dead bodies float.
So Justine, lib. 2. Erat res spectaculo digna, and aestimatione sortis
humanae, rerum varietate, miranda; in exiguo latentem videre navigio quem paulo
ante vix aequor (...) capiebat. Thus the Hellespont has the greatest part of
its fame, from the misfortunes of two kind Lovers, and one proud Prince; It
received its name from Hell, daughter of Athamas, King of Thebes, who fearing
the treacheries of her Mother in Law, fled with Phryxus her Brother, and with
him was, here drowned. Lucian, Dialogo Neptuni and Nereidum, says, she fell
into the water by reason of a Vertigo that took her on the sudden: And Hesiod,
troubled with such another, says, she was married to Neptune, of whom he begat
Paeon.

37. What Proreus told] This was a Sea-God, famous for his prophesying, and for
the power he had to change his shape at his pleasure; Ovid Metamorph, l. 2. v.
9. and lib. 8. v. 737. Virgil, Georg. 4. 388. Hygin. fab. 118. He foretold
Thetis, that her Son should be killed in the Trojan War: Which prophecy gave
the argument to the ensuing story. This Proteus was King of Egypt, Serve. in
Aeneid. 11. and, perhaps, got this fame of transforming himself by his using,
still to alter his temper and disposition, suitably to his affairs and
occasions; From the like ground, sprung the fame of Herculeae labors,
achieved with unimitable strength and valor. Proteus was also called
Hercules, as Servius affirms on that of Virgil, Aen. 11. 262.

Atreides Protei Menelaus ad usque columnas, Exulat. Those Columns having been
wholly attributed to Hercules, are there set for the bounds of Egypt.

40. Ionian] Over the Ionian sea, many auxiliaries came to assist the Greeks
against Troy. This Sea took its name from Ion son of Dyrrhachius, whom Hercules
having by mischance slain, that he might make him some amends by perpetuating
his memory, threw him into this Sea; Others allege different reasons, but none
worth setting down: Formerly, as Pausanias says, it was accounted part of the
Adriatic. But Ptolomy, in his description of Macedon, attributes that part of
the Adriatic which washes Macedonia on the East, to the Ionian. But Pliny,
lib. 3. c. 6. more rightly divides these two Seas, by the Ceraunian, or (as
Horace, lib. 1. Carm. Od. 3. v. 20. calls them) Acroceraunian mountains: From
which the Ionian Sea reaches to the promontory of Malea.

Aegean billows] A Sea between Asia and Greece, full of Islands called Cyclades
and Sporades; of as uncertain Etymology, as the Ionian. Most say, it had its
name from Aegeus, the father of Theseus: Who going to fight the Minotaur, was
charged, if he got the victory, to give notice thereof at his return by a white
sail; But he forgetting so to do, his Father, from his Tower seeing the ship
coming without the token of success, gave his Son for lost, and for grief cast
himself into the Sea. But some derive the name from Aege, a Queen of the
Amazons; Strabo, from Aegae, a Sea-Town in Eubaea, Servius in Aen. 3. calls
that the Aegean, which is between the Hellespont and the Adriatic; others,
that between the Hellespont, and Tenedus. It is now named the Archipelago.

41. All the sworn Greeks, which the Atrides got] i. e. Menelaus and Agamemnon,
called Atridae, from Atreus, their supposed father. But they were indeed the
sons of Philisthenes, and only bred by Atreus their Uncle; These two Brethren,
to revenge the injury done by Paris, having assembled the whole strength of
Greece at Aulis, bound them all by an Oath, to see Troy ruined, or never to
return, Serve. in Aen. 4. as will also appear in the third book of this Poem.
Thucydides, lib. 1. glanceth at the reason of the unanimous consent of the
Greeks, to punish the rape of Helen, viz. an Oath by which Tyndarus had obliged
all that came Suitors to his daugher, that they should revenge whatsoever wrong
should be done to him that should enjoy her; But he rather believes, that
Agamemnon being heir to the houses of Perseus and Pelops, and (as Homer styleth
him) King of many Islands, was the chief cause of the Expedition. The account
of the ships in this Fleet, is various in several Authors; D^ctys Cretensis
makes them, 1138. Dares, 1140. Homer, 1193. our Author here, with a Poetical
carelessenesse, reckons them but 1000. So Seneca, in Agamemnon, and Virgil,
Aen. 2.

Talibus insidiis, perjurique art Sinonis,
Credita res: captique dolis lacrimisque coactis,
Quos neque Tydides, nec Larissaeus Achilles;
Non anni domuere december, non mill carinae.
Thus they themselves, made captives by belief
Of Sinon's perjured fraud and feigned grief.
Not Diomed, nor Aeacides prevails,
Nor ten years War, nor yet their thousand fails.
Thucydides says, the number of the Soldiers was not great: But by an
indifferent judgment on his own words, the 1200 ships, as he numbreth them,
carried 102000 men; a number in my opinion, not to be made so slight of. Some,
as Dion Chrysostomus, have made a question, whether there ever was such a War;
although it has employed the pens of Homer, Dares Phrygius, Dyctis Cretensis,
Lycephron with his Scholiast, and Josephus Iscanius, and has been believed by
so many Authors in succeeding ages. That a siege should continue ten whole
years, seemed ridiculous to some; but Thucydides, lib. 1. initio, gives a
reason for it: Others have conceived, and our late Travelers have also
observed, that a potent King could not reign in so inconsiderable a place.
Neither do the ruins give testimony of an ample and famous City; And though
there never were such a War, yet is it not to be wondered at, that so many have
reported it, and that more have believed it: since the report of false-hoods,
especially, when favored by an ancient pen, gains belief, either because
it cannot be disproved, or because the crediting of it saves pains. Besides,
things are seldom examined or disputed, where interest is not concerned.

44. On Pelion bred, in Chiron's den] Pelion is a mountain of Thessaly, in the
Territory of Magnesia, joining to the mountain Ossa: Herodot. lib. 7. In mount
Pelion, was the Cave of Chiron; who (as the rest of the Centaurs) was like an
Horse behind, but forward like a Man: S. Ifidore, lib. 4. holds that he was
so represented, quia medicinam jumentorum quidam Chiron Graecus invenit,
because he found out medicines for beasts. And he was named Chiron, (...),
because he was a Surgeon; Suidas says, he was the son of Ixion, and the
Cloud, as the others Centaurs also were: whom Virgil, Aen. 6. places in
Stables in hell. But he is generally said, to have been the son of Saturn, and
Phillyra: So Pindar, Pyth. od. 4. And Virgil, lib. 3. Georg v 550. Phillyrides
Chiron. according to the custom of the Greeks, who were wont to give the
Parent's names to the children; Servins, on the place affirms the same: This
Chiron, the justest of all the Centaurs, as Statius represents him, was
Master not only to Achilles, but to Hercules also, Jason, Aesculapius, Castor,
and others, (Apollon. Argonaut. lib. 3.) Hermippus styleth him, (...) Centaurum
sapientem, in Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom. lib. 1. He first taught men to love
justice, showing the sacred Rites of the gods, the figures and natures of the
heavenly bodies; His reputation was so great, that some of the Achaians
sacrificed to him, as Eusebius writes, lib. 4. Prepar. Evang. citing Monimus,
(...). A poisoned arrow of Hercules, by chance wounding Chiron's foot, he
desired death, but could not obtain it, being the issue of immortal parents;
At last, Jupiter advanced him to be a sign in Heaven, called Sagittariks.

Armatusque arcu Chiron. Virgil, de XII Signis. So Seneca, Thyest. act. 4:
Lucian, in his Dialogue between Menippus and Chiron, makes Chiron give another
reason, Why he was out of Love with immortality here; Because this life wants
variety, and is nothing but the repetition, and doing again and again, of the
same things: And he promised himself in the other World, to be free from
Thirst and Hunger, and whatsoever begets care. And though Lucian makes
Menippus advise the Centaure, not to feed himself with hopes of that nature;
yet we may have a better opinion of his wishes, having more knowledge of the
joys of the next life, and enough of this to be of Plutarch's mind, Consolat.
ad Apollonium.

Terra malis scatet, adversis pelagusque redundat.
O Mors, veni nostris certus medicus malis,
Qui portus humanis es tempestatibus.
Aeschylus, ibid. The Earth has no such plenty as her woes;
The Ocean too with misery o'reflows.
Come, Death, thou cure of all this misery,
The Port where all from storms securely lie.
62. The Tritons swim.] These by the Poets are commonly called Neptune's
Trumpeters, and were the issue of him and Salacia, Serv^us in Aeneid. 1. That
excellent Trumpeter Misenus owes his death to the malice of a Triton, Aen. 6.
v. 170.

Se^ tum forte cava dum personat aequora concha
Demens, and cantu vocat in certamina Di^os,
Aemulus exceptum Triton (si credere dignum est)
Inter saxa virum spumosa immerserat unda.
But on a Rock whilst he by chance the charms
Of Mars rung out, and all the gods alarms
With the loud challenge from his wreathed shell,
(If it be worth belief what others tell)
Whirled by an envious Triton from that height,
Among the rocks and waves he found his fate.
So Virgil, Aen 10. v. 209. Ovid, Metam. l. 1. v. 333. and Claudian, de Nuptiis
Honorii and Mariae, give Triton the character of Neptuue's Trumpeter, Seneca
Troad. act. 2. Triton cecinit hymenaeum; that is, with his shell or trumpet;
for none ascribe human voice to a Triton. Pliny, lib. 9. c. 5. says, The
Emperor Tib^rius was told, That a Triton was seen in a cave winding a shell.
Gillius, in Additionib. ad Aelian, and Alexander ab Alex. lib. 3. cap. 8.
relate, That there was a Fountain near the Seashore, frequently used by the
Inhabitants, whence women and virgins fetched water daily; which a Triton, that
lay hid on the shore, espying, on a sudden ravished one of them, which his hot
fancy had most liking to: And that afterward, he being caught in a snare and
imprisoned, died for grief. The same Author reports, that one Trap^zuntius,
to whom he affords a fair character, told some friends, That he had seen a
Maid of an exceeding beauty playing in the Sea, and ever and anon from the
middle upward appearing above the water, till at length perceiving she was
discovered, she plunged her self into the Deep. Claudius the Emperor, by a
device, made a Triton appear in the middle of a Lake, rising out of the water,
and sounding a Trumpet, Sueton. in Claudio, c. 21. Which spectacle was afteward
commonly showed in the Theaters, as Casaubon on that place relates.

73. By the bold Jason.] Statius here glanceth at the story of Jason's
ravishing Medea with the golden Fleece, comparing that act of his with this of
Paris. Jason was the first who violated the Sea's reserved rights, as Seneca
Medea, act. 3. chor. ult. It was the opinion formerly, that Seas were set as
bounds, to confine every man within his own Country, and that no man's ambition
should aim at more than the higher powers had placed him in. This among others
Seneca Hippol. act. 2. makes an argument of the innocence of the Ancients.

Nondum secabant credulae pontum rates:
Sua quisque norat maria.
No ventrous ship, trusted the waves or wind:
But all men were with their own Seas confined.
76. By the rash Judge of Ida.] Paris, whose judgment is accused of rashness,
because he preferred Pleasure before Wisdom or Empire; and because his fond
choice was his Countrie's ruin, Horat. lib. 3. Carm. Od. 3.

-- Ilion, Ilion
Fatal is incestusque judex
Et mulier peregrina verti^
In pulverem.
Troy by a fatal Judge's lust,
And a strange Woman, turned to dust.
So Seneca, Troad. act. 1. calls him, The fatal Judge. Wherefore our Poet
justly gives him here the title of a rash one. For any thing that is fatal,
is hardly to be freed from the imputation of Rashness.

79. A Foster-child.] Venus: who was bred of the Ocean, as Hesiod in Theog. and
Pausanias in Corinthiacis, relate. By Seneca, Hippol. act. 1. she is called
Diva generata ponto. This was the greatest reason that Leander encouraged
himself withal, to swim over the Hellespont. Musoeus verse. 248. -- (...);
(...),
(...).
-- why do thou fear the waves?
Know thou not Venus from the Sea first came,
Mistress both of the Ocean and my flame?
Servius in Aen. 5. writes, that Venus was therefore said to be born of the
Sea, quia dicunt Physici sudorem salsum esse, quem semper elicit coitus Hence
the Myrtle was consecrated to Venus, because that Tree prospers best on the
Seashore. Like this is that of Coelius Rhodiginus, lib. 14. c 4. Lascivos
Graeci (...) vocant i. e. humidos, etc. because venereall appetites proceed
from moisture. Hence Poets took occasion to feign, that Venus sprung from the
Ocean. Caspar Bartholinus Adversar. l. 21. c. 22. gives this Mythologie, Eam
Fabulam aliquando arbitratus sum exinde venire, quod Venus prima questus
faciendi causa corpus prostituit, velut insatiabile pelagus omnes ad se
trahens. I was sometimes of opinion, says he, that the Fable arose from hence,
Because Venus was the first who prostituted her body for hire, like an
insatiable Sea attracting all to her. More of Venus is to be seen in Gyraldus,
Histor. Deor. Syntagm. 13. Turnebus 9. Adversar. c. 2. Natalis Comes, Mytholog
lib. 4. c. 13. Fulgentius, Mythol. l. 2. But above all, I prefer the
Interpretation of the Fable which Macrobius gives, Saturnal. lib. 1. c. 8.
That by the secret parts of Coelus, which were cut off by his son Saturn, and
thrown into the Sea, and of the froth whereof Venus was engendered, were meant
the seeds of things falling from Heaven, as soon as there was such a thing as
Time; which Saturn is always held-to signify. And by Coelus nothing can be
understood but COELUM, Heaven; Servius in Aen. 5. denying, that the proper name
of any god can be of the Neuter Gender. Cicero lib. 3. De not. Deor. tells us
of four Venus's; one the daughter of Coelus and Light; another of the Froth of
the Sea, of whom, and Mercury, Cupid was begotten; a third of Jupiter and
Dione the wife of Vulcan; the fourth of Syrus and Syria. This last was married
to Adonis, and her the Syrians named (...), the Hebrews Ashteroth, 1 King. 11.
5. Judge. 2. 13. And as Tully reckons many Venus's, so, as Mr. Seldom says,
De Diis Syris syntagm. 2. c 2. St. Augustine interprets (...), as if there
were many Astartes. This goddess had many sacrifices offered to her, Alexand.
ab Alexandro, l. 3. c. 12. and from thence had her name, Ashtaroth signifying
greges: Suspiceris (says Scaliger in Conjectaneis) dictam eam a Victimarum
multitudine. She was entitled also, The goddess of Love, or rather of
Lasciviousness. Clemens Alexandrinus tells us, that once all her pictures
were made after the likeness of Phryne, a famous Whore, and that the man who,
like another Pygmelton, could embrace the statue of the goddess, conceited
himself religious, Admon. ad Gentes: where he also sets down her lascivious
Ceremonies. Mr. Gregory writing of the Assyrian Monarchy, relates, that
there was a custom, that every woman should once in her life repair to the
Temple of Venus, and there prostitute her body to any one that would throw her
down a piece of money, which was to be given to the Temple, and to the honor of
the goddess. The manner was for the women to sit down in the Temple,
distinguished by little lines or cords, which he that had a mind might take
away, or break, if the woman seemed coy, and so take the strumpet out of the
Temple into a by corner. This is expressed in the Epistle ascribed to Jeremie,
at the end of Ba^uch, v. 43. The woman also with cords about them fitting in
the ways, burn bran for perfume; but if any of them, drawn by some that passes
by, lie with him, she reproacheth her fellow, that she was not thought as
worthy as her self, nor her cord broken. Such attendants this goddess had as
we read, 2 King. 23. 7. And he broke down the houses of the S^domites that were
by the house of the Lord, where the women wove hangings for the Grove. This
place Mr. Seldom interprets thus, Diruit quoque domos scortatorum -- ubi
mulieres texebant cortinas pro Aserah, seu luco. Of which, see his De Diis
Syris, Synt. 2. c. 2. and 4. page 237. and 283. Thus far I have digressed, to
show the antiquity of this lascivious goddess; which was not the production
only of fictious brains. Nor is it to be wondered at, that a thing so loathsome
and ridiculous should meet with adoration; for the whole Religion of the
Gentiles is so contrived, as to agree with licentious appetites. Which easy
way to propagate a novelty, Mahomet well understood; nor is it now wholly
unpractised.

88. By his affected tomb to grieve] Thetis here expresses a passion, so great
for her Son, that if his fate, as sore-told, should be to perish in the Trojan
War, she would leave the Ocean, and ever mourn in those waves, that should wash
the place of his Sepulcher: And that was the Sigean promontory. There Alexander
the Great performed ceremonies in his memory, declaring him happy, who in his
life enjoyed such a friend as Patroclus, and after death, does still live by
Homer: Plu^arch, in Alexandro. Cicero Epist. ad famil. l. 5. cp. 12.

107. Caphareus.] Neptune being forced by the cross decrees of the Fates to
deny Thetis petitioning for a storm against the Greeks, to appease her
somewhat, tells her, that the Trojans should be ruined by the valor of her
son, and herself be revenged on the Greeks at Caphareus, who should there
suffer shipwreck. Whereof the Tragedian thus.

-- Hanc arcem occupat
Palamedis ille genitor, and clarum manu
Lumen nefanda vertice e summo efferens,
In saxa ducit perfida classem face.
Haerent acutis rupibus fixae rates.
Upon whose summit Nauplius stood, and raised
In his revenging hand a Light that blazed.
Whose treacherous flame the navy guides betwixt
The wracking Rocks, whose points the vessels fixed.
Seneca Agamemn. act. 3. v. 557. Nauplius's grudge against the Greeks, arose
from this occasion; Ulysses having charged Palamedes, for holding
correspondence with Priam, and writing letters to him, discovered, as a proof
of his Treachery, an heap of Gold in his Tent, which he before hand had closely
conveyed thither. Whereupon, innocent Palamedes was stoned to death, Serve. in
Aen. 2. Dictys Cretensis, and Dares Phrygius, give other accounts of him:
Dares, that he was killed by Paris, lib. oe excidio Trojano; Dictys, that
Diomedes and Ulysses, overwhelmed him with stones in a well, whither he,
suspecting no foul play, went down to fetch up Treasure, which they told him
was hid there, and he should have his share of it, lib. 2. Caphareus is an high
Hill in Eubaea, over-looking the Hellespont: On the top of this, Nauplius
caused fi^es to be made by night, to allure the weather-beaten Greeks to fall
upon the Rocks, that so he might revenge his son's death upon them.

108. Joynt-revenge] Neptune promises Thetis to join with her against Ulysses.
His quarrel with him, was upon the account of his son Polypheme, whose eye
Ulysses had bored out: Which story is thus related by Achaemenides, to Aeneas,
Aen. 3.

-- Domus sanie dapibusque cruentis,
Intus opaca, ingens. Ipse arduus, altaque pulsat
Sidera (Dii talem terris avertite pestem!)
Nec visu facilis, nec dictu affabilis ulli;
Visceribus miserorum and sanguine vescitur atro,
Vidi egomet, duo de numero cum corpora nostro,
Pr'ensa manu magna, medio resupinus in antro
Frangeret ad saxum, sanieque adspersa natarent
Limina: vidi, atro cum membra fluentia tabo
Mandere^, and trepidi tremerent sub dentibus artus.
Haud impune quidem: nec talia passus Ulysses,
Oblit^sve sui est Ithacus discrimine tanto.
Nam simul expletus dapibus, vinoque sepultus,
Cervicem inflexam posuit, jacuitque per ant^um
Immensum, saniem eructans and frusta cruento
Per somnum commixta mero; nos magna precati
Numina, sortitique vices, una undique circum
Fundimur, and telo lumen tenebramus acuto
Ingens, quod torva solum sub front latebat.
-- Slaughters and bloody feast,
With shades the vastness filled. He high and tall
The stars assaults. (The gods such plagues from all
Avert!) His voice and visage stern: his food,
Bowels of slaughtred wretches and black blood.
As in his den he lay along, I saw
Two of our men, grasped by his cursed paw,
And dashed against the rock: the blood all ore,
With purple drops drenched the sprinkled floor.
Limbs flowing with black gore I saw him eat,
And in his teeth the trembling sinews beat.
Nor unrevenged their fates Ulysses bears,
But mindful of himself in all appears.
For now ore-charg'd with wine and bloody feasts,
His head bent down, as in his Cave he rests,
Wine mixed with clotty gore returning flows,
Which belched up from his grave-like breast he throws.
Burl'd in sleep: We all the gods implore,
Spreading o^r selves round on the bloody floor,
And with a sharp spear fixed eternal night.
Upon his brow, robbed of its only light.
Servius, on this place, says, That Polyphemus was some wise man, and
therefore feigned to have his eye in his forehead, that is, near the brain,
which V^ysses, being wiser than he, put out. But by the Cyclopes generally are
understood the Vapors of the Sea or Earth: and hence, perhaps, Polyphemus, the
chief of them, was said to be the son of Neptune, by whom was meant, according
to Ch^ysippus, the spirit that moved the waters. Cic. lib. 1. de Not. Deor. And
Ulysses was therefore seigned to overcome Polypheme, because he found out these
natural causes.

111. Thessalie.] A R^gion of Greece, girt about with Mountains, Olympus, Ossa,
and Pelion, on the North; Othrys and Oeta Southward; and Pindus on the West.
Its bounds are exactly set down by Herodotus, lib. 7. It was anciently called
Pyrrhaea, from Pyrrha the wife of Deucalion, Strabo lib. 10. Afterward Aemonia,
from Aemon; from whose son Thessalus, at last it was called Thessalie.

115. Sperchios.] A River in Thessalie, issuing from Mount Pelion, and falling
into the Malian Bay, ten furlongs from Thermopylae, Strab. lib. 9.

129. Disturb the geniall crue] Our Poet glanceth at the fray between the
Centaurs and the Lapithae, which happened at the marriage of Pirithous, so
excellently described by Ovid, and after him by the enjoyer of his Genius, Mr.
San^ys. Genius (from which Genial is derived) est nascendt atque nature deus, a
gignendo d^ctus. Hence the four Elements, whereof all Inferior bodies are
generated, were called Dii geniales; and the Nuptiall-bed, Lectus genialis. See
Turnebus Adversar l. 16. c. 19. and l. 26. c. 14. Ge^ii were accounted the
moderators and disposers of the Planets, and their Influences, at men's
Nativities. Horace lib. 2 epist. 2.

Scit Genius, natale comes qui temperat afirum. Those Doemons also whom, the
Heathen attribute so much the dependancie of our resolutions unto, were called
Genii, as begetting the thoughts of men, and working on them. And perhaps the
frequency of these Spirits and opinions, before our Savior's time, was the
occasion of that more absurd conceit, set down by scoffi^g ^ucian in his
Menippus, That the shadows which our bodies cast in the Sunshine will be
witness against us in the other world. With reference to these Genii must that
of the Poet. Aen. 6. v. 643. be interpreted, Quisque suos patimur manes. i. e.
Every one in the next life must receive either punishment for the crimes he
committed, by harkening to his woes^r Genius, or rewards for the good he
wrought, by the assistance of his better. For two Genii, they say, one good,
(the other bad,) attend every man from his birth. This the Heathen were taught
by their gods; the Devil herein, as in many other things, playing the Ape, and
imitating the true God; who indeed gives his Angels charge over us, (see
Clemens Alexandrinus, lib. 5. S^r^m) that we be not overcome by the power of
evil Spirits. For we wrestle not, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 6. 12. against
flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers
of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness: (...), here
translated, in high places; which is not at all assisting, if not prejudicial
to the meaning of the verse. Beza renders it, Quae sunt in sublimi, something
nearer, But I see not why the words should not be rendered, in the lower
Heavens, that is, the Air, the habitation of these Demons, as Mr. Mede, on 2
Pet. 2. 4. and Jude 6. does prove. And it is observed, that for the Heaven of
Heavens, or supernatural Heaven, the word (...)* is always used. In relation
to this sense, Origin uses the Verse in his writings against Gelsus. Moreover,
judicious Calvin on the place, intimates as much, where the Interpretation he
uses, is, Incoelestibus. Diodate also understands, The region of the air,
in which evil spirits, driven cut of heaven, do wander. And by Principalities
he understands evil Angels; excellently adding, that in the quality of their
nature, and in the power which God suffers them to have over the world, they
have also something common with the holy Angels, in the eminency of Titles. Yet
he there retracteth this Interpretation, in my opinion for a worse.

153. with Magic art.] Thetis, desirous to conceal from Chiron the purpose she
had, to disg^ise his Scholar in woman's apparel, whom he by rigid principles
had fitted for the hardest employments, bears him in hand, that ominous
dreams moved her to attempt the prevention of his fate by Magict Art. Such a
deceit passionate Dido beguiled her sister withal, pretending to seek only a
remedy for her love, when indeed her plot was to cosen her self of life.

Ergo ubi concepit furi^s, evicta dolor,
Decrevitque mori, tempus secum ipsa modumque
Exigit, and maestam dictis aggressa sororem,
Consilium vultu tegit, ac spem front serenat.
Inveni, germana, viam (gratare sorori)
Quae mihi reddat eum, vel eo me solvat, amantem.
Oceani finem iuxta solemque cadentem,
Vltimus Aethiop^^ locus est, ubi maximus Atlas
Axem humero torquet stellis ardentibus aptum.
Hin^ mihi Massylae gentis monstrata sacerdos,
Hes^eridum templi custos, epulasque Draconi
Quae dabat, and sacros servabat in arbore ramos,
Spargens humida mella soporiferumque papaver.
Haec se carminibus promittit solvere mentes
Quos velit, ast aliis dur^^ immittere curas:
S^^^ere ^quam fluviis, and vertere sidera retro:
Nocturnosque ciet-manes-Mugire videbis
Sub pedibus terram, and descendere montibus orn^s.
Virg. Aen. 4. Vanquished with grief, and now resolved to die,
The means and time to act the Tragedy
She plots: And, with f^ign'd joy to hide her crime,
Thus to her sister says* Joy that the time*
Is come, that I shall now procure my rest,
And gain his love, or freedom to my breast.
Near to the Ocean's bounds, where Phoebus flies
To end his course, burnt Aethiopia lies:
Where on his laden shoulders Atlas bears
Heaven, which filled with glittering Stars appears.
Hence a Massylian came, the Temple'^ Priest
Of the Hesperides, who there did feast
The watchful Dragon, and preserved too
The Tree on which the sacred branches grew,
With Honey and mixed Poppy, which conveys.
A drousie dullness: By her charms, she says,
She can dissolve a passion, and procure
A scornful breast another to endure,
Stop in its speed the swiftest stream, and all
The Stars turn backward from their course, and call
Ghosts from the howling earth, and from the high
Tops of the Hills make stubborn Trees to fly.
That Witches had such a faculty as Dido here speaks of, to quench or kindle
love at their pleasure, former times believed. Carmine Thessalidum dura in
praecordia fluxit
Non fatis adductus amor; flammisque severi
Illicitis arsere senes.
Thessalian charms, without assisting fate,
Can passion give to hearts still used to hate.
Severe old men are fettered with Love's chains,
And their chill breasts burn with unlawful flames.
Lucan lib. 6. verse. 452. And a little after, -- Quos non concordia misti
Alligat ulla tori, blandaeque potentia formae,
Traxerunt torti Magica vertigine fili.
-- Those who never cared to try
Love's joys, whom Hymen's knots could never tie;
Whom charming beauty never yet compelled,
A slender thread, by Magic tied, has held.


Their power also in other things the same noble Poet thus describes.

Cessavere vices rerum: dilataque longa
Haesit nocte dies: legi non paruit ether:
Torpuit and praeceps audito carmine mundus.
Axibus and rapidis impulsos Jupiter urgens
Miratur non ire polos. Nunc omnia complent
Imbribus, and calido producunt nubila Phoebo:
Et tonat ignaro coelum Jove. Vocibus iisdem
Humentes late nebulas, nimbosque solutis
Excussere comis, ventis cessantibus aequor
Intumuit: rursum vetitum sentire procellas
Conticuit, turbante Noto: puppimque ferentes
In ventum tumuere sin^s. De rupe pependit
Abscissa fixus torrens: amnisque cucurrit
Non qua pronus erat. Nilum non extulit aestus.
The course of things was stopped: nor Heaven obeyed
Its Laws: the Day in Night's black Arms delayed.
The tottering world these potent charms benum,
And while the rapid Poles forget to run,
Jove stands amazed. A storm obeys, and shrowds,
Phoebus adorned with all his rays, in clouds.
Jove ignorant the Thunder hears. The same
Dire voice, with loose dishevelled hair again
Shattereth the dropping clouds: Seas swell with waves,
The winds all hushed; again, though Notus raves,
The Seas becalmed lie. Ships make their way
Against the wind, and rushing torrents stay
Thrown from a precipice. Streams backward run:
Nor Nile over flows the plains scorcht by the Sun.
These places I have produced, to show what an opinion the ancient Heathen had
of Witches. I will only add, that I find that the Tyrians had a custom, to tie
the Images of their gods with bands, lest they should be called from them by
the charms of their enemies, Alexand. ab Alex* l 4. c 12. And so subject were
those gods to the power of charms, that they were thereby compelled to come,
nor could return back without license obtained; Eusebius* de praepar. Evang. l. 5.
c. 8, and 9. From this opinion arose that question in Lucan, lib. 6. v. 492.

Quis labor hic superis cantus herbasque sequendi,
Spernedique timor? cujus commercia pacti
Ob* rictos tenuere Deos? parere necesse est,
An juvat? ignota tantum pietate mere n'ur?.
What is it makes the fearful gods forbear
To scorn both herbs and charms? whence comes this fear?
Does strong necessity, or their own design,
Or piety unknown, them thus incline?
I shall say more of this subject happily hereafter, when a more proper place
shall afford opportunity. But thus much at present, to show, that Chiron had
reason to believe Thetis, when she told him, that she would make use of Magic
for her son's preservation.

166. The envious gods.] Our Poet is here thought to have no further aim, than
to set forth the praises of his Achilles, as if he deserved the envy of the
gods. But I have observed Statius to be a great imitator of Virgil, who was
still wont to omit no occasion of interweavning his Learning with his Poetry:
wherein Macrobius strongly justifies him. Since these words therefore will
afford it, hold it not amiss to interpret them to the more learned sense.

There was a general Tradition among the Heathen, That the gods envied any
perfection or happiness in Mankind. This proceeded from the Devill's policy,
who from the beginning of the world endeavored to represent God env^ous unto
Man, in that h^ denied him the knowledge of good and evil; as Junius and
Dioda^ observe on Genesis 3. Learned Merick Casaubon, in his Cause of tempora
Evils, says, that Aristotle sets down this opinion, That God i (...),
envious; but protests against it, (...), It is not possible it should be so;
yet says, That if it were so indeed, that the nature of God could be envious,
that Envy must needs consist in hidenying of men the happiness of certain
knowledge and contemplation. That impious Philosopher Porphyrie, directly
chargetl God with envy, for forbidding the Tree of Knowledge: Who is answered
by Greg. Nazianzen, Orat. 38. Such impious men perhaps take offense at Genesis 3.
22, 23. I forbear to produce further Testimonies, to prove, there was such an
opinion among the Heathen, I do not think them needful; since it is certain,
the Devil would let slip no occasion of raising prejudice against God, and
charging him with his own c^ime. Through envy of the Devil came death into the
world, Wisd. 2. 24. It was the Devil's envy that made Man lose Paradise, and
not God, who placed him in it. Another reason why the gods were conceived to
envy men, was, Because all their prosperity and happiness, is at length
requited with crosses and calamity. Examples of such change are frequent in all
times: Among all, scarce is there any more notable then that of the once-Great
Pompey, flying alone after his overthrow in Pharsalia, Lucan. lib. 1. v. 28.

-- Sed longi poenas Fortuna favor is
Exigit a misero, quae tanto pondere famae
Res premit adversas, fatisque prioribus urget.
Nunc festinatos nimium fibi sentit honores,
Actaque lauriferae damnat Syllana juventae.
Nunc and Corycias classes and Pontica signa,
Dejectum, meminisse piget. Sic longius aevum
Destruit ingentes an^mos, and vita superstes
Imperio. Nisi summa dies cum fine bonorum
Affuit, and celeri praevertit tristia leto,
Dedecori est fortuna prior. Quisquamne secundis
Tradere se fatis audet, nisi morte parata*
But Fortune with her favor still beguiles,
And with sad woes pursues her former smiles.
His fame most presses his declining state,
And former glories add unto the weight.
Too hasty now his early fame he found,
And blames those wreaths with which his Youth was crowned.
Of Pontick or Corycian Victories
Now when he thinks, his flaming blushes rise.
Thus greatest minds consuming Age destroys,
And Life survives our Empires and our Joys.
Unless life with those joys together flow,
And a swift fate prevent ensuing woe,
To Fortune Shame succeeds. In the best state
Let none confide, unless prepared for Fate.
Another instance of the mutability of Fortune, was that great Soldier,
Hannibal; whose prophetic spirit was sensible of this, almost fatal,
necessity: as we may see in that incomparable speech, which Livy makes him
speak to Scipio; advising not to trust the gods and Fortune too far: telling
him, that what Scipio was then, himself had been* after the battles at
Tras^emen^ and Cannae; and that Fortune had never yet deceived him. Thus he
spoke to move his enemy to accept peace, conceiving no argument of more force,
then the consideration of the vicissitude of human affairs. And his words,
though then slighted, Scipio himself afterward found true, and had sad
experience, both of the inconstancy of Fortune, and of the ingratitude of his
Country. To these, I might add the examples of Marius, Caesar, and infinite
others, out of the stories of former times, with more prodigious ones of our
own age; Habet has vices conditio mortalium, says Pliny in his excellent
Ranegyrick, ut adversa ex secundis, ex adversis secunda nascantur. Occultat
utrorumque semina Deus; and pletunque ^^norum malor^^que causae sub diversa
specie latent: The condition of mortals, has these changes, that adversity
should spring out of prosperity, and prosperity out of adversity. The seeds of
both, God concealeth; and for the most part, the causes of good and evil,
things lie hid under a different species. Herodotus relates, how Amasis King
of Egypt, counseled his friend Polycrates, King of Samos, That he should
interrupt the course of his felicity, by casting quite away something that he
held most dear, and the loss whereof would most afflict him. Plutarch, De
consol. ad Apollonium, tells us, that Theramenes, one of the thirty Tyrants
at Athens, being at Supper wi^h many friends, the house where they were,
suddenly fell down, and he only escaped. Many upon this, gave him the name of
Happy: But he crying our, asked, For what sadder death Fortune had reserved
him? And indeed, the Torments he endured before his end, added him to the
number of those examples, which serve to admonish prosperous persons, of the
uncertainty of their Estate, Seneca, Troad. act. 2.

Violenta nemo imperia continuit diu:
Moderata durant. Quoque fortuna altius
Evexit ac levavit humanas opes,
Hoc se magis supprimere felicem decet,
Variosque casus tremere, metuentem Deos
Nimium faventes.
None violent Empires long enjoy secure:
They 're moderate conditions that endur^.
When Fortune raises to the greatest height,
The happy man should most suppress his state,
Exspecting still a change of things to find,
And fearing when the gods appear too kind.
It is an excellent Character, that Macrobius gives of Fortitude, Tolerare
fortiter vel adversa vel prospera, To bear with courage, either adverse or
prosperous Fortune, in Somn. Scipionis, l. 1. c. 8. And perhaps, it may aim at
our sense, In the best condition, without distemper, to exspect the worst. This
dreading invidiam Numinis, was the cause, why that mighty Emperor Augustus,
used once a year, Cavam manum asses porrigentibus praebere, as Su^tonius in his
Life relates, c. 91. To beg with his open, or hollow, hand; the most
opprobrious way of begging. On which place, see learned Casaubon, giving
reasons from the generally received opinion, thus elegantly expressed by
Erasmus, in his Philodoxus, Saepe mecum admirari sole^ seu Fortunae seu Naturae
invidentiam, quae nihil omnino commodi largitur mortalibus quod non aliquo
temperet incommodo, i. e. I have often wondered with my self at the envy, either
of Fortune or Nature, who never dispense things convenient to mankind, which
are not tempered with some inconvenience. For this Philip of Macedon, kept a
Youth, whose office was, every Morning thrice to salute him thus, (...),
Philip, thou art a man, Aelian. var, hist. l. 8. c. 15. I will end all with a
passage of Diodorus Siculus, Biblioth. hist. lib. 3. Thus rendered by Merick
Casaubon, in his Cause of evils, Nevertheless, God ((...)) has not afforded
unto men any entire happiness, without some blemish or envy; but to these his
blessings he has annexed somewhat that is hurtful, which might serve to
admonish them, who through continuance of worldly blessings, are wont to grow
into a contempt of the Gods. Whether our Poet had an eye to this opinion, I
cannot say; Certainly, his words seem to look that way, and so my discourse is
excused from impertinency.

195. Pholoe] A woody mountain of Arcadia, having a Town of its own name, Plin.
l. 4. c. 6.

207. So tired Castor.] Statius here compares Achilles to Castor, whose beauty
he makes as bright as his own star. He and Pollux were the sons of Tyndarus
and Leda: And their amity was so great, that they never differed either in
matter of Power or Counsel. For which Hyginus says, Jove translated them into
Stars; Servius in Aeneid. 6. says, that Helen and Pollux were begotten by
Jupiter, in the shape of a Swan, and from him, drew immortality; but that
Castor was the son of Tyndarus, and so mortal: but by the extreme kindness of
his brother, and the concession of Jupiter, mortality and immortality, was
equally divided betwixt them, Virgil, Aen. 6.

Sic fratrem Pollux alterna morte redemit. The fable arose from the Stars, one
whereof ever rises at the setting of the other, as if the fate and fall of one
redeemed his fellow; That these brethren were ever watchful for the Roman
Commonwealth, Valerius Maximus proves by many examples, lib* 1. c. 8. Also
Plutarch in the Life of Paulus Aemylius relates their meeting of L. Domitius,
and how they gave him in charge to make known to the Senate and people of Rome,
that they were victorious; which as yet they were uncertain of: And then, (as
Suetonius, in the beginning of Nero's life writes, though Plutarch mentions
it not) to evidence their Divinity, they changed his hair from Black to Red.
And thence came the name of Aenobarbus, which continued to one of the greatest
families in Rome.

216. -- Sings the acts of Heroes] Maturantius says, it was a custom among the
Greeks, to sing the actions of famous persons; to the and, that others might be
inflamed to a generous imitation of them. So Scipio was excited to great
achievements, by gazing on Statues, ^rected to the memory of renowed men.
Music was ever much ^onoured: Epaminondas, among other things was famous for
it. ^acobus Crucins, in lib. Annot. relates out of Polybius, that the Ardi^ns
generally instructed their youths in Music, and says, It was a custom among
the Grecians, to sing the praises of their Genii, Heroes, and Gods. So
Alexander ab Alexand o, l. 4. c. 17. says, They were wont to sing the praises
of their gods, while the sacrifice was in eating. And lib. 2. c. 25. having
reckoned up many famous men that were excellent Musicians, he adds that among
the Greeks, Musici, Vates, and Sapientes were in equal estimation; And that,
after Supper, the Harp was wont to be played on; Which when Themistocles
refused to take in hand, he was for that very cause, held the less learned. He
there also affirms, that the Ancienrs used to chant out the Encomiums of
renowned persons. Thus our Poet sets forth Achilles, to have been instructed
by Chiron, and now to give his Mother the usual entertainment after their
Feast; And Homer tells us, that he often practiced this art at the siege of
Troy. Thus also, Dido entertaineth her guests, Aeneas, Virg. Aen. 1.

-- Cithara crinitus Iopas
Personat aurata, docuit quae maximus Atlas.
Hic canit errantem Lunam, solisque labores;
Vnde hominum genus and pecudes, unde imber, and ignes:
Arcturum, pluviasque Hyadas, geminosque Triones;
Quid tantum Oceano properent se tingere ^oles
Hiberni, vel quae tardis mora noctibus obstet.
-- Hai^y Iopas then begun,
And on his Harp what Atlas taught he sung;
The Moon's unconstant ways, and how the Sun
Performs his course; whence men and beasts first sprung;
The Bears, the Hyades, and Arcturus sings,
The cause of showers, and why heaven lightning fl^ngs;
Why to the waves the Sun should take his flight
Sooner in Winter, and prolong the night.
219. The victories of Pollux.] The weapon by which Pollux was victorious, was
much used by the Ancients, called Caesius; whose description J. C. Scaliger
thus gives: At first, (says he) the Greeks used to fight with naked sists.
Pugnis addita lora ad munimentum, propterea quod nudi cum ferirent sape plus
damni acciperent quam facerent. Ea lora Graeco vocabulo CESTUS dicta ((...)
enim cinguluir.) Br^via initio: mox, ne excussa exuerentur in ictibus, tum
cubito tum humero alligabantur. Postremo ferrum plumbumque assutum est,
saevissimo spectaculo. Cerebrum enim and gattur facillime elidebant. Idcirco
aurium munimenta induebant, (...). Thus he describes the Castus to be a piece
of a Leather, for the safeguard of the hand, which, when naked, received
oftentimes more damage by a blow, than it gave. Lest this Caestus should be
shaken off by striking, it was fastened, not to the arm only, but also to the
shoulder. At the end of it was sewed a mass of Iron or Lead, which rendered the
combat a most cruel spectacle. Their very brains were often dashed out; for
prevention whereof, they covered both their ears with defenses. This character
Fabricius also confirms, relating, that the form of this Caestus was to be
seen in the house of Peter ^embus, when he lived at Padus. Fuerunt coria
bubula, says he, quibus plumbum ferrumque insutum est, articulis manus in
volam ^lexae circundata; and, ut pondus sustinere ferientium manus valerent,
brachi is alligata. And hence he believes, the ancient Germans took the use of
the Gantlet, which they wore in war. The reason Fabricius gives, why the
Caestus were fastened to the arm, is, in my opinion, better then Scaliger's,
That so the hand might be strengthened to bear the weight the better. This
Fabricius writes, on the Combat between Ente^lus and Dares, Aen. 5. This
Exercise, as Scaliger says, was at first only used with bare fists, and
prizes propounded for it in the Olympic Games, Thucyd lib. 1. The invention of
Caestus is ascribed to Amycus, Clem. Alex. lib. 1. Strom (...) Amycus the
Bebrycian King first found out (...), lora pugilum, that is, the Caestus. Which
very words, with others of ^lemens, Eusebius uses, De praep. Evang. l. 10. c.
5. Hence Statius here, -- crudo quo Bebryca caestu
Obruerit Pollux.
i. e. Amycus, so called from the place where he reigned, Bebrycia, which had
its name from Bebryae, a King in the Pyrenaean Mountains, Sil. Ital. l. 3.
Since, it was called Mygdonia; after that, Bithynia, from Bithynius, a King
there, Strabo l. 7. and. 12. Arianus gives one of the daughters of Danaus this
name, who, as well as her sister Hyperinnestra, spared her husband, contrary to
her father's command, and flying with him into this Country, gave name to it;
till fresher merits destroyed the memory of hers. There is a Village called
Bebryacum, by Suetonius, in Othone, and by Tacitus, Anual. 18. seated between
Verona and Cremona. In the Lipswick Edition it is called Bedriacum, by Josephus
(...), by Plutarch (...). But by reason of the authority of Tacitus and
Orosius, Joseph Scaliger says, Eanihil aliud sunt quam unum nomen multifariam
deprava^um. At this place Otho was ove^come by Vitollius; and statim, says
Suetonius, moriendi impetum cepit. Yet then had he a reserved Army, competent
enough to have attempted, in another Battle, the recovery of his Fortune; but
he chose rather to let that be the certain advantage of his friends, to procure
peace from Vitellius, than by hazarding them to pull on all their ruins
together. For which cause, Tacitus justly says, Many enjoyed Empires longer,
but none left them bravelier.

220. The monstrous Minotaur fam'd-Theseus slew.] The Fable is thus; The
Adultery of Mars and Venus being discerned by the Sun's all seeing eye, and by
him discovered to Vulcan, in a Net that he had made for the purpose, he caught
the Lovers in their embraces. Hereat Venus being enraged, ever after pursued
the race of Phoebus with revenge, infecting them with prodigious passions. The
first that suffered was Pasiphae the wife of Minos; she, being in love with a
Bull, was by Daedalus h^s art enclosed in a Cow of wood, and so received the
horrid satisfaction of her beastly Lover. And from that loathsome embrace came
the Minotaur. By this Queen, Minos had three children, Androgeos, Ariadne, and
Phaedra. Androgeos, after many noble Victories, was at last slain by the
Athenians and Megarians. In revenge of his death, Minos having vanquished the
Athenians at Sea, imposed on them this punishment, that seven Youths, and as
many Virgins, should every year be delivered to be devoured by the Minotaur.
But Eusebius, de praepar. Evang. l. 5. c. 19. lays their death to Apollo's
charge, whose Oracle directed the Athenians, to send the Youths to be killed by
Minos, that the plague might be averted from them, which they suffered for the
death of Androgeos. In the third year of this imposition, Th^seus son of Aegeus
was sent. He, no less powerful in person then in forces, first obtained a
conquest of the heart of Ariadne; and then, by her procurement, having got a
thread from Daedalus to guide him, he found the way to the Minotaur in the
Labyrinth, and slew him; and having so done, he fled away with Ariadne. Then
Minos finding, or suspecting, that Daedalus, who made the Labyrinth, had
assisted Theseus, enclosed both him and his son Icarus therein. But Daedalus
procuring wax and feathers, with other materials, from his Keepers, under
pretense of presenting something rare to the King, made Wings, with which
himself and his son slew away. But the rash Youth, contrary to his Father's
instructions, soaring too high, melted his wings against the Sun, and fell into
that Sea, which bears his name, Ovid. de art lib. 2. and Metam. lib. 8. The
place his father alighted first upon, was Cumae; Where, (...) the gates of
Apollo's Temple, he engraved this story, omitting ^ot^ing but the rate of
Icarus, Virg. Aen. 6.

-- Tu quoque magnam
Partem opere in tanto, sineret dolor, Icare, haberes.
Bis conatus erat casus eDffingere in auro;
Bis patriae cecidere manus.
Thou also, Icarus, had had a part
In this, had grief given freedom to his art.
Twice he attempted thy hard fate to paint;
Twice thy concerned father's hand did faint.
Some hold, this Fable was invented to shadow a true story, and hat Pasiphae
being in love with Taurus, Captain of the Guard to Minos, lay with him in
Daedalus's house; and she bringing forth ^wins, the mockery made up the
Minotaur. The Fable was more l^wdly presented by Nero: In relating whereof,
Suetonius, as Beroaldus notes, uses words, that seem to credit Beasts having
copulation with Women; against which we read a Law, Levit. 20. 16. which
shows the probability of it. Besides, if it be possible, we need no farther
proof than the unsatiable nature of some women. Nor would any doubt, that
Messalina the lascivious Empress would have scrupled at such an act, if her
fancy had but directed her to it. Juvenal. Sat. 6.

-- Claudius audi
Quae tulerit. Dormire virum cum senserat uxor,
Ausa Palatino tegetem praeferre cubi i,
Sumere nocturnos meretrix Augusta cucullos;
Linquebat comite ancilla non amplius una:
Sed nigrum flavo crinem abscondente galero,
Intravit calidum veteri centone lupanar,
Et c^llam vacuam, atque suam. tunc nuda papillis
Prostitit a^ratis, titulum mentita Lyciscae,
Ostenditque tuum, generose Britannice, ventrem.
Excepit blanda intrantes, atque era poposcit*
Mox l^none suas jam dimittente puell^s,
Tristis abit: sed, quod potuit, tamen ultima cellam
Clausit, adhuc ardens rigidae tentigine vulvae,
Et lassata viris, necdum satiata rec ssit.
-- For hear what Claudius does endure:
Whom whilst his wife believes in sleep secure,
She did prefer before a Princely Bed
The Bawdy-house's smoaky-coverlid.
The Imperial Whore disguised from being known,
With Night and Scarfs goes with one Maid alone;
A yellow Periwig her swarthy hairs
Conceals, and she to the Bawdy House repairs;
Which from the new-employed bed a fume
Retains. Possessing the then emptied room
She rich adorned with naked breasts appears.
Lycisca's name the lying entrance bears.
There, great Britannicus, thy belly's shown.
With a lascivious kindness every one
She meets, and asks her hire. When all the Whores.
The Bawd sends home, hers last of all the doors
Was shut. She burning with unquenched fires,
And toiled with men, not satisfied, retires.
The Second BOOK.
The Argument.
Thetis at last, though long delayed by fears,
Through the calm waves her dear Achilles bears.
Love shows an object to inflame his eyes:
The King receives him hid in a disguise.
BUt Thetis, in the night leaving the caves,
Stood where the Rocks sent Echoes from the waves.
And in her unresolved fancy weighed,
To what safe place her Son might be conveyed.
She fears, where Mars was born, the adjacent Thrace;
And dreads the warlike Macedonian race.
Famed -Athens too her doubting phancies fear,
With Sestos and Abydos, which appear
Too aptly placed for ships. For those loved Seas
She now resolves crowned by the Cyclades.
Nor Myconos, nor Seriphos pleased her mind,
Delos, nor Lemnos unto men unkind.
By Lycomedes Court, she lately stayed,
And heard the shores sound while the Virgins played.
As she was sent to view Aegaeon's bands,
Who strove to loose his hundred-fettered-hands.
This Land, where quarrels no disturbance wrought,
The much distracted Thetis safest thought:
Like a poor Bird, with wavering phansies pressed,
That dares not choose a branch to build her nest.
Lest it her brood, should unto storms, or snakes,
Or men expose; at length she likes and takes.
So Thetis on the place resolved, prepares
To go, but is assaulted with new cares;
Whether her son should in her breast be laid,
Or through the waves born by a Triton's aid.
Or to the winged winds, his waftage owe,
Or unto Iris Ocean-nourish'd bow;
At last two Dolphines she was pleased to rain,
Which by great Tethys, in the Atlantic main,
For her were bred. The vast unfathomed flood,
Bore nothing else in all its scaly brood,
So swift, so kind to men; At her command
These staid in waves, least injured by the Land.
The sleepy Youth, (for youth may soundly sleep)
She from the Aemonian cave, bears to the Deep.
The waves and winds becalmed her designs
Assist, and Cynthia in full luster shines.
For his return the Centaur following prayed;
Of wav^s he knew, he need not be afraid.
O're-flowing tears, fall from his gazing eyes,
Whilst they upon the rouling billows rise
Now almost out of sight; yet still he gazed:
And when with waves they sunk, himself he raised
Upon his hinder parts, till the waves quite
Had swallowed all impressions of their flight.
Him that to Thessaly must never return,
Sad Pholoe, and the clouded Othrys mourn:
Sperchios streams, no more with joy swell high;
And Chirons den now wants harmony.
The Fauns ament his loss; the Nymphs begin
To mourn their passion's hope, ravished with him.
And now the Stars begin to take their flight,
At the approach of Titan's radiant light.
Which from the Ocean rose; whose drops like dew,
Back to its waves the rising Chariot threw.
But Thetis long before, to Scyros came,
And gave her Dolphines liberty again;
When sleep forsook refreshed Aeacides:
His eyes saluted by the light, and Seas.
To him unknown, for Pelion all amazed
He looked, and on his doubted Mother gazed.
Who takes him by the hand, with words thus kind,
Dear child, if he that sure was once designed,
Had shared my marriage bed, thou had been placed
With Stars, for ever there by me embraced:
Heaven had been then thy due inheritance,
Nor had I feared the lesser Yates or Chance.
But now thy Father's mortal, there can be
No way for thee to escape death but by me;
And now the sad and fat all time draws near,
Whose dangers are the cause of all myfear.
Forget a while thy Sexe's honor then,
Nor this safe habit which I wear contemn.
If Hercules thus learnt to spin, and round
A javeline bore with winding Ivy crowned;
If Bacchus in these Ornaments was dressed,
And Jove himself, nor Ceneus mind depressed
Thereby; then suffer thus at my desire,
The appointed time Fate threatens to exspire.
Then I Will restore thee to the Centaur's cave.
By all the joys and glory youth can have,
I do conjure thee now. If I for thee
Shared with a Mortal my Divinity?
If by the Stygian arming waves I stood,
And dipped (I wish, all over) thee in the flood:
Suffer thyselfe thus now to be concealed,
The mind's not hurt with what the body's healed.
Why do thou frown, and turn away thy face?
Needst thou to blush? Is gentleness disgrace?
By our known streams, I do assure thee too,
Chiron, nor does, nor shall know what we do.
His breast in vain she tries, where rougher seeds
Were sown, and stories of his Father's deeds:
Thus a proud horse, with vigorous blood inflamed,
And heat of youth, contemns to be tamed.
But does through fields, and unto rivers fly,
O'rejoy'd with his affected liberty:
He scorns to yield to the restraining Bitt,
And wondreth at his fellows that submit.
What God with craft inspired the Mother's mind,
And unto softness her rough Son inclined?
By chance to Pallas, on the shore that day,
The Syrians did their sacred offerings pay.
Hither the King, with his fair daughters came,
(Though seldom seen) unto the holy flame.
The image of the rigid Pallas.
Power they crowned
With fragrant wreaths, her spear with garlands bound;
All wrondrous fair. Their youthful blossoms grew,
Now like ripe fruit, as fit for gathering too.
But as the Sea-nymphs are by Venus looks
Excelled, by Cynthia's those of lesser brooks;
So from her Sisters, such loved victories
Were challenged by bright Deidamia's eyes.
Her rosy looks did vanquished Jewels shame,
And on her purple garments threw a flame;
She might compare with Pallas, when she takes
Her gentlest looks, and lays aside her snakes.
At this fair Object, the fierce Youth remains
Fixed like a Statue, and received Love's flames.
Nor would the insulting passion be concealed:
His sparkling eyes the inward fire revealed.
Like the Massagetans red liquor mixed
With milk, or purple stains on ivory fixed;
Such mixture his new kindled passions bred:
His cheeks now pale, but straight with blushing red.
At length, not brooking to be so delayed,
The advancing Youth was by his Mother stayed:
Like a young Bull, to rule the herd designed,
His horns not yet with full perfection twined;
When Love first kindles in his savage breast,
Those ruder passions for some snowy beast;
He somes at mouth, whilst the exspecting swains,
Joy at the certain witness of his flames.
His knowing Mother, finding the fit time,
Was now, thus said; Can thou, dear Son, repine
With this fair crew, to share unknown delights?
Can Pelion, or cold Ossa, show such sights?
Oh that my cares were thine! that thou would give
A young Achilles in mine arms to live!
At this, with blushes gentler he remained:
And though he yielded, yet she still constrained.
A woman's dress, does now the youth enclose,
And his strong arms, he learns how to compose.
His hair's not now neglected as before:
And on his neck, she hangs the chain she wore.
Within rich robes, his steps confined now
Move in a gentler pace; and he is taught how
To speak with a reserved modesty,
Thus changing Wax, which nimble fingers plie,
First rendered soft by active heat, inclines
Unto that form the workman's hand designs.
So Thetis to another shape conveyed
Her Son. Nor needed she to what she said,
Have added more: For in his beauty too,
All things appeared, which to the sex were due.
Yet as they went along, she still renews
Her words, and her instructions thus pursues;
Dear Child, in gentle looks compose thy face,
And imitate each motion, and each grace.
Thou see these beauties wear, or else I fear,
Unto the King our cous'nage, may appear.
This said, still as they go some Ornament
Her busy fingers mend. Thus Cynthia went
From hunting with her Mother; toiled with sport,
And with her quiver, to her Father's Court;
Her arms now hid, her garments losely flowed,
And in a better form her hair bestowed.
Then to the King, her Son the goddess brings,
And thus, the Altars witnessing, begins.
Receive Achilles Sister, as thy guest,
Are not her Brothers looks in hers expressed?
She in her quiver, and her bow delights,
And, like the Amazons, scorns marriage-rites.
Achilles is enough to be enjoyed
By me: Let this in these rites be employed.
Let thy best care of her allay my fears,
Errors are incident to tender years.
Let her not rove the woods, nor Gymnick game
Frequent, lest with her clothes she put off shame.
Let her still live with this fair company,
Nor ever let thy shores unguarded lie.
Thou saw the Trojans lately, without cause,
Did violate the world's observed Laws.
This said, the unknown Youth the King receives,
(Who finds out fraud when it is a God deceives?)
And further, renders all his thanks as just
To her, who thought him worthy such a trust.
The pious troup, with fixed eyes amazed
Upon his beauty, and proportion gazed
So much excelling others, then invites
Their company unto their sacred rites.
So the Idalian birds, that nimbly fly
Through yielding air, in a known company.
If to the flock, a stranger join his wings,
He with himself an admiration brings:
At last acquainted all with joy, receave
The stranger, and the air together cleave.
The lingering Mother, still yet loath to part,
Now takes her leave, repeating all the art
She taught before, and what she more could tell,
And with her whispered wishes bids Farewell;
Then takes the waves: her looks still backward bends,
And to the shore, these gentle wishes sends.
Dear earth, which hold'st my dearest joy, to thee
Committed with a fearful subtilty;
Be ever happy and in silence just
To me, as Creet to Rhea in her trust:
Long may thy glories last, and may thy name
Grow greater then the wandering Delos fame:
Less hurt by storms, then all the Cyclades,
That break the billows of the Aegean seas.
Let thy name be the Sailer's sacred vow:
Yet to thy shores no Grecian ships allow.
Tell Fame, with thee no warlike spears are found,
But headless ones with Ivy-garlands Crowned.
Whilst Mars, the parted Worlds, such rage does give,
Here let Achilles like a Virgin live.
ANNOTATIONS on the II Book of STATIUS his ACHILLEIS.
5. THrace.] Thetis considering with her self, whither she might with most
safety convey her Son, in the first place feared Thrace, conceiving that it
would be an hastening of his destiny, to commit him to that warlick people;
Whose Country received its name from the son of Mars; or, as Stephanus says, a
regionis asperitate, quam (...), Graeci appellant. So Pomponius witnesses,
that this Region is obliged neither by air nor soil, especially near the Sea.
The roughness of the place wrought a like disposition in the Inhabitants: And
hence happily it is said, that Mars was here nourished. It is confined on the
West by Macedonia, and the River Nessus, as Ptolomy; but by Strymon, as Pliny
says. See Thucydides, lib. 2.

6. The Warlick Macedonian race.] Macedonia bordereth on Thrace, Epirus*
Illyris, and Thessalie; so called from Macedo, son of Osiris, or (as Stephanus
and Solinus) of Jupiter and Thyria, daughter of Deucalion. Thucydides, lib. 2.
praises them for an hardy and warlick people: But Statius had more reason to
give them that character, as living after Alexander the Great's time, whose
Victories were that Nation's greatest glory. In their Militia, the Phalanx had
the pre-eminence. This Nero imitated, Sueton. Nerone, ubi vide Casaubonum. This
steady Band consisted all of tall and able Soldiers, six foot high, or
thereabouts, and (...), as Suidas says, of equal age. The like policy the
Turk uses in the choice of his Janissaries, and with no less success.

7. Athens.] This place also the goddess held not safe to trust Achilles in,
by reason perhaps of the great confluence of strangers thither, it being the
most famous City in all Greece, scated in Attica, about forty furlongs from the
Sea, as Strabo, lib. 9. Thucydides, lib. 2 says, It was at its greatest height
in the time of Pericles. It was the Mother of many Philosophers, and Orators,
and Poets, and (as Tullie styleth it) the Mistress of all human Sciences. But
in the time of Synesius, it retained no such excellency, Epist. 135. It was
called Cecropia, from Cecrops who first built it, and reigned in it; afterward
Mopsopia, from Mopsus; lastly, Athens, from Minerva, whom the Greeks call
(...), quasi (...), because she never sucked the breast, nor had need to do it;
at her first springing from Jove's brain, being not an Infant, but a mature
Virago, of full stat^re and strength. To this derivation, Cael. Rhodiginus
assenteth, lib. 14. c. 18. Macrobius, Saturnal. l. 1. c. 17. says, It was the
opinion of Porphyrie, that Minerva was the virtue of the Sun, which infuseth
prudence into the minds of men. For therefore is this goddess said to have
issued from the head of Jupiter; that is, Wisdom comes from the highest part
of Heaven, whence the Sun has its Original. (...) also, which signifies
not-^ffeminate, or manly, does not only come near to the name, but also
agrees with the nature of this goddess, who was still pictured in a warlick
posture, with an Helmet, a Spear, and a Shield, and said to have a great stroke
in all actions of War, which ever depend upon Wisdom. This was the chief plea
that V^ysses used against Ajax, when they strove for Achilles's Armor, That
Ajax his valor had been useless, without Vlysses's policy to direct it, Ovid.
Metam. lib. 13.

11. Myconos.] One of the Cyclades, under which the Poets feign those Giants to
have been buried, that were slain by Hercules. The Inhabitants are said to have
been so subject to baldness, that a bald man was wont proverbially to be
called a Myconian: Plin. l. 11. c. 37.

Seriphos.] The Poet gives it the epithet humilis, happily by reason of its
small compass, which is but twelve miles, as Pliny says. So Juvenal, --
parvaque Seripho, Sat. 10. The whole world, he says, was not wide enough for
the young man of Pella, (so he calls Alexander the Great) but when he had it
all to turn him in he found himself pitifully straightened for want of room, like
one cooped up in little Seriphos. The people of this Isle Perseus transformed
into stones, by showing them his Gorgon's head, to revenge his forced mother.
Yet long before, Acrisius having thrown his mother Danae and him into the Sea,
they were cast upon this Island, and taken up by a fisherman, and here
preserved.

12. Delos.] This was placed in the middle of the Cyclades, and most famous of
them all, by reason of Apollo's Oracle there, consulted from most parts of the
world. The Fable of its first becoming firm land, see in Pliny, lib. 4. c.
12. Strabo, lib. 10. and Servius, in Virg. Aen. 3. who relate, that it first
appeared to receive the burden of Latona, who was here delivered of Apollo and
Diana* It has its name from (...), manifestus, perspicuus, Macrob. Saturnal.
l. 1. c. 17. being said to have risen up on a sudden above the waves. Some
think it worthy of this name from its Oracles; I wonder why, for they were
seldom manifest. But Servius, and Alexander ab Alex. l. 6. c. 2. say, The
Oracle here was clear, when all others were obscure. After this Island had
appeared, it continued for some time loose, and floated up and down, until at
last it was fixed by Diana. Seneca Agamemnone act. 2. Chor. -- Tu maternam
Sistere Delon, Lucina, jubes
Hue atque illuc prius errantem
Cyclada ventis. Nunc jam stabilis
Fixa terras radice tenet.
Thou did thy mother's Delos bind,
Wandering before, drove by the wind
Among the Cyclades: Now it stands
Fixed to the earth with rooted bands.
Servius in Aen. 3. says, The truth is, that Delos being shaken by a constant
Earthquake, the Inhabitants petitioning Apollo that they might be freed from
it, were enjoined thence-forward to bury none in the Island. And Alexander ab
Alex. lib. 6. c. 2. writes, That all such as were near dying, and all women
ready to be delivered, were carried over to the Island Rhene. Thucydides lib.
3. says, That when Delos was totally hallowed by the Athenians, (Pisistratus
the Tyrant having before hallowed as much as was within the prospect of the
Temple) they took away all the Sepulchers, and made an Edict, That none should
either be born or buried there for the future; but when any were near the time
for either, they should be removed into Rhe^e. In the dispute between Pausanias
and the Athenians, about Title to this Island, the Athenians alleging this
Edict of theirs, Pausanias wittily demanded, How it could be their Island,
seeing none of them had either been born or buried in it, Plutarch in Apophth.
Rhene is so near to it, that when it was won by Polycrates, he dedicated it to
Apollo, and tied it to Delos with a chain. Diverse Games were here celebrated,
as Thucydides affirms, and Homer, Hymno in Apollinem; who ending their
praises, thus also leaves his own, verse. 165.

(...),
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...);
(...),
(...).
Let Phoebus and Diana's kindness dwell
Still here: And now to every one Farewell.
But yet remember when I leave this land,
And among all some pilgrim shall demand,
Who was it, O Virgins, that with harmony
Could most affect your charmed ears? Reply
With one consent, and thus my praises tell,
A Poet blind, in Chios who does dwell.
Lemnos unto men unkind.] This is an Island in the Aegean Sea, called Ardens by
Seneca, Herc. Oet. v. 1362. It is described by Valerius Flaccus, Argonaut. lib.
2. Here Cicero, de natura deprum, places Vulcan's Forge. Statius, Thebaidos l.
5.

-- Aeg^o premitur circumstua Nereo
Lemnos, ubi ignisera fessus respirat ab Aetna
Mulciber.
To Lemnos in the Aegean waves retires
The wearied Mulciber from Aetna's fires.
Here Vulcan was bred, and had in great veneration. In his injuries the
Inhabitants held themselves so concerned, that they hated Venus for her
adultery with Mars, Alexand* ab Alex. l. 2. c. 14. Wherear the goddess being
exasperated, infused such hatred into the women against their husbands, that
they took counsel to slay them all at their return from the Thracian War; and
did so to all, except Hypsipyle, who saved her father Thoas. The story we have
in Statius, Theb. lib. 5.

15. Aegaeons bands.] Aegaeon the son of Heaven and Earth, (Hesiod. in Theogon)
was called by Thetis to assist Jupiter, when Pallas, Juno, and Neptune would
have fettered him, Lucian. dial. Martis and Mercurii: But afterward waxing
insolent, (as most are wont to do after great merits) was himself fettered by
Jupiter to the Rocks of the Aegean Sea. And now Neptune having given notice,
that he was endeavoring to unloose his hundred hands, Jupiter sent Thetis to
view his chains. She passing by Scyros, and seeing King Lycomedes his daughters
at their innocent recreations, and the Island filled with effeminate
Inhabitants, thought presently no place could be more fit for her son's
concealment, and resolved thither to bring him. This Giant was named Briareus
by the gods, Aegaeon by men, Homer. Iliad. ^. v. 403. by Lucian (...), Briareum
centimanum; and therefore was he bound with an hundred chains, as our Poet here
says. By Virgil he is placed in hell by Chimaera, Aen 6. The rest of the
Giants also are fixed in their several places by the Poets, as Otus in Creet,
Typhoeus in Campania, Enceladus in Sicily, whose burning Tomb is made famous by
Claudian's Muse, de raptu Proserp. l. 1.

Enceladi bustum, qui saucia membra revinctus
Spirat inexhaustum flagranti pectore sulfur:
Et quoties detrectatonus cervice rebelli
In dextrum laevumque latus, tunc Insula fundo
Vellitur, and dubiae nutant cum moenibus urbes.
Vast-limb'd Enceladus here buried lies,
From whose hot breast unwasted sulfur flies.
As often as o're-laden with his burd'n,
To ease his wearied side he strives to turn,
The motion makes the heaved Island quake,
And with their walls the tottering Cities shake.
28. Iris Ocean-nourish'd Bow.] Iris (...) nuncio, because the Rainbowe tells
of rain either past or to come, Magir. lib. 4. cap. 5. Our Poet calls her
Thaumantida. In Greek she is called (...). And there is no Meteor so worthy of
wonder. Its many colors are caused by the reflection of the Sunbeams on a
watry-clowd. Aristot. Meteorol. lib. 3. Iris ^st arcus multicolor in nube
roride, op^c^, and concava, ex radiorum Solis oppositi reflexione apparens.
Virgil. Aen. 4.

Ergo Ir's croce is per coelum roscida pennis,
Mill trahens varios adverso Sole colores.
Swift Iris therefore with her dewy wings,
On which the Sun a thousand colors flings.
The difference of its colors arises only from the unequal parts of the
clouds. According to Aristotle they are three, Funiceus, Viridis, Caruleus.
Others make them five, as Ammianus Marcellinus, who calls the first Luteam
speciem, a palish Yellow; the second, nearer a Tawny; the third, Red; the
fourth, Purple; the last, a mixture of Blew and Green. But it is a strange
error in Philosophers, to define the colors of the Rain-bowe, and they almost
all differ about them. Yet are the colors they quarrel about not real, but
apparent only; as the sky seems blew, which without doubt is not blew
indeed. Nor is it possible, at so great a distance, to describe colors
certainly. All that can be said, is, That they appear such to the eye.
Marcellinus, lib. 20. takes occasion, from the appearing of a Rainbow, while
Constantius besieged Amida, to treat of the reasons of the Rain-bowe, and why
the Poets feigned, that Iris was so often sent from heaven, Indicium est, says
he, permutationis aurae, a sudo aere nubium concitans globos, aut contra ex
concreto immutans in serena^s laetitiam coelum. Ideo apud Poet^* legimus saepe,
Irim de coelo mitti, cum praesentium rerum fit status mutario. That is, It is a
sign of alteration of weather, gathering clouds in clear skies; or, on the
contrary, changing thickness into serenity. Therefore we often read in the
Poets of Iris being sent from heaven, when there was any alteration made of the
present state of affairs. Of this fancy of the Poets, see Gyraldi Syntagm. 9.
For the Philosophy, experience contradicts it. And Pliny says, Nec pluvias
nec serenos dies cum fide ab Iride portehdi. They held, the Rain-bowe was
nourished by the Ocean, by reason of both the Sun's and the Clouds arising from
thence. Scaliger, Exercit. 10. Sect. 11. speaks of a Rainbowe that appeared
in the nightime, and was seen by Albertus and many others. And Vi^eilio, in
his answer to the E. of Mirandula, concerning the possibility of a Rain-bow's
seeming entirely circular, though not being so, affirms, that he saw four
such at once in Padua.

33. So swift, so kind to men] Pliny says, Dolphins are the swiftest of all
fish, and a morous. Agellius, lib. 7. c. 8. relates a story of a Dolphin* that
loved a Boy so passionately, that his life was tied to the Boy's life. The same
Author, lib. 16. c. 19 out of Herodotus, sets down the story of Arion's
being carried by a Dolphine, charmed by his Music, Virg. Ecl. 8. Orpheus in
^ilvis, inter Delphin^s Arion. The story is also related by Plutarch in Symp.
but most sweetly by the sweetest of all the Poets, Fast. lib. 2. who thus
describes Arion, when the covetous Mariners threatened him with drawn swords.

Ille metu pavidus, Mortem non deprecor inquit;
Sed liceat sumta pauca refer lyra.
Dant veniam, ridentque moram. Capit ille coronam,
Quae possit crines, Phoebe, decere tuos.
Induerat Tyrio distinctam murice pallam.
Reddidit ict a suos pollice chorda sonos.
Flebilibus numeris veluti, canentia dura
Trajectus penna tempora, cantat olor.
Protinus in medios ornatus defilit undas.
Spargitur impulsa caerula puppis aqua.
Inde (fide majus!) tergo Delphina recurvo
Se memorant oneri supposuisse n^vo.
Ille sedet, citharamque tenet, pretiumque vehendi
Cantat, and aequoreas carmine mulcet aquas.
He frighted, cries; I ask but that you would give
Me leave to touch my Harp, not leave to live.
They grant it, ^miling at his fond delay,
Whilst he assumes a Crown, which, Phoebus, may
Become thy locks, and on his shoulders bound
A purple Robe. The stricken strings then sound.
The dying Swan so, when his fate begins
Near to approach, in mournful numbers sings.
And so adorned, he leapt into the flood:
On the ship's sides the dashed up waters stood*
When straight his crooked back a Dolphin showed,
And placed it under the unusual load*
He sits, holding his Harp, and whilst he plays,
The Sea grows calm, and for his portage pays.
48. Otbrys.] A Mountain bounding Thessalie on the South, Herod^^* l. 7. It
has on the West Side Phthiotis, Strab. lib. 9.

51. The Fawns lament his loss.] These were Silvane gods, whose Chief ^as Pa^,
lascivious like all his followers, who were held strangely amorous of men and
women. The Chorus in Seneca, Hippol. act 2 believe it impossible, that
Hippolytus living in the woods, should escape being solicited by them:

-- Te nemore abditum,
Cum Titan medium constituit diem,
Ci^get turba lice^s, Na^ades improbae
Formosos solitae cla^dere fontibus:
Et somnis facient insidias tuis
L^s^ivae nemo r^m deae,
Montiv^gique Panes.
For whilst in shades you bide, and day's
Divided by the god of Rays,
The Naiades thy beauty moves,
Who in their fountains shut their Loves:
And the lascivious gods that keep
In woods, will court thee in thy sleep.
The question, Whether Spirits affect carnal copulation, has been disputed by
many: I shall only relate these few opinions. P^utar^h de Or^culor. defect.
says, that fury attends their unsatiated last Paracelsus relates stories of
some; who have been married to mortal men. Cardane, de Subtilit. and variet.
rerum. says, They are as apt as dogs to be familiar with men. Plato was
believed to have been begotten on a Virgin by the phantasm of Apollo, by reason
of his admirable wisdom. Cardane, de var. and subt rer. lib. 16. c. 43.
speaks of some, who had had familiar company with Spirits for many years. And
Agrippa, de occ^lta Philos. lib. 3. cap. 24. says, Sunt adhu^ ^o^ie qui
commercium and conjugalem commixtionem habent cum Daemonibus. Burton in his
MELANCHOLY relates a story of Menippus Lucius, That between Cen^hrea and
C^rinth he met a Spirit, in the habit of a fair Gentlewoman; and, deceived by
her allurements, married her. To the Wedding, among other guests, came
Apollonius, who by conjectures found her to be a Spirit. When she saw her self
discovered, she begged of Apollonius to be silent: But he refusing, she
vanished with all her house and furniture. Sabinus, in Ovid* Metam. lib. 10.
has the like story. Florilegus, ad Ann. 1^58. tells of a young Gentleman of
Rome, who, the same day he was married, going to play at Tennis, put his ring
on the finger of the image of Venus; and returning to take off his ring, Venus
had bent-in her finger so that he could not get it off. Whereupon loath to make
his company stay, he left it, intending the next day to use some other means
for it. Night being come, and going to bed to his Bride, Venus interposed
between, telling him, He had betrothed himself to her by the ring he put upon
her finger; and thus troubled him for many nights, till by the advice of
Palumbus a Magician, he was released from his unwelcome Lover. Lavater, de
spectr. part. 1. cap. 19. tells this story, I have heard, says he, a grave
and a wise man, in the Territory of Tigure, who affirmed, that as he and his
servant went through the pastures in the summer time, very early, he espied one
(as he thought) whom he knew very well, wickedly committing lewdness with a
Mare. At which being amazed, he returned back again, and knocked at his house
whom he supposed he had seen. There he certainly understood, that the man had
not been that morning from his chamber. Upon which, discreetly searching into
the business, he saved the man, who else had suffered for the deluding Damon.
Corn. Agrip. de ocult. Philos. l. 3. c. 19. cites a passage in St. Augustine,
that Spirits are subject to these lusts. And Mr. Burton quoteth Pererius in
Genesis lib. 8. c. 6. v. 1. who affi meth, that these Genii can beget, and have
carnal copulation with women. In that fair Temple of Belus, as Herodotus
says, there was a Chapel, in which was splendide stratus lectus, and
apposita ^ens^ aurea. Into this adorned bed none came, but the woman whom the
god made choice of, as the Chaldean Priests told him; and their god lay with
her himself. Of this opinion is Lactantius. And Lipsius relates proofs thereof
in his days, in the City of L^vain. Further discourse on this point I shall
reserve for a place more worthy of it.

75. If Hercules thus learned to spin.] The^ is being come to the Island where
she intended to place her son, lets him know, that for his safety, she would
put him into woman's habit. And knowing that the greatness of his spirit would
scorn such a disguise, she sertteth Hercules before him, who at the command of
Omphale in such a dress sat spinning, Seneca Hippolyto, act. 1.

Natus Al^mtna posuit pharetram,
Et minax vasti spolium Leonis,
Passus aptari digiti^ smaragdos,
Et dari legem rudibus c^pillis.
Crura distincto religavit ^uro,
Luteo p'ant^^ cohibente socco:
Et manu, clavam modo qua gerebat,
Fr^d deduxit properante fuso.
Vidit Perses, ditisque s^r^x
Lydia regni, dejecta seri
Terga Leonis, bumerisqu^, quibus
Sederat alti regia coeli,
Tenu^m Tyrio stamine pallam.
Vid. Herc. Furent. v. 465. and Herc. Oct. v. 372. Great Hercules once threw
away
His Quiver and the Lion's prey:
His fingers he adorns with rings,
And his rude hair in order brings:
His legs with gold embraced round,
His feet with yellow buskins bound:
That hand, which so well armed had been
With his great Club, now learns to spin;
By Persians and rich Lydians scorned,
Not with his Lion's skin adorned.
Those shoulders on which Heaven should rest
Were in a woman's habit dressed.
77. If Bacchus] Bacchus also disguised himself in a Virgin's habit, for fear
of his mother-in-law Juno, Senec. O^dip. v. 417. Mythologers understand this of
the effects of Wine, which sometimes renders men esteminate, and otherwhile
gives courage to the most womanish mind: And therefore was Bacchus said to be
of both sexes. Origin lib. 3. contra Celsum says, that Bacchus was thought
sometimes to have worn a woman's habit. Eusebius, de Pr^p. Evang. l. 3 c. 9.
gives this reason, why a woman's form (and therefore habit) was ascribed to
^acchus, ^t vim illam quae plantarum fructi^us i^est ex mascula foemineaque
conflatam significet; To signify, that the strength was of both kinds by which
fruits were produced.

78. And Jove himself.] The story is commonly known: Jupiter going to visit the
world, injured by Phaeton's Lightning, employed his first care on Arcadia;
where his eyes told his heart such wonders of Colisto's beauty, that he
counterfeited the shape and dress of Dianae, (Quis Divum fraudibus obstet?)
and so enjoyed the deceived Calisto, (...). Metamorph. lib. 2.

^ Coeneus] Who being ravished by Neptune, and having the grant of ^ish for her
recompense, desired to alter her sex, that she might ^^r suffer such a
misfortune more. Unto this the too kind god added her being invulnerable. Yet
in the battle of the Centaurs, and the Lapithae, she was pressed to death: So
impossible it is for power, any way applied in this world, to alter destiny.
Nor do our fond attempts give occasion to Him above, to appoint new accidents:
It is He, that permits those fond attempts, and lets them be the means of
those accidents, which we would most avoid. The fable sometimes goes, that she
had power to change her sex. Otherwise the sense remains not perfect. In the
other World, Virgil shows her in her first sex, Aen. 6. v. 448.

-- Et juvenis quondam, nunc foemina, Coeneus,
Rursus and in veterem fato revoluta figuram.
And Coeneus once a Youth, but now a Maid,
By fate into her former sex conveyed.
85. If by the Stygian arming waves.] Thetis to prevent the mortality of
Achilles, which he had received from his Father, dipped him in the Stygian
flood, all but the heel, which she held by; In which mortal part, he was shot
by Paris. By this River, the gods took their inviolable Oaths, Virg. Aen. 6.
Seneca, Thyest. v. 667. gives it this Character, Deformis unda, quae facit
caelo fidem.
And Homer, Odyss. (...). -- (...)
(...).
The greatest Oath among the blessed Gods.


The fable is, that Victoria the daughter of Styx, assisted Jupiter in his War
against the Giants; For which service, he gave this honor to her Mother, that
the gods should swear by her, and inviolably keep their Oath, or else be
banished from the banquets of the gods. This affords some illustration to
verse 213. Where Thetis wishing honor to the Island Scyros, says,

Let thy name be the Seamans sacred vow.
The Viscount, St. Albanes, Sapient. Vet. applies this to the Leagues and
Covenants of Princes, which by reason of interest, are preciselier observed,
than more sacred ones. Natalis Comes, ^ytholog. l. 3. c. 2. says, that Styx
discovered the conspiracy of the gods, and that therefore, perhaps Jove made
that Water their obliging Oath. Aristotle, M^taphys. l. 1. c. 3. conceives,
that the Poets by this fiction, intended to signify, that water is the
original of all things. So Thales Milesius said, that, water is initium rerum;
Deum autem, eam Meutem quae, ex aqua cuncta fingeret, as Cicero says, De not.
Deox. lib. 1. according to that of Moses, Genesis 1. 2. So the god's Oath seems
to have been by the first beginning of things. Other reasons may be seen in
Call. R^odiginus, lib. 27. c. 5. Of this opinion, Plutarch shows Homer to be,
lib. De Homero, where he cites Thales for it; and, after them, Xenophanes. The
reasons of whose conjecture, Eusebius gives, De praepar. Evang. lib. 14. c.
14. Servius in Aen. 6. says, Acheron has its name, qua^^ (...), sine ga^dio:
From whence, Styx comes; from Styx, Cocytus. Whose Etymologies he thus
brings along; They, who want Joy, have Sadness, which is neighbor to Grief,
the production of Death. The Poets feigned these Rivers to be unpleasant: So
must Death needs be to those, who placing their joys in this World, part with
both together. By Victory, daughter of Styx, may be intimated the power of
Death, who assisted Jupiter; in that the Giants were mortal: showing the
vastness of their crimes, which make the true War with God, and want but
eternity for themselves, to make their crimes perpetual. All this signifies
but the series of Life and Death, not more of sorrow belonging to our ends,
then to our beginnings. Man is born unto Sorrow, says Eliphaz, Job 5. 7. And
according to this sense, Plutarch speaks, whose words I have taken the
liberty, to dress in verse;

Sicut qui argillam tractat, fingere
Ex ea animalis fo^mam potest,
Rursumque diffingere, iterumque ae
Quoties libet perpetuo vices istasrepetere:
Sic etiam Natura ex eadem materia
Olim avos nosiros, postea patres pro-
tulit, deinde nos, ac deinceps a-
lios ex aliis evolvet. Ac fluvius
Ille ortus nostri absque intermis-
sione labens nunquam subsistet;
Sicut and interitus flumen hujus
C^ntrarium, five is Acheron est.
Prima ergo Causa, quae nobis Solis offendit
J^bar, eadem ad calig^iosum Orcum adducit.
As one that chafes the pliant clay, may bring
The substance to the form of any thing;
Again, destroy the species, and by skill
Repeat the same as often as he will:
So nature also at the first, from clay
Our Ancestors did to the World convay,
Our fathers next; to them do we succeed,
Others to us; and they shall others breed.
This flood of Life, flows at a constant rate,
Consuming still, as do the streams of Fate.
This flood's Cocytus, or else Acheron,
Which stream the Poets set those names upon.
Thus the first cause, which shows us the Sun-light,
Restores us back unto Eternal night.
120. Received Love's flames.] Those thoughts of glory, that would not suffer
Achilles to consent to his kind Mother's advice, yield to Love's power, by
which all the World is fettered. Which matter is excellently expressed by
Seneca, Hippolyt. act. 1. Chor. The greatness of which power, joined to the
swiftness of its execution, made the Ancients believe, it was a fascination;
So Dido, at the first sight of Aeneas, received a passion as durable as her
life, since she could find no way but one, to end both. The amorous Sappho,
having expressed all the symptoms of a powerful passion, exspecteth the same
fate.

-- Velut herba pallent
Ora: spirandi neque compos, Orco
Proxima credor.
My lips grow pale, and my disordered breath
Is spent in sighs: sure, the next thing is death.
Ex interpretatione Henrici Stephani. According to these examples, there is
reason enough to believe Claudians amorous beggar;

Paupertas me saeva domat, dir^sque Cupido:
Sed toleranda fames, non tolerandus amor.
In Loves and Fortunes fetters I remain:
One may endure the hunger, not the flame.
Aelian, Variae hist. lib. 12. c. 58 relates the story of Dioxippus, the
famous Wrestlet of Athens; Who coming into the City, as the manner was, after
those exercises, fell in Love with a Maid, (like Achilles here) at the first
sight, as he passed along.

123. Massagetans.] A people of Scythia, inhabiting Caucasus, who used to break
such in pieces, as died of old age, and to throw such to Wild beasts, as died
of diseases, Strabe. lib 2. They worshipped the Sun chiefly; to whom they
offered an Horse. When they traveled through a wilderness, they were wont to
drink Horses blood mingled with milk. So Claudian,

Et qui cornipedes in pocula vulaer^t aud^x
Massagetes.
170. Altars witnessing.] It was an observed custom, when any thing of
cons^q^ence was to be said, or petitioned for, to do it before the Altars of
the gods. So when I^rbas heard of Dido's passion for Aeneas, Aen. 4.

Isque amens animi, and rumore acceusus amaro,
Dicitur an^e^aras, m^dia inter numina Divum, etc.
Enraged ('t is said) at this unwelcome fame,
Among the Altars of his Gods he came.
This he did, that he might perform that usual ceremony of hol^ing the Altars;
as a little below, Talibus orantem dictis, ^rasque tenentem. And the same
Prince of Poets, Aen. 12. Tango ^ras, ^edios ignes acnumina testor.

And Macrobius, Saturnal. lib. 3. c. 2. says, that Jupiter heard him, non quia
orabat tan^um, sed quia and aras tenebat. And he cites Vario, Divin. lib. 5.
who says, Aras primum dictas, quodesset necess^rium a sacrificantibus eas
teneri. Ansis autem solere teneri vasa, quis duhitet? Alexander a^ Alexandro.
lib 2. c. 18. says, It was a custom for those that were piously praying to the
gods, to embrace their knees, i. e. the knees of their Statues. And this
certainly, is the only meaning of that in Juvenal, 8 a^. 10. 55. -- genua
incerare Deorum. But because incero signifies to cover with wax, some hold,
that they waxed-on their Petitions on the knees of their Statues. Turnebus lib.
1. cap. 17. says, That they he^d the Statues with such assiduous fervency, ut
sudore incrassarentur, and videretur illis quas^ cera superposita. Were it
possible this place should still remain unperfect, after its having passed
through so many learned hands, I should guess the word insuccare, to make
moist, more apt to the sense, especially to the interpretation of the most
learned Turnebus.

159. Nor Gymnick game.] Gymnad^s, from (...), Exerceo; or rather from (...),
Nu^o. For they which exercised these Games were all naked. These were invented
by Lycaon of Arcadia. And the Spartan Vi^gins used to practice all manly
exercises naked. Alexand. ab Alex. lib. 2. c. 25.

208. As Creet to Rhea.] Thetis having now taken leave of her disguised son,
and being entered the waves, turns her eyes toward the Island, and beggeth of
it to perform its trust as justly, as Creet had done to Rhea: Who, when her
husband Saturn intended to murder all his children, being told that he should
have one, who would depose him from his throne, hid her son Jupiter in Dicte, a
Mountain of Creet, where the Corybantes her Priests, with their sounding
Brass, drowned the noise of the child's crying, Natalis Comes. lib. 2. c. 1.
Saturn was a great devourer of children, for to him the Carthagenians offered
their sons, Plato in Minoe. By Saturn was understood Time; by Jupiter, Heaven,
which is not subject to the power of Time: And therefore was it said, that
Jupiter was not devoured by Saturn. Gaffard in his Curiosities, part. 3. chap
11. sect 8. says, The ancient Hebrews stood in much dread of the malignancy of
the Planet Saturn. And the Chaldeans, who gave themselves over to the
worshipping of false gods, observing this Star to be hurtful, thought good by
some sacrifice to render it more propitious to them. And no sacrifice being
fitter than that on which it wrought its sad effects, they began to sacrifice
children to it under the name of Moloch. And this, he believes, was the
original of the Fable, why Saturn was said to devour his children. And the
Priests were said to have made a noise with their brass, to drown young
Jupiter's cry, from the custom which they had to make such noises when the
children passed through the fire to Moloch; which was no other then some
particular Daemon-rite. For MOLOCH signifies as much as BAAL. So we read,
Psalm. 106. 37. Mactarunt (...) s^^s and filias daemonii^, as Mr. Seldom
renders it, De Di^ Syris, cap. de MOLOCH; to whom, and Saturn, children were
the usual sacrifices, as he there shows.

The Third BOOK.
The Argument.
An Oath obliges the revengefull Greeks,
At Aulis took. The sly Ulysses seeks
The wished Achilles; who, disguised, does move
Unto the Conquest of his Mistress Love.
IN the mean while, the fatal love of Arms
Stirrs the fierce Greeks. The Princes give th'alarms,
Soliciting revenge. The Ilians crime
They thus enlarge; that in a quiet time,
No wars, the * [Helen
daughter of great Jove by them
Was injured, with the Laws of god and men.
How shall the common people fare, if thus
They venture first their injuries on us?
Thus all prepared for war; not alone The Inhabitants of Pelopon^esus.
those
Whom the two Oceans do almost enclose,
Or round Malea dwell, but also those
Who do inhabit where * The Hellespont.
Propontis flows.
Europe from Asia parting, and again
Those where the waves spread in a larger Main.
The wretched love of war warmed every breast.
Famed Temesa gave Brass; rigged Navies pressed
The waves of the Euboean shores; and in
Mycoena, strokes of hammered Armor ring.
Her Chariots Pisa sends for warlick use,
Nemaean-shades the skins of Beasts produce.
Cyrrha the Quiver fills; and for the Shields
Lerna gives Hides: the bold Acarnan yields
Bodies of Foot* so does the Aetolian; Horse,
In Troops from Argos sent, compl^at the force,
Fetched from Arcadia's fair now-emptied plains.
For war her famous breed Epirus trains.
Aonian Woods and Phocis Arrows lend:
Their Engines Pilos and Messana send.
No place left free. They Arms from Pillars tore,
There by their Ancestors hung long before.
The gifts to gods the melting flames devour,
Altered to serve a far severer Power.
No ancient shades on th'hills must longer grow:
Taygetus now and Othrys naked show.
Great Oaks for Ships, less Trees for Oars they trim:
Whole Woods do now on the vast Ocean swim.
Iron by skillful workmen is designed
For various use; the beaks of Ships to bind.
For Armor, and for Bridles, and for Nails
On arming-coats, set like to fishes scales;
For Swords, for Darts, which, dipped in poison, throw
Death in the wounds they give. The whetstones grow
With sharpened weapons thin. Some pieces bring
In forms for Bows, some Bullets for the Sling
Prepare, some harden Stakes, some places gave
To Helmets where th'advanced Plumes should wave.
Among these tumults Thessalie remains
Alone unactive, and alike complains
That Peleus was too old, his son too young.
All-emptied Greece, now mad with fury, throng
To Ships, the crowded shores do seem to glow,
And sensible of heat the billows show:
The justled waves seem to present a storm;
The Ships that raise it on the swellings born.
Under their weight the Ocean almost fails,
And all the winds scarce serve to fill their sails.
At first the waves by rocky Aulis bore
The swarming Greeks, the much affected shore
Of Cynthia. There loud Proteus
Caphareus shows
His head, and back to th'waves, their clamors throws.
When all these swarms of sails came to his sight,
Thrice he presaged a sad prodigious night.
Here first Troy's fatal foes-united are,
And all by Oath oblige themselves for war,
Until the Sun had passed one annual course,
And Greece appeared in her united force.
Into a formed Army they compose
Their differing people, and a General chose.
So the wild multitude that shades enjoys,
Enclosed with toils, frighted with fire and noise,
Fly to imprisoning valleys, and admire
To see their Mountain lessen by the fire.
There the wild multitude know equal fear.
The Boar, the Woolf, together with the Bear
Imprisoned lie: the fearful Hearts by them
The fettered Lions in the toils contemn.
Though both the Atridae with the Army came,
And Diomede ambitious of great fame,
With Sthen'lus, and Antilochus appears
More mindful of the war than of his years.
Though Ajax brought his Shield of seven hides,
In compass like a swelling Mountain sides.
Though sly Ulysses was among the rest;
Yet of Achilles all a want expressed.
His name brings joy. He must be Hector's fate,
And ruin of great Priam and his State.
"For whose first steps but his were taught to go
"In the Aemonian Valleys thorough Snow?
"Whose youth such rigid principles was taught?
"His line from Heaven so directly brought?
"For whom, but him, such care would Thetis have,
"To arm his fair limbs with the Stygian wave?
This through the Camp while all the Greeks proclaim,
The Captains joy, though vanquished, at his fame.
So in Phlegraean fields when the gods were
Assembled, and great Mars assumed his Spear,
Pallas her Snakes, his Bow Apollo took;
Yet Nature still wore an affrighted look,
Till Jove himself loud storms and thunders raised,
And from the clouds Aetnaean lightning blazed.
Whilst here the Captains by their Troops enclosed
Consulted on those ways to peace opposed,
Protestlaus, who most active showed
In The War, and on whom fate was first bestowed,
Thus unto Calchas said; Thestorides,
Sure thou forgettest Phoebus Oracles:
For when can thy inspired lips relate
Better then now the hid decrees of Fate?
Do thou not see how all amazed admire
Aeacides, the object of desire?
The Calydonian Prince now all contemn,
Slight either-Ajax too, and me with them.
But since our valor now is scorned thus,
Both Mars and ruined Troy shall speak for us.
For him, the Princes all neglected are,
And he is honored as a god of war.
Speak quickly, (or else why should we allow
Those sacred wreaths on thy adorned Brow?)
Where larks the Youth? for now, as men report,
He Is not in Chiron 's Cave, nor Peleus Court.
Speak then: if ever, now let thy desires
Wish for Prophetic breast-inspiring fires.
Thou shall secure from war and danger rest,
Those gentle Wreaths with Helmets never be pressed.
Be happy in th'esteem which all will ow
To thee, if thou to us Achilles show.
Calchas this while his eyes does wildly throw,
And his pale looks the god's approach do show.
His cheeks straight glow with heat: nor can he find
Or friends, or tents; so wild he is and blind.
Now in the sky great troops of gods he spies,
Now from the Fowls he takes his Auguries,
Now asks the Fates below their hid designs,
And then consults the bright perfumed Shrines,
Snatches the tops of the ascending fires,
And with the holy fume himself inspires.
His hairs erected stood: in no one place
His neck kept fixed, nor keep his feet one pace.
Tired at length and trembling, a voice broke
Through the opposing fury, and thus spoke.
Whither do thou Chiron 's loved charge now bear,
Thetis, with Woman's craft? Return him here.
He Is due to us: though waves obey thy will,
Yet Phoebus too a god my breast does fill.
Where do thou hide the Trojan 's fate? I see
The Cyclades and shores sought out by thee,
Where thou of thy unworthy theft art cased,
The guilty Land of Lycom^des pleased.
O crime! those shameful flowing garments tear,
And be not subject to a Mother's fear.
Ah me! now from mine eyes, he is ravished quite,
What guilty Virgin's that salutes my sight?
Then staggering, by his strength and rage forsook,
He sunk down by the Altar whilst he shook.
Then to Ulysses, Diomede thus said,
This business now seems to require our aid.
For I shall never refuse to go with thee,
If the design does with thy thoughts agree.
Though he in Tethys hollow sounding caves
Were hid, or wrapped by Nereus in his waves,
Thou 'dst find him out. Let thy care be expressed
From that great spring of counsels in thy breast.
For, which of all our Prophets can deny
Thy judgment equal to their Prophecy?
Ulysses pleased, replied, What thou would do,
Great Jove assist, and's blue-ey'd Daughter too.
We run a hazard, 't is an act of weight
To arm Achilles; and a shame as great.
If our design be frustrated by fate:
Yet what the Grecians wish, I Will venture at,
And with me, the Peleian Prince I Will bring,
Else Calchas tongue did uninspired sing.
The Grecians shout: and Agam^mnon too,
Excites them unto that they meant to do.
The Council then dissolved, the Grecians rise,
And with a gentle murmur show their joys:
So at the night's approach, calm Hybla sees
Return, with buzzing noise, her Laden bees.
Now Ithacus a prosperous gale implores
To fill his sails, the youths too ply their Oars.
Far off Achilles his disguise concealed,
Who to Deidamia now must be revealed.
She, though the crime were hid, did fear express,
And thought her Sisters at the thing might guess.
For as Achilles stood among the bright
Fair charming troup, (his blushes put to flight)
He chose his loved companion, (though the fair
Enamored troup for him had equal care)
And practiced the unknown designs of love,
Which in her breast could no suspicion move.
With haste, he follows her from place to place:
His eyes no business find but in her face,
Repeating looks; he uses to abide
A close companion by her lovely side:
Sometimes about her, flowery wreaths he strows,
And sometimes at her, harmless javelins throw.
Now chants he Lays, that Chiron taught, and brings
Her courted fingers to the warbling string;
Straight his obliged lips to hers are fixed,
And praises with a thousand kisses mixed.
She gladly learns how Pelions top was raised,
And who Achilles was, and hears amazed
His name, with his achievements of great things,
Whilst he himself, himself there present sings.
She teaches then his gentler arms to pull,
In long extended threads, the following wool.
Settling the shaken distaffe in its place,
And his full voice admires and strong embrace:
Observes his looks on none but her were fixed,
And all his words with long-fetcht sighs were mixed.
Now going to reveal his flame, she flies
With Virgin-fears, and his design denies.
So Heaven's great Ruler in his tender years,
Kissed his affected Sister without fears:
But Nature's laws being observed no more,
She fears that love, she blushed not at before.
At length, his Mother's craft he did disclose,
A grove there was, whose top to Heaven arose.
Sacred to Bacchus, in whose shades by nights
The women paid their Trieterick rites.
Whole herds they slaughtered, spears from Trees they rent,
And to the God their grateful furies sent.
The Law forbad all Males: yet that command
Was given anew. Besides, a Priest did stand
To watch the bounds, left they might be defiled
By some rash man. At this Achilles smiled.
Before the troup he with the Ensign goes,
And in unpractiz'd ways his arms bestows.
Such as became the sex, and helped the tales
His Mother told. Wonder on all prevails
To see Deidamia's self excelled, as she
From her fair Sisters challenged victory.
But from his snowy neck, that so excelled,
When the Hart's skin was thrown with Ivy held,
His shining brows with purple ribbands bound,
And tossed his spear with Vines and Ivy crowned.
The troup then all amazed the sacrifice
And rites forsook; on him to feed their eyes.
So Bacchus looked, whilst he had yet resigned
To Theban luxuries his loosened mind,
Then leaves soft wreaths, his green spear head's with steel,
And now his nobler force the Indians feel.
Now Cynthia, in her Silver Chariot rode
On heaven's highest road, when the dull God
Of Sleep pays visits to the earth, and flings
Over the silent world his heavy wings;
The tired Company then weary grown,
Lay down to rest. Achilles all alone
Thus with himself begins, How long shall I
Endure a Mo^hers fearful subtilty?
And in this soft esseminate Prison lose
My noblest thoughts? May not my right hand chose
One armed dart, nor more pursue wild game?
Does not Sp^rchios still for me complain?
And prom^s^d hairs? Must I for nothing look,
That Is brave, who such a Master so forsook?
Or to the shades do all believe me fled,
And Chiron mourns me without issue dead:
My darts and bow are now employed by thee,
Patroclus too, and horses trained for me;
Whilst I brandish a spear with Ivy dressed,
Or learn to spin, I blush while't is confessed.
Why do thou hide thy passionate design,
And in dissimulation bury time?
Shall still these flaming words consume thy breast,
And leave thy sex and passion unexprest?
This said, and pleased with the conc^aling time
Of night, sleep too assisting his design,
She now no more his feigned embraces found,
Whilst he by force his burning wishes crowned.
The Stars all smiled, whilst they the wantons spied,
And Cynthia, her bright horns with blushes di'd.
The Woods and Hills rang with her noise; when all,
Roused from their sleep, thought it the signal call.
At which the ecchoing grove with clamours shakes,
Whilst he again, his wreathed Thyrsus takes:
But his afflicted mistress first thus chear^,
'T is I am he (why do thou show these fears?)
Born of the Oceans Queen, who did bestow
My breeding on me in Thessalian snow.
Nor had I e're endured this soft disguise,
Had not I first been charmed by thine eyes.
It was thy power besides, that did command
A Timbrel and a Distaff in this hand.
Why do thou weep, since to the Ocean's King,
Thou art a Child, that must Heaven issues bring?
And ere thy Father shall disturb my joy,
Storms and unvanquish'd flames shall all destroy.
I am not turned a woman quite with this,
But yet awhile conceal this stealth of bliss?
At this, new fears amazed the affrighted Queen,
Though still suspicious of him she had been.
Trembling when he came near, now she feared more,
When he confessed what she believed before.
Should she her Father tell, (what should she do?)
And with her self ruin the loved Youth too?
For his dear sake, she rather chose to be
By silence made as deep in guilt as he.
By joint consent, one confident they chose,
To whom they did their secret theft disclose,
Her womb now swells: and, all her heavy time,
She cunningly conceals her shame and crime.
Till Nature's just designed term did come,
And kind Lucina did unload her womb.
ANNOTATIONS on the Third Book of STATIUS his ACHILLEIS.
STatius, in the beginning of his third Book, (according to the Paris-Edition,
for that of Amsterdam makes but two) represents Greece preparing war against
Troy, and declaring their affection to it. This was the first war we read the
Greeks were engaged in, Thucyd. lib. 1. And therefore it is the less wonder
that they loved war, seeing they understood it not. Since also we have
monstrous examples of some, that have been weary of peace, giving it no better
a name than Idleness, and making it the scandal of a Nation. When it is
wanted, it will be esteemed. Such is the fatal folly of frail nature. Sylla
told King Bocchus, that the gods advised him, when he chose any peace rather
then war. And when some disliked the effects of the Treaty, Salust Bell. Jug.
excellently says, Scilicet ignari rerum humanarum, quae fluxae and mobiles
saepius in adversa mutantur. Expectation of better is the great cousenage of
this world, at least the attempts and profession of it.

10. Two Oceans.] Peloponnesus, now called Morea, has the Ionian Sea on the
right hand, and the Aegean on the left, being a Peninsula, in whose isthmus
stood the City of Corinth.

11. Malea.] A Promontory in Laconia, between which and Taenarus is the
Laconian Bay, Strab. lib. 8.

16. Temesa.] A City of the Brutians, famous for Brasse-mines; after called
Tempsa, Plin. l. 3. c. 5. There is a Town of this name in Cyprus also famous
for Brass. One of these afforded matter for the stately Horse of Domitian,
Statius Silv. lib. 1. in Equo. Domit.

Et quis se totis Temese dedit hausta metallis. Upon which large and stately
Statue, shrines
The City Tem^sa's exhausted Mines.
17. Eubaea^ shore.] Euboea assisted with ships, being an Island opposite to
the Continent of Attica, Boeotia, and Locris, extending from Sunium as far as
Thessalie, Strab. lib. 10.

18. Mycena] A City so near Argos, that, as Strabo says, their names were
oftentimes promiseuously used for one another. It was once the head of Argia;
distant from Argos but fifty furlongs, Str^b. lib. 8. and Pausan. in Corinth.
It received its name (as Etepha^us says) from the handle of a Sword, which the
Greeks call (...). The word signifleth properly a Musbrain. It is used also for
the lower part of the handle of a Sword, which is like a Mushrum. Mycena had
its name from hence, because Perseus letting the handle of his Sword fall
there, was commanded by Mercury there to build that City.

19. Pisa.] A City near the River Alpheus, where the Olympic Games were
celebrated, seated in Elis, a Region, which with Messena takes up the West-part
of Peloponnesus. Here Salmoneus once reigned, whose ambition and punishment is
thus described, Aen. 6. 585.

Vidi and crudeles dantem Salmonea poenas,
Dum flammas Jovis and sonitus imitatur. Olympi.
Quatuor hic invectus equis, and lompada quassans,
Per Graiuin populos mediaeque per Elidis urbem
Ibat ovans, Divuinque sibi poseebat honorem:
Demens, qui nimbos and non-imitabile fulmen
Ae^e and comipedum cursu fimularat equorum.
At Pater omnipotens densa. inter nubila telum
Conto^fit (non ille faces nec fumea tedis
Lumina) praecipitemque immani turbine adegit.
I also saw Salmoneus cruel fate
In tortures held, who strove to imitate
Jove's lightning, and the noise that heaven makes.
By four Steeds drawn, a sputtring Torch he shakes,
And through fair Elis crowded streets he drives,
Ambitious of the gods prerogatives;
Mad man to think, that Flame which thought exceeds,
To imitate with Brass and trampling Steeds.
But through the cracking clouds enraged Jove
A fatal rushing Dart whirled from above,
(Not Brands, nor smoaky Torches) and him cast
Headlong by that unimitable blast.
20 Nemea.] A Wood of Achaie, where Hercules slew a Lion. Servius says, Nemca
est vicina sylva Thebis, in qu^ Hercules interemit Leonem. But this is a great
error in the learned Servius. For Nemea is a Forest between Cleona and Phlius,
Strab. lib. 8. and Thucyd. l. 5. which Towns are far distant from Thebes, which
is in Boeotia.

21. Cyrrha.] A City of Phocis, in the Corinthian Bay, Strab. lib. 9. Pausanias
in Phocicis, makes it all one with Crissa; Pliny, not. Here Apollo was
worshipped: And therefore the people happily said to have delighted in Arrows.

22. Lerna gives hides.] Near Argos is a Lake of this name, where Hercules slew
the Hydra, notwithstanding that in the room of one head lopped off, three new
ones still sprouted forth. Servius believes, that in this place there was a
swift River, which overflowed the neighboring Towns, and being stopped in one
place, broke forth in many others with greater impetuousnesse: Which mischief
Hercules remedied, by damming up the whole Lake. There is a Town also, as
Britannicus says, of this name.

23, 24. Acarnan -- with the Aetolian.] Aetolia bordereth on Phocis, Acarnania
on Aetolia, betwixt which runs the river Achelous. The Bay of Ambracia
parts Acarnania from Epirus, Strab. l. 9.

Argos.] Here Juno had a Temple, whence she was called Juno Argiva. It is
commonly placed in Maps a great way from the Sea; but Pausanias in Corinthiacis
says, It is but forty furlongs off; which Thucydides also confirms, lib. 5.
where he says, that the Argives fearing the Lacedaemonians, and renewing
League with the Athenians, raised large Walls from their City down to the
Seashore, to the end, that if they were shut up by Land, they might, by the
Athenian's help, receive in fitting provisions by Sea.

25. Arcadia.] A Region in the midst of Peloponnesus, Strab. lib. 8. remote
every way from the Sea; famous for pasture, and much more, in having been the
subject of so many excellent Pens. For which cause it needs no more of mine.

26. Epirus.] A Country bordering on Greece, on the East divided from Achaia by
Achelous, on the West by the Acroceraunian Mountains, which lie upon the
Adriatic shore; on the North it is bounded by Macedonia: Its South Side is
washed by the Ionian Sea. It was first named Molossia; afterward Chaonia, from
Chaon brother of Helenus; now, Albania. Once it was full of Cities and
Inhabitants; but after it was vanquished by the Romans, it long retained the
marks of a conquered Nation. Among other things it was famous for swift Horses,
Servius in Virg. Georg. 3. That incomparable Poet (Georg. 1.) also ascribes
the same to it, -- Eleadum palmas Epiros equarum. Ep^rus Breed by swiftness
gains
The Garland in the Olympic Games.
Servius in loc. out of Pliny, gives this reason of their swiftness, that
they stale in their courses; which is not only ridiculous, but impossible.
Georg. 3. 273. The Poet relates the fond opinion of Mares generating with the
wind, which Servi^s also out of Varro conirmeth. In these latter days, Epirus
gained its greatest fame, by being the place for which the generous Scanderbeg
performed so many glorious actions.

27. Aonian shades, and Phocis.] Both Regions of Boeotia. The Phocians inhabit
the East Side of Para^ssus the Muse's Hill, Sirah. 1. 9. Aonia also had a
Fountain dedicated to the Muses: Whence Juvenal Sat. 7.

-- aptusque bibendis
Fontibus Aonidum.
28. Pyles and Messan^.] Pylus is a City of Messenia, on the Promentory
Coryphastum. Thucydides, lib 4. relating the advice of Demosthenes to fortify
Pylus, takes occasion to show its distance from Sparta to be four hundred
furlongs, and that it stands in the Territory, called by the Lacedaemonians
Coryphastum, that once belonged to the Messenians. This was Nestor's Country.
There is also in Elis a City of this name; Strabo speaks of them both, and
also of a third in Arcadia, Messene, here called Messana, is a City and Region
on the West-part of Peloponnesus, consining on Arcadia, Elis, and ^aconia. But
Messana is a Town in Sicilie, near Pelorus. Strabo lib. 8. says, it was called
Zancle: Which name, Ibucydides, lib. 6. says, the Sicilians gave it, because
it was like a Sickle, which they called (...). After, it received the name of
Messana, from Anaxilas the Tyrant of Rhegium, being the name of the Country
whence he was anciently deseended; but others say from the Messenians, a people
in Achaia.

34. Taygetus] A Mountain of Laconia, beginning at the Sea, and reaching up
toward Arcadia as far as Lacedaemon, Sirah. lib. 8. It was sacred to Bacchus,
as Servius says on these words, Georg. 2. -- et virginibus Bacchata Lacaenis
Taygeta. -- And on Taygetus top, where all
Laconian Virgins pay their Bacchanalls.
Cicero de divinat. lib. 1. says, The Lacedaemonians being warned by
Anaximander to leave their houses, they were suddenly thrown down by an
Earthquake, with part of the mountain Taygetus.

45. Stakes] The Ancients made use of stakes in war, sharpened at one end, and
hardened in the fire, Virg. Aen. 11.

Stipitibus ferrum sudibusque imitantur obustis. 57. Aulis] An Haven (or an
Island, as Servius says, in Aen. 4.) of Baeotia, where the Greeks made their
great rendezvous, and took an Oath to destroy Troy, or never to return, Senec.
Agam. 170.

Cruore ventos emimus, and bellum nece
and v. 172.

Non est soluta prospero classis Deo.
Ejecit Aulis impias portu rates.
War and the obliged Winds by blood were bribed.
Not a propitious Power was their guide,
When from the Port of Aulis first they fled,
And their swelled sails the impious Navy spread.
This blood was Iphigenia's, who was sacrificed to Diana, because Agamemnon her
father had killed a Heart which the goddess loved. Much contention there is
concerning her transformation; Most agree she was turned into a Hind.
Ludovicus Coppellus in his Diatriba de vot^ Jephtae, compares the condition of
Agamemnon and Jephtha together, and makes them contemporary, and fetches the
name Iphigenia from Jephtha, quasi Iephthigenia; and conceives the fable of
her transmutation arose from the story of Iepthah's daughter wandering on the
Mountains. Of this sacrifice speaks Nazianzen, Orat. 20. And Eusebius, de
praeparat, Evang. has much of human sacrifices; which are said to have been
performed by diverse Authors. The Fable of Agamemnon's daughter is set down by
Hyginus, lib. 1. cap. 98. Ovid, Metamorph. lib. 13. Euripides, in Iphigenia,
Seneca in Agam. Dictys Cretensis, and many others.

79. Antilochus] the son of Nestor, famous for his actions against Troy.
Statius here gives him this character,

-- nec cogitet annos
Antilochus.
This, Britannicus interprets of his youth, and his doing actions, that such
years as his were not wont to produce. But had he remembered, that his Father
had been at the hanting of the Bore with Meleager, Ovid. Metamorph. lib. 8. fab
4. and had already lived two ages, when he came against Troy, Homer, Il. a 250.
he might with more reason, have believed Juvenal, concerning the age of
Antilochus* Stat. 10. 250.

-- Oro, parumper
Attendas, quantum de legibus ipse queratur
Fatorum, and nimio de stamine, cum vidci acris
Antilochi barbam arden^em, cum quaerit ab omni,
Quisquis adest socius, cur haec in tempora duret,
Quod facinus dignu^ tam long^ admiserit aevo.
Hearken a little, how old Nestor cries
Against the Fates, and too kind destinies;
The beard of brave Antilochus, while he
Upon the funeral pile does flaming see.
Of every one, demanding what strange crime
Prolonged his age to such a wretched time:
85, 86. He must be Hectors fate, And ruin of great Priam] The death of
Hector, I have above set down. The ruin of Priam is justly attributed to
Achilles, in that he begat Pyrrhus, who killed him before the Altar, Virg. Aen.
2 554.

Haec finis Priami fatorum; hic exitus illum
Sort tulit, Trojam incensam and prolapsa videntem
Pergama, tot quondam populis terri^que superbum
Regnatorem Asiae, jacet ingens littore truncus,
Av^ls^mque humeris caput, and sine nomine corpus.
This was of once great Priam the hard fate,
Troy seen on fire, and his ruined state;
He who over part of Asia late did reign,
Now headless lies, a corpse without a name.
We read of few examples, of so great alteration of fortune, unless this later
age has produced them; Who now perhaps, take such a prospect of their scorned
bodies, as Lucan, lib. 9. v. 10. gives pompey of his from Heaven,

-- Illic post quam se lumine vero.
Implevit, stellasque vagas miratur, and astra
Fix^ polis, vidit quanta sub nocte jacere^
Nostra dies, risitque sui ludibria trunci.
There with true light inspired, the wandering fires
And fixed stars for ever he admires.
The day sees wrapped in night, which us beguiles,
And at his scorned and headless carcass smiles.
95. Phlegraean fields] Phlegra is a valley in Thessaly, where the mountains
Pelion and Ossa stand, on which the Poets feigned the Giants ass^^^lted heaven.
There is another Phlegra in Campan^a, near Cume, which some make the stage of
that bold attempt, Strab* lib. 5. Some reduce it to a truth, as ridiculous as
the fable; How that a proud Nation, of monstrous dispositions, rather then
statures, warred against Hercules, and were here overthrown by help of
lightning, which arose by agitation of winds, the ear^h being sulfurous, and so
^ubject to burning: From whence it had the name Phlegra, (...) signifying to
burn. Cicero, in his Ca^o major, says the War of the Giants ^ith the gods, was
nothing but Men' rebelling against Nature. And Macrobius, Saturn, lib. 1. c.
20. describes them to have been an impio^s race of men, who, denying the gods,
were therefore said to attempt the dethroning of them, And their lower parts,
feigned to be like the winding voluminous tails of Dragons; signified their
indirect and crooked affections. Vadianus, in his learned Notes on Mela,
understands this Gig^ntomachia, of the enclosure of air in the earth, which
forces its way forth, as it were with defiance to Heaven, which is Jupiter;
And this glanceth at the Mythology, that Macrobius gives. Ovid, Fastor. 5.
thus expresses the Fable.

Terra feros partus immania monstra gigantes
Edidit, auturos in Jovis ire domum.
Mill manus illis dedit, and pro cruribu^ augues;
Atque ait, In magnos arma movete Deos*
Exstruere hi montes ad sidera su^m^ paraban,
Et magnum bello sollicitare Jovem.
Fulmina de coe^i jaculatus Jupiter arce,
Vertit in autores pondera vasta suos.
The Earth brought forth Giants to vastness grown,
That durst attempt to storm Jove's starry Throne.
A thousand hands she gave them, crooked thighs
Like snakes, and bids them war with Deities.
They hills on mountains pil'd to reach the stars,
Attempting Jove himself with impious wars.
From whose revenging hand, the lightning blazed,
Turning those mountains on them which they raised.
This, learned Bochartus accurately applies to the builders of the Tower of
Babel, Geograph. Sacr. lib. 1. c. 13.

175. Hybla.] A City in Sicily, abounding with flowers and bees. Senec^, O^dip.
601.

Nec vere stores Hybla tot medio creat. Nor does the fragrant Hybla bring
So many flowers in the spring.
213. Heaven's great Ruler.] Jupiter was bred with his sister Juno in Creet.
See on Book II, verse 208. He was said to marry her by reason of the
propinquity of the Fire and the Air; Hence also it was, that he could not match
with Thetis, that is, the Sea. He is called (...) in Greek, (...), from being
the gi^er of Life. Aulus Gellius, lib. 5. c. 12. Jovem Latin^ veteres a ju^^hdo
appellavere; eundemque alio vocabulo juncto Patrem dixerunt: Which by the
cutting off, and altering some Letters, is Jovispater* as Marspater, or
Marspiter. This, unimitable Seldom condemns, Syniagm. 2. de Ba^l and Belo.

219, 220, 221, A grove there was -- Sacred to Bacchus, in whose shades by
nights, The women paid their Trieterick rit^s.] I shall venture to be judged
impertinent, rather then neglect th^se two subjects, consecrated Groves, and
the Rites of Bacchus; Of these, with as much brevity as is possible. A Grove is
called in Latin, I ucus, quod non luceat; non, quod sint ibi lumina causa
religionis, ut quidam volunt, as Servius, in Aen. 1, And in Georg. 3. he
affi^meth, that all Groves were consecrated to Diana; Perhaps, it was generally
believed so, by reason that she was reputed the Goddess of the Woods. For
Servius certainly, could not forget that verse, Aen. 7.

-- Et viridi gaudens Feronia lucs. On which both himself and Sabinus relate,
that the grove of this Goddess, Feronia, being burnt down, and the people
going to carry away her Statues, immediately it sprung up again, fresh and
green. Suetonius in Augusto, speaks of a grove, sacred to Liber or Bacchus,
where Octavius consulted concerning his son; These Groves were used for Temples
by the Germans, Alexand. ab Alex. lib. 4. c. 17. And Tacitus, de morib.
Germanor, cap. 9. says, Lucos ac nemora consecrant, Deorumque nominibus
appellant secretion illud quod sola reverentia vident: A description of these
groves, fee in Seneca, Oedip. act. 3. and in our Poet, Thebaid 4. I have in
some of these Notes, given short intimations, that there was nothing in the
worship of Demons, which was not an imitation of the worship of the true God:
Larger proofs whereof, time perhaps may favor my intentions to produce. Among
other things, Groves will appear to have had such an original; Learned Mr.
Mede, on Josh. 24. 26. shows that the Jews had their praying places, besides
their Synagogues, out of a notable place of Epiphanius, a Jew bred and born in
Palae^^ine. Which, he says, were open places, and calls them Proseuchas. Of
which Juvenal, Sat. 3. 296.

-- In qua te quaero proseucha? On which words, the Scholiast and Lubine say,
Proseucha signifies a place, where Beggars use to inhabit. For (...) is Orare,
to beg or pray. Yet the Scholiast immediately adds, Est Proseucha, locus
Judaeorum, ubi orant; Mr. Mede also cites a place of Philo Judaeus, in his de
legate. ad Caium, where he commends the exceeding clemency of Augu^ius Caesar,
in allowing the Jews their Proseucha's. But he denies not but that, under
that name, Philo comprehends Synagogues also; Politian Miscell. cap. 30.
faith, the word is used, pro Templo and Synagoga Judaeorum. Some held the Jews
had no Synagogues before the Captivity: and their reason, perhaps, is the
silence of the Scripture, which mentions them not, till the Jews were
returned from Babylon: This Mr. Mede takes notice of, and lets it pass for
current; But as for Proseucha, or consecrated Groves, he proves them to be
near as ancient as Joshuah: showing the Oak of Shechem, to have been such an
one, and not a single Tree, as the common interpretation rendieth it. That
Trees were in these Proseucha's, may be gathered from another place of Philo,
cited by the same worthy Author, where relating the outr^ge of the Gentiles, at
Alexandria, against the Jews, there dwelling in the time of Caius, he faith,
Of some of the Proseucha's, they cut down the Trees, others, they demolished to
the very foundations. This also is implied by that of Juvenal, Sat. 6. 542.
Arcanam Iud^^ tremens mendicat a^ aurem,
Interpres legum Solymarum, and magna sacerdos
A^boris.
And Sat. 3. 12. he complains, that the Jews had leave to live in the wood,
which had been sacred to the Mases. Whence this joining of Trees and Jews
together, but from their having their Pros^ucha's ordinarily set with them? I
could set down many Texts of Scripture, which directly distinguishes between
these Groves and Temples, as Psalm. 74. 7. though not rendered so in the Vulgar.
Translation. So Genesis 13. 4. it is said, that Abraham went unto the place of the
altar which he had made at first, and there called on the name of the Lord.
Which is explained by Genesis 21. 33. a place express to our purpose, And Abraham
planted a grove in B^ersheba, and called there on the name of the Lord, the
everlasting God. Luke 6. 12. we meet with one of these praying-places. There it
is said of Jesus; (...), He went out into a mountain to pray, and continued
there all night p^^ying to God. So Beza rendieth the place, Abii^ in montem ad
precandum, and pernoctavit illic preca^s Deum, which certainly will not seem a
just interpretation to any eyes: but it would be much more genuinely translated
in proseucha Dei, than, taking (...) for a Genitive case of the Object, in
precatione ad Deum. And in this sense, witho^t doubt, the word is to be
understood, Act. 16. 16. (...), euntibus nobis ad prose^cham, or locum
^rationis. Beza here also translateth it ad precationem. But v 13. it is said,
that Paul and his company went on the Sabbath day out of the city Philippi by a
river side, where prayer was wont to be made. If the word (...) be here taken
for prayer, nevertheless it imports a place where it was used, and that by a
river's side: And it could not be a Temple, because they went out of the city
to it, and Temples always stood in Cities. Therefore ^^ judge the word most
properly to be taken for a place, that is, a Proseuchs, or grove. These Dae^ons
taught the Gentiles, in imitation of the Jews, to use such places of devotion.
H^rein abominable ceremonies were practice, as frequently appears in
Scripture, and therefore were they forbidden. See Isa. 57. 5. Hos. 4. 13. Ezekiel
6. 13* Thus much of Groves. Now for Baechus and his rit^s, I shall first set
down the Fable, which has more reflection on the truth than is generally
conceived. The Poets say, that Semele desiring to embrace Jupiter as Juno was
wont, and being burnt for her ambitious appetite; Jupiter caught his little
imperfect Infant from within her, and having sewed it up within his own thigh,
kept it there till the time was complete that it should have lien in the womb
Then issuing forth, he was bred up by Nymphs, and became the inventer of Wine.
Of which, see Eusebius de praeparat. Evang. lib. 2. cap. 2. who there speaks
of another Bacchus the son Jupiter and Proserpine, much antienter than the son
of Semele. But this is rather from others fancies, than from proofs either of
his own or theirs. As little will it be necessary to take notice of the
endeavors of Macrobius, to make Bacchus all one with Apollo, Sat. l. 1. c. 8.
Which opinion is condemned by Easebius, de praepar. Evang. l. 3. c. 13. It will
be only in some small manner convenient, to take some slight notice of some
Physical applications of the Fable. Bacchus, they say, was feigned to proceed
from his father's thigh, because Vines prosper best in a warm soil. His lips
were anointed with Honey by the daughter of Aristaeus; for the Ancients held
Wine a friend to Eloquence. He continues still young; for Wine preserves the
heart from cares, which are a greater cause of wrinckles and gray hairs than
age. Hence also was he called Liber. Other reasons of which name, see in
Plutarch, Quaest. Roman qu. 25. Many other appellations of his see in Ovid
Metam. l. 4. Aelian V^r. hist. l. 3. c. 41. Alex. ab Alex. l. 6. c. 4. Natal.
Com. l. 5. c. 13. Pier. Hieroglyph. l. 27. Gyrald. Synt^gm 8. All which, having
no relation to the truth, I forbear to meddle with. For declaring who Bacchus
was, and what his rites and ceremonies were, I hold it req^isite to show who
Saturn the father of Jove was, by whom Bacchus was begotten; and herein I shall
wholly follow learned Bochartus. Saturn he accurately proves to be Noah. For,
as the Scripture styleth a Soldier, a man of war, Josh. 5. 4. a murderer, a
man of blood, 2 Samuel 16 7. etc so it sty^eth Noah only, a man of the earth,
that is, an Husbandman: Which title Saturn had, and was, as Noah, believed the
first planter of Vineyards. Therefore to him they attribute the use of the
Reap-hook, and picture him with one, Plutarch Quaest. Romans 42. Macrob. Saturn
l. 1. c. 7, and 10. And as if Noah, by his being a man of the earth, had indeed
married the earth, Saturn was said to be the husband of Rhea, which seems to
be derived of (...), to flow, and signified the earth, which is the sea^ of
moisture. For, according to ancient Philosophers, all Rivers are generated, and
have their courses under ground. This Virgil shows, Georg. 4. who says, That
when Aristaeus was admitted into his mother's kingdom, Omnia sub magna labentia
flumina terra
Spectabat diversa locis.
-- There under ground he spied
How several ways the wandering Rivers glide.
Macrobius Saturn l. 1. c. 10. deriveth Saturn's name a sa^u, to wit, from
planting or sowing. Satur, that is, plenteous or abundant, is nearer to it; and
Sator, that is, a Sower or Planter. From Noah's being drunk, Bochartus lib. 1.
cap. 1. brings the use of the Saturnalia; and inserteth a pretty observation
concerning his cursing of Cham, because he had seen his secret parts. The like
the Heathens held proceeded from Saturn. For Minerva having stricken Tire^^as
blind for seeing her naked, thus excuses her self to his mother, Callimach.
Hymn. -- non per me, perdidit ille o culos:
Nec mihi luminibus pueros orbare volupt^s,
Ast a falcigero lex Seen l^t^ jubet.
Vt poena graviore luat, te^eraria quisquis
Ausit in invitos lumina far deos.
'Twas not by me: nor do I take delight
Or pleasure to rob any of their sight.
The Law from Saturn came, That he should be
Punished, who e're the unwilling gods should see.
For this, Actaeon suffered. And to this Law Propertius alludeth, lib. 3. ^^eg.
12. speaking of the Golden age, Non fuerat nud^^ poena videre deas. The son of
Noah or Saturn which was cursed, was Cham or Ham; who, by reason of his being
the youngest, or rather because cursed by his father, inhabited the sandy and
barren parts of Africa, where he was worshipped by the name of Jupiter Hammon,
or Ham. Now Ham had a son or grandson called Nimrod, who was all one with
Bacchus, as Bochartus, without any question, concludes, lib. 1. cap. 2. For
Bacchus is the same with BAR-CHUS, that is, the son of Chu^^ or C^sh, as Nimrod
was, Genesis 10. 8. So Darmesek and Dammesek is all one with Damascut. One of
Bacchus his ancient names is (...), which signifies a mighty Hunter, as Nimrod
was, Genesis 10. 9. And this is the reason why some held Bacchus the same with
Pluto, Pluto enim defunctorum ^nimss venatur and captat. Bacchus was also
called (...), from (...), an Hind's Calf, because himself and his frantic
adorers were usually clad with Stags skins. This also has relation to Nimrod's
being termed an Hunter: And Bochartus shows Nimrod and Nebrod to be all one.
Bacchus was said to be born of Jupiter's thigh: Now some will not have (...) to
signify a thigh, but to be the name of an Hill where he was born, by Nysa in
India; so Mela, lib. 3. cap. 7. and Pliny, lib. 6. cap. 21. Others conceive,
it signifies the side of a mountain, as Judge 19. 1. (...), in the thighs, or
sides, of mount Ephr^im. And 2 King. 19. 23. (...), to the thighs, or sides, of
Libanus. So perhaps Bacchus was said to be born out of his father's thigh,
because he was born on the side of some mountain, not that of India. But I much
rather believe this part of the Fable arose from mistake of the original word
(...), femur, that is, the thigh, or the leg, which the Scripture uses for a
modest expression of the place of generation, as Mr. Mede teaches on Genesis 49.
10. where he interprets also the words, [from between his feet] to signify
his posterity. Genesis 46. 26. it is said, All the souls that came with Jacob into
Egypt, which came out of his loins, etc. And Exodus 1. 5. All the souls which
came out of the loins of Jacob. But in both places the Hebrew signifies thigh,
as the Marginall Notes in our Bibles show* And learned Bochartus says, the
Phoenician words, which properly signify the thigh, signify also the
generating parts. Thus Bacchus his proceeding from the thigh of Jupiter,
according to the Oriental expressions, (from whence this Fable came) implies
no more, than that Bacchus was the son of Jupiter. Now I shall briefly consider
their Rites, which will appear the same with the worship of Heroes and Demons.
Jupiter the son of Saturn or Noah was the same that was named Baal or Belus, as
Bochartus shows, Geogr. sacrae. page 189. Bell was the proper ^h^ldaean word,
Baal the Phoenician, as the most learned Seldom says, Syntagm. de Baal and
Belo; both which names (as he shows) are promiscuously used by Fl. Josephus.
The same illustrious Author proves Baal to be Jupiter; and withal makes it
appear, that Baal was a general name for all the gods of the Gentiles. And
Belus might be taken for Heaven: and so perhaps the Altar which Manasseh raised
to the host of heaven was erected to Baal or Bell. Eusebius de praepar. Evang
l. 1. c. 10. says, Beel-sames signifies the Lord of Heaven, who by the Greeks
^^ called (...), Jupiter. As the Altars of Baal which Josiah threw down Were in
high places, so Delrius in Senecam. Hercul. Oct. cites a place of Herodotus,
to prove that sacrifices were performed on the Tops of high mountains. Omnis
autem mons, says he, Jovis mons dicitur, quoniam mos fuit antiquorum ut
supreme Deorum in sublimi l^co sacrificarent. This he cites out of Melanthes,
that every mountain was called the mountain of Jupiter, because it was the
custom of the ancients, to sacrifice to the most high God in an high place. Now
as the Babylonian Bell, differed from the Phoenician Baal. or Bell, so Jupiter
Hammon, from Jupiter Capitolinus, and others. St. Paul, 1 ^or. 8. 5. says,
Sunt dii multi, and domini multi. Which Mr. Seldom allows to be many Bells;
or, as the Europaeans speak, many Joves. And thus the name of Belus; was
conferred on many; But that -Baal or Jupiter who was the son of Noah or Saturn,
was the first we read of, that was worshipped; though the worship of Ba^ls, was
the worship of Heroes or Demons; To which we now descend. And that it may
appear most reasonable, to apply this worship to the most early persons, that
we read of in the World; two things are to be thought on, 1. That the Devil no
sooner fell from Heaven, but he began to act against God: as we see in his
tempting of Eve, 2. That he found, all men would be apt to ado^e most, what
they knew here, and from which they received most benefit; Which was the sol^
reason, that Plato and other Heath^^s give for the worshipping of Heroes. And
in the time of Noah, there being none besides him and his sons to leave
beneficial directions for the succeeding age, it is likely, that they were the
first, who, by the Devil's means, were worshipped as Heroes: To whose worship,
the Demons jo^ned their own. That their worships were the same, Cicero
confirms, making Gods and Heroes all one* Divas, and cos qui coelestes
sempe^^habiti, colunto; and illos quos in coelum merita vocaverint, that is*
Those Gods which have ever been in Heaven, are to be worshipped; and those
also, whom their deserts have called th^ther. And again, By death they came to
be Gods; Apuleius also, Est superius aliud augustiu^que Daemonum genus, etc.
There is, says he, a more high and excellent kind of Demons, which never were
imprisoned in bodies: And these Pl^to be^ieved, were the directers of the minds
of men. And Plato in his C^atylus, gives the same Title un o He^oes;
affirming, that Hesiod and other Poets, say excellently well, that good men,
when they die, attain great Honor and Dignity, becoming (...), wise ones. And
in his de Republ. he would have all that die valiantly in the field, to be
worshipped as Demons, and all that (...) any thing profit^ble for their
Country; Cicero, also in his (...) S^^p. makes him say, that all which died in
the service of their Country, be rewarded with Divinity: On which, see
Macrobius, lib. 1. c. 4. There are some, that believe Serapis, whose Idol had a
Bushel on its head, was Joseph worshipped by the Egyptians; Mr. Mede, in his
Apostasy of the last times, cites Ph^lo Byblius, who in his Preface, to
Sanchuntathon, the ancient Phaenician Historian, says, The Phoenicians and
Egyptians, account those as the greatest Gods, who had found out any thing
profitable for the Life of man, or deserved well of any Nation. See Eusebius,
de praepar. Evang. l. 2. c. 6. about the middle; To these also, were Temples
erected as well as to their Daemon-gods. Thu^ydides, lib. 2. says, The
Athenians, who after the Persian War, inhabited the Country, altering their
resolutions, went to dwell in the City; but finding it not large enough to
^eceive them, they filled also the Temples and Chapels of the Heroes. Clemens
Alex. in his Protrept. and Strom. gives many the like instances, which I
forbear to add; Only showing, that the Demons joined their own worship to
that of Heroes, or deified men, as being the aptest course to draw men from the
worship of the true God; Religion, in the infancy of the World, being most
confirmed by visibilities: Which way God himself was pleased to allow, and the
Devils imitated. The worship of these Heroes, or Baalim, we find to have been
wholly Tragical, as Plutarch, de defectu oracu^or. describes it: ut
collig^mus ex utrorumque sacrificiis, orgiis and ritibus sacrorum multa admixta
funebria and lugubria cernentes. Now this* was an expression of sorrow for the
deceased; which grew a part of the religion. Wherefore we read, Lev. 19. 28. Ye
shall not make any cuttings in your flesh for the dead. So Lev. 21. 5. They
shall not make baldness on their heads, nor make any cuttings in their flesh.
This cutting off hair, we find often an expression of sorrow among the ancient
Poets; And its being forbidden by God, is a plain Demonstration, that it was
part of the Idolatrous worship of Demons or Heroes. Yet sometimes it was used
only, for an expression of sorrow, See Jer. 48. 37. To this effect, Saint
Augustine de civ. dei. l. 6. c. 10. q^oteth a place of Seneca's, not exstant in
his works ^^ ^ut praefixed by Lipsius in his Edition; who thus describes this
^^^latious and Tragical employment, Ille viriles sibi parts amputat, ille
lacertos secat. Se ipsi in temp^^s contrucidant, vulneribus suis and sanguine
supplicant. An exacter description, cannot be had of their cutting and lancing
themselves, and making their wounds their supplications. This sad manner of
worship, we may plainly see to be no other th^^ ^^at of Baal or Jove, as it is
expressed, 1 Kings 18 28. And th^^ cried aloud, (that is, the Priests of Baal)
and cut themselves after their manner with knives and lancers, till the blood
gushed out upon them. Thus have we seen the worship of of Baal or Jove; that
is, Cham or Ham the son of Noah; Whose ill mind, it is probable, was easily
enticed by Spirits, to cause himself to be worshipped when dead. We shall find
his son Bacchus to have had no other rites but those of his. I will not stand
to dispute when Bacchus lived, whom Clemens Alex. lib 1. Strom. places after
Moses. Neither will I set down the reasons of learned Vossius, who says he was
Moses. This would be too large a field to walk over, and at this time not
greatly to my purpose. I will only show, that his worship was the same with
that of Demons or Heroes, as Baal's or Jove's was. First, it will not be
amiss to take notice, that Bacchus had the title of Heroes given him, Plutarch
Quaest. Graec. 36. His name BACCHUS signifies something fu^ious. So he is also
called Maenoles, ^b insania: of which, see Eusebius, Praep. Evang. l. 2 c 3.
who expresses it according to Clemens Alex. in Protreptico, where he applies
the word Evan, which when they kept their Bacchanalta, they used to houl out,
being crowned with Serpents, to the first Serpent the Tempter, Et signum
Bacchicorum orgiorum est Serpens initiatus mysteriis. And, by the way, this
perhaps was the cause why in these rites they used to be crowned with Ivy:
This, being always young and flourishing, is the hieroglyphick of the Serpent,
who, by casting his skin, renews his youth. Bochartus shows, how Bacchus
his name comes a luctu, from the funera^l rites and howlings used in his
worship. But such were not proper to Bacchus, but common to all Demons or
Heathen gods. Alexand. ab Alex. lib. 3. c. 12. Non animali victima, nec hostia,
sed suo cruore sacrificant. And perhaps these sad ceremonies of wounding
themselves, were by some over-devout Zelots extended to human sacrifices, which
were offered to diverse Heroes, and among them to Bacchus, as Clemens Alex. in
Proireptico, reports from Dosidas and others. Eusebius Praep. Evang. l 4. c.
16. relates the same out of Porphyrius, where he mentions others besides
Bacchus, to whom human sacrifices were offered. The (...) of his Priests we
often met with, leaping and dancing on the (...) ^^horus's. So Baal's Priests
are described, 1 King. 18. 26. And ^^y leapt upon the altar which was made. The
Margin^ll Note, according to the Hebrew, is, They leapt up and down a (or
about) the altar. The cries and wailings in the Bacchanalia were ^o other, than
the howls which accompanied these ceremon^^^ (...) Isa. 15. 2. Moab shall howl
over Nebo and over Medeba: on all the (...) shall be baldness, and every beard
cut off. And that the rites (...) appear the same in all things, we may see the
very cutting and lanching, that is, the effusion of blood, mentioned in Baal's
Worship, to be also performed in the Feasts of Bacchus; as Statius intimates,
describing the wandering Polynices, who leaves -- Ogygiis ululata furoribus
antra
Deserit, and pingues Baccheo sanguine colles.
Those caves which furious rites with howlings fill,
And with Bacchean blood th'enriched hill.
Upon which, Lactantius says, Citheronem significat, ubi se Bacchae secant in
honorem Liberi; that is, By the hill is meant Citheron, where the Bacchae, the
Priests of Bacchus, cut themselves in honor of Liber, or Bacchus. Thus have I
made it appear, that the worship of Bacchus was exactly the same with his
father Jupiter's, and both no other than that of Heroes and Demons. And herein
was there an imitation of the worshippers of the true God, as may be gathered
from Jer. 41. 5. There came certain men from Shechem, from Shiloh, and from
Samaria, even fourscore men, having their beards shaven, and their clothes
rent, and having cut themselves, with offerings and incense in their hand, to
bring them to the house of the Lord. And because the Lord saw that this would
be converted to Daemon-worship it was therefore perhaps forbidden in the above.
quoted places of Leviticus, and Deuteronomy. 14. 1.

254. Does not Sperchios.] A river in Thessalie, to which Peleus promised his
son Achilles his hairs, if he returned safe from the Trojan war. Maturantius
says, It was a custom to offer the hair of Youths to the gods of Rivers,
because moisture is the cause of increase. But I read of no such custom. I have
rather given an understanding of this in the precedent Note, where I showed,
that the cutting off of hair was a sacred ceremony, performed to Heroes or
Demons. And no River anciently being thought to be without a Deity, Peleus
vowed the hairs of Achilles to Sperchios, that is, he promised he should be
worshipped by him with the performance of that Daemon-rite. And these words of
Achilles, which Homer Il. ps'. makes Achilles speak over the body of his dear
Patroclus, show, that Peleus had built Temples to Sperchios. (...),
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
In vain, Sperchios, Peleus vowed to thee
At my return to Greece these Locks from me,
Besides a Hecatomb, should then be paid,
And on thine altars fifty Weathers laid,
Near to those fountains where thy Temple's raised,
And odors on thy fragrant altars blazed.
So Peleus vowed. But he is unsatisfi^d.
And since my Country I am now denied
For ever, these hairs to the Stygian shade
In my Patroclus hand shall be conveyed.
This said, in his friends hand his hair he pressed,
Whilst every one affected grief expressed.
Alexander ab Alexandro lib. 5. cap. 25. says, This Ceremony was performed by
the Delian Youths and Maids, over the Hyperborean Virgins, the Men laying their
hair on the Sepulchers, the Virgins upon the Tombs. And lib. 3. cap. 7. that it
was used by the Barbarians, not only in funerals, but in any great adversity;
and that the Persians at funerals non tantum seipsos sed and equos and jumenta
tondebant: But, that the Romans and the Greeks were wont for expressing their
grief, to let their hair grow, and only their women to shave theirs. Hence it
appears, that the Ancients thought it the greatest expression of grief to
take away those Ornaments, which they preserved in conditions of better
satisfaction That which he says of the Greeks, is to be understood of the
later Greeks, who, by letting their hair grow long, did express an alteration
from content: And because that could be no expression in women, they still
retained the old custom of ^utting off their hair. In these later times, it
has been usual to neglect our selves, when the World or Fortune have feemed
unkind to us, letting our hair grow to rudeness and undecency, quitting vanity
upon no other cause but misfortune, nor ceasing to care for our selves, till
Fortune appear careless of us.

30^ ^^cina] Juno and Lucina are taken for the same, Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c.
15. And Alexander ab Alex. lib. 6. c. 4. gives Juno the name of Lucina, and
Opigena, quod parturientibus opem ferat. Therefore happily was she held the
goddess of Mar^iage. Vi^g. Aen. 4. 59. Junoni ante omnes, cui vinc'la jugalia
curae.
-- and Juno most of all,
Propitious to the marriage-thrall.
And after, ver. 166. -- et pronuba Juno.
But the confusion of the names of the Heathen gods I will not here stand upon,
having spoken something thereof els^ where. The etymology of Lucina Ovid thus
delivers, Fastor. l. 2. -- dedit haec tibi nomina Lucus;
Aut quia principium tu, dea, lucis habes.
Parce, precor, gravidis, facilis Lucina, puellis,
Maturumque utero molliter aufer onus.
From sacred groves they thee Lucina call;
Or else because thou give light to all.
Spare, kindest goddess, every teeming Maid,
And gently too their fruitful wombs unlade.
Mr. Seldom Syntagm. de Astoreth, condemns those who seek the etymology of
(...), that is, Lucina, from the Greek; and he deriveth it from the Arabic
word Alileth, which signifies Night. The Hebrews also from Lailah, that is,
Night, called this goddess Lilith, which may be rendered Noctiluca, or
Nocturnus demon. To keep this Demon away from women in travel, the Jews at
this day are wont to write this charm on the walls of the chambers where they
are, ADAM, CHAVAH, CHUTZ, LILITH; Be far hence, Lilith. Perhaps the Moon was
adored by women in that condition, by reason that it makes their labors
easier when it is at the full. Ier. 7. 18. she is called the Queen of heaven:
The women knead their dough to make cakes to the Queen of heaven. Some
testimony of that custom remains in these days, cakes being still commonly
made at such times, and the children themselves being called by the name of
Cake-bread.

The Fourth BOOK.
The Argument.
The Grecians at the last Achilles find,
Who is betrayed to what the fates designed.
Fair Deidamia mourns her Love with tears;
Whose theft had more of joy, though more of fears.
ULysses now through the Aegean seas
Changed, as he passed, the scattered Cyclades.
Olearos and Paros hid, they by
Lomnos next sail, and lessen as they fly
The Isle of Naxos: Samos bigger grew,
And Delos made the Ocean less in view.
Here they with offerings did the God implore,
For to confirm what Calchas told before.
Apollo heard. From Cynthus-top kind gales
Ended their doubts, and stretched their swelling sails.
Their ship in safety rode. For Jove forbid
Thetis to strive to hinder what Fate did;
Who grieved she could not, being so confined,
On loathed Ulysses throw waves swelled with wind.
Now Phoebus near his journeye's end arrives,
And to the waves his sweating Horses drives,
When Scyros showed. Ulysses bids them all
Furl up their sails, (At his Command they fall)
And with united strength to reach the shores:
The sinking wind, the Youths supply with Oars.
Now all perceived that Scyros they had found,
And saw the shore with Pallas Temple crowned.
Leaving their Ship, the Heroes went on shore,
And there the kind Tritonia they adore:
When wise Ulysses, l^st the City might
At sight of all his Troup receive affright,
Commands them all within the ship to stay,
Whilst they alone attempt the rocky way.
But Abas, that kept watch, had told before
Of strangers, though all Grecians, on the shore.
Like Wolves the Heroes went, who although prone
To ease their young ones hunger, and their own.
Yet on they slily creep, dissembling want,
Lest dogs should make their Masters vigilant;
^o slow, they took the nearest way that bent
Toward the gates, discoursing as they went.
Tydides first began; How we should find
This truth, is always running in my mind.
Why were these Thyrsi and these Timbrels bought?
Why Mitres, Drums, and gilded Stags-skins brought
Hither with us? Must these soft things employ,
And arm Achilles for the War of Troy?
To him Ulysses smiling said, To thee
Let this suffice: If that Achilles be
Under a V^rgin's habit here concealed,
By these fond Toys, thou 'lt see the Youth revealed.
In these attempts let this alone be thine,
To bring the things when it is a fitting time.
And join to these the fairest painted shield,
On which the Gold does radiant luster yield.
This shall suffice. But let Agyrtes too
His Trumpet bring, to help what we must do.
Then seeing to the Gates the King was come,
Showing an Olive branch, he thus begun.
I do believe that Fame has filled your ears,
Best Prince, with Europe's and with Asia's fears,
Preparing war. If you our names would know,
On whom great Agamemnon did bestow
This trust, He Is Diomed, who has given Fame
The bravest tales; Ulysses is my name.
To tell the cause I come I need not fear,
Since you're a Greek, in friendship tooso clear,
It Is that in safety we may still employ
Our ships this way against injurious Troy;
The King thus stops his speech, May ye still find
In all ye do the Gods and Fortune kind.
But now let me be honored by your stay
Within my Court. This said, he leads the way.
The Tables straight were spread, the Beds laid out,
In the mean time Ulysses sought about
If any Virgin, of too large a size,
Might give suspicion to his doubting eyes,
Thus roam'd he round the house. So every way
Through fields the Huntsman his undoubted prey,
Trails with Molossian hounds, till in the shade
He finds the Beast, his head on cool Turfs laid.
By this the news was to the Virgins got,
How that a Ship had Grecian Princes brought.
They all express their sexes fears, besides
Aeacides, who scarce his new joy hides,
Greedy to see the Greeks. The room with guests
Was filled, who on rich Beds received their feasts.
The Princesses came, sent for by the King,
Like those fair Amazonians that did bring
Their Troph^ys with them by Maeotis, round
With Scythian and with Getan conquests crowned,
(Whose ruined walls in their own ashes lie)
Now seated at their feasts, their Arms laid by.
Then straight Ulysses with his busy eyes
Observed them all. But night, that great disguise,
Denied the Heroes should be quite revealed,
Whom lying on the bed the board concealed;
Yet To Diomed.
to his friend, he showed his wandering eye,
How unconfined by Laws of modesty.
For had not kind Deidamia's care compelled
His temper, and his arms from moving held,
And with his veil, his mighty shoulders hid,
And naked breast, the full bowls too forbid.
And on his head, settled his tottering Crown,
Achilles then had to the Greeks been known.
Three courses now had satiated their souls,
When thus, inviting them to crowned bowls,
The King began, The glory of your deeds,
I do confess, in my breast envy breeds.
I wish I were now with that Youth inflamed,
Wherewith the Dolopes on these shores I tamed:
As tokens of which victory, their torn
And shattered ships do still our walls adorn.
Had but kind Nature, made my children men,
To serve you now, my joys had perfect been.
You see old age's witness on mine head,
And these soft pledges of my marriage bed,
When shall the wished for issues from these come?
Ulysses catching at these words begun.
Thy wish is just. For who would not have fled
To see such swarms, by troops of Princes led?
The united strength, that Europe now affords
All sworn to just revenge upon their swords.
Cities are empti'd, mountains naked show,
Sails without number on the Oceanthrow
A darkning shade: Fathers deliver arms
To the inflamed Youths, who rush in swarms.
Fame for attempting-spirits never did yield
So fair an object in so just a field;
Whilst thus he spoke, he saw how the Youth's ears
Drank up his words, the rest expressing fears:
Then thus proceeds, Who'ere proud in the name
Of Ancestors, or in his Nation's fame,
Who manageth his Horse, or else can throw
His dart with fatal aim, or use his bow;
Here all their aemulating deeds are paid,
Virgins and fearful women scarce are staid.
But that basewretch, who this brave action fears,
Hated by Heaven, shall spend his fruitless years.
At this how the Youth moved, Deidamia's eyes*
Soon found, and gave her sisters signs to rise,
Leading him forth. Yet he departed last,
And still his eyes upon Ulysses cast.
Who having paused a little, thus again
Assumed his sp^ech, May you, best King, remain
In peace, providing marriage-beds for these,
Whose heavenly beauties equal Deities.
How much their looks amaz^, in which does shine
Mingled with beauty something masculine!
The King replies, If now their looks invites,
What would it do at Bacchanalian rites,
Or circling Pallas shrines? This shall appear,
If the kind crossing winds detain you here;
At this new hope, their silent wishes blessed,
With haste accepting it. The Court in rest
Was now laid free from cares; only the night
To wise Ulysses seemed too slow of flight.
The morning scarce appeared, when Diomed,
Bringing the gifts, with him Agyrtes led;
The Scyrian Virgins too rose with the day,
Unto their guests the promised rites to pay.
Before the rest, Achilles with the Queen
Appears. Pallas and Cynthia so were s^en,
With the Elysian King's loved Proferpine,
By Aetna's rocks among the Nymphs to shine.
Now they began to move in measured time,
And from the Ismenian pipe they took the sign.
Four times the strokes on Rhea's brass rebound,
As many times the Evian Timbrels sound.
Four times their measures changed: at once they threw
Their spears all up, which fell together too.
Now they like the Curetes all advance,
Then they present the Samothracian dance:
Now all do side like Amazons, then all
Into Lacaenian circling figures fall.
Achilles now most plain appears, and stands
Neglecting the just time of joining hands,
Scorns the soft measures, and to be so dressed,
Forgets his part, disturbing all the rest.
Afflicted Thebes saw Pentheus thus despise
His mother's tymbrels and the sacrifice.
The praised Chorus from their sacred sport
Were now dismissed, and all returned to the Court:
Whither the gifts Tydides had conveyed,
And all before their eyes in order laid.
With these they seem their welcome to requite,
And every one unto her choice invite.
The King consents, too innocent to find
The Greeks, and what Ulysses had designed.
They (by their nature to such choice applied)
The Thyrsus took, or else the Tymbrell tried,
Or Jewels chose. The shining Arms they view,
And thought them presents for their father too.
But fierce Aeacides, still kept his sight
Upon the Shield, as if prepared to fight.
His face with fiery blushes grew inflamed;
Then to the warlike spear his eyes were chained.
His brows in furrows knit, his staring hairs
Grew stiff, and he forgot his Mothers cares.
With his own Love: Nothing durst then employ
His high-erected thoughts but War and Troy.
So from the teat, when a young Lion's brought,
And against nature an obedience taught,
Nor is an anger of his own expressed:
But if the shining steel threaten his breast,
His faith then flies; he makes his Lord his prey,
Scorning a fearful Master to obey.
But when he nearer came, and in the bright-
Reflecting shield, saw the contemned sight
How he was clothed, then his fierce looks proclaim
In his inflamed blushes rage and shame.
Then sly Ulysses coming to him, said
With a low voice, Why are we thus delayed?
We know where thou were bred, how thou do spring
Both from the Ocean's God and Heaven's King.
For thee the Grecians doubting-Army cal^s,
And at thy name Troy shakes her nodding walls.
Let Ida shrink, and please thy Fathers ears,
Who blusheth at thy crafty Mother's fears;
At this, his garments from his breast were cast,
Agyrtes straight gave the commanded blast.
Throwing their gifts away, the Virgins run
For shelter, and believed a War begun.
His robes untouched, fell down at the alarm,
Snatching the spear and shield upon his arm.
He taller far then Ithacus appears,
Or Diomedes. Swift dispersing fears,
Fill the affrighted Court, whilst in his gate
He seemed now seeking to be Hector's fate.
The fair troup the Peleian Virgin seeks,
At whose discovery Deidamia shreeks.
Whose well known voice, no sooner filled his breast,
But Love began to plead his interest.
His shield sunk down, and on the King his eyes
Fixing, amazed at all these prodigies,
He still thus armed to Lycomedes said,
It Is I, dear Father, (be not now afraid)
Whom the immortal Thetis bore. To you
This glory to oblige the Greeks is due,
In giving them Achilles. Thou shall be
(If it be just to say) dearer to me
Then Peleus or loved Chiron. Yet attend
These words with kindness, and attention lend:
Peleus and Thetis add a child to thee
By either side s^rung from a Deity.
They do require one of these Virgins here.
Do thou agree? or else do I appear
Degenerate from them? Our hands then join
With free consent, and pardon those are thine,
With thy Deidamia 's rape. Who can restrain
These limbs attempting to appease their flame?
If thou 'lt revenge, to me it ^s only due,
See how I wait it thus unarmed too.
Why do thy angry eyes so madly run?
Thou art a Father-in-law. Then throws his son
Before his feet, and then again proceeds,
By this a Grandfather. New rigor needs
More then such troops to punish. The Greeks with him
Join all their reasons to appease the King.
He with his daughter's injury though pressed,
And with the words of Thetis still possessed,
And loath to break his trust, yet fears to stay
The Grecian War, and Fate's designs delay.
His Mother now, if there, in vain might use
Her power: Nor could he such a son refuse.
Thus he was vanquished; When yet full of fears
The fair Deidamia, blushing still, appears;
She could not think her Father yet was made
So kind, the crime upon Achilles laid.
The news of all to Thessaly he convaid,
And to his friends and subjects sends for aid.
The King for his new Son, two ships prepares,
And blames his power short for such affairs.
The day was spent in feasts; the Lovers tied
In Hymen's knot: The gentle night complied
Now to their bold embraces. He in dreams
Fancy's the war, Xanthus and Ida's streams.
The Grecian ships; whilst unto her a fright
The thought of waves did give, or morning's light.
About her Lovers neck her arms she spread,
And mingled with her tears these words she shed.
Shall I e're see thee more, and thus remain?
May we be worth thy visit once again?
Will not Troy's ruin, your swelled mind forbid
To think where you were like a Virgin hid?
Ought I to beg, or only to have fears?
Should I use words, that scarce have time for tears?
Is this our nuptial bed's designed right,
To be bestowed and ravished in one night?
Is this free Hymen? O thou kinder theft!
What we have leave to love, must thus be left.
Go, go: I dare not ask thee to remain,
Go then; Yet think not Thetis feared in vain.
Go, and return again to me, but mine
I wish too much. Those charming eyes of thine,
Will give such passion to Troy's beauteous Dames,
They they will forget their Country's for thy flames.
Perhaps on Helena, thou wilt be inflamed,
Whose beauty by her rape is so much famed;
Whilst I shall never be mentioned to be thine,
Or made the subject of thy youthful crime.
But yet, why should not I still go with thee,
And bear thine ensign? Thou have born with me
The distaff, and the arms of Bacchus too;
Which Troy will hardly credit you did do.
Your Image though, the comfort of my breast,
Never forget; nor yet this one request.
Let not a barbarous Love enjoy my place,
And bring to Thetis an unworthy race;
This said, the shaken Youth comforts her fears,
Swears her his faith, and seals it with his tears:
And promises she should alone enjoy
The Captives, and the wealth of ruined Troy.
His fruitless words thus strove to ease her care,
And his vain promise lost it self in air.
ANNOTATIONS on the IV Book of STATIUS his ACHILLEIS.
3. PAros.] One of the Cyclades, famous for clear Marble.

5. Nax^s.] Another of the Cyclades, sacred to Bacchus, who is said to have
been here nourished. Here, they say, Ariadne was married to Bacchus, happily
because being here forsaken by ungrateful Theseus, she here found a remedy, at
least an end of her miseries. Bacchus, from his easing of cares, received the
names of Liber and Lyaeus, and from his pity, of Eleleus, from (...),
Misericordia. But this I conceive rather comes from (...), clamo, and has
relation to his rites.

Samos.] An^ sland famous for the birth of Pythagoras. There be three Islands
of this name: One but a little distant from the Continent of Asia, an ^onick
Island, having a City of the same name, Strab. lib. 14. Here Juno lived whilst
a Virgin: whence the Island was called Parth^nia. Another, not far from the Bay
of Ambracia. The third, in the Aegean sea, over against the mouth of the
Thracian River Hebrus, Plin. lib. 4. This is here meant.

24. Kind Tritonia.] Pallas was ever kind to the Grecians, and the Trojans
enemy. So Ovid, Aequa Venus Teucris, Pallas iniqua fuit. And Virgil Aen. 1.
says, that among other Pictures that Aeneas saw at Carthage, one was of Trojan
women going to the Temple, non-aequae Palladis, of unjust, or ungentle, Pallas.
And Aen. 2. Omnis spes Danaum, and coepti fiducia belli,
Palladis auxiliis semper s^etit.
All the Greeks hopes and confidence which chose
Th'attempted war, from Pallas helps arose.
Her particular kindnesss to Diomedes Homer shows, Iliad 5. Servius in Aen.
2. says, she was called Tritonia, (...), to fear; Pallas being commonly
represented terrible with her Snakes. Or else she was called so, in relation to
the three concerns of Wisdom, Memory of things past, Judgment in things
present, and Providence for things to come. Or she had this name from a River,
as Lucan there cited, Etse dilecta Tritonida dixit ab unda. She was called
Trigemina by the Egyptians, Alexand. ab Alex. l. 6. c. 4. the same perhaps
with (...), and (...), from (...). which in the Cretian Language signifies a
Head.

85 Maeotis.] A Lake of Scythia, receiving the River Tanais, with many others,
and divided from the Euxine Sea by the Cimmerian Bosphorus.

86. With Scythian and with Getan conquests.] Scythia was divided into two
parts, the European, and the Asiatick. The European from the banks of Tana's,
by the shores of Maeotis, and the Euxine Sea, reaches to the mouth of Ister.
The Asiatick from the opposite shore extends to the East, and is bounded by
the Ocean on the North, and by the mountain Taurus on the South. The Getae were
a People of Scythia Europaea, called Dacians, as Britannicus affi^me^h, and
Pliny l 4 c. 12. But Strabo lib. 7. places the Getans toward Pontus and the
East, but the Dacians toward Germany. The G^tae were famous, or rather
infamous, for cruelty. So Ovid, Nulla Getis toto gens est truculentior orb.
One of their cruel customs was, to kill the wife, that by her death they might
appease the ghost of the husband, Alex. ab Alex. lib. y. c. 26.

102. Inviting them to crowned bowls.] It was a custom observed by the
Ancients, especially at their Entertainments, to drink freely after their
feasts, Virg. Aen. 1. Postquam prima quies epulis, mens^que remotae,
Crater as magnos sta^uunt, and vina co^enant.
The first Feast ended, on the tables shine
The weighty bowls, crowned still with sparkling wine.
At the beginning, small glasses went about, but at the end they enlarged their
draughts, Alex. ab Alex. lib. 5. cap. 21. The Greeks had a Law, ut biberent,
aut abirent. How Anacreon liked this custom of drinking, appears from this
Ode of his concerning himself, H. Stephano interpret.

Vt me subit Lyaeus,
Tune cura dormit omnis,
Croesumque sperno prae me.
Dulcis repent nostro
Erumpit ore cantus:
Hedera comasque cingens
Proculco mente cuncta.
Ad arma currat alter,
Ad pocula ipse curram.
Puer, ocyus scyphum da:
Nam praestat ebrium me
Quam mortuum jacere.
When powerful Bacchus rules my breast,
Then I am from all cares released:
Scorned Croessus too seems poor to me,
Whilst charming Lays take liberty
Through my melodious lips, and round
My brows with winding lvy crowned,
Contemning all things in my mind.
Some are for war and arms designed;
But the crowned bowls do fill my head:
It Is better to lie drunck than dead.
106. The Dolopes] A People on the borders of Thessalie, overcome, as it
seems, by Lycomedes in a Sea-battle. See Servius in Aen. 2. verse. 7.

162. Ismenian pipe.] Ismenus is a River of Boeotia, not far from Aulis, where
the Greeks made their great Rendez-vous. In this Country stood Thebes, where
Bacchus was much worshipped: For which City, Statius here puts the River
Ismenus. A liberty frequently taken by the Poets. So Achaia and Pelasgia, being
but Regions of Greece, are commonly put for Greece it self. There is also a
Hill of this name by Thebes, whence Apollo was called Ismsnius. Plutarch in
Pericle speaks of a Trumpeter of this name, of whom Antisthenes, Si probus
esset, tibicen non esset.

163. Rhea's Brass.] Rhea was held the mother of the gods; Who had diverse
other names set down by Alexander ab Alexandro lib. 6. c. 4. She was Saturn's
wife, and taken for the Earth: The reason whereof see on Book III. verse. 220.
Alexander ab Alex. lib. 3. c. 12. says, A Sow, which was called Praecidanea,
was offered to Ceres, or Rhea, because (as some conceive) a Sow, being a
fruitful creature, was thought a fit Present for the Earth, which was
understood by Ceres. But I rather choose the reason of Servius in Georg. 2.
where he observes, that the sacrifices to the gods were all performed, either
by similitudes or contrarieties: By Similitude, as a black Beast to Pluto: By
Contraries, as a Sow to Ceres, because an enemy to Fruits; a Goat to Bacchus,
because an enemy to Vines. This Agellius l 4. c. 6. seems to confirm, where
explaining the word Praecidanea, he adds, Porca etiam Praecidanea appellata,
quam piacul^ gratia ante fruges novas captas immolari Cereri mos fuit; that is,
A Sow was called Praecidanea, or a preceding sacrifice, by reason that it was a
custom to offer one to Ceres before harvest. Rhea was commonly represented with
Towers upon her head, and drawn by Lions. And hereby the Earth is signified.
Which Macrobius Saturn. l. 1. c. 21. affirming, adds also, Haec dea Leonibus
vehitur, validis impetu atque fervore animalibus. Quae natura Coeli est, cujus
ambit^ Aer continetur, qui vehit terram; that is, This goddess is drawn by
Lions, creatures of great strength force and fervor: Which is the nature of
the Heaven, in whose compass the Air is contained, which carries the Earth.
On which words Pontanus cites these Verses of Lucretius; Hanc veteres Graium
docti cecinere Poetae
Sublimem in curru bijuges agitare Leones,
Aeris in spatio magnam pendere docentes
Tellurem; neque posse in terra sistere terram.
The learned and ancient Grecian Poets sung,
This goddess was by Lions drawn along;
Teaching that round the resting Earth is laid
In Air: for Earth by Earth could not be staid.
A Philosophy contrary to that which is now received. This goddesse's Priests
were called Galli, from Gallus, a River of Phrygia; and Corybantes, which some
derive from (...), which signifies to tos^e the head in any violent motion:
Which frantic action they used in their mad ceremonies. But Turnebus Advers.
lib. 13. c. 24. understands the word otherwise. Their rites set down by
Clemens Alexandrinus Protrept. and repeated by Eusebius, de Praepar. Evang. l.
2. c. 3. little differed from those of Bacchus, altered only by the fancy and
interest of several people And all the worship that we read to have been
performed to several gods, was no other, than that which from the beginning of
the world was taught by Demons.

175. Afflicted Thebes saw Pentheus.] Pentheus was killed by his zealous mother
Agave, and other frantic women, for contemning their Bacchanalia. Natalis
Comes, lib. 5. cap. 13. thinks Pentheus was some just and temperate Prince,
who striving to suppress those rude ceremonies, was murdered by his displeased
subjects.

The Fifth BOOK.
The Argument.
For fatal Troy Aeacides now goes:
And as they sail, he from Ulysses knows
The wars original; which having known,
Desired, he pays the story with his own.
NIght's shadows now began to fly away,
When from the waves, the Ruler of the day
Began to spread the promises of light,
Yet injured by the struggling shades of night.
When now Aeacides, (his soft robes scorned)
Appears in his first courted arms adorned.
For now the winds invited. Now no more
Durst they remember how he lived before.
So changed, as if he were not now the same
That lived in Scyros, but from Pelion came.
Then, as they used, Ulysses did advise
To offer to the Ocean Deities.
To Neptune on the flames a bull was laid,
To Thetis an adorned heifer paid.
Achilles having then the entrails flung
Into the briny waves, he thus begun.
I have obeyed thee, Mother, though it was such
A hard command: I have obeyed too much.
Now with the Greeks, I go famed Troy to find,
This said, into a snip he leapt. The wind
Drove them from shore: the clouds still thicker grew,
And Scyros lessened to their hindered view.
The whilst Deidamia on a Tower appears,
Accompanied with her sad Sisters tears,
Holding young Pyrrhus. Still the waves she viewed,
And that which bore him with fond eyes pursued.
He too his looks sends to the affected walls
And widowed house; then with a sigh recalls
What he had left: His fire burns again,
And his great thoughts give way unto his flame.
Ulysses guessed his passion by his grief,
And sought by this diversion his relief;
Were thou, (to whom the fate of Troy is due,
Whom Oracles and Grecians call for too
And war within the open threshold stayed)
Dressed by thy crafty Mother like a maid?
Could she herself to all be so unjust,
To act such theft, and yet expect a trust?
Her fears were much too great in all she did,
Should so much virtue in a shade be hid.
Which at the Trumpet's summons, freed thy breast
From thought of friends, and thy loved flames suppressed?
Nor is this glory to our selves assigned,
To bring thee now: It was above designed.
Aeacides replied, Too long't would be
To tell my Mothers crimes. This sword for me,
And my disguise shall at a handsome rate,
Plead and excuse, though it were the guilt of Fate.
You rather, whilst sost Zephyrus conspires
With the smooth Ocean calmed to our desires,
Relate, why Greece thus for revenge prepares,
That my resent may be as just as theirs.
Sly Ithacus replied, If that we may
Give credit to the tales of Fame, they say;
Once on the Hectorean shore, three goodly fair
Dissenting Goddesses had equal care.
For their disputed beauties: And all three
Agreed the Trojan Swain, their Judge should be.
Sour Pallas pleased not his deciding eyes,
Nor the immortal Mistress of the skies:
Only fair Venus looks his mind inclined,
This strife arose when first the Gods designed
Peleus for Thetis, and their happy seed,
Thy glorious self, was for our aid decreed.
The vanquished Goddesses hid passion fires:
The Judge his fatal recompense requires;
Straight sees in Sparta his admired Love;
Then fells the holy shades, and Cybele's grove
Falls on the earth, and the forbidden Pine,
Though sacred, must assist his foul design.
His ships, now built, do through the Ocean pass
To the Achaian shore. His crime, alas!
The injury on potent Europe leaves,
Which first the stained marriage bed receives
Of Menelaus, when he his ravished joy,
Helen, with captive Argos bears to Troy.
The news through every City Rumor flung,
And to their arms the willing Grecians throng.
For who can bear at so unjust a rate,
Stains on a marriage bed, with such deceit?
Plunder of grain, or cattle, cause affords
To men of valor, to employ their swords.
Agenor brook'd not such a rape, when Jove
Had through the waves born his affected Love;
But sought Europa, when the fact was done,
Scorning the God of Thunder for his son.
Aeetes so followed his child's escape,
Though Semi-gods were guilty of the rape;
Yet he pursued the ravishers with War,
And that famed ship, in Heaven now a Star.
Shall we endure these Phrygians, but half-men
Seeking upon our shores their plunders then?
Are we grown bankrupt and unarmed thus?
Or will the waves be lesser friends to us?
What now, if from the Scyrian shores should fly
Unto thine ears, thy loved Deidamia 's cry,
Ravished by some, and calling on thy name?
With that unto his sword his fingers came,
And 's face with angry blushes grew enflamed,
Ulysses then in silence pleased remained.
Then Diomede succeeding him begun,
Thou worthy Issue from a Godhead sprung,
Tell thy admiring friends, from thy first age,
What practice did thy youthful thoughts engage;
The ways to virtue taught by Chiron too,
And how thy limbs and mind enlarged grew.
Let this requite our seeking Scyros shores,
Through tedious waves, and plying of the Oars:
You need not be ashamed to tell your deeds.
At this he blushing, as compelled, proceeds;
When Chiron first received me to his cave,
The food which to my tender years he gave,
I 've heard was much unused. For from the breast
My hunger with soft milk was never suppressed,
But with firm flesh of Lions; and I sucked
The marrow from wild Beasts yet-dying plucked.
This was my first cheer: Chiron bred me so,
Till Time with larger stricles taught me to go.
He led me then to the Woods, without amaze,
Teaching mine eyes upon wild beasts to gaze,
And not to fear the noise which billows made
On Rocks, nor the horrid silence of a shade.
I now a quiver got, and with a spear
To arm my youthful hand was all my care.
As unconcerned, I suffered the extremes,
Of binding cold and Sol's reflecting beams.
My tired limbs, a soft bed never pressed:
I with my Master on astone took rest.
When now almost to twice six years I came,
He taught me to pursue the swiftest game.
And the fierce Lapithae; and when I threw
My darts, to overtake them. Sometimes too,
Chiron would follow me through fields and plains,
Till age denied; and tired with my pains,
Would lay me on his neck. He made me bold
To pass the frozen Rivers bound with cold.
These were my youthful sports. Why should I need
To tell my wars, in the woods from roars now freed?
He taught me, not to hunt those beasts whose fear
Urged their swift flight, the Lynx, and fallow Deer;
But force the Bear to her affrighting roars,
The cruel Tigres, and the foming Boars.
Or from the mountains fetch the Lions young;
Whilst in his cave he looked to see me come
Bloody; Nor took me in his arms before
He saw my spear colored with blushing gone.
And now my Age, and Chiron, did design
My arms for nobler Wars. All discipline
Of Mars I used. I practiced how to throw
The Macedonian pile: I learnt to know
The use, as Sauromatians do, of spears;
Or Getans, of their crooked semitars:
And how the famed Gelonians use the bow,
And how the Balearian slingers throw*
With sounerring aims the circling slings,
Which wound as sure and often as motion flings.
I scarce remember all. I learned the art
To leap vast dikes, whose banks were far apart;
And the high tops of airy hills to gain,
To get me breath and swiftness for the plain.
Then, the true image of a fight to yield,
He made me take huge milstones on my shield;
To enter burning hovells, and with force
And speed, to stay swift Horses in their course.
Once I remember, how dissolved snow,
And constant showers had swelled Sperchios so,
That with its furious stream it drove a throng
Of torn-up Trees, and rolling stones-along:
Then where the waves, the horrid'st force expressed,
He bad me to oppose my youthful breast,
And stop the swelling billows as they run;
Which he with all his feet could scarce have done.
Nor could the impetuous stream a conquest gain,
Whilst Chiron threatened, urging still my shame.
Thus glory I attained by his command,
Who still a witness of my toils did stand.
To fight with armed fists, and the Oebalian stone
To throw and wrestle with oil'd limbs, alone
Were sports, nor seemed more toils then when
I took my harp, and sung of famous men.
He taught me too, which herbs for health were good,
And which would stop effusion of much blood.
Which would close wounds, and which procure kind rest,
How gangrain'd parts to sever from the rest.
What ulcers herbs would care. He also taught
Still to make Justice guide of every thought.
Thus the Thessalians he made happy still,
And thus he wrought his Centaurs to his will.
Y^ave heard, my friends, those acts that did employ
My early years: These I recount with joy.
The rest my Mother knows. Thus he gave over
His tale, and came unto the Trojanshore.
ANNOTATIONS on the 5th Book of STA^IVS his ACHILLEIS.
13. A Bull.] This was the usual sacrifice to Neptune. Yet Ovid, Metam. 4.
when Andromeda was freed, says, A Bull was offered to Jupiter. And Silius
Italicus, lib. 15. -- cadit ardua Taur^s
Victima, Neptuno pariter, pariterque Tonanti.
And Virgil, Aen. 3. Caelicolum Regi mactabim in littore Taurum. -- upon the
shore
To Heaven's King a Bull I slew --
On which place Servius says, that Aeneas did this contrary to reason, in
relation to the event, a Bull being the sacrifice of Neptune; resembling the
roughness of the waves, and the nature of Neptune, and other Sea-gods, as
ungentle as the waves that bred them: as Agellius l. 15. c. 2. Ferocissimos and
immanes and alienos ab omni humanitate Neptuni filios dixerunt; that is,
Neptune's sons were said to be most fierce and ungentle, and strangers to all
humanity. See Macrobius, l. 3. c. 10.

15, 16. Having then the entralls flung Into the briny waves] This manner of
throwing the entralls into the Sea, when sacrifice was performed to the
Sea-gods, Virgil sets down, Aen. 5.

Dii quibus imperium pelagi, quorum ^quora curro,
Vob is laetus ego hoe candentem in littore taurum
Constituam ante aras voti re^s, exteq^e salsos
Porriciam in fluctus.
You gods whose empire in the Ocean lies,
Over whose waves I sail; this sacri^^ce,
A (...) Bull as due to you I pay --
And in the briny waves the entralls lay.
For in a sacrifices the entralls were a thief part of the ledication; as
Juvenal, Sat. 10.

Ut tamen and poscas ^liquid, voveasqae s^c^llis
Ext^, and candid^^^ divi^a t^macul ^ p^rci.
That thou may something wish, and at the shrine
Offer the sacred entralls of white Swine.
This ceremony of throwing the entralls into the Sea, was, because Neptune, to
whom the sacrifice was offered, there reigned. Suetonius in Augusto has these
words, ^uneiata repent hostis incur^^one, (...) ^^pta faco prosacuit; alque it
a praelium ingressus, victor rediit; that is, Hearing of the incursion of the
enemy, he cut off the entralls half-raw, snatched from the fire; and so going
cut to Battle he returned victorious. On which words, Salmasius, Partem extorum
prosecandam and Diis porriciendam arae super-impo^ebant and diis adolehant;
They laid that part of the entralls on the Altar that was to be cut off, and
sacrificed it to the gods. Reliquam partem vescebantur qui sacrificio
intererant. The rest was eaten by such as were present at the sacrifice. All
the actions about the entralls, looking into them and examining them laying,
them on the Altar, eating what is to be eaten, Arrianus compriseth under this
one Verb (...). This custom, among others, which in the Notes I have given
short hints of, was taken up by the Heathen in imitation of the true God's
worship as will appear from Levit 1. 9, 13. The inwards and the legs shall he
wash in water, and the Priest shall burn all on the Altar. Of the Priests
eating part of the sacrifice, s^e Levit. 2. 3. 10 and 6 26. Ecclus 7. 31.
Likewise the baked and broiled meats ave^e the Priests, Lev. 7 9. Here imita^ed
by the word semicruda. And we read but of few ceremonies among the ancient
Gentiles, that had not such a beginning.

35. War within the open threshold stayed.] The Poet means the Temple of
Janus, which in Peace was ever shut, and open in War. From Janus the gates of
any private house were called Januae. The gates of Janus were shut but twice
before the time of Augustus. Janum Quirinum semel atque iterum a condita Vrbe
memorium ante suam clausum, in multo breviore temporis spatio, terra marique
pace parta, ter clusit, says Suetonius, in Augusto, c. 22. That is, The Temple
of Janus, from the beginning of the City, was but twice shut before the reign
of Augustus; but in his reign, in a much lesser space, he being at peace with
all the world, it was thrice shut. The first time it was shut was in the reign
of Numa Pompilius; The second, when T. Manlius Torquatus, and Attilius Balbus
were Consuls: but it was opened again (as many say) the same year, and so
continued till Augustus. Perhaps Rome's not enjoying peace was not the least
cause of its prosperity. For in troublous times, men's endeavors commonly are
united for the public safety, but pursue private interests in times of peace
and idleness; so hard it is to make true advantage of God's greatest
blessings. Augustus first shut Janus his Temple, Anno ab V. C. DXXV after the
overthrow of Antonie; Himself the fifth time, and Sextus Apuleius being
Consuls. Four years after he shut it the second time, M. Junius Silanus being
Consul with him. The third time he shut it was about the time of our Savior
CHRIST, the Prince of peace. The next time we read of its being shut, was, when
Nero, and Valerius Messala, were Consuls, Anno V. C. DCCCXI. which Tacitus and
Orosius reckon not, because Nero shut it upon no just grounds. So Suetonius in
his life, Janum geminum clausit tam nullo quam residuo bello; which ^aernus
reads, Tanquam nullo residuo bello: that is, He shut the Temple of Janus, as
if there were no signs of war remaining. The seventh time it was shut (or,
more truly, the sixth time) was, Anno V. C. DCCCXXIV. Vespasian and Nerva being
Consuls. After this time, Historians say nothing concerning the gates of this
Temple. Yet Capitolinus in Gordino Juniore, affirms, that the custom still
remained. Alexander ab Alexandro lib. 1. c. 14. conceives the reason, why
Janus his Temple was the testimony of peace and war, was, his being the
Pr^sident of the revolutions of times; so his Statue intimated, having on its
hands the number of the days of the year figured. As he was figured with two
faces, so he had also two gates, one toward the East, the other toward the
West. These Macrobius, Saturn. l. 1. c. 9. uses for arguments, to prove Ianus
the same with the Sun, according to his design. But I rather judge this arose
from Saturn, (by whom Time was meant) his being perhaps all one with Ianus.
But Macrobius cap. 7. believes, Ianus's two faces related to the prudence and
care of a Prince, who looks both on what is past, and also on what is to
come. Ianus made Saturn partner with him in the Kingdom, for the benefit he
received from his instructions about Hu^bandry: And after his death, in honor
of him, and in memory of the ship which brought him to Italy, he caused the
figure of a ship to be stamped on one side of his Coin, which on the other had
his own Image. Hence came the Game, cum pueri denarios in sublimi jactantes,
CAPITA AUT NAVIA, lusu test vetustatis, exclaman^; which in our days still
remains, being now called Cross or Pile. Cap. 9 he tells this original
story of the opening of Janus's gates in War; When the War of the Sabines was
in favor of their rav^shed Virgins, the Romans hastened to shut the gate at the
foot of the Hi^^ Viminalis, (which from the event was after called lanualis) by
reason the enemy was rushing in that way. After it was shut, it straight opened
again of its own accord. Which having happened twice or thrice, they stood to
defend it with Soldiers, because they could not shut it: when suddenly there
came a report, that on another side of the City the Romans were bea^er by
Tatius: At which, the Romans that defended this gate, affrighted fled. And when
the Sabines were breaking in, it is said, that from the Temple of fanus a
violent torrent of hot water issued, and overthrew the pressing enemy For this
cause in war the gates were always set open, as it were in expectation of such
help, and as representing the god himself going out to their assistance. And
this no doubt proved very advantag^ous, for the encouragement of the common
people, who are apt enough to believe any, that tell them of a god's going out
with them. To this purpose also, Servius rela^eth the story, in Aen. 1. and
says, the reason of Janus his being figured with two faces, was the
confederacy of the two Princes, Romulus and Tatius. The best reason he gives,
as he thinks himself, is, That those that go to war wish to return. But
certainly he is unjust to himself, having before said, vel quod ad bellum ituri
debent de pace cogitare, that is, or because that those that are going to war
ought to have their thoughts on peace.

55. Hectorean shore.] That is, Trojane.

58. The Trojan Swain.] Paris, so called, from his having been bred up among
shepherds. See Annot. on Book 1 v. 33.

6^. So rose the strife, etc.] For they fell out, when they were at the
marriage of Peleus and Thetis, about a golden Apple cast among them by Discord.

73. Europe] is here put for Greece.

83. When love, etc.] love ravished Europa in the shape of a Bull. See Ovid
Metam, lib. 2.

87. Aeetes.] The father of Medea, who pursued the Argonauts that carried her
away in the Ship Argo, which was after made a Constellation.

150, The Macedonian Pile.] See on Book 2. v. 6.

151. Sauromatians,] a people of Scythia, commonly called Tartars.

152. Getans.] See on Book 4. v. 86.

153 Gelonians,] a people also of Scythia, so called from Gelonus the son of
Hercules. They are now comprehended under the name of Tartars. They were wont
to paint and discolor their faces, that they might appear the more terrible in
Battle. Hence Virgil calls them Pictos Gelonos, Geor. 2. They were famous
Archers: Hence Horace, lib. 3. od. 4. calls them pharetratos Gelonos: And
Virgil Aen. 8. Sagittiferos Gelonos. They used, as the Massagetans, to drink
Horses blood mingled with milk.

154. Balearian Slingers.] The Baleares are two Islands belonging to Spain,
commonly called Majorica and Minorica. Some hold, they received their name from
Baleus, a companion of Hercu^es, there left by him. But rather they were so
called (...), from Slinging: For the inhabitants were very skillful in the use
of the sling, and bred their children to it. When their children were hungry,
they laid their victuals on a high beam, and they were to strike it off with a
sling before they had it, Flor. l. 3. c. 8. and Alex. ab Alex. lib. 2. c. 25.
The Greeks formerly called them Gymnes^aus, from their custom of going naked.

177. To fight-with armed fists.] See on Book 1. v. 219.

Oebatian quoits.] This was a weight with a ^ing in it, which they used to
throw. At this Exercise Apollo killed his Beloved Hyacynthus. See Alexand. ab
Alex. lib. 3. cap. 21.

178. And wrestle with oil'd limbs.] I have showed above; why places of
Exercises are called Gymnasia. Those that w^est^od were naked, and had their
limbs anno^^ted! Thucydides, lib. 1. says, The Lacedae monians first
instituted Wrestling naked, with oyled limbs: but he there affirms, that the
more ancient custom was to wear Breeches. This exercise was in sueh esteem,
that one that was excellent in it was valued as much as the bravest Soldier,
Alex. ab Alex. l. 2. c. 25. For which reputation's sake, they used
assiduous-practise before they came to the place: And then, as Clemens
Alexandrinus lib. 7. Strom. reluteth, looking on the Starve of Jupiter, they
made this prayer to him, If all things, O Jupiter, are rightly. performed by me
for the Combat, give ^e the deserved Victory.

A PANEGYRIC to General MONCK.
It Is not your power, that has inspired my muse,
It Were mean to praise that which you scorn to use.
It Is that above the reach of power in you
I praise, Victorious over Conquest too.
Yet you more truly glorious will appear,
To dispose Scepters, than you could to wear.
For ravish'r Crowns are still another's due,
But thus bestowed, they are all owed to you.
How much your Debtour is our Nation grown,
People their freedom owe, the Prince his Throne.
Brought from his barbarous exile to be Crowned,
And practice mercy that he never found.
So when the Aeneas so described by Virg. lib. 1.
Trojan Prince was almost lost
In Storms, among ungentle billows tossed,
Displeased Neptune from the surges rose;
And storms of frowns among the tempests throws.
At which the waves no longer durst aspire,
But to obedient calmnesse all retire.
At your approach, phanatique storms so shrink,
And factious waves to seeming quiet sink.
That La^bert.
Wave which to the vastest swelling rose,
Found destiny in attempting to oppose.
Under your weight and principles they sunk,
And his unto your brighter Genius shrunk.
So common fires seem to be undone
At the victorious shining of the Sun.
He too that hated King's, just fate designs
Should stoop to one sprung from a Prince's loins.
Yet little does your birth share with your deeds,
Your Godlike acts, your Princely ^ace exceeds.
Whilst you despise those long prevailing charms
Of power, ready with its open arms.
So holy men, in heavenly firmness staid,
Refused those honor's others would have paid;
It Was such a Temper only could have brought,
That which we strongly hoped, and weakly sought.
Such conquests as to mighty minds are due,
Sought your embraces; whilst alone for you
So clearly victory it self declared,
That neither common sword, nor fortune shared.
Whilst we amazed your perfect conquest find,
Wrought only by your conduct and your mind.
Their power and fates that you before you saw,
Did not excite your thoughts, nor could they awe:
You took no measure from their fates or them,
Whilst power and danger you alike contemn;
For their ambitions were not your designs,
You did not fear their fates, but feared their crimes.
Yet by degrees you moved, as after Night
The Sun begins to show the World its light.
At whose approach, darkness its place resignes,
And though it seems to move not, yet it shines.
So softly you began to spread your beams,
Through all our factions dark in all extremes.
And though at first, you scarce a motion showed,
Yet early glory from your actions flowed.
May you still shine, as now at your full height,
Till you to greater glory pass through fate.
You that a KING a Scepter gave to sway,
And taught rebellious Subjects to obey;
FINIS.

