Bella Scot-Anglica.

A BRIEF OF ALL THE Battles, and Martial Encounters which have happened
'twixt ENGLAND and SCOTLAND, from all times to this present.

Whereunto is annexed a Corollary, Declaring the causes whereby the Scot is
come of late years to be so hightned in his spirits; With some Prophecies which
are much cried up, as reflecting upon the fate of both Nations.

Printed in the Year 1648.

Bella Scot-Anglica.
A Brief of all the Battles and Martial Encounters, which have happened
'twixt England and Scotland, from all times to this present, etc.
The Proeme.
THe Design of this short Discourse, is to relate the Quarrels, and sundry
traverses of War, which have passed from time to time between England and
Scotland, Extracted out of the most approved and impartial Historians, as well
Scottish, as English, French, and others.

Out of which premises are deduced these Conclusions;

First, That Scotland has been always apt and forward to apprehend any
occasion to invade and visit her Neighbor England.

Secondly, That when she was at the highest pitch of strength, and had the
greatest advantages against her, when she had active and martial Kings for her
Generals, and the French for her firm Confederates, with other Coadjutors and
Auxiliaries, she could never be a match no, not by many degrees, for England,
whether you respect the int^insick power of the Country, or the innated
prowess of the people: All which will clearly appear by the circumstances and
success of diverse Battles and interchangeable Exploits, which being
indifferently balanced it will be found* that if Scotland did sometimes beat
England with the scabbard, England may be truly said to have beaten her more
often with the blade.

I Will not look back and rake the ashes of antiquity so far, as to speak of
the sociall war they entered into with the ancient Britains and Picts
against the English, when they began to take first firm footing in England.
Nor, of that so famous battle 'twixt Athelstan and them, at which time they
had a great Army of Danes joined with them; when being above twice more in
number then the English, King Athelstan carried away a complete victory by a
kind of backblow ( Parthian like) For the two Armies being ready to join, the
English made semblance to fly away, leaving all their baggage behind, and much
matter for booty, which as the Scots and Danes were sharing, the English
suddenly wheeled about by the advantage of a woody hill, and finding them in
disarray, and the Soldiers laden with pillage, they rushed upon them with that
resolution, that above forty thousand of them fell, and as Buchanan their
Prime Chronologer records, the flower of their Nobility perished that day.

But I intend not to involve my discourse in these mistie times, but will take
my rise from the Norman Conquest, for indeed the History of great Britain
being over clouded with so many incertainties, casts but a dim light before
those times, whereas since, she shines with such a luster, that what stands
upon Record may be asserted for clear and undeniable truth.

At that time, I mean the time of the Conquest, Scotland did England a very
good office by preserving the English blood-royall (which not long after
returned to the Crown in Henry the second) but it was casually: For Prince
Edgar and his Mother, with his two Sisters, intending to go for Denmark,
(some say for Hungary) and being by distress of weather driven upon the
Scottish coasts, they were hospitably received by Malcoline, then King of
Scotland; At which time civility with the English tongue took first footing in
the Scottish Court, as the French did amongst the English.

WILL. the second.
THe first dart of War that was thrown 'twixt England and Scotland after the
Conquest was in Will. Rufus his reign, when the Scots having made diverse
incursions into the English Pa^e, Moubray Earl of Northumberland was sent
against them, who Encountering their King Malcoline with his eldest son in the
field, they were both slain, and the whole Army overthrown. Afterward the
Scots choosing the dead Kings brother, King William went in person and deposed
him, causing Edward the second, son of the slain King, to be crowned, and
making him to swear fealty and homage to England; But the Scots obtained the
favor of King William, that neither English or Norman should bear any office
of State in Scotland.

King STEPHEN.
KIng Stephen having obliged the Scots by many high favors, by giving
Cumberland to David their King, and making his eldest son Earl of Huntington;
Yet so ungrateful did they prove that they provoked him to send Thurston then
Archb. of York with such an Army, that meeting with the King himself in the
head of his Forces, he utterly discomfited him, with the death of 10000. of his
men.

HENRY the second.
HEnry the second, though the pulse of those times did beat high, and that he
was distracted with a world of con^^^ions yet employing the Yorkshire Knights,
Humphrey Vile; Scutvill and Vescy, they with their victorious Arms took the
Scots King in the field and tendered him prisoner at Northampton, whence King
Henry carried him along to attend him in his wars in France.

RICHARD the first.
RIchard coeur de Lion caused William King of Scotland to carry the Sword
before him at his second Coronation at his return from the holy Land: At which
time King Rich. passed a Royal Charter, that whenever the King of Scotland
was summond to the English Court, the Bishop of Durham, and Sheriff of
Northumberland, should receive him at Tweede, and accompany him to Teis, from
Teis the Archbishop of York should attend him to the borders of that County,
and so the Bish. and Sheriffs of other Counties, until he came to the English
Court.

King JOHN.
KIng John one of the weakest Princes, and the most forlorn that ever England
had considering how the Pope and all the world did bandy against him, and what
fearful exigents he was reduced unto, yet finding Alexander the second then
King of Scotland to give sanctuary to his fugitive clergy, and foment others
against him, made an expedition thither himself but the two armies being ready
to buckle, the Scot seeing fire and sword to gape upon him, submitted himself,
and subscribed to such terms as the Conqueror propounded.

EDWARD the First.
NOw come I to the scourge, or, as his Tomb in Westminster tells me, the
hammer of the Scotts-men.

Edwardus primus Scotorum malleus hic est.

He causes Balioll to come to Newcastle to swear Fealty and homage to him,
who after flying to the French King, Edward was so netled for this his
defection, that though he had a far greater arrand in France, yet he chose
rather to employ Edmund Earl of Lancaster thither, and to march himself to
Scotland in the front of a puissant army; where the Scots in far greater
numbers showed their teeth only but durst not bite. King Edward summons Balioll
to Berwicke when he resubmitted himself with all the Nobles in open Parliament
which he held there; And for caution brought the King himself along with him,
leaving the Earl of Surrey Warden of Scotland.

Not long after the Scots revolted again notwithstanding their King was in
England, having one Wallie for their ringleader, who did much mischief on the
frontiers. And their insolency grew to that hight, that besides their inrodes,
they began to rhyme upon him.

What this Edward with his land shanks? But he paid them for their rhiming
with a vengeance; He goes again in person and at ^^nkirk battle killed out
right 200. of their Nobles and Gentry, with 40. thousand common Soldiers.

Then he summons a Parliament at Edinburgh where all the Nobles swear him
fealty again; He carries away the Ragman roll, the black cross, and the
stone wherein they say the fate of their Kingdom is fixed.

Then was there offered a third provocation, when le Bruce was crowned King of
Scotland.

The Earl of Pembrooke was sent against him, who utterly defeated him at
Iohnston.

Hereupon le Bruce flies to the Popes pantofle making him Lord Paramount of
Scotland, which moved King Edward notwithstanding the menaces and fulminations
of the Pope who wished him to forbear the Scots (because they were an exempt
nation belonging to the Roman Chapel) to make a fourth expedition thither
where he constrained le Bruce to fly to Norway, where he blew on his nails
while K. Edward lived. And* so eager was this great King in pursuit of this
action, that falling sickly upon the way, He said, If I die before I enter
Scotland, I charge you to go on courageously, and carry my body round about the
Country; but it pleased God to reprieve him until he had done his business
himself.

EDWARD the second.
BUt here comes a cooling-card for the English, Edward the second* whose
greatest honor was to be son to a Peerles father, and father to an incomparable
son, Rosa spinam, spina rosam genuit. In his time all went to wrack especially
in Scotland. At Bannocks battle Gilbert de clare Earl of Gloucester, and 40
Barons more, with 700 Knights and Gentlemen, and as some stories record above
40000. more were slain. Which defeat was imputed principally to the ill choice
of ground the English had taken. The Scots had behind them rocks, hills, and
woods to fly into if necessity required, before them loughs, and moors, that
the assailant could not march further. Add hereunto the pusillanimity of the
King (and the spirits of men are much raised by their leader) who was said to
fly first: and better it is for a lion to lead sheep, then for a sheep to
lead a company of lions.

The Scots hereupon were so agog that they enter Ireland with an Army under the
conduct of Edward Bruce the Kings brother, who landing at Karig Fergus
ransacked all the North parts, where he took such firm footing, that he
proclaym'd himself King of Ireland, though he had only overranne Ulster. At
which time there was such a direful famine, that in some places of Ireland
dead bodies were dug up, and their flesh boiled in their sculls to be eaten,
as the story tells.

But two years after, Sir Io. Bremingham then chief Justice, with the
Archbishop of Armagh, went with such a power against this upstart King, that at
Dundalke they got a most complete victory, one Manpas as it seemed having killed
the King hand to hand, for both their dead bodies were found together, and
Manpas covering the Kings body.

In England another Army was sent against the Scots, called the York Army,
which was also overthrown at Milton upon Swayle. Nevertheles the King would
venture once more in Person, and with a numerous Army invaded Scotland; The
Scots fly into the woods, and places of fastnes; And for want of provision in
that hungry country, the English were forced to retire, but in the retraict
they were so pursued that they lost all their ammunition, which was attributed
to the treason of Sir Andrew Harkley. But your critical Annalists ascribe it
to the poverty of spirit in the royal head, who being become hateful to God,
and man first for perjury, by infringing the oath he made to his Barons; then
by disobedience to his father who in his death bed charged him upon his
blessing to abandon Piers Gaveston, whom nevertheless he still doted upon with
the Spencers, by whose counsels he guided himself, And it was always seen
that Princes of an ill destiny follow the worst counsels.

EDWARD the third.
BUt here comes a spirit who will soundly vindicate his fathers affronts.
Edward the third, a Prince that was the soonest a man, and the longest that
lasted so of any in the whole catalogue of English Kings; yet being but young
when the Diadem first begirt his temples, after an encounter at Stanhope Park,
where great multitudes of Scots appeared, but vanished away like meteors,
skulking in woods and mountains.

In the Parliament held at Northampton, the King of Scotland was released of
his homage; But some years after, when the young King began to understand
himself, he sent an army with Balioll, whom he caused to be crowned at Scone;
And afterward there was a Battle fought at Hallidowne, where the English made
the Scots a bridge of gold to fly over, for they betook themselves all to their
heels.

King Balioll being thus restored, Scotland became feuditary to England again.

But a few years after king Ed. being deeply engaged in his French wars, and
thinking Hoc agere, the Scots presuming his absence would prove advantageous to
them, make cursorie sallies out of Scotland, and plunder all before them in the
North, by the instigation of the French.

But the Queen and the Lords of the North make such a levy of Martial forces,
that they entered Scotland like thunder, and at a mighty battle one Copland
takes the King prisoner, whom, pleading the law of arms he would not deliver
the Queen, until the King had sent order from France.

This overthrow was given upon Saturday, and upon Saturday six weeks before the
battle of Cressy had bin fought, with another against the Duke of Britain; in
all which king Edward proved victorious. And being triumphantly returned from
France, with the Flower-de-luces upon his sword, and redoubted now by all the
Princes of the Christian world having a triumverate of kings his prisoners, one
would think the Scot would have bin quiet but they still provoked him so far,
that in the dead of Winter (and King Ed. was a Prince for all weathers) he went
thither in Person himself, took Berwick, and had all Scotlond resigned unto
him, by the King himself, and the Nobles who jointly swore fealty and homage
to him.

RICHARD the second.
NOw the grandchild of this great King (who turned the wheel of his times
every where up and down the Christian world as he pleased) mounts the stage.
The Scots begin to infest the borders, and do other acts of hostility being
actually assisted by the French king, who sent thither his Admiral with a
1000. men at arms, and 60. sail with furniture to arm 10000. men more.

King Richard musters up an Army worthy of a King, and rusheth into Scotland
like a whirlwind as far as Dondee, and neither Scot or French appeared to
make oppos^tion.

The Scots (as the French annals say) not symbolizing with the humor of the
French grew weary of them, and casheered them, but they kept Jean de Viene, the
great Admiral prisoner in a manner, until the French king had paid his
ransom, which he did, otherwise his Admiral might have lain at dead anchor
there all his lifetime.

But being returned to France, lest he should seem to show no fruits at all of
his voyage, he informs the King, that he had pried into the uttermost
intrinsique strength, both of Scotland and England, and found that Scotland was
able to put in the field about 30000 men, and 5000. horse, and England 60000.
Charles the 6. of France, called le phreatique.
foot, and 8000. horse, This relation induced Charles the frantique to attempt
the invasion of England the year following, with a formidable Army, and Fleet,
which was to make sail from the Sluice, and for Landforces far exceeded the
invincible Armada of the year 88. But the Admirals account was found false,
and to have reckoned much without his host, for as the French Historians
report. King Richard had levied near upon 100000. Foot and 20000. Horse.

HENRY the fourth.
IN Hen. the fourth's time the tumultuous Scot stirs again, and pillars about
the Marches at last he composeth the body of an Army, whom Hen. Hotspurre
encountered, and killed more enemies then he had men in his own Army.

Sir Robert Umphreyvile being Vice Admiral, takes 14. great ships laden with
corn, together with the great Galeon of Scotland, hard by Lith, which so abated
the price of corn, that he was commonly called Sir Rob. Mend market.

A little after the young Prince of Wales hurld himself seven days march into
Scotland, and did what he would.

HENRY the fifth.
HEnry the fifth that man of men, and mirror of chivalrie (and the strangest
Convert that ever was) being come to the Crown, he falls like a Politician to
work in erecting Forts on the frontiers of Scotland, which he did without
control.

After he took the young King James the first, prisoner, in a very hot
encounter, and carried him up and down with him in the French wars.

HENRY the sixth.
HEnry the sixth for some gallant parts in the aforesaid young King James the
first of Scotland, married him to the Lady lane, Daughter to the Earl of
Somerset his Niece; But he proved afterward hatefully ungrateful, and
perfidious to King Henry, banding all his main forces against him but he was
shamefully repelled and beaten by Sir Ralph Gray, and the Knights of the North.

EDWARD the fourth.
ANd no less ungrateful and treacherous was James the third in Edward the
fourths time who desiring in marriage Cicilia the Kings daughter, it was
condescended unto so far that he had part of her portion advanced him; yet he
fell to acts of hostility and frames an Army, which the Duke of Gloucester with
15000 men ill favourdly beat (though they were twice more in number) and got
Berwicke again.

HENRY the seventh.
NOw come I to that great Magus of his days Henry the seventh who was said to
be hanted with walking spirits Simuell Warbecke, and Perkins, whom he chased
away by sprinkling of blood.

The Scots entertained Warbecke, though they knew him to be an Impostor, and
raised an Army for him.

The Earl of Surry and Bishop Fox, were sent against it, who drive the King
and Warbecke with the whole Army before them six days march into the Country,
at last the Scots King sent a defiance for a battle, which being to be fought
the next day, the Scot steals away the night before in a silent march.

Hereupon a Peace was concluded, provided that Warbecke should be banished
Scotland, whom notwithstonding they furnished with ships, to go to try his
fortune with the Cornish Rebels.

HENRY the eight.
ANd now come I to the glory of his days (especially two thirds of them) Henry
the 8. for never did Prince rise with a greater luster in Englands hemispheare,
and set in a darker clowd. And being extremely busied in the wars of France,
who should disturb him but his own brothervin-law, James the fourth, excited by
the French, who contributed great sums of money toward the support of the
war; The King sends presently from France to the Earl of Surry to make head
against them; At first the Earl sent Sir William Bullmer with 200. Archers
upon the borders to observe their motion.

The Lord Humes, enters with 8000. men, and as he thought to return with his
booty, Sir William Bulmer having reinforced his 200, to 1000. fell upon the
8000. Scots, with that fury, that he killed 500. took so many prisoners, and
intercepted the whole booty. This made the young Kings blood boil within him
for revenge, and composing a royal Army of the utmost strength of Scotland
went in the head thereof himself.

The Earl of Surry was not idle, but raised an Army of 26000 men, and his son
then Admiral came to him from Newcastle with 1000. old Sea soldiers. The two
Amies met in Flodden, where after many hot incounters victory fluttered a long
while with doubtful wings, at last the King himself, with the Archb. of St.
Andrews his brother, were slain, with 12. Earls, and 14. Barrons, and 12000
Gentlemen and others, and there fell of the English but 1500. only, nor could
the Scots rescue the body of their King, but to mend the matter a little, gave
out it was not the Kings body, but one Elfinston attired like to him, to
encourage the Army.

But afterward, though they acknowledged it was his body, yet would not Henry
the 8, permit him to have the due rites of Princely burial, because he had so
perjuriously violated his faith with him.

Some few years after the Duke of Albany raised an Army, but he was prevented
to do any hurt by the Lord Roos and Dacres, who made Bonefires of above 80.
Villages without seeing the face of an enemy, No sooner were they returned, but
news came, that the Duke of Albany had by this time in perfect equipage an
Army of 30000. men.

Hereupon the Lord Treasurer and Admiral, were sent to find him out, but both
Armies being come to sight of each other, the Scots not enduring well the
countenance of the English Forces, ran away and shamefully disbanded, so that
if the Lord General had had then commission ample enough, they might have
given a fatal blow to Scotland, as they themselves confessed, but by the
intercession of the Queen Dowager, Hen. the eights sister, they obtained truce.

After this King Hen. condiscended to meet James the fifth at York, but he
failed, sending certain Commissioners, and so cunning was the Scot, that their
Commission, and private instructions looked two ways, and as they were
treating, tidings came, that the Scots had rushed into, and rifled the Marches
most barbarously.

Hereupon the Earl of Norfolk was sent with 20000. men, who for 8. days did
what he would within the bowels of the Country.

Anothor Army was sent undet the Command of the Lord Dacres and Wharton, who
gave them such a mortal blow, that eight Earls were taken prisoners, and 200.
Gentlemen, and 800. more, and the stories concur, that there was scarce a
soldier, but had at least his two prisoners, this was Solmemosse battle.

Yet for all this such is the inclination of the English to be at peace with
their neighbors, that a match was concluded, and ratified by act of
Parliament, with a special instrument under the Scots Noble-mens hands between
Prince Edward, and the young Queen Mary, yet by the cunning negotiation of the
French, the Scot fell off. Hereupon old king Henry, who could digest no
indignities, sent 200. ships laden with soldiers to the Frith, under the Earl
of Hereford, who marched as far as Edinburgh, burnt the town, and part of the
castle, returning with revenge and rich booty. A while after the Scots
understanding the King was gone to France, thought to serve themselves of that
advantage, and to fall upon the borders, but the Earl of Hereford repelled them,

EDWARD the sixth.
EDward the sixth, though yet in his minority, seemed to be sensible of the
affront the Scot had put upon him for a wife, though his Father had vindicated
it pretty well, but as the case stood, nothing could concern England more,
then to hinder that the French of any in the world should have her.

And now am I come to the last true battle that was fought 'twixt England and
Scotland since the Conquest. The Duke of Sommerset was appointed General, the
Earl of Warwick his Lieutenant General, the Lord Clinton Admiral had 60.
ships of war, which were to hold course with the Landforces. So from
Barwicke, with a sober Army they entered Scotland, consisting of about 13000.
foot and 1200. men at arms, 2500. light horse, 16. pieces of Ordnance, every
piece having a guard of Pioners, who came in all to 1400. They had marched as
far as Musselborough, far within the Country, and with infinite pains did they
surmount the natural and artificial difficulties of the ways, three small
Castles they seized upon in their march without offering any act of violence to
small or great.

They understood the Regent of Scotland did far exceed them in number and there
came Recruits hourly to him, for the fire cross was carried about by the
Heralds through all parts, which is two firebrands upon the point of a Spear,
that all above 16. and under 60 should resort to the General rendezvous so
that the Historians on both sides leave the number of them indefinite to this
day, but they all agree, that they were at least twice as many and they had
twice as many Ordnance, yet notwithstanding many other advantage it pleased God
to give the English a complete victory (and victories are the decrees of
Heaven, when there is no tribunal on earth to determine the quarrel. This
happened precisely the same day that Flodden field battle was fought 34. years
before. There were 14000. slain outright, whereof there were 3000. Kirk-men;
Friars and Monks, above 1500. taken prisoners, whereof young Huntly, and other
great Lords were of the number; the spoils of the field 30000 jacks and 30.
pieces of Ordnance were shipped for England, and the English plundered the
Country up and down 5. days march further.

To these exploits at home may be added a smart blow the English gave the Scots
in Ireland, in Sir Io. Perrots government, for some 2000. Redshanks being come
over by the Burks means, like a swarm of Catterpillers they proll'd and pill'd
up and down, Sir Ri. Bingham then Governor of Connaught, made head against
them, with a small contemptible number, and at the river of Earne near Slego,
slew them all outright, so that not one soul escaped, to return to Scotland
with news what became of the rest.

Touching these late traverses of war 'twixt England and Scotland it is true
that unfortunate England has drawn upon her self a great deal of dishonor
in the opinion of the world abroad, specially among those who understand not
the true carriage of things; For these late rushings in of the Scot cannot be
so properly called invasions a^ invitations, by some spurious and most unworthy
degenerous Englishmen, who from a long time had plotted the bringing of them
in, and it was the most pernicious and basest treason that ever was practiced
against poor England: But to give a full and satisfactory relation of this
War, I will deduce the business from the beginning.

Before this unlucky storm fell 'twixt England and Scotland there were certain
clouds issuing from the vapors of diverse discontented brains, plainly
discerned to hover up and down a long time in both Kingdoms specially in that
Northern Region: The first which appeard was, when some years after his
Majesty's access to the crown, there was an act of revocation passed, where
some things which had insensibly slipped away from the crown, and other things
which were illegally snatched from the church were resumed, and reannex'd to
both; which lighting upon some of the great ones, they were over heard to
murmr though this was done with as much moderation as possibly could be, and
by the mature advice of the Counsel of state there, with the free opinion of
the approved'st Lawyers of that Kingdom, and from hence issued the first
symptom of coffeehouse.

Not long after his Majesty being informed of the mean and servile condition
of the Ministers of that Kingdom, which have the charge of the conscience, and
service of God, and make up a considerable part of the free borne subjects; his
Majesty understanding what poor pittances they received for their subsistence,
and for those small stipends also, or rather alms of benevolence, they
depended upon the pleasure of the Laiks, His Majesty by a special Commission
to that end found away to augment and acertain that allowance, and free them
from that slavish kind of clientele and dependency they had upon the seculars;
Whence may be inferred what monsters of ingratitude those men showed
themselves to be afterward, by exasperating and poisoning the hearts of the
people against their sovereign in their virulent and seditious preachments,
and inviting them to arms. Not long after, when the poor husbandman and
owners of corn were bound to pay tithes to lay persons called there the Lords
of the ^rection, were much incommodated by them, because they could not take in
their corn till the Parson had fetched away his tithe, who sometimes to show
his power or spleen peradventure would defer of purpose the taking in thereof,
whereby the whole crop, by not taking advantage of the weather, would oftimes
suffer: His Majesty for the redress of this grievance, appointed Commissioners
who found a way to purchase those tiths, and bring the impropriators to take a
pecuniary certain rent counterveylable unto them: Hereupon the Lay Lords and
Gentlemen finding that the respect and dependency whereby the Ministers and
owners of corn were formerly obliged unto them to be hereby lessened did
tacitly discover much animosity and displeasure: Moreover his Majesty when he
went thither to be crowned having conferred honors upon some whom he had found
industrious to promote his service, envy (which is always the canker of
honor) began to reign among diverse of them which did turn visibly afterward
to discontentments.

These were the concealed and private grounds, now the open and avowed causes
were the introduction of our Liturgy, the book of Canons, Ordination and
Consecration with the high Commission Court among them: and it has bin found
since that those things were introduced by the cunning of those discontented
spirits, that thereby there might be some grounds to suscitat the people to
rise, which plot of theirs took effect.

Add hereunto that after the King of Swedens death diverse Scots Commanders
came over, and made a flourish in our English Court, but being Soldiers of
fortune, and finding no trading here, they went to Scotland and joined
counsels with those discontented spirits to beget a war that they might be
in action.

The only pretense they took for their rising then, was our Common Prayer
Book, hereupon his Majesty sent a Proclamation to be published wherein he
declared that 'twas not his purpose to press the practice of that book upon
any ones conscience, therefore he was willing to discharge them from the use
and exercise of it, and to abolish all acts that tended to that end and that
all things should be in statu quo prius. But this would not suffice, for they
went on to fish in these troubled waters, having a design to drayne all the
Episcopal sees in the Kingdom, and turn them to laic land: Hereupon they
entered into a holy league which they termed Covenant, without his Majesty's
privity, and this was point blank against an Act of Parliament 1585. which
utterly prohibits all leagues, covenants or bands whatsoever without the Kings
consent: Hereupon the body of an Army was raised, and one Lesley was made
General, so they marched to Dunce Hill within five miles of Berwicke Where the
rendevouz was: They gave out they came with a petition to his Majesty, though
they brought it upon the pikes point. There were many noble English hearts
which swelled high at this insolency of the Scot, and therefore went with
wonderful alacrity to attend his Majesty to Barwick, but there were others who
were lukewarm in the business, and those of the greatest Ones, which the
Scots knew well enough, for there was nothing trans-acted or said in the Kings
Cabinet Counsel or Bedchamber, but there was intelligence given them:
Hereupon a pacification was shuffled up, and so both the Armies were dispersed.
The King being returned to London, grew more and more sensible of these
indignities of his Subjects of Scotland, and having called a Parliament
expressly for that purpose in England, some of the chief Members thereof were
so intoxicated by the Scot, that they did not only not resent this bravado he
had done to England, but seemed to approve of his actions. His Majesty finding
the pulse of his Parliament beat so faintly for enabling him to vindicate these
indignities upon the Scot, dissolved it, and proposed the business to his
privy Counsel, who not only advised him, but supplied him with noble sums to
repair his honor by War; hereupon the former Forces were rallied, and made up
into the body of an Army: The Scot was not idle all this while, but reunited
his former Army, whereof there was a good part undisbanded (contrary to
Article) and choosing rather to make another Country the theater of the War
then his own, he got over the Tweed, and found all passages open, and as it
were made for him all the way til he came to the Tine, and though there were
considerable Troops of Horse and Foot at Newcastle, yet they never offered as
much as to face him all the way; at Nea^burg there was a small dispute, but the
English Infantry would not fight, so Newcastle gates flew open to her
inveterate Enemy, without any resistance at all, where he had more Friends than
Foes, and the English Generals rather then to be put to unworthy compositions
retired in disorder: Whither this happened either by secret faction, or want of
affection in in the Soldier, or by the faults of the General, I will not
determine; but sure I am it was dishonorable enough to poor England, who was
bought and sold in this expedition. This was the first entrance the Scot made
into England since these unhappy Wars; but this invitation was private, the
last was public, being voted by the English Commons, and they rushed in, in
the dead of Winter; notwithstanding that his Majesty had taken a toylsome
journey not long before to sit amongst them himself in Parliament, where he
condescended to every thing they could imaginably desire, and they
acknowledging his unparaleld Grace, desired that Act to be revived whereby it
was Treason in the highest degree that could be, for any of the Subjects of
Scotland of what degree or condition foever to levy any Mlitary Forces without
his Majesty's express Commission, and this they did to express their
gratitude: as they said. But the year came scarce about before they had
molded another Army, not only without, but expressly against his Royal
Commission, and Counter-command, and would intrude themselves to be Vmpires
twixt him and his English Subjects whither he would or no; so in they rushed
again in dead of Winter, and for Martial exployts, the little credit they got
by storming of Newcastle was nothing countervaylable to that which they lost
before Hereford, where the Welsh-men banged them to some purpose from before
the town, and made their General to trusse up his pack and away, sending him a
fat Sow with Pigs after her, and a blew bonnet upon her head for his breakfast.

COROLLARIE.
THus have I run over, and faithful related by collation of many Authors, with
their concurrent testimonies, those trave^es of war which have passed betwixt
the English and Scots since the Conquest, having omitted many circumstances
which might have tended further to the glory of England, to avoid prolixity,
for I intended at first that this Discourse should be like a skein of Silk
wound up close upon a small bottom, which a freer hand might put upon the loom
and draw to a large piece.

Any man of a clear and unpassionate judgment will hence infer that the
Scots have been always far inferior to the English (except in these latter
unlucky Invasions) in point of true prowess, and National Power: In some
examples you may find how the English carried away more Captives then they
were Soldiers of themselves, driving them as sheep before them most of the
Battails they fought were in Scotland herself, when the English had been tired
with long marches, over uncouth, and strange places, being ignorant of the
advenues, and advantages of them.

Indeed in Edward the Seconds reign they got three battails, and one at the fag
end of Hen. the 8. wherein Sir Ralph Evers was slain, but it was more by
stratagem than strength, and besides the English might have been said to have
fought rather against the Heaven and Elements then men, having Wind and Sun in
their faces, but that might have been termed more properly a petty defeat then
Victory, for there fell not above 200. But what use did the Scot ever make of
those Victories, though the North parts have many places of fastness, and
tenable, yet I read not of any place they kept except Barwick; all the rest of
their Wars were but tumultuary sallies, and predatory devastations, and
pilfrings. But the English have taken four of their Kings captives, killed two
of them in the Field, carried away their Crown (which they give out to be
greater and more weighty than that of England) their Ragman-Roll, the Black
Cross, with other instruments of Sovereignty, and did sundry acts equivalent
to a Conquest. They pierced the very heart of the Kingdom, and the Scot may be
said to have only trod upon Englands toe, for they never came farther than the
Walls of York, till the reign of this thing that calls it self Parliament.
But if one should ask me why the English having made such firm Invasions from
time to time into the very bowels of Scotland, did not reduce it to a
vassallage and perfect provincial obedience, as well as to make their Kings
fuedetary in which state they continued toward England near upon five hundred
years?

My Answer shall be the same that Suetonius gives in behalf of the Romans, who
notwithstanding they lorded over the rest of Brittany four hundred and odd
years, yet they never went about to conquer Scotland, because they knew the
prize would not have countervail'd the pains, by reason of the cragginesse of
the Country and incommodity of habitation, therefore they thought it enough
that Adrians Wall which extended from Tinmouth to Solway Frith, near upon
fourscore miles should be the Western Bounds of their Empire.

Out of the precedent Examples we may also gather, that the Scot has been
always of a genius apt and forward to stir against England upon any the least
occasion. For of those five and twenty Kings and Queens that have been since
the Conquest, only five have been free of their insolences: yet did England
never begin with them till she was justly provoked thereunto, nor could
Alliances nor Leagues, or any ties of Treaty confirmed by Solemn Oaths (which
are those religious Bonds that pass 'twixt God and the Soul) detain the
Scottish Kings from puzling and disturbing England, when her Kings were most
distracted in Wars with France, and the better half of her strength employed
abroad, so that the Scots may be said to have been from time to time as goads
in Englands sides, or a thorn in her toe; and France leaguing merely for his
own advantage with them, may be said to have made use of Scotland as the Fox
did of the Cats foot to pull the Apple out of the Fire for his own eating: yet
for all these eager and irrefragable Combinations 'twixt the French and Her
against England, England ever bore up, and made her party good, and that in a
victorious way against both, and for Scotland she may be said to have given Her
blows for phillips.

But it seems that Italian was well versed in the Scotishmens humors, who
understanding of the late Union between the two Kingdoms, said that England
had got no great catch by the addition of Scotland, she had only got a Wolf
by the ears, who must be held very fast, else he will run away to France.

Some there are who much magnify and cry up the Scots of late years, for
great Soldiers, tacitly derogating thereby from the English, as if they should
stand in some apprehension of fear of them; but I cannot imagine upon what
grounds they should do it; true it is, that since the Revolt of the Hollander,
and these seventy years Tumults in the Netherlands, some of them are much
improved in the Art of War, and knowledge of Arms from what they were; they
have also pushed on their Fortunes in the Wars of Denmark, Sweden, Russia,
Germany; and France; for Poland, their Profession there is to trusse Packes
rather than traile Pikes. By reason of the quality of the Soil and Clime they
have tough and hardy bodies, and it may add to their courage that they venture
for a better Country, in regard they cannot go to a worse than their own. Now
it must be granted that the greatest advantage wherewith Nature does recompense
a mountainous and sterile Soil above a luxurious and easy, is, to make it
produce suffering bodies; which made the Romans ^e ninescore years conquering
of Spain, when they were but nine conquering of France.

For the first, it is answered, that if the Scot has made salsies abroad into
other Countries of late years, the English also have done the like, and are in
some places in greater numbers, as in the Low Countries, where at this day they
treble the number of the Scots, so that the Netherlands may be said to be a
Military Yard for the English as well: and he that is never so little versed in
the Modern Stories will find that the Foundation of that State has been
chiefly cimented with English Blood.

For the East country, it is true, there are many able Scots Leaders, and there
are also many English of abilities and fame.

To the second, if the Scots are a hardy People because of their cragges and
mountains: I answer that the Welsh and Cornish with them that dwell about the
Northern Alps in England, are as mountainous as they, and I believe have as
suffering and sturdy bodies; which makes the world yield it for a Maxim, that
no Prince of Christendom has a better choice to make Soldiers of than the
King of Great Britain.

I will conclude with certain Prophesies the Scots do much speak of. The first
is out of Polychronicon, where the Author Ranulphus Cistrensis relates the
words of a certain Anchorite who lived in King Egelbert his time, now near upon
900. years ago, and the words are these, Angli, quia proditioni, ebrietati,
and negligentiae domus Dei dedit^ sunt, primum per D^nos, deinde per Normanos,
tertium per Scotos, quos vilissimos habent, conterentur: varium erit saeculum,
and varietas mentium, designabitur varietate vestium. 1. The Englishmen for
that they wonneth themselves to treason, to drunkenness, and wretchlesnesse of
Gods House; first by the Danes, then by the Normans, and lastly by the Scots,
whom they holden least in esteem, shallen be overthrown, 'twill be an instable
Age, and the variableness of men's minds shall appear by the variableness of
their vestments.

The Danish and Norman Conquest have happened since, and the third is to follow
in the same manner, say they, not by Succession, but by the Sword.

2. The second are those Prophesies of Merlin, who much tampers with the single
Lion, and of the Feats that he should do, which they say, is meant of their
Lion within a double Treasure Rampant, Mars counterflowred.

3. Then come they to the Stone wherein they say, the Fortune of their Kingdom
is fixed, which has lain in Westminster, now near upon five hundred years.

Ni fallat fatum, Scoti quocunque locatum
Invenient Lapidem regnare tenentur ibidem.
If Fate fails not, the Scots, where ere they find
This Stone, there they shall reign and rule mankind.
Which they interpret also must be by the Sword not by Succession.

4. Then do they apply to themselves a Prophecy that the Irish have very
frequent amongst them, which is, That the day will come, when the Irish shall
weep over the Englishmens graves.

5. Lastly, that which is so common in the English men's months. [Lincolne was,
London is, and York shall be] which they say, shall be at last the Seat of the
British Empire, to be erected there by them.

But I am none of those that afford much faith to rambling Prophesies, but will
conclude with a late much cried up Wiseman, (Sir W. R.) that Prophesies are as
seeds sown in the vast field of time, whereof not one grain of a thousand comes
to grow up: yet these Prophesies may serve as so many Prospectives for England,
to behold, though a far off in a mist, the danger and destiny which may befall
her, from this growing Nation if not timely prevented.

6. Hereunto may be added another very old and il-favoured one, which shall
fore run her fall.

Gens tua te prodit, proh Anglia, Scotia rodit*
-- O England,
Thine own People thee betray,
And Scotland makes of thee a prey.
FINIS.

