A BLACKSMITH AND NO JESVITE: OR, A True relation how I William Houlbrook
Blacksmith of Marleborough was betrayed by Cornet George Joyce, who carried
the King prisoner from Holmby; and of the unjust imprisoning of me: And my
several examination: before Bradshaw, and his bloody Crew: With my Answers unto
all of them, as you may read in the following Discourse.

Written in the time of my imprisonment, and now put to public view.

Luke 21.14, 15. Settle it therefore in your hearts, not what ye shall answer;
for I will give you wisdom which all your adversaries shall not gainsay.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Francis Lash, next door
to the Pauls-head Tavern at Pauls-Chain, 1660.

To the Right Worshipful Henry Hungerford and Ieffery Daniel, Esquires,
Burgesses for the Town of Marleborough.
Worthy Sirs,
YOU have here presented the result of a few melancholy nights spun out in
recollecting what the minds Intelligencer had recorded from the single eyed
Cyclopean cruelty and unthought of heat in framing Chariots and hammering out
thunderbolts and other engines for Mars. Verily did not Zeal burn within me,
as impatient of concealing such firebrarnds, I should not dare thus boldly to
scriblle and grate your (now) serene, sedate spirits with such an ignoble
pedantick story of Royalty ravished with the disguised wildfire of
Aristocrasie, which heaven only knows how many heads of this Kingdom it might
have blown off, had they not (as wanting sufficiency of the fool to act the
knave artificially) being too confident of effecting their designs, in due time
discovered their dark Lanthorn.

Honored Sirs, The noble respect you were wont to manifest toward all
industrious achievements, as also some friends did incite me not to to defer
the divulging this (though rude, rustic, incomposed) Table-talk; has
imboldned me to crave for it a shelter under the shadow of your benign wings
from the contagious breath of heated tongues.

I am far from presuming to delineate these Monsters, so as to undertake to
derive their Pedigree, to fadom their bottomless profundity, or calculate the
knaverie, simplicity, instability or independencie either of their lives or
actions: but yet I have adventured in Loyalty to my Sovereign, obedience to
your selves, respect to my friends, and fidelity unto all, to present you a
true (though not so artificial) survey of a single plot, which had almost been
unwittingly purchased of the intending usurping Landlords, had not their
Achitophel-like Counsels been soon defeated, and they soon after confounded in
their own devices, for which Divine Providence, and a continuance thereof, is,
and I hope ever shall be the daily prayer of him, who devotes himself, to fear
God, honor the King, and unfeignedly to serve you,

William Houlbrook.

THE EPISTLE TO THE Reader.
CHristian Reader, it was not my thoughts to ever appear in Print, nor do I now
in any vainglory, or to expect any praise from men; but being moved by some
Friends, and having most part of it written by me ever since I was in Newgate,
and having witnesses in the Country that knew how it was acted: I have thought
good not to pass it over with silence; for it is not for any private ends that
I do it, but that the world may know what bloody men we have had in this Nation
that went under the Notion of Religions men, when indeed they were Devils; as
witness that blasphemous Petition of Praise-God Barebones, for which he had the
thanks of the Devils Imps, to have Church and State ruined; but there be many
other Presidents of as great a nature, and therefore I shall not name them
here; but we have had such wicked Governments that no man did dare to speak his
conscience. Seeing now it is Gods Love and mercy to settle us in our ancient
form of Government, of King, Lords and Commons, let us submit thereto,
according to our duty; For we all see the danger in rejecting the Lords
Anointed, and to what great extremities these poor Nations were brought into by
endeavoring to ruin one another: and I desire all persons that shall find
fault with me, to examine their own selves, and not to look too much abroad,
and all people to obey their King, and all Soldiers to remember our Savior
Christ's Command; and in their doing so, we shall live a peaceable and quiet
life, according to Gods Command, and shall never be brought under such bloody
men again. So leaving thee to the ensuing Discourse, I rest,

Thine to serve thee, William Houlbrook.

A BLACKSMITH And no Jesuit; Or, The Smith of MARLEBOROVGH.
THE twenty eight of July 1659. Cornet Joyce, Cornet Small, Quartermaster
Tynne, Mr. Waldron, and Corporal Carter, came to Marleborough with about twenty
Soldiers, which Soldiers quartered at the George at the towns end; but Cornet
Joyce and the rest of his Confederates, went into the Town; Joyce quartering at
the White-hart, and the rest at the Angel; having thus dispersed themselves, I
was sent for to shoe Cornet Smale's horse, which I did; being called into the
Chamber to receive my due, I went, not suspecting any design; but after
payment, Tynne, Waldron, Small, and Carter, were exceeding inquisitive
concerning news; I told them I could not inform them of any, being from home
till last night at Sarum Assizes: What news there? I made answer, great
complaints of bad trading, and great Taxes, and the poor ready to famish.

Tynne. Is it so? said Tynne; now thou shall see honest Smith that in a short
time things will alter, for thou shall see the Rump turned out.


Smith. Say you so sir? truly I am very glad of that, for then I shall have
some work, and likewise all other tradesmen.


Small. Truly honest Smith, I see thou art right, for I have lost all that I
had for being for the King.


Smith. Sir, be of good comfort, for a good Conscience goes beyond riches, and
no doubt but God will raise you up again.


Then they asked me what friends the King had thereabouts; I said there are
many that would be glad to see better times.

Tynne. But honest Smith, do thou know of any who have sent any thing to
carry on our Kings Interest? thou needs not be a fraid, (said he) for we are as
faithful true subjects to the King as any persons can be: then they all said,
we have lost our estates, we have ventured our lives, and therefore thou
need not doubt or fear us.


Smith. No, for my part I have no cause: then they called for Beer, and did
drink the Kings health, and I pledged them: then they said the Rump was
Cheaters; and my answer was, they said true enough, for they had not only
cheated the King of his right, but many thousands more.


Tynne. It is very true indeed, for these Members which sit now at Westminster
have Cheated me of a brave estate.


Waldron. And so also have they of mine, and I would not for forty pounds but
that I had known thee, for thou may do us a great deal of good, to help on
our Interest.


Smith. My answer was, that any good which I could do, I would do with all my
heart.


Small. Well honest Smith, tell what persons be here abouts as will do us any
good, for our desire is not to be Governed by this Rump all the days of our
lives.


Smith. You speak well sir, for they did pretend the Bishops was lazey, and
would preach but once a year, and Hazelrig and the rest have gained their
estates, and they will not preach at all; and added also, that self-interest
had been the cause of all divisions, for there is no more Religion: then one of
them went our of the room, and called Tynne out after him, and left only Cornet
Small with me.


Small. Honest Smith, what do you think of Captain Burges, and Mr. Thomas Baly?


Smith. They are very honest Gentlemen, and would be glad to see better times:
But sir, did you never hear the Letter as came from Hell to this Parliament,
otherwise called the Rump?


Small. No, pray tell us what it was; so I did.


Smith. It was directed, To our Right and Trusty, Welbeloved Members now
sitting at our House at Westminster; or in their absence, To our good promoters
of our Good Old Cause.

The Contents follows.

Right dear and Welbeloved,
Whereas you according to the Trust that we have reposed in you, have gone on
with the work of Reformation, and desolation of all our good people of England,
we return you thanks; hoping you will persevere so to the end; And our desire
is, that you wll send as few to Heaven of those you Murder as you can; for we
must give you a hint of your former mistakes in Charles, Love, and Hewit, cum
multis aliis, ( here you must understand the Devil mistakes, in speaking Latin
to those as cannot understand English) And we would not have you cloy us with
so many stinking Lobsters, I mean your Red-Coates; for if we shall think it
convenient to continue you any longer on Earth, we shall come and keep our
Court amongst you at White Hall; therefore we would not have you sell it, nor
yet Somerset House; it may be thought meet if you sit long, to make it one of
our ^eens Palaces.

Dated at the Stygian Lakes, in the Infernal shades. Pluto.


This I told them, and many other things which made them very merry; and all
this time they called for Beer; and when one had drunk unto me, then another
did begin; so they kept me drinking til Ten a clock that night, and they did
endeavor to keep all out of the Room, Tapster and Chamberlain, because they
should not hear what they did say unto me. Then one of them went to Cornet
Joyce at the White-Hart, and told him that they had got a Blacksmith at their
Inn, who would do them a great deal of good, and wished him to deal warily
with me; for they could do no good upon me, if he would but try me they knew
it would be worth their labor in coming; so he promised them in the morning he
would attempt what they desired: All this was done unknown to me, (and all this
I was told by the Chamberlain afterward.) Having proceeded thus far, and it
being late, they began to prepare for bed, so away came I home, and told my
Mother and a neighbor what had passed. The next morning Cornet Joyce did send
for me, to come and shoe his Horse, and I went; but it was as a Bird to the
snare, by the cunning of the Fowler. As soon as I came to the Heart, he was
standing at the stable door, and was clothed like a Farmer, and so I thought
him to be; and he desired me to nail his Horse, which I did, and he gave me
six pence for my labor: sir, this is too much, no, it is not said he, for thou
do deserve it, for I perceive that thou art a good workman.


Joyce. Welcome honest Smith, go up into my Chamber, and I will make thee drink
into the bargain.


Smith. I being come into the Chamber, Joyce called for a pint of White Wind
and sugar, and some Tobacco and Pipes, and caused me to sit down with him, and
drank unto me.


Joyce. Come honest Smith, here is a health unto the King; and threw his Hat
under the board.


Smith. Seeing that, I plucked off my hat also, and said, with all my heart;
and pledged him.


Joyce. Come honest heart? as a comfort unto thee, I Will tell thee news, if thou
do not know of it already.


Smith. What is that sir, I pray?


Joyce. I will tell thee, there is to be this day seventhnight a Rendezvouze of
about ten thousand men at the Forest of Dean for the King, did not hear of
it?


Smith. No indeed Sir, not I; I never heard of any such thing.


Joy. It is very true; for a friend of mine at London has sent down 50000. l.
into the West, and ten thousand Case of Pistols to carry on my Masters
interest; how think thou of that, honest Smith?


Smith. Very well; God prosper you. I am glad to hear such news; for God knows,
Sir, I should be willing to venture my life for the King, so I might do him any
service.


Joyce. It is a sad thing for a man to be banished from his right, and for
seeking after it to be proclaimed a traitor by those that are Traitors
themselves, and murderers too.


Smith. Then he showed me the Kings Commission, telling me that the King had
given him power to raise Forces for him, and I did read his Commission, and
there was the Broad Seal on it, signed Charles Rex. Having laid this as a
foundation to the mischief intended, he proceeds to ask of me many questions;
first about Captain Burges.


Joyce. Do thou think that Captain Burges is right for us?


Smith. Pray Sir do not question that, for he is a very honest godly man; and I
am sure he is willing to have a Government settled, and not be governed by the
Fagg-end of the Nation, as we are now (the more is the pity.)


Joyce. I believe he is honest, because he has not raised his Troop all this
while; but do hear honest heart? do know of any that has given any money
or Horses to carry on our Masters interest?


Smith. No indeed sir? I do not know of any that have.


Joyce. But do know of any that will?


Smith. Yes, there are as honest men hereabouts as any in the Land.


Joyce. What do think of the Lord Seamour?


Smith. He is a gallant, noble, and worthy person.


Joyce. But do hear honest heart? do know of any interest which he has
carried on for my Master?


Smith. No indeed sir; I do not know of any interest wherein he has engaged
himself in reference to the King.


Joyce. But do think if we should make trial of him to aid and assist my
Master, that he would be willing? for, if we should take away horses by force,
we shall lose the good will of the Country; therefore if we can gain such men
as he whereby to carry on our design without oppression, we shall be in a more
likely way to prosper.


Smith. Truly sir, you may make trial and see, but he lives very privately, for
they have been pulled and baited up and down, so that I think they will have
but small stomach to meddle any more, unless they see an opportunity.


Joyce. Well Smith, what, do thou know my Lord Marquess? what do thou
conceive of him?


Smith. Truly, a noble Lord.


Joyce. Do thou know of any interest he has carried on for my Master?


Smith. No indeed sir, I do not know of any.


Joyce. Do think that Captain Burges does carry on any design for him?


Smith. No indeed sir, I do not know any of them that carry on any design for
him; but I conceive they are all his good friends.


Joyce. Do think that the Lord Marquess will do my Master any good, to let me
have any money, or horses; for that as we do, it must be done before the
Militia be raised, or else we shall be disappointed.


Smith. You may go and try sir; for if you go to him, I believe he will do what
may be done with the safety of his life and Estate.


Joyce. But honest Smith, if thou will go and carry these Letters to these men,
thou shall be well paid; which Letters are in number four; one for the Lord
Marquess, another for the Lord Seamour, one to the High Sheriff, and the other
to Mr. Webb of Ogbourn a Minister.


Smith. I cannot go, to morrow being Saturday, and our Market day, which
requires my being at home; therefore I pray go your self.


Joyce. Honest Smith, what think thou of Mr. Byfield, Mr. Proffit, Dr.
Chambers.


Smith. Truly they are honest true hearts, and would be glad to see better
times.


Joyce. Do think we may trust these Presbyterians? for thou know they have
been false to my Masters Father.


Smith. Pray sir, do not question them; there were some indeed who were not
right; but they that were so, have suffered deeply for it: For Quakers, and
Anabaptists, and others of the Phanatick sort have been so violent against
them, as to pull them out of the Pulpits, and cast dirt in their faces; as that
now they will prize a good King when it is Gods will to send him.


Joyce. But do hear Smith? where is your meeting place?


Smith. At Mr. Thomas Baylies.


Joyce. What is Mr. Baylie?


Smith. An honest Royal heart.


Joyce. But if we should speak with him, he having no horses, will be useless
in this matter.


Smith. But sir, Mr. Byfield of Collingbourn has two, he may have one of them.


Joyce. Well honest Smith, what horse was that which the Duke of Buckingham
bought here?


Smith. A very good horse indeed sir.


Joyce. Do hear he is going to carry on my Masters Design?


Smith. No indeed sir, I do not hear so; but he bought one or two horses by the
way, and one there; and said be would buy some more if he could light upon them
worth money, and therefore it may be like enough.


Joyce. Well honest Smith, the Lord Fairfax is to be General of all these
Forces as are raising now.


Smith. I am very glad of that indeed sir, for he is very well beloved in the
Army; if he could have had his will, our King had never been beheaded.


Joyce. Thou say right honest Smith; but do hear no reports of it whether
it is so or no?


Smith. No verily sir; I did never hear of it until now.


Joyce. But do hear Smith; do know of any who are to carry on my Masters
design? if thou do know; do so much as tell me, for I shall be as true as
thine own heart.


Smith. There are many true Royal hearts that are gone down toward Bathe.


Joyce. Who in particular, honest Smith?


Smith. One of them is one of London, one Mr. Maskell.


Joyce. And how can tell honest Smith?


Smith. Why, he had some discourse with me?


Joyce. What discourse was it you had?


Smith. He said sir, that there was an interest carrying on, and he did hope I
would fight for my Country as well as the rest.


Joyce. O! I do know him, for he is an honest blade! a good number of such men
would do well, do know of any more?


Smith. No indeed sir.


Joyce. What company had he with him here?


Smith. Why sir? he had two or three with him.


Joyce. What were they?


Smith. One of them was one that was a prisoner; and Thurlo that wicked fellow
would not suffer him to have the use of Pen, Ink, or Paper; but he said he
should be even with him: he is as honest a Gentleman as you ever came near sir.


Joyce. There is no doubt of that; for there is none but honest men do carry on
my Masters interest; and there is no doubt, that if ever my Master King Charles
shall come, he is so Royal a Master, that he will reward all those that are
true and faithful unto him: For my part honest Smith I have lost all for being
faithful for my Master; for truly, if I had known of any interest carried on, I
should have told them of it: But do know Mr. Bond of Ogbourn?


Smith. Yes very well sir?


Joyce. When did he come out of France from my Master?


Smith. I cannot tell sir, whether he was ever with the King or no; or whether
he be at home; but I am certain he is as honest a true heart for the King, as
any in these parts.


Joyce. Do you know Master Parrom?


Smith. Sir, I know him very well, for he has suffered very much for the King,
poor Gentleman!


Joyce. Thou say very right honest Smith; but when did see him?


Smith. Indeed sir I have not seen him a great while.


Joyce. If I could but see him, I should make known our Design unto him, for
he would be very joyful to hear of it.


Smith. You say right sir; I, for you need not doubt but that he would be glad
to hear (as well as many others) of the bringing the right Heir to his Estate
again, from which Oliver Cromwell that Grand Traitor, and the rest of his bloody
Crew has banished him, murdering his Father before his own Palace Gate, the
like whereof has not been known in former Ages; for I have read of all the
Reigns of the Kings and Emperors, and cannot find the like case.


Joyce. Thou sai'st right honest Smith; for it was the Horridst thing that ever
was committed; but God will find them out, I will warrant thee, for God will
not let innocent blood go unrevenged.


Smith. Upon these speeches the tears did stand in mine eyes, which he
perceiving, did take notice of it; and told Bradshaw of it when I was brought
to London, as you shall hear in the following discourse: sir said I, Oliver
Cromwell did pretend that the King was a Traitor, and that he did violate the
Laws of the Nations; but pray sir consider what he has done; for he was the
greatest Traitor that ever Hell hatched, for first he puts his Sovereigne Lord
King Charles to death: and when that was counted a High Breach in the King to
demand Five Members, he most Traitorously turned them All out; for just as
Richard the Third did, so did he; and likewise he brought, like the Divil, as
he can, Religion for all his bloody Actions; as if God had ordered him to
Murder his King, which God and man knew was innocent, and whom he ought to
have obeyed, and not to have slain: But what is it that a Tyrant will not do?


Joyce. Thou say right honest Smith, for he was the grearest Tyrant as ever
was read of, which I did find unto my sorrow; and these his Imps which now sit
be as bad as he, for they seek after other men's revenues as he did, for they
are bloody-minded men all of them.


Smith. You say right sir, for if Hell had been picked there could not a more
wickeder pack been found out, for they all seek after blood, and other men's
estates; and there they sit and Vote estates one for another, and lay great
Taxes upon the Nations, but never looks after a Trade for the Nation whereby
they might be able to pay them; and fetches Martin and others out of Goal as
are in for debt to sit in the House, because they lack Members to stand for the
Good Old Cause; as if there were not men enough in the Nation, as will stand
for the Good Old Cause as well as they; but this cause as they name, is not the
Cause as tenderhearted Christians would have; for these seek after other men's
estates, for Martin to make him rich; and the rest will not be in debt as long
as there is money in the Nation.


Joyce. Thou say right honest Smith, for my estate and other men's must pay
their debts.


Smith. But sir, did you never read Mr. Prin's Books? he discovers what their
Good Old Cause is: That man has done as much good as any one man in the
Nation; and there is no doubt but the King will reward him for it.


Joyce. Indeed honest Smith I have seen many of his Books, and have read many
of his passages, but cannot hear of any thing as he does Act, and thou know
that my Muster cannot be brought in with Books, but with Arms.


Smith. You are right sir for that, but there is a time for all things, and I
believe when he can see an opportunity, he will not be wanting.


Joyce. But when did see him.


Smith. I saw him about a week a go at the sign of the Bear in Marle-borough.


Joyce. And whither was he going?


Smith. Down toward the Bath, I think.


Joyce. And had thou any discourse with him?


Smith. I was with him there, and did speak with him by the means of a Londoner
that was there.


Joyce. But what discourse had you with him?


Smith. Truly very little, for I went in only to see him, and I only said I was
glad to see him, for I had heard good report of him, for I had read many of his
Books; and he returned me thanks, and made me drink; so I went from him, and
did never before nor since see him.


Joyce. But did he not speak about a rising there?


Smith. No indeed sir.


Joyce. That is a wonder they do not tell him of it, for he would be a good
friend to my Master; had I but spoken with him, I would have given twenty
pounds if I had been there.


Smith. You might have been there for half the money sir.


Joyce. But do hear honest Smith, Do know the Lord Herbert?


Smith. Yes sir, very well.


Joyce. Do think he will do us any good, for he has been right for my
Master formerly?


Smith. You need not question that sir, he is so still; for I assure you that
he is as honest a Noble Lord, as any is in the Western parts.


Joyce. Do know of any Interest he has carried?


Smith. No sir, there is none that I know of, but he will not be backward when
opportunity may serve.


Joyce. Thou do know a great many Travailers as come up and down, do not?


Smith. Yes sir, I know a great many.


Joyce. I wonder thou wast not Trappan'd amongst them.


Smith. No, thanks be to God he has preserved me hitherto; but in Old Nolls
time I was very fearful, because he set many such persons awork.


Joyce. How did carry thy self being always amongst them.


Smith. I have read the 13. of the Romans, and there I find that we must be
subject to the higher Powers, for there is no Power but is of God; and except
that power do command any one to do that which is not according to his Word,
then we must suffer and not resist; for there is Scripture for it: Whether it
is lawful to obey God or man judge you?


Joyce. So honest Smith, thou art in the right; for we all ought to do so.


Smith. I must now take my leave, for I am in much haste, for all my work lies
to be done, and to Morrow is our Market Day; and so I give you many thanks for
all your loving kindness and favors you have showed me.


Joyce. Nay, pray honest Smith stay a little longer.


Smith. I cannot indeed sir; and so I departed from him, and when I came down
the stairs, I went for my shooing basket into the stable, and as I came back
again, I saw Cornet Joyce go forth toward the Angel unto the rest of his Crew;
but God knows I could not believe any otherwise, but that they had been as
honest as any men in England, for their pretenses made me believe no otherwise
of them: I seeing him going forth to the Angel, I went to the Chamberlaines who
heard most part of this discourse, and desired them to say nothing of what
discourse had passed between Joyce and me, and them; because if they did, we
should be called to question about it, and these honest Gentlemen might be
ruined.


Chamberlains. We will not speak a word to any Christian.


Smith. Pray do not; for God prosper him and all others that be in Arms, to get
him to have his own, whose right it is.


Chamberlains. We will all keep secret.


Smith. So I went home to my shop, but all this time I did not know what their
names were, nor what they were, but when I came to my shop, I was sent for to
shooing unto the Kings Arms, and being there, after I had shooed the Gentleman's
Horse, he made me drink: and then I desired Mr. Sadler the Inne-keeper to go
into the Court, for I had some news to tell him: so I told him what Joyce had
told me.


Sadler. I am very Joyful of it, but is it true?


Smith. It Is very true, for I have seen the Kings Commission Signed Charles
Rex. Then my Brother came for me, and told me there was a Gentleman stayed at
the shop to speak with me: so I went to my shop, and when I came, it was one of
them that was at the Angel the night before, as I have related already, whose
name was Corporal Carter.


Carter. Smith, prithee go along with me to shoe a Horse.


Smith. Where is your Horse sir?


Carter. At the sign of the George at the Towns end.


Smith. I cannot go sir, for I shall lose more the while, than I shall take of
you.


Carter. Pray go, you shall be paid over and above for your going down; for
you shooed the Gentleman's Horse so well at the Heart, that I would desire you to
shoe mine too.


Smith. Well Sir, any good as I can do you, I Will do with all my heart: so I
went along with him, and as I was going along with him, my Mother called me.


Mother. William, whither are you going?


Smith. To the George to shooing: Mother. To the George to shooing; to the
George to undoing, I am afraid.


Smith. Why Mother; what need I be afraid to go? for I know of no hurt I have
done to any one; so along I went with him, and as I looked behind me, I see
Joyce, and Tynne, and Small and VValdron coming after whispering, and still I
did think they were friends to the King; so when I came to the George, the
horse did not want a shoe, but I was to take one off, and set a better on; and
as I was a shooing of him, these four blood-suckers as I have named, came by
me, but said never a word, but went up into the Chamber; and when I had shooed
the horse, the Soldiers called me in to take my money; so I went in and
received six pence, and they made me drink so long, as it cost me the six pence
as I received for my work; then the Corporal as had me down, said he would give
me a Flagon of Beer; which had, and there was one Ia. Brown with them, who was
for the King formerly, and seeing him, I took them to be very honest men: and
told them their horses were very poor and unable to do them any service.


Soldiers. We have better horses when occasion serves.


Smith. So you had need Sirs, for the Rump's soldiers have very good horses,
if they should take you, you will be utterly ruined; God preserve you; if I
could gain a good horse, I would not be long behind you to Act for such a
Cause, as God owns, as he does this.


Soldiers. Time may come, you may have a horse honest Smith, to your hearts
desire.


Smith. Then Joyce and the rest sent down an Order to the soldiers, to provide
for a March, and it was then time for me to march too; so I took my shooing
basket, and as was going, James Brown called me back.


Brown. Honest William, do me a Courtesy:


Smith. What is it honest James?


Brown. It is but to go to the end of the Village along with me, to be a
Witness to the receiving of some Money.


Smith. Any good as I can do you, I Will do it with all my heart; so I went along
with him, and being about the middle of the Village, I looked back, and saw a
led horse coming after with five or six a horseback, and four or five a foot,
which made me wonder what it meant; But I thought the led horse had been for
James Brown; so I went a little further, and being near the house, which I was
to go unto, they said,


Ioyce's Crew. Come Smith, get up and ride.


Smith. Why so, we are hard by the house.


Ioyce's Crew. You must get up, and ride.


Smith. How Gentlemen, is it so? is this the money, the receiving of which I
was to be a witness to^; Gentlemen, pray tell me what you a^e, and whither you
will carry me, and I Will go with you with all my heart, but before I Will go with
you, knowing not whom you are, nor whither you will carry me; upon which I took
a case of knifes out of my pocket and drew one, they being afraid, lest I would
do them some hurt or my self, fell all upon me and took away my knives; James
Brown broke one of them on his knee, carried the other to Joyce: so they
searched my pockets, took from me one shilling, the Picture of Oliver Cromwell
with an Owl on his head, and the Letter as the Devil sent to the Rump (as it
was said) having so done, they set me on horseback with main strength, and tied
my legs under the Horses belly with a great cord, John. Forty of Hunger ford,
was ambitious of that employment: then they had me away to a place called
Shabourn out of the rode by Woods and Lanes for fear I should be taken away
from them. (Christian Reader) little do thou think what a Condition I was in,
not knowing that they were, nor whither they would carry me! fearing also lest
they would they have murdered me in the Woods; from Shabourn, their Order was
to carry me out of VVilt-shire into Berk-shire, and so they did: there I stayed
at an old man's house with a cord about me, till nine a Clock at night, at which
time there was an Order brought from Joyce, to carry me away to Reading, but
they would not tell me so, until I came to Newbury, so they set me a horseback
again, and the same man tied me as before: the horse as I rid on, was a pitiful
stumbling creature, he fell with me twice upon his knees, if he had fain on his
side, it had broken my legs short of; at break off day, we came to Newbury,
where they with much entreaty untied my legs.


Soldiers. We have a very strict charge given us, our lives are at stake, if
you should get away; you are not to be lost for twenty thousand pounds.


Smith. If I did offer to run, then you might do what you would with me.

At nine a Clock in the morning, we came to Reading, where I was conveyed down
to Major Evelling, to whom they delivered a Letter they had from Joyce, when he
had read the Letter, he called me up stairs to him.


Evelling. How now honest friend, this will be a brave voyage for you; if I
could speak so much for the good of the Nation as you can, I would give twenty
thousand pounds; come honest friend, you must go to London presenrly for the
Council of State, do expect your deing there this night; there is a Packet gone
up to them about you already.


Smith. Sir, is this your Love to me to be brought all night with my legs tied,
and have me now to London? no Sir, you shall draw me at the horses tail, before
I will, until Monday; for if I am worth twenty thousand pounds to you, you may
well keep me till Monday: then it was ordered, I should stay till Monday the
first day of August, then I was to go toward London: I asked Major Evelling
what I should do for meat while I was there, for I had no money.


Evelling. You shall have some meat.


Smith. Then I was had to the Red Lion, where we had meat and drink, which came
to two shillings; thence I was carried unto the Sign of the Angel, where I
supped and lay all night: the next day being Sabbat-hday, when I rose in the
morning, the soldiers upon my entreating, were willing to go to Church along
with me.


Soldiers. If you go to Church, you must pluck off your Apron.


Smith. I will Gentlemen.


As I was going to Church, there comes a Corporal from Major Evelling to have
me unto the ship, unto three prisoners more.

Smith. Why friend, said I, we are going to Church, pray come again after
dinner.


Corporal. No, you must go along with me; for a Church belongs not to you, nor
any of your Crew.


Smith. What Crew is that you speak of.


Corporal. Your bloody Presbyterians.


Smith. They are not so bloody as you are, Sir.


Corporal. Well, you must go along with me.


Smith. Well, I Will go along with you; and when I came to the place assigned for
me, they put me in a Room with two more prisoners: a porter that was taken a
carrying Letters to the Lady Howard, and a poor seaman, which seaman did cry
out for Beer most miserably, but could have none, so that he was forced to
drink his own water; the Porter gave him a Flint that he used to strike fire
with, to put in his mouth to quench his thirst, he fell asleep with it in his
mouth, and had liked to have choked him: seeing this bad usage, I was amazed,
in thinking what I should do, having no money: then I called for some Beer, and
made the Tapster believe I had money, by speaking these words, that it was a
good turn as I had some money, or else I should be but in a sad condition: by
which words, I had some Beer and Tobacco, I made the sea man and the Porter
drink: then the seaman spoke to me.


Seaman. The people of the house desired me to come off the Bed, and said I
must lie on the Boards.


Smith. Do not, lie still where you are; It being Sabbath, I desired them to
lend me a Bible, but their answer was, that a Bible did not belong to me, nor
none of my Crew; I asked what Crew, and they answered, the bloody
Presbyterians: Well then, shall I have any dinner? then they had me down in the
Kitchen to dine with the servants; but there was but little meat; God keep all
good people from the Ship at Reading. After dinner, I was had up into the
Chamber again; and at night we were all removed into another Chamber, where we
lay the next day, being Monday, we were ordered to provide our selves ready for
to go to London, so we came to Coates's Coach, where there was great contest
whether they should tie my legs, or no, as I did sit in the Coach, but at last,
it was carried in the Negative, by the means that one of the soldiers was one
of my acquaintance, then we went into the Coach, being four of us; that was,
one Mr. tradling a Gentleman of Wales; the Seaman, Porter, and my self, and we
went by the way of Sunning, being two miles beyond Reading, and there they did
take up in the Coach three Passengers more, a Gentlewoman and her son, and an
Anabaptist, the Anabaptist fell in discourse with me.


Anabaptist. Upon what Account are you carried prisoner.


Smith. Because I would not bring innocent blood on the Nation.


Anabaptist. I lament your condition, because of your hard usage.


Smith. But when I had turned my back, he Ioab like, speaks to the soldiers to
tie my legs, and said I was the shrewdest fellow as ever he did discourse with,
but they did not hearken to him. So when we came to Cole-brook, we had a good
dinner: and the Gentlewoman pitying of me, paid four shillings six pence
toward the dinner: so along we came toward London, but by that time we came
some four miles, I had an occasion to dis-burthen my self of Natures due.


Smith. Pray let me come forth out of the Coach.


Soldiers. No, you shall not, it is only a pretense to get away from us, you
may do it in the Coach if you will.


Smith. with all my heart, I do not care; pray make room for me, hold up your
legs, so I untied my point.


Coachman. Pray Gentlemen, let him out of the Coach, for there will be a stink
to poison us all.


Soldiers. We Will let him forth: Come Smith, go to the middle of the Village.


Smith. I Will go to yonder end of the Village with all my heart: or if you will
not let me, I Will do it in the Coach.


Soldiers. We, we will go along with you.


Smith. So I went to the ditch, and they with me with their pistols in their
hands: now Gentlemen, I think, you will make me do it for fear, if you watch me
so narrowly.


Soldiers. We do not care for that, we can do no less; for our lives lie at
stake, if you escape.


Smith. So I went into the Coach again, and about seven a Clock, we came to
London, being the first day of August, the Coach carried us down to White Hall,
where many people did resort to see what prisoners was there, so I came out
with my Lether Apron before me.


Gentlemen. What have you brought here?


Smith. A Blacksmith.


Gentlemen. Why, what has he done?


Smith. I do not know siir, without it be for a present supply to fill up the
House, for I hear they want Members.


Gentlemen. How now, what do you jear at White Hall gate? come along with us?


Smith. So we were had in, and all other people kept back, because we should be
seen from the rest: we went through several Rooms until we came to the Council
Chamber Door where Sergeant Dandy came forth to take their names as came up
with me, after he had taken them, he enquired farther.


Dandy. Is there not one Mr. Holbrook here?


Smith. There is one Mr. Holbrook a Blacksmith here; upon that he looked upon
me, and seeing my habit, he went into the Counsel and told them what I was,
upon that, out came the Lord Sidenham and looked very eagerly on me.


Sidenham. Are you a Blacksmith?


Smith. Yes my Lord; and I have heard very good reports of this Honorable
Court of their merciful dealings, and I hope I shall find it so now.


Sidenham. You are some Jesuit I Will warrant you? for you are no Blacksmith.


Smith. Why my Lord? have you such thoughts of a poor Blacksmith.


Sidenham. Because you give such answers.


Smith Why my Lord? If you have read the History of K. Henry the 8th, you shall
find there was a Black-smiths son whose name was Thomas Cromwell that was
Vicegerent unto the Kings person, and one of his Privy Counselors. And if you
read the History of Scanderbag of the Turks, my Lord, you shall find there was
a Blacksmith that commanded all the Armies when all the Officers fled, and
gained victory. And if you have read the Lives of the Emperors, you may find
one of them was a Black-smiths. And if you read the History of Queen Mary, you
shall find six Black-smiths that suffered for a good Conscience. And if you
read the Heraldry of Arms, you shall find that the highest Coat of Arms in the
three Nations belongs to the Black-smiths.


Sidenham. What, do you come with your Peddegree my merry blade? come Sergeant
Dandy look to this fellow, for he is some Jesuit, and has transformed himself
into a Blacksmith habit, because we should not know him.


Dandy. What, shall I set you down a Blacksmith, or a Farrier?


Smith. I am a Smith, I am no Farrier.


Dandy. I Will set you down a Farrier.


Smith. You will not set down a lie sir, for I am a Blacksmith.


Dandy. Then I Will set you down Blacksmith.


Smith. Then he called for a File of Musketeers to guard us unto the Irish
Guard in cotland-yard, where we lay on the boards with some other prisoners;
the next day I was sent for to the Council, where was the Lord Bradshaw, the
Lord Disborough, and Sir Henry Vane,


Bradshaw. What a woeful fellow have thou been for to endeavor to bring these
Nations in blood, in carrying on the interest of such a bloodsucker and O
Villain.
Traitor as Charles Stuart is? But come my merry blade; if you will be
ingenious, and reveal the enemies of the Commonwealth, you shall see what we
will do for you; you ought to be encouraged, and not discouraged; and to be
rewarded, and not punished; remember thou have a soul, thou must seek to save
it, and a Conscience; do not stretch it, neither must you lie.


Smith. (My Lord) if I should not reveal the enemies of the Commonwealth, as
should seek to act against such godly people as you are, I am worse than
accursed.


Bradshaw. You speak well my merry blade: I wish we may find it so.


Smith. William Lenthal the Speaker came and told them that the Parliament
would desire their company to carry on the work of the day in prayer.


Bradshaw. My merry blade, go into the Council Chamger, and be Royal, and you
shall not lose by it, for we must go.


Smith. (Ha thought I) when the Fox preaches, beware the Geese. Then General
Lambert was going out against Sir George Booth; all went but Disborough, and he
had more mind to examine me than go to prayr; and whilst they were at prayer,
he was at his prey; so they had me in the Room, and Disborough came in after
smoking.


Disborough. Come honest Smith, do thou know me?


Smith. No indeed my Lord, I do not know your honor.


Disborough. My name is Disborough.


Smith. Is it so, my Lord; you was one of the Major-Generals then, my Lord.


Disbo. But do hear honest Smith; do know Captain Burges of Marleborough?


Smith. Yes, very well my Lord.


Disborough. Why is he made Ranger of the Lord Marquess Forest.


Smith. Truly my Lord I cannot tell; but as nigh as I can I Will tell you; he
being a man of power, and the Common lying open, and many offenders living
thereabout, he is put in for a strict terror unto the offender.


Desborough. Is that all do think?


Smith. Yes my Lord, that is all as I know of?


Disborough. Did never hear of any design as he carried on with the Lord
Marquess of Hertfod?


Smith. No indeed, my Lord.


Disborough. But thou know honest Smith, that one good turn asks another?


Smith. That is true, my Lord; for if you would let me have my liberty, I
should pray for you?


Disborough. Thou need'st not doubt of that, if thou will be royal, and reveal
the enemies of the Commonwealth: But do know of no design as is carried
between them?


Smith. No, my Lord.


Disborough. Well honest Smith, what do think of these bloody Presbyterians?


Smith. Truly you give strange titles. It is true, some may be bad, but you
may put more confidence in them, then in a great many you do put in trust.


Disborough. How so Smith?


Smith. Why my Lord, they that engage to be true for all Governments, will
never be true to you.


Disborough. Say you so, my merry blade!


Smith. Yes my Lord; and I can bring a History of Constantine to make it appear.


Disborough. Come, let us here that.


Smith. Well, you shall my Lord: This Constantine was born here in England, and
was the first Christian Emperor that ever was; Hellena was his Mother; and
Constantinus was his Father; he was buried at York, and this Constantine built
Constantinople the chiefest City now in Turkey, and there he lies buried;
this Constantine made a Proclamation, that all those persons that were his
servants, that would not bow and worship unto an unknown god, should not be
suffered to be in his Palace, to try their pulses; and of three hundred and
odd servants, there was not above forty but did forsake him; they chose rather
to go to hell with their riches and honor, than to be with God, and suffer
afflictions. The Emperor seeing so few, wept bitterly; well said he; them that
be true unto God, will be true unto their Prince; and them that are false unto
God, will be false unto their Prince; so he turned them out that forsook God
for their honor; I hope this will be your Rule, my Lord.


Disborough. What, do come as a Counselor unto me?


Smith. No my Lord; I come as a poor Blacksmith.


Disborough. It is an unhappy one then.


Smith. Then he went to examine me about many other persons, and I seeing many
writers behind, I thought I had need to have as many eyes as Argus had to be
amongst these men; well though I, I Will set you to work; so I went on upon
Histories as follows.

May it please your honor, my Lord, to call to mind the Ancient Histories, you
shall find that William the Conqueror was begotten of a Skinners daughter, his
Fathers name was Duke Robert, and his Mother was dancing under a May Pole when
Duke Robert first fell in love with her (and was Crowned three times a year)
and he reigned twenty years, and eleven months, and odd days, and could
scarce have his length and breadth in the earth, for all he was a Conqueror:
And then William Rufus his son reigned in his stead, and he pulled his brothers
eyes out, he loved honor so well, and he was killed in the New Forest in
Hampshire by the glancing of an arrow shot by one Tirell, a just judgment of
God upon him for his Fathers destroying so many Churches; therefore two more of
his loins was killed there too. And after him reigned Henry the first, which
was the first inventor of Yards and Else, and his eyes and brains was buried
at Roan in Normandy, and his body was wrapped up in Ox hides, and salted, and
buried at Reading, which has been a mighty place for Tanners ever since.
Disborough at last looked back on the Clerks that write.


Disborough. What do you write there?


Clerk. What your discourse is, my Lord?


Disborough. Strike it out, strik't out, here is stuff indeed; we shall have
Speeds Chronicle by and by.


Smith. Now my Lord is going to seek unto God by Prayer; but I believe it was
done before he came: Then Sergeant Dandy had me down into the Cellar at
White Hall, where several men had the Cellars to sell drink, and bread; and I
seeing this, thought to my self that Cardinal Woolsey did never build it for
that use; so when I had dined, I was had up again; but as yet they were not
come from their fasting, so I was had to the Irish Guard in Scotland yard, and
did not go again until the next day. That night I had a kind of a blind
Certificate came from Marleborough, which was procured by my Mothers weeping
and making great moan, to acquaint the Council that I was a Blacksmith, and
kept a great charge from the Parish, so that if I should be debarred of my
liberty, the charge would lie on the Parish; so you see what a weak
Certificate they sent in my behalf; if it had not been for my charge, they had
not cared if I had been ruined: the next day I was fetched again, where was
Bradshaw, and the Lord Whitlock who was President.


Bradshaw. Come my merry blade? you came yesterday and promised us to be
nigenious, and did only tell us a few merry tales; come, we will send you to a
place that shall make you reveal our enemies; are you so hardened in your
wickedness; come, you must prepare your self for Newgate.


Smith. Newgate, what, the Metropolitan Goal of the Nation? no meaner a place,
my Lord: Now Christian Reader, my sorrow comes; they sent for two Messengers,
and gave them Order to convey me in safety unto Newgate; Whitlock signed the
Warrant; then seeing all would not do, I showed my blind Certificate to the
Lord Bradshaw, as some of them whose heart the Devil had hardened, had sent me,
to do me no good; I wish that their hearts had been no worse toward me, and
their Conscience so good as mine was toward them: for he that is the searcher
of all hearts knows how I was put to it, to bring them into trouble by the
means of Joyce that bloody fellow Bradshaw received the Certificate from me,
and did read it.


Brashaw. A Blacksmith! you may be a Blacksmith, and carry on the interest
of Charles Stuart: a charge, what do we care for your charge? the Parish is
bound to keep them.


Smith. My Lord, they will be but poorly kept then.


Bradshaw. Then you must complain to the next Justice of Peace my merry blade!


Smith. My Lord, I had as good complain upon a Senator of Venice, as to do any
good upon some of them.


Bradshaw. Go my merry blade along with them.


Smith. So they had me up to Newgate, and the Keepers were called, the doors
being shut; so they came and read the Warrant, and put me into the Dungeon
where it was very dark.


Smith. Pray let me have some light.


Keeper. You must buy some Candles if you will have any, for you must have
none without money.


Smith. I have no money; so that I was fain to lie all that night, and the next
day in the dark; then I sent to a friend in Town and borrowed five shillings;
in the mean time the Keeper came into the Dungeon.


Keeper. You must give me forty shillings, or else I Will put Irons on your
legs.


Smith. I have no money.


Keeper. You must give six pence a night for lying on the Mat.


Smith. I have no money.


Keeper. Then you must lie on the floor, for I Will take away the Mat.


Smith. Well, I will pay you s^x pence a night then; the which I was forced to
promise, there being almost nothing but dirt and piss which was thrown down
from the common side; and there was a house of Office at one end, which made
such a stink that I was ready to be poisoned: Nay, had been, if God had not
raised up a friend for me, in particular Mr. Samuel Proffit which brought me
Cordial waters and Syrrups, which was the saving of my life under God; the next
day there was an Order from the Council of State of bring me down.


Keeper. If you have any money, you may hire a Coach and go down to the
Council; it may be for your deliverance.


Smith. What will a Coach cost?


Keeper. A shilling.


Smith. Then I came to the door, and there was a Coach, so I gave a shilling
for the two keepers; the Messenger that came did ride in the Coach with me; and
when we came, there was only Bradshaw and Cornet Joyce, which was newly come
out of the Country, because he could go no farther in his enterprise, until
they made me Knight of the Post, to swear that all that he did write was truth:
when I saw him there, my heart rised exceedingly at him Smith to Joyce.
; Are you come sir, it is well if you have brought a good Conscience with you;
so Joyce did deliver a sheet of paper written on both sides.


Bradshaw. Come my merry blade; you have told us merry tales all along, but
now here is something of consequence come against you; come hear your charge;
did you not say there was a number of honest men in your County?


Smith. Yes my Lord.


Bradshaw. And that these men carried on the interest of Charles Stuart.


Smith. No, my Lord.


Bradshaw. Come my winding-blade, did you say this or not?


Smith. My Lord, some I did say, and some I did not say.


Bradshaw. Answer Negative or Affirmative.


Smith. Why should I say there be no honest men, when there be my Lord?


Bradshaw. Come my merry Blade; we do not speak of that; don't play with the
halter.


Smith. Why then my Lord, set down, No:


Bradshow: If there be honest men, come to the next my merry blade; did you not
say there was a number of good horses in the County?


Smith: Yes my Lord.


Bradshaw: And that those horses were kept for the interest of Charles Stuart?


Smith: No my Lord, do you not know upon what interest men keep horses for?
some for hawking, some for hunting and some to ride to Markets and Fayres.


Bradshaw: Come hearken to your charge; you shall have play time enough with
the halter.


Smith. Shall I say there be no good horses when there is, my Lord?


Bradshaw. Sirrah, we do not talk of good horses, but what persons do keep
them for Charles Stuart.


Smith. Truly I do not know my Lord, so you may set down.


Bradshaw. Come to the next; you said you had received diverse Letters from Mr
Prynne, and had delivered them to many persons in Wiltshire to carry on Charles
Stuart interest; to the Lord Marquess one and the Lord Seamor another: Mr
Byfield, Mr Profit and Mr Sheriff, each of them one, Mr Webb of Ogbourne and Mr
Thomas Bailey, Doctor Chambers and Colonel Popham, with many others, had
meetings at Mr Thomas Bayly's to carry on this design; how say you to this my
merry blade!


Smith. Truly my Lord, without this Joyce had bin with the Devil for Advice, I
cannot see how a man could invent such forgeries.


Bradshaw. How my merry blade, will you be hanged, drawn and quartered come,
you shall have fair play; must all this be concealed? you shall smart for it
soundly; is there not meetings at Baylie's?


Smith. Yes my Lord.


Bradshaw. What do their meetings tend to?


Smith. To seek unto God for a blessing on your endeavors, if you act for God,
my Lord.


Bradshaw. Come, you are a winding Blade; what horse was that that the Duke of
Buckingham bought at your Town?


Smith. It was a very good-prized horse, indeed my Lord.


Bradshaw. Why did he go to such a high price?


Smith. Because they belong to Dukes and Earls, I think.


Bradshaw. Was it not to carry on the interest of Charles Stuart, that he has
bought that horse?


Smith. I do not know indeed my Lord; Then he shaked his head.


Bradshaw. Do you not know whether M. Woodbride of Newbury, and M. Fowler of
Reading, do carry on any interest for Charles Stuart?


Smith. I know of none my Lord.


Bradshaw. What did you make at Bath?


Smith. I went to receive some money that was there due to me.


Bradshaw. You carried Letters to Mr. Pierce and Mr. Harrington, to carry on
the interest of Charles Stuart.


Smith. It is no such thing my Lord; it is as false, as God is true.


Bradshaw. Come, what Alderman of London was that you had discourse with.


Smith. I do not remember my Lord.


Bradshaw. Do you not? we will make you.


Joyce. Yes, my Lord, we have other Witness as will prove that he had discourse
with him; if you please to read along my Lord, you shall find one Thomas
Goddard's hand to it.


Smith. There Joyce set down names that I never spoke to him of, and all to see
what I would say; so knowing what discourse Joyce and I had, I told them that
he said there was an interest carrying on for the King, and he hoped, I would
fight for my Country as well as the rest: so they sent for that honest
Gentleman down to White Hall, and kept me there, and would not have me away
until I had confirmed what Joyce had set down. And when he was there, they
made me come in.


Bradshaw. Come, Is this true as is writ in this paper which I have here in my
hand?


Smith. He holds a paper in his hand, and would not let me see it, nor read it;
and I must say that that was true, or else I must be hanged: I answered, My
Lord, what I said to Joyce, is true; but if he has writ any more then I said
to him, it is false: so the Gentleman by great providence was released: then
they come to the Examination of me again.


Bradshaw. Cornet Joyce, will you swear this is true as is written in this
paper?


Joyce: Yes, my Lord, I dare swear it is true.


Smith. Ha my Lord, he will swear as much against you, if there were but a
change of Government.


Bradshaw. Come my merry blade, it will not be a time for you to dally;
therefore be ingenuous.


Smith. Pray my Lord, let me speak a few words for my self.


Bradshaw. You speak! away, away.


Smith. Why my Lord, pray let me have as much privilege as Paul amongst the
Heathens had, that is, to speak for my self, my Lord.


Bradshaw. Why, you do not count us Heathens; do you?


Smith. No not I my Lord; but as Paul had that privilege amongst the Heathens,
I hope I shall have the same amongst you thar are godly Christians.


Bradshaw. Come my winding Blade, what have you to say?


Smith. Why my Lord, Joyce did tell me at the Heart, that he was an Agent of
Charles Stuari, and that a friend of his at London, had sent down into the
West, fifty thousand li. and ten thousand Case of Pistols; he drunk the Kings
health, and showed me the Kings Commission.


Bradshaw. Vil
Oh my merry Blade, we do allow him that, to try you and such as you are.


Joyce. Hark, he can remember what I said, but he cannot remember what he said!


Smith. But my Lord, that which he lays to my charge, is false: and my Lord I
have witness to swear what he said.

But what he says of me, there is none will swear but himself.


Bradshaw. Well, we do allow him in it.


Smith. Do you so my Lord? why, you told me my Lord, when I came first before
you, that I should remember I had a soul that I should seek to save, and a
Conscience I should not stretch, and I must not lie, and may he lie my Lord?
has he a conscience, and may he stretch it? has he a soul, and may he damn it
my Lord?


Bradshaw. What my merry blade, do you come with your Application? wel'e show
you fair play my merry Blade: come, call the Keepers of Newgate in.


Smith. The Keepers are come.


Bradshaw. You must look after this fellow very narrowly, for he can peach
above forty men, and he will not; but we will make him, ere we have done with
him.


Smith. So away they had me, and when I came to White Hall Gate, they called
for a Coach.


Keepers. You must pay for the Coach.


Smith. No, I will never pay for a Coach to carry my self to Goal.


Keepers. You had as good pay for it, for you shall before you come out of
prison.


Smith. So they had me away to Newgate, and as soon as I came; they put two
great chains on my legs, and put me into the Dungeon again, and pulled my coat
from my back for fees; then I bought some candles, and when they were lighted,
I was in a worse condition than before; for the Rats did so run about me, that
I was driven to keep a stick in my hand to keep them from me, yet I lay there
seven or eight days and nights, being in a sad condition* for the chain was so
little for my legs, and their beating of them made them swell very much, so
that they entered into my flesh; at last, the Keeper seeing me in that
condition, said,


Keeper. If you will give me a shilling, I'e take off one of your chains.


Smith. I will. The Keeper fearing I would not live, let me out into the
Masters Prison; there I stayed a week before I was had down to the Council;
then I went, where was Disborough, Bradshaw, Vane, Colonel Berry.


Bradshaw. Come my merry Blade, what are you convinced of your bloody actions
yet?


^mith. Truly my Lord, you lay that to my charge which I know nothing of.


Brad. Come my merry blade, what Arms did the Lord Herbert carry down in his
Coach?


Smith. None my Lord, that I know of.


Bradshaw. Did he carry none to carry on the Interest of Charles Stuart.


Smith. Indeed I did see none my Lord.


Joyce. Well there is one at Marleborough, as will justify, that you do know
of it.


Smith. What is he sir?


Joyce. It is one Thomas Goddard, and he will justify more than this too.


Smith. Then you may fetch him, for I know nothing.

Now this Joyce when he was at Marleborough, did provide a Writing, and did
desire Mr. Goddard to put his hand to it, for it was a thing of no value,
because he could not write, neither did he understand what was writ, put a
mark, which had like to have undone my self and all the rest: so I sent down
unto Mr. Goddard, and he sent me word he knew nothing, upon which I escaped
their snare. But to go on where we left.


Bradshaw. Come my merry Blade, what design is that which Mr. William Pryn
is going to carry on?


Smith. None that I know of, my my Lord.


Bradshaw. Do you not know? wel'e make you know before we have done with you.


Smith. My Lord, let me keep a good conscience according to your own desire.


Bradshaw. No, my merry Blade, it is not my desire, you should conceal the
enemies of the Nation, so as to wrong your conscience, as you do: Come my merry
Blade, did you see any of his Books?


Smith. Yes my Lord.


Bradshaw. And what does he write.


Smith. He writes, that this Parliament that sits now, is a Rump: the Clerks
writ this down.


Bradshaw. Did not there come Mr. Clark to this Prin at Marleborough?


Smith. Yes my Lord, there was one Mr. Clark as was with him there?


Bradshaw. And what did he do there?


Smith. Truly my Lord, I do not know.


Bradshaw. Do think he did carry on any interest with him against us?


Smith. None, my Lord, that I know of


Brad. Well, my merry blade, you shall have fair play, but do not play with the
halter.


Smith. Fair play, my Lord, is to be tried by the Common Law; and then my
evidience may be tried as well as yours; and then my Lord, I shall have the
privilege of twelve men, and that is the privilege of every English man, for
every Emperor to be tried by twelve Emperors, and every King by twelve
Kings; and I by twelve persons according to my degree; that is the Common Law,
my Lord.


Brad. Do you know Law so well? we will show you Law; for the Parliament have
given Order that there shall be a high Court of Justice to try all plotters.


Smith. You may do what you please my Lord, for I am but a poor Blacksmith;
but yet I have read the Common Law, and cannot find of any Court higher than a
Court of Parliament.


Brad. Come my merry blade, you shall find a court higher.


Smith. Nay my Lord, if you please, I will send to Marleborough and have their
Letters to vindicate me.


Disborough. There is but three honest men in Maleborough.


Smith. Who are they, my Lord?


Disborough. Mr. Hews a Minister, Mr. Keynes, and Mr. Blisset; but I fear Mr.
Blisset is poisoned in drinking too deep in the Presbyterian cup.


Smith. I will send down to them, my Lord, and gain their Letters: I sent to
them, and Mr. Hews did for me as it I had been a Child of his own, and so did
Mr. Blasset, in making known unto them how I was betrayed, and Trapand, and
that it would be a disgrace unto their Government. Then some of the Council
sent down to Mr Hews the Minister, to know whether I was a Blacksmith or no;
and he did acquaint them that I was a Blacksmith; and if they did know what I
was, as he did, they would not have kept me so long a prisoner; all which they
did, notwithstanding there were some bloody-minded men persuaded them to the
contrary, but I am the more engaged ever to pray for them.


Bradshaw. Can you write, or no?


Smith. Yes, I can my Lord.


Bradshaw. Keeper of Newgate, look after this fellow, and keep him from Pen,
Ink, and Paper; for he has received Letters, and Papers from those in the
County to conceal them.


Smith. There is no need of that, my Lord, for I know nothing of them, but
honest men.


Bradshaw. Mr. Carter of Marleborough has left off his pleading, to act
against us, and you know it well enough my merry blade.


Smith. No my Lord; truly I know of no such thing. Then they had me away again
to Newgate by the Order of Disborough, Vane, and Bradshaw; where three
Gentlemen came and gave one shilling six pence to have me over to the Celler to
drink with them, whom I did not know.


Gentlemen. Pray sit down with us; what is the reason that you are used so
cruelly?


Smith. Because I would not swear that all the forgeries as Joyce, and Small,
and Tynne, and others had invented, was truth, to bring innocent blood on the
Nation, when there has been so much spilt already.


Gentlemen. But you need not lie in this condition if you would but speak
truth; for thou know that these Presbyterians are bloody, and thou can
not wrong them, say what thou will; for surely they are in the plot, and
therefore thou need not scruple swearing.


Smith. Truly, for my part I know nothing but honesty by them, and therefore
they shall rack me before I will wrong my Conscience to bring innocent blood on
the Nation.


Gentlemen. We thought to have spoken for you, and got you out; but seeing you
are hardened in your wickedness, you may lie by it for us.


Smith. Then I was had to prison again, and the next week I was had down to the
Council; and when I came there.


Bradshaw. Well said Bradshaw, will you set your hand to this writing?


Smith. Let me hear what it is first, my Lord. For I remember the History of Q.
Mary, that she provided had a writing to put her sister to death; but King
Philip reading it over did save her life, and himself out of the snare;
therefore I Will read it before I will set my hand unto it, my Lord.


Bradshaw. He read it.


Smith. So he read it, and it was such lies, that it made my hair stand an end,
and my heart trembled, for the whole scope of it was to bring the number of
forty men to ruin, which I would not.


Bradshaw. Come my merry blade; seeing you will cast away your self, and will
no reveal the enemies of the Commonwealth; prepare your self for death, carry
him away to Newgate.


Smith. So they had me away to Newgate again, and as I was going out of the
Chamber, I did meet with one Mr. John Dove of alisbury, Pray sir commiserate my
condition.


Dove. What art?


Smith. A poor Blacksmith of Marleborough that was betrayed by Cornet Joyce
which carried the King prisoner from Holmby; and he will cause my life to be
taken away, if I will not swear that all that he says is true.


Dove. Thou shall be hanged for me O Villain!
right or wrong, if you will not reveal these Traitors as Joyce has named.


Smith. So away they had me to prison, at which time the Sessions was in the
Old Baily, where they had me, and made me give three shillings ten pence for
Bail-dock money; then was I called to the Bar, where the Order was read which
the Council of State had sent up with me, which was as follows; viz. William
Houlbrook committed for high Treason for holding correspondence with the
enemies of this Commonwealth, by Bulstrode Whitlock President. To which there
was no answer demanded of me, as I hoped there would, that I might have been
tried by the Common Law, that my Evidence might have been heard as well as his;
for I much feared the High Court of Justice (as it was called) but having
nothing said to me, I was carried to Newgate again; after which, I was had
again before the Council where Bradshaw was.


Bradshaw. Be honest, and remember there is a God, and do not conceal the
enemies of the Commonwealth as you do?


Smith. If I did know of any as did act against such godly Christians as you
are, if I did not reveal them, I was worse than accursed.


Bradshaw. You are a hollow-hearted blade, you can please all Governments.


Smith. Then my Lord, I am the fitter to live in the Commonwealth, for my work
lies so amongst them, that I must do it always, provided with a good
Conscience.


Bradshaw. But do hear my merry blade; why di'st thou weep when thou wast
with Cornet Joyce at Marlborough?


Smith. Why my Lord, it was because I did understand he was a going on a design
against such godly persons as you are.


Brad. No my merry blade; you wept, because that O Villain.
Tyrant Charles Stuart did non enjoy his own again, as you termed it.


Smith. No my Lord, it was not so; for what I said to him, was only to try
him.


Bradshaw. O my merry blade! if he had not meddled with you, you would never
have meddled with him.


Smith. You say right, my Lord; for it did not belong to me, because you had
put him in trust to do ^t.


Brad. Why, my merry blade, do you meddle so much with State matters as you
do? cannot you follovv your Trade, and let them alone.


Smith. Truly my Lord, the peace and vvelfare of this Nation does as much
concern me to look after, as it does your Lordship.


Brad. Come, what is Rachley of Marlborough? does not he carry on the interest
of Charles Stuart?


Smith. Not that I know of, my Lord.


Brad. Does not he entertain some of Charles Stuarts friends in his house?


Smith. Why my Lord? if any comes to his house, he must not turn them out of
doors, because his house is a house of entertainment, and there is no reason
for it, so long as they do not act against you, my Lord.


Brad. Come, he is a notable youth, he was one of my Lord Cottingtons Stewards.


Smith. What if he was my Lord? so long as he acts nothing against you, it
matters not.


Brad. Come my merry blade; seeing you are so hardened in your wickedness,
provide for death; we thought to have bestowed riches, and honor upon you, but
now there will be no hopes.


Smith. I beseech you, my Lord to show mercy unto me, and let me not be sent
unto Newgate again; for the allowance of the Prison is but bread and water.


Brad. It is no matter, it is too much for you.


Smith. Then he raged like a Lion, and would not let any one ask me a any
question but himself. Then came in the Lord Disborough; my Lord, pray come to
dinner, you will do your hononour much wrong by keeping your self fasting, and
so long in examinations


Bradshaw. Pray my Lord, hold your peace; if you will not look after the
welfare and peace of the Nation, I will; and I have lighted on a cross-graind
fellow, that I cannot get one word out of him.


Smith. Why my Lord? You gave me Order that I should keep a good Conscience,
and so I will; for I can bring two or three witnesses, and they will justify
that I said no such words unto Joyce as he lays unto my charge.


Bradshaw. You bring witnesses! you shall find that one witness will be enough
for a Commou-vvealth against yours.


Smith. Then he called the Keepers of Newgate in.


Bradshaw. Carry this fellovv away, and bring him again next Thursday, then
he shall have his revvard.


Smith. So they had me away again to prison, then I sent to my Mother to desire
her if she could do me any good, that she would do it, for on Thursday I did
expect death; so she went unto Mr Hews the Minister and Mr Blisset, two of the
three as before mentioned, who writ letters to the Council on my behalf. I
also sent to Captain Butler, and his brother Major Butler, they being men that
I had been acquainted with at Marllborough who spoke for me, and told Col.
Berry that was their Colonel, what I was, that I never acted any thing for any
Government; that I kept a great charge from the Parish; and well read in
histories; and desired, him to speak for me, which he did and did me much good;
then I sent to the Lord Strickland who proved my very good friend; for in
speaking for me, he endangered himself: There was also one Mr Booth in
Iremonger Lane London, who married Master Proffets daughter of Malberough, who
was very kind and loving unto me, in visiting and relieving of me when I was
in the Dungeon with Chains on my Legs, by going down to my Lord Sidenham and
others on my behalf; But Sidenham replied I was a dangerous fellow, and
Committed for high treason; and therefore wished him to be careful for fear of
bringing himself into trouble: But he answered, my Lord, I do not justify
him; if he has deserved to be hanged, let him be hanged; but pray my Lord, let
him be fairly tried: and let him be removed out or that nasty Dungeon wherein
he lies, and there shall be good security given for his forthcoming, or to
let him be removed into a more aerie prison for his health; but yet I could
never hear of any thing that Sidenham did for me; for he (good man) was
persuaded I was a Jesuit. When Mr. Booth gave me this Relation, I thought I
should have lost my life, and the rather, because my friends met with Joyce in
Cheapside, and desired him to have mercy on me; he did say that I was a Rogue
to go to make him a liar; but before he had done with me, he would have me
hanged, drawn, and quartered; which friends of mine did come and acquaint me of
it. So I made a Petition and sent it down to the Lord Fleetwood, and when he
read it, he did much detest against the bloody actions of Joyce, and his crew;
so he went unto the Council and told them it would be a disgrace to their
Government to hearken to such a bloody fellow as Joyce and the rest of his
crew were; so they gave him a favorable answer; the next night there came
Major Goff of Marlborough that knew Joyces actions, and what bloody designs he
went upon, so that he went down to the Lord Fleetwood, and told him it was a
scandal to Religion to uphold such a bloody person as Joyce was; for he knew
that I never acted any thing against them. The next day being Thursday, I was
had down again, where was Bradshaw, and Col. Morley, and one more.


Brad. Have you lighted upon any trappanners in Newgate?


Smith. Upon which words I was at a stand, fearing some had informed against
me; for there were many such in that place.


Brad. Why do you not answer?


Smith. My Lord, Newgate is prepared for such persons; and I wonder my Lord,
Joyce has not been sent thither all this time, at which some of them smiled,
which made me rejoice.


Bradshaw. Come, we are willing to show you mercy.


Smith. Are you so my Lord? then blessed are the merciful, for they shall
obtain mercy, it is Christ's own Sermon my Lord.


Bradshaw. Well, we see you are but ill beloved in the Country where you live;
for there is but few few friends as speak for you in this your time of
adversity.


Smith. I am as ill beloved in the Country as you are, my Lord.


Brad. Upon the same account as I am!


Smith. I do not know that my Lord; it is for being faithful to the
Commonwealth. At which the Council fell a laughing.


Brad. I believe that I am beloved ill enough, thou say right in that; come,
what security have? for thou must be bound in a Bond of two hundred pound.


Smith. No less my Lord! I was never worth so much in my life.


Bradshaw. What security have thou?


Smith. If you will have two substantial men, there is the Lord Strickland, and
another Lord.


Brad. What, no meaner persons! it seems you are beloved my merry blade; two
meaner persons shall serve.


Smith. Then there is a Major and a Captain, my Lord.


Brad. Meaner persons than they will serve.


Smith. Then here is a Cook and a Coachman my Lord. Then he spoke to the Clerk
who proved my good frind.


Brad. What is this Cook?


Clerk. A very honest man my Lord, he lives but at Chairing-cross.


Brad. Let him be one then; what is the name of the other?


Smith. I shall desire to speak with him first, my Lord.


Brad. Take the Cook now while he is here, and let him go on his Paroll till he
bring the other.


Clerk. Yes my Lord.


Smith. Pray my Lord, as you say you are merciful to me, I desire it may extend
a little farther.


Brad. What is that you would have?


Smith. I would have my fees abated, my Lord, for I am but a poor Blacksmith,
and have nothing but what I earn by the sweat of my brows, and I have paid much
money already.


Brad. If you will not pay your fees that are due to the Keepers, you must lie
there and rot for me; you may thank God we give you your liberty.


Smith. If it must be so my Lord, I cannot help it. So when the Cook had signed
the Bond, who was my very good friend in my extremity, whom I am ever bound
to pray for,


Door keeper. Come Smith, you must come in.


Smith. Yes, I am a coming.


Brad. Come, you must take the Engagement.


Smith. What is that my Lord? I never took ame.


Brad. If you mean to have your liberty, you must take one now.


Smith. Pray let me hear what it is my L^^d, first, because I shall make
conscience of what I take.


Bradshaw. You shall. The Clerk read the Engagement: You shall be true and
faithful unto the Commonwealth of England, as it is now established, without
King, single Person or House of Lords; And you shall be ready upon all Summons
that shall be sent from the Parliament or Council of State, to make you
personal appearance before them: And you shall not Act nor encourage any one to
Act against this Government.


Bradshaw. What say you to this, Smith?


Smith. I conceive my Lord, that the Contents of the words, is, that I must be
true and faithful to you as long as you are our Governors; and so I do not act
against you, it matters not who do: I shall be very faithful, my Lord.


Brad. I wish you be.


Smith. My Lord, you may know the tree by his fruits, and me by my actions.
Then the keepers had me away again to Newgate, until I had paid my fees: so I
sent to some friends, and borrowed the money, so I paid them their due as they
said, which was one shilling for the coach to White Hall, and one shilling: the
keeper for going with me one shilling up again; and three shillings 6 d. a week
for my lodging, with many other such like unreasonable prizes, that it cost me
eleven pound in all, although I had great relief from my friends in City and
Country. Then I went to the Coachman for him also to engage for me, whose name
was Edmund Poynes, who went along with me and signed the bond; and as we were
coming from the Council we met with Cornet Small.


Small. What are you at Liberty? if you are at Liberty, and will not bring
these persons in, as you have peached, it will make all the faithful friends of
the Parliament forsake them.


Smith. It is you that have peached them sir, not I; it would be happy for the
Parliament, if they were freed from such servants as you are. Away I went from
them. Now Christian Reader, thou may find what persons these have been by
this true Relation from first to last: Then I went home in Esquire Riches Coach
of Sunning, who was my very good friend; and when I came home, there I heard
what Joyce and his Crew had done when I was in prison; First they went to the
high Sheriff, and said,


Joyce. Why do you not raise your troop?


Sheriff. because I had no order.


Joyce. I have then. And showed his order (but his Commission was out seven or
eight days before he came there) so that the Sheriff escaped the snare: then
Small went to the Sheriff, and told him that I had peacht him of great crimes,
and wished him to send for Joyce; for he was very sorry he should be brought
into trouble, Joah like, pretending love, yet meaning to murder him. Then Joyce
played upon Mr. Rashly, and desired him to drink the Kings health, for he had
lost all for being for the King; but his wife knowing him, by that means he
escaped the snare; then they went to Mr. Web Minister of Ogbourn, and said, if
he would do any good for the King, this was his time, for they were his Agents;
but by Gods providence, that good man escaped the snare; then they went to Mr.
Hunt of VVick by Marleborough, and said they were Farmers, knowing him to be
for the King, and suffering much for him; they played upon him, but he escaped
the snare: Then Tynne came from the Angel to the Heart, and pretended himself to
be for the Parliament, and I think he was for the Devil: Joyce pretended to be
for the King, so Tynne took Joyce prisoner, and Joyce cried out he was undone,
for the Roundheads had taken him prisoner; and desired the servants to rescue
him from them, but the servants by Gods providence did not: but the Chamberlain
told Tynne, if he would lie with Joyce, he would make a bed for them together;
but Tynne said, Joyce looked like an honest man; therefore he would crust him
to lie by himself; for he did believe he would be forth coming: But to reveal
all the Actions that were done, it would be too long: so after I came from
London, down came that bloody Villain Small, who labored so hard to have me
murtherd, because I would not bring these Noble men into trouble; he came to
the White Heart, and told Mr. Rashly, that I had peach't him and Capt. Burgess
of great crimes at the Council, but the Clerk being a friend of his, he caused
him to strike their names out, when he did all he could to bring them into
trouble, and threatened me I should be hanged, if I did not bring them in, and
yet all this did he, because they should not mistrust him that he had any hand
in the bringing of them in, and Judas like, pretending to love them, yet
endeavored to betray them, in setting down what they pleased, and bringing me
to swear that all was true, to carry on a fair show amongst men, as if they
were innocent and bore them no ill; and when they came to London, they must be
believed, and not; I if I had twenty witnesses, it must go against me: And if
this be the good old Cause, (as the Rump have cried out so for) to bring so
much innocent blood on the Nation, when there has been so much spilt already,
I must say with the Letany good Lord, deliver us from such men. Thus I have
made known according to my weak ability, what misery I have gone through, and
what ado I had to keep a good conscience amongst them that did long for blood.
If God had not been with me, I had never been able to escape with life: for
Joyce would have sworn through an inch-board (as the Proverb is) but he would
have brought these Noble men to Ruin, and then we should have had a
Thanksgiving day throughout the Nation for joy, as if God was the Author of
their bloody and traitorous actions, and Joyce might damn his soul by lying,
because he was for a Commonwealth: but I must not, which was my happiness. Let
all the world judge what they were.

Now (Christian Reader (as God has been pleased in much mercy to look down
upon these three poor Nations, to bring us under that ancient form of
Government, of King, Lords and Commons, let us seek unto God by prayer, for a
blessing on our gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the second, to submit and
obey him, which is our duty, and then we shall have hopes of being settled in
peace after so many years distraction.

And now Christian Reader, I have showed thee how Joyce and the rest
endeavored to ruin very many of the Nobility and Gentry in this Nation, as
aforementioned, by their false informations, to gain their Estates; and how
they appeared like Angels, when indeed no better then Devils; and I have made
known to thee what persons they were, and how these Villains worked upon me at
first, and their Actions to the last; yet by the providence of God, I was
delivered from them, and kept a good conscience, which is my comfort. Therefore
from such bloody men, God keep all good people; which is and shall be the daily
prayer of him,


Who is thine to serve thee, William Houlbrook.

To God be all the Glory, Amen.
FINIS.

