THE NVPTIALLS OF PELEVS AND THETIS. CONSISTING OF A Mask and a Comedy, OR THE
The Great Royal Ball, Acted lately in Paris six times BY The King in Person.
The Duke of Anjou. The Duke of York. with diverse other Noble men.


ALSO BY The Princess Royal Henrette Marie. The Princess of Conty. The
Duchess of Roqvelaure. The Duchess of Crequy. with many other Ladies of
Honor.


LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Ancor in the lower walk of the New Exchange. 1654.

The Stanzas of the Royal Ball, with the Argument of every Scene of the
Comedy, which gives occasion to every entry in the Ball.
THE ARGUMENT.
PEleus King of Thessaly being enamored with Thetis, and crossed by two potent
Rivalls, Jupiter and Neptune, does so carry the business by the Counsels of
Chiron, and by the succor of Prometheus, that both the Gods are at the end
excluded of their pretentions; Neptune desists by reason of his old age, and
Jupiter being the elder of the two, but much more considerable, does
voluntarily renounce his interest. Whereupon Thetis being plainly persuaded of
the constancy, and fidelity of her Lover, gives her consent to marry him, so
the Nuptials are celebrated with a great concourse of Gods and Goddesses.
Prometheus also having done good service in the business, and to put a period
to his troubles, is there also present, and brings with him the Liberal and
Mechanic Arts which he had invented; Discord also would feign have been
there, but that she was ashamed to appear upon the theater, having been chased
out of France, and it had been to no purpose for her to disturb so joyful a
meeting.

The Singers.
Two Rivers of Thessaly. Epidan and Onochone
Jupiter Neptune Juno Mercury Peleus King of Thessaly Thetis Chiron Prometheus
A Quire of water-Nymphs A Quire of Sirens and Tritons A Quire of priests of
Man. A Quire of all the Deities.
The Dancers.
Apollo, and the nine Muses. Magicians. Fishers of Corrall The Furies of
jelously Savage men and women. The Dryads or Woodnymphs. Cavaliers of Thessaly
Chirons Academists Peleus his Courtiers Thetis young maids of honor The
Liberal and servile Arts Love Juno Hymen Hercules The harmony of the Spears.
TO THE MOST EXCELLENT, And HIGHBORN Lady, The Lady KATHERINE Marchioness of
DORCHESTER, etc.
Madam;
I Believe, no discerning Reader will question my Judgment in point of
Election, nor accuse my Election of much presumption in Dedicating this
princely new piece to your Ladyship.

Touching the first, the Fancy coming from that Country which does challenge
as much Interest in your Illustrious blood as England, I humbly conceived it
might well become your Ladyship to be Patroness thereof.

Touching the second reason, it having been not only Represented, but Acted so
many times (and reserved yet for entertaining Pimentel the Spanish Ambassador)
by a Great King in person, with such a number of Princes, Princesses, Nobles,
and above a hundred Representators besides, so that the charge of the scene and
shows amounted to half a million of French livers; But above all, it being an
invention so cried up, so well contrived and traced, so full of wit, and
variety of Musical airs, with other gentilesses; I deemed it would be a thing
not unworthy of your Ladyships private entertainment.

Lastly, Madam, the Fancy being so fresh, and suitable to the season, it comes
to usher in a happy and healthful spring to your Honor, attended with
affluences of all Felicity present and future, according to the humble and
pregnant votes of

My most Highly Honored Lady, Your thrice-Obedient and devoted Servitor JAM.
HOVVEL.
The first of May 1654.
THE PROLOGUE. Apollo and the Nine Muses, Epidan and Onochone Rivers of
Thessaly, a Quire of water-Nymphs.
AT the opening of the Theater, Apollo and the Muses appear upon the top of a
Mountain, on both sides thereof run two Rivers of Thessaly, and the
water-Nymphs being separated in two Quires, fall into the praise of Apollo,
inviting him to come down and give a happy Augury to the Loves of Peleus; The
said Mountain stoopes by little and little, whereupon the Rivers and Nymphs
retiring, Apollo and the Muses fill the Stage, and compose the first entry of
the Ball.

The first Entry.
Apollo and the Nine Muses.
The King represents Apollo, Madam Henriette Princess of England. represents
Erato. Madamoisella of Villeroy. represents Clio. The Duchess of Crequy
represents Euterpe. The Duchess of Roquelaure represents Thalia. The
Princess of Conty represents Urania. Madam de Monlovet represents Terpsicore.
Madam de Saint Simon represents Calliope. Madam d'Olonne represents Melpomene.
Mademoiselle de Gourdon represents Polyhimney.
THE NVPTIALS Of PELEUS and THETIS; OR; The Great Royal Ball.
The King of France representing Apollo. MOre bright and better made then all
the Gods,
Superior to the rest of Deities by ods,
My ForeSPEAKER with immortal beams is crowned,
Victorious beauties I raise from the ground,
I after Glory always run,
Not after Daphne whom I shun.
That fierce destructive Python I did quell,
That ugly horrid Serpent hatched in Hell,
Rebellion, which had poisoned far and near
Fair France I chased from off this Hemispheare:
I rather had this Monster slay,
Then with my Daphne sport and play.
Yet it must be at last, early or late
I must a Femall court, it is my Fate,
And though I am all God, yet there is a she,
Whom with love glances I must deifie.
And what Nymph, Goddess, Queen, or Muse
To be my Daphne would refuse.

Madam Henriette the Princess of England, representing the muse Erato, which
fell to her by lot. My stemm is more then of a mortal race;
For to great Henry's Granchild all give place:
My Innocent and young aspect,
Inspires both pity and respect;
And he who loudly would complain
of Princes falls and Peoples reign,
Of angry stars, and destiny,
Let him but cast his eyes on me.

Mademoiselle de Villeroy representing Clio, the inventresse of History. I turn
this charming look
Sometimes to Doomsday book;
These eyes, where in his throne
Love sits, make many moan;
My Rosy cheeks, my quickening fire,
Madd the beholders with desire:
And though I am but a young thing,
Blown as it were but in this spring;
My office is the History to tell
Of what a thousand years ago befell.

Madam the Duchess of Crequy, representing Euterpe, the inventresse of
Music. The Mouth of Fame does tell,
In Mine the graces dwell:
So red, so small, Loves Queen
Had not, nor ere was seen;
A hundred beauties more
I have in bank and store;
Yet none esteems them less:
I nature rather bless
For those inward parts I have,
Which will last me to my Grave.
Though I with music use to cheer the mind,
Yet in my Pipes no foulness you shall find.

M. the Duchess of Roquelaure, representing Thalia, the inventresse of
Comedy. There is no heart so free
But it will yield to me;
I have the true supremacy
Of beauty both in front and eye:
My glances able are for to recover
The sickest amorist, the palest lover:
My Comedies, if that you listen well,
Are able to redeem a soul from hell.

Madame the Princess of Conty, representing Urania the inventresse of
Astronomy. The stars in their carreer
Are not so bright and clear
As is my mind, which 'bove the Elements
Does soar to view those high syderian Tents.
This port, this countenance, and eyes
Show I did drop down from the skies.
I study their Aspects and Influence,
Their Motions, and what good descends from thence.

Madam de Montlouet representing Terpsicore inventresse of dances and masks. If
for a mortal I am taken,
You may perchance be there mistaken,
I dart a ray will pierce the heart,
And make the center of it smart:
I carry such a Majesty,
Which represents Divinity:
The graces all in me do dwell,
Contending which shall bear the bell:
I do preside in Maskes and Dances,
Wounding the looker with my glances.

M. the Duchess of San Simon representing Calliope, the inventresse of Heroic
Poesy. Beauty a treasure of high rate
Is my companion and my mate;
Of virtues I have such a store,
That could enrich a thousand more:
I raise my spirits to enhance,
(When I am in poetique trance)
By high heroic verse the acts
Of noble Champions and their facts:
The Sock I scorn, the Buskin me
Does raise to immortality.

Madam d' Olonne representing Melpomene, the inventresse of Tragaedy. Although
my countenance be grave,
Yet pleasure and delights I have*
I look on Death and Destiny,
Yet are my strains Divinity:
The passages of virtue I rehearse,
Though in an Elegiack Tragic verse.

Mademoiselle de Gourdon representing Polhymny, the inventresse of vocal
Music. A hundred objects I do see,
Although at my Nativity
They say I hooded was, my song
Will carry one to heaven along,
The various postures I do show
Will make the Gods themselves to bow;
I am the glory of our hills,
Where joy both heart and spirit fills.

THE FIRST ACT.
The first Scnee, where appears a Grott open on both sides.
Chiron, Peleus, a dumb quire of Magicians. CHiron advises Peleus either to
abandon love, or not to lose higher hopes; persuading him, that the old age of
his Rivals, might happily give him some assurance, yet he exhorts him for
preventing the violence that Jupiter might perchance offer to Thetis, to go
upon Mount Caucasus, and implore the help of Prometheus, who with the fire he
stole from heaven, had brought thence all the great and sublime sorts of
knowledge; and Prometheus would be glad to oblige Peleus in such an occasion to
cross the passion of Jupiter, who made him endure such cruel torments; Peleus
approves of Chirons counsel, whereupon the Magicians, as they dance, use a
charm, carrying him away in a flying chair. The second Entry. Magicians. The
Count of Lude, the Marquis of Villequire, and of Genlis, the Lords Bontemps and
Cabou, the Lords Verbec, Baptista, and Lambert. The Count of Lude representing
a Magician. Let my heart go loose more then to one,
If I do love but three, I leisure have
To sell love by retale;
I cry; I sigh, and ready am to hang,
Yet then I vanish in the height of passion.

The Marquis of Villequier representing a Magician. The beauty which me charms
is like the spring, we ought to love each other, she is fierce, and so am I. A
young forceresse may well become a Magician of twenty years.


The Marquis of Genlis representing a Musician. Who can make scruple of my art
and skill,
My reasons in due time have Energie enough;
If I look fair in any part,
Is It not a trick of Magique Art?

The second Scene, which opens within a perspective where a Sea is seen.
Thetis, Neptune, a Quire of Sirens* and Tritons, a Quire of dumb Fishers for
Corrall. Thetis appears upon a great shell attended by a half Demi water God,
being encompassed by a fair troop of Corrall Fishers; On the other side Neptune
appears upon another great shell drawn by four Sea horses, and begins to vent
his passion to Thetis; but when he perceives that she despises him, he
suddenly leaves her, and retires with all his train in choler, and striking the
Sea with his Trident, he raised such a horrible tempest, that Thetis with all
her Corrall Fishers was forced to descend, who being very joyful to escape the
storm, make a dance among themselves to cheer and entertain her with delight.
The third Entry. A half Sea-God leading Thetis attended by twelve Fishers of
Corrall. Mounsieur the Count of St. Aignan prime Gentleman of the Kings
Chamber, is the half Sea-God. The Fishers of Corrall. The Duke of Anjou the
Kings only brother, the Duke of York, the Duke Danville, the Count de G'viche,
the little Count of Aignan, the Marquis of Mirepoix, Mounsieur Saintot,
Mounsieur de la Chesnay, the Lord Bruneau, S. Fre. L'Anglois, and Raynal. The
Count Saint Aignan representing a demi Sea-God, beginns. I have enhanc'd my
gallantries so high,
That Neptunes Court is glorified thereby.
They equal the exploits of Paladins,
Whose fame the Earth with Ecchos dims,
What a poor thing it is to be
A Demy-God by land or Sea?
Yet I am one, I Would have it known,
It is no stain but a renown,
In the fair field of love for to be so
Where joy and sadness, flowers and weeds do grow:
And for the water-Nymphs none can express
Better then I whether they are fish or flesh.

A Madrigall.
With a Nymph both fair and cruel;
The Fates have called me to a Duel
My torments endless are, my breast
with the Sea surges have like rest.

The Duke of Anjou representing a Fisherman. 1. In my fine hooks there is danger,
then beware
I am a fairer Fisherman by far,
Then love himself my hook and line
Can catch a creature though Divine.
2. Husbands their cares do double, lest one day
I fish within their ponds and catch the prey,
So subtle is my wit, that none can see
Where I do fish those things which flow from me.
3. I will lance out when Age improves my flanks,
In the mean time I keep upon the banks
For corrall on Vermilian lips I fish,
And who will hinder me to have my wish?

The Duke of York representing a Fisherman. It Is not for me to fish for
Corrall here,
I to another Coast my course must steer,
A fatal ground
Which Seas surround.
There I must fish upon an angry Main,
More then two Crowns and Scepters to regain.

The Duke Damville representing a Fisherman for Corrall. I have the same bait,
hook and line
I had when I could scarce tell nine,
A few there are
Though nere so fair,
If I am set
Can 'scape my flaxen net.

The Count of Guiche representing a Fisherman. Upon the side of a still
peaceful pond
I use to fish, and dare not go beyond;
The time will come that I may also seek
The Rivers Banks, and happly a Sea-creek.

The little Count of Aignon representing a Fisherman. As straight and slender
as a rush
I use to cast my line, and push
It on, but I do only catch
Small things, I cannot yet attach
Great wel-grown fishes, one might make
Good cheer with those I cannot take.

The Maaquis of Mirepoix representing a Fisherman. Of this sweet Trade of
Fishing I intend
To be one day a Master, and so mend
My fortunes, now, the greatest skill
Of a true Fisherman is to be still,
And patient for a while, to make no have
So he may compass well his ends at last.



The third Scene.
Thetis, Jupiter, Juno, a dumb Quire of the Furies of jealousy* Jupiter being
encompassed with pomp and Majesty, descends from the Air in midst of a great
cloud, and propounds to Thetis all the tender and passionate things which might
oblige her to be his spouse; but she refuses this honor out of high respects
she owed to Juno, who had been so careful of her Education; whereupon Jupiter
was upon point of carrying her away; but as he was wrapping her within the
cloud wherein he descended, Juno comes in a whirlwind not so violent as her
rage; And after a loud fit of scolding, having brought the furies along with
her, the earth opened and disgorgeth a huge horrid Monster; At sight hereof
Jupiter letting go his prey, and putting off his design till a more convenient
time, returns to Heaven.

In the mean time the Furies extremely well pleased to have so opportunely done
such a piece of service to Juno, dance all before her, whereupon the goddess
Juno having thanked Thetis for her virtuous resistance, takes the furies up
with her in the same whirlwind which brought her down to persecute Jupiter in
his repose, and in his glory.

The fourth Entry. The King, the Duke of Ioyeuse, the Marquis of Genlis,
Mounsieur Bontemps, the Lords de Lorge, Verpre, Beauchamp, Mollier, le Vacher,
Desairs, Dolnist, Baptiste. For the King representing a fury. Spain, fly from
this young fury, fly away,
She comes to daunt thee, and with torch in hand
Through every corner she does force her way,
To find thee out, against her thou can not stand.
She persecutes the bad, and makes them read
Their guilt within their looks, nay, the same time
They mischief work, and do commit the crime,
She glides into the Conscience fear and dread.

The Duke of Joyeuse representing a Fury. Believe me not, to trust in me
forbear,
A fained sweetness on my front I wear,
Of me there may be some mistakes,
for I do hide my claws and snakes.

The Marquis of Genlis representing another Fury. My face is lovely, sweet and
debonnair,
Such as an honest Fury ought to bear.
My heart some poison may contain,
Yet serpents lodge not in my brain.

THE SECOND ACT.
The first Scene.
Which represents the top of Caucasus. Prometheus, Peleus, a Quire of dumb men,
and savage wmen. PEleus being conducted by savage men and women, meets with
Prometheus upon a Rock with his Eagle which gnawes upon his heart, and having
made a light comparison of their torments, Prometheus assures him that the
Oracle of Delphos had foretold that Thetis should bear a son greater then his
Father; and that Jupiter also without doubt should be constrained to renounce
his pretention, and that Mercury having been sent in his behalf to Jupiter, to
acquaint him with the saying of the Oracle, the business should end to his
contentment: Peleus hereupon returns to Thessaly extremely comforted, and the
savages upon hopes that Prometheus should be freed from his torment, and that
Peleus should obtain his hearts desire, could not more lively express their
joy then by a dance.

The fifth Entry. The Lords of Chesnay, and Joyeux, the Lords la Mar,
Monglas, Laleu, Raynall, Roddier, all Savages. We value beauteous cheeks, and
how
They must be used we also know,
Nor such rude savages are we,
But civilized we soon may be.
The second Scene.
Which discovers a place of Gold and stones. Jupiter, Mercury, a dumb Quire of
Wood-Nymphs.

Jupiter meets with Mercury in this fair Palace which he had caused to be
prepared in the secret place about Caucasus, to celebrate his Nuptials there
without the knowledge of Juno, and devising the means how to conduct thither
the new spouse; Mercury gave him notice what the Oracle had said; Jupiter being
therewith surpised, and fearing that the same distaster might befall him
there, which had happened 'twixt him and Saturn, makes love to yield to
ambition, and retires to Heaven after he had commanded Mercury to make it known
that he would think on it no more, nor do an act so injurious to his Authority;
the Dryades being Land-Nymphs, fell to be jealous of the good fortune of Thetis
a Sea-goddesse, being there as spies to give account to Juno of all the
purposes of Jupiter, and they express by a dance the joy they conceived that
Jupiter had altered his resolutions.

The sixth entry. Dryades or wood-Nymphs. The King, the Dukes of Joyeuse, and
of Roquelaure, the Marquis of Genlis, Mounsier Bontemps, the Lords of Lorges,
Desairs, le Vaiser, Verpre, Beauchamp, Molier, D'Olivet.

For the King representing a Dryade. 1.
A Nymph as great as generous,
In Oaks as green as precious
I lead a happy train:
My youthful branches taper so,
As if to heaven they would grow,
And stars salute would fain:
They spread and shoot so bravely out, that they
The glory of their root will not betray.
2.
By their rind you well may know
With what strength and Sap these grow,
and whence it springs.
They may be fit Caesar's to make,
Or Alexanders for to shake,
with thousand earthly Kings.
3.
About this proud and Royal Tree
Others do grow, but modestly
They creep more humble then the grass,
So that one day 'twil come to pass,
This Tree of Heaven may be made
Unto the Europian world a shade.

The Duke of Ioyeuse representing another Wood-Nymph. While the seasons, rude
and cold,
I wonder none with me makes bold
My wood has this rare quality, it shall
Burn, warm, and make no noise at all.

The Duke of Roquelaure representing also a Dryade. 1.
Some hold me for a merry wench,
And that I care not much for Continence,
I am the greatest babbler I confess,
And imitate Vergonda by my tresse.
2.
There is no Forest but does feel
The strokes of my victorious steel,
As soon as I do haunt a cops of wood,
To bring the Axe among them were as good.
3.
I have my vanities, besides my Age
By right of Impudence sometimes does rage,
And if a Tree cleffed may chance,
They presently impute the cause to me.
4.
But to conclude, sweet Nymphs, my pleasures shall
Never hurt yours, therefore doubt not at all;
To my beloved trunk i will so adhere,
That for to injure others none shall fear.

The Marriage of Genlis representing the last Dryade. Within the bottom of a
Grove
A Satyr thereabouts did rove,
Who held my honor at a bay,
But hard it was for to display
Whether a real Satyr, or one clad
Like Satyrs, or indeed a true Dryad.

The Third Scene.
Which represents a Theater, and at the end of a prospective, a Statue of God
Mars. A Quire of Mars his Priests, with another dumb Quire of Thessalian
Knights. The Cavaliers of the Principal City of Thessalia being afflicted for
the cruelty of Thetis against Peleus their Monarch, do bring in a combat at
Barriers to the honor of Mars: in the mean time they offered sacrifices on the
other side to the same God, with supplications, that he would employ his credit
with Venus for the return of Peleus, and for mollifying the heart of Thetis;
At this same time the Statue of Mars having spoken and foretold all good
auguries, the Knights quit their arms and dance.

The seventh Entry. A combat at Barriers by the Knights of Thessaly. The Count
of Saint Aignan chief of the Defendants. Defendants Young Beaufort, San Maury,
Desens, Derville.
M. Beaufort chief of the Appellants. Appellants Gamard, Clinchant, Ourdanlt,
De Hallus.
For the Count Sant Aignan representing a Thessalian Knight. Attend me
Lawrells, this combat's made
To gain the glory of those irons which hold
Me captive, therefore I must be more bold
Then any, and employ my trusty blade.
What force can lance or sword
Against me then afford?

THE THIRD ACT.
First Scene.
Which represents the portall of Thetis Palace. Peleus, Chiron, a Quire of
Chiron's Academists. PEleus being returned from Caucasus, and living with
Chiron, does resolve by his advises to present himself to Thetis, and to make
his address to her with amorous patheticall prayers, which he might do the
more confidently by reason of Jupiter's declaration, wherein he resolved not
to think any more on her; The Disciples of the said Chiron, the inventor and
Master of many differing professions frame a dance to express the joy they
conceived for the return of Peleus. The eight Entry. Chiron making his Academy
to dance for the entertainment of Peleus. Mounsieur Hesselin Master of Chirons
Academists. The Academists habited like Indians. The King, The Lords Saintot,
Bon^ emps, and Cabou, the Lords Mollier, Bruneau, Langlois, Beaucham, le
Vacher, Baptiste, D'Olvet, and de Lorges. Chiron the Centaure who was to be
represented by Mounsieur Hesselin. Be not my friends at all astonished
To see a man only for back and head,
He happy is who is a beast
Backward, and not above the breast.
I find no incommodity
That I am such a prodigy,
Half a man sometimes may need
Half a horse for better speed.
When I have moraliz'd by sense,
(Within my cell) neat and distinct
Unto the stable, I withdraw me thence,
From Reason taking pleasure in instinct.

The Master of the Academy represented by Master Hesselin. If that my pride
appear, I reason have,
For I instruct all gallant men and brave,
Lucre makes me not mercenary,
But I do teach all frank and free,
If among my scholars [King.]
one be pleased to pay,
I can afford the rest a good long day.

For the King representing an Academist. This young Academist does learn so well
His part, that all the rest he does excel;
His present (and his future) Grandeur show
All mortal his high virtues are below.
This Master piece to perfect, it seems that
Fortune with Nature did cooperate.
The Bodies exercise is his delight
Against his own in many an eager fight;
He beaten has the iron, and made them fly
A fair presage of future victory
He greater things prepares; And Spain shall find
How dextrous he will prove in every kind.
He cannot broke any should him exceed,
Whether he runs, or leaps, or mounts the Steed,
In dancing neatly none surpass him shall,
The world admires him, only the Ladies are
Wary, nor dare they what they think declare.

The second Scene
Thetis, Peleus, a dumb quire of Peleus Courtiers, and the little Maids of
honor of Thetis Court. Peleus does all he can to gain the good grace of Thetis,
but she continues still in the same rigor, and as Proteus daughter, takes
advantage of the privilege of her birth to deceive Peleus by various shapes,
yet he faints not in the pursuit, but begins to add boldness to affection: at
last Thetis transformes her self to a Rock, which Peleus embraces, and
protests to perish rather then forsake her; at this last proof of Constancy
and love, Thetis yields, and accepts him for her husband; hereupon all Peleus
Court falls into an excesss of gladness, which makes the Courtiers to fall a
dancing.

The ninth entry. Courtiers. The Duke of Candale, the Marquis of Villequier,
and of Genlis the Count.


For the King who should have represented a Courtier. This youthful Courtier
has so high a look,
As if for some great King himself he took,
He Is forward, bold, and cannot be alone,
Nothing does please him more then to come on:
He sure will something do:
The charge we see he has is honorable,
And for his age very considerable,
Some lofty spirits would be glad with less,
But he does far more glorious things profess,
sure he will something do.
He ordinary titles does excel,
He would do better, though he now does well,
Had he no process with a neerally,
Which yet does set an edge on Majesty,
Sure he will something do

The Duke of Candale, representing a Courtier. The Court would not so splendid
be and brave,
Were I not there, nor half that luster have:
We are the 'ffects of one another,
We laugh, and play and sport together,
The Courtier may do Fortune a good turn
As well as she to him --

The Marquis of Villequier, representing another Courtier. Fortune and Love are
two odd things,
The one is blind, to'ther has Wings,
It is a tedious task and doubtful gain
The true good will of either to obtain;
For me, I like the lover, who does go
By way of storming, and ends quickly so.
I will not knock too long at one hearts door,
Lest in the mean time I lose hundreds more.

The Marquis of Genlis representing a Courtier also. In the Court a number te^ds
To diverse projects, diverse ends,
All opposed to one another,
The sisters often do cross the brother,
Touching my self, I hope to expedit
My business by my charming face and wit.

The last Scene.
Thetis, Peleus, a quier of all the Deities, Prometheus, a dumb quier of loves,
Hercules, Hymen, Juno, dumb personag^s, a so a dumb quier of the Liberal and
Mechanic Arts, a Celestial Harmony. Thetis and Peleus appear, being seated
upon a high Throne, whereof the upper part changes to a prospective of the
Firmament where the loves are seated; and the other part of the Scene forms
it self into a Cloud, athwart whereof all the Dieties do glitter, being
invited to the Marriage: Hercules brings with him Prometheus freed by Jupiters
order; in the mean time, Juno and Hymen accompanied by the intelligences that
compose the Celestial Harmony, descending in a great engine, all which being
joined to the Liberal and Mechanic Arts, which were the invention of
Prometheus who conducted them thither, a great dance is formed on earth below,
while the little loves make another in the heavens above at the same time. The
last entry. The liberal Arts. Madam de Brancas, Mademoiselle de Mancini,
Mademoiselle de Mortsmart, Mademoiselle de la Riviere Bonnevill, Mademoiselle
de Fovilloux, Madomoiselle Destree, Mademoiselle de la loupe. Madam Brancas
represents Geometry. I trace the earth all over by account,
As far as Pindus or Parnassus Mount;
I Corinth view, where every one
Cannot arrive, it is I alone
Who can by Land-skips, Mapps, and Instruments,
Measure all Regions, and their vast extents.

Mademoiselle Mancini, representing Music. In me a comely spritfull grace,
Makes Unisons throughout my face:
A charming harmony
Moves betwixt lips and eye:
Sometimes I melt, bring sadnesses and smarts,
Which shows I am not welcome to all hearts.

Mademoiselle de mortmart, representing Logique. My youth, my hue, my eyes do
prove,
The strongest Reason in the School of Love
Is Beauty, 'twill convince the most austere,
And make a Fool of a Philosopher:
I pray let this serve for an argument,
I merit on Parnassus Hill a Tent.

Mademoiselle d' Estre, representing Astronomy. My mind is not so mussled among
the clouds,
But I can know the causes which by crowds
Puzzle us here below; the stars when I
Was born, did smile at my Nativity,
The Heavens did power their graces in such store,
That ever since it makes me them adore.

Mademoiselle delle Rivere Bonnevill represents Grammar. Though young and
innocent, I have some fitts
Of the Green sickness, yet I well may sit
Among these sisters, to my A. B. C.
There Is not an Art but it is an obligee:
The groundwork I do lay, cut out, and trace,
Therefore on Phocis Hill let me have place.

Madam de Fovilloux representing Rhetoric. I useful am at Court, Hearts will
not yield
I snatch away, and so do win the field,
I conquer with my tongue which I do file,
When I a charming beauty would beguile.

Mademoiselle de la Loupe representing Arithmetic. My youthful charms make
many hearts
With groans, and sighs, and sobs to smart
Beyond computing, yet could I
To number them my self apply,
But that thereof I make a small account,
They to so many Ciphers do amount.

Madam de Commenge representing Juno. Having immortal beauty in my face,
Where roses bloom, and Lillies still have place,
What reason is there I should jealous be?
Poor Mortals be not so deceived in me;
I jealousy do scorn with foul disdain,
I Will neither give nor take it, it is a grain
Of cursed, seed that naturally does bear
A dry black leaf, which will the heart strings tear.

Hymen represented by the Duke of Ioyeuse. I am as serious, as Cupid is a sot,
I turn his flames to virtue every jot,
Madam de Puy knows well no Blonden is
So frequent with chaste maids though full of wish.

The Duke Damville representing Hercules. In the behalf of Love whose pleasing
bait,
Have done me such good offices and bad,
I must begin my Labors, and go clad
On Venus shrine, and Altars for to wait;
I find my veins and passions all as hot
My heart as vigorous as 'twas at first,
There Is nothing in me that is decayed a jot,
For glory also I never more did thirst:
Only my feet are not so quick, as when
I deceive did my host, and may again.

The Mechanique Arts.
The King represents represents War, The Count St. Aignan represents
Agriculture, De Verpre represents Navigation, De Lorges represents Hunting, Le
Vacher represents a Goldsmith, Beauchamp represents a Painter, D' olivet
represents Surgery.
The King representing War. Peace, sure thou wilt come at last so much desired,
Who have to heaven thy self so long retired
And we must be
Thankful to War for thee.
Behold she comes, and she to me is sent
To make me have a timely sentiment
Of Europes doleful case, lo, she does bring
Laurels and palms, fit presents for a King.
Ye charming Femals, from your eyes
It is, that wars and tumults rise
You dart the thunderbolts of strife,
You have your trumpets, drum and fife,
Venus we know is Mars his wife.

The Count Saint Aignan represents Agriculture or Husbandry. By toyling much
both night and day
In Mars his field, and Venus dales,
I glory have obtained, they say,
Having still propitious gales;
I have got Laurells, but the bloom
Is passed, the fruit is not yet come.

A Quire of Loves. The Duke of Anjou the Kings brother, the Count of Guiche,
the Marquis of Villeroy, the little Count of Saint Aignan, little Rassent page
of the Chamber, Laleu, Donart and Aubry. For Mounsieur, representing the first
love. Ladies, from this tender spray
There may some danger come one day,
Ye with caresses flatter him, he you,
Ye kiss, and hugg him, but you will find it true,
It is a Lions cubb which yon do stroke,
Who with his paw in time may make you smoke;
He sports with you, he smiles and mocks,
Plays with your jewels, fancies, locks,
But take ye heed, for he at length
Will gather more increase of strength;
Yet, I foresee he will wean quite
Himself from all such soft delight;
And marching in the steps of his great sires
Make Glory the sole Queen of his desires.

The Count of Guyche representing another love. All those Loves I do behold
Brighter then the burnished gold,
Are nothing if compared with me,
Whether Fire, or Light they be,
I do discover in effect
I am all love, when I reflect
upon my self --

The Marquis of Villeroy representing another Love. I peep to hear what lovers
say,
When they whisper sport or play;
And sometimes lay
Traps in their way.

For the little Count of Saint Aignan representing another Love. If he be as
discreet as is his mother,
He will neglect the love of any other,
But if the father he be like unto,
He mistresses will have and Beauties woo.

For little Rassent representing another Love. Our talents are diversified,
Each one has his perfections aside; For me,
Till I have wings, it is meet
I fence my self with feet.

FINIS.
THE NUPTIALS OF PELEUS AND THETIS. A NEW ITALIAN COMEDY, Whence the preceding
MASK was extracted; Made English by a nearer adherence to the Original, then to
the French TRANSLATION.

-- Non seria semper.

London. Printed for Henry Herringman, at the Anchor. The PROLOGUE.
Apollo and the Muses upon the Pierian Mount; Quires of Water-Nymphs upon the
Banks of Epidano and Onochono, Rivers of Thessaly. The NYMPHS to APOLLO. O
Living Treasure of the glorious Sky,
Who by thy piercing all surveying eye
Do in thy golden Armor conquer Night,
And so in triumph usher'st in the Light:
Among the glittering Stars thou do not shine
With greater Luster, then amongst the nine
Aonian Sisters* O descend and daign,
Great God, (leaving a while Olympian Reign)
To feast with us: a joyful Augury
Vouchsafe to Peleus passions, whose pure breast
May justly merit Hymen for his guest.
To the eternal Laws of Love,
The highest Gods and Saints above
Are Subject: Monarchies and Scepters yield*
To Love, and crown him Victor in the field:

ACT I. SCENE I.
Chiron, Peleus, A Quire of dumb Magicians. Chiron. WHy do you thus your self
torment?

Peleus. Chiron, How shall I find content?

Chiron. Pursue your hopes, and onward go*

Peleus. Is It possible I should do so?
When on my heart a beauty lies
That is descended from the Skies;
A beauty that is all moving and immense,
That has over me such an omnipotence?
Moreover, I two Rivals have,
No less then Gods, who me outbrave
For Neptune with his Trident, and great Jove
Are my competitors for Thetis love.

Chiron. Peleus, Why do you thus your self torment?

Peleus. Chiron, Where is it I should find content?

Chiron. Then follow your fair hopes, and onward go.

Peleus. How is it possible I should do so?

Chiron. Listen to me, gray hairs do but in vain
Attempt young beauties, they will them disdain
Though they be Gods: Neptune is rich in years
As well as Treasure, Thetis will him jeer.
For Jove, besides his age, his rapes and wiles,
How he so many Ladies did beguile
Will make her shun him: but if you desire
To compass your designs, and quench your fire,
Behold those Magies that with charmed flight
Will guide you safely to Prometheus sight,
Who being bold and wise, is the only man
Who in this Enterprise you pleasure can:
He is no friend to Jove, who him torments
With such eternal pangs, therefore he will,
To help you, exercise his utmost skill.
Wherefore take my advice, and hence away
To India, through the air cut out your way.
Delay is always dangerous to Lovers,
He never obtained his ends who hums and hovers.

Peleus. This Aerie journey I will undertake,
But though herein Fortune my friend I make
Yet are my hopes but small, I have a hint,
That Thetis's cruel, and her heart is flint.

Chiron. When modest beauties to excuses fall,
You must not presently it rigor call.
The heart oft-times desires what lips deny,
For a huge distance does betwixt them lie.

Peleus. Could it unto my Lovesick thoughts appear
That what you say hereto is true and clear,
Those pangs I suffer in my breast
Would turn to case, delight and rest.
But fall what will my fate portends.
I still will glory in my ends,
Which an unmeasurable joy distills,
And my so high-swoln heart with comfort fills.

Chiron, Peleus. Let a true Lover never lose
His hope or courage when he wooes:
The more his suff'rance is, the more
Sweetness is kept for him in store.
In Cupids gentle kingdom nothing is
Impossible, but one may gain his wish.

Chiron. Go on then happily, for who does know
But that your constancy may tell you so?

Peleus. On, on, then to my Magies I will go.

The Second Scene.
Thetis, Neptune, a Quire of Tritons, and Meremaids, with a Quire of
Corral-Fishers. The Quire of Tritons and Meremaids.
At such a splendid glorious show,
What heart but would turn fire and tow?
A Pomp so rare, a sight so fair,
Is able to perfume the air:
Nor Morn nor Sun did ever view
So bright and ravishing a hue.
At such a splendid glorious show,
What heart but would turn fire and tow?
Neptune. There is no fence I find,
Love will invade my mind.
In these moist fields my Rivers run in vain,
To quench my fire, or tepifie my pain;
Though I in midst of waters lie,
Yet do I melt, dissolve and fry;
But Thetis, you at last will find it true,
To be more fool unto your self, then you
Are cruel unto me. Will you refuse
The richest of the Gods, Him who does use
To give those gems that beauties do adorn,
Thence, where the Queen of Love her self was born?

Thetis. Aurora commonly does rise
Cheerful and smiling to our eyes
But suddenly we oftentimes do see,
She falls a weeping upon flower and tree.
If you desire the cause I should unfold,
It is because her Titan.
Consort is so old.

Neptune. Thetis, Be not deceived, though I be gray,
My waters still are green, and so they may
Be wholsomer then Springs, which by and by
'Pon the least drowth grow shallower and dry.
Youth is unstable, heady, rash; but age
Is constant, cautious, provident, and sage.

Thetis. I do confess, that you discourse, and reason
Like a quaint Amorist, although the season
Of Love in you be past. It was for Love
The Heavens made Youth, for which the Gods above
Have journeyed down to earth; no other age
Is fit a Female beauty to engage.

Neptune. Perfidious thing, I plainly now do find,
Thou art unto another more inclined.
Come winds and tempests, and with my lament
Your blasts unite; Come, come incontinent,
Let hispid blustering Boreas from the North,
Bring all the Haracanes and Whirlwinds forth,
Blow off, and banish from my Kingdom quite
This impious Girl so full of hate and spite.
Revenge the quarrel of your King,
And with your vengeance Justice bring:
Shall she in my Dominions dwell,
Who has inflamed my heart with fire from hell?

Chorus. Ungrateful, rash, and foolish Nymph, can thou
Slight thus the greatest of the gods below*
The grief will be thine own
When thou art wiser grown.
Neglected Amorists may learn from hence,
Against blind Cupids arrows a true fence*
Disdain of beauty a revenge may be,
Though not of love the expected remedy:

The third Scene.
Thetis, Juno, Jupiter, A Quire of the furies of Jealousy: Thetis Now that the
fury of the wind
Has left so sweet a calm behind:
Now that the storm is gone,
I pray let me alone
To vent unto my self my moan.
Oh me, I find that ambushes are laid.
To take me and entrap poor silly maid:
What will become of thee my heart?
Thou Art like to suffer many a smart.
Oh me, Oh me,
Poor heart what will become of thee?
Thy chastity Love studies to surprise.
He Is sly and cunning, though not always wise;
He Armor has of every sort
For to assault a female Fort:
He prays, complains, and pines,
He menaceth and whines
Now, if another God should join
With him, who can me then essoyn?
Oh me, Oh me,
Poor heart what will become of thee?

Jupiter. What can blessed heaven me avail,
If still of my desire I fail?
Celestial joies, if they to sorrow turn,
Far worse then all Tartarean tortures burn*
O Thetis, thou alone
Have made me quit my Throne,
Thou giv'st him law,
Who Gods does aw^
It is my destiny and luck,
By thee for to be deadly struck;
And that which is the greatest wonder,
Thy beauti's stronger then my thunder.
But come, O come, my Fair, increase my bliss,
And let us cohabit both in Pardise.

Thetis. O no,
Not so.

Jupiter. Come and be partner of my Throne
Which Hymen offers thee alone;
That Empire Love has thee designed,
Come, come my Fair, be not unkind.

Thetis. O no,
Not so*
The heavens forbid I should be said,
(Poor innocent and silly maid)*
For to be such a Rebel as to wrong
Her Juno.
bed who trained me all along
From my first cradle: I had rather die
A thousand deaths, and scorch in Tartary.

Jupiter. If you will use such slight Apologies,
To him who can command both lair and Skies;
To clear your error, and my pain assuage,
I must use force, my Dear, but far from rage.
Cloud, A cloud appears.
gently take her up.

Thetis. Oh me.

Jupiter. What ails my soul?

Thetis. Aim, who helps me?

Jupiter. What mortal Creature's he
Can thee reprize from me?

Juno. Disloyal Jove, Juno with the help of the fishers and furies redeem her
is it my hapless fate
Thou should so often thy Faith thus violate?
But since in Heaven no Justice can be found,
Or Piety among the Stars, the ground
Shall open, and styx shall belch forth furies fell:
Come then appear, ye ghastly dames of Hell;
And help to vindicate
The justness of my fate.

Jupiter. Farewell my Thetis, so enchanting bright,
But know I do not thee abandon quite.

Thetis to Juno. Great Goddess, I no pardon crave of thee,
But pity; though unfortunate I be,
Yet I am guiltless, and from foulness free.

Juno. Such hazzards to escape is no offense,
Much less misfortune or incontinence.

Thetis and Juno. Sweet gratitude does always rest
In a' well born gentle breast:
The Gods desire no more
For those blessings in such store,
Which on us Mortals every hour
They in silver showers do pour.

ACT II. SCENE I.
Peleus, Promethus, A Quire of dumb men, and savage women. Peleus. Unfortunate
Prometheus, how thine
Eternal torments are like mine!

Prometheus. Ah, who is he*
Thus speaks to me?

Peleus It Is Peleus King of Thessaly,
Who may thy mate for torture be.

Prometheus I from the body of the Sun
Stole fire e're scarce the world begun.

Peleus And I some fiery glances took
From Thetis all enchanting look.

Prometheus Jove chastneth my temerity
By this voracious A Vultur preying upon his heart which still renewes.
bird you see.

Peleus Prometheus, it is Jove the very same
Torments likewise with jealousy my flame.

Prometheus But yours one day
May find allay.

Peleus But when, and how?

Prometheus Ah, ah, my torments grow.

Peleus O cruel pangs some truce and respit give,
Prometheus may with counsel me relieve.

Prometheus I have received advice from Mercury,
The Jove.
Thunderer will Thetis fly,
And his Ambition place (as you shall prove)
Before her Beauty, or his flames of love;
To credit this you may be bold,
For by the Oracle it is foretold.

Peleus If it be true what issues from that vioce,
My soul shall carols sing, my heart rejoice
There never was so coy and cruel she,
But only sought by one, may conquered be.

Prometheus Go, go, return where thou did leave thy heart,
Thou shall find ease for thy corroding smart.
In the vast sea of Love who e're does sail
Must lose no wind, and then he may prevail.

Peleus For this sweet counsel thou have given me,
May heaven, O Prometheus, set thee free.

Prometheus The Thunderer may be
Less cruel unto me.

Prometheus, Peleus O dear, and solacing, sweet blissful Hope,
How comforting art Thou to those who cope
With rigid beauties? thou do periods put
To black despair; the Gods did justly shut
Thee out of Hell; Thy breath though never so small
Would ease the damned souls in Pluto's Hall.

Peleus to the Savages And you my faithful guides unto this place,
Enjoy the comforts also I embrace;
Be all partakers of my hopes, and share
Some of my joys, which past expressions are.

The Second Scene.
Jupiter, Mercury, A Quire of dumb Dryads, or wooed Nymphs. Jupiter Well,
What did the Oracle at Delphos say
Touching my love to Thetis, tell me, pray.

Mercury Apollo from the Tripod did pronounce,
The Achilles.
Son of Thetis (all will see)
Shall greater then his Father be.

Jupiter How can that be? unless the fates renew
In me my Saturn thrust out of (...) by Jupiter his son.
Sire's example, and make it true.

Mercury That which Prometheus told me also is
No less infallible and true then this.

Jupiter Then I do find that it does me behove
To leave commanding Heaven, or not to love.

Mercury Which do you most desire,
To serve or domineer?

Jupiter I hold Love's golden fetter,
Then any Empire better,
The one does thousand sweets instill,
The Other the brain with cumbers fill.

Mercury Permit me, mighty Jove, to tell you it is
Folly of a Mortal still to wish,
Under the vail of good, to meet the bad,
Which goes in Virtues habit often clad.
But you which over the Spheers do sway,
And such coruscant beams display;
Can you be so transported, as endure
That a blind lying Boy should you allure,
Who will vapor every where,
That he did fetter Jupiter.
Thetis, suppose, an idle wench should prove:
Have you not Goddesses enough above?
If you Olympus loose, where will you find
Throughout the world a Kingdom of that kind?

Jupiter In your Discourse you go so strongly on
That makes me half of your opinion.

Mercury Nor can you any true content obtain
Whilst you are compast with a double pain.
Juno pursues you with her Furies here,
And Thetis may perhaps fly from you there;
The one is doubtful, the other is jealous still,
Both may confederate to cross your will.

Jupiter It Is true, that Juno me pursues,
And raises furies by whole crews.

Mercury She every where does stir and wheel about,
She does disturb all Heaven to find you out.

Jupiter Then Mercury, go and proclaim
From Pole to Pole that I disclaim
Thetis, and will no more my Honor maim.
Go speedily.

Mercury Jove, I will fly.

Jove Fair Wood Nymphs let this day be Festival
That I my wonted freedom did recall,
Which impious fate and beauty did conspire
To captivate with false and fatuous fire.
Fair Wood Nymphs let this day by all
Be kept hereafter Festival.

The Third Scene.
A Quire of Priests, a dumb Quire of Cavaliers at Barriers. The Quire of
Priests. Great God of War, the prop, defense and stay
Of Empires, intercede that Peleus may
(By favor of that Venus.
Goddess whom alone
Thou do adore, and art to serve so prone)
Return to sway again fair Thessaly:
Behold that amourous Warrier with mild eye.
And you brave Champions propitious make
Our vows and Altars; let the welkin quake
With the high clashings of your Barriers.
Peleus at his return will pay you your Arrears.

One of the Priests. But stay a little, stay,
Our Oracle will something say.

The Oracle At last the King of Thessaly
Shall home return with mirth and glee.

The Quire of Priests O news more rare
Then Indian Pearl, and sweeter far
Then that Hyblean juice the Attic Be
Stov'd in her cell for Joves Nativity;
And will King Peleus come again?
Then Thessaly shall swarm with men.
O news more rare
Then Indian pearl, and richer far.

ACT III. SCENE I.
Peleus, Chiron, A dumb Quire of Chirons, Academists, or Disciples. Peleus. FOR
him who parts from his delight
Time makes too quick and rapid flight,
But who is traveling to see his Love,
Each moment unto him an age does prove.
Hope still with doubts, fruition with fear
Is commonly attended every where.

Chiron. I with my companions here
Did think to find you full of cheer.
Now that you are a Champion over the Gods,
Of whom for Faith and Love you have such odds;
Why do you thus afflict your self with pain?
Faint heart did never a Ladies favor gain.

Chiron. Sometimes my spirits are alert and high,
Then they begin to languish presently;
Because I fear that Thetis heart
May Marble prove; hence comes my smart.

Chiron. You are deceived; when Thetis knowledge had
You left fair Greece, and undertook so bad
And hazardous a journey to find ease,
The fury of your passion to appease;
She with a pitying paleness then was struck,
And sighing said, The Stars send him good luck.
Go, lay close siege, and let her see
You are resolved for Battery.
The Female who believes she is truly loved,
Need not by too long Prayers to be moved.

Peleus. Your counsel's good: now with alacrity
I will both Love and Fortune try;
And of the business you shall quickly see
I Will make a shaft or bolt. But where is she?

Chiron. I Will go in quest of her.
In the mean time let my Disciples dance,
We will be fortunate in spite of chance:

The second Scene.
Thetis, Peleus, A Quire of Peleus Courtiers. Thetis Love, if you will enter
like a friend,
Lay down your Arms, let peace attend
Your purposes, and so you may
Be welcome, and so win the day.
If boisterously you me assault,
Come not near me, but make a halt:
Be sure not to torment my heart,
Or with your passions make it smart.

Peleus. O Thetis, you desire to shun
That which your self to me have done.

Thetis Ohime.

Peleus. My Dear,
What do you fear?

Thetis Ohime, when you were far from hence
Love did do much for you; but now
You are so near, I fear with violence
He will assault me with his bow.
I pray retire.

Peleus. Will you with such a heart of flint and steel
Convert those pleasing passions which I feel
To pangs? Shall he still languish
With tears, with doubtfulness and anguish,
Who loves your eyes
More then the Stars or Skies?

Thetis These words an amorous pleasure do instill
Into my breast, my thoughts with fancies swill;
Fool that I am, I who have made a vow
To any Love enchantments never to bow;
I who two Gods for marriage did refuse,
Shall I yield now
And lovesick grow?
I pray retire.

Peleus. From those fair eyes I will not part,
Who have infused into my heart
Grief, and content, with constancy;
All Trophies of your chastity,
And of my Faith: where ere you go
I will adore your shadow too and fro.

Thetis to her self Against such a charming violence
If I can find no guard or fence,
I Will have recourse for quenching of this fire
Unto the Arts of Proteus my great Sire.
Peleus will then desist, unless he fall
In love with Lions, Monsters, Rocks and all.

Peleus. Dear, What Is that you whisper?

Thetis May your laments
Find their contents.

Peleus Oh pleasing accents!

Thetis. But Peleus now I will you disabuse,
They are feigned fancies which you thus amuse
When you made me the object of your mind
You took me for a Nymph, A cloud appears, wherein Thetis enters.
but you shall find
I am a ravenous Lion, a hard Rock,
A Monster that wears clouds in lieu of smock.

Peleus. My sweetest friend,
What do you now intend?

Thetis. I Will wrap my self within that cloud:

Peleus Do not do so, The Cloud vanishes and Thetis turns her self into a Lion
for I shall cry aloud.
O heaven bless me, what do I see!
Can such a beauteous Creature turn to be
A beast of such immane ferocity?
You cannot fright me, or make an escape,
My Thetis I Will pursue in any shape.
What do I see? She transforms her self into a Monster.
This shape becomes you well,
And shows that you are cruel, fierce and fell.
But all this cunning will not serve your turn,
The more you horrid are, the more I burn.
A Sacrifice of sighs and groans
I Will offer though you change to stones.
Dear, take your shape again,
And ease me of this pungent pain.

Thetis. O God,
The more I monstrous make my self in show, Thetis resumes her self.

The more my spirits melt, and gentle grow.
I am almost in Love.

Peleus Almost! That word my panting breast does pierce,
And shows you still are cruel, fell and fierce,
In lieu of solacing my love-swoln mind,
It leaves a double agony behind,
Ohime, what Lions, Monsters thus oppose
My virtuous Love, and make themselves my foes?

Thetis to her self. I know not where to turn, my spirits are
in such a strange confusion, yet I dare
Not say I love as yet; my hot desire
I will suppress and quench this raging fire.
The tongue shall give my heart the ly;
I Will make no haste,
Though I must yield at last,
There is no remedy.

Peleus Dear Thetis, cast on him a pitying eye,
Whose breast for thee with candent coals does fry.

Thetis to her self. Distracted soul, it is too too true,
I must bid now Virginity adieu.
But sure my lips and faltring tongue does err,
Oh did my heart do so; I must prefer
The heart before the tongue, because the last*
Less noble is; in the Heart Dame Nature placed
The pure arterial and illustrious blood;
I fear that I am too well understood.
By Peleus.
Ohime, by soft degrees I find
That cunning little God, though blind,
Does make his way into my breast,
Maugre my self, I must make him my guest.
Yet I must try once more this Boy to mock,
And turn my self into a senseless Rock:

Peleus Have I again lost Thetis? Thetis does metamorphose her self into a Rock.
is she gone?
Must I to stones and rocks make now my moan?
O precious cristal Rock, thou now do hold
A gem more rich then Diamond or Gold; He embraces the Rock, and weeps upon it.

I fear that at the foot of this hard Rock
My Hope will shipwreck by a fatal shock.
But for strong water made of Mercury,
I Will try with tears this Rock to mollify.
My heat is such, 'twill me to ashes turn,
Then will I make this precious Rock my Urne.

The Rock vanishes* whereupon Thetis resumes her shape and speaks. Love, Lo, I
yield, I can no more resist
Thy all subduing power, or persist
In my first purposes, thy dart
Has split in two my tender heart.
Who have no hearts at all are only fit
To cope with thee, and fence away thy hit.
Lo Peleus I am thine.

Peleus in a kind of rapture. Hold heart, do not too wide thy self dilate,
Lest by excess of joy I draw my fate
Too soon upon me, and so dye
Ere I make use of Victory.
And you my faithful followers rejoice,
And cleave the air with your triumphing voice: The Courtiers* sing.

You have been sharers of my misery,
Now you shall share of my prosperity.

The last Scene.
Thetis, Peleus, Prometheus, a Quire of Deities, Who had freed Prometheus.
Hercules, Juno, Hymen, with the Liberal and Servile Arts. Thetis and Peleus
Now our Desires
Do flame with equal fires.
And there does nothing want but constancy,
For to complete both our Felicity.

Peleus. Thetis, Thou art my chiefest good.

Thetis And you my heart and precious blood.

Thetis and Peleus Behold the Gods are come to be our Guests,
And learn of us what it is to be blessed.

Prometheus Peleus, We now are both from tortures free;
You Hymen helped, and Hercules helped me.
And to oblige us further, they are here
To mingle joy with us, and make good cheer.

The Quire of Deities To them who languish
In pain and anguish,
Love gives at last
A sweet repast.

Thetis, Peleus, Prometheus Just heaven never fails, and Powers above
To recompense a virtuous constant Love;
Grief, cares, and pain
Turn all at last to gain.
By this we find adversity to be
The surest road to true Felicity.

FINIS.

