SERMO SECVLARIS. OR, A SERMON To bring to Remembrance the Dealings of JEHOVAH
with this Kingdom of ENGLAND, and our ingratitude and dis-loyalty to HIM, in
this last Century of years.

Ab Anno Nativitatis Christi, 1547.

Usque ad praesentem Annum, 1647.

PSALM. 107.43. Who so is wise, and will observe those things: even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.

DEUTERONOMY. 32 6. Do ye thus requite the LORD, O foolish people, and unwise? Is not
he thy Father that has bought thee? Has he not made thee and established thee?

PROVE. 9.12. If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self: but if thou
scornest, thou alone shall bear it.

The Time of the Ruin of ROME, is herein according to Gods Word modestly
pointed at.

With sundry Uses seasonable and suitable for all degrees and sorts of people.

DAN. 12 4. Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased. Tho.
Brightmannus Haec obscuritas non omnem intellectum adimet sanctis, sed
serutandi tantum diligentiam acuet. Preached at Belstead, near Ipswich, July 4,
1647.

By BENJAMIN HUBBARD, Preacher of the Word of God at COPDOCK in SUFFOLK.

LONDON, Printed by R. L. for Nathanael Webb, and William Grantbam, at the
Sign of the Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard, 1648.

To the Right WORSHIPFUL, NATHANAEL BACON, AND FRANCIS BACON, ESQVIRES: Members
of the Honorable House of Commons now assembled in PARLIAMENT, And His
MAJESTY'S Justices of Peace for the County of SVFFOLK.
SIRS,
THere is no Age in which God does not manifest his infinite Wisdom, Goodness,
and Justice, Psalm. 107. ult.
by some apparent strokes of His hand; and daily observation will teach us
experience herein: And indeed in the Age even now past, or the last Century of
years, Psalm. 107.1, 2.
We that are the redeemed of the Lord, which he has delivered from the
Egyptian darkness of Popery, and Spains hellish cruelty, and from the
devilish treachery of others: We (I say) may well sing aloud, Psalm. 111.2, 3, 4
O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever.
His works are honorable and glorious, which he has made to be sought out,
Psalm. 105.2. and 26.7.
and remembered of all them that have pleasure therein. It is our duty then to
search out, and to keep in remembrance Gods gracious providence concerning us
in this Land, and to confer together of them, and declare them to others, and
especially to raise up our hearts into an holy admiration, saying unto God
himself, O! how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that
fear thee, Psalm. 31.19.
which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee before the sons of men!
Psalm. 66.3.
And how terrible art thou in thy works! Through the greatness of thy power,
shall thine enemies submit themselves unto thee. And withal consider with our
selves; 1 Pet. 3.11.
What manner of persons should we be in all holy conversation and godliness?
Now that we might so do, I have endeavored (according to my poor ability) to
bring to remembrance the dealings of JEHOVAH with this Kingdom of England, and
our ingratitude and dis-loyalty to him in this bypast Age; not at large, but
briefly, humbly begging of every one his largest bounty, for the augmenting,
amplifying, and completing in his own mind, the Meditations herein pointed
at; so shall my single and simple Music (by the good blessing of our God) be
not only increased, but multiplied; and thanks shall be given to God by many
(and those far more fit for such a Caelestiall service, 2 Cor. 1.11.
then I am) by my means; and all of us together, as a well-tuned Quire, shall
make sweet harmony, whereby Gods glory shall be promoted, which (I know) your
religious selves conscionably aim at. Therefore (most worthy Sirs) I am bold
to present this Sermon unto your Patronage, hereby to testify both to you my
sincere thankfulness and love, and to the World (who has heard of the fame of
your renowned Ancestors, for harboring, relieving, yea even maintaining many
faithful Ministers, being persecuted,) that the Lord has not left your
Honorable Progenitor (being in his time a pattern of Piety) destitute of a
Worshipful Posterity, M. Allen, Preface to Doct. Gosp.
(your selves and your brethren) who walk in the steps of your religious
Parents; and are not only inheritors of the same earthly Mansions and
Possessions; and successors in their high places of authority, importing
dignity and duty, but also (which is best of all) Possessors of the same Spirit
of Christ, and the graces thereof, Romans 8.9.2 Tim. 1.5.
whereby you are enabled to behave your selves in those places, and use those
estates to his Glory that gave you them. Thus humbly entreating Jehovah to
counsel and direct you in all the weighty Agitations of this Kingdom, to make
you do right worthily, and to prosper your selves and yours in soul and body;
And craving of you to pardon my boldness and rudeness, and to extend your
wonted favors (the Asylum of many faithful Ministers) to me (though
unworthy,) who indeed am much more willing, Ad vos tanquam ad Asylum consugimus.
then able to serve you: I remain,

London, Sept. 20. Yours in CHRIST JESUS, Benjamin Hubbard.

To the Right WORSHIPFUL, THOMAS BLOSSE, ESQUIRE, HIGH SHERIFF of the County
of SVFFOLK.
Honored Sir,
WHereas by the All-disposing hand of the Almighty, this Sermon had its birth
in your hearing, of which your Worship was pleased to manifest your favorable
acceptance, now being importuned to publish the same, I thought it but equal,
it should again return to your self, as an humble and thankful
acknowledgement of all your many and great kindnesses both to me and mine, and
the rather because your former acceptance was no small encouragement hereunto.
Kind Sir, the experience that I have of your wonted benignity, gives me rather
assurance then hope that you will not value the same by the imperfections of
the work or writer; but by the weighty matter, of eternal concernment, for
every soul contained therein; and by the good will of him who sincerely
desires the present prosperity and eternal felicity of you and yours; Who is
also

London, Septem. 20. Yours to command, in the service of Christ. Benjamin
Hubbard.

To THE READER.
Christian Reader,
SEeing a word spoken in his season, is admirably good, yea it is like apples
of gold in pictures of silver, and runs cleverly as upon his wheels, and that
none (that I hear of) have made this use of the Opportunity which now is, past
by and gone; And considering, that he which has fewest Talents, ought to
occupy them for his masters advantage: and not knowing what power of God may
show it self in the weakness of his feeble creature; in blowing his trumpet,
and breaking his earthen pitcher, it may be some light may break forth to
consolate and encourage the people of God: to put in a fright his and his
peoples enemies, that they might tremble and not dare to sin, but make their
peace with God; which I heartily desire: therefore at the instant importunity
of a special Christian friend, and being much encouraged by the very loving
acceptance it found from other Christians that heard it, I was content this
Sermon should be published, if it be judged meet. It is indeed brought forth in
a time, wherein I my self have both much employment, and many troubles, that I
could not afford unto it such serious premeditation, nor review, as I desired:
nor have I the help of many books useful for such a purpose, nor yet a
dexterity in Temporary narrations, as those that are skillful in the times,
both which were requisite in a Sermon of this subject: yet that is but part of
the matter, and (if I mistake not) here is some thing useful for thy soul, in
whatsoever condition thou art. And therefore I pray thee, in Christian love
either heal or conceal any failing thou find in it, and say (as truly thou
may) perhaps it was an oversight; for I confess, I am full of infirmities;
bear with my rudeness in speech, I do assure thee I would be loath to offend
any gracious soul. But fail thou not to make particular application to thy
own self, of what thou find most suitable to thy own estate and condition;
so shall God have the glory, and thy soul shall prosper, and my soul shall
rejoice with thee. This I heartily desire; And remain,

Copdock, July: 1647. Thine in Christ, Benjamin Hubbard.

DANIEL 5.25. The latter words of that Verse. MEAN MEAN, TEKEL VPHARSIN.
RIght Worshipful, Sape fit ut aliqua brevis and exigua scriptio vocetur
liber. Matthew. 1.1. and 19.7. (...) Deuteronomy. 24.1. (...)
and beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, of the sixty six books of
Sacred Scripture, some are more Historical, relating many things done before
the writing of them, as the books of Moses, and the Evangelists: some are more
doctrinall, teaching the rules of a Christian life and a holy conversation, as
the Epistles of the Apostles and some are more Prophetical, and so are the
words of my Text,

Mean Mane, Tekel Upharsin, There are four difficulties that do obscure and
veil the meaning of the Text, which I shall comprehend in these four words,

Tempus, Locus, Lingua, Brevitas. There is likewise a fourfold consideration
that will farther help us to understand the same in some measure; take them in
these four words,

Occasio, Quomodo, Quibus, Eventus. Give me leave to speak briefly of these
eight particulars.

Tempus. The circumstance of time when, when these things were done, which are
mentioned in this Chapter, is very considerable. And although those that have
been famous for their studies in Chronology, do not all agree herein, yet the
difference betwixt most of them is not very much, considering the great
difficulty of the work.

In opere Chronologico.

Anno 3395. An. Mun. 3412 Vide, de Annis Captivitatis Babylonicae. Chyt.
Chrono. Herodoti. 3424. Funct. 3425. Perkins 3430. In 2 Chronicles. 36.23.

Dan. 6.1. Dan. 5. ult. Ezra ^.^.


Calvisius sets down these things as done in the year of the World 3395, and
says, that Cyrus overcame Darius Medus, and took Babylon 17 years after; and
that the Jews had liberty to return to Judea, and build the Temple, in the
year 3418, and that they returned 3419. But Chyiraeus, Functius, and Mr.
Perkins, do write that these things were done about the year of the World
3425, and in the last year of the Babylonish captivity; for Cyrus began to
reign presently after the death of Belshazzar, although his father-in-Law
Darius Medus had the Name and Title for honor sake, yet Cyrus himself in
effect had the dominion, as Tromellius, Junius, and Calvin observe. Now certain
it is, that in the first year of Cyrus, after that he and Darius had won
Babylon, the Jews had free liberty to return out of that captivity, 2 Chronicles.
36.20. And hence I gather, that these things were done in the last year of the
Babylonish captivity.

Locus. The circumstance of the place is also very considerable, Babylon, in
the sacred Scriptures.

Genesis 11.2, 4.
Babylon, even that City where the Tower was built by Euphrates, and build the
City partly on the one side, 2 Chronicles. 36.20 Psalm. 137.1, 2, 3. Dan. 4.30. Genesis
11.8, 9. Isa. 13.19. Babyl^lon. 83.10 lat. 3^.50. Ierus. 66.0.31.40. Clavius in
Io^de Sacro Bosco.
and partly on the other side of the same River. And thither the Jews were
carried into captivity, and there they made their lamentation. And in it was
the Royal Palace of the Kings of Caldea. It was at first called Babel, for the
confusion of Tongues, a judgment of God upon the first builders of it, as it
tended to confusion at the last. It was situate nearest the Rumbe, East and by
North from Jerusalem, and distent from it about eight hundred seventy and five
miles.

Cayro, a famous City in Egypt, is by some Authors named Babylon, and so it is
called in Ortelius his Map, at which place, Fran. Sac. Qu. Funct. Com. Chron.
Anno Christ. 44 and 45 B^n^ng. ^in. totius Sa. Scrip. Calvin. Beza in 1 Pet.
4.13. Rhem. Annot. in 1 Pet. 5.13. Calvis. Chrono. in An. post Chri. 64. negat.
2 Cor. 11.28. Romans 15, 16, 20 Romans 16. 2 Timothy 4.6, 16. Revel. 17.4, 5. and
18.2. Revel 11.8. Revel. 17.5. ^ulling. Brightman. L. Napier. Fr. Iuniur. Dan.
4.30.
some do conceive Peter the Apostle was when he wrote his first Epistle,
although some rather hold he was then at another City, of that name, in
Assyria. But the Translators of the Rhemish Testament, in their Notes upon that
place do say, that by Babylon is meant Rome, because they would thereby
confirm their saying, That Peter the Apostle was Bishop of Rome 25 years,
which is contrary to the holy Histories in the Acts of the Apostles, and to
many passages of the Apostle Paul in his Epistles. But is Rome Babylon by their
own confession? then, ex ore tuo, by thine own confession, o Papist, we
conclude, Rome is Babylon and the mother of whoredoms, and shortly to be
destroyed.

Rome, in a figurative and spiritual sense, is called Babylon in very deed,
Revel. 18.2. as all Orthodox, Modern Expositors do interpret the same, both
for their proud uprising, superstitious Idolatries, and horrible confusion a
Rome is also called Egypt, because it has been a prison and bondage to Gods
people and truth, Revel. 11.8. But these things mentioned in this Chapter, were
done in the City, in which both Belshazzar did live, and before him
Nebuchadnezzar, which was first, properly, and constantly called Babylon,
situate by the River Euphrates, as I said before.

Lingua. The language this my Text was written in; for these words, Mean Mean,
Tekel Upharsin, are not properly Hebrew words, as most words of the old
Testament be, but the Caldean Language, which, both for the character and tone,
is of near affinity with the Hebrew, as I shall show more plainly by and by.

But then it may be admired, Object.
why the learned men of Caldea, could not read it?

I answer,

Answ. wemes Christian Synag.
that these words were written (first) in the Caldean tongue, and the Samaritan
character, which differed very much from the Caldie letters, and therefore they
could not read it.

Or else, it was the wonderful work of God; to take the wise in their own
craftiness, he did confound their skill, Job 5.13.
for they could not so much as read it, much less could they interpret the
writing.

Brevitas, Brevity is often a ground of obscurity, as in the Brevis esse
laboro, obscurus fio. Eccles. 12.13. Deuteronomy. 10.4. Nehem. 8.8. Matthew. 5.
which contain the whole duty of all men in ten words; therefore did they need
explaining and expounding, even to those that spoke the same language; hence it
is, that many can say the Commandments, but very few understand them. And
therefore when Daniel had read the writing, yet the hardest work was still to
do, namely, the interpretation and application of the words, hic labor, Verse.
26.27, 28
hoc opus est; and therefore he spends three verses in that work.

And now I come to the four Considerations tending to the clearer illustration
of the meaning of these words,

Occasio, the Occasion was a merry meeting of a company Caldeans was wont to
disdain the company of his Lords, yet now to show his great carelessness
(although the City was besieged) he would make a feast, Dan. 5.1. Jer. 25.12,
15, 17. Dan. 5.2, 3, 4.
and drink before a thousand of his Lords: And, as was foretold, it tended to
his destruction, for drunkenness seldom goes alone; he first prophaneth the
vessels of the Lords house, and then blasphemeth God, by magnifying his Idol
idle gods.

Quomodo, the manner how this mad mirth was quelled, mirabile dictu, a strange
thing to be told; the King, his Lords, and all are amazed, why? Digitus Dei hic.
what is the matter? No man, but a hand; no hand, but the fingers of a hand were
seen to write over against the Candlestick, that all might behold it, And this
was the writing that was written, Mean Mean, Tekel Upharsin: and all their wise
men could not read it, this made their hearts to ache; they were terrified and
astonished, for they might see plainly, Dan. 5.6, 9. Exodus 8.18, 19.
it was the finger of God. Thus God by small means can quell the swelling
braves of proud men.

Quibus, to what persons this speech is referred, truly in a general sense
unto them all, for they were all filled with amazement, and some of them soon
after were slain: Verse 9.
but it did specially belong to the King, who trembled exceedingly. And the
Prophet made application of the thing home to the King himself before he comes
to the full declaration of the meaning of the words, And thou his son, O
Belshazzar, Verse 6. Verses 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23
have not humbled thine heart, though thou knew all this: But have lifted up
thy self against the Lord of heaven, etc.

Eventus. The Event was the sudden taking of the City of Babylon, and the
slaying of King Belshazzar, Verse 30, 31. Ioh. Funcii^. In Commenta. in
Chronolog. lib. 2.

Anno Mundi 3425.


and many of the Caldeans. Funcius sets down the same after this manner: Cyrus
finding Babylon so fortified, and the inhabitants having all things in a
readiness to resist their enemies, and therefore deriding and mocking his
endeavors, he commanded Trenches to be cut to receive or carry away the waters
of the great River Euphrates, which ran through that City; but least the
Babylonians should perceive it, they left the earth whole next the River,
until all things were prepared, and the Babylonians did celebrate a Festival
day according to their old wonted manner, in which every one was given to
feasting, wine, or music, and neglected the watch of the walls: Then Cyrus
taking that opportunity, commanded the prepared Trenches to be opened speedily,
for the receiving the force of the River, and so the stream being diminished,
he brought his Army by the River Euphrates into the middle of the City; of the
Babylonians, few durst resist them, and those that did so were slain by Cyrus
his Soldiers; the King of Babylon being in the Tower (which because of the
tumult in the City, was rashly opened) there was he slain with all his guard,
by Gobria and Gadata, Calvin. in Ier. 51.31.
Captains obliged by promise to Cyrus, who thus overcame all the power of the
Babylonians. And this also was foretold to be done in this manner, Jer. 51.30,
31, 32.

Now I come to the words themselves, which though they be but few, yet they
contain much matter worth our meditation. Tempus praeteritum vitum, praesens,
suturum.
And as time is distinguished into time past, time present, and time to come:
So these three words, Mean, Tekel, Upharsin, by their exposition, do seem to
respect those three parts of time: God has numbered; Thou art weighed. The
Kingdom shall be divided suddenly.

(...)
Mean, is a Caldean word, although in the sound it be like the Hebrew word
Meneh, for this is written with an Aleph, the Hebrew word with an He, and
signifies to number, Psalm. 90.12.
as ver. 26. So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto
wisdom.

Mean mean, the gemination and doubling of the word does note the certainty of
the thing; the dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice, Genesis 41.32.
as Joseph told him, because the thing is established by God.

peace peace, Isa. 26.3.
in the Hebrew is very well rendered, perfect peace.

Psalm. 50.21.
with all the circumstances of time and place, what was first said or done, and
what next, etc. He numbreth exactly the sufferings of his people, and the
cruelty of his own and their enemies, Psalm. 56.8.
and they shall end together.

(...)
Tekel is also a Caldean word, for the Radix of the Hebrew word is tacan to
weigh, Prove. 16.2. The Lord weighs the spirits.

Genesis 23.16.
Abraham did, either for want of coined money, Mat. 22.20, 21
which afterward they had; yea, I have seen a Shekel made in the time of
Solomon K. in Jerusalem, as the Hebrew superscription did import.

London, (...)
as 2 King. 12.11. and they gave the money being told, or weighed, as it is in
the Original.



So it is meant here, God will exactly try every man; and give to every man
according to his ways. Jer. 17.10. (...)


Upharsin, that is also a Caldean word, for the Hebrew Radix is Parash, and
does signify to divide, and so to scatter and destroy; for to divide is the
ready way to overcome: (...)
and it does also signify to break in pieces, Psalm. 55.9. Lam. 4.4. Mic. 3.3.
Jer. 16.7. (...) Levit. 11.13.
as bread to be eaten, Isa. 58.7. to deal or break thy bread to the hungry: It
is some time translated to tear; and so the foul called the Ossi. frage or
Bone-breaker, is in Hebrew called Peers, because by the strength of her beak
and tallons, she does break the bones of lesser birds, so it is also used for
the Claws, with which they tear them in pieces. Zech. 11.16.


And thus you see briefly the meaning of the words.

Mean Mean, Tekel Upharsin. The first of which belong unto God, Mean, God has
numbered thy Kingdom and finished it. Verse 26.


The second to King Belshazzar, Tekel, Thou art weighed in the balance and art
found wanting. Verse 27.


The third to his Kingdom, Peers, Thy Kingdom is divided and given to the
Medes' and Persians. Verse 28.


And they all contain useful lessons for every one of us; as one said long
ago, Lego Historias, ne fiam Historiam; And all that was written afore-time,
was written for our learning, Romans 15.4.
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. 1 Cor.
10.11.
And let wicked men, learn to beware by the fearful examples of those that
were punished in former times.

From the words of the Text thus understood, we may gather these three
observations.







And first of the first Note.

That God does exactly number the extent and continuance of every Kingdom.

The Text Mean Mean, he has numbered, he has numbered, that is he has
certainly and exactly numbered; and the interpretation, Verse 26.
God has numbered thy Kingdom, that is the Kingdom of the Caldeans, and
finished it; Shows us plainly, that God did number exactly the extent and
continuance of that Kingdom.

By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. Therefore he named some Kings
long before they were borne. Prove. 18.15. 1 King. 13.2. Isai. 44.28.
As Josiah above 300 years before his birth, and Cyrus 179 years before he
began to reign.

Deuteronomy. 29.19. Judge. 11.15, 18.
Israel took none from them.

Canaan. And 70 years for the Kingdom of Babylon. Genesis 15.13. Jer. 25.2. 1 Samuel 15.23, 26. Dan. 5.18, 19, 20, 21.
Yea, and it is.

Saul and Nebuchadnezzar.

And God has made of one blood all nations of men, Act. 17.26. Psalm. 31.15.
Terminus and status vitae meae. Tremel.
for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and has determined the times
before appointed, and the bounds of their habitations. And my times (the term
and state of my life) are in thy hand, says David.

Beasts power of acting, 42 months, and the Gentiles treading down the City so
long also, Genesis 15.16. Rev. 13.5. Rev. 11.2. Rev. 12.42.
and 30 days to a month; 42 months make just 1260 days, the time of the
woman's flight into the wilderness. It shows us that God will suffer the wicked
so much and so long to rage, as shall make for the glory of his justice, and no
more, nor no longer. Psalm. 76.10.


2 Reason. Semil.
gracious goodness, and fatherly care for all his people: As a loving master
will many times let out farms to those that have been his diligent servants,
but being tender over his own Children, he will so order the leases of his
servants that he will be sure to provide comfortable habitations in due season
for all his Children; this is very plainly affirmed of the Lord. Deuteronomy. 32, 8.
When the most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated
the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of
the children of Israel. As if he should say, he did so set out the bounds of
other people as he might be sure to provide for every one of his a meet
inheritance. And he renders the Reason; Ver. 9. Romans 8.32. Psalm. 84.11. Mat.
10.29, 30, 31. Psalm. 125.3.
For the Lords portion is his people, etc. For God having given them Christ, he
will give them all other things that are good for them. This argument Christ
used, taken from Gods care for the sparrows; then he will take much more care
for his own people. He loves them too well to let the Rod of the wicked to lie
always on their backs. Rev. 15.3. Psalm. 2.
For Christ the King of Saints shall break all his enemies in pieces, as
earthen vessels are broken with a rod of iron.



Jacob said, Minor sum, Genesis 32.10.
nullus sum, I am less then all thy favors.

David when he stirs up his soul effectually to thankfulness, he says, My
soul praise the Lord, and all that is within me praise his holy Name, My soul
praise the Lord and forget not all his benefits. As if he should say, although
thou forgettest many of them, yet be sure not to forget all of them. And then
he reckons up diverse of Gods mercies to himself, to his people generally, and
to all the world universally; for as a late worthy Divine well observed, M.
Sam. Ward.
A fool cannot, a proud man will not be thankful. For the one cannot reckon
up Gods dealings with him, and the other will not acknowledge them (from the
truth of his heart) to be free favors.

Therefore let us, I beseech you, beloved, look back a little while upon the
National favors, judgments and warnings of this Kingdom only, and that in
this last Centurie of years; for as they say, Seculum Speculum, an Age is a
looking-glass wherein we may see Gods mercies, our own ingratitude, his
Chastisements, our incorrigiblenesse; and by his grace we may be made more
humble, more thankful and obedient to God,

I cannot largely repeat things (neither will the time give way thereunto,) as
Moses did in 4 Chapters together; Deuteronomy. 1.2, 3, 4. Chapters.
I shall only point at some things briefly; I pray be larger in your
Meditation and application of them to your own souls, Genesis 18.17, 18, 19.
Psalm. 78.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
to your Children and servants, as it is the duty of every godly parent, by
virtue of a Statute Law in Israel, ordained by Jehovah himself, and obeyed by
all his people.

And the rather shall I make bold at this time, it being the hundredth year of
Englands Reformation, and coming out of Popish captivity and idolatry.

Josiah of England) began to reign, M. Fox. Acts. and Mon. Vol. 2. 651. and
652. K. Edward the VI. his Injunctions printed July, 1547. Vol. 2. p 654. M.
Hooper. Vol. 3. p. ^45. John Alasco. Vol. 3. p. 40.
being but nine years of age, and yet a gracious Governor. And it is this
month just a hundred years since he began Reformation, and to put down
Idolatry, which did not a little cheer and revive the hearts of the godly in
England, and many other came over to enjoy the liberty with them, of which some
were our own countrymen, before that time fled from persecutors there, and
some were godly people of other Nations.

London, Vol. 2. p. 669.
the English Protestants put the Scottish Papists with their Idol gods, altars
and popish trinkets to the worse, in Musoleborough field: where, though the
number of the Scots far exceeded ours, yet in that field were slain of them
between 13 and 14 thousand, and not above a hundred English men.

Davonshire, Vol. 2. p. 666, 667, 668, 669.
requiring popery again to be established, were first by the King most
lovingly and wisely answered: and after, with their consecrated god in whom
they trusted, the Pax under his canopie riding in a cart (which they brought
into the battle, with masses, crosses, banners, candlesticks, holy bread and
holy water plenty,) were they vanquished, many being slain, their chieftains
and two priests taken, with their Idol god and his trumpery about him.

Hooper opposed certain ceremonies, Acts and Mon. Vol 3 p. 145, 146, 147.
but was over-powred by the Arch Bishop of Canterbury, although K. Edward, the
Duke of Sommerset, with others, and also the Earl of Warwick wrote to the
Archbishop, desiring he might be borne withal.

Sommerset, Acts and Mon. Vol. 2. p. 754.
the Kings Uncle, and Protector of his person, was executed.

Calvisius.
That famous King (lento veneno) departed out of this life, having reigned
prosperously 6 years and 8 months.

Acts and Mon. Vol. 3. p. 13.
Lady Jane the Duke of Suffolk his daughter, was, by the Kings Testament and
consent of the Nobles, proclaimed Queen.

Acts. and Mon. Vol. 3. p. 15.
QUeen Mary by the help of the Suffolk Gospellers, got the Crown, promising them
not to alter the Religion then established. Yet she hasted to restore both
Popery and the Popes power in England. P. 16.
And then were the Saints of God persecuted; Vol. 3.
who as they had taught the Gospel sincerely, so did they hold it forth most
clearly in the bright flames of fire. Many hundreds of Gods precious servants
suffered death in her few and evil days.

Philip Prince of Spain, Acts and Mon. Vol 3. p. 31.
and Mary Queen of England, which occasioned Wyats conspiracy, for which he
was executed.

P. 114, 115.
Much talk was there the same year that Queen Mary had conceived and was quick
with child, but it proved rather a conceit then a conception, for she and
they also were deceived, P. 953.
although they were very confident thereof, P. 114, 115, 116.
as by an Act of Parliament, their Prayers and provisions for it did appear.

P. 953.
A great dearth was in England, so that many poor people were fain to feed of
acornes for want of corn.

P. 669. P. 953. P. 952. P 954.
Queen Mary lost Calice, and being left desolate by K. Philip her husband, in
great grief she dyed, having reigned mavelous unprosperously five years and
five months.

P. 943. to P. 952. P. 704. (...).
In which Maryan times, though many hundreds suffered for the Truth, yet diverse
God mercifully preserved, as the Lady Elizabeth, though in prison; some were
hidden in their own houses, Martyrs, or Witnesses. Acts 1.8. Thom. Hubbard was
my grandfather. Vol. 3. p. 1020. P. 920. Vol. 3. p 976. P. 979. Vol. 3 p. 954.
to 963. D. Rainolds in Psalm. 8.47. etc.
as the Mendlesham Martyrs, who oft-times openly professed the truth, and some
even miraculously were delivered from the fury of their persecutors; as
Laremouth, Crosmons wife, and many others.

Elizabeth of famous memory, in the beginning of her reign, restored the
Reformation begun in King Edwards time, to the great joy of the godly, and Gods
just judgments fell upon many malicious persecutors.

Norton or Moorton a Priest sent from the Vir: (...) pudoris. (...)
confusionis, a man of shame and confusion. In Psalm. 78.70. in Ministers,
Patrons and Bishops. Letter to Mr. R.D. 24. Dec. His Preface to the Q Majesty.
Englands thankful Remembrance of Gods mercies.
Ishbosheth of Rome, with his accursed curse, raised Rebellion; and seduced the
Duke of Northfolk, the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland; the two former
were beheaded, and the other fled.

Edward Deering preached before the Queens Majesty, against many abuses in the
Church. And after was in the Queens name, forbidden to preach in her dominions.

Don John of Austria, brother to the K. of Spain, who proclaimed perpetual
peace to England, but intended to captivate the Kingdom, and failing thereof
dyed with grief.

Gregory the 13 and the K. of Spain, conspire to raise rebellion in Ireland by
means of Thomas Stuckley an English man, giving him a holy peacocks tail: but
Thomas Stuckley was slain at the battle at Alcazor.

Nicolas Sanders priest stirs up the Earl of Desmond, with a consecrated
banner from Rome to make rebellious war in Ireland: the Earl was slain by a
Common soldier, and Sanders ran mad.

England was admonishid by a terrible Earthquake, one of the Sanctions used at
the giving the Moral Commandments. April 6.


Parsons and Campion, English Traitors, Deuteronomy. 19.18.
and Romish Jesuits, walking about to withdraw subjects from loyalty, sometime
like Ruffians, sometime like Ministers, sometime like Noble men.

Campion was taken and hanged at Tiburn, but Parsons fled.

Summervil, an English gentleman, was seduced to kill the Queen, which he
attempted desperately: but was hindered and cast into prison, where he
strangled himself.

Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador did work treason with Throgmorton: but Mendoza
was banished, and carried in each hand a paper, in the one were written the
Names of such Lords here as stood affected to the Pope: in the other the Havens
and Creeks in England, and Throgmorton was hanged and quartered.

Chreighton a Scottish Jesuit, being taken at sea by Dutch pirates, having
traitorous letters concerning England, threw them overboard torn in pieces,
but the wind brought them aboard again, and Sir William Wade plated them
together; And found out their plot and discovered it.

Doct. Rainolds in Psalm. 18.47. etc. p. 14.
William Parry the proud miscreant, being resolute to work his devilish vow,
the Pope incensing him with allowance of the fact and plenary pardon of his
sins, having an opportunity did come with his dagger purposely to kill the
Queen: but being stricken with her looks of Majesty, he trembled, was taken
and executed.

Ballard, Savage, Techburne, Traverse, Babington, Gage, Tilney, Charnock, Dunn,
Jones, Barnwell, Abington, Salisbury and Windsor, consulted treason in Giles
fields by London: but were discovered, and in those fields were executed.

Rouland York, and Sir William Stanley turned Traitors.

William Stafford an English gentleman, was persuaded by the French Ambassador,
to kill the Queen as himself declared to the Counsel: but the Ambassador
denied it.

Octogessimus octavus mirabilis annus, Clade Papistaram, faustus ubique piis.
Acts and Mon. A Continuation, etc. added to the third Vol. Printed London,
1632. p. 76. to 83. M. John Carter of Belsted. Theod. Beza. Quam been te,
Ambitio, mersit vanissima vertus? Et tumidae tumidos vos superastis aquae! Quam
been reptores orbis totius Iberos, Mersit in exhausti justa vorago maris! in
Revel. 3. V. 15, 16, 17.
called by the Pope The Invincible Navy, consisting of ships, galleys,
gallions and pinnaces to the number of 242, in them were soldiers, mariners
and gallislaves 31030. And great ordnance 11630, Came against England to
captivate the same, and our Fleet being 120 vessels, the Camp at Tilbury 22000
foot and 1200 horse: In France Mendoza Mendaciously made songs of triumph, as
if the Spaniards had gotten the victory: but they were soon frustrated of
their vain expectation: of English men there were not a hundred lost, and but
one ship of ours: whereas many hundred (if not many thousands) of the Spaniards
were slain; for they lost near two hundred vessels, and as I heard the late
reverend Minister of his town say, They shot not one bullet unto the English
shore; Thus did our Jehovah pay his enemies in kind, and overthrow their
swelling minds puffed up with pride, with swelling waves and puffes of wind,
for which our Royal Queen Elizabeth gave public thanks to God.

Lopez, a Jew by descent, a Portugal by birth, a doctor of Physic and the
Queens Physician, promised the Spaniards to poison the Queen: but being found
out, he was executed.

Brightman did write against the proud prelacie and beggariy ceremonies; and
fore-telleth their extirpation.

Tyrone an Irish Earl rebelliously raised war in Ireland, Acts and Mon. Vol.
2. p. 333. Nata Sept. 7. 1533. Moriturque Martii 24. 1603. Calv.
and put this Kingdom to much cost and trouble, and then fled.

Elizabeth of famous memory, notwithstanding these 15 rebellions and treasons
conspired against her: and she dyed in peace, being about seventy years of
age, when she had reigned 44 years and four months.

Sir Fr. Dracus in Anno 1577. 1578. 1579. 1580. Cap. Thomas Candish in An.
1586. 1587. 1588.
In the time of her reign Sir Francis Drake, and also Capt. Thomas Candish,
sailed round about the world, to the lasting honor of her Majesty and of this
Kingdom.

Britain, began to reign over England, and continued the same Reformation
before settled.

London, whereof (as A Song of Thanksgiving for Gods wonderful works, never to
be forgotten, 1588. 1603. 1605. Printed 1625. Acts and Mon. A Continuation,
added to the 3 Volume Printed at London, 1632. page 86. to 96. Fausta and festa
dies, lux aurea, quinta Novembris.
some write) there dyed 34079 in three months, in one week 3385.

Watson and Clarke, two popish priests, seduced Lord Cobham, Lord Gray, Sir
Walter Rawleigh, and some other, to imprison the King: who yet pardoned those
that were so seduced.

Gunpowder treason, which no doubt was devised by the Devil, but acted by a
company of popish catholics, Robert Catesbie, Robert Winter Esquires, Thomas
Percy, Thomas Winter, John Wright, Christopher Wright, Guido Fawkes gentlemen,
and Bates Catesbies man, were first in the Treason and labored in the Mine:
Everard Digby Knight, Ambrose Rookewood, Francis Tresham, Esquires; John Grant
gentleman, and Robert Keys, were acquainted with it, though nor personally
laboring in the Mine, nor in the Cellar. These traitors intended to have blown
up the King, Queen, Prince, the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, and
then A Song of Thanksgiving.
they meant to lay that horrid fact to the charge of the Puritans, and so to
have taken up some pretense to have rooted out, if possibly they could, all the
true professors of Christ, and to establish popery in this Kingdom. But our
good God overruled them, so that by their own letter, with the Kings
Majesty's most wise construction, his faithful Counsels diligent and
discreet inquisition, was it discovered, although they took the Sacrament of
secrecy, and the time was near for the performance thereof; Thus was our great
danger by our gracious Jehovah prevented, An. 3. Jacob. Regis, Act. Parl. In a
Prayer and Thanksgiving appointed for November. 5.
and their own by themselves procured, the remembrance whereof we ought with
all thankfulness in solemn manner to Celebrate, to Gods praise, every fifth
day of November. And entreat we the Lord to root out that Babylonish and
Antichristian sect, whose Religion is Rebellion, whose Faith is Faction, whose
Practice is murdering of souls and bodies.

Henry, that Royal and hopeful branch, departed out of this life.

Randall Bates, a reverend Preacher, dyed in prison, having lain in the
Gate House about twenty months, only for opposing the Lordly Prelacy, and the
ceremonies then used in the Church.

Spain; and returned safe, for which we ought to praise the Lord.

Drury a Priest (who drew the people awry indeed) being at Mass in the
Blackfriars at London, Dru (aw) ry. In Roman Account. Nov. 5. Occidit una
domus, sed non domus una perire digna fuit.
and much people of high degree, and others being there, the chamber fell down,
slew the Priest himself, and many of those that were hearing him, and maimed
others. A fair warning to all that neglect the means of grace, (doubtless
many houses or households have deserved the same punishment,) as also it is a
sure presage of the downfall of Popery,

James, of blessed memory, departed in peace, having reigned in great
tranquillity, in England, two and twenty years; and in Scotland, about 58
years.

Great Britain, and continued the Reformation before established, except that
by degrees it did degenerate, and the prelacie laded us with more Popish
innovations, or at least, the same burden bound more straightly upon us.

God from heaven gave warning to this Nation by a Sight in the air, which many
saw; being a lively representation of Wars, toward the North, and after a
round Church appeared: which when I saw, I did even then conceive, and say,
that which since I have observed to be in a great measure fulfilled, videlicet;
That there would be terrible wars, I feared, in this my Dear Native Country,
but in the conclusion, the Church should be reformed more and more, and not so
deformed by conforming to the Orders, or rather disorders then practiced.

Cambridge, which forced the Students of that ancient and famous Universitie
(my self being at that time one of them,) to a long discontinuance: and in
diverse respects it was a great affliction to most parts of this Kingdom, (if
not to all,) and therefore not to be forgotten by us.

Episcopacy in Scotland, there was great danger of engaging England in a war
against our brethren in Scotland, which it also pleased God to prevent, showing
much mercy to us and them.

Sixty six Spanish ships lay near to Dover, for what end I know not; it was
feared they came for no good: but they were fought with by Seven Holland ships
at first, and after there came in to help those 7, seventeen more of them; And
among them all, in a short time, about 2000 men were slain, and we but
Spectators only of that tragoedie.

New Canons, and overcharged them with an Odious Oath, which shortly after in
their discharge ruined themselves. The Lord is known by the judgment he
executes: O quanta veritatis potentia! Psalm. 9.16.
the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands; Higgaion, Selah! or Medit
andum Selah! So let all thine enemies perish O God.

This present Parliament began, as the fruit of many prayers; T. H.
for when the people of God in this land were full of fears and troubles,
their hearts failing them, and they ready to say, What shall we do? whither
shall we flee? The Lord gave to them the Spirit of supplication abundantly, and
indeed showed himself to be, The God that hears prayer, by giving a
Parliament, and such succesfull beginnings thereunto, as opened a fountain in
this Jawbone, to revive the fainting Church of his here.

Protestation was taken all this Kingdom over.

Wars began, yet God was good to us in discovering and preventing many secret
treacheries, and assisting us in great difficulties.

Covenant was taken, wherein we all lifted up our hands to the most high God,
that we will endeavor the Reformation of the Church according to Gods Word,
the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism and
Profaneness, and each one to go before another in the example of a real
reformation.

And many superstitious relics were abolished, which neither we nor our godly
fathers (as ye have heard) were able to bear. Since which time, ye know, many
Witches have been discovered by their own confessions, and executed; Englands
Remembrancer. from June 13, to Feb. 4. 1645.
Many glorious victories obtained (beyond any man's expectation) and places of
strength yielded, above seventy in eight months space: This is none other but
the Lord himself has done it. For when our enemies sometime said, They have
nothing to help themselves with but prayer; It seemed fully sufficient, or
rather, the Lord who was prayed unto. S. B.
As one (that doubtless is now with God,) wrote to me being absent, Then, then
in due season, when Gods people had nothing to lean to but a God alone in
Christ: but why should I say nothing, when they had an All-sufficient God to
go unto, and it proved all in all unto them? And this is to be admired as the
wonderful goodness of God, that the life of our Most gracious Sovereign Lord
the King, has been all this War most mercifully preserved. O that we were in
some suitable measure thankful to God above for the same.

Jehovah of Armies give us a timely, complete, and comfortable conclusion of
the same, for his infinite mercy sake in Christ.

In this brief Relation (Beloved) I have said little of the latter times, as
hoping they are fresher in your own memories, and easier to make use of.

And observe I pray you, Many have been our provoking rebellions, Many have
been the dangerous destructive designs of our enemies, Many have been Gods
preventing mercies and gracious deliverances, Many his fatherly chastisements
and most loving warnings and admonitions, and yet We, We (I say) revolting from
God almost by a perpetual backsliding.

You may also see in this short Commemoration, Truth striving in some of Gods
Saints for power against Ceremonies, and yet oppressed. Annex we, to those few
before mentioned, the many we have read, or heard of, or known in our times:
And then we may well admire Gods goodness to us, and bless his Name that he
has showed us some reviving, and at the present has given us ease from such
snares of Conscience, and such hopeful beginnings of Reformation, and let us
beseech him to perfect the same according to the pattern showed to us in his
holy word.

And now England, England, Deuteronomy. 10.12.
what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to
walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all
thy heart and with all thy soul. Deuteronomy. 32.29.
O that we were wise, and understood this, and that we would consider our
latter end! Psalm. 116.12.
Let us every one study a Quid rependerem Jehovae! Make vows and pay them unto
God. Psalm. 50 14.
Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most High. But take
heed of making vows and not paying them. Eccles. 5.2.4.5
For better it is, not to vow, then that thou should vow and not pay.

Here you are to understand.

I sent before thee Moses, Micah 6.4. Jer. 44.4.
Aaron and Miriam, and all my servants the Prophets. I think verily, never did
any Kingdom enjoy so many, such faithful, painful and powerful Preachers of
Gods word in any one age, Acts and Mon. Vol. 3. M. Prynne his Catalogue in
Anti-Armin.
as this Kingdom has enjoyed in this age, (now the Lord our God add unto
them an hundred fold:) But he will call us to an accout, what use we have made
of all the endeavors and labors of our godly Kings and Magistrates, and of
our faithful Ministers.

Manna, quatles, and water too. Psalm. 78.23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. Amos 4.6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
And in another Prophet, the several judgments, as the famine, by want of
rain, by blasting and mildew, the pestilence, war and Sodom like overthrows.

Psalm. 78.31, 32.
How often does he repeat this sharp reprehension, yet have ye not returned
unto me, says the Lord. Yea, Amos. 4.6, 8, 8, 10, 11.
he numbers all our hypocrisies in our turnings to him too, and that is most
odious unto God. When he slew them, Psalm 78 34.35, 36.
then they sought him, and they returned and enquired early after God. And they
remembered that God was their Rock, and the high God their redeemer.
Nevertheless (says he) they did but flatter him with their mouth, and lied
unto him with their tongues; for their heart was not right with him, neither
were they steadfast in his Covenant. Psalm. 78.37.


Revel. 2.21, 22
And I gave her space to repent of her fornication, and she repented not;
Behold, I will cast her into a bed; and them that commit adultery with her,
into great tribulation. And it shall come to pass at that time, that I will
search Jerusalem with candles, and punish the men that are settled on their
lees, Calv. Chron. An. Mundi. 3325. Zephan. 1.1. 2 Chronicles. 34.8. and 35.18, 19.
or their old corruptions, at that time: at what time was that? Truly the time
of a through Reformation, as may appear plainly by comparing the time of
Zephania his prophesying, and his prophecy together.

As for particular persons, let every one of us consider with his own self.

Jer. 29.7.
Is not my peace wrapped up in the peace of the Kingdom I live in? And was not my
life preserved in the lives of my parents, Genesis 44.30.
more properly then the life of the parent is bound up in the childs life? 2
Cor. 7.10.
which yet is most true; as the comfortable life, or as inordinate sorrow for
them, tend to temporal death.

Again let every one consider,

Psalm. 8.
as all the creatures here below; the birds, beasts and fishes, to lose their
lives, for the preservation of ours. And that he should make such vast glorious
bodies, as the Sun, Moon, and Stars, in such an excellent order waiting upon
me: Quid est mortalis, ut memor sis ejus? Tremel. Ainsworth. Psalm. 107.
how should I then break forth into an holy and humble admiration, What is
sorry man that thou remembrest him, and the son of Adam that thou visitest him?

when we have received the sentence of death in our own or other men's
apprehensions; Psalm 31.1^.
how should we say with the Prophet, my times are in thy hand, with all the
several changes of my condition, and give to God only all the glory!

Ephesians. 2.3. Psalm. 103.1, 3, 4, 5.
as his love to me, (a poor wretch by nature) in and through Christ Jesus,
forgiving all my sins, healing all my diseases, crowning me with loving
kindness and tender mercies, and satisfying my mouth with good things. Now he
that is wise will be wise for himself, and will observe these things; even
such shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord. Prove. 9.12. Psalm.
107.45. Psalm, 107.1, 2.
O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever;
Let the redeemed of the Lord say so, for of all men in the world they have most
cause to know and acknowledge the same.

Col. 1.10, 11.
to walk worthy of these mercies, liberties and opportunities that we enjoy,
and to be fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God,
strengthened with all might according to his glorious power, unto all patience
and long-suffering with joyfulnesse; walk humbly with thy God, do justly, Micah
6.8.
love mercy, walk before the Lord in the land of the living.

Now especially having such an opportunity, Ezekiel. 18.34.
while God calls for Reformation, Cast away from you all your transgressions,
whereby ye have transgressed, and make you a new heart and a new spirit, Or beg
earnestly of God, Psalm. 51.10. Luke 11.13.
to create in you a clean heart, and to give you his holy Spirit; Why will ye
die O house of Israel?

Now, now I say, while those in authority do also call for Reformation, Prove.
17.16.
why should we be so foolish not to lay hold of a price thus put into our
hands? The Apostle says, Gal. 6.10.
as we have therefore Opportunity, or a season (for so the same word is
translated in the verse going before it) let us do good, (...). Gal. 6.9.
redeem we therefore the opportunity or season, (...). Ephesians. 5.15, 16
by double diligence, walking circumspectly, not as fools but as wise.

Let me stir up My self and You hereunto, with these three Motives.

1 Motive. Acts and Mon. Vol. 3. p. 168. John 8.56. Acts and Mon. Vol. ^. p.
367. Acts and Mon. Vol. 3. p. 877. and 878.
Our godly parents by faith foresaw and longed for these Your Father Abraham saw
my day and rejoiced; did they pray for this opportunity, as for a great mercy,
and did they rejoice in the expectation of it, and are we entered into the
possession of the fruits of their prayers, and of the harvest of their
endeavors, and do not we make use of this season, nor rejoice in it? How
shall we answer God or our Parents at the day of judgment? Will not they then
be ashamed of such Children as we? 2 Pet. 3.11.
do but think what manner of persons they expect we should be.

2 Motive. Covenant.
Another Motive may be drawn from the Covenant; we most high God, and engaged
our selves to go each before others in a real Reformation. Beware that be not
verified of us, which was said of Israel, They have spoken words, swearing
falsely in making a Covenant: Hosea 10.4. John 5.45. Mal. 3.5. M. Tho. Case in
his Epistle before Quar. Covenant. Levit. 26.25.
for then Christ, in whom we say we believe, he, I say, himself will be a
swift witness against the false swearers. And, as a worthy Labourer in the
Lords harvest lately wrote; If God be dallyed withal in this Covenant, I
tremble to think what will become of us; It is the strongest Physic that ever
the Kingdom took; and I am almost confident (says he) That as in the public
State it will either put a period to our distempers, or to our being; so in thy
personal condition, it will either blast thy lusts, or stay thy soul. My
reason is, because God is engaged. If we be found conscientious of this
Covenant, he is engaged to us against our enemies without, and our lusts
within, and they shall not be able to stand upon us. If after so solemn an
Obligation, we shall be found to mock God, we have engaged him against us, and
add the Almighty to the number of our enemies, a swift and a powerful
witness, and avenger of our perfidiousnesse. Nor will refusal of this
Covenant help us; when God shall come to interpret, It will be found, Job 22.17.
I fear (says he) in most but a depart from us; And when God shall answer the
daring sinner in his own language; Psalm. 78.9, 10, 36, 37. Levit. 26.25. Deuteronomy.
29.24, 25 3 Motive.
woe to the poor wretch that ever he was borne.

Be not therefore like the children of Ephraim, for he will avenge the quarrel
of the Covenant.

The religious observation of the monthly Fast,
and his high and Honorable Parliament. How can this neglect and contempt both
of the Laws of God, and of the land, be answered? And so in regard of the
plenty of the means of grace which we enjoy; Matthew. 11.21, 22.23.
it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah, in the day of judgment,
then for such as have had abundance of means, and not made good use thereof;
the higher they be lifted up, the lower they shall be thrown down. Heb. 2.1.2,
3.
Therefore we (I may well say) ought to give the more earnest heed to the
things which we have heard, lest as any time we should let them slip. For if
the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and
disobedience received a just recompense of reward; How shall we escape if we
neglect so great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord,
and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him. Our own consciences shall
first accuse; secondly, bear witness against; thirdly, judge and condemn;
lastly, execute and torment our own selves. O wicked wretch that I was, I had
so many such opportunities as few had the like, and yet I like a fool trifled
and wasted away such precious times and seasons: 1 John 3.20.
And if our consciences shall condition us, God will much more condemn us,
because God is infinitely great.

Every one of us in this condition, without repentance, shall mourn at the
last, Prove. 5.11, 12, 15, 14.
and say, How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof! and I
have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, etc.

Psalm. 137.7.
oppose, and would root out the godly, but God limits them, and they shall do
no more then shall make for Gods glory and his peoples good, Romans 8.28.
they are like mad men in chains, and can go no farther then the chain
permits them. Psalm. 76.10. Psalm. 2.12. Psalm. 55.23.
Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee: the remainder of wrath shall thou
restrain. They st^ perish in the midway of such their plots and designs, they
shall not live out half their days; which is either half the time themselves
dream of, or that one would think, according to their natural constitution,
they might live, rather then they shall proceed a step farther then may make
for Gods glory. Luke 12.19, 20
Thou fool, this night (when thou least think of it) thy soul must be
required of thee. And so the rod of the wicked shall not always lie upon the
back of the Righteous, Psalm. 125.
their power and time is numbered.

measure, not to make a full end of them, Jer. 30.11.
and therefore God has a double measure.

2 Cor. 5.10. Psalm. 7.16. Psalm. 9.16.
A measure of justice, whereby as a Judge he measures

A measure of mercy, whereby as a tender Father, and loving Physician he
faithfully chasteneth his Sons for their faults; Psalm. 103.10. 1 Cor. 10.13.
not according to what they have deserved, but according to what they have
deserved, but according to their ability, with respect to their profit, how
much will do them good. And in case they want strength and grace, Heb. 12, 10.
2 Cor. 12.9. Revel. 2.10.
he puts into them strength and grace sufficient. And he measures the time
also, how long it shall continue.

Acts 9.31. An. Christi 34. Acts 12.1. An. Christi 43.
for although the state of the Church hitherto has been such, that sometimes
they have had some breathing times of peace; yet it was not long before
persecutions came again.

But there is, doubtless, a time a coming, and now even very near too, in
which this shall be fulfilled. Moreover, 2 Samuel 7.10.
I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and will plant them, that they
may dwell in a place of their own, and move no more; neither shall the children
of wickedness afflict them any more, as before time. And though this place may
most properly be applied to the Christian Church of the Jews; after their
conversion to Christ, (which we now expect) yet the true Christians of those
times, of what Nation soever by birth, and not being Jews, are as children of
the same Church, employed therein, as appears in another Prophecy. Arise,
shine, Isa. 60.1.
for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. This
seems to be spoken to the Jews only, but by and by he says, And the Gentiles
shall come to thy light, and Micah 4.2.
The which times the Prophet Micah also sore-telleth at large, saying, And many
Nations shall come and say, Come, and let us go up to the Mountain of the
Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways,
and we will walk in his paths: And of the great peace of those times he says,
they shall beat their swords into plow shares, and their spears into pruning
hooks: Nation And he confirms this truth, saying, for the mouth of the LORD of
Hosts has spoken it. And he shows the resolution of Gods We will walk in the
name of the Lord our God for ever, and ever.



holy one of Israel, to set a certain day or year; Yet we may conclude, the
beginning of those times is very nigh, upon two Scripture grounds, (for I love
to build upon no other foundation in matters of this nature.)

Jews, Psalm. 102.13, 14
they take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust thereof, hence the
Prophet concludes, Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Zion; for the time
to favor her, Exodus 17.11. Calvis. Chron. An. Christi 394. Acts and Mon. Vol.
1. p. 66. 67.
yea, the set time is come. For when the servants of Christ lift up their hands
and hearts in fervent faithful prayer, their enemies fall to fearful ruin,
as appears in the Sacred story of Moses and Amalek: the Ecclesiastical History
of Theodosius, and the Letter of Marcus Aurelius Antonius, Emperor to the
Senate and people of Rome.

Dan. 9.2. Jer. 25.12.
as Daniel understood by reading the Prophecy of Jeremiah. I will therefore
propound some things, and leave them to your serious and wise considerations,
hoping they will give some light unto this truth.

That famous and faithful countryman of ours, and indeed a reverend Divine,
and (if I may without offense hyperbolize a little) the Prophet of this
Centurie, the bright burning light of our age Master Thomas Brightman, in his
Commentaries both of the Revelations and Solomon's Song, In Apoc. 19.1, 2, 3, 4.
Cant. 6.9.
does suppose the first calling of the Jews to be in the year 1650, and that
Rome shall be destroyed some short time before the calling of that new people.

Yet will I make bold to propound some Scripture-grounds why some other godly,
learned, and judicious Divines, do rather refer these things to a time somewhat
longer hence; take the substance of them in these few propositions.

Acts. 1.7. Amos 3.7. Dan. 12.4.
and does reveal things useful for his Church, to his servants the Prophets.

Egypt, the Babylonish Captivity, Gen 15.13. Jer. 29 10. Dan 9 24.
so their Calamity from the time of Daniel unto Christ; even so the Captivity
of the Church under Antichrist, is also limited to a certain set time, Revel.
17.17. namely, 1260 days. Revel. 11.3. Revel. 11.2. Revel. 13.5.
Revel. 12.6, which is contemporary and of equal duration with the 42 months,
and the time, times, and half a time, or three years and a half, reckoning
30 days to a month, 12 months to a year.

Revel. 12.6. Ezekiel. 4.6.
but a prophetical day is a year, as in Ezekiel, I have appointed thee each
day for a year.

Dragon was cast out, Revel. 12.6, 7, 8, 9.
and there was no more place found in heaven for him.

Constantine the Great, though he indeed began that War; because that after
his time, heathenish Idolatry was again used in public, in the days of Julian
the Apostate: But we must begin that number of De qua victoria Claudianus ita
canit: O nimium dilecte Deo, cui militat ether, etc. Et coniurati veniunt ad
classica venti.
years at the last victory of that famous Theodosius in his Battle against the
Pagans under Eugenius. Which Theodosius did root out Satanicall worship, so
that it never, in the same kind, prevailed since his time in Rome.

And for the time when this Battle was fought, as the Roman Histories do not
wholly fail us, so neither do they so certainly report the time to us as were
to be desired. For Functius puts the same Battle of Theodosius against
Eugenius, An. Christi 395. 1260.
in the year of Christ 398; but yet Calvisius, who herein seems more exact,
1655.
has it in the year 395, and some do abate of those years also. An Christi
398. 1260.
Whereupon some reverend and judicious Divines, do think that the downfall of
Rome shall be either in the year 1658, 1658.
or before, and that it shall not stand longer then that year at the most.



Hester, Hist. 10.2.
where the Holy Ghost does refer the readers of that age unto the Chronicles of
the Medes and Persians (which were the Civil Annals or Histories writ and kept
by those Heathens) that there they might read a more large declaration of
those things which were more concisely and briefly related in that Book; Titus
1.12. Acts 17.28.
so that, for amplification and illustration, such writings may be used, though
not for sufficient and single probations of divine truths.

Vivification, or quickening to revive our languishing spirits, which in these
sad times, are too too ready to give in. Lift up, I say, your heads with joy,
Luke 21.28. Heb. 12.12, 13.
the days of your consolation are nigh. Wherefore lift up the hands which hang
down, and the feeble knees, and make straight paths for your feet, lest that
which is lame be turned out of the way, but let it rather be healed; and as the
Apostle Peter exhorts, 1 Pet. 1.13.
Gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope unto the end: In that
phrase, Gird up, he alludes unto the long-side garments which the Jews did
wear, which, if they were not girded up, 1 Kings 18 46.
did hinder their activity; now this he applies metaphorically to the mind,
which must be girded up, but let it be with the girdle of truth (sirs) and it
shall fortify our slack minds to these duties. Ephesians. 6.14.


To Christian Moderation of spirit concerning sublunarie things, an excellent
grace in these so doubtful times; Aequa men's, tranquilitas mentis.
useful it is in prosperity and adversity, not being too greedy in getting or
keeping the things of this life, nor too much fearing the loss of them. Let
your moderation be known unto all men, The Lord is at hand. Phil. 4.5.


Patience, to undergo whatsoever God shall call us to suffer in the mean
time, Me thinks I may safely say, we are the last generation that shall dye in
the field fighting against Antichrist, if we do not over live him, as it may
please God, many of us may: but beasts in the killing, when they have the pangs
of death on them, use to struggle and kick very strongly, and so doubtless
will he do: let us therefore with patience wait in hope for the time of his
utter destruction, for now in the mean time, Romans 8.25. Heb. 10.36.
we have as much need of patience, as ever Christians had.

Faith. It was a worthy speech, and well-becomming a gracious Minister on his
deathbed; M. Rob. Bolton. Psalm. 27.14.
Hold out faith and patience, your work will speedily be at an end. Remember
David's charge, Wait on the Lord, Isa. 26 22.
be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thy heart: Wait, I say, on the
Lord. Hide you in your chamber, Psalm. 91.1, 2.
in the secret place of the most High, abide under the shadow of the Almighty,
trust in him, make him thy refuge, till these calamities be over past: Psalm.
57.1. Psalm. 37.5.
Roll thy way upon the Lord, trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass.

Psalm. 67.1, 2.
God be merciful unto us, and cause his face to shine upon us, Selah. That thy
way may be known upon earth, thy saving health among all Nations. Let us
requite to our power the labor of the love of their forefathers, and consider
the fullness of the Gentiles also shall come in with them, Romans 11.12, 15
which shall be much more riches, and as life from the dead to us Gentiles. our
own joy is wrapped up in theirs; And therefore every one of us have good reaspn
to pray with that Princely Psalmist, who tryumpheth in Hebrew rythme, Remember
me, O Lord, Psalm. 106.4, 5. Liroth betobath bechirecha, Lismoach besimcbath
goiecha, Lehithhall alim nachalechecha.
with thy favor that thou be arest unto thy people: O visit me with thy
salvation, that I may see the good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the
gladness of thy Nation, that I may glory with thine inheritance. For perhaps,
yet before we die (many of us I mean) our eyes may see that blessed time, our
ears may hear that happy news, and our hears may rejoice in the joy of the
Christian Jews.

He does strictly observe (I say;) for the Text says, he weighs, as a man
that will not trust to a guess, conjecture, or a supposed probability of a
thing, and I say, every soul, for the Prophet names the King Belshazzar in
particular, and I use those phrases, Verse. 22, 23, 27
of gravity, heaviness, ponderousness, and weightinesse; or levity and
lightness, in reference to the word weighed, used in the Text: which is (as I
said before) a metaphor taken from men that will have current pay, and not
counterfeit coin; therefore they bring it first to the Touchstone, and after
to the Gold-scales, and weigh it, for it may be good metal, and yet deficient
in the quantity; Mal. 3.2, 3, 4.
so the Lord will try the sons of men, as Refiners do gold and silver, Zech.
13.9.
and will come near to judgment. He will bring them through the fire, and
refine them as silver is refined, and try them as gold is tried. Psalm. 119.119.
And then he puts away all the wicked of the earth like dross. And because
the Lord will be very punctual in his proceedings, therefore the Scripture
(speaking of God, according to the manner of men) says in the person of God
himself, Genesis 18.21.
I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether according to
the cry of their sin. Showing, that the Lord as a most wise and just Judge,
will first enter into strict examination, before he proceed to a sentence, and
severe execution. These phrases are equivalent with that in my Text; but ye may
also take the proof of it even in the very phrase used in the Text. All the
ways of a man are clean in his own eyes: but the Lord weighs the spirits,
Prove. 16.2. Prove. 21.2.
or, he pondereth the hearts, which is all one.

And lastly, I say, God will observe their gravity or levity, in the matters of
God, for it makes nothing to this point, what riches, honors, or pleasures,
men have in this world, nor how men esteem us; for ye see in the exposition of
my Text, the great King Belshazzar, in all his pomp, glory, Dan. 5.27.
and jollity, is found wanting, and why so? Because his heart was not humbled,
but on the contrary, he lifted up himself against the Lord of heaven.

The Reason is taken from the most exact justice of God, Reason. Genesis 18.25.
Ezekiel. 18.29.
who being Judge of all the world will do right, for all his ways are indeed
most Equal, or Weighed, as the Original word signifies. The Lord reigns,
Psalm. 99.1, 4.
and he loves judgment, he does establish equity, he executes judgment and
righteousness. As wise men are careful in every thing, neither to deceive,
nor to be deceived: Truly God cannot be deceived, Be not deceived, God is not
mocked: 2 Timothy 3.13. Gal. 6.7. Jer. 17.10. 2 Cor. 5.10.
for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap. For Jehovah searches
the heart, and tries the reins, even to give every man according to his ways,
and according to the fruit of his doings.



First, What it is that God does weigh; and this may be expressed in these four
particulars.

weigh the Spirit or heart of every man, the very affections of his soul, Prove.
16.2. Prove. 21.2. Deuteronomy. 6.5.


weigh the Actions of men also. 1 Samuel 2.3.

weighs the Words of men, for the Prophet says, Isa. 26.7.
He weighs the path of the just. And the path does imply as well words as
actions, Psalm. 73.2. with 15. Matthew. 12.36. Psalm. 139.1. Jer. 4.14. (...)
Vanitas. i. res quae non est quidpiam, aut quae cito desinit, ut slatus qui
exit abore.
as appears by the Prophet Asaphs expressing the slipping of his steps, by
speaking against Gods children. Therefore an idle word is a light word in Gods
account.

weigh the Thoughts too. For Jeremiah speaks of vain thoughts, that they must
be washed away: now vain words or thoughts are too light, for vanity is a
vain light thing as appears, both by the Comparison the Prophet David uses,
Psalm. 62.9. And by the Hebrew word Hebel, in the same place signifying a vain
light thing, as the breath of ones mouth, or a bubble on the water, or
lightness in the Abstract.

Secondly, We may be informed of Gods method, in this

1 Quis? Gen 4 4, 5.
The Lord first weighs the man, and then his performances; The Lord had
respect to Abel and to his offering: But unto Cain and to his offering, the
Lord had not respect. The Lord looks first what the man is, Heb. 11.6.
whether he be in the faith; For without faith it is impossible to please God.

Our ways and performances, the Lord tries these, because

2 Quid? Isai. 1.12. Deuteronomy. 6.25. 1 John 3.4. Deuteronomy. 12.32. Deuteronomy. 5.33. Matthew.
5.18.
Whether the thing done, spoken, or thought, be a duty Who (says he) required
this at your hands? And this is our righteousness, to do whatsoever he has
commanded us. It is sin to add to it, or detract from it, to turn aside to
the right hand or to the left, to go beyond, or to fall short an Iota of it.

3 Quomodo? Gal. 6.16. 1 John 2 6. M Allen Doct. Gosp. Haec tria perpetuo
meditare adverbia Pauli: Haec tria sint vitae regula sancta tuae.
Whether (if it be a duty) it be performed in that manner For he that says he
abides in Christ, ought himself also so to walk even as he walked: for God
looks to the due manner of performing good works. We should live, sobrie,
just, and pie, soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, Tit.
2.12.

Whether the end aimed at be the glory of his own name? for as God made all
things for his Glory, so in all our actions Natural or Moral, we should aim
at his glory. Whether ye eat or drink, 4 Quorsum. 1 Cor. 10.31. Psalm. 139.1, 2.
or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. And God is acquainted with
our ends, that we aim at, in performing every action, for he perfectly knows
our thoughts long before, or afar off.

(...)
and employed in the Text, in the word weighs: this wanting notes two things
then.

Wanting substantial weight for the present, or wanting convenient supply to
stand us in stead for present use, for so the word is used in Sacred Scripture,
Job 30.3. (...)
as for want of food in famine, or lacking of things necessary, 1 King. 11.22.

Wanting, may also respect the time to come, when a man has not lands to live
on, or a continued Trade or employment to continue a livelihood withal, this
man may also be said to want, although he should have somewhat for his present
use: and the Original word is used in this sense also. And the barrel of meal
wasted not, 1 Kings 17.16. (...)
and the cruse of Oil did not fail, or wanted not.

Just thus it is in this case in a spiritual sense.

Laodiceans, which may yet well be applied to many people in England. Thou
say I am rich, Revel. 3.17.
and increased with goods, and have need of nothing: and know not that thou
art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked: we are ready to
think highly of our selves and our own works, but we should go unto Christ
for all, even as he there says, I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the
fire, Revel. 3.18.
that thou may be rich, and white raiment that thou may be clothed, and
that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear, and anoint thine eyes with eye
salve that thou may see. For both our selves, and our weak endeavors in holy
duties (which we are bound conscionably to exercise) must be accepted of God
the Father in and through Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 4.7. Matthew. 3.17. Revel. 8.3.
Isai. 64.6.
or else our selves shall be unclean, and all our righteousnesses but as filthy
rags in Gods sight.

Matthew. 25.3.
and very fair shows of grace too, wherewith they seem to shine bright for the
present, but yet they want a supply, Romans 8 9. Luke 4.18. Matthew. 25.4. 2 Cor.
12.9. Psalm. 84.12.
because the Holy Ghost dwells not in them himself (as he does in every
gracious soul) and the Spirit of God is as a vessel of oil to the godly
soul; whereby he has a continued and plentiful supply of all graces he
stands in need of. The Lord will give him both grace and glory, and withold
nothing that is good for him: But he that has not the Spirit of Christ
dwelling in him, but only parts and gifts; yet when he shall have most need of
the use of them, they being indeed (in themselves considered) good gifts of
God, then they are taken away: Matthew. 13.12.
(...), even that he has, says the text. And all his fair shows shall also be
taken away, he shall no longer have them to beguile others or himself withal:
and therefore another Evangelist expresses it thus; from him shall be taken
(...), Luke 8.18.
even that which he seems to have: that which he has in his own or others
opinion.

videlicet; men openly wicked, and hypocrites; for so the Psalmist does speak
of them, saying, As for such, as turn aside unto their crooked ways, Psalm.
125.5.
he means hypocrites, that in show turn to Godward, and to Heavenward, and
yet indeed turn to Satan-ward and to Hel-ward: This is crookednesses in very
truth, M. Henry Ainsworth his translation. But they that turn aside to their
crookednesses, etc.
as the Original word there signifies; and what shall become of them? The Lord
shall lead them forth as the condemned Malefactor is led out of the City to the
execution: And with what sort of people shall these be so led? with the other
sort I mentioned before, the workers of iniquity.

To speak a little more distinctly of these two sorts of people that are too
light.

cast the word of God behind them and hate to be reformed. Psalm. 50.17. Dan.
5.1, 2, 3, 4
Of this sort was Belshazzar, though he was a King, yet being a drunkard, a
profane man, one that praised his gods of gold, etc. And so dishonored the
living Lord; and on the other side, he had not humbled his heart before the
Lord, 18, 19.20, 21, 22, 23.27.
but lifted up himself against the Lord; and had not glorified him in whose
hand his breath and all his ways were; Now he was Weighed in the balance and
found wanting. Psalm. 9.17.
For the wicked shall be turned into hell, with all the people that forget God.

Luke 18.11, 12.
he fasted twice in the week and paid tithes of all, and many things more they
did, and abstained from many sins; And yet our Savior Christ himself says,
Matthew. 5.20.
Except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of heaven. And the
Apostle Paul gives us the reason saying. Romans 10.3, 4.
They being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to establish their
own righteousness have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of
God. For Christ is the end of the Law to every one that believes. 1 Cor. 1.30.
Psalm. 32. John 15.5.
He is our righteousness, or his righteousness is imputed to us, and applied
to us by faith, for without him we can do nothing that is acceptable unto God.

Neither (beloved) is it a mere verbal professing of Christ that will serve
our turn, for many there be in these days that talk much of Gods free grace
in Christ, and yet live graceless lives. Why (say they) we are not saved by
our own works, and Christ his righteousness is mine (says one;) I have
nothing of my own to present unto God; if I had, I were not poor in spirit,
and therefore they are careless in their conversations.

These are not of Paul's spirit, who as earnestly and truly longed for Christ,
as any, Phil. 3.7, 8.
as appears by his counting all things, to be loss and dung, in comparison of
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, and that he might win Christ, and
be found in him not having his own righteousness but that which is through the
faith of Christ. And that is not all he desires, Verse 9.
for he yet adds, That I might know him, and the power of his resurrection, and
the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death. For
wheresoever there is a true application of Christ his righteousness to the
poor soul unto justification, there also is the necessary concomitant
thereof, the efficacy and power of the spirit of Christ, working true
sanctification in some measure. And therefore the same Apostle tells us plainly,
Titus 2.11, 12.
That the grace of God that brings (or accompanies) salvation has appeared to
all men, teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. Those therefore
that only talk of grace shall miss the salvation. And the Apostle John is
clear in this Truth, 1 John 3.1, 2.
saying, Behold, what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we
should be called the Sons of God! Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it
does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know, that when he shall appear,
we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. And to the end, no man
should be deluded with a vain hope of this great and inestimable favor of God,
he gives this rule of cry all to be distributed to each one severally, saying,
And every man that has this hope in him, Verse 3.
purifieth himself, even as he is pure.

Examination; seeing God will weigh, search, and try, every man, woman and
child; let us examine our selves; as a wise man will tell his money when he
goes to make a payment, Psalm. 44.
that he may be sure to know whether he has sufficient or no. Let us search
and try our ways, Lam. 3.39.
says the Church of God; and the Apostle says, Examine your selves whether
you be in the faith, prove your own selves, 2 Cor. 13 5.
know you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be
reprobates, or as the Greek word signifies, (...).
not approved, for without the privative letter Alpha, it signifies approved,
ver. 7. of that Chapter.

2 Cor. 10.18.
And it is nothing to our question, what men approve, but what God approves.
Therefore let us measure our selves by Gods bushel or standard; (if I may so
say) weigh we our selves in the balance of the Sanctuary.

Quest.
But how shall one know that he or she is weighty in the sense we speak now
of, or that he wants weight in Gods account?

Answ.
I will follow the Metaphor of the weight of things natural. Now there are two
evident demonstrative signs of the weight, gravity, and ponderosity, or of the
levity and lightness of natural things, which are known generally of all men.

Gravitas est qualitas ad centrum vergeus and movens. Mag. Phys l. 3. c. 7. S.
8. Psalm. 38.4.
gravity is a quality tending to the center. And therefore David being sensible
of the weight of his sin, and of his own weakness, says, Mine iniquities are
gone over my head, as a heavy burden, they are too heavy for me to bear.

But on the other side, a thing that is light, a weak thing will support it and
bear it up.

Genesis 29.8.
We cannot water the sheep till they roll the stone from the wells mouth, say
they. So the women going to the Sepulcher of our Savior, said among
themselves, Mark 16.3.
Who shall roll us away the stone from the door of the Sepulcher? They knew it
would require strength to remove a weighty stone: For heavy things are not
removed by a puff of wind.

But things which are not heavy, but light they are easily removed, chafe is
blown away with every puff of wind. Psalm. 1.4.


Now to apply only these two Rules to spiritual selftryall.

Christ only. 1 Cor. 3.11.
For other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ.
He, Mat. 1.24.25.
and only He is the Rock of solidity upon which you may safely build the whole
weight of eternal salvation. Heb. 5.9. Acts and Mon. Vol. 2. p. 427.
Therefore that gracious Martyr, and our Country man, Lambert cried out in the
very flames, None but Christ, none but Christ.

Mat. 16.16, 18.
For Christ (whom Peter made confession of) is the Rock upon which the Church
of Christ is built: and neither the person of Peter himself, 1 Cor. 3.11.
as Papists; nor his Confession, or his faith professed, as some others would
have it understood: For the Apostle Paul (being not only Romans 8.14. (...). 2
Pet. 1.21. (...). 1 Cor. 3.11. Psalm. 19.14.
led but carried by the holy Ghost) says, other foundation then Christ can no
man lay. And every gracious soul speaks thus; O Jehovah, my rock and my
redeemer! From which place of holy Writ, we may safely thus argue.

The Redeemer of the Church of God is the Rock upon which the same Church is
built;

But Christ only is the Redeemer of the Church of God:

Ergo. Christ only is the Rock upon which the Church of God is built.

The Major, or first proposition, is clear from the place alleged, Psalm.
19.14.
Jehovah my rock and my redeemer, therefore one and the same person is the Rock
and Redeemer of the true Church, and consequently of every gracious soul which
is a member thereof.

Gal. 3.13. Acts 4.12, 10. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
The Minor, or second proposition, is as clear, for Christ has redeemed us from
the curse of the Law* Neither is there salvation in any other. We are redeemed
by the precious blood of Christ, and no other way.

The Conclusion does undeniably follow upon the premises.

Well then, the soul being thus built upon Christ, cannot be removed; Matthew.
16.18.
for the Text says, The gates of hell shall not prevail against it. The gates
of Cities in those days were both places of Fortification, Godwin. Antiq.
as also of their great Consultations, so that it shows that neither Hells
power nor policy shall prevail against the soul that does close kindly with
Christ. The just (not only does, Hab. 2.4.
but) shall live by his (own) faith. And what is the life of faith, but Christ
living in the soul? Gal. 2.20.
For the Apostle Paul makes these Phrases equivalent and convertible, saying, I
am crucified with Christ: Nevertheless, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives
in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the
Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. Now the soul being by God
the Father given to Christ, John 6.39. John 10.28. Romans 8.35.37.
none can pluck it out of his hand. It may therefore triumph in the words of
the same Apostle, who shall separate are us from the love of Christ? shall
tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril,
or sword? Nay in all these things we are more then conquerours, thorugh him
that has loved us.

Therefore I beseech you, Psalm. 4.4.
let every one of us Commune with his own heart upon his bed, in his most
secret thoughts; and most retired from the world, Examine we our own hearts how
it is with our poor souls.

If you desire so to do, then try your selves by these two rules following; and
be well assured,

Christ the rock of our salvation. Psalm. 89.26. Luke 13.3. Luke 18.11, 12
Matthew. 5.20.
Except they repent they shall all perish: It is not a refraining from many
sins and performing many duties (as did the Pharisees) that will carry one to
heaven; alas, here was their overthrow, Romans 10.3. Col. 2.7. Revel. 3.18. 1
Cor. 1.30.
they had no root in Christ, as every true Christian has. And therefore Christ
Counsels all to come to him for all spiritual riches. For he is made of God
to us wisdom, because we are ignorant and foolish, Righteousness, because we
are sinful, Sanctification, because we have the remnants of Corruption still
hanging about us; and Redemption, to recover us out of the snares of sin and
Satan. So Paul did earnestly desire to be found in Christ his righteousness,
Philip. 3.8 9, 10.
therein to be accepted before God, which is Justification: And also the power
of his resurrection, which is Sanctification, 2 Cor. 5.17.
to be made conformable unto Christ; for He that is in Christ is a new creature.

opinion, Quot homines, tot opiniones.
of which the world (I think) is now fuller then ever it was; for now adays,
how many men, so many minds. For the godly, Psalm. 44.13, 14, 15, 16. Psalm.
44.17.
they stick unto Christ in persecution; even in reproach and derision, and when
confusion was before them, then they say, All this is come upon us, yet have we
not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant. And when the
Church found him whom her soul loved, she held him and would not let him go.
Solomon's Song 3.4.


Now there is a threefold levitie in men.

Doctrine of wholesome truth,even as children tossed to and fro, Ephesians. 4.14.
and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men and
cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive, says the Apostle
Paul. Therefore the Apostle Peter gives to all Christians, this Caveat; 2 Pet.
3.17.
Beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye also being led
away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own steadfastness.

forsaking the assembling of our selves together, Heb. 10.25.
as the manner of some is. Whereas we should exhort one another, and so much
the more as we see the day approaching. 2 Timothy 3.1, 5, 6, 7
For these are the last days, perilous times, Men having a form of godliness
and denying the power of it: Of this sort (says the holy Apostle) are they
which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women, laden with sins, led
away with diverse lusts, ever learning and never able to come to the knowledge
of the truth: Titus 1.11.
Whose mouths must be stopped, who subvers whole houses. Then such houses or
households, who are led by them, are subverted. For the sacred Scripture calls
the attending upon Gods holy ordinances, an approaching to God. Isa. 58.2.
Psalm. 73.27. Heb. 10.39.
And therefore, the withdrawing from them, is drawing back from God, and
tends to perdition of the soul. And those that are carried away into sinful
ways, as into fornication, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11.
idolatry, adultery, theft, covetousness, drunkenness, reviling or extortion,
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, except they be washed by the blood of
Christ, and sanctified by his Spirit.

Psalm. 42 5.
and for the soul to be cast down and disquieted, upon every trouble it meets
withal, is also an infirmity. Job 15.11. Psalm. 73.2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12
Are the consolations of God small with thee, or in thy estimation? Indeed a
gracious soul may sometimes refuse to be comforted, but it is through his own
infirmity, Psalm. 34.8. The experience of T.H.
and forgetfulness of the most sweet taste of the Lords infinite goodness to
his soul in his calamity, and his adequate fullness to supply his souls
necessities; for he has sometime found by good experience, that it is better
trusting in God naked, then in any creature, how richly soever clothed. And
therefore the Apostle says, Phil. 4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say, Rejoice.

Most true it is, that the truly godly may be carried away, in any of these
three Deviations, in some measure for a time, but the Lord will certainly bring
them (and any other that belong unto salvation) back again unto himself, Matthew
26.70, 72, 74, 75,
by true humiliation for their wanderings from him and his ways: for the
Apostle Paul says, 2 Cor. 7.11. Phil 3.15.
Let us therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded, and if in any thing ye
be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you let us walk by the
same rule, and he means the rule of Gods Word, out of which the foregoing
directions are taken.

Exhortation to Unum necessarium. Luke 10.42. Matthew. 6.33. 1 Kings 8.38. Ezekiel.
36.31. Psalm. 38 4. Isa. 44.3. Matthew. 11.28. Isa. 50.10. Psalm. 27. ult. Psalm.
126.5, 6.
this is the one thing that is needful. Seek first the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness, that is, the righteousness of Christ. Desire the Lord to show
thee the plague of mine own heart, and to make sin a loathsome, burdensome
thing to thy soul, and to give thee a heart to mourn and thirst after Jesus
Christ, and then in his due time he will give thee eases only be content to
wait patiently on the Lord, and trust in him, for God has said, Those that sow
in tears shall reap in joy: He that goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious
seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with
him. David had good experience of this truth, Psalm. 40.1, 2, 3.
Waiting. I waited for Jehovah, and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry. He
brought me up also out of an horrible pit, out of the myrie clay, and set my
feet upon a Rock, and established my goings. And he has put a new song into my
mouth, even praise unto our God.

A Caveat. Psalm. 73.25.
But be sure then, that nothing in the world content thee, and satisfy thee but
Christ himself. Many would have benefits by Christ, but seek thou Christ
himself; let neither ease of mind, means of grace, esteem of Christi^ns,
nor gifts and parts (though good things) content thee; Job 27.8.
no not yet shows of grace: for hopes built on these things are but sparks of
men's own kindling. Isa. 50.11. Job 18.14.
If thou have no better hopes when thou come to dye, thou shall lie down in
sorrow, meeting with the King of terrors.

1 Kings 19.13.
What do thou here Elijah? And the Devil will do all he can to beguile us,
and apply a promise of Scripture too, though abused and wrested: as he deal
with our Savior to persuade him to cast himself down from the pinnacle of the
Temple, he told him, it is written, He shall give his Angels charge concerning
thee, Matthew. 4.5, 6.
and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy
foot against a stone; but he left out these words, in the promise, in all thy
ways, for so the words run in the Prophet. Psalm. 91.11.
For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways,
etc. And very sad have been the miscarryages of some of Gods own people, while
they have gone out of their way; and yet God, in his time, has brought them
into their way again; even by weeping cross, and hell gates, as it was with
Jonah, who being hidden to go to Nineveh, Jonah 1.1, 2, 3, and 2.2, 7.
will needs sail to Tarshish.

Lam. 3.39, 40. Matthew. 6.12. 2 Cor. 7.11.
Look over thy ways, and beg pardon of thy sinful failings, may be so
obtained: but thy known sins confess thou to the Lord before his people, and
give glory to God: 1 John 1.8, 9. Psalm. 32.5. James 5.16. Joshua 7.19. Heb.
12.14. Verse 4. 2 Cor. 7.1.
And withal. Follow peace and holiness, without which holiness, no man shall
see the Lord: strive against sin, according to that exhortation, Having
therefore these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

1 John 1.7. Dan. 9 17, 18, 19.
look only to the free mercy of God in Christ; put nothing of thy own works to
it in point of justification, and it will do well; Romans 3.28. Philip. 3.9, 10.
Psalm. 31.3. Psalm. 139.24. Isa. 48.17. Psalm. 1.4. Psalm. 7.3.18, 19. Prove. 1.27.
Matthew. 3.12.
yet as heartily desiring to feel experimentally the power of Christ working
grace in thee, as to enjoy the benefit of his merits; and therefore beseech him
to lead thee in the way thou should go, and to teach thee to profit more and
more.

Terror, to both the open wicked and hypocrites; they shall be found as light
as chaff, suddenly blown away to utter destruction, by the whirlwind of Gods
just wrath, for Christ will thoroughly purge his floor, and burn up the chafe
with unquenchable fire.

Isa. 26.4.
Trust thou in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting
strength. Happy art thou o true Israelite, who is like unto thee, Deuteronomy. 32.29.
o soul saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help? Luke 12.32.
and who is the sword of thy excellency? Fear not little flock, for it is your
Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. Romans 8.32.
For if God did not spare his own Son, but delivered him up for us all; how
shall he not with him also freely give us all things?



pour waters upon the thirsty, and stoude upon the dry ground. Isa. 44.3.


Also love to eve is as well, if not better, perceived in the soul in which
love dwells, by its sad longing after one in his absence; as by its joyous
embracing the same party being present: both which, being in truth, are sure
evidences of true love. Cant. 1.7.
Then if we have such longings for Christ, we love Christ; And if we love
Christ, it must needs spring from his love to us first. 1 John 4.19.
We love him (says the Apostle) because he loved us first: for flesh and blood
never taught any soul to love Christ truly: Romans 5.5.
But the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, and that makes us in some
measure of truth to love him, John 13.1. Jer. 31.3.
and those that Christ loves, he loves to the end, even with an everlasting
love.

Psalm. 94.19.
Therefore oh poor soul, in the multitude of thy thoughts (thy desirings and
longings after Christ alone) let these consolations of God delight thy soul.
(...)
It is plain, he there means the consolations of God, for the gracious soul is
there speaking unto God; and says, thy consolations, as the Hebrew word,
coming of the Radix [Nacham] signifies. Rad. (...) consolatus est.


Give me leave (Beloved) to speak only a few words of the last Doctrine.

That when profane men are most sinfully secure, then is dreadful judgment
most near. As King Belshazzar, now in his drunkenness and rude profaneness,
was stricken with fear and trembling, Mr. Dering on Psalm 78.70.
and that night he was slain too. And (as a late worthy labourer in Gods
harvest, whom we mentioned before; Luke 16.1.
well observed,) the unjust Steward never lived more riotously then when his
Lord was even at hand to call him to his accounts. The foolish Virgins are
never faster asleep, Matthew. 25.6.
then when the Bridegroom is ready to enter into his wedding chamber. The
children of this world are never more busily occupied, then the night before
their souls shall be taken from them. The son of perdition shall never be more
lofty then in these latter days, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
when he shall be revealed; (let me add) and very shortly be destroyed.

A little before the victory at Nas^by, June 14* 1645.
So have we known it in this our native country; the enemies of God were never
so proud and insulting, as they were a little before their un-expected
downfall, according to the saying of Solomon Before destruction the heart of
man is haughty: and before honor is humility. Prove. 18.12. Jam. 4.6.
For God resists the proud; they are aspiring, and think to climb up to
honor; but God mightily resists them, and throws them down to shame and
destruction. Prove. 3.35. Dan. 12.2.
For shame is all the promotion that such fools shall have at the last.

The Reason why dreadful judgment is most near when wicked men are most
sinfully secure, is; Reason.
Genesis 15.16.
because their sins are now grown to such an height, that God in his justice
must needs cut them down.

Even as when God did suffer Haman to contrive his plot, Hest. 5.9. and 5.14.
and 7.9. 1 Cor. 10.5. to 12. Use
and bring it near to the execution, then he hanged him up, as an ensample to
all such wicked ones from that time to the end of the world.

All the Use that I shall make at this time of this point, is, a word of
dreadful terror and amazment to all such as rush on desperately and carelessly
in their sinful courses, as the horse rusheth into the Battle, Jer. 8.6.
and put far from them the thoughts of the evil day. But what will ye do in
the day of visitation, Amos 6.3. Isa. 10.3.
and in the desolation which shall come from far? To whom will ye flee for
help? And where will ye leave your glory? For the same Prophets words shall be
verified in due time: The sinners in Zion are afraid, Isa. 33.14.
fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites: who amongst us shall dwell with
the devouring fire? Who amongst us shall dwell with the everlasting burnings?



1 These. 5.3. Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.
For when they shall say peace and safety: then sudden destruction comes upon
them, and they shall not escape. And he that hears the words of this curse
and blesses himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace though I walk in
the imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst; The Lord will
not spare him, but then the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke
against that man, and all the curses that are written in Gods book shall lie
upon him, etc. And I my self, Jer. 21.5.
(says Jehovah) will fight against you, with an outstretched hand, and with a
strong arm, even in anger and in fury and in great wrath. Numb. 14.23. Psalm.
2.10, 11, 12.
And as he said, Who shall live when God does this? Be wise now therefore, O ye
Kings; be instructed ye Judges of the earth: Serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the
way, when his wrath is kindled but a little: Blessed are all they that put
their trust in him. Now consider this, Psalm. 50.22.
ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces (says God) and there be none to
deliver. Oh that they were wise, Deuteronomy. 32.29.
that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end. Jer.
13.17. Heb. 6.9.
But if ye will not hear it, my soul shall weep in secret places for your
pride, etc. But beloved I am persuaded better things of you, and things that
accompany salvation, though (out of the sincere love I bear to your souls
good) I thus speak.

Heb. 12.9.
The Father of spirits give us hearts to make such use of these things, as we
may never come into that woeful place of everlasting burnings and devouring
flames, where the worm shall not die, Isa. 66.24.
neither shall the fire be quenched. But the Reprobates shall be tormented,
Mat. 13.49, 50.
continually without any intermission; and there shall be yelling, weeping, and
gnashing of teeth to all eternity.

2 Timothy 2.7.
Consider what has been spoken, and the Lord give you understanding in all
things.

FINIS.
I will here annex these things to be seriously considered of by us.
Century, In the Book of Common Prayer.

In the preface before the Commination.


did publish their acknowledgement that they attained not to that primitive
Discipline which they desired; Saying,

There was a godly Discipline in the primitive Church, which is much to be
washed that it might be restored again.

A Song of thanksgiving for Gods wonderful works, never to be forgotten, 1588.

Printed, 1625.


and our neglect of proceeding in Reformation: saying, God waited long for our
return
Unto a purer strain:
But we cast off his Word with spurn,
And horrible disdain.


An Exhortation to the Bishops, Printed, 1620.
have foretold the fall of the proud Prelates: saying,
Your Kingdom 'gins to shake,
The hand is writing on the wall,
Which makes your knees to quake.

Your groundwork laid in sand:
Come down it will, take Babels fall,
Sure long it cannot stand.
It is not Jeroboams calves,
Can save you I am sure:
Nor yet your cruel Canon Laws,
Can make your Kingdom dure.
-- Also Mr. Brightman, on Rev. 3.

Acts and Mon. Vol 3. p. 877, and 878.

Anno Christi, 1558.


The fulfilling of the Prophesies of Gods servants, Age. as,

The Prophecy of Roger Holland, Martyr, fulfilled

The Prophetical Excommunication pronounced John Corneford, Martyr, against
persecuting Papists, Vol. 3. p. 89 ^. Anno Christi, 1558.

An Christ. 1641


fulfilled in their loss of that power within six days after.

The fulfilling of the abovesaid Predictions, in the England.


