Lazarus's sores licked; Or, AN ANSWER TO These three POSITIONS: I. That Christ
paid Tribute to Caesar. II. That Caesar was an Usurper in Judea, and had only
bare Possession, but no Right at all. III. That bare Possession, without any
Right to a Throne, gives Title sufficient to the Usurper, and is ground
sufficient for People to subject to that Usurper.


(...), Matthew. 22. 21. (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 71. in Matthew. 22. Printed at
LONDON, Anno 1650.

To the READER.
IT is not (courteous Reader) with an Heretical Independent, a Papist, or a
proud Prelaticall Protestant, that I am to deal withal; but with a
Presbyterian; and not with a loose, vain, weak but with a grave solid,
judicious, and learned one; with such a one I undertake to grapple. I confess
it is a bold attempt; and the Truth may suffer much under pretense of defending
it. I have made it my profession to defend Truth (since I could grasp a Spea^)
in Jonathans Armor, more then with David's sling: but since I cannot now go in
Jonathans Armor, I have boldly taken up David's sling and from the brook of
living water, have fetched smoothe stones to sling at this Champion, who, like
another Goliath chalengeth all the world to answer him. Indeed the odds betwixt
my Antagonist and my self are great; for, I am but a youth, and he a man of war
from his youth. This is the first Field (of this kind) that ever I pitched;
but he has pitched many. He has both the Hill and the Wind of me in this
field: for he has many learned Authors who in some things support him; and he
has (which is all) the Times on his side: whereas I am alone in this
controversy, like the Dove in the valley and shall be envied by the most that
read my papers. Truly had he been a Papist, or an Heretic, or one de
crumenimulga turba, that had only writ to get money; had he not been a
Presbyterian, and an eminent one, and by his open Apostacy, and impudent
defense of a dangerous Error both in Cambridge and London* scandalized his
profession reproached the Gospel, hardened the wicked, and perverted many; and
grieved and made ashamed the rest of Gods faithful people, who stand silent, as
having nothing to say against those who reproach them with such foul
Apostacy, in so eminent a Presbyterian: I had altogother been silent as to
this Controversy; neither had I now done what I have done, but to rouse up the
invincible pen of a most learned and pious Doctor, in case I am wronged, or the
Truth by my weak defense wronged. The truth is, this fire was first kindled by
him in my breast; who by making a question of it, set me to search whether ever
Christ paid Tribute to Caesar. In searching, I found the contrary so clear,
that, for the undeceiving of many of my misled friends, I have adventured it to
the public view, in opposition to this relapsed Presbyterian Doctor, whose
fall is so notorious, that it made M. John Goodwin kick at him in this Jeer,
(...), Joh. 11. 11. As M. Goodwin uses the first part of our Saviors words to
jeere his relapsed friend, so I shall use the latter part in charity, and say,
(...). I pray God I may: for I am sure he sleeps a sinful sleep. M. John
Goodwins jest, I perceive, is better then his earnest: for he speaks truth in
jest, which he seldom does in earnest.

I know nothing better to rouse the Doctor, and recover him out of his swouning
fit then to sprinkle some of his own holy water in his face: it is no worse then
he gave to the Earl of Manchester, in the Epistle Dedicatory before his book
called The (...),

Christ (says he) ownes none as being of his side but those that are called,
chosen, and faithful, Revel. 17. 14. Your Doctorship knows assuredly, and you
need not be put in mind by me, that they who do wickedly against the Covenant,
(whether God's, or man's) are such as are corrupted by flatteries. Neither is
this without the bounds of your consideration, that [without understanding,
Covenant-breakers] (Romans 1. 13.) are joined together, in the same Catalogue of
those that are given up [(...)] to vile affections, Romans 1. 26. and [(...)] to
a reprobate mind. To these his own words retorted on himself, I Will add but
these of Chrysostom, Hom. 16. in Matthew. 17. (...); I have done: I hope no man
will say that I bite him: if I do, it is with his own teeth, and he may thank
himself.

The worst that the sharpest Censurer can say of me, is only this, that I act
the part of Dives his dog in licking Lazarus's sores. If that be all, I shall
not refuse the employment, so be it I may lick them whole: for I dare pawn my
salvation upon it, that such spiritual sores as Covenant Breaking* and
Apostacy from persecuted Truths, being uncured, shall sooner depress Lazarus
to the place where Dives is, then carry Lazarus into Abraham's bosom.

MATTHEW. 22. 19, 20, 21. Show me the tribute-money. And they brought him a penny.
And he said unto them, Whose is this image and superscription? They say unto
him Cesars. Then says he unto them, Render therefore unto Caesar the things
which are Cesars, and unto God, the things which are Gods.
FRom this Text the Doctor endeavored to prove (as my self and others
understood him) that a King who has true Title, and just Right to the Throne,
and is out of possession, may lawfully subject himself to an Usurper, who has
not title, but bare possession: This he said was Christ's opinion, who in Matthew.
22. in the Text above rehearsed, acknowledges, by the penny which bare Caesar's
Image, that the possession was Caesar's. He proved the other part, from Christ's
practice, who being by right King of the Jews, being of the Royal blood, of
the family of Judah, and Heir to the Crown; yet being out of possession, pays
Tribute to Caesar, who had no right, but possession only.

That Christ paid Tribute to Caesar, he proves in Matthew. 17. 24, 25, 26, 27.
And when they were come to Capernaum, they that received the tribute-money,
came to Peter, and said, Does not your Master pay tribute? He says, Yes. And
when he was come into the house, Jesus prevented him, saying, What think
thou, Simon? of whom do the Kings of the earth take custom or tribute? of
their own children, or of strangers? Peter says unto him, Of strangers. Jesus
says unto him, Then are the children free. Notwithstanding, lest we should
offend them* go thou to the Sea, and cast an hook, and take up the fish that
first comes up: and when thou have opened his mouth, thou shall find a piece
of money: that take, and give unto them for me and thee. Now (says he) though
Matthew. 22. 19* 20, 21, prove nothing but that Caesar had the possession, not
the right; yet since in Matthew. 17. 24, 25, it was the practice of Christ to pay
Tribute to Caesar, it was also the opinion of Christ in Matthew. 22, that Tribute
ought to be paid to Caesar an Usurper, who had possession, but no right, by
those that had right to the Crown, yet were out of possession: and that because
the practice of Christ, and the opinion of Christ were one and the same;
otherwise we should make a strange Christ of him. But he did pay Tribute to
Caesar (Mat. 17. 24, 25.) though he were by right King of the Jews, but out of
possession. By this it is manifest, that the Doctor holds these opinions; upon
which he grounds his Discourse.

1. That Christ paid Tribute to Caesar. 2. That Caesar was an Usurper, one that
had no right, but bare possession only of the Kingdom of Judea. 3. That bare
possession without any right, is ground sufficient for any people to subject to
that power.
Now because I am resolved to be brief, I will avoid all ambages, and
forthwith enter the list, and grapple with the Doctor, by denying every one of
these Propositions: viz.

1. Christ did never pay Tribute, nor give order to Peter to pay Tribute to
Caesar. 2. That Caesar had more then bare possession of the Kingdom of Judea.
3. That bare possession, without any right, as it gives no true Title to any
power, so neither is it a sufficient ground for any people to subject to such a
power. 1. Christ did never pay or order any Tribute to be paid to Caesaer. This
I prove thus: 1. Argum. If the Scripture no where prove it, then there is no
ground for me to believe it. But the Scripture no where proves it. Ergo. 2.
Argum. If those Scriptures alleged for to prove Christ's paying of Tribute
prove the contrary; then I am bound to believe the contrary. But these
Scriptures alleged prove the contrary. Ergo.

The only place alleged to prove that Christ paid Tribute to Caesar, is
Matthew. 17. 24. 27. where the Collectors of the Didrachme came to Peter to
demand it of him and his Master, in verse 27. Christ bids Peter pay a Stater
for himself and Christ his Master; and he does it. Now this, they say, was
Tribute-money to Caesar. Not only the Doctor, but many learned men are of this
opinion. In the Margin of one Bible, I find these words: This was an Attick
Didrachme, which the Romans exacted after they had subdued Judea. So says
Deodat's. But Beza denies that: for, says he, Hoc postea factum; the Romans
did not exact this money until 75 years after the birth of Christ. Joseph. de
Bello Judaico, Lib. 7. Cap. 26. Therefore he refers it to Matthew. 22. 17. where
the word [Census] he thinks contains both the Didrachmes that Christ paid;
which Tax he conceives was a Tax of Augustus, which he laid upon every head,
because Peter and Christ paid a certain sum. I do not know in any thing that
Beza stumbles and rambles so much, as in this. He proves out of Josephus, that
the Didrachme was never paid away from the Temple until 75 years after
Christ's birth; and therefore he conjectures 'twas some other certain Tax laid
upon every person by the Romans; but brings not the least proof for it out of
Scripture or History, that the Romans exacted the Didrachme. Some other learned
men conjecture that Augustus exacted this Didrachme when Cirenius was
Governor, Luke 2. 1. when all the world was taxed: but neither Dio,
Chrysostom* nor Josephus* nor any other Historian that ever I heard of, makes
mention that the Didrachme should be put upon every man's head. Indeed there
were Surveys taken of the Grounds, and Mechanics names taken, Luke 2. 1. Vt
discriberetur totus terrarum orbis; id est, ut discriptis omnium Civitatum
capitibus intelligeretur, quae cujusque regionis, vrbis, familiae, domus,
facultates essent, says Beza; and Deodate is of the same opinion: but this is
far from proving that the Romans exacted the Didrachme of the Jews.

Cornelius e lapide is of opinion, that this Didrachme which Peter paid, was
not sacrum but prophanum; and that it was paid to the Romans: and he only,
endeavors to give reasons for this opinion; the one is from Christ's words to
Peter, ver. 26. Of whom does the Kings of the earth demand Tribute or Custom?
There the word Censum (says he) declares it to be not the money of the
Sanctuary, but the Kings money, the Roman Tribute: for the word Census is a
Roman word, which signifies the Estimation or Valuing of goods.

But grant all that Cornelius e lapide says, his consequence will not hold,
that therefore that which Peter paid was money to Caesar; because Christ, to
show Peter how little reason they had to exact it from him, (who was born King
of the Jews, and was the natural Son of 'Ei (...). Chrysostom. in Mat. 17.
the King of kings) puts an allusive question to him, or, (as Chrysostom
holds) proposes an argument, a minore ad majus, drawing it thus, from Peter's
Concession: If Kings of the earth do not exact Tribute from their natural
Sons, being of the Royal blood (because 'twas their Prerogative royal to
receive;) then much less reason have these to demand this money of me, who am
their King, and the natural Son of the King of kings, to whom of right this
Tribute belongs. (For this was no other money then the Shekel of the Sanctuary;
and for that end it was gathered, and for that end it was paid, as we shall
prove anon.) So that Cornelius e lapide's reason is invalid, unless he will
also thence infer, that Christ was of the Royal blood of the Caesar's, and
Christ drew the force of his reason from thence; which no man will affirm.

His other Argument is false, which he grounds upon Josephus, lib. 14. Antiq.
cap. 8. where he says, after that Pompey had won the City Jerusalem by
conquest, he subdued them to the Romans, and from that day exacted the
Didrachme. Whereas Josephus speaks not one word of the Didrachme. He says, As
for Jerusalem, he made it Tributary to the Romans, taking away from the Jews
those Cities in Coelosyria, which they had Conquered, and assigning them a
proper and peculiar government. Pompey was so far from robbing the Temple of
the Didrachme, that (says Josephus in the same Book and Chapter) though he saw
the Table of Gold, and golden Candle-stick, with diverse other rare and precious
things in the Temple, besides two thousand talents of silver there put;
(through the reverence he had of God) he touched nothing of all which he saw.
So that e Lapide's Reasons herein are both destitute of strength and truth; and
therefore none at all.

I find learned Weemes, and Godwin, no less learned in the Jewish Antiquities,
both of this opinion, that Christ paid this Didrachme to Caesar: but neither of
these learned men prove that Caesar (in Christ's time of being on earth) exacted
the half Shekel that was paid formerly to the Temple; but a man may almost
prove the contrary from their own words. To begin with Doctor Weemes, two
things he acknowledges. 1. That Caesar was exceeding favorable to the Jews.
2. That the Pharisees demanded this Tribute money of Peter. Now if Caesar was so
favorable to the Jews, as that he granted them a free exercise of their
Religion, he debarred them not from keeping the Sabbath, nor from circumcising
their children, he neither took their Synedria, nor their (...) from them; is
it probable that he would take away the money of the Temple, which was to
repair it, and to supply the Priests wants, and several other holy uses?
Certainly he was no such favourer of the Jews, that would starve all their
Priests, and ruin their Temple; which Caesar must needs be guilty of, if he
took away the money due to the Temple.

2. But he says in another place, that the Pharisees demanded this money of
Peter; and I am prone to believe it. If then the Pharisees gathered this, as
it is most probable they did, (for the Masters of the Synagogue, from the
Captivity in Babylon, gathered the half Shekel, which is the Didrachme, and
sent it to Jerusalem to the highpriests; and the Pharisees were many of them
Masters of the Synagogue* Luke 9. 43.) it is most probable, then, that this
money that they demanded, was money for the Temple, and that money which every
one paid to the Temple according to the Law, Exodus 30. 13. This was sacred
money, and this only the Pharisees would gather. As for Caesar's Taxes, the
Pharisees abhorred such an unholy employment; that was the office of the
Publicans, to gather Caesar's money: the Pharisees were so far from gathering
Caesar's money that they abhorred a Publicans company, because of his office:
they would not dine with him, nor converse with him; but would even wash after
they had gone through the marketplace where the Publicans were conversant. And
is it probable that the Pharisees would take upon them the Publicans office, to
gather Cesars money? Thus far it seems improbable, from M. Weemes his own
Concessions.

So Godwin i. e. acknowledges that what the Greek copy reads (...), the
Syriac reads duo zu^im. Now that zuz was answerable, says he to the Roman
Denarie: so that by his confession, there is as great difference betwixt the
Roman penny which they showed to Christ, Matthew. 22. 19. and the Didrachme which
Christ paid. Matthew. 17. as betwixt seven pence halfpenny, and one shilling and
three pence; which any old man without spectacles may discern. M. Godwin
therefore, to make his opinion hold, makes this distinction: There is (says
he) the common penny; and the penny of the Sanctuary: the common penny that
valued seven pence halfpenny, was Roman money; but the penny of the Sanctuary,
that valued one shilling three pence, he says Caesar exacted. And brings for a
proof Joseph. lib. 7. de bello Judaico, cap. 26. which plainly proves that
Caesar never exacted it till above forty years after Christ's ascension; until
which time, the Didrachme was paid unto the Temple. So that that which he makes
the ground of his argument, proves just the contrary.

Thus have I, out of their own mouths, (who endeavor to prove that Christ did
pay Tribute to Caesar) proved almost, if not altogether, the contrary.

But to come more close to the Argument, and to prove that the Scripture
alleged proves not that Christ paid Tribute to Caesar. The Scripture
alleged is Matthew. 17. 24. 27. In ver. 24, the gatherers of the Tribute came
to Peter, and say, by way of Question, (...); pays not your Master the
Didrachme? Peter answers, Yes. And in ver. 27. Christ bids him look in the
first fishes mouth that came to the hook and therein he should find a Stater;
(...), thou shall find a Stater; that give for me and thee.

Now I prove this was not paid as Tribute to Caesar,

1. Because this was Gods money, and none of Cesars. There was Cesars money,
and Gods money; both which Christ distinguishes, in Matthew. 22. 19, when the
Pharisees came to tempt him: he calls for a piece of money, numisma census, the
Roman Tribute-money: they brought him denarium, which had Cesars Image on it.
He says, Whose Image and superscription has it? They said, Cesars. Then said
he, Give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, and unto God the things that
are Gods. That money that had Cesars Image and superscription on it, weighed
one Attick drachme: for (says Budaeus) Dram Attica, and denarius Romanus,
ejusdem fuerunt ponderis and praetii. The old Silver Denarie here mentioned was
in value seven pence halfpenny: This was Cesars money; and Christ bids them to
give Cesars money unto Caesar.

But there was Gods money, which was the Shekel. Now there was the full Shekel,
which weighed four Drachmes; and this was the Stater which Christ paid for
himself and Peter. Stater and Shekel are all one; only the one is a Greek
word, the other is an Hebrew word. Stater comes from (...) which signifies to
weigh; and (...) in Hebrew signifies to weigh. And in 1. Sam. 9. 8, the Shekel
and the Stater are one and the same: what the Hebrew reads Shekel, the
Septuagint Translates Stater. Now half this Stater or Sheke every soul
throughout Israel, from twenty years old, was to pay to the Lord. The half of
this Shekel made the Didrachme, which was as much money as the Roman
tribute-money in weight. It was in value fifteen pence. (The Roman
Tribute-money was in value but seven pence halfpenny.) This had the Rod of
Aaron on one side of it, and the Pot of Manna on the other side stamped on it;
and this was Gods money, and this Christ bids the Pharisees give to God: Give
that which was Cesars money to Caesar; and that which was Gods money, to God.
Now this Didrachme was none of Cesars money; for it had not his stamp on it, as
Beza manifests: this money went to Gods house; and for that end Christ paid it.
And of this opinion is Baronius, and Franciscus Lucas, and others (says
Cornelius e lapide). This half Shekel (as Chrysostom observes) and the
Didrachme, are all one: and it was demanded of Peter, says Chrysostom, and
was paid, for Christ and Peter; for Himself, as the firstborn; and for Peter,
as the first and chiefest of the Apostles, or because he was the firstborn:
for that money was Redemption-money that the Jews paid; it was Gods money,
which was paid to God in remembrance of their Redemption in Egypt, when God
slew all the firstborn in Egypt: then he saved Israel; therefore the
firstborn of Israel was God's Redemption, Numb. 3. 13. (the very Text that
Chrysostom grounds his Discourse on:) which Custom from that day continued
amongst the Jews. So that Chrysostom is far from conceiving that Christ paid
that money as Tribute to Caesar.

This half Shekel being Gods due by the Law, Exodus 30. 13, 16, and paid until
the Captivity* and in the Captivity* and afterward, by every man in Israel* to
the Temple; this having also the Stamp of the Sanctuary upon it viz. the Pot of
Manna, and the Rod of Aaron; it being also in value as much more as Cesars
money; it cannot be imagined that this Didrachme, and that money, Matthew. 22.
19. which they showed Christ, should be all one. It is most improbable, for
this reason; Because in Matthew. 17. 24. there they came and demanded money at
Capernaum of Christ, and he paid it. Now certain days after this at Jerusalem;
the Pharisees brats (Matthew. 22) came on purpose to entrap him with this
Question; Is it lawful to pay Tribute to Caesar, or no? (...)* says
Chrysostom, Hom. 17. in Matthew. 22. the Pharisees breathed out their fury
against Christ, in that question. Now if Christ had paid Tribute before to
Caesar at Capernaum, this question had been out of doubt, and the Pharisees
device exceeding weak, in proposing that which he had put out of doubt before.
Therefore it is probable that what Christ paid at Capernaum, was money to the
Temple, and not Tribute to Caesar (...) Chrysostom. Hom. 56. in Matthew. 17.
: for there they came not to tempt him, but to ask him, and to receive it.

2. This money that Christ paid at Capernaum, could not be Tribute-money to
Caesar, because Christ was never taxed: he was never enrolled in Cesars books
that we read of; neither was there any reason: for he had neither House, nor
Land, nor Money. And what could Caesar exact from him, who had nothing?

3. If the money that Christ paid had been Tribute to Caesar, then Peter, who
had a house and family in Capernaum should have paid more then Christ, who had
neither house, nor family nor goods, nor any thing else of value: but Christ
paid equally with Peter; which, according to the Roman Law had been most
unjust; but, according to Gods Law (Exodus 30. 15.) was most just: for there the
Rich was to give no more then the half shekel, and the Poor was to give no
less; because the Redemption of their souls was a like precious; therefore
they paid alike, each man his half shekel; which was here exactly paid by
Peter, for himself, and his Master. He gave the Stater; which being divided
equally into two, make just the redemption-money, the half shekel for each.

4. If that money which Christ paid, had been Tribute-money to Caesar, then
Christ's inference from Peter's answer to his demands, Matthew. 17. 25, had not
been good: for if from Peter's concessions, Christ had argued thus: If the Kings
of the earth demand not Tribute of their natural sons, then I am free from
paying tribute to Caesar; this would not have followed unless we shall make
Christ of the family of the Cesars: Or if he had argued thus: I am of the
family of the Kings of Inaah; I am heir to the Crown, therefore I am free from
Cesars Tribute, which he has laid upon Judea; this would not follow neither:
for, in a Conquest, the King's family is most engaged to the Conqueror; and so
Christ could not have expected to be free from Caesar. But now to argue from
the money paid to the Temple, to his Prorogative Royal, the Argument will hold:
For, if the children of the Kings of the earth be free from Taxes, because of
their Prerogative Royal, then much more am I free from paying the half Shekel,
being the Son of God, and the true King unto whom you pay your
Redemption-money. In this sense Chrysostom understands it.

5. It cannot be proved by any History that ever Caesar exacted, or that the
Jews paid this Didrachme, until after the destruction of Jerusalem by
Vespatian, which was above forty years after Christ's ascension. So that by
this time I doubt not but the Reader may satisfy himself, that the Scriptures
alleged to prove that Christ paid Tribute to Caesar do not only not prove the
same, but prove the contrary.

The Doctor says (secondly) that Caesar was an Usurper and had no Right at all,
but only bare Possession of the Jews Kingdom: and this he proves out of 1
Mac. 8. where the Jews made friendship, and joined in association with the
Romans, not out of any intent to subject to them. But, to answer that, it is
well known to every Historian, that very many years after that League made
betwixt the Romans and the Jews, the Jews provoked Pompey to break the League.
For when Hircanus and Aristobulus were in contest about the Kingdom and the
Priesthood, they referred the ending of the difference to Pompey, who gave the
Kingdom and Priesthood to Hircanus. Whereupon those that favored Aristobulus
in Jerusalem, resisted Hircanus: whereupon began a Civil War, unto which Pompey
was called, by Hircanus and his Party; who coming with an Army against
Jerusalem, besieged it and took it by storm; subduing the people, and making
them Tributaries to Rome. And here began the Jews Tribute to the Romans; they
being brought, by a perfect Conquest, to submit to the Romans.

But to view more strictly every particular of the Doctor's Thesis: He says,
Caesar was an Usurper. To that we answer, first, If we consider the Office of
Caesar (...), 'twas lawful because his Office was Monarchical; and Monarchy was
by God instituted from the Creation: for Adam, by institution, was Sovereign
over Man, as well as the rest of the creatures: Adam was subject only to God.
Adam, had he continued in Innocence, though he should not have had dominium
directum, or, as the Schoolmen say* dominium altum; yet he should have had
dominium subordinatum, a subordinate rule to God over men. This was Adam's do
after the Fall, by the fifth Commandment; which Law was implanted in Adam, and
was verbum (...) in his heart. Now though Adam fell from this Law, and by that
means lost all his ability to keep this Law, yet this Law thereby lost none of
its strength; it expected as much from Adam as before he fell and from all
other men descending from Adam: so that if the fifth Commandment were in force
then, doubtless there was subject on required then; and this by right belonged
to Adam, as the Eldest man the first man. This subjection to the eldest, was
Gods institution Genesis 4. 7. Caine was the Eldest; he was a wicked man, whom God
regarded not: Abel was the beloved of God, yet God would not take away Caines
temporal right of dominion, but said, He (viz. Abel) shall be subject to thee
and thou shall rule Those that endeavor to read this text otherwise, offer
violence to the Hebrew copy.
over him. So that Monarchy is Gods institution: and personal evils in that
Monarch, cannot exempt good men from subjection to them. Indeed, the world ran
into Anarchy after the murder of Abel; but yet we shall find that God
preserved Monarchy amongst his own people in the family of Seth, and so to
Noah, and from Noah to Abraham, and from Abraham until the Church of God
became exceeding numerous: then God raised up those two great Ordinances of
Magistracy and Ministry to govern his people. Moses and Aaron both which
sprung out of one fountain, 1 Chronicles. 33. 13. to show the nearness that is
betwixt Magistracy and Ministry in the Church, they are as two pleasant rivers
rising from one head and running one way in several streams, for the protection
and profit of the Church. From that day, till the destruction of the Jewish
Sat, (except when Gods heavy hand in judgment was upon them) they were
governed by Monarchs. Moses was a Monarch: for the twelve Tribes received the
Law at his mouth; all other Officers in that State were appointed by him, and
not immediately by God, as Moses was. From Judges, the State rose to Kings:
when they came to Kings, they came to the top of their prosperity; they came to
the government that God had promised to Abraham, and to that government which
Moses prophesied of, and left directions for, Dut. 17. 14, 15, 18, 19.

It Is true, God gave then their first King in Anger, because they sought him
unlawfully, in murmuring against their lawful Magistrate Samuel and desiring a
King for unlawful ends, and not patiently waiting Gods leisure. This King God
took away in his wrath, and cut off his family: but God chose him another King,
David by name, and established his family in the Throne of Judah, until the
carrying away of the King and People into Captivity. By which it is manifest,
'twas not the office of a King that God gave in anger, but the person of a King
that God gave in Anger. Kingly government continued for fourteen generations in
Jerusalem unmoved, in the family of David: neither the Church nor State of
Israel were settled, until Kingly government was established; and then the
Arc was brought to a settled place, and a Temple erected for Gods worship. By
all which, and much more that might be said, it is evident, that Monarchy is
jure divino; and therefore the office of Caesar, as Monarchical simply
considered, was not usurped, but lawful.

Object. But the Doctor says that Caesar had no right, but bare possession
only of the Kingdom of Judea,

Sol. To that we answer very briefly and plainly not meddling with learned
Grotius, or those other Discourses of learned men, but using this plain
distinction of right in general; There is a Natural, a Providential, and a
Civil right.

1. A Natural right Caesar could not have, unless he could prove a succession
from Noah; which were ridiculous to think. Besides, he got his power by
violence; and therefore 'twas not any natural right that he had to be Emperor.

2. There is a Providential right, which is by Gods permission: this Caesar had:
for God suffered him to subdue the West and after that to overthrow the Eastern
Armies that came against him: he overthrew Pompey himself and so made himself
Possessor of the most of Pompeys Victories in the East Yea, this right Traitors
and Usurpers have to the Thrones that they possess: this right a Slave (through
Gods just judgment on a Nation) may have to the Throne: for not a Sparrow falls
to the ground without Gods permission. This right both lawful Kings and
Usurpers have to the Thrones they possess. Athaliah, that murderer of the
Royal family* had only this Providential right, which she made appear only by
possession. But this right gives not just Title, nor can expect any subjection
merely upon that and no other right: and the reason is, because when
Providential right crosses Civil and Natural right, here a man is not bound to
follow providence, but to guide himself by Moral and Divine precepts: for
divine precepts are perpetual standing laws, by which the actions of men ought
to be guided: but Providential acts were never ordained for laws or rules by
which men should walk; and therefore to such a right there is no subjection
due: for Providential right may be given by God to the to the vilest person, in
judgment to a nation on purpose to try them, that so, by such divil-worship and
unlawful subjection that nation may fill up the measure of their iniquity, and
God may destroy both them and their Governors. We see this dreadful ensample
written on the ten Tribes backs, in bloody Characters.

3. There is a Civil right, which in diverse respects may be either humane or
divine. As for example: Caine had a Civil right of domination; this civil
right, it was in respect of its original, and the Author of it, divine: for God
had ordered it so: but as descending from Adam the Monarch of the world, he had
a right by succession; which right we call humane right.

Now a humane right is either by Succession or Conquest, or Compact. To be
brief, we affirm that Caesar had an humane right by conquest, over the
Kingdom of Judea. That I call an humane right, by conquest, which brings the
whole Community, by an over-awing power, to promise subjection to, and own the
Authority of the Conqueror; whereupon the Conqueror promises them protection.
This gives the Conqueror a humane right and title: for he holds his title jure
gentium and concessu gentium. The Learned well observe there are five sorts of
Subjects: 1. Subjecti naturae. 2. Subjecti affectionum. 3. Subjecti fortunae.
4. Subjecti belli. 5. Subjecti ex compact. The Jews were Subjecti belli, to
Nebuchadnezzar, who by Conquest subdued Zedekiah, and made him take an Oath of
Allegiance not to rebel against him; the breaking of that Oath was rebellion,
2 Chronicles. 36. 13. Here Nebuchadnezzar's Conquest gave him a humane right;
otherwise there could be no rebellion against him. Now I prove the Jews were
either subjecti affectionum, subjecti belli, or subjecti ex compacto, or all,
to Caesar, by this Argument, If the chief Priests and the people owned no other
King then Caesar; then Caesar, by the consent of the Priests and people, was
their King, and they his subjects: But the chief Priests and the people owned
none for their King but Caesar, John 19. 12. the Jews cried out, If thou let
this man go, thou art not Cesars friend. Whosoever makes himself a King*
speaks against Caesar. Ver. 14. Pilate says, Behold your King. Ver. 15. the
chief Priests answered, We have no King but Caesar. Now I would feign know of
the Doctor, what more Caesar could desire to make him King of the Jews by
humane right, then the consent of the high Priests and the people. So that
Caesar had more then bare possession: for he had as much humane right as both
the chief Priests and the people could give him.

3. The last position of the Doctor's we contradict, by affirming, that bare
Possession without Right gives no true Title to any Power; neither is it ground
for any people to subject to such a power. This my Position has been already
proved, by more learned Pens; therefore the less shall be said at this time;
only we'll state what bare possession means rightly, by putting a right Case.

We'll suppose that Eutopia's Kingdom is governed by a King, whose power is
measured by the Laws of his Kingdom, which are the rules of government: those
Laws are made not by the King alone, but by a Convention of to Estates who are
joined in equal power with the King in making a Law: for those two Estates have
Negative voices (which is their grand privilege) equal with the King: In this
respect there is no Subordination in the three Estates sitting; for they are
concauses of the same effect; which admits not of Subordination. Yet this King
is Principium, Caput, and Finis Parliamenti: for he is Primus motor: he is
created by none, nor chosen by none; but he creates the Lords, who make one of
the two Estates which he assembles to him to make a Law: and the other, by
virtue only of the Kings Writs and Summons, are enabled to be chosen by the
People, and sent up to the place mentioned in the King's Summons, there to
consult de arduis Regni. This King has power to continue or to dissolve a
Parliament when he pleases; but this power he invests his Parliament with:
which done, He and the Parliament differ; whereupon the King forsakes his
Parliament; which by Law he cannot do, the Parliament sitting; for neither of
the three Estates can depart upon any pretense from the other two, withoutt he
joint consent of the whole: if either do, the other two will act, protempore,
as if the third were present; because otherwise, through the obstinacy of one,
the whole would run to ruin, by reason of the third's absence. This difference
at last breaks into a Civil War betwixt the King and the two Estates:
whereupon necessity inforceth the two Estates to lay hold on the Kings Sword,
the Militia, which was the Kings undoubted Right; and the Parliament could not
have touched it, had the King continued with them. The King complains that the
Parliament takes away his right; the Parliament say the King's mistaken, and
misled by evil Popish Council; who under pretense of establishing him, seek
his ruin, and the ruin of Religion, and the Parliament: they protest they
intend not to take it from him, but secure it for him; which they may do, in
time of such apparent danger: and to show their Loyalty, they voluntarily enter
into a Solemn League and Covenant, to defend Religion, Laws, Parliaments, and
the Kings Person, against Papists on the one hand, and Sectarians on the other
hand. After they have thrown down the Papists party, who were the King and
Parliaments Enemies on the one hand, up starts a Subtle Politic Religious
Hypocrite, who by undermining and supplanting his betters, gets at last to have
the power of the whole Militia of the Kingdom in his hands: which, when he
has it, contrary to his former Oaths, Vows, Protestations, and Covenant, all
which he solemnly took in public, he lays violent hands on the King, allures
by promises, and terrifies by threats the two Estates, who hereupon are
divided: the timorous and guilty party fly to this Hypocrite, who presently
ingageth them to live and die with him: which done, by the power of his Sword
he removes those that did oppose him, and puts in his own party, who vote what
he commands them. This done, he claps up the King close prisoner, and then puts
on his party to enforce him to resign his power: which the whole Kingdom
seeing, rise up in Arms against this Traitorous Hypocrite, and divert Him and
his and party from proceeding in their intended design. Whereupon the two
Estates assemble, and sit freely, and vote a Treaty with the King. The King
yields to it, and signs the Propositions; especially these three. 1. To root
out Popery. 2. To establish the Protestant Religion. 3. To give the power of
the Militia to the Parliament. This the two Estates vote to be sufficient
ground for the settling of the Kingdoms Peace. Hereupon this aspiring
Hypocritical Traitor, persorce, pulls down those that voted this, and sets up
again his own party, which were formerly engaged to him. Whereupon the
secluded Members make this Protest: We the Knights, Commons, and Burgesses of
the Parliament, above a hundred in number, being forcibly seized on and, kept
by violence from sitting in the House, do, in our own, and the names of the
Counties for which we serve, protest, to the Kingdom, that (since the
execrable force upon our Persons, against our Ordinances and Commands) all Acts
or Votes, made or to be made during our restraint, are null and void: and all
Assistants or Abettors in the same Treasonable armed violence, are hereby
proclaimed open Enemies, and professed Perverters of the Kingdoms Privileges.

Thus the third Estate protests: notwithstanding the pact party in the third
Estate of the Kingdom of Eutopia sits by the power of the aspiring Traiterous
Hypocrite, who has the power of the Militia thorowout the Kingdom into his
hands: these few proceed in their exorbitant and illegal courses, to destroy
the chief of the three Estates; and for this end, desire the said Estate of
Lords to join with them; which by the law of Nature they cannot do: for
neither of the three Estates are capable of being attached as Estates: for,
then two might join together to destroy any one of the three; and so the
Government must necessarily, by its own power, be confounded. The Lords reject
the motion: hereupon this pact party, by the power of the Sword, which now was
wholly theirs, clap a Lock and a Guard upon the door of the House of the
second Estate of Lords; and forthwith dubb themselves Kings, by voting these
three Votes. 1. That the People are the original of just Power. 2. That the
Commons are the Supreme power of the Nation. 3. That whatsoever is declared by
the House of Commons to be Law, has the force of a Law. Against this the House
of Lords, who are the second Estate in the Government of the Kingdom, protest;
as also against their violence in secluding them from sitting in the Parliament.

This pact party proceed by their own power, and erect a Court, and appoint
the men who shall sit, judge and condemn the King, who is the first Estate;
who, upon the Scaffold where they behead him, protests, that would he have
yielded to have given away his power, he needed not to have come there; but for
the Government, Laws, and Liberties of the Kingdom, he there died a Martyr.

Now in such a Case, where a whole Kingdom is engaged by Oaths, Vows,
Protestations, and Covenants, to defend their lawful Governors and Government
all the days of their life; if such a party shall arise, and, contrary to
their Vows, Oaths, Protestations and Covenants, rise up against, overthrow,
imprison, behead, and overtop the three Estates, all which three never resigned
the least of their power, but all three openly protested against them as
public enemies to the Kingdom, and Traitors; I say, in such a case,
notwithstanding that party be in possession, and have suppressed the ancient
Government of the Kingdom, yet this gives them no just Title to the
Government; neither does it disengage people from their former Oaths to the
ancient Government, nor oblige the People to subject to the Usurper. For if
this should be true, that an Usurper that has no right, but being in
possession, ought therefore to be subjected to, then this must necessarily
follow, that all resistance made against an Usurper, is Treason or Rebelion;
and then the Priests, and the Captains, and People, in 2 King. 11. who deposed
Athaliah the Usurper, and set up the lawful heir the Kings Son* in her stead,
rebelled: but the Scripture does not affirm anywhere that they were Rebels, or
Traitors, nor dares any sober-minded man affirm it.

I shall say no more but this, (because I am unwilling to exceed or be tedious
upon this Discourse) that he that shall affirm, that Obedience is due to an
Usurper, because he is in possession of the Throne, affirms that, which, 1.
Iscontrary to the Law of God; 2. To the Law of Nature; 3. He maintains a
damnable sin.

1. He opposes the Law of God: for the fifth Commandment injoynes every man,
Honor thy Father and thy Mother. Now an Usurper is he that deposes and
murthereth my Civil Father; and I am no more bound to obey him, then the
natural Son is bound to observe him who murders his Father, on purpose to take
possession of his family and estate: nor no more, then the Apostles were bound
to obey Judas because he betrayed his Master; though he should have got Christ's
Coat on after he had murdered him.

Again, It Is contrary to that Commandment, Thou shall not steal: for he that
gives to an Usurper, that which is due to his lawful Magistrate, plainly robbs
his Magistrate of his due. S. Paul injoynes the Romans to pay Tribute to whom
Tribute is due: but no Tribute is due, no nor Honor, to an Usurper, one that
has neither Humane nor Divine right. Indeed many times people have been forced
to pay Tribute to an Usurper, and to sit silent under the Tyranny of Usurpers:
but a forced subjection is so far from being an argument that subjection is
due, that it proves the contrary.

It Is contrary to that Command, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy
neighbor: for in subjecting voluntarily to an Usurper, the lawful Magistrate
is slandered as a Tyrant and an Usurper, and the Tyrant and Usurper is honored
as a lawful Magistrate.

It Is also contrary to that Commandment, Thou shall not kill: for in setting up
and worshipping the Usurper, the Authority, Honor, and Majesty of the lawful
Magistrate is stifled, and killed; and, as Augustine says, He that goes about
to destroy a King, as much as in him lies endeavors to dethrone God: for Kings
are Gods representatives on earth. But I shall bring the Fathers, anon, within
the Ordinance of speaking Treason.

2. It Is contrary to the law of Nature: for Justice which is the Queen of
Nature's Laws, bids me Suum cuique tribuere, give to every one his due. It
forbids me to give that to the Servant which is due to the Master; it forbids
me to set the Foot where the Head should be, and the Head where the Foot should
be. Solomon observed this as a great evil which he saw; Princes on foot, and
Servants on horseback. If that were so great an evil, what would he have said,
if he had seen Princes heads on the block, and their sworn servants, yea, those
that were scarce worthy to eat with the dogs of their flock, judging and
condemning their Masters heads to be cut off! This sin is so much against the
light of Nature, that the Ravens of the field shall pick out his eyes that is
so presumptious as to behold such iniquity with approbation. But this sin and
great evil, even against Nature, are they guilty of, who shall yield subjection
and obedience to those who are such Usurpers; inasmuch as they allow of all
their actions, and justify their authority.

3. It Is a damnable sin to subject to Usurpers, who have no Right but bare
Possession; because, they that so subject themselves, resist the powers that
are ordained of God, Romans 13. 2. and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation. Now he that subjects to an Usurper, who in the sight of
all the world, has, by Treason against the Higher Powers, got possession of
the Throne, consents to, and allows of the evil of the Usurper, and so comes
into the same condemnation with him. If under the Law, (Lev. 20. 9.) He that
cursed his Father was surely to be put to death; of how much greater judgment
is he worthy, who shall crucify his Civil Parents, the Parents of the
Kingdom; who shall presume to make, by his Rebellion and Treason, a whole
Kingdom Fatherless! This sin of Rebellion is so abominable, that in one
place it is put in the balance with Witchcraft, to show that Witches and
Rebels, as they are two abominable parties in a Kingdom, so they are fittest
to be linked together: They are fit Companions; the one renounceth his
Allegiance to God, and the other renounceth his Allegiance to Gods Vicegerent,
to his Sovereign. In Deuteronom. 27. verse. 16. the second Curse to which all
the People were to say Amen, was this; Cursed be he that sets light by his
Father and Mother: This is put next to the Curse of the Idolater, to show, that
Rebellion against a lawful Magistrate, is next to Rebellion against the Sacred
Majesty of God himself.

Now if Rebellion be so great sin in those that act it, How much greater is
their sin that set up such Rebels in the Throne, and, by subjecting to them,
give them the Honor due to those they murdered and dethroned! If God does
say, Thou shall not suffer a Murderer to live; that God says, Thou shall not
exalt and magnify that Murderer.

I shall conclude all, with Revel. 13. verse. 4. where Christ himself styles
those that subject to an usurped power, Worshippers of the Dragon. Verse. 1. The
Beast of the Sea, that is, a Beast rising out of the Church; that is, say
learned Interpreters, the Government by Popes. Verse. 2. The Popes got to their
greatness by Subtilty, and Murder, and Treason; by dethroning their lawful
Masters, the Roman Emperors. Verse. 3. All the World wondered after this Beast;
that is, the greatest part of the Western Empire subjected to the Pope; and
this subjection to the Pope, that Grand Usurper, is called, (Verse. 4.)
Devil-worship; And they worshipped the Dragon; and why the Dragon? Because he
gave power to the Beast. Usurpers have not the power from God, but from the
Devil; and he that subjects to an Usurper, subjects to the Devil.

Now as for that man that dares presume to preach for subjection to Usurpers,
and bring our blessed Lord and Savior for an example, I pity that man, and
wish him hearty and speedy repentance, before that God whom he has blasphemed
by a ly, fall upon him.

FINIS.

