A DRY ROD BLOOMING AND FRVIT-BEARING.

OR, A Treatise of the Pain, Gain, and Use of Chastenings.

Preached partly in several Sermons, but now compiled more orderly and fully
for the direction and support of all Gods Chastened that suffer either in
CHRIST, or for CHRIST in these days.

By G. Hughes, B. D. Pastor of the Church in PLYMOVTH.

Legi apud quendam sapientem, Non est vir fortis cui non crescit animus ni ipsa
rerum difficultate: ego autem dico, Fideli homini magis and inter flagella
fidendum.

Bern. Epist. 256. Ad. D. P. Eng. It is good for a man, that he bear the yoke
in his youth.

Lam. 3 27 My yoke is easy, and my burden is light.

Mat. 11.30. London, Printed by T. Pain for John Rothwell at the Sun in Paul's
Churchyard. 1644.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, the Major, Recorder and Aldermen of the Town of
Plymouth, with all that love the Lord I sus in sincerity even unto deepest
sufferings in that place.
Honored and Beloved,
GOds Furnace of affliction, and refining Fire has been visibly set up among
you, as in other parts of this distressed Island, the furnace has been as
hot, and the flame as great, as in any of Gods workhouses in the land: Me
thinks pity should be showed, to you so deeply afflicted and tossed with
tempest, by your friends. Your enemies, and the Churches oppressers will not
spare to add to your afflictions, persecuting you as evil doers, and charging
you with Disloialty, a Crime more bitter than your sufferings, were the charge
but just; unjust aspersions will turn to greater honor at the last, therefore
may be present comforts; I pray both for my self and you, the abhorring of
that Sin next to Rebellion against the Lord of Glory; I trust we shall strive
equally against it, and be approved before the Reproacher in the latter end.
But why disloyal? if I may a little reason) because obedient to the lawful
commands of the true fundamental power ordained by God over us? such obedience
cannot be Treason, unless that power be Traitorous; and before this Age it
was never known that a true Parliament was a subject capable of the crime of
Treason; and truer than this raised according to the fundamental constitutions
of this Kingdom never was any, let the enemy himself be Judge. In this case
it is safer to be accounted a Traitor for obedience to such a power, then to
be one indeed by resistance of it. To the accusers return, The Mystery of
Iniquity, as it covers sin in poisoning, so it hides the cause in
persecuting; It pretends Christ, when it would convey into the Soul the very
Hell of Antichrist, and it cries out Faction, Treason, when it would murder
outright Christ in his Members; And this devise is too well known now, than
that Gods chosen should be deluded by it; wish them again to leave calling
Traitors, and wait for the Chronicle in the next Generation, which will more
truly tell the generations to come, who have been indeed Traitors in this
Age: And tell them once more, it little concerns the Saints in this matter to
be indged in man's day or of man's judgment; Gods day and judgment are hasting
on, unto which alone do we appeal: There shall they answer Christ and us, and
until then we will patiently bear and wait for sentence from our Judge.

Your great suffering in the eyes of others both God and Men will find, I
hope, better acceptance, and draw sweeter expressions for return: God has not
hid his face from you in yours deepest darkness; in the flame he has kept
your Bush from burning, and in the furnace your selves and substance yet from
consuming All that I pray for you is, ye may not be found unthankful nor
unfruitful, but that ye may tread in the steps of Gods bosom-sonne to learn
obedience by all that ye have suffered, and return unto the Lord according to
mercies received.

For your help in this course, I am bold to present this work to your eyes
and hearts to be seen and studied: My first conceptions of it (I confess)
were occasioned by my own afflictions, for my own use, which though bitter to
the flesh, I hoped to sweeten by the Spirit of these truths bound up in this
Apostolical advertisement to the Christian Hebrews: and I bless God, my hope
did not altogether fail nice in this matter. Afterward my thoughts were
enlarged to some Sermons upon this subject, with desire not to keep close
these reviving cordialls, but to impart them in measure for the comfort of Gods
afflicted; The desire of some of these to have those words under their eyes,
which did but touch their ears, has prevailed with me to compose all in this
Treatise, and now to make it of public use. Yet in sending it abroad my hearts
desire is to give it a special direction unto you, and my prayer to God, that
it may abundantly be profitable to your souls: To the love and care whereof as
I am engaged by the more special bonds of Christ; so if you may better prosper
under chastenings by this first fruit of my labor on you, it will be my full
rejoicing.

I present this work to you, and the afflicted Church, the rather at this
season, to be both a remedy against present pressures, and an Antidote against
the malignity of future troubles in the flesh, which the Holy Ghost seems to
bid us to expect in these last days of testifying against the Antichrist, and
his vassal creatures, if we be the Saints of God: he points at our time, and
all that space remaining to the harvest of Antichrist, Revel. 14.12.
with that finger, Here is the patience of the Saints; Here and now trialls
enough shall be raised to exercise the patience of Gods Saints, but no cause to
undervalue Saintship for this. Blessed Saints in this time that store up
patience, that keep the Commandments of God and the faith of Jesus; The
victory and Kingdom shall be theirs. If any afflicted soul may by this
Treatise be directed to its due exercise under the rod, and helped on to the
receiving of the desired fruit, it is all I aim at, that God may be glorified
in it.

Upon you (dearly beloved and longed for) J cast this seed with a great hope
of a sweet return of a treble fruit, toward the rod, toward your God, toward
your selves, which I beseech the Father of mercies by the word of blessing to
perfect, and you by your obedience to help on, that we be not ashamed. 1.
Toward the rod, I shall long and hope for your return of patience in a sweet
bearing of it, that ye neither faint under it nor despise it; of obedience in a
due hearing of it, that like the Be, ye may work honey out of every netle;
and of diligence or watchfulness to be conformed to Gods Covenant, for which
the Rod pleads, that it may be as the thorn at the Nightingales breast, your
constant Awakener unto God.

2. Toward God, no less shall I desire and wait for, the eminent Piety,
Holiness, and zeal for his cause in the power of them, to give him Glory his
Peculiar, in word, in ways, in worship, this he will have, either from you, or
upon you: How well spent are we, if we be consumed and God glorified? Saints
are but Lamps or Candles of God, they burn and shine to show his beauty, and
at last are done, Col. Gould.
go out sweetly and expire in his glory. Such a Lamp is lately gone out with
you, that is burnt and spent for Christ, his Church and you; His life was
light, and that desired, his death darkness, not in yours only but the
kingdoms Hemisphaere, and that lamented: I cannot think upon such a public
Man but with Honor, and though Envy bark, the memory of the just shall be
blessed; I mention him only to move you to a repair of such a Light, Be all
so; burn and shine, and spend state, and parts, and lives to become at last
Gods Glory in expiring.

3. Toward your selves, I pray and wait for out of all your troubles the
fruit of Love and Union; though in times of peace Christians may perhaps grow
fat, and proud, and wanton, and kick with the heel, yet me thinks the rod and
afflictions should tame them; Though in the palace the Martyrs may contend,
the stake did surely make them friends: One scourge upon all backs for one
cause, by one Adversary, will certainly whip the hearts of them together that
suffer: Either ye are not all indeed sufferers in the same cause of Christ, (if
so, let Hypocrites unmaske themselves) or else ye must be of the same heart
and mind; O let that cursed self dye, and let Christ live in you, then ye
shall be of one heart and of one mind. Self-conceit, Selfe-ends,
Selfe-pleasing, let them perish; Is this a time to seek things for our selves?
Seek Christ, serve and please one another in him; no way so holy and so
prosperous. Let the rod have such an answer: or if by any other arguments I
may, let me now beg you into mutual love and sweet accord; I will strive by the
Apostles strength: Beloved, if there be any consolation in Christ, Phil. 2.1, 2.
any comfort in love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and
mercies, fulfill my joy to be like-minded in the Lord. With this hope I send
this token to you, in this hope I am hasting toward you, your union and
mutual love in Christ will be my joy, your divisions from him my greatest
grief: Honor Christ, and comfort me, and bless your selves in yielding this
fruit. Take now this pledge of my love and use it. I also shall bow my knees to
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that while ye are reading, the Spirit of
life and light may fall upon you, and change your hearts into the likeness of
every Truth; He teach and stablish, and comfort, and perfect you unto Gods
Heavenly Kingdom; Into his bosom I now commend you through the Beloved, In
whom I must subscribe my self,

Land. May. 11th. 1644. Your unworthy Pastor, desirous to be your faithful
servant for Jesus sake. GEORGE HVGHES.

A DRY ROD BLOOMING AND FRVIT-BEARING, OR A Treatise of the Pain, Gain, etc.
use of Gods Chastenings upon his own Children, issuing from this Text, Heb.
12.11, 12, 13.
Now no chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous,
nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto
them that are exercised thereby.

Wherefore lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees.

And make straight ( or even) paths for the feet, lest that which is lame be
turned out of the way, but let it rather be healed.

THE FIRST PART. Of the Pain of Chastenings.
SECT. I. The scope and inference of this Scripture-ground leading to the work.
THe Text in its scope is a Lenitive prepared and prescribed by the highest and
most able hand to ease the smart, The Scope.
and cure the faintings of his chosen portion under all afflictions: Such care
does God express to the true seed of Abraham the Hebrew his old Friend in
their deepest sufferings.

The inference is thus; The illation.
The Apostle had finished the maine doctrinall part of this Epistle touching
the glory, sufficiency and efficacy of the great Minister of the Gospel,
chap. 10. v. 18. The summary drift of all which was, That every Soul both of
Jew and Gentile for all things toward God must only and wholly acquiesce or
rest satisfied in that one Jesus Christ the Son of God, by whom alone the
Father has revealed his bosome-thoughts and purposes concerning that one way
of saving poor sinners: This ground work being laid, he thence laboreth to
draw them to practice and duties suitable to such a Doctrine; 1. To nearer
acquaintance with God by this new revealed Christ. v. 19, 20, 21, 22. 2 To
boldness and constancy in the profession of this Son of God, v. 23. 3 To
mutual care for stirring up each other to walk worthy of such a Ministry, and
not to sin against this revealed truth, with mighty arguments to enforce it,
from v. 24. to 32. 4 To patience under any cross that may accompany this
profossion of Christ; he touches their past experience of scoffs reproaches
and spoylings of their goods, he advises to store themselves with patience for
the future, for as much as they should find need of it. and from the certain
and speedy coming of their Redeemer incourageth them to faith as the only rise
and maine support of patience which closes that chapter. In the whole 11th c.
he reports the effects and notable exploits of this victoriousfaith in many,
Worthies of their own nation, that made them endure to the nullifying of
torments, and astonishment of their bloody persecutors, therein exemplifying
the power of faith working patience. In the 12. chap. v. 1 he resumes with
greater strength from the cloud of witnesses his former counsel and presses
them to run out with patience the race that was set before them, with the
addition of some forcing considerations. 1 From the leader in this course,
Christ the Son of God, to whom all must be conformed in sufferings that
bear his name, v. 2.3, 4. 2 From the Author and inflicter of these smart rods,
it is God the Father, and he takes not this pains in chastening any but his
children v. 5 6.7.8. 3 From the end of these chastenings, it is not from
pleasure as earthly parents may do, but for our prosit, that we might be
partakers of his holiness; and should we decline such rods? v. 9.10. 4 From the
future, certain event which every exercised soul shall find from all
sufferings in Christ, and for Christ, this is the peaceable fruit of
righteousness, one maine clause of the text; and would a Belcever lose this
for escaping the cross? Sum we up all premised in these collections, Gods
care is very tender to his afflicted; Christ their hope may be the occasion of
many strokes unto them; patience will be needful to overcome the bitterness
of their afflictions: Faith is powerful to make patience victorious; and the
future fruit of sufferings will encourage grace to hold out its course
unwearied. Now to fall close to the text and matter.

SECT. II. The order, parts, and letter of the Text discovered.
THe spirit of Christ seems to order this scripture by way of anticipation to
silence some risings of flesh in these Christian Hebrews, which might easily
appear against this bearing work in such returns as this. Ob. Objection.
Alas! what flesh and blood can endure those burdens unto which you would have
us subject our selves? do you think there is no smart in them? Sol. Solution.
The spirit here answers, yea sure God knows that every chastening is smart,
and works grief, but is it not sweet too? take this with that, and then
judge what cause ye have to withdraw from these sufferings. In the Text then
these generals are observable.

1. A proposition concerning the true state and issue of all Gods chastenings
upon Christ's members; which is double. 1. By way of concession, granting that
which the afflicted say, concerning the evil of their sufferings; True, no
chastening for the present is joyous, but grievous. 2. By way of correction yet
to their misconceit as if nothing but bitterness were in them, therefore he
adds, nevertheless, etc. v. 11.
2. An Inference of duty, which is twofold. 1. Of encouragement, lift up the
hands, etc. v. 12. 2. Of direction for rectifying ways and walking, make
straight etc. and this urged by a double motive.
1. Inconvenience of neglect, the lame may be so perverted 2. Convenience or
benefit of doing, so the lame may be healed, v. 13.

The proposition of concession yields the pain, that of correction gives the
gain, and the inference brings home the use sharpest chastenings to the soul.
These three are the chief heads which I shall here treat of for the support
of Gods afflicted. As for the letter I shall open it in all, as they fall into
an orderly prosecution: Here only of so much as concerns the first
proposition. Three terms are here considerable; The Subject, that is
chastening, which for the notion is such a smart correction as a father would
use to his child, (...)
be it by what instrument soever; and here notes the affliction or evil of
what kind soever that God is pleased to exercise his children withal, even his
smarting rod. 2 The Attribute two ways expressed. 1. Negatively, it is not
joyous; 2 Affirmatively; but it is grievous: In the letter, it is given in
genitives of the several affections, no chastening is of joy, (...).
but grief, that is, matter of joy, but of grief; sorrow, not mirth is is the
affection proper to this evil of affliction; therefore full enough rendered in
these adjectives, not joyous but grievons. Jo^^^ (...) videtur, non est quasi
tantum appirens esset onus, Theophyl. Aquin. intextu.
3 The manner of attribution, It se^meth to be so, the words are not so
positive, as to say, no chastening is joyous, etc. which has made some to
gloss irrationally the uncertainety of this Attribute, as if it only seemed
to be grievous for present, but indeed were not so; This is not the mind of
God as if he did mock his afflicted, but he grants really to them as much as
they feel, that the rod is truly grievous for the present; therefore this
seeming is of sense by which it is felt to be so, not of uncertainety. So that
God speaks plainly in the letter to us, and grants as much as flesh can say
it feels.

SECT. III. The first conclusion and its explication.
HAving thus understood the letter, remembering it to be a proposition of
concession; Let us now observe in it these particulars, 1 Who grants this? It
is the spirit of God. 2 What he grants? It is that which the flesh of the
Saints feels, that no chastening is joyous but grievous. 3 What limitation he
makes to this grant? That he surely puts in touching the time, it is so but
for the present. 4 To whom he grants this? It is to his chastened or afflicted
children; the result from all will be in this conclusion.

God himself accounts all the afflictions or chastenings of his people, not
light but heavy, Cenclus. 1.
and allows them not joy but grief under their present pressures. To take the
full weight of this, these four things must be more clearly opened, 1. The
condition judged, no chastening is light but heavy, 3. quia^it?
or not good but evil. 2 The affection allowed, not joy, but grief. 3 The
Author or Judge of both, it is the Lord, by his spirit that grants this. 4 The
due limitation for the time or season, It is so for the present. To the 1. the
condition here judged and the sentence passed on it, The condition indged.
is clearly carried in that speech of the Spirit, no chastening is matter of
joy, therefore not good, not light or easy, but matter of grief, therefore
evil, heavy, and smart. Two things must have some light here. 1. The Subject
whereof this is spoken. 2. The Attribute or sentence given of it.

1. The Subject here is Chastening, one kind of the evils of pain, and, as
will appear, the easiest of them all; To conceive aright of it, we shall
distinguish to find it out, and then discover it more fully. The evils of pain
in the Scripture dialect are threefold, (...), Ezekiel. 14 21.
so many different titles we have of them. 1. Some are called Judgments; These
for the matter of them may be of any sort of pain (as all the rest) either
sword, famine or pestilence; but the form or special being of them, is made up
of the Jer. 23.19.
principle or rise of them, which is the wrath of God, Isai. 34.5.
a Judge of the rule for the execution, which is the curse of the Law, and Exodus
9.16.
of the end of their inflicting, which is Gods Glory in the creatures ruin on
whom they fall; A Judge.
These are peculiar to the wicked only.

2. Others are called Chastenings, as in the text; (...)
These also in their general or material consideration, may be any kind of
affliction or painful evil, but in their special nature, they are specified
by the love of God a father the root of them, Heb. 12.6. Psalm. 89.30.34
by the promise of grace the rule of their execution, and Heb. 12.10.
by the communication of holiness for Gods glory to these afflicted, the
certain end whereunto they are intended; These are proper only to Gods
children.

3. The rest are called Trials, (...).
which agree with the two former in the material part, the same evils upon
state, name and life may be in all. The end gives the name to these, forasmuch
as God intends and uses them as the Refiner his fire, to try the silver, to
put a diffetence between dross and metal, to consume that and polish this;

Revel. 3.10.
So by these afflictions God tries spirits, discovers the refuse, rotten,
vile and reprobate, to separate them to shame, and 1 Pet. 4.12.
the choice, sound and approved souls to reserve them for honor: These befall
good and bad, children and bastards, whereby the one appears dross,
combustible matter, and the other gold of eternal durance: yet in fine to the
children these prove chastenings, but to the outcasts insufferable judgments.

Chastenings then are the subject wherewith we are to deal, the nature and
extent whereof are touched in the text. 1. The nature is in the name. It is such
a correction as God the Father in care for the profit of his own children, is
pleased to inflict upon occasion of their slips or wanderings, lest they should
run into the condemnation of the world; which though it be smart, yet in
comparison with the other, is the sweetest rod.

2. (...). Chrysostom. in text.
The extent is in that universal note, No chastening; which imports both
universality of kinds, no kind of chastening neither bodily nor spiritual,
inward nor outward; and of degrees also, no chastening at all by the least
twigge, or the greatest rod, from the Ague-shaking to the Fire-scorching, or
rack-terrifying, none as good, but evil, all matter of grief, not of joy.
Thus is the subject stated.

2. The Attribute here is the sentence given; these are not matter of joy, but
of grief. In short, if we can determine what is the due matter of a Christians
joy and grief, we shall easily gather the Spirits mind in this. The proper
object or matter of joy to a man, is some humane good in present possession; so
the special matter of grief is some painful burden or sense of evil in
present. Now then the present enjoying of the Christians good, is the matter of
his joy, and sense of his peculiar evil, is the subject of his grief:
Determine these, and we have all we seek for. 1. The Christians good primarily
and in chief, is God himself, his favor, and the light of his countenance
immediately is the chiefest portion that he pitcheth on. Let David speak for all
in this, among the many searchers and suitors in the world for good, crying all
several ways, Psalm. 4.6.7.
Who will show us any good? he looks to heaven, and sueth thus; Lord, lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. This makes gladness of heart,
when it is so^n, more then the richest harvest or fullest vintage. Again, the
effects of this in the pledges of his favor, the blessings of the right hand
and of the left, are as a secondary or derived good, which are sometimes
carried in that expression, the light of Gods countenance, the whole salvation
of the Church is the content of that, in their own confession; Psalm. 80.7.19.
Cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved. The fruition of all this is
matter of joy.

2. The Christians evil is the want of all the former, the present
apprehension of nothing but frowns from God, and sense of all the effects of
them in smarting troubles: It is the saddest draught of an evil and calamitous
condition to the Saints, that the Spirit has made, to present God either Psalm.
74.1. Psalm. 88.14.
absent, or far off, or angry and displeased, or hiding away his face;
inundations of evils must follow upon this. If this be then the Christians good
and evil, let us see what chastenings are according to this in Gods account;
the Spirit speaks expressly, they are not matter of joy, that is, not good in
the present smart of them, no light of Gods countenance, no smiles of his face,
no sensible pledges of his favor are in the vinegar and gall while it is in
drinking, but it is said, they are matter of grief, that is, evil and
burdensome, frowns of Gods brow, grimnesse of his face, weight of his hand,
are only seen and felt in the tokens of his displeasure, the grinding pains
that fall upon the creature; are not these evil and heavy? Thus God himself
determines of these chastenings.

SECT. IV. The Affection, Author, and Limitation opened.
2 ACcording to the judgment passed on the condition, The affection allowed.
the Spirit sidy suits the affection, in the same breath denying one
unsuteable, allowing another proportioned thereunto. 1. In this state of evil
there must be no joy, that cannot be meet for a soul upon which God frowns;
two things at least are prohibited in this. 1. Lightness of heart, and
pleasantness of spirit, the secret ticklings of the soul which are fit to be
in the day of good things, all this inward joy of heart must not be now; Isai.
16.10.
gladness goes away, when plenty fails in harvest; and joy, when the vintage
cease? Who can rejoice in evil, unless sins hardened slave? 2. Lightness
of carriage, in laughing, leaping, singing, and all cheerful deportment; this
is suitable for a fair Sunshine day, but not for the day of darkness; no
singing, when God is chiding, nor leaping, when he is whipping, nor laughing
under the rod for thee Christian, lest thou be taken to laugh at it. See the
Church declining such sinful Invitations in the day of Gods revealed
displeasure on her. Psalm. 137.1.2.
By the Rivers of Babylon, the place of our chastening, we hung our harps upon
the willows; no harping here, unless Isa. 16.11.
harping bowels, that make a doleful tune; nor could scorns, or threats, or
any invitations, drive us to mirth or singing. Alas, how should we sing the
Lords song in the land of a stranger, the land of our captivity and severe
correction? None of this therefore, none of this lightness does God allow in
his chastening time.

2. In this state of evil there must be grief. This is suitable, to be
grieved when God is grieved, and for the grief we have laid upon him: As much
is here allowed as on the contrary was prohibited, 1. Heaviness of spirit
within, discovering that we are deeply affected with Gods frowns and
chastenings. The afflicted of the Lord have showed us this in expressions, as
deep as their sense, Lam. 1.20.
My bowels are troubled, is one; bowell trouble, bowell-sounding, bowell
harping, cannot but note deep impression of Gods: If this be not enough, hear
another word, Lam. 2.11.
My liver is powered upon the earth. O poor soul! the liver is the very blood
of life, that is made there, and issues thence, and this liver-powring is
nothing else but blood-dropping from within in sense of Gods displeasure, as
the tears did stream down from her eyes without: this is heaviness
impressed. 2. Heaviness of carriage, or outwardly expressed, is under this
affirmation and allowance also: Isai. 22.17.
weeping, fasting, mourning, clothing with sackcloth, and all sad deportments
are called for in the day of evil; God expects this and no other carriage to
answer his rod. Hear the reply of that sweet Saint, to a kind of
Court-revelling question, Neh. 2.2.3.
Why is thy countenance sad? It was half a Court-wonder the Kings favorite
should be sad at the Kings elbow; but the Persian Empire could not comfort him,
when God seemed to frown upon the Church and him: He returns therefore
thus, Why should not my countenance be sad, when the City, etc. Gods rod must
make sad hearts and faces too amongst his own people. This match is of Gods
own making between his rod and our grief.

3. The Author.
Look we then next upon God the author both of this judgment and allowance;
concerning whom, as in this matter he must be conceived as a Heb. 12.7.
Father, for none but a parents hand can chasten, so in this giving judgment
upon the sad condition of his children, these farther considerations must be
taken of him. 1. In his being Exodus 32.4.
as Truth it self, which cannot lie, neither deceive nor be deceived, it is
he that says, his rod is smart, and his strokes painful, calling out grief;
great authority then must this sentence have issuing from such a Judge; 2 Cor.
13.8.
against the Truth there is no prevailing, it winnes or overcomes all opposites
at last. This God-Truth speaks, none can gainsay. 2. In his working, as he is
Heavens and Earths Creator, so he is Isai 45.7.
the Rods former, the maker of darkness, and evils Creator. He the Lord does
all these things: can we deny him to be Judge of what he makes? He appoints
every grain and scruple of the gall and wormwood that make up the afflictions
of his people, not a jot more or less bitter can they be, then he ordains
them. The maker of chastening says it is grievous. 3. In his exact and
constant intuition, view and knowledge of all that he has made, he grows not
careless nor forgetful of the work of his hands, that he should mistake in
such a matter. If he call sword, famine and pestilence, Ezekiel. 14.21.
sore Indgements, he knows them so to be: though it be too low for him to speak
after the manner of men; yet as in others, so in this case he uses it for our
profit: Exodus 3.7.
Seeing I have seen, or I have surely seen the affliction of my people that
were in Egypt, are his words, who created all those burdens for them for their
good, therefore must needs know the bitterness of them: God then the only
Truth, Creator, and knowing Governor of all events, both sweet and bitter,
good and evil, he says, the chastenings of his children are grievous things.
But does he say it universally and without bounds? not so, the following
correction cleares that, and no less the restriction in his very grant, next
in order to be considered.

4. The Limitation restraines this judgment to the present time; The
Limitation. (...)
no chastening is joyous but grievous for the present: as in the former part of
the sentence chastenings are measured by weight, and all found to be heavy,
pressing out grief, so in ^his expression they are measured by time, which
does something allay the smart, and make amends for the bitterness of them;
chastenings are painful, yet for the present only. This measure then more
expressly dictates to us, The continuance, the shortness, and the expiration
of the smart of these afflictions.

1. The continuance of the burden and bitterness of chastenings is for the
present, (...)
that is, for all the present wherein they lie upon the flesh: This may be
more or less according to the will of God inflicting either Jobs Job 7.3.4.
months of vanity, days of breaking, and nights of terror, which were many but
not all, or Romans 8.18.
Paul's present time of sufferings, which is the whole time of life; so long as
the rod is kept on, that wholly is the present of its bitterness, and grief
is permitted so long its abode answerable.

2. The shortness of the smart is carried in this measuring word also, it is
but for the present, and this compared with time past or to come is a very
little portion, (...).
so that for the present is but for a very little while; The longest present
for term of life, (...).
by the Apostle is paraphrased, and not untruly, Romans 8.18.
The now or instant timenay; all sufferings at the longest here, are worthy of
no larger expression with him, then the afflictions of a 2 Cor. 4.17. (...). i.
in hoc vel ift hoc puncto.
momert It is but as a point or minute of time that measures the bitterness of
all chastenings in the account of God; It is but one short span that finds them
longer.

Thirdly, the expiration of all this evil is certainly carried in this
measure, for it lives and dies with the present time; now we know that every
present looks to the after that is to come, and when it is come, that present
ends, and expires in the succeeding time, (...).
and its end is good or bad, according as that succession brings: now the
afterward succeeding this present is by the judgment of the same truth a good
space of ^weet fruits, of peaceful righteousness and living com^orts; this
end we are directed to look unto in the very notion of present grief. The
Church bears the insulting taunts of her enemy the better in the sense of
this, Though for present I Micah 7.8.
fall I shall arise; this present of scorn must expire, in the succeeding
after, and that will be my joyful resurrection above all these sorrows. With
this measure are we to take this sentence from truth it self; chastenings
(though the best of evils) yet are they painful things to Gods own children.

SECT V. The demonstration of this Truth.
TO prove that the rods were smart, were as needless as to hold a candle to
the Sun, every man's sense speaks this out: The matter of proof shall be
Gods indulgence, grant, and judgment for his people in this case, of which
many afflicted souls are hard to be persuaded, that the God of Heaven should
be so sensible of, or have respect unto, or be affected with their afflictions,
as to speak so feelingly of them, and grant so much unto them; Light to this
may prove comfortable, I shall therefore show, 1 Quod sit, that God does so. 2
Cur sit, why he does thus toward his afflicted.

1. These three evidences will clear the first; Gods notice of his peoples
burdens within himself, his respect to the afflicted, and his carriage to
their adversaries the instruments of their affliction. 1 That God tenderly
accounts the burdens of his people heavy, may be evident from the notice and
observation he takes of them, which is exact and full; if any expressions after
the manner of men may help us to conceive this, we have variety that God
uses, and yet all fall short of that which God does in this respect, because
the observation of God is beyond the expression of man: yet if Exodus 2.25.
seeing, considering and looking upon the afflictions of a people argue
tenderness, or if Ier. 31.18.
hearing, harkening to their groans prove a carfulness, Psalm. 56.8.
or if telling the Pilgrims wanderings, or botling or booking the mourners
tears, show a right valuing of their sad condition; this God has done, this
he does, this he will do for his people, 2 He does not only note thus the
griefs of his people, but is sutably affected toward their sufferings, in his
own way above creature comprehension, because he cannot suffer from any
object; his affection is all act, and to be discerned by the effects upon the
creature; yet these things in the language of men are spoken of him. 1 His pity
to his chastised: he speaks himself of mourning Ephraim, ^^r. 31.20.
My bowels sound or are troubled for him, and it is said of him, his soul was
grieved for Israel, straightened or shortened, put to distress or pain from them;
strange expressions for God, and strangely true beyond our imagination; nay as
if being God he could not be pitiful enough, because he could not suffer he
sends his Son Heb. 2.17.
to be made like unto his brethren in the flesh, that he might be feelingly
merciful to the tempted. 2 His care to measure and moderate the afflictions of
his people, that they exceed not their strength, and to make way for escaping
when they overcharge. 1 Cor. 10.13.
He is faithful in this, and therefore tenderly yielding to the moanes of his
afflicted. 3 His tender bearing with, kind interpretation of, and gracious
pleading for, all the hasty words, froward and unseemingly carriages of his
children under their sad pressures, which fellow creatures would scarce endure:
So God pleads for Job against Satan, Job 2.3.
See thou my servant Job still holds his integrity, although thou moovest
me against him to destroy, or swallow him without a cause? so he excuses all
Jobs hasty language, which by his unfriendly comforters were turned to his
reproach, and charged as brands of his hypocrisy, yet after all God gives him
this witness against his mistaken friends, Job 42.7.
Ye have not spoken of me the things that is right, as my servant Job has: It
is Gods return as was Elisha's to his servant about the Shunamite, in her sad
unseemely and passionate carriage holding the Prophet by his feet; Gehazi is
presently at her to deal roughly with her, and thrust her away, but Elisha is
more tender, 2 King. 24.7.
Alas, let her alone, for her soul is bitter or vexed within her. This is a
Spirit from God, like himself, yielding to the infirmities of a chastened
soul.

3. His carriage to the very adversaries of his people, the instruments of
their sorrows, speaks his tender indulgence toward his burdened ones, and
argues that he grants the rod is smart and painful; see it and judge of it in
these particulars. 1 In his limiting and restraining the Adversaries which are
his rod, that not a stroke more shall be laid on but what he commands
himself for his childrens good: Psalm. 76.10.
The wrath of man shall praise him, so far therefore he will use it, but the
remainder of wrath, that which takes away his praise, he will constrain; So he
bounds Satan in afflicting Job, first touch not his body, then touch not his
life; God yields there is bitterness in the afflictions of his servants,
therefore he will not suffer them to overflow. 2 In his reproving of men for
their unkind and merciless carriage to his chastened people; see how he
handles Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar, for dealing so harshly with his afflicted
Job, Job 42.7, 8.
he charge them they spoke not right, and no less then a sevenfold sacrifice
can purge away their sin or folly, and that too by the intercession of
despised Job, sure he is contrary to what he reproves, and if man's folly
think afflictions light, Gods wisdom accounts them heavy. 3 In discovering
his wrathful displeasure upon the persuers of his afflicted; what matter were
it, how afflictions were multiplied, if there were no burden in them? but God
is angry with them that increase the sorrows of his chastened, therefore he
must think them grievous: Hear what he speaks for poor afflicted Zions,
and Jerusal^ms sake, Z^ch. 1.15.
I am very sore displeased with the heathen that are at ease, for I was but a
little displeased, and they helped forward the affliction. Gods displeasure
then upon the distressers of his people declares his grant that their
chastenings are grievous.

2. (...).
Why God gives this Judgment of indulgence, and allows this carriage under
their chastenings, the two great causes Efficient and Final will soon
determine. Reason 1.
1 The Efficient is God-Love himself, who from eternity has purposed the
discovery of himself in the notion of his good will and pleasure to these souls
whom he thus indulgeth; This love being declared in giving them to Christ, in
accepting them into Covenant, in calling them out of the world by his Word and
Spirit, in chastising them as children, must now look to the perfecting of his
purpose in their appointed glory: therefore needs must it work so toward
them in all conditions, that they may be furthered in all to their determined
end; hence it is, that he chasteneth them, when they need chastening, and
supports them, when they need help, and pitieth them, when they are pained,
and indulgeth them, when they begin to faint, and discovers thoughts of
compassion to their griefs, when they think themselves forsaken. This love made
him fall upon Ephraim neck in the midst of his bemoanings under the rod, Ier.
31.20
Ah poor Ephraim, ah dear child, the son of my delights, how have thou been
chid and whipped, and yoaked and distressed, and none regard thee? I remember
thee, since I spoke against thee, I know thy burden is heavy, surely I will
have mercy on thee; Love makes God of this mind.

2. Reason 2.
The End which God aims at no less necessitates this present judgment, and
in respect of us is twofold only that I shall now touch. 1 More generally for
all, to leave a rule of truth unto his creatures, thereby to order their
judgments and affections what to think and what to do to their brethren in
like case of afflictions: for God does not judge so because it is truth, but it
is truth, because he does judge so, he makes truth in his creatures, he finds
none else to steer himself by: nothing more clear then this, that God lays
himself a rule to his creatures, in his Attributes and works; As in that,
Levit. 11.44.
Be ye holy as I am holy, so in this, Luke 6.36.
Be ye merciful as your heavenly Father is merciful; otherwise vain
creatures are apt to call heavy light, and bitter sweet, and put off thereupon
all bowels toward the Lords chastened; God says chastenings are heavy, yet
we might know it, and say so too, and subscribe unto it, and express suitable,
indulgent affections to our afflicted brethren. 2 More special for his
chastened ones, and that is to be a standing comfort to them at every cross,
when lovers and friends may stand fa^re off, and none regard their sad
condition; though creatures think our burdens nothing, and show no pity to the
afflicted, it is no small refreshing that God knows our sorrows, and judges
them grievous, sit for his compassions. David was often put to the use of this,
and sound no little comfort, when an exiled pilgrim he wanders heavily driven
from house and home, and sprinkles his steps with tears, and yet no man
pitying or taking him in, then he is comforted with this thought, Psalm. 56.8.
Lord thou tellest my wanderings, and bo^llest up my tears. Again, when his
spirit is overwhelmed with grief, and he looks on the right hand, and beheld
and no man would know him, no man cared for his soul, then he can see and say,
Psalm. 142.3.4.5.
O Lord thou art my portion and my refuge, thou carest for me, and countest my
burden heavy. Thus therefore God shows his certain judgment of his
peoples chastenings, that in case of creature comfort failing to show himself
to be above all, that it might be a standing cordial to the afflicted soul.

SECT. VI. Some Corollaries, or inferences for instruction.
Within the bosom of this sentence past by God lies this useful truth, Use
1. Inst. 1. God indulgeth, yet grieves his children.
As God that chastens his own judges their sufferings grievous, so he
himself spares not to put his holy ones to grief; He knows the rod is smart,
and yet he lays it on, though he pity he will not spare to grieve his
children; He that knows its grief, himself inflicts it; He chastens, yet
pitieth them for their pain, he pities, and yet he chastens and sets on
sorrow: It does not gainesay Gods gracious indulgence to afflict his people.
Three things God eyes, Their sin, Their profit, His own Covenant, all which
enforce the unin of Gods indulgence and correction.

1. God indulgeth, yet scourges sons with an eye unto their sin, not for
satisfaction, this were a detraction from Christ, who alone can make it: And
what can the pain of the body recompense for the sin of the soul? but for
correction, having marked former errors and miscarriages in them: It is no
less then Atheism to deny God such a sight of sin in his children, testified
by his chastenings, and intended not so much to afflict the soul as sin; as may
appear in these aims of God therein.

1. Every chastening respects sin.
To render sin more evident to the creature, which perhaps before lay hid and
unobserved, or mistaken to be better then it is; but when the deserved rod
comes and grieves the flesh, this discovery is presently made. All the grief is
sin, which either has provoked this painful chastisement, or at least made a
way for it, that the glory of God may appear in the manifestation of sins
bitterness by it. None knows the fire better then he that has been scorched,
nor can any better tell what cold is, then he that has been frozen, and
benumbed by it: and no man can speak of sin so well, as he that knows it in
the smart. It is a truth unquestionable, Lam. 3.39.
Man suffers for his sin: sin then is his suffering, and its malignity in the
smart of this. Compare Genesis 34.30. and Genesis 35.1.
Jacob never so smelt the stench of his sin in the neglect of his vow at
Bethel, as when it made him stink amongst the inhabitants of the land. 2 Chronicles.
33.11.12.
Manasseh never thought sin so burdensome, as he found it by the iron chains in
Babylon. Psalm. 38.3.
So David sees his sin to be the racker of his bones. And Romans 7.24.
Paul acknowledges it his death. Thus sometime God teaches men the knowledge
of sin by its bitter evils, Judge. 3.16.
as Gideon taught the Elders of Succoth with thorns.

2. To render sin more odious to his people, does God put them to grief: He
that loves wine, its likely he does not love poison, and if one cannot be had
without the other, if reason be left in the man, the loathsomeness of this will
mar the pleasantness of that, and make both equally odious. It is usual
with God to put gall and wormwood upon sins desired Teat, to wean his peoples
affections from it, that they might feel it the bitterness of their souls,
and hate it. Hos. 2.6.7.
When thorns and adulterating seducing lovers are bound together, the Church
forsakes both these and them; when Idols have no better companions but Isai.
30.20.22.
bread of adversity, and water of affliction, they shall have a quick dispatch
from the chastened souls, with indignation they shall say, Get ye hence.

3. To render sin less pernicious or destructive, and to give the speedier,
and the surer death unto it, God grieves the soul, which he so much tenders;
Flesh and sin are so nearly related and united, that one cannot be, but the
other must be also; neither can that lie weakened, or afflicted, but the other
likewise suffers, when the chastening hand of God lays on the corrosive upon
the Flesh: when this weakens flesh, it weakens sin; and when it kills flesh, it
kills sin, that it may save the soul from sins malignity in reigning, and in
killing. It is the Apostles sure word, 1 Cor. 11.32.
We are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world.
The life and power of sin brings condemnation in the world, Gods chastening
kills that life, and prevents that condemnation in his own afflicted: See then
indulgence and severitie in Gods rod toward his own in respect to sin: it is
great mercy to lance that he may not kill. With these purposes did God
intimate his care of correcting the promised seed. Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32, 33.
If his children forsake my Law, etc. then will I visit their transgressions
with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes; yet I will love them too,
though I make it smart: See chastening and yet indulgence, love and yet the rod
laid on.

2. God puts his children to grief, though he count it grievous, Chastening
looks to childrens profit.
with an eye to their further profit; the full success is given in that
expression, Heb. 12.10.
That they might be partakers of his holiness. But this falls in the second
part of the treatise, touching the gain of chastening, I shall therefore
reserve it for that place.

3. God weighs the smart, and yet he whips his children, Chastening serves to
fulfill the covenant.
with respect to his covenant made in Christ with them. The sum thereof is, to
be Genesis 17.7.
God to them, that is, to be all good to them; the goodness of their End,
their Portion, Inheritance, eternal life and glory; and no less their
goodness in the way, their guide, their rule, their strength, to bring them to
their appointed end. Now in drawing the lines to glory, one constant passage
both to his natural Son in the flesh, and his adopted ones in affliction.
Christ taught this of himself to his misconceiving Disciples, Luke 24 26.
Ought not Christ first to suffer, and then enter into his glory? The Apostle
no less for the general state of Christians affirms, Acts 14.22.
We must through much tribulalation enter into the Kingdom of God. It is then
a clause in the covenant, as the Lord will perform all good to his people, so
to let them taste the good of the rod; he knows they will need it as much as
daily bread: and therefore though it smart, yet will he so manage it, that it
shall work together with his love, the good of his promises to their poor
souls: so far then, and no further, will he afflict, but to show himself
faithful in his covenant to his own. Therefore in the midst of all the stripes
he speaks of to be laid on the seed of David, the children of promise, he
orders and measures all by his covenant and truth to them: However I visit them
with scourges, Psalm. 89.33.34.
I will not suffer my faithfulness to fail, nor make void my faithfulness to
lie, My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing which is gone out of my
lips. I must chasten them upon their failings; yet no otherwise then that
thereby my covenant of grace may be accomplished to them. Gods Amen-covenant
implies the rod as useful to its end: when God corrects, he says not Nay, nor
contradicts his Yes to love and save his people, the scourge says Amen to save
the soul, as much as the staff of bread, or comfort. David sweetly
acknowledges this, and accepts of his chastening thankfully, Psalm. 119, 75.
I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are righteousness, and that thou in
faithfulness have afflicted me. To prove thy Amen, or settled truth in thy
promises of grace have thou chastened, therefore is it good for me. Learn this
then Christian, and be encouraged; thy God, who knows and grants thy burden
heavy, and pities thee, he, he inflicts it, and puts thee to present grief for
future comfort, his Amen-covenant assures this.

2. Instr. 2.
Another inference flows from the former truth, if chastenings be grievous to
the souls, whom yet God indulgeth, dreadful, astonishing, confounding and
intolerable must judgments be upon the souls that God abhors; pack these
considerations together, and then see if their burden be not inexpressible:
Their rise is the wrath of God, a consuming fire; their rule by which they are
executed, is the curse of God, a word and sentence more bitter then gall or
wormwood; their subject, all the outcasts of Gods family; their end, Gods glory
in vengeance upon, and perdition of ungodly creatures. Woe then to those
inhabitants of the earth upon whom judgment is powered forth before the Lord,
no wonder if Cain cry out, Genesis 4.13.
My punishment is greater then I can bear. Hear and fear sinners, lest wrath
implacable beat you as stubble before the whirlewind, and judgment
unsufferable seize on you, and smite you to everlasting torments; Judgments
here in the flesh, are but earnests of greater to come, and in their time to be
revealed upon the workers of iniquity. There is no striving with the Judge,
Job does but think himself the mark of his displeasure and is in horror, but
ye are indeed the very But he shoots at in his fiery indignation, except ye
return: no more is left for you; Repent, or die.

SECT. VII. Conviction of sin to diverse from the light of this truth.
ANd does that God indeed that makes the rod, Use 2.
and uses it on creatures, count it smart, and grant their grief? Sinners then
are they, who suit not with him in judgment and affection about this matter.
Three sins I shall touch to discover them, if it may be, to remove them, all
against God in his commands; yet something distinct by their immediate objects:
one against our selves, another against our brethren, and the last more
directly against God.

1. (...).
If painful chastening call forth grief, and Gods indulgence to us, direct us
to a pensive feeling of our own smart, sinful then is that Apathie, or
senseless stupiditie under burdens pressing our own flesh; natural light
con^u^es that Stoicisme, there can be no patience where there is no sense of
evil, much more divine judgment and practice to the creature. I shall not
stay long in convincing these; they are all either foolishly hard 1 Samuel
25.25.37.
Nabal-stones, drunkenly besotted, Prove. 23.25.
though they be stricken, yet they are not sick, and though beaten thoroughly,
yet they feel it not: or else they are maliciously hard against the rod, Exodus
5.2.
Pharaoh-hearts out-daring judgments. The content of all their living
fellow creatures will convince the first, and the experience of all the
hardened rout will teach the last, that they are sinners; and in fine, the
conquering judgments of the great God, will conclude both to have been
rebellious. These sin against themselves.

2. If Gods thoughts and carriage toward his peoples sufferings, be a rule for
ours among our selves, (...).
then the tenderness and indulgence of his, taxes the harshnesse and
stiffnesse of ours toward Gods afflicted to be transgression: unnaturalness in
our carriage toward our chastened brethren, is the sin displaid, and reproved
by God. It was Jobs note in his sad condition, Job. 16.14.
To the afflicted pity should be showed from his friend; nature has this
impression from the most High, therefore he convinces the pitilesse bowels of
sin, He forsakes the fear of the Almighty: Gods fear and unnatural
affection are inconsistent. This sin shows it self in neglecting, or want of
feeling, in slighting, or want of pitying the griefs of the Saints, and more
eminently in aggravating, or adding thereunto* of the one the Widow-Church
complains, Lam 1.12.
Is it nothing to you all ye that pass by? Hardhearted passengers, merciless
spectators, do ye look aside from the afflicted? So it is sometimes, Job. 12.5.
the slipping foot, which is wrencht and grieved, is as a lamp despised, or a
light going out very unsavory in the thought of him that is at ease. Of the
other many of the Saints cry out, one says, Psa. 142.4.
None cares for my soul; another, Psalm. 88.18.
Lover and friend are far from me. A third begges heartily, Job. 19.21.
Piti^ me, O my friends; and complains sadly, Job. 16.20.
My friends scorn m^, but mine eye powers out tears unto God. The last is the
greatest sin to add to that affliction which they should ease, and this not
unusual in friends of the better sort, Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar,
Church-friends, men of skill and understanding to speak for God,
Christian-friends, from whom Gods afflicted do expect support; and yet these
may prove miserable comforters. 1. By over-severe animadversion of the
chastened souls sin, which yet God has pardoned, or an unjust charge of that
which most it hates; nothing more odious then hypocrisy toward God to Job, and
yet he is made to own it by his friends. 2. By making God an enemy to the
afflicted, urging his power and justice against his chastened, to kill them,
which he puts forth to support and save them. This may be in some degree the
infirmity of the Saint, as it is height the malignity of the wicked; God does
not leave any such a pattern; the groaning defense or Apology of burdened
souls, and Gods sentence for their clearing, may muzzle the mouths of such
unkind observers: It is Jobs defense, and a just one, Will you speak wickedly
for God? and talk deceitfully for him? Gods name must not be pretended falsely
against the poorest creature. And it is Gods own sentence at last for Job
against his accusers, Ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my
servant Job has. A sweet justification of the guiltless, laying sin at the
unkind reprovers door: See then, here is sin against our brethren.

3. (...).
If God indulgeth his scourged children, the soul that answers not his
indulgence, is in this, a sinful child. Impiety against a correcting, yet a
yerning Father, is a sin in equity condemned from this present truth. (...).
This is expressed either in excess of spirit rising up against the rod,
despising Gods chastisement; or in defect of spirit, falling under the scourge,
while the soul considers not Gods love in it, or indulgence with it. Ephraim
was faulty in the first, when he kicked and flung under the rod, as a Jer.
31.15.18.
Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke; and Rachel in the second, when she refused
comfort, and undervalues Gods sweet indulgence. Sinners against God are they
whom either severity in the rod does not humble; or if it do, goodness in the
same cannot revive, let us hear and fear thus to transgress.

SECT VIII. Connsaile to duties enforced by this Truth.
LEt this then be granted, Use 3.
that God does weigh the burdens of his afflicted, and tenderly allow them
grief under their sad pressures, two duties will be enforced upon Christians
hence, one toward Gods chastened ones, the other respects themselves.

1. 1. Duty to others.
Gods way and work binds Christians to conformity in mind and practice; see
we then our brethren scourged, some groaning under sense of wrath and sad
desertion, others wrackt with grinding pain, some wasted with pining sickness,
others pained with sores and breaches on their flesh, some in wants, some in
wanderings, exiled from their house and home, some spoiled of goods and some of
name, and some of liberty, the iron entering into their souls: Does God look
upon such in pity? does he grant their bitterness and allow their moanes? And
should we stand aloof off as bowel-lesse spectators? or else look off, that it
may not move us? or else slight it with a tush, its nothing? or else unkindly
charge it as good enough for them, and so smite the afflicted reproachfully on
the cheek? God forbid: If we be his people, surely his thoughts must be our
thoughts and his ways our ways in this matter: Accord we ought with God in a
pitiful judgment, sense and carriage toward his distressed; think as Christ
thinks their burdens heavy, feel as Christ feels their smart with them, and
in pity help and bear as Christ helps and bears their burden for them, this
were to fulfill his law.

All this is urged strongly upon the seed of Christ, and with such engagements
as they must yield, or be content to deny their interest in Gods eternal love,
thus speaks the Apostle, Col. 3.12.
Put ye on, as the Elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies; See how
he does engage them, if ye be Elect of God chosen from eternity to glory in
himself, or if ye be Saints sanctified by the Gospel of his Son, or if ye be
beloved of God, of Christ, or would have a proof of it in your selfs, oh put
on the bowels of mercies: each word has weight, Mercies are sweet themselves
exercised to men in misery; bowels of mercy more, the tenderest mercies are
meant by this; no fuller Emblem of pity, tendrest pity, then bowels, yorning,
His toti nos ornamur. Zanch. in text.
and sounding bowels: but the putting on of these adds yet more propriety and
measure of this grace; his mind is, cloth or clad your selves with bowels,
that ye may be sure to have them as the clothes upon your backs, and put them
on all over you from top to toe, it is a robe long and large enough, bowels
upon head, let mind and thoughts be bowels, the tenderest mercies, bowels
upon face, the ear bowels, pitiful when it hears their sorrows, the eye
bowels in looking and weeping over them, the tongue bowels in speaking
tenderly and sweetly to them, bowels upon all the members, the hand bowels
pitifully to support, and all bowels compassionately to deal with the
afflicted. These thoughts may perhaps quicken us to this. 1 It is the Law of
Christ, that we should thus bear each others burdens, what Christian then
will not submitt? 2. It may be our own condition to come into the afflicted
souls stead, what bowels then should we desire? 3 It is an evidence of
Election, the state of grace, and of being in Christ's body; and who would not
gladly be found there? It is duty from Christ's command, It is equity from our
own lot* It is comfort from the evidence of a greater good: take then this
close, dear christians, pity, o pity Gods afflicted ones, and be merciful as
your heavenly Father is merciful.

2. 2. Duty for our selves.
This Gods indulgence teaches the chastened themselves some duty under the rod
in return to the hand that smites them, hereunto our next counsel is to
drive them; suitable demeanor to a chastening Father is the duty, that does
concern us, and Gods allowance is command and direction enough for us in the
present case. Several Items are given in the context for our behavior under
chastening; some negative, as Heb. 22.^.
Despise not the chastenings of the Lord; This is an extreme of patience in
excess, to hardness, obstinacy, overlooking, slighting and contempt of Gods
scourge: And again, Faint not when thou art rebuked of him; This is an extreme
in defect, to fainting, languishing, and hopeless drawing out of spirit, under
Gods rebuke; Gods Sovereignty and power in chastening forbids the first, and
his grace and tenderness in rebuking should heal the other. Other positive
notes of duty are also added for the chastened soul, as Patience, in feeling,
bearing and waiting for the blessing of the rod, and Filial subjection unto
the Father of spirits by reverencing his power and submission unto his will in
this matter; but the consideration of these will fall in other places:
therefore no other duty shall be touched here, but that which Gods allowance in
the present truth discovered put's into our hands, when God smites or
scourges, grief not joy is now our duty; It is the match which God has made
between his chastening and our sorrow; laughing and lightness at this season
may argue dispising of the rod: but yet to persuade smoothly to this duty, the
rubs in the way must be removed.

1. Objection.
Apostolical practice and counsel seem to cross this direction; of their
practice, thus we read, Romans 5.3.
We glory in tribulations, and this is the height of joy in the worst
condition: of their counfail it is thus written, Iam. 1.2.
My brethren count it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations. If these be
true, smart and joy are the fittest couple.

To take this block out of the way, Solution.
let us remember all afflictions in the world fall under the threefold notion
forementioned, and accordingly variety of affections are suited to them. 1
Judgments are the terriblest of evils that God inflcts, killing evils
therefore paraphrased by tempests, whirlewinds, thunderings from heaven and
roaring of lions, whereunto trembling in the creature is the duty suited, Amos
3.8.
The lion has roared, who will not fear? when evils issue from Almighty
wrath, creature hearts must fear, and knees will tremble. 2. Trialls are
probation-evills, for matter or pain of them it may be, the same with the
former, but in their formal consideration inflicted for proof of graces and
of spirits; gold indures the hottest fire, and comes out of the furnace purer,
where dross perishes and is consumed, so grace, and gracious spirits endure
and thrive under fiery tortures, when drossy formality, and gilded grace
vanish and die away in such scorching trials. Just and due to this kind of
troubles is the practice and advise of those heavenly Ministers, the highest
joy and not least of griefs is now the meetest, and most honors Christ; when
for his sake by cruel mockings, scourgings, bonds, imprisonments, by stoning,
sawing, wandering, and killing the faith and holiness of Saints shall be tried,
not to give place for a moment, so much as by a tear, or secret melting is now
proper to Christian magnanimity; and it were unworthy of God, of Christ, of the
Gospel to yield the least to these by mourning; 1 Pet. 4.14.
the spirit of glory, which mounts up the soul above all these terrors, and
makes it sit and sing aloft, is most honnorable and suitable for this state; and
of this only it is certain, the Apostles speak.

3. Chastenings are loving, yet angry strokes of God, marking out the sin and
unevenness of his childrens walking; all which naturally and properly teach
grief unto the chastened soul, for grieving its father; and no less is godly
sorrow due in this case, than glory in the former: this is all we strive for in
former evidences; and no way weakened by the objection pretended.

2. Objection.
Special charges which God lays upon his servants not to grieve in this
case, seem to cross the foregoing truth; So upon the death of Nadab and
Abihu, he commands Aaron and the rest, Levit. 10.6.
uncover not your heads, there must be no sign of mourning with them: And to
Ezekiel upon the taking away of the desire of his eyes his charge is, Ezekiel.
24.16
Thou shall not mourn and weep: And to the lamenting mother, weeping to
excess over her lost children, this word is given, Ierem 31.16.
Refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears: All this was
under chastenings, and yet here grief prohibited.

It were enough for satisfaction to return to all these; extraordinary cases
and excess in sorrow do not prejudice ordinary and measured rules of God; yet
I shall reply to the several instances. 1 To Aarons case, it was
extraordinary, therefore not exemplary in ordinary scourges: Two great reasons
are evident of griefs prohibition here. 1 Its opposition to Gods glory, which
he had now by a dreadful judgment gotten to himself upon vile creatures
that did profane his Holiness; In such cases, the Churches joy commends Gods
Acts, their grief condemns them: so Revel. 18.20.
Heaven is invited to rejoice over the ruins of Antichrist. 2 Its
inconsistency with Gods service, which lay upon the hands of his ministers at
that time; therefore upon no less then the pain of death was mourning now
forbidden. There may be a time when the dead must be left to bury their dead,
but Christ's servants must attend on him and preach the Gospel.

2. To Ez^kiels case, it was extraordinary also, but in another kind, and to
another end; for neither is it discovered to be an act of wrath upon his wife,
nor that he was to refrain for glorifying God in his work of justice; but
herein it was Gods pleasure, that the prophet should be an extraordinary sign
of the Lords indignation against the Jews; that as his wife died, and he must
not mourn, so they should be taken away utterly with a stroke, and God would
not once be grieved for them. It is very sad to die unlamented by men, none to
say, Alas my friend; but unexpressibly doleful, for God to laugh at a peoples
destruction. To teach man this, God forbids his servant grief, which otherwise
were due; but this is not every chastened souls case.

3. To Rachels case, it is clear, she is called off from excess in grief, she
refused to be comforted, neither was any excess allowed in Gods grant; grieve
we must, when we are smitten, but not exceed, future hopes of relief were to
lay bounds to her lamentation, and so to ours. These then satisfied, if the
regulating of this duty be desired I shall proceed to that, as the Spirit
draws the lines in the present Scripture.

The material part of chastening, which is the evil, bitterness, and smart
of the rod, requires grief as its yoke fellow; but yet this leaves it at large*
neither regulated nor limited: The right ordering then of this affection, will
be by rules issuing from the Author, Form, End and Duration of these kind of
afflictions; whereunto it must be good to listen.

1. Chastening is a displeased Fathers Scourge, checking within, and smarting
without; nay, in this case it is our heavenly Fathers stroke. It must be then a
fillall or child-like grief, answering to the Fathers correction. Now the
notions of Father and Child in this matter, the one inflicting and the other
suffering, must regulate both in their several respects, the one in smiting,
the other in bearing and grieving. A child then smitten of his father, may and
must grieve, as becomes himself: a grief with shame, a grief with fear, a
grief with subjection, beseems a child.

1. Rule 1.
Shame and sorrow, this for smart, and that for sin against a Father, God
requires in the case of Miriam, Number. 12.14.
If her father had but spit in her face, should she not be ashamed seven days?
Shame is as due for offense to fathers, as grief for the smart we feel. So
Jer. 31.18.19.
Ephraim shames and mournes. 2. Grief and fear suit well a corrected child
toward his father; grief with obstinacy and rebellion, is murmuring, not
gracious bemoaning sin and smart, and becomes slaves, not sons. It is the
Apostles note, Heb. 12.9.
Our fathers in the flesh corrected us, and we gave them reverence. It was
indeed a duty for children so to do; and is it not much more due to the
Father of Spirits? O let us grieve and fear, for he is our Father. 3.
Submitting grief is suitable to a rebuking Father from the son of the rod. To
cry and howl with sorrow, and charge God foolishly, or blaspheme him, is a
reprobate state: Children will grieve, submit, and fall down at the foot of a
displeased father, to honor him, and be guided by him; God looks for this at
all times. M^^. 1.6.
If I be a Father, where is my honor? And reason yields it him, especially
while pleading against his children with the rod; Heb. 12.9.
Shall we not be in subjection to the Father of Spirits, and live? Thus Father
rod, and Childrens grief are sweetly suited; let us do like sons.

2. Rule 2.
Chastening is the rod of love: Grace or Love is the very differencing form of
it, that singles it out from all other evils: Grief and love then is the answer
to this affliction; loving tears, to loving checks: God does rebuke, yet love;
God does afflict, yet love; God whips, and yet he loves: Now we must thus
return, complaints and love, remorse and love, lament and love must be our
rule. This is the composure of the clouded Spouse, Cant. 5.6.8.
she weeps and loves, and faints and loves, and groans and loves, scourged
with the absence of her desired, yet displeased Lord. It was David's posture
under Gods chastening hand in his sad ascent to mount Olivet, 2 Samuel 15.26.30.
bare feet, covered head, weeping eyes, and loving heart, his pressures heavy,
and his love great to honor God with the nullifying of himself: Here I am, if
he will have no delight in me, let him do what seems him good. Let me be any
thing, or nothing, so he be glorified in his will done. It is Jobs strain under
his pressures, espying the love that put him to grief, Job. 13.15.
Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. Loves wounds and slaughter makes
no enemies; believe, and weep, and love, are sweet returns to love chastising.
Grieve and love.

3. Rule 3.
Chastening is a profitable correction, God does it for our profit, that we
might be partakers of his holiness, this is the End, and the Rule then is, It
must be grief and good, grief and amendment, reforming grief turning to
holiness that answers such a rod. Moaning and turning are Ephraims work when
God is chastening. David relents and turns to his affliction, therefore in
proof he sings, It is good for me that I have been afflicted; repenting tears,
and returning sorrows, are sweet characters of Gods chastened ones, and duties
to a chastising father.

4. Rule 4.
Chastening is but a present burden, the shortest time, if we look back to
past, or forward to that which is to come, the Rule is just, present smart
should have but present grief, and shortest scourgings shortest sorrows. The
night may measure out our groans, the day must cut them off. The nature of
evils points out the affection due, Matthew 6.34.
and their time its measure: and if, by divine Oracle, Sufficient for the day,
be the evil thereof, (so Christ metes our affliction by the day, not to
over-presse his suffering members) then sufficient for that day, is the care
and sorrow of it; the length of the present day must make even both smart and
grief: God has judged it, a days space is measure sufficient for one and
other. It may be sullen stubbornness, or childish frowardness, to keep a
sobbing when the rod is gone. Dear Christian, see the indulgence of thy
heavenly Father, and thy heart must love him; it is but present smiting, this
days or hours smart that he inflicteth, and it is no longer plaints of tears
that he expects; present, not future succeeding, wasting or consuming sighs
that he requires: Manage the days trouble with proportioned and suitable care
and sadness. Bring not the morrowes weight into this days burden, The morrow
shall take thought for the things of it self. If providence lengthen out thy
life so long, it can command it to come in with joy; but if must be gloomy and
cloudy too, thy God will have the present trouble past, before that shall come:
As he never did nor will, Jerem. 33.20.
while his covenant stands with day and night, clap two days together into
one, neither will he join two days burdens into one upon thy back, nor ask of
thee two days sorrows at once; one days grief well managed is enough at
once. I shall leave thee, Christian heart, with this note to chew upon the
rest, It is the hardest and sweetest work for Christians to keep close to
present duty. O then yield, I will live, I will love, I will pray, I will walk,
I will grieve, as the present call from God commands. Sum up all now, and
take we the duty regulated, The chasteneds grief to the chastenings rod:
Grieve we ought, when God rebukes; yet as children to their fathers scourge,
with shame, with fear, and with submission; and as children to their fathers
love, with hearts enlarged, and love redundant, weep and love; and as children
to their fathers aim, with holy change and fullest reformation; and as children
to their fathers bounds, with eye to present time for present duty: keep this
compass and it is well. Present, purging, loving, obedient, childlike grief,
it is the duty fitted to Gods present, refining, indulgent, and fatherly
chastenings on his people. In all this ye shall not sin, nor will it need to
weep again over these tears, nor grieve for thus grieving. Expect your
comforts hence, and you shall have them.

SECT. IX. Comforting encouragements from the present truth.
IN the very worst of chastening there is some good, in the bitter there is
sweet; in very pain, some ease; and in the faintings a cordial, poor
afflicted soul, to stand between thee and perishing under the hardest
pressures. Look but upon this again, God indulging thy present smart, and suck
the honey, the sweet of heaven, reviving comforts by these frequented
meditations.

1. Think, and think it seriously, and think it thoroughly, that in this matter
you have to do with God; it is he, independent in his being and judgment upon
creatures, that says of thine affliction, It is heavy, and of thy sorrow,
Alas poor soul, for it is bitter, none can blame thee. O thou afflicted! put
thy case now in the saddest state of chastening; How is it with thee? Surely
comfortless enough, I am the man that has seen sorrow, my dwelling has cast
me out, and my place knows me not, I wander as a bird from her nest, in
danger of devouring every moment, yet no door is opened to me, man looks not
toward my distress; I am consumed with pining sickness, spoiled of goods, my
flesh worn with iron bonds, and I become a reproach and byword, yet this is
nothing to lookers on; nay, when I labor to hold fast my integrity, when I
humble my soul with fasting, yet this is turned to my reproach; I suffer as an
outcast of God and Men, lover, and friend, and kinsmen, get far off; nay, God
is suggested to be my enemy by the adversary, and they persecute me as a
forsaken soul; yet no man cares for me: and what more absolute misery, then
in the depth of sorrows to be denied pity? Alas, dear heart, thy right and
left hand comforts from the creature fail. But why look thou not upward? No
thoughts of God in this matter? O remember, no soul truly miserable, but that
whom God looks not after, write him wretched when God cares not for his soul.
But, O thou chastended of the Lord, thy God stands by thee, he tells the
steps of thy wanderings, he bottles and books up thy tears, he weighs thine
affliction in scales, and knows, and says, it is heavy, he sees the iron
marks upon thy flesh, and treasures up all thy sighs; let the whole creation
cast thee off as loft, yet this is comfort invincible, in thy affliction God
knows thy soul: Weigh but his greatness, his grace, and his faithfulness,
and then be comforted; His greatness shall not terrify nor dismay thee, but
it shall help and supply thy weakness under burdens; his grace shall blot out
sin, that gives a sting to thy afflictions; and his faithfulness shall
establish thee in peace and comfort, when thine own unevenness would make thee
fall. See Jobs practice about these, when they were urged against him for his
wounding by unkind comforters, Job. 23.6.
and do likewise: Will he plead against me with his great power? No, but he
would put strength in me. Say thou so too, and be revived; shall his greatness
set it self against me in my trouble, to drive me like a leaf, or crush me as a
worm, when his grace has accepted me, and his faithfulness is engaged to
make good his Covenant of love unto me? No, no, though creatures prove a lie,
stones in stead of men, and oppressors in stead of friends, they think it glory
in revenge to pursue a Flea, 2 Samuel 24.14.
a weak thing that cannot resist them, yet God is truth and the same for ever,
his power and grace and faithfulness are one undivided being, he will not so
glory over his poor, weak chastened ones, but will put strength within them,
and make them stand under their burdens, his strength shall be theirs to make
them more the conquerors over all afflictions, for he knows their griefs:
resolve then, Christian, and say, though creature comforts fail, and
creature-power does rather oppress than ease me, Habak. 3.18.
yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation, he
pitieth and will heal me.

2. Think upon thy very smart, and think rightly, with the thoughts of God
concerning it, and some comfort must arise; It is not abstracted pain, but
pain with purging, pain with scourging, pain with refining; In short, it is
thy smart, but sins death, the spirits purging, but the flesh its consumption.
The most tearing physic is comfortable in its very torture, for then it
killes the disease and secures the patient from dying by it. So great has
been the evidence of the good of such afflictions, that the Holy ones of God
have made it their petition in the furnace, Lord let thy scourge abide, and
sin be gone; it is good for us to be here, where sin does least annoy us.
It is true comfort under wounds of flesh to have spirit healing: This keeps
those heavenly souls from fainting; 2 Cor. 4.16.
the pain and p^rishing of the outward, is the reviving, polishing, and daily
renovation of the inward man; what ever works ruin to that, and repair to
this, is no cross but comfort. Such thoughts will ease thy pain and make thy
burden lighter, refresh thy spirit and make thy joy the greater.

3. Think upon the bound, and measure of thy smart, it is some comfort to know
it is short; It is but a present pain, a moment, a very now of affliction to
be endured; and should this swallow up spirits and hopes too? Art thou a man
but of a day, and have an eternal spirit, and everlasting hopes presented? Let
this refresh thee, thy pains are shorter lived then thou art, thy hopes
outreach them, and thy spirit shall outlive them; give not up the Ghost then
for present pressures. It was a Saints reviving once, Psalm. 30.5.
Weeping may endure for a night, or for an evening, I shall outlive this to see
the day, and then joy, singing shall returnne in the morning. To close this
part of the pain of chastening, and leave some taste of sweet with the
afflicted, and desire of more to be expected in the succeeding portion, add
but this thought to continue thy attendance upon that which follows; Think
upon the After, that sweet After, that long After, wherein all present grief
shall be swallowed up, and all transformed into that After fruit, so that no
remembrance shall abide of former sorrows; Comfort thy self a while with the
thoughts of this, until more fully it be revealed; it is the next work,
whereunto for thy greater consolation I shall proceed.

THE SECOND PART. Of the gain of Chastenings.
Nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of rigteousnesse unto
them that are exercised thereby.

v. 11.
SECT. I. The true stating of the second proposition from the text, with its
due partition, and partial explication.
THe Spirits Method in giving sentence upon chastenings is to pass from
concession unto sense, to correction unto faith: He grants the present, the
now of pain unto their feeling; True, the chastening is for the present
grievous, yet would he not, they should thence conclude nothing but bitterness
in their chastening; He therefore suddenly corrects such misconceits, by adding
an assertion of its after gain, commending it to faith to be realized and
settled in the soul, for strength against sense of present evil, and victory
over prevailing grief. Nevertheless afterward, etc. The Sum is in this
second conclusion. Conclus. 2.
All chastenings (however painful, yet) are indeed very gainefull things, or
more largely in the Apostles own terms, All hastenings for the afterward
yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them that are exercised
thereby. Of which I shall treat in the former order: The truth, the manner,
the certainty, and necessity of this gain issuing from the rod must be
declared, then faith may work kindly on it.

1. 1 Qu^d sit.
The truth will eminently appear in the right unfolding of the terms in the
text; they be generally two. 1. The Subject. 2. The Attribute. The subject in
this proposition, is the Root, or Rise of all this gain, and it is only the
dry Rod, that Chastening, which was opened in the foregoing part; which only
we may remember in its formal consideration, is the rod of love, used by the
Father of mercies upon his own children; The other part is the work here.

2. In the Attribute several particulars fall under inquiry. 1 The gain
self. 2 The condition unto which it is designed. 3 The season of its return.
4 The manner of its rise from the former stock. What may all these mean?

1. (...).
The full account of this chastening gain is given out in three expressions.
Fruit, Righteousness and Peace. 1 The general nature of it is touched, in
that it is styled Fruit, Isa. 27.6. Mic 7.13. Fructus importat dulcedinem unde
fructus est, delectari in fine adepto. Aquin. in text. Psalm 92.14.
a word of no bad notation of it self, unless specified by some adjunct,
Fruit of sin, or Fruit of our own doings, etc. Two cosinderations it imports
which do much commend this gain. 1. Sweetness of goodness; it must be good
because it is fruit, unless made evil by some other bitter ingredient; it is
therefore a common paraphrase of a sweet and good success, They shall bring
forth fruit, when the Spirit would describe the prosperous condition of any:
Fruit therefore is good enjoyed, wherein stands man's delight or pleasure; So
then, when fruit is promised, sweet and good is intended by the rod, which when
enjoyed is fruit, and being fruit is pleasant; This is no reproach, no
chastenings.

2. Abundance or fullness is employed in this also; Deuteronomy. 28.4.
Fruit in this kind is a collective term; As the fruit of the land, is not one
ear or sheafe, but the crop, Deuteronomy. 22.9.
and the fruit of the vineyard is not one grape or cluster in the usual
speech, but many clusters or all the gathering; so not one sweet or good can
be the fruit of chastening completely, but the harvest and crop of many goods
and sweets: so that the weight of this general word commends thus far the
gain of chastenings, It is a full cup of all good things for souls delight;
And yet add one thing more, for honor of Gods Scourge, if this be fruit of
chastening, it is as firmly intailed on the rod, as the grape upon the vine,
or the apple on its tree, or the cherry on its graffe; All this is carried in
the term of fruit.

2. The special nature of this gain is Righteousness, the fruit is therefore
specified lest any doubt its goodness, (...).
it is fruit of Righteousness; This specification is not from Earth, it is not
fruit of ground, nor fruit of body, nor fruit of vine or figtree, nor fruit of
cattle, these are too low to grow upon Gods rod, the word is from heaven, and
thence the meaning of it must be fetched. Now as given us of God, the use of it
is either proper, or figurative. In the proper use of it there be two
significats. 1 Gods work upon us, changing our conditions, not our natures,
Romans 5. Ier. 23.6.
wiping out our guilt, not our stains, which is the gift of righteousness or
our justification in and by the Lord our righteousness. This cannot be
intended here, for chastening supposes men the adopted and justified of God
already; this then cannot be gained by it. 2 Gods work in us by the
sanctification of our natures, even an universal frame of rectitude in our
hearts conform to the revealed will of God: it answers to that holiness
whereof God aims to make us partakers by his chastening, which in effect is
the fruit of righteousness; it is summed up entirely together in those titles,
the new creation, the form or image of Christ, and the divine nature: In its
parts or members described, it is knowledge of God, faith in God, love to God,
walking with God exactly in the right way and due seasons of his worship; it is
obedience, meekness, patience, contentedness, humility, bowels, chastity,
goodness, upright conversation, and whatever else is required to the integrity
of a Christian, Phil. 1.11.
with these fruits of righteousness the Apostle prays the Church of God may
be filled by Christ Jesus: These in their collection and growth are the fruit
of scourgings; no despicable gain. Again in the figurative or metonymicall
use of this term, it notes all the insaperable adjuncts and consequents of
this righteousness, in short, eternal life, kingdom of glory, throne and
crown of righteousness, so styled because assigned to it: It pleases some to
grant the former, but deny this to be the intended fruit of chastenings;
Estius in text.
I confess that more immediately issues from the rod, but why should we not
suppose life as near to righteousness, as righteousness to the rod? nay it
will be necessary with this intaile to conceive this fruit, if we duly
consider one rule which I think will not fail us, That whatsoever
righteousness is promised, or expressed as a reward or consequent of a
precedent duty, it may or must be understood with the latitude of all its
effects. And therefore as containing heaven it self, such is the use of it in
this place; so it is used elsewhere variously; Hosea 10.12.
to touch but one instance, Sow to your selves in righteousness, break up the
fallow ground, for it is time to seek the Lord, till he come, and rain
righteousness upon you. Here raining righteousness is an effect proposed to
seeking the Lord, breaking up barten hearts, and sowing in righteousness; here
is one righteousness the reward of another; who can deny in reason, this
rain of righteousness to be showers of greater grace and following glory upon
their obedience? Like is the use of it here, adn therefore we open to its
largest bounds. To sum up this parcel, much gain was from the rod, in that
it was fruit issuing sweet and abundant good, but more that this fruit is
Righteousness. The name and thing are of divine original, so that fruit of
righteousness must be fruit of God, that is, excellent fruit; and two
excellencies at least it notes here. 1. Diviue nature, created indeed, and such
as is communicable, but exactly conformed to Jehovah Righteousness the very
image of it. 2. Divine bless, which is the confluence of all glories,
communicable also, and depending upon this righteousness derived from God, and
rooted in him. And is not this excellent fruit? Would any but a beast grudge to
be whipped into God, into the divine nature, into the image of Christ? Who would
not be willing to be scourged and beaten into heaven, into glory, into life
from the ways of death? These are the sure gain of chastenings, but yet more
good.

3. The inseparable property of this heavenly fruit, is peace; the term seems
to answer to the former grief, vexation, or torture that might be in the rod,
which disquiets the man, and fills the flesh with pain and trouble, this is but
for the present, working of Gods physic, the after fruit of righteousness
brings peace, and settles and quiets all again: it is like a stomach settling
cordial after a tearing vomit. The Syriack reads it by conjunction, the fruit
of righteousness and peace, not losing any thing of the gain; yet, me thinks,
not uniting close enough that sweet pair by a conjunction, when the Spirit
shuts up Peace in Righteousness, as the inseparable fruit of that, and so
makes in a manner one of both, to show their undivided society: Peace as sure
a fruit of Righteousness, as righteousness can be of chastening, is Gods own
discovery, Isai. 32.17.
The work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness,
quietness and assurance for ever. But what then is this peace? I shall not
stay long in variety of translations of the word to search this, Pacatum
fructum.
only to take the best; That is not good that reads passively, quieted or
appeased righteousness, far from the word; It is nearer that renders it
actively, quieting, Pacisicum, tranquillum.
or pacificall righteousness, for it brings peace with it: but nearest is the
absolute reading of it, as in ours, peaceable, or peaceful righteousness,
abundance, or fullness of peace has this fruit in the compass of it. But what
is it still? I shall return in short, as in the general use of it, Peace is
the confluence of all good, and therefore points out a prosperous state, when
all things are in peace; so in the special application of it here, it notes
all those kinds and degrees of good which only can be the cure of the several
evils in the rod: for that way alone looks this peace. Now there be these sore
evils usually in Gods scourge. 1. Frowns and displeasure discovered in the
face of a chastising God. 2. Smart, and trouble, and vexation upon a suffering
flesh. 3. Doubts, and fears, and terrors, arising from both the former, in a
tender and afflicted soul: in all is great bitterness. The fruit of
righteousness, this peace, has sovereign virtue against thesee, and cures
them all. Psalm. 119.165.
Great peace have they which love Gods Law (such only are like unto it) and
nothing shall offend them: they shall have no stumbling blocks to vex them;
great peace issuing from that right frame of heart, conform to Gods Law, takes
away all offense, no reigning grief to such. 1. This turns frowns of God
into smiles, and displeasures into pity, when the rod has got the victory,
and brought home the wanderer to righteousness; then it is all peace, God
frowns no more, Jer. 31.20.
but loves and pities: so he speaks to returned Ephraim, It is my dear child,
he is my pleasant son. Peace then is Gods smile and favor fixed on his
chastened, righteous seed. 2. This peace has a good or virtue in it contrary
to all diseases, maladies, or sores that the rod can make, and therefore must
carry healing in it; every yoke it eases, and every burden it removes; it is
a salve for every sore, no pain can afflict the flesh, but peace can ease it:
This is honor in reproach, supply in wants, health in sickness, a guide in
wanderings, security in dangers, relief in injuries, life in deaths: this is a
shelter against the storm, and shade against the scorching Sun; there is no
malady whereunto this is not a suited remedy, it comforts all sorrows, and
wipes away all tears from the eyes of Gods chastened children. Psalm. 3.5.6.
Psalm. 31.22.
By this David may be kept secure, sleeping in the siege of ten thousand
adversaries; this shows him his acceptance with God, and eases his terror,
when he judges himself a reprobate, and an outcast from heaven. Nay this a
sure guard against all the in-rodes of Satan upon the soul, and invincible
shield against his fiery darts. This peace of God, and righteousness will
guard, Psalm. 4.7.
or keep safe our minds, our bodies, our all in Christ Jesus. This is peace,
the ease of every smart laid upon the flesh.

3. Once again, as no rackings so full of torture, as those of a doubting,
fearful, self-condemning heart; so no remedy so sovereign against these, as
the peace of righteousness. In a word, this is assurance, or confidence settled
upon the righteous soul, that answers every doubt, and quells every fear
rising up from the apprehension of Gods displeasure in the rod; it is so
sweetly styled, (...) Isa. 32.17.
the service, work, or effect of righteousness is assurance. It does indeed
assure God, assure life, assure deliverance, assure glory to the soul against
all cavils; it puts every good out of question, and makes the heart live
confidently above every cross; see now the gain of chastening, Fruit,
Righteousness, and Peace: the rod brings forth a fruit, that destroys it
self, sweet abundant grace and glory, with Gods smiles, griefs ruin, and
hearts assurance to triumph over every doubt and evil: who would think that
such a dry stick should bring forth this blessed fruit? yet thus it does. But
now to whom? That is the next quaere.

SECT. II. The condition of the foregoing Fruit opened.
2. 2. Condition. (...).
THe character or condition of those souls, who only find this fruit of the
rod, is thus expressed in the Text, To them that are exercised thereby, to them
this fruit is yielded from the rod; There is much weight in this clause, and
yet I find it little considered, our gain or loss by all afflictions, depends
upon the Yea or Nay of this. It will be fit therefore to see what is in the
letter, and then take more seriously to thought the matter intended. Three
terms there are in this clause. 1. The Subject, the men here pointed at. 2.
The Condition, Exercise. 3. The Occasion, or Incentive of it, the Rod; no
difficulty here but about the right taking of the condition: It is for the most
part only rendered passively, They that are exercised thereby, that is, they
that suffer, and are pressed, and afflicted by the Rod, and so used to
sorrows; but this cannot be the mind of the Spirit here: For then all that
suffer afflictions would have this fruit of chastening. which we see eminently
false, many the worse and not the better by the rod; but all that are exercised
as here meant, fall not short of this blessed fruit. It must needs therefore
have an active signification implied here to this purpose, To them that are
exercised thereby, that is, all such as by the rod are provoked and stirred up
to exercise themselves duly under Gods chastening, for obtaining the fruit
promised; so that not only passion is here noted, a mere suffering of pain,
but action, stirring and Christian exercise moved by the rod, to work together
with it for the desired fruit. This is in the letter. But now it will be more
expedient to look into the nature of the thing; what may this exercise be,
whereupon depends so much advantage to Christians? The discovery of two things,
the Manner and Matter of this action, will satisfy that quaere, both which
will be supplied from the words duly weighed. 1. The manner of this action
(because the shortest) shall be first touched, to show how Christians should
buckle themselves to this work; The very word of Exercise teaches this in
three particulars. 1. The original expression issues from a term denoting
Nakedness, (...), from (...).
or a naked man, and therefore has been properly used in profane Authors, to
set forth such exercises, which men acted in their shirts, or naked, as
wrestling, running, foyling, or fencing, wherein garments or clothes would be a
great encumbrance; activity, nimblenesse, intention of spirit, are intimated in
this form of exercise. He then that would find this fruit from the rod, had
need labor in his shirt, cast off all carnal encumbrances, and wrestle it out
with God; holy activity and sweat of the brows, great intention, and fervencie
of spirit become the practitioner in this work, to gain the prize, and obtain
the fruit promised: what is done, must be done with all the might of man, in
this business. Idle husbandmen, let seed, and ground, and season, be never so
good, Eccles 9.10.
in vain expect a crop where no labor was. The greatest pains this way, brings
the greatest gains.

2. Frequencie.
Exercise in this place notes frequencie of action, it is no working by spurts
and fits, that will make a man thrive in this way, or become eminently
fruitful: Exercise and use are here Synonymaes, He is exercised indeed, Jer.
9.24.
to whom it is usual to study Gods mind in the rod, and who is daily like the
Be, sucking and making honey out of it; As the daily influence of Gods love, is
called the exercise of his loving kindness to his creatures; Ezekiel. 22.29.
and the common thief is said to exercise robbery; so the soul that meets
Gods scourge, and chastening every morning, Psalm. 73.14.
and falls to work about it, is here the truly exercised Christian. The daily
labourer thrives the best.

3. Constancy.
Exercise here intends constancy and continuance in labor until the fruit
comes: many plucks may be had at a bucket, yet to stop before it be full up, is
but to lose all former labor; draw home we must and reach the mark, if we mean
to carry back the price of our high calling: to work two days, Isai 64.5.
and leave off the third, when we should be parfected, is as fruitless as
never to begin. As in all the ways and works of God, constancy crowns the
action, In those is continuance, and we shall be saved: continuance and
salvation are yoaked; so no less in this, Matthew. 10.22.
He that endures to the end shall be saved, that is, he that abides in
bearing, in doing, in working after Gods mind under the rod, the safe fruit of
righteousness, life and peace, shall be to that exercised soul. Thus must
their labor be ordered. But then what is the work it self?

2. To come to that, Let us diligently consult the text again, it is said,
they are exercised by it, that is, by this chastening they are awakened,
provoked, and stirred up to the work or exercise suitable to the condition
under which they are, and to the end or fruit which they desire. Now both the
Rise or Incentive to this labor in the rod, and the end of it, which is here
expressed Righteousness or Holiness in God, sweetly point out unto us together
the variety of work that must take us up for exercise in this case.

The rod that awakens and puts upon this work, points us to it, to our selves,
and unto God for special exercise; so Holiness unto which chastening is
intended, no less directs us to looks to the rod, to our selves and to God,
for some special work; if we would be partakers of it: Hence then we may
gather the exercise that does concern us is threefold. 1 About the rod that
smarts. 2 About our hearts that feel. 3 About God that does inflict and
chasten. 1. Much work there is to do about the rod, Work about the Rod.
if we expect the appointed end, or fruit, it is all taken up in hearing,
bearing, and doing after the rods voice.

1. Hearing-worke.
There is hearing work for the soul; for there is a voice or speech in every
chastening, and a special duty is it to understand the meaning of the rod,
which yet cannot be had, without hearkening or listening thereunto: The one is
therefore asserted a truth from God, and the other commanded a duty to him:
upon a wise heart that would have profit by chastening, Mich. 6.9
The Lords voice cries to the city (the wise will see his name in it) hear ye
the rod, and who has appointed it. If it be enquired, what voice the rod has?
It is fully replied, The Lords voice cries in it: But what is the matter of
all this cry? In short, virtually it takes in the whole contents of Gods
covenant, and calls for all restipulations due unto God from a covenanted
people. It is spoken of the rod, Levit. 26.25.
which is the sword; I will bring a sword upon you, that shall avenge the
quarrel of my Covenant; vengeance absolute of wrath it takes up on reprobates
for their rebellion, but only a smart exaction or correction of love upon his
chosen, to convince them of former errors, and awaken them to future care in
obedience to his Covenant. Whether it be vengeance to one or chastening to
another, this is certain, the rod carries in it the voice of Gods whole
Covenant, and requires obedience to it, where it comes, God appoints it for
this purpose: That one Notion under which word and Rod are signified, Psalm.
119.20.30.
even Judgments, is enough to evince the substance of one to be carried in
the other; The word of covenant is Judgment, Ezekiel. 14.21.
that is, a right word of truth to bring to God, and the rod as Judgment also
a right stroke upon the creatures default, to require the abuse of so right a
covenant. The rod then does speak, though it be a word in a blow, for God who
sends it; therefore is the chastened souls duty to hear, that is, to listen,
to study out: and understand, and to believe what the Lord speaks in his
chastenings. But what cries the rod more distinctly?

These three words plainly are uttered in every scourge, and must be so heard,
by the wise soul that would be fruitful under the rod. 1. The stroke cries
aloud unto the soul, Thou have sinned, thou have sinned; affliction could
never fall upon a creature, where sin had not made entrance for it: and
however God sees not iniquity in Jacob so as to lay to Judgment to the rule,
to cast away his people for ever, and forget his covenant of grace to them, yet
in every rod he notes their corruptions to convince of them, to lay strokes of
death upon them, and keep from them for time to come. It was the cry of
Isreal's fall before Ai to Joshua; Jos. 7.11.
Israel has sinned, and no less David's family troubles and Kingdom shakings
sound in his ear, did the matter of Vriah: every chastening speaks the same
to Gods Sons.

2. Another note the whip sounds out, God is displeased, God is displeased:
though in love God take up the rod, to keep his children from the worlds
condemnation, yet every stroke shows a frown upon their sin: Though David be
Gods dear, and Solomon his beloved one, and Ephraim his joy, yet his
displeasure is against their sin. God loves his Saints, Number. 12.14.
but not their sins, and were he not displeased he would not smile, God sparing
Miriam showed that he loved her, but spitting in her face, argues his
indignation against her folly. Notably does this appear, Psalm 44.24.
when the cry of Gods afflicted returns, Why hidest thou thy face from us?

3. The plain voice of the rod to the chastened soul is, Return, Return,
because you strayed abroad, God sent out his appointed scourge after you, to
call you home, and to set you right in the way of life again: when Ephraim was
unruly in this kind, the scourge pursues him, and whips and cries, Come back
Ephraim, come back; and at last he hears it, Jer. 31.18
and replies, Turn me my God and I shall be turned. Thus every rod cries
repentance to the chastened child; and his work it is to hear, to understand,
to be convinced, and believe all this revelation by the rod, if ever that
excellent fruit of righteousness appear.

2. Bearing-worke.
There is bearing work also for Christians in reference to the rod; The
necessity of this patience is urged by one, and the perfection of it advised by
another Apostle, Heb. 10.36. James 1.4.
to give men possession of the promise, and render them entire, wanting
nothing. The Church commends it to her children, It is good for a man to bear
the yoke in his youth; good to bear, Lam. 3.27.
and to bear betimes, and she resolves to do it in conscience of her own
guilt deserving it, Mich. 7.9.
I will bear the indignation of God, because J have sinned against him; this
is the way to that desired gain, He will bring me forth to the light, and I
shall behold his righteousness; see the success of bearing smart.

But how must we bear, to be sure of this? Quest.


Three words will direct safely. Answ.
1. We must bear feelingly, that is, feel and bear, or else what patience
here? little hope of whipping a dry post into green, alas there is neither
life nor sense in it, the Anvile-bearing may make worse and harder, never soft
nor better. It is stupidity, not patience, where there is want of sense; no
thank for bearing, Job 1.20.21.22.
where no pain is felt: poor Job feels and bears, and takes all kindly from
the hand of God; in this he did not sin.

2. We must bear freely and willingly; forced suffering against our wills is
not worth the name of patience; overpowered strength may bear in policy,
when it must yield of necessity, but little thanks for such a bearing in
respect of God; to choose to bear rather than not, when God chastises and his
will is so, to take up the cross, when flesh might find the way to shift it,
Christ calling thereunto, this is action, and truth of duty, not dull passion,
or patience perforce. Correct me O Lord, and that in judgment, Ier. 10.24.
measured by the rule of thy saving truth, was the desire of a gracious soul,
rather then be left unrebuk't and hated.

3. We must bear waitingly also, if we expect the fruit; to grow weary after
some strokes born, (...). Chrysostom in text. 26.8.9
is but to forfeit all former pains to loss; to hold out and endure bearing
to the utmost point of the will of God is the only way to get the crown: It is
therefore a true paraphrase of the condition in the text by an Ancient, to be
exercised is to bear, and to hold out: The practice of that good Prophet and
people of truths suits sweetly with this rule, yea in the way of thy judgments
O Lord have we waited for thee; that is, in all the journey round or circuit of
Gods scourges, though he take rod after rod, and lead them from fire to fire,
and from water to water, they keep him company throughout the way, and wait
unweariedly till the fruit do come, that they may be exactly skilled or learned
in righteousness. No hope of healing the wound, if the plaster lie not long
enough, nor expectation of harvest by the husbandman, till winter be past and
the season come: thus bear the rod, and the rod shall bear his precious fruit.

3. Doing-work.
There is yet more doing work about the rod, to complete this exercise, and
help on the desired gain: to hear and bear the rod will prove but idle
work without doing, or bestirring our selves in action suitable to its demands;
these three Acts I shall commend for completing your exercise about the rod,
and enlarging the intailed fruit.

1. Kiss the rod in your Fathers hand; no storming, no snatching, nor biting
at it, if you consult your peace: Ask ye what I mean by kissing the rod? I
shall shortly tell you, Honor it as the Scepter of God, set up above you;
Fear it as the sword of God, sent to require all failings against his
Covenant; Love it as Gods medicine appointed for healing your sores, and
preventing death, and condemnation, the kiss is but the token of love and
homage due. 2 Chronicles 33.12
Manasseh did thus under the iron rod in Babylon and prospered.

2. Cast away the sin that has provoked God; say unto it, what ever it be,
Get thee hence; and within your selves parley, What have we any more to do with
evil? Isa. 30.22. Hos. 14 8. Job 34.31.32.2 Sam. 20.22.
Elihu sweetly notes this to Job in his affliction, Surely it is meet to be
said unto God, I have borne chastisement, J will not offend any more; That
which J see not teach thou me; if J have done iniquity, J will do no more. It
was the speediest way the woman took to secure Abell, and make Joab retreat,
to throw the Traitors head over the wall; no other way to calm the sea but by
casting out Jonah, John 1.12.
nor shorter course can be found to still the rod, and ripen the sweet fruit of
holiness, than to thrust out that sin that angers one, and contradicts the
other.

3. Embrace the covenant of God for which the rod pleades, This is the message
about which the scourge is sent, to teach you your folly in transgressing, and
wisdom for a timely embracing the covenant of the Lord. Genesis 43.30. Genesis
35.1.2. etc.
That rod which made Jacob stink in the nostrills of his Neighbors, tells him
of his forgetfulness of his vow at Bethel, and minds him to purge his family,
and haste to perform his covenant with God; upon obedience to this his fear
was removed, his smart eased, and his grace strengthened. Gods Covenant
embraced, brings Righteousness and Peace with it, This is the First piece of
our exercise about the Rod.

SECT. III. The exercise about Hearts, and about God, opened.
2. THe next work to be done for perfecting the pleasant fruit of the Rod, is
about our Hearts, upon whom the strokes are laid. Now being stirred up and
excited by the scourge, to this exercise, the Heart-work will be taken up in
these particulars, Heart-weighing of the Rod, Heartbreaking under it, and
Heart-bending to it; by these the chastening is furthered to its end.

1. It will be our duty to lay to heart the affliction inflicted on us; in
other terms if you will, to consider and cast in our thoughts the evil
incumbent, what it is, whence it comes, by what provoked, to what intended,
this is that heart-weighing mentioned. It is the Preachers rule of wisdom,
Eccles. 7.14.
In the day of adversity consider. Now, if ever, it concerns men that have
hearts to use them. Silly Doves, and heartlesse Ephraims, Hos. 7.11.
must pine away and perish in their troubles, they have not hearts to bethink
themselves, nor to work good out of their evils: but men of hearts must do
more wisely, if they resolve to be gainers by the rod. A solid consideration of
the Nature, Author, Motive and End of chastening, becomes that soul, who
would be afflicted for his profit. Hag. 1.5.
The Lord himself presses this on some, Consider your ways, when he pleads
against them with his scourges, that is, Set your hearts on your ways, bethink
your selves what you have done to pull these burdens on you, and what must be
done for removal of them. Isai. 42.25. Ier. 12.11. Ier. 8.6.
And no less does he complain of others, that they lay nothing of his
judgments to heart, nor so much as once do say, What have I done? He that
sees the mystery of the rod, and understands the deeps of God in it, is in a
way to reach the sweetness of it, but of the foolish inconsiderate heart, that
either sottishly neglects, or rashly runs over the study of affliction, there
is as little hope it should be holy, as that it can be wise; skill in the
mystery of the rod, as well as of the word, is requisite for holiness. This
heart-work then is needful, to think, and think, and study thoroughly this work
of chastening.

2. It must be no less our exercise to plough or break up our hearts, with
Gods chastening plow-share, if we hope for that good fruit to grow upon them.
Thistles and weeds are the best return that fallow grounds make to the
blessings of heaven, until the plow turn it up, and fit for the seeds, and
future bearing: no better can the heart of man yield in spirituals, until God
plow and fit it for his hand. This though the mighty Spirit of the Lord can
only do, yet such instruments as Word and Rod, he uses to dig through our
flesh, and calls no less for our concurrence with him in the work. Jer^m 4 3.
Hos. 10.12.
Thus says the Lord, Break up your fallow ground. It must be then our
exercise as well as his hand-work; this is nothing else but heart-renting,
heart-afflicting, and heart-humbling; such a one is a sweet soil for
holiness, and a desired rest by God, to come and dwell there, and fill it with
himself. Requisite is this heartbreaking exercise.

3. It is work also heart-bending to the scope of Gods rod, if we would
prosper; our hearts are not fully suited to the intended profit of chastisement
by thinking, and by breaking, something else must be done to reach the mark:
Inconsistencies with holiness must be removed, and disposition and resignation
of the heart unto it, must be settled, stones must be picked out, and weeds
plucked up, and ground manured and fitted for the seed, where we expect a full
crop. Rebellious risings are these stones, careful, lustful thoughts and
affections about the creature are these weeds, our hearts themselves unapt
soil to nourish the seed of righteousness, all must be picked, and plucked, and
cleansed, that we may see the holy fruit abound. Circumcising and washing
hearts so often enjoined, Jer. 4.4.14.
have the force of this duty in them; our hearts gain not on God, till God bath
gained on them; when once our hard is softened, and our stiff made stoop and
yielding, that our hearts lay down gainsaying, and are at the beck of rod, to
go and do its pleasure, answering to God, Lord, what will thou have us do?
then come the showers of grace, then righteousness raineth down, then peace
abounds, and the dry rod gives forth its pleasant blossom, and precious fruit.
This heart-work then must needs fore-goe the crop.

3. The last piece of our exercise concerns that God who is Father of his
chastened, Lord and commander of the rod, to use it at his pleasure, to burn it
when he will: our work will be to eye God in all our afflictions, as the
sovereign that appoints them, that we may do him honor, Mic. 6.9.
if we look to share in holiness with him. It is Micahs expression upon Gods
cry in his rod, The man of wisdom shall see thy name, that is, eye and take
notice of Gods known and famous Majesty, and perceive he has to do with God
in this matter. I confess there are other readings of this passage; that of
the Vulgar is wide from the letter, Salvation shall be to them that fear thy
name, Lorin. in text.
though the Jesuiticall gloss seeks to maintain it for good. There is another
reading which the Learned have, and our Translators express in their
variations, Thy Name shall see that which indeed is, making it an Apostrophe to
God, Junius.
and intimating the reason of his cry unto the City, viz. his overseeing eye
beholding what was there in being; this cannot be denied to be very congruous
to the letter; yet by several learned in the original, is the first reading
only used, as is expressed. Ar. Mont. Vatal.
The difference arises from one word, which signifies either substance,
essence, and truth of being, or else wisdom, (...)
virtue of any thing, and the Law it self, for the stable and settled being of
these; the word in short signifies any thing that is solid and substantial;
therefore translated to express wisdom, so that we must read then, Wisdom
shall see thy Name, but not unfitly translated here, The man of wisdom, that
is, the solid substantial wise man will eye the noted Majesty of God, when in
the rod he cries to him: but this looking to him is for a further work, to
honor that Name, that sees and has found him out with his rod. It is a full
expression by another Prophet, Isai. 24.15.
Glorify ye the Lord in the fires, even the name of the Lord God of Israel in
the Isles of the sea, that is, in the hottest fiery trials, and in the
remotest parts of your solitude, or exile misery, glorify the name of the
Lord. His glory is dear to him at all times, he will not give it to another;
and because it is stolen, or limited, or spoiled by creatures, therefore by
fiery tortures comes he to require it. Now then, if ever, give glory unto God,
unless ye would that he should glorify himself upon you in smiting to
desolation.

How must we then glorify God in our afflictions? Quest. Answ.


In general, to glorify God, or give glory to him, cannot be by adding any
thing to him, but by acknowledging and manifesting the fundamental glory that
is in him. Glorificare est clarificare. Augustine.
Now the glory of God, is his excellency, wherein he out-reacheth, or
over-commeth all created being; as his excellency of Power, excellency of
wisdom, excellency of holiness, of majesty, of justice, and of goodness,
is that which is unparalled, that cannot be matched, and therefore truly
glory: were this given unto God, that is, manifested to the world to be in him
by his people, in their suitable demeanor to such a glory by their words,
duties, ways, and conversations, while it is peace, our feet might be kept
from stumbling upon the dark mountains. But when creatures deny this, Ier.
13.16.
how just is it for that glorious majesty to require it by his rod? and now it
must be yielded, or we yield our selves to perdition. His glory he will have,
and we must thus ascribe it.

1. By abasing, abhorring, and nullifying our selves as unworthy to be, who
have lifted up a word or thought against such a glory. Impudent pride of heart
is in creatures, while they set their sin above God, which they do, when they
obey it in the lusts of it; obedience is a debt to glory, and is there glory in
sin, poor man, that thou should obey it? or is there none in God, that
thou deniest it him? Is shame become glory, and glory shame? Thy sin thy God,
and thy God baser in thy thoughts then sin? O abhor thy self in dust and
ashes, Job 42.5.6.
that God may yet be glorified in thee. Job was never right until he came to
this pass, I have heard thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye
sees thee; wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. Go we
must as low, and let God be exalted in our abasement.

2. By justifying God in all the ways of his judgments, and proceedings
against his creatures; Lam. 3.39.
if man suffer for his sin, as who does not? why does living man complain? Yet
see what sots sin makes us, to provoke the Lord to jealousy, and then quarrel
with him for being angry, and so spoil him twice of his glory: Learn, learn,
poor soul, of Jeremy, though his span-long thoughts could not reach Gods
exquisite proceedings in his judgments, yet this he lays down as undeniable,
Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee. Ier. 12.1.
Or learn of David, Against thee, thee only have I sinned, etc. that thou
might be justified when thou speak, Psalm. 51.4.
and be clear when thou judge. Say thou also, I have sinned, thou Lord, have
all the wrong, I have robbed thee of thy glory, for this am I scourged, and it
is righteous: yet this is mercy, my just recompense is Hell; Thus should
chastised sinners glorify their God.

3. By a suitable demeanor toward the glory of Gods being, especially now under
the rod: deepest trembling to highest Majesty, greatest fear to Supreme
Holiness, fullest obedience to greatest Power, strongest faith to glorious
Truth, and largest love to Excelling goodness are equal matches, if man be
judge; All we are are and have, and can, is but his debt, who gave all this,
and is more then all to our poor Soul. Deuteronomy. 6.5.
No less can such a glory crave than all the heart, and all the Soul, and all
the mind, and all the might; and yet our all too little for the least of him.
Manasseh began to study this at last, when shame was fallen on him, to honor
God, it is best at first: Aim at this, strive for this, Gods glory is our
truest gain.

4. By going to this only living fountain, and drawing from him the blessing
of the rod; He that prays, as well as he that praises, honors him, and
declares him to be the Absolute and alsufficient Author of all good. It is
neither rod nor word that of themselves can make us fruitful in holiness, he
only blesses, and the fruit appears. It is his own word, J am the Lord thy
God that teaches thee to profit. Isa. 48.17.
Our profit indeed in righteousness and peace is the appointed end of
chastening, but alas the rod it self cannot give this, no strokes can beat
grace into a soul, divine light and life and wisdom and power only can
effect this, to stamp holiness to the Lord upon any soul; The praise then is
not to the rod, but to the Lord; This must be acknowledged by the soul that
would be blessed in suffering, therefore must the Lord be inquired of by him
for all this good; This praying work also blazons the glory of the Lord, and
speeds a blessing on the rod, to make it of a sanctifying nature and virtue in
us; This is our exercise, and thus the saints have constantly done and
prospered. Sum we up now the whole work to take it at one view, The
indispensable condition of the Saints receiving the full fruit of affliction is
their activity, and stirring exercise under the scourge; work they must about
the rod in hearing, bearing, and obeying the voice of it; stir they must
about their hearts, in pressing, breaking, bending them to the will of the
chastiser; Exercise they must to Godward in giving him his glory, by self
abhorring, by justifying his scourge, by a worthy demeanor to him and by a
faithful seeking of the blessed fruit of chastening from him; to all this they
must buckle strongly, as wrastlers, labor in their shirts, as Artists, at it
every day, and as Racers run till they reach the mark: this labor shall not
be in vain, the full crop is entailed upon it, and inseparably follows it, in
its appointed season; Afterward the sweet fruit abounds: but how long after?
that we shall see in the ensuing search of the season.

SECT. IIII. The Season of the fruit stated.
3. ALL the help the text gives us to find out this season is in that one
large expression, Afterward, which yet considered with the rest leaves us not
unsatisfied. (...).
It has been noted of the fruit forementioned, that completely taken and in
its compass it is Grace and Glory, all the effects of Gods favor here begun,
and the perfection of it in heaven; for all this is life truly, and life is the
fruit of righteousness: Accordingly this afterward may be of grace, and that
is more near at hand, or else of glory, and that has its stated time, the
instant of our translation. But yet to give you a stricter account of this
time-specifying expression, it is evident that it points at a future season for
gain, contradistinct unto that present of the pain of chastening, and in this
future notation three things are carried that concern this fruit, The Order,
Speed, and Duration of it.

1. In this afterward is carried the order of this fruits appearance, it
succeedes, not foregoes, it is after, not before the pain and Christian
exercise under it: folly would brand that husbandman, who expects his crop,
before he till, or winter be over; and madness in that Christian who looks
for peace, before his exercise performed and rod removed: It was the method God
keeps with his own Son (not in way of chastening, unless the chastisement
of our peace) he must first suffer, and therein manage his suffering well, and
then enter into his glory; the same order is to his members, Isa 53.5. Luke
24.26.
first grief and exercise under the rod, then after fruit of righteousness
and peace.

2. In this afterward is intended speed, that is, soon after, or immediately
after labor this fruit is returned; The traveling woman's pain after
laboring through some throws, brings forth the child anon; it is at the very
heels of her travail: (unless it be a cross birth, whereof no fear in
present case) so soon comes fruit of grace and peace upon the Christians
travail under the rod; atleast the beginnings or first fruit, though not the
full expected harvest. Isa. 66.7.8.
It is a sweet prophetical note, about the miraculous and fruitful return of
the Jews to Christ, after their long rejection and many pains, when they
begin to exercise and labor under the rod and word indeed, As soon as Zion
traveled, she brought forth her children, Nay if that be not soon enough
after, take a nearer expression, Before she traveled she brought forth,
before her pain came, she was delivered of a man child: Then she need not
stay to labor: but understand it rightly, it is an expression, that notes
speed in fruit-bearing, yet not excluding pain in the due labor of the
Church; but a rhetorical phrase it is to set forth the swiftnes of the
flocking of the Jews to Christ, as afterward, Shall a nation be borne at once?
Hyperbole.
This was never seen, but such an income shall there be of these unto the Lord
much like to this; As if to express the quick deliverance of a woman in her
pains, we say, she had her child, before she cried; joy came so speedily
after, as if it had been before. I shall close this with an eye to the present
matter, the harder labor under the rod, the speedier return of the desired
fruit.

3. In this afterward there is duration noted, it is a long afterward, when
once its come, always afterward does this fruit abide with the exercised
soul; It is like that in the Psalmist, Thou shall guide me with thy counsel,
Psalm. 73.24.
and afterward receive me to glory, that is, for ever after never to leave
glory again; no After shall follow this to cut it off, but this fruit shall
be from generation to generation; eternity is long enough, and that of joy, to
recompense a present, an instant of grief: ye have the burden of this note of
time, it tells when, how soon, how long this blessed fruit of chastening may
be expected. But how does the rod bring forth? This will be satisfied in the
last inquiting of the manner.

SECT V. The manner of this fruit-bearing.
4. ALL that touches upon this in the text, (...).
is in these, it yields, that is, the chastening yields this fruit, or
gives it out from it self: What, does the dry rod or smart upon the flesh,
carry in it such spiritual effects as righteousness, etc. or else how can it
give them forth? It is firmly asserted in the text, Chastening yields this
fruit, which that we may take aright, two things are to be remembered
concerning chastening. 1 The material part of it, which is nothing but the
smart. 2 The formal part, and that is the spirit of the rod, or the spiritual
energie, which it receives from that Hand of power, holiness, and grace that
uses it toward the children of his bosom; when therefore we speak of
chastening it is meant the Result of both these, not smart abstracted, nor
spirit abstracted, but both united in this chastening and of this it is truly
said, It yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness; and in the particulars
following I shall show you how. 1 Orderly, for as there are many ingredients in
this chastening, Smart, and Love, and Spirit; It is Spirit that is active,
working this good unto the creature, for Spirit must be in the cause, if Spirit
be the effect: Now this mighty spirit works through smart, and through love
to bring forth this fruit, yet in this method, observing these steps. 1 Through
the pain and grief upon the flesh, as by its instrument it works privatively
to take away stubbornness and indisposition unto righteousness; true, smart
it self does rather anger, but spirit and smart will make men yield. This
chastening knocks down rebellion, weakens corruption, takes away gainesaying
to the will of God; for there is the spirit that overpowers, and the smart that
in bitters sin unto the flesh, so that it becomes willing to leave the dug
though its delight, when nothing but wormwood is tasted in it. This spiritual
effect of chastening, lies in that promise, Esa. 27.9.
By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to
take away his sin. Spirit in pain does this first. 2. Positively, by love
and smart it draws to God, and forms the fruits of love and purpose of the
rod upon the heart. Now that love of the Father that does chastise, carries all
the effects of grace in it, righteousness is but his love, and peace his love,
and life his love, that is, the issues of it, and the rod makes way through the
flesh to bring these into the soul, and the Spirit through both perfects the
effect, and leaves Gods image more eminently stamped upon the heart, that more
exactly we might subject our selves to the Father of spirits and live. Luke
15.17. Ier. 31.18. Psalm. 119.67.
By this the prodigal was brought to himself, and Ephraim tamed and turned,
and David established and perfected in the way of God. Thus then conceive the
way of this increase; the Spirit by his power strikes out this bloom and fruit*
through the dry rod; that is but the stalk, yet such a stalk there must be,
the Spirit is the seminall virtue that gives forth the fruit; and in this
order, by the smart awing, humbling purging an untoward flesh, and by love
adjoined drawing and conforming the soul to God, so making righteousness and
peace to abound.

2. Freely does this rod thus give the fruit; the very word imports it,
yielding it from it self: No green tree yields its fruit more naturally, none
so freely as this: For Grace is in it, which every way is free, and works most
freely toward the creature. Nothing more free then gift, and that gift the
freest, which comes only from and for the Donors self. Thus the love of God,
through the rod, gives forth this gain: it is not by force, nor charm, that
this dry rod is quickened, and made fruitful, only by Grace and Promise,
because the chastising father says, Hosea 5.15.
I will afflict, and they shall seek me early. It is not for thy exercise, but
to thy exercise, that the Lord commands his rod to yield this blessed fruit.

3. Certainly shall this fruit be rendered from the Rod, to the exercised soul:
It is not doubtfully delivered, it may yield, or it may not, but peremptorily
affirmed, it does yield. If the power, promise, or truth of the Father of
spirits, can give certainty enough, all is put to it to assure this fruit. He
that works, and none can let it, has thus spoken, Isai. 48.11.
For mine own sake, even for mine own sake, will I do it. What will he do?
Even refine his people, and make them choice ones in the Furnace of
Afflictions, righteous and glorious; nay, it stands him upon, otherwise his
Name would be polluted, and his glory lost, in his Churches barrenness under
the Rod. From all the premised explications we must take the state of the truth
concluded; the sum whereof is this, Gods chastenings, his smarting loving Rods
for the afterward yield, that is, in their appointed time and manner, give the
peaceable fruit of righteousness, both grace and bliss to them that are duly
exercised by them. Ye see the gain of the Rod discovered.

SECT. VI. The demonstration of this Truth.
Add we to these the Certainty and Necessity of this truth, then faith may
freely feed and get strength from it: Each particular indeed has its light in
opening enough to convince of all being put together; yet to leave no doubt,
the entire truth shall be demonstrated in its certainty, that it is so, and in
its necessity, why it must be.

1. That this is true in the whole proposition, (...).
will be evident from two great Arguments, Gods Revelation, and Man's Experience.

1. God has spoken it, therefore it is certain. Take we some testimonies; Isai.
26.9.
This is divine, When thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the
world will learn righteousness. These judgments in the earth, are chastenings
to Gods portion there, these inhabitants of the world, are not all, but some,
and they the people of truths, whose souls are said to desire after Gods Name
(for the rest abide wicked) these learn righteousness, this is their gain, but
how come they by it? Not by idleness, but exercise: they must go to school
for it, and learn it. This also is his Oracle, Psalm. 126.6.
He that goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come
again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him. Here Is grieving and going,
and working, and sowing in the day of man's affliction; but what return? He that
goes forth, shall as surely come to his home, he that sprinkles his way with
tears, shall come leaping and rejoicing, and he that bears and sowes his
seed, sowing to the Spirit, so shall he reap, for every seed he shall bring his
handful, or for every handful he shall have a sheafe, abundance of
righteousness, peace, and everlasting life.

2. The Saints have found it, and experience is a visible demonstration, then
which nothing surer. Psalm. 119.71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, says David; and good for me,
says Job, and for me, says Je^my, and for me, says Daniel, and for us, say
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; all the Saints, Psalm. 23.4.
Patriarchs, and Prophets, subscribe to this. And this steels David against
distractions, Thy rod comforts me, what needs more witness?

2. The necessity why it must be so, depends upon one undeniable ground, that
is, the supreme irresistible ordinance of God, then which nothing can be
stronger to convince. The alone decree and ordinance of that great God, whose
counsel none can cross, has so linked this chastening cause to this effect,
and this condition, and this season, that they cannot be separated. If we
allow his Sovereignty in lesser matters, we may not deny it here, unless we
ungod him. Ier. 33.20.
The same power that has decreed the Winter storms, and Summer calm, the cold
and the hot, the wet and the dry, the frost and the thaw, to fit the earth that
it may yield its strength to the laboring man in the time of harvest, and none
can alter one link of these, or change his mind; to that Sovereign might we
must grant, that his counsel must stand what ever he determine: In an higher
and more excellent way has he ordained, that the rod to the laboring and
exercised Christian, should hasten and give out the sweet fruit of
righteousness and peace in the appointed season. His authority is the highest
reason. Now that his Name and stamp is upon this truth to own it, and make it
his, is visible in every piece of it, as before declared. It is all then his
ordinance, and thereforeour duty to believe, and love, and honor God in
obedience thereunto.

SECT. VII. The inference of some truths depending.
HAving thus stated the Apostles Proposition, Use 1. Instruct.
it will be profitable for us to gather those precious truths that fall from
it: four fruitful lessons I shall teach naturally issuing thence. 1. It being
in the scope a correcting assertion, to allay the bitterness of the former
concerning present smart of chastening, and to rectify misguided thoughts,
that from sense might be ready to conclude, nothing but evil in the rod, learn
this truth, Note 1.
A right and perfect judgment of the state of chastening, cannot be made from
present sense, but from future success. The judgment of faith is better then
that of sense in this matter; this sees nothing but present grief, therefore
judges it all evil, but faith perceives love and faithfulness of God in his
scourge, and discovers the ensuing good of it in the promise, therefore
determines it good, very good, and nothing better; while Jeremy looks no
further then present smart, Jer. 15.10. Job 3.3. Jer. 20.24.
he bewails himself, Woe is me, he takes himself as a man undone. So Job,
while his sense is judge, curses the day of his birth, as the other also.
Sensual judgment upon Gods dealings, misguides men to perverse thoughts of
Gods rod, and lets loose passion, and whets the tongue against the Almighty;
Thus they tumble in the net, and are faster taken, and murmr themselves into
greater torture: for God will have the mastery, and whip his own out of
sensual rashness and complaints. I note this for the profit of Gods own in this
day of darkness; sense never deals well with Gods word, nor with his rod; lay
that aside, rectify your thoughts of the present troubles on the Church by
believing; let faith look through the providence which now chastises us, it
will discover the after part of it to be very good, so full of glory to Gods
people that they would not avoid the smart, to lose the gain. Ease and
deliverance in this case, would be spurned away by a believing soul. It was
Isreal's sin to live by sense, to murmr in straits, to be barren in mercies.
Unhappy sense, unhappy men that live by it! Sense makes Murmurers, Beggars and
Apostates from God in time of trouble; but faith makes Martyrs, gainers, and
fruitful, praisfull admirers of God in fiery trials: believe thoroughly, and
then judge aright of Gods chastening providence.

2. Look we upon the linking, of rod, of exercise and of fruit; all this gain
is given in to exercise, this exercise is daily labor, this labor must be
under the rod, this note is worth the taking; The more exercise under
affliction, the greater fruit to Gods people; the longest labor under the rod
has the largest income of peace and righteousness. Note 2.
The more pains, the greater gains in the trade. If there be a rich vein of
metal in a mine, the longest, the hardest labor brings the greatest and the
richest profit.

Now there is abundance of heavenly good hid in Gods chastening, as much as his
love can compass, and all this to be wrought out by exercise, therefore the
longest travel will bring the largest fruit: Yet not the longest continuance
of the scourge absolutely gives this advantage, but the longest that can stand
with the Christians exercise; for there is an appointed time for the kindly
working of every affliction, and excess in it may cut off a man's hands and
bar from exercise, kill and not quicken to the work: As there is a stated
time for the seed to lie under ground, and if excessively it be kept under, it
dies for ever and cannot get up to fruit, but within the set season the longer
it lies, the root is deeper, and the fruit greater. There is a time also that
the refiner sets for the golds trial, in the furnace, and within these limits
the longer it continues, the purer it comes forth, but in outlying these, it
loses it self as well as dross: So in our present case, the time of the rod
is measured for doing good, while Christian spirits are spurred to work, and
quickened to labor by it, within these bounds the most continued labor brings
forth the greatest crop; but beyond this stint the rod breaks and kills: These
bounds of time our refiner the Lord himself only knows; but this we may
build on, if it should be all the days of the standing of our Tabernacle, and
all those days we stoutly exercise under our afflictions, as our strength is
not over-wrought, so our return of fruit will be exceeding great. These
suggestions will evince it. 1 Gods enlarged thoughts of tenderness and respect
to the long sufferings of his people, to have them relieved and eased; Note one
instance to his dear Jerusalem, Isa. 40.12.
Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says the Lord, etc. for she has received
at the Lords hand double for all her sins. How double? Neither she nor any
creature can pay a single debt to God; bat yet the Lord so indulgeth the long
travailing soul, that he accounts every lash two, and provides treble comfort;
Its not enough to comfort her once, but again comfort her, nay and again
speak comfortably to Jerusalem: sure there is nothing lost in the longest
sufferings, if God so account of his peoples pains.

2. Isa. 61.7.
Gods enlarged hand for return to the hard and long traveiles of his children;
Hear his proportion, For your shame you shall have double; for confusion they
shall rejoice in their portion; therefore in their land they shall possess the
double; Everlasting joy shall be unto them. In this reading, we have good
gains, two for one, in joy for suffering, in honor for reproach; No cause
then of repenting bargain in this pains. But if we take another as may be
fit; For your double shame and confusion, they shall praise their portion; (it
is usual thus to change the person) as if he had said, ye shall be no loosers
by your multiplied afflictions, for your double shame, ye shall have a worthy
portion, your selves, and all that see it, shall commend it; or if this may be
thought two little, eternity has enough in its compass to satisfy you,
everlasting joy shall be upon you. Make not have then, brethren, from under
the rod, but labor in the fires, your work shall be well rewarded, and long
travailes crowned with everlasting peace.

3. Note 3.
Remembering that this exercise is such stiff, frequent, constant labor, age
and growth must needs be requisite to this; another useful note will issue
hence: The right managing of afflictions to the full purchase of the sweet
fruit intailed, is a manly work, Heb. 5.13.14.
and beseeming a grown Christian. Exercise truly stated is the character of
distinction which the Spirit makes between men and babes in Christ. It is true,
as in meats there is difference, milk for babes, strong meat for men, yet
both eats and digest though not the same; So in works there is variety,
slighter for Children, harder for men; yet both are doing: so in rods also,
there is distinction, twigs for children, but cudgells and whips for them of
stronger growth, yet both suffer; God has so fitted correction as well as
food and work for several ages in his Kingdom; but so to endure affliction,
and manage it to the greatest advantage as may be attained, to bring in the
abundance of peace and righteousness, this will exercise the strongest
Christians: less strength may gain a little fruit, but greater must be had
and used to bring in plenty: grown knowledge in the ways of God, grown faith,
grown patience, grown experience, and grown strength in grace are needful
to a through exercise and a well managing of afflictions for the greatest
advantage. Mat. 9.16.
The wisdom of the Father would not put weak disciples upon the strong
service of fasting while they were as old garments ready to tear upon every
little stresse; Luke 24.49.
nor would he have them venture on the hard conflicts with the world, nor on
the bitterness of suffering until they were endued with power from above. How
sweet is the proportion between abilities and work which God has settled?
Medications hence arise suting all ages: Art thou strong to bear afflictions?
pity and tender the weak, that sink down under burdens, take them in thine
Arms and bear for them. Art thou weak in suffering? Infirmity must shame
thee, it is thine own fault to obstruct thy growth; yet Gods pity may revive
thee, he will not for all this overcharge thy life: And now up and be growing,
blessings are promised from heaven, and means afforded on earth; O heighten
thy mind to great gains, therefore to much pains and high abilities: This
mark I drive at only in giving this note; not to dash the babes because the
work is manly, but to put them upon growth, that they may be men and work
strongly, so bear the yoke, and wear the crown.

4. Note 4.
Considering this precious fruit inseparably entailed upon this kind of
affliction, take this note of discrimination between rods. It is judgment not
chastening that leaves a man fruitless, or void of righteousness. No clearer
sign of a man plagued in vengeance and under the curse, that to grow worse, or
of a man under grace, and chastened in love, than to grow better under the rod:
Saul and David are a pair of instances fit to exemplify both parts; 1 Samuel
28.7. 1 Samuel 30.6.
he the worse, this the better by all afflictions, he running to the devil,
and this to God in time of trouble; therefore he judged in wrath, and this
chastis'd in love. Judge all the variety of scourges in the world by this
evidence, such as the fruit is, such is the tree; the rod of vengeance if it
harden and make worse, of chastening if it correct and make the soul better. I
do but hold this out to the world, as a black note of perdition, to Pharaohs,
and to Ahabs, anvill-soules, that grow harder by every stroke from God: but as
an Item unto Christians for special care in this matter for improvement of the
rod, to gracious fruit: oh let not a cross, a loss, a sickness, a grief
pass over you, but see some fruit of righteousness proceeding from it; such
profit in holiness by the rod will prove you sons and not bastards: Make
this good, that ye be not disinherited.

SECT. VIII. Conviction of sin to many.
IT will not be amiss in the next place to glance a little light to sinners
from this truth, Use 2.
that if they will open their eyes they may see their sin and misery to
escape them.

1. If exercise under the rod be Gods ordinance upon his people, for gathering
fruit, then idleness in affliction must needs be a sin; and such a one as
will bring utter beggary and undoing upon the soul at last, while it opens a
way to the scourge to wear and wast, and impoverish the creature and makes no
resistance, nor suffers the man to make any shift for turning away the
bitterness of the evil. God himself sets a mark upon these, and lifts a cry
against them, that in the time of his shaking the rod, and scourging his
creatures, are professed idlers, neither study the rod, nor understand its
voice, nor search hearts, nor look unto God; nay not so much as say within
themselves, What have I done? Absolutely stupefied are these, Isa. 32.^21.
or willingly bent with Issachar to lie under every burden, and take no notice.
Hear how God calls them, women at ease, Isa^. 56.10. Amos 6.1.
careless daughters, sleepy dogs, neither shall they go without their
doom, fear, astonishment, and woes unutterable, shall awake them, and make
them howl for ever. I confess it may be an infirmity upon Gods own, for a
moment; but it will be their shame and sorrow at their awakening. It was much
that Pagans should bestirre themselves in a storm more then Jonah, and be his
remembrancers to raise him from his sleep, that he might call upon his God; yet
so then it was, but it cost him dear for it afterward, when he is imprisoned
in the belly of hell, he was taught thoroughly never to sleep out an affliction
again. Sluggishnesse may fall upon the Saints, but it is their burden, and
abides not with them. But habituated and accustomed idleness, is the
provocation, upon which God returns his heavy displeasure. I shall commend
one word to these for their serious thoughts, a character of themselves, and
presage of Gods dealings with them, except they repent, Isa^. 26.11.
Lord, when thy hand is lifted up they will not see; they wink, or sleep,
here is their character: but they shall see, and be ashamed, the fire of thin:
enemies shall devour them. This is their doom.

If it be work for God to be done under chastening, such as may help in
holiness, then counter-working is sin, when men shall give God blow for
blow, and stroke for stroke, they are busy under the rod indeed, but wickedly
employed. Fruits of such exercise are Hardening, Impatiencie, Fretting, Fuming
against God, more hatred of his ways, and blaspheming of his Name. Here Is
work enough, but all for the Devil, and to bring forth greater ungodliness:
It was that foolish Woman's advice to her afflicted Husband, Job. 2.9.
Curse God and dye; Folly indeed to fight against God, to be scourged with
Scorpions; and it was that wicked Jehorams practice, 2 Kings. 6.33.
This evil is of the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer? Seeing
he is thus angry, as little care we for him, as he for us. See the proud
creature. No more to these but this, God will have the victory, and will
certainly out-curse you. Tremble, and return; if not, the everlasting curse
shall get glory over you.

3. If gracious fruit must spring from the rod of chastening, then sinners are
all unfruitful sufferers. No great difficulty to evince this, seeing it is
against the command for such returns, as well as against the helps ministered
by the rod, to make men fruitful. Return, return, is Gods call upon every
smiting, and no less the love, Mal. 3.7.
smart, and spirit of the rod given out to them that will make use of them, are
sweet helps engaging to work together with them, to bring forth the fruit of
righteousness. It is sin indeed against grace, as well as against command, to
be thus unfruitful, yet sinners there are of less and of greater guilt: the
less, that rises of infirmity, is dangerous indeed, but not deadly; to be
lamented and abhorred, yet not desperate: such the soul will be ashamed of,
and for it condemn it self and repent. This I only call for here; as for
other scruples concerning these souls, I shall answer them among the cases.
The greater, which is of strength and habituated obstinacy, is fatal; such is
evident by men's content and delight in barrenness. I have but little to say to
these; yet a message heavy enough. As love, and rod, and labor, and fruit,
righteousness and peace, are inseparably linkt in Gods course of chastening:
so wrath, and smart, and curse, are individed from idleness and barrenness in
midst of afflictions. The sentence is gone out against all barren ones under
Word and Rod, cut them down, why should they cumber the ground? they are cursed
already, and now fit for nothing, but to be suell for everlasting flames to
feed upon. Consider the terrors of the Lord, that they may not be to
destruction, but correction. Repent, or die.

SECT. IX. Counsel for duty bence concerning us.
IN all this Concatenation of Rod, Fruit, Exercise and Time, there is but one
thing that concerns us as duty, wherein, if we fail, all the rest are
scattered, and become vain; True it is, Gods hand must temper rod and love, to
make a chastening; and he must bless this chastening to produce kindly fruit,
righteousness and Peace, and time or season in his power, but his ordinance
calls in our exercise, as an indispensable duty, wherein we are to expect this
blessed gain, and without which we shall be but as the barren field, and dry
heath, nearer to a curse then a blessing, fit for nothing but the fire.

To this noble Christian Exercise then under the Rod, is the work now to
persuade men, necessity lies on us to be doing, either to escape (otherwise
inevitable) destruction, or to gain that sweet and desired fruit intailed on
Gods chastening. As for the matter of the duty, not needlessly to repeat, learn
it in the premised draught of the work: There is, hearing, bearing, doing-work
about the Rod, there is considering, judging, breaking, bowing-work about the
heart, and that great business of all, giving glory unto God. And in all
these, if we exercise aright, our labor must be hard, even in our shirts, and
frequent, every day must we be at it, and constant, no giving over until the
fruit come.

But alas, Quest.
what flesh and blood can endure thus to labor in the fires? Who can set about
that Rod-work, heart-work, God-work, when he is under the lash, and no rest in
the bones, nor ease in the flesh?

I shall easily grant, flesh and blood cannot do it; Answ.
nothing but judgment is determined upon reprobate flesh, nor any thing
expected from it but murmurings, and sinking under the rod; yet from gracious
hearts, who only can be the chastened of the Lord, better things are not only
hoped, but must be returned. True, because there is flesh in them, lusting
against the spirit, they cannot do what they would in this matter: It will be
needful therefore to suggest some helps, to cool the fire, or to steel their
flesh against smart or scorchings, that without distractions they may attend on
their appointed exercise: these three directions only I shall move.

1 Have a watchful eye over the stings of the Rod to pluck that out, it cannot
torment and vex when the sting is gone; thou may play with the Aspe, and make
sport with the Adder, when their sting and poison are taken from them, no hurt
can they do, nor by torture indispose to work. It is the right method, that
Samson took, he first kills the Lion, Judge. 14.6.9.14.
and then the Eater gives meat, and the strong gives forth sweetness: Honey
and meat, not bitterness, roaring, and death, are the fruits of a slain Lion;
so ease and quickening, not torture and astonishment are the issues of the Rod
without a sting; the affliction is as good as dead for hurting, when the sting
is out.

But what is then this sting of the Rod? Quest.
and how to be taken out?

Surely it is no other, Answ.
but that which is the sting of death, that makes every evil of punishment an
evil indeed, and that is Sin: could a man lie in the fires without sin, the
scorching flames should not disease him, as to put him beside his work in
glorifying God; sing and rejoice may Gods servants in the stocks, when sin does
not make the stocks to pinch, nor the iron to strike anguish into the soul.
Now the main strength this sting has to strike and hurt, and torment, 1 Cor.
15.56.
is from the Law; it is expressly so averred, the strength of sin is the Law;
The Law? does that strengthen sin? yea, but not sinfully; not by adding any
thing of the same kind, to make it more sin, but by aggravating the
sinfulness of it, to make it more pain and terror: Thus the Law strengthens
sin to vex the soul in these several ways. 1. By making it sin; for without
the Law, whereof it is a breach, sin were not; where there is no Law, there can
be no transgression, at least none to be imputed: but now the Law being given,
Romans 5.13.
and that in absolute holiness, rectitude and goodness, it makes every
transgression absolutely vile, corrupt and sinful; yea, sinfulness in the
abstract, the spirit, the heart, the hell of sin; it can be no less, being
extremely opposite to the very heart and spirit, and heaven of holiness in the
Law, and this must make the scourge strike like a Scorpion to torturing and
astonishment: how terrible is it, merely to suffer as evil doers with sin upon
us?

2. Romans 7.7, 8, 9, 10.
The Law strengthens sin to vex, by making known the sinfulness of it to the
conscience: I had not known sin, says the Apostle, but by the Law; and again,
by the Law is the knowledge of sin: and such a glance it was the Law gave him,
that he was dead with the sight of it, Romans 3.20.
Sin revived, and I died; It is torment for a man to suffer with his guilt cast
in his face, written upon his forehead, and stricken to his heart; no marvel
if that soul faint.

3. Gal. 3.10.
And yet further the Law strengthens sin to torment a soul in affliction, by
discovering the wrath from whence it comes, the curse of God that has whet and
sharpened it, to wound deadly, and that it is but the earnest of seventie times
seven plagues more to come upon it for sin: Now dreadful is this condition.
Alas, what soul can labor for good under the frowns and wrath of God, or give
him glory, when the effects of his furic drive them like a whirle-winde? Surely
none; care then must be, that this sting and strength of the Rod be destroyed,
if ever a soul be fitted for that great exercise under Gods chastening. Again,
there is besides this another life, and strength of sin in the flesh, where it
lives naturally: As a man is said to be living in or by the Law, when it
acquits him, and condemns him not to take away his life, yet he is naturally
alive also, by the principles of life within him; so sin is alive by the Law,
when it is made strong thereby to condemn and kill the man; yet it is natural,
rooted life, whence all the motions and stirrings come, are in the flesh; Romans
7.23, 24
of which no less is the Apostles complaint, in bemoaning that Law that wars
in his members, and counting himself a wretched man, until he be freed from
that body, wherein reign only sin and death. Now this double strength of sin
must be spoiled to kill the sin, and the sting must be pulled out to give the
soul ease to labor in the midst of the fires.

But how then may this be done? Quest.


The great charmer of this Serpents sting, is Christ, Answ. 1 Cor. 15.57.
it is so acknowledged in that doxologie, Thanks be to God, who has given us
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Yet this victory over the sting of
afflictions and death, is gained from some special piece of Christ, and that
his death, the only powerful Antidote against sin, to take away all the life
and strength of it; effectual for justification, and so to kill sin in the
Law; and no less for mortification, and so to kill sin in the flesh; This is
Gospel doctrine in plain assertions, Romans 9.5. Hebr. 9.14.
We are justified by his blood, and again, The blood of Christ shall purge our
consciences from dead works; which is nothing else, but his death, and the
virtue of it both ways asserted.

The true virtue of this remedy against this sting and it is strength, and the
right application of it, are two things needful to be known by them, who
desire to find this help by it in the day of their affliction, to be so
quieted, as then to sit close to their appointed exercise.

1. The death of Christ has a force predominant over the Law, to take away all
the strength it gives to sin, that it can no longer accuse nor make guilty, nor
terrify the conscience, nor lay on the tormenting curse, which shakes the
soul out of all abilities of performing duty to God: this power is seen in
these effects. 1. In that it is the full payment of man's debt to the law,
beyond which nothing more could be desired for satisfaction, which the second
Adam that heavenly one has paid for all his seed; hence is the mouth of Law
stopped from laying any thing to their charge; for the Law being just, can demand
nothing but that which is right and due, all that is here discharged. 2. In
that it purchases forgiveness, or the gift of righteousness from the
Lawgiver to his seed, so that now sin is no sin, debts are no debts, all
hand-writings being cancelled by this purchased pardon, neither is the Law in
this respect a Law, or in force to burden the soul with fears, and drive it
from it is work.

2. The same death of Christ has an overruling power, quelling the motions,
weakening the strength, and wasting the life of sin in the flesh; for from
thence is the heart of man no less indisposed to duty, than from the Law; sin
by the Law frights a man from his work by scaring fears, but in the flesh by a
direct opposition to the Will of God, warring against all light and power that
should help one to this exercise; it does so hinder, put back, and thrust off
from the work, that a man cannot set to it, unless the force be quelled; now
admirably efficacious for this, is the death of Christ; To give a right
understanding of this, how the death of Christ wounds, and weakens and kills sin
in our flesh, is a work of great skill, such a Mystery, that I almost despair
of a fit, and complete expression to make it plain and easy for every mind to
conceive; yet, because it is a thing so profitable, and so desirable by
Christians, to be acquainted with that one only way of baining, of killing
their corruptions, trusting on the guidance of the Spirit of truth, I shall
endeavor to give some help for this. To present therefore this singular way of
sins mortifying by Christ's death, conceiveable to a believer, I shall labor in
these propositions, to set down the state of it.

1. As the fundamental ground for framing our thoughts aright about the
precedent Mystery, we must lay this truth, That the Lord Christ in this, as in
all other instances of giving out, and communicating grace, is to be considered
as the second Adam: Thus is he set forth as the Truth, Romans 5.14.
or Auti^ype of the first Adam, who should have conveyed life, but indeed gave
out nothing but death to his poor seed; 1 Cor. 15.45.47.
and so is he expressly styled, the last Adam, and the second man, with his
characterising excellencies, to specify him to the Church: Now the true
significa^e of this notion, first or second Adam, is a Man by way of eminency,
in some notable and special respect, a Root-man, one made as a Fountain of
Nature to convey it with it is advantages or disadvantages to the derived seed,
such was the first man made after Gods Image, which had he kept, he should have
propagated to his succeeding issue, but having given it to the spoil, naught
else could he derive to his Posterity, but the miserable effects of his own
wilful ruin, sin and shame; so he begat a Son in his own likeness; Genesis 5.3.
and such like must be all the generations of men that arise from him. Romans
5.12.
It is the plain assertion of Gods spirit in this matter: By one man sin entered
into the world, and death by sin, yea, and death passed upon all men, for that
all have sinned. That one being the fountain of humane nature, and having in
the fountain corrupted it by sin, could not convey this nature any further, but
with the deadly attendants of it, guilt imputed, enmity against God, and an
universal depravation insued upon, with those bitter consequents of death and
hell, following after it. This is the line of our misery, which God^ spirit
has drawn; It is not my purpose to stay upon the proud cavils which flesh and
blood make against this, that charge God foolishly for so ordering, and curse
such parents for their natures thus derived: I shall only suggest this thought
to such a Disputer. Had thou been the first Root-man, to have raised man's
seed, that nature which was so treacherous in him, would have been no better in
thee, and thou would have transgressed even as he in the very same
particular; Let not pride vain man, deceive thee, humbly seek by the second
Adam to be healed, and be not foolish to deny or cover the wound, which
otherwise will prove incurable by self-conceit, and confidence. My digression
shall be no longer; The reason of mentioning the first Adam here was for the
sake of the second, that as it may appear not only possible but reasonable,
the way of conveyance of sin and death from him upon his seed, so no less the
probability of receiving sins death, and deaths plague from the second Adam may
be apparent. For suppose this man also, as we must, to be a Root-man, a
fountain of Nature ^um^ne, spiritual, heavenl^ to give out to his seed, no
more difficulty can there be of conceiving the way of communicating what is
communicable from him to his seed, than of the first to his; nay more easy to
be convine do^ influence coming from the second, if we take up but these
additions; This is the quickning-spirit man, that by spirit can mightily work
upon his members, to conform them to himself, and every piece of himself,
death, resurrection, etc. This is the Lord-man, that has all dominion and
sovereignty committed to him by God to work what he will to work upon his own
for the perfecting of his Kingdom; yea, this is the heavenly-man set against
and above the sin and corruption of creatures, to destroy them in his seed,
Sermon, Embalming of dead Saints.
(of which I more largely dealt elsewhere): All which considered facilitates
the way of our conceiving ver^ue flowing from Christ to his.

2. This truth is next to be suggested, As Christ in whole and entirely
considered carries in himself the complete work of our salvation, to give out
unto his seed; so the several states and conditions of Christ have some
special and proper pieces of that salvation depending on them, Romans 6.5. Col.
3.1. Joh 14.19.
as death of sin upon his death, resurrection to grace upon his resurrection,
and life of God on us upon his life; these necessary dependances of our graces
on his several works, the Scriptures fully declare, which revelation may help
on to conceive the special virtue of the death of Christ in the present case.

3. More nearly to the point in hand, this is a main truth, The death of
Christ, as it was intended of God, so indeed it carries in it a direct
contrariety to all that withstands his seed in the way of their salvation, and
not only that it weakens, but a sovereign contrariety, able to quell and
overpower every thing that opposes the salvation of his people; These
opposites are sin in the first place by the guilt and poison of it, then the
Law with it is dreadful curse, whereunto are joined the Devil that has the
power of death, the bitterness of death it self, and the terrors of hell, with
all the powers of darkness; all these conspire to destroy poor souls, and
against all these has the death of Christ a ver^ue opposite and predominant,
as hot medicines to overcome cold diseases, and cold to quel the hot, therefore
very reasonable that it should eat out the very heart of sin, the sting of our
afflictions. Romans 6.2, 3. Ephesians. 2.16.
The frequent oppositions of the death, blood and cross of Christ, against
sin, curse, enmity in flesh toward God, etc. and the victory of that averred
over all these adversaries, are evidence without exception, sufficient to
conclude this truth.

4. Add we this, The death of Christ is not only contrary unto sin, but in
the mystery has actually killed and destroyed the enmity which is in the
flesh of his members against him, as well as all other adversaries of our life
without us; Col. 2.14, 15. (...). Hebr. 2.14.
The Act past is plainly recorded, He blotted out the handwriting, which was
contrary to us, (not only that of Ordinances which peculiarly concerned the
Jews, but that of his Law that was against every man) and took it out of the
way, nayling it to his Cross, and spoiled Principalities and Powers, etc. that
is, those of hell, that constantly opposed the salvation of Christ's seed; which
elsewhere is thus expressed, By death heed'd destroy him that had the power of
death, which is the Devil. The world also a grand enemy is crucified to
believers by Christ's Cross. Gal. 6.14.
Here are blotting out, taking quite out of sight, and nayling to the Cross
for dead law and curse that were against Christ's people, to note their utter
abolition, so is there a destroying or making void and useless all the power
of the Devil to kill, so again crucifying the world, making it as a thing
hanged out of the way which every one abhors, and no less by the same death
or cross a killing of all enmity in the creatures against God, not only by
pardoning, but by abolishing it in the flesh, insomuch, Romans 6.2.
that the Apostle concludes for himself and fellow-believers, an impossibility
of their abiding under the life of sin, being actually dead to sin by the death
of Christ. Now all this, as is said, was done by Christ in the mystery, and
that expression teaches us, that what-Christ so does, is done by him as head
of his body, and therefore in reference to it, and with influence of all those
secret mystical acts on it: the plain effect of this Mystery is most fitly
and pithily expressed in those terms of conjunction which couple the souls
with Christ, as being together within all his works and travells for their
salvation: So we read that his members are crucified together with him, Gal. 2
20.
and their old man crucified with him, and they again buried with him, and
risen with him: So the mystery is discovered to the Gentiles, Romans 6.4. Col.
2.12. (...).
that they should be fellow-heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of his
promise; all which are expressed by withs, cons, and together, and knitting
particles, which can import no less, but the sharing of these joined souls
with Christ in all the virtue of those works, sufferings or privileges wherein
by God himself they are joined with him: so that if they be planted together
with him in his dying, Ephesians 3.6. (...).
though they cannot die for sin as he did, yet a likeness to that death they
must have in effect, even a death to sin in themselves; therefore they are
joined with him in that suffering of his, Romans 6.5. (...).
because they do hold out a suitable effect to that his death, issuing from it
in their own flesh; and the same reason is of their conjunction with him in his
other works tending to their salvation, suitable effects are wrought in them
from all. This is actually done by Christ; as for the time of the actual
manifestation of this sin in his united members, more will be declared in the
application of this virtue of Christ hereafter; but for present some help is
given from hence to conceive of the efficacy and necessity of sins fall by the
death of Christ.

5. Yet the difficulty is not cleared, How should cross, or blood, or death,
these dead things, work the fall or death of sin in my flesh and spirit? The
last position will come home to this: There is a living spirit purchased,
given, and annexed unto all these saving works of Christ, which applies the
virtue of his death, sufferings, and resurrection, to produce suitable and due
effects upon man's soul: This, this is that active principle that sets Christ
death on work to kill sin, that brings men to a fellowship of his sufferings,
and makes them conformable to his death. The vast difference between blood and
blood, death and death, together with the ground of it, is fully declared by
the Apostle in comparing the legal sacrifices with Christ's one perfect
offering, Heb. 9.9.13, 14.
Alas the blood of Bulls and Goats could, but at best, sanctify to the
purifying of the flesh, it could never perfect concerning the conscience, but
the blood of Christ purges consciences from dead works to serve the living
God, which is the same with killing sin within us, and freeing our hearts from
the bendage of corruption to that glorious liberty in serving God. But what
makes the difference, that so worthless, this to excel for purging sin? The
same Text will satisfy: It was the blood of him, who through the eternal
Spirit, offered himself without spot or fault to God; wherein these
excellencies are observable. 1. It was a pure blood, without any poisonous
tincture of sin by participation, therefore a remedy fitted against it, such is
no blood of creatures besides, but all, either by inheritance, or
participation, defiled. 2. It was a powerful, spirited blood, for that
eternal Spirit, by which he offered himself, works in it and by it, to purge
consciences from Spiritual death of sin, but the other to a weak spiritlesse
blood, therefore altogether useless for these high effects; No soap nor nitre,
no fire nor blood material can work out sin, no spirit in these; only that
Fullers soap, Mal. 3.2.
and that Refiners fire, and that Sacrificers blood can purge from sins
powerful pollutions, into which the eternal Spirit gives influence, and
whereby it works sins perpetual destruction. It is not obscure, that our Lord,
upon leaving the world, designs his Spirit in his own place, to put his Church
in remembrance of what he has told them, to show them the things of Christ in
the power of them, and to bring home the spiritual energie and force of all
his satisfaction, death and resurrection to their souls; however therefore the
death of Christ be the plague of sin, when we come to feel the virtue of this
death, we must by the Spirit mortify the deeds of our flesh, Romans 8.13.
by yielding to that Spirits effectual application of this killing power to
our indwelling corruptions. It is observable in those former conjunctions
mentioned, We are buried with him, and risen with him (i. e. we have in our
selves the inseparable effects of his death and resurrection a death to sin and
life above it.) Something else is added for perfecting the effects in us, Col.
2.12. (...).
Even through the faith of the Operation of God; Faith draws on our parts, but
Gods powerful Spirit works upon the other, killing sin by his death, and
quickening by his resurrection, and hereby only becomes his blood so victorious
over sin: So that now from all these considerations put together, Christ
acknowledged the Adam, or principle of propagation, his death the special
remedy intended against sin, having a sovereign contrariety to quell it, and
having actually given the deathsblow to it upon the Cross, which the Spirit at
this day puts in force upon every united member, we may clearly conceive the
powerful virtue of this means against the life of sin in the flesh, and
withal not only a reasonable possibility, but an ordained necessity upon
Christ's part of giving out its force for the thorough subduing, and utter
abolishing sin in his seed; yet a question is behind, But how should we draw
this mortifying virtue from Christ upon our own flesh, so as to feel the
effect in the dying of our corruptions? The second part must answer this.

2. It is now needful having seen the waters at the gate of Bethlem, and known
that sovereign sin-killing virtue in the death of Christ, to consider the way
of getting of it through all difficulties, and of having the actual experience
of it upon our own hearts; and in short, the way that we must take is but one,
even that singular way of faith, wherein this saving issue may be expected.
Nothing can be clearer than this in the revelation of God, that every virtue is
drawn out of Christ by believing: It is true, Christ's death and burial kills
and burieth us to sin in the mystery, as conjoined with him, but yet this is
not done, Col. 2.12.
but by the Faith of the operation of God, this actually instates us into all
the privileges of Christ. It is the Apostles profession of himself in
communion with the head, Gal. 2.20.
I am c^ucified with Christ: Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives
in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the
Son of God. Death and life he confesses he has issuing from Christ, and
suitable to him, death to the law and sin as well as life to God; but how are
these drawn out? Only by believing, for he dyed as we will as lived by the faith
of the Son of God: So that it is questionless, That by faith the virtues of
Christ are brought into the soul: all the difficulty is of the way and manner
how faith should obtain them from him, whereunto I shall labor to give
satisfaction in these following determinations.

In general I shall premise that all the operative force of Faith in this, as
in other parts of salvation is only isntrumental, serving a superior Agent,
and effectual only in his hand: The mighty Spirit of God has created and
fitted this in our hearts to suit with his gracious dispensation, that by it
the whole good-pleasure, and free purpose of God to life might be accomplished
in us; he only working himself all acts of grace upon us, and this serving
his hand and working (nothing else being meet to join with grace) until he
finish the whole mind of God in us. This isntrumental virtue is frequently
averred in subordination to that power that uses it: As, by grace ye are saved
through faith; Ephesians. 2.8. (...).
and again, Ye are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, Gods
power and grace is the Savior, Faith but the instrument, whereby he brings
salvation to us; and that too is properly its isntrumental consideration, 1
Pet. 1.5. (...).
as it is in his hand, and not ours; for it is our grace given and work acted,
but his instrument only in us. Now this faith serves that Spirit to bring in
the several virtues of Christ for perfecting our salvation in these special
ways.

1. In answering the Spirit to his work of union; for as that from Christ
takes hold of us, so faith in us moved by the Spirit takes hold of him, whereby
the soul is actually united to him, and by this union made partaker of all
saving virtue in him, therefore of the power of his death. Romans 11.20.
Hence it is said, that we are ingrafted into Christ by faith, and no less
that Christ dwells in our be arts by faith. Ephesians. 3.17.
Now the work whereunto faith moves us in this matter, is to yield to the
Spirits offer, and to close with Christ as members, whom he reveals as sent of
God to be our head, and so with him to become one Christ mystical; thus our
minds by faith are moved to close with him by apprehending, knowing and
acknowledging him to be our head, our wills by choosing him, and yielding to
him as head, and our hearts by faith also cleaving to him as head, in loving,
fearing, and delighting in him; thus by consent of faith are we brought to
union with Christ, and thereby to communion in all his fullness; whence we draw
from his death that fruit which his death does yield, and from his
resurrection, that good which it carries for us; and in a word, from him thus
we have grace for grace: as the graft sucks out the juice and fatness of the
good Olive.

2. In answering to the Spirits work of revelation, faith is serviceable,
which faith does and indeed only can do by making evident and real to the
soul, what the Spirit by the word reveals: Now indeed the greatest works of
the Gospel on men's hearts are effected by revelation, the Gospels light has a
mighty influence upon all saving effects, Nothing of grace is wrought in a
soul but by light, this works life and all to men. To the present case, the
Spirit reveals Jesus Christ the complete salvation to his people, his death
the plague of their sin, his resurrection the cause of their life to God, and
therefore a necessity of dying and living with him; this revelation being made
evident and real by faith unto a soul, becomes not a Platonicall Idea, or
vain speculation, but an over-powering truth, working it self into the heart
and moulding it into its own likeness of death or life. The power of such
revelation is eminently averred by a mighty Apostle, that was once a bitter
enemy to the Gospel, yet thus he speaks, Gal. 1.15.
When it pleased God to reveal his Sonue in me, immediately I conferred not
with flesh and blood; It was so powerful, being evidenced by faith, that it
presently takes him from all carnal considerations, knits him so fast to
Christ, that flesh and blood can never take him off; somewhat like that fiery
charret that separated Elijah from Elisha, and took him unto God: indeed such
fire there is as well as light, in these revelations realized by faith. And
that this is faiths serviceable work to the Spirit so to evidence is clear
enough, when it is styled the Evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1.
faith will convince, when no light else can move: The Spirit of revelation
therefore meeting with faith, Ephesians. 1.17.19.
leaves great and mighty works upon that soul, no less than the might of the
power of God revealed to them can effect. Such is that in the present instance,
when the Spirit revealing and faith evidencing the death of Christ to be sins
destruction, the soul is hereby lest dead unto sin. Let faith therefore work
upon this revelation to evidence it, that the mind may discern it, and heart
rest upon it, the life of sin will surely fall, as the hearts of Israel at the
sight of Goliath, or as the man dies at the piercing of the Cockatrices eye.

3. Faith serves the Spirit to bring in the vertnes of Christ upon the soul,
in answering its application and direction concerning this matter, by receiving
one and obeying the other, which being fitted for this instrument, none but
faith can answer. It has been declared before that the maine work of bringing
christ and his excellencies into the soul, is upon the hand of Gods mighty
Spirit; This unites to him, and reveals the force of him, and by its
spiritual energie gives or applies him entirely for life, and every piece of
him for the several effects of grace, with command so to receive him, and
expect the revealed force or virtue from him; Now nothing but faith can suit
the answer, this only receives what the Spirit gives, and obeyes what the
Spirit commands, and so doing makes the soul have actual experience of all
that good of Christ ministered by his Spirit; So that the obedientiall act of
faith in receiving Christ as he is given, in eying of him, and depending on
him, as the only salvation of his people, is the only way of faith to draw
salvation from him. So the like work of faith upon his death, to evidence it
the only baine of sin in our flesh, so to receive it in mind and will and
heart, and rest on it only for this effect, is the way to find the desired
issue, even the death of sin in our flesh. To them therefore who are puzzeld
with that question, How faith should draw virtue out of Christ or his death, I
should only reply, (premising that union with him, and evidence of him
forespoken) it is by an obedientiall receiving the truth of him, and resting on
it to be made good by the Spirit of promise, upon which reception all the
benefits of person, death and life, are conferred by the arm of God upon that
soul. If God send this word to Naaman, 2 Kings 5.10.
Go wash in Jordan seven times, and be clean; though the water in it self
had no more virtue to heal his leprosi^, than another, yet upon his
obedience, He that commanded did effect it; Or a little more near the case, God
commands Moses, when the people were bitten with the fiery Serpents, Number. 21.8,
9.
to make a brazen Serpent, and set it upon a Pole, with express word, that if
any bitten should look up unto it, he should be healed and live: If any now
shall ask, how did their looking to the brass, draw virtue for their
recovery? No satisfaction can be given but this, their obedience being therein
testified, God fell not short of his word, he healed, while they were looking.
Our Lord himself applies this to our present case, Joh 3 14, 15.
As Moses lift up the Serpent in the Wilderness, so must the Son of Man be
lifted up, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life: As eying the brazen Serpent, healed the fiery bite, so
looking upon Christ lifted up, crucified and dying, heales the poisonous bite
of that old Serpent, and the sting of sin, that the soul shall not perish by
it, but live. Some difference there is here in the objects, for power indeed is
in Christ to kill up fin, no virtue in the brass it self to heal the
Serpents bite; but the acts are of the sa^e force, for looking there and
believing here, were both Gods ordinance, to the obedience whereof the effect
is made sure by God himself: so is all the glory of Christ made over to the
obedience of faith, the very receiving of him given, and the looking on him,
and resting in him for the effecting of all grace in us. The prerogative and
nature of Sons is assured upon this believing, Ioh. 1.12.
As many as received him, to them he gave power or privilege to become the
Sons of God: Only in this obedientiall receiving of him by faith, we must
consider these Rules.

1. To look unto him with a single eye of faith; as he is revealed the only
salvation of his Church, and his death the only plague of sin, so must faith
only eye him for salvation, and his death to kill sin by it; No other looking
but the brazen Serpent only could prevent death; Consideration of ways,
humbling soul with fasting, circumspection, and watchfulness, are a good way
of diet, for removing sins strength and recovering the health of God, but diet
may not be used for medicine, that which only can kill sin in us is the death
of Christ, unto this only must we look for our cure, and no other way: And
this one eye has like force with that of the Spouse, Ca^t 4.9.
to ravish the heart of Christ, and pull any virtue that is in him for the
help of the poor soul; sin dies while it looks to the death of Christ only,
expecting the likeness of it, or the suitable effect thereof to be produced in
the soul.

2. It must be a full eye of Faith also, that receives this virtue from
Christ; that is, Faith gathering it is full force, turning all the thoughts of
the mind, all the purposes and resolutions of the will, and all the affections
of the heart to close with Christ in his dying, and to draw virtue thence
conformable thereunto, even death to sin; such an ey, when all the spirits in
the soul give their joint influence unto it, must needs have a piercing sight;
such as Christ must, and will yield unto: with such a full Spirit of Faith came
that woman to touch the hem of Christ's garment, and sutably drew virtue out of
him for stopping the issue of blood; Neither was it properly her drawing
against the knowledge and will of Christ, Mat. 9.21.
that did this, but his free giving out virtue from himself unto that full
Faith, which made her say: If I may but touch his garment, I shall be whole.

3. It must be a fast ned waiting eye of Faith, unto which this grace is vouch
safed, unset led; wandering eyes, now off, now on, draw little knowledge, or any
good else from their objects; the fixed look is that, which turns Christ unto
it; believing to the end, will certainly make the effect to come. Such a fixed
ear and eye of Faith, had that poor Criple, that attended on Paul so
int^ntively and firmly, that he drew back the Apostles eyes steadfastly upon
him, Act. 14.9, 10.
who perceiving he had Faith to be healed, that is, Faith every way
proportioned to receive an healing, said with a loud voice, Stand upright on
thy feet: and he leaped and walked: single, full and constant believing cannot
go off from Christ empty, but while men are so beholding him in death or life,
they shall be changed into the same Image from glory to glory, from one step of
excellency to another, in sins ruin, and graces reviving, by the Lord the
Spirit: Faith only looks, and the Lord-spirit works all effects of grace upon
poor souls, whilst they are so earnestly looking for good from Christ.
According to their Faith, so the Lord dealt graci^usly with the blind, and
deaf, and lame, and sick, they believed for all, and he performed all for
them, and gave eyes and ears, and limbs and health to Faith, while it eyed and
received him. Thus far is that way, that only way declared of taking out the
sting of afflictions by faith's working upon the death of Christ, which done,
the torment of the scourge is allayed, and then may the soul sit close to it is
exercise, even give glory to God in the fires, and thereby bring home the full
desired fruit of peace and righteousness to themselves.

SECT. X. A second direction to enable Christians for exercise under the Rod.
2. TO those poor souls, that in the valleys of trouble, hemmed in with
unpassable hills upon every side, would sit close to work without distraction,
my counsel is, that they earnestly and singly eye the Spirit of the Rod, to
draw that out, and not so much pore upon the grosser part of it, which is
nothing but smart upon the flesh; This Spirit of the Rod is lenitive for the
pain, active for the work which concerns a chastened soul; The grosser parts
of unsavory herbs may be bitter, and invalid, or dull to give out their virtue,
yet the spirit of these may be sweet, and operative for special ends, being
rightly extracted. It is very true in the present, the more sensible and
carnal part of the Rod is irksome and ineffectuall of it self for good, but
the more invisible and spiritual part of it is most pleasant, full of energy,
and virtue to make the soul live above affliction, and according to God to
labor in it. This is a mystery, (but a great truth) as there is a spirit in
the word Covenant, so there is in the Rod of the Covenant, one and the same is
the very soul of the Rod, as is also of the Word, without which the Word is
but a dead letter, and the Rod but a dry stick; but with it, Word and Rod are
not only God^ power to awaken, Vna cademque manus vulnus opemq^ tul^t.
wound, afflict and kill toward sin, but to quicken, heal, comfort, and
strengthen in all duties toward Christ. Two things at least will be inquired
concerning this, which I shall resolve, and then leave this direction to
Christian practice.

1. What is this spirit of the Rod? Quest. 1.


2. Where is this especially to be eyed, and whence procured? Quest. 2.


To the first; Answ. 1.
In short this Spirit is that divine power or spiritual energy and virtue
secretly put forth in the Rod, by the Lord himself, to bring his purpose to
pass by it, what ever he intends for the good of his children: As for the Rod,
take it by it self, of what kind soever it be, it is of a smarting, vexing,
angring quality, when it meets with flesh, and stirs up corruption against it
self, as it falls out, but subdues it not; It is this Spirit, the very soul of
chastening, that overpowers sin by it, and quickens, and rectifies, and
strengthens the chastened ones for their present work; This in short is no
other, than the awakening power, the awing power, the convincing power, the
softning power, and reforming power of the Rod over the flesh; whoever have
experience of this, they are put in, not beaten off from present duty under
afflictions. The being of such a Spirit is demonstrable, as well by divine
revelation, as by real effects from the execution of the Rod.

1. It is revealed, 1 Pet. 4.14.
that together with fiery and wasting trialls there is a Spirit of Glory and of
God given to the Saint; that is, a mighty excelling power, that shall master
and overruled all sufferings, reproaches, scorchings that may befall them, and
make them so to live above pain, as to glorify God, in the midst of torments;
This is the spirit of the Rod, intayl'd on it, for them that shall be heirs of
salvation, which shallinable them to present duties, and smart shall not turn
them back from a conscionable attendance on their work: this is that only which
overcomes corruption, and caused the Rod to do good and no hurt.

2. The different effects of affliction upon several hearts must conclude this
Spirits presence in one Rod, and it is absence in another; what reason else can
be given, 2 Cor. ^^.11, 12, 13.
that the very same Rod should convert one, and not so much as move another to
any goodness: Manasseh was bound with a Babylonish chain, and affliction was
great upon him in that bondage, no lighter irons were upon Jehoiakim, and
Zedekiah, yet he converted unto God, and accepted, but not they: what may be
the reason of this? Surely the spirit of the iron was upon him by it to press
him unto God, but nothing save Iron upon these to press them under sin. O let
our eyes be then in our afflictions toward this Spirit, that we may gain it;
Surely this will weaken affliction and strengthen us.

But where may this be found, Quest. 2.
and whence is it to be obtained?

For satisfaction unto this also, Answ. 2.
nothing is more clear then the Apostles expostulation, Gal. 3.2
Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith?
Doubtless not by that, but by this; It is true, this is meant of the Spirit of
the Covenant, which same also is the spirit of the Rod by gracious dispensation
annexed to it; This is not parchased by any labor or work of ours, but by the
hearing of Faith; that is, by that doctrine or word of promise (here opposed to
the Law) which Faith hears and receives: so that no Spirit or divine power
from God tending to life, is any where to be found but in the promise, nor from
any place to be expected, but from the Word of Grace. The former expression
notes both term whence, that is, the promise; and means whereby this Spirit is
drawn forth, and that is Faith; the word of Grace carries in it this power,
and Faith is the only instrument to work it out. Such promises as these are as
the treasuries of the Spirit; whence variety of power is given out to the
chastened and believing soul. Hos. 5.15.
In their affliction they will, or indeed, they shall seek me early; for the
form of words is promissory, and here is a Spirit or power given out to by
ass the soul in afflictions unto God, and to speed it too in seeking early
in the morning after him; and so it appeared in the effect, Hos. 6.1. Isa.
43.2, 3.
when immediately they call upon each other: Come, let us return unto the Lord;
so again it is promised, When thou passest through the waters, I will be with
thee, and through the rivers, they shall not over slow thee, when thou walk
through the fi^e, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon
thee: For I am the Lord thy God, etc. Here lies the securing spirit, and the
preserving power for the Saints in the house of affliction, that may make them
sit and sing, and work securely; God gives it out from himself in his promise
to them, Z^ch. 1^.4.
and Faith must receive. Yet further, I will bring a third part, (that is, his
chosen remuant) through the fire, and will r^fine them as silver is refined,
and will try them as gold is tried; They shall call on my Name and I will hear
them; I will say it is my people, and they shall say the Lord is my God; See
here the trying, refining, spirit, working in the fires upon poor souls, yea,
the covenanting, closing, obedient spirit, that through all chastenings knits
the soul closer unto God; Let faith now work thoroughly upon these promises, it
will engage the power and Spirit of the Lord, to refine and fit the soul for
God, and to unite it with him. It is evident what this Spirit is, and where to
be obtained: Obedience to this direction is now required; eye more the spirit
of the rod by faith, than the smart by sense; this will be the benefit, the
stick of the rod cannot so much disturb, as the spirit setles, nor that so
much grieve, as this does comfort, nor that so much weaken from work, as this
does strengthen to it; for Spirit is stronger than flesh in any kind; and in
this is given out of God to overpower affliction, that it should not hurt or
hinder, but help and further them in the way to glory: Gain this Spirit, and
thou can not be lost under the rod.

SECT. XI. A third direction.
3. TO the soul that would be industrious in keeping close to this spiritual
exercise under chastening, the last word that I should give for help is, To eye
the Mediator of the rod, and make sure of him to be siding with it. Jesus the
Son of God the Mediator of the Covenant, mediates also for his in respect of
the rod, to make this work together with that, for the eternal good and
comfort of his chosen; There is no passage of providence from God to us, but it
comes through the hand of a Mediator; 1 Cor. 8.6.
All things are therefore said to be by him, and among those all, chastenings
of his people must fall in; O sweet and blessed rod that falls upon any poor
soul, through its Mediators hand; it cannot be evil, but good unto him. The
very notion of a Mediator is full of sweetness; Some smattering light of this,
that it is best to have to do with God through a Mediator, some of the
Gentiles had, Heroes, Damoues, Deastra, Mediantes dignitates notans.
for which in their way they canonized such as they conceived to be Heroical
Spirits while they lived, to be the Favorites of the High-gods when they died,
by whom they expected to draw down some favors upon themselves. But the true
light of God gives us to know, one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things,
and we by him, one Lord Mediator indeed, Jehovah is in him, fullness and
goodness of being, and that (quatenus) in the very respect of Mediatorship,
that by Mediation he might bring down all from the highest God to the lowest
creature: Now put what you will into the hand and power of a Mediator, it must
turn to good unto them, for whom he has undertaken this Mediation; His hand
intends nothing else but help to the weaker part, for whom he mediates, as it
obtaines nothing but grace from the mighty God, to whom he ministers for them.
Take we this instance; Nothing could be more contrary and hurtful to Man a
sinner than the Law, that found him guilty, and accordingly cursed him to
death; Gal. 3.19. (...).
yet this ordained in the hand of a Mediator, though but an Earthly one, must
be revealed with Evangelicall purposes; the hand or Ministry of a Mediator,
must needs be gracious; how much more the hand of that heavenly Mediator,
wherein is power and grace it self (more than commonly ministerial) can and
will turn all within its reach, scourgings themselves to the comfort of Gods
chastened ones? Now nothing clearer than this, that the rod as well as Covenant
is in his hand, therefore overruled, and tempered by him for the afflicteds
comfort: He commands the spirit of the rod, and he takes out the sting of it.
Ravish him with the piercings of the single eye of faith, and you are sure of
him your Mediator, and he sure so to order afflictions for good, that they
shall not press you out of your working frame. Two special mediating helps
are observable.

1. The Mediator steps in between wrath and us, to interdict that; no fury nor
effects of it, can issue from God upon the people of Mediation; he suffers
nothing but love to proceed toward them, and if that love bring the rod to try
or purge, he yet again interposeth, either to hold off the smart, or to allay
it that it shall not distract: no affliction comes but he sweetens and meekens
it. The rage of man could not aggravate a torment more, Dan. 3.19, 26, 27.
than that proud Monarch did in his seven times overheated furnace, for those
three valiant Confessors of the true God; yet thrown in and coming out, the
smell of fire was not upon them, nor a finge upon their clothes. How came this
to pass? There was a fourth went in with them, and stood betwixt them and
harm, the Son of God, whose hand mastered and cooled the fire; The Mediator
sweetens the Cross.

2. The Mediator as he steps in against the rod, so for us, as to allay the
bitterness of that, so to strengthen our weakness for bearing the remaining
smart. It is mavelous that a creature should do and suffer that so
triumphingly, which the Apostle professes of himself; Phil. 4.11, 12, 13.
I have learned in what ever state I am, therewith to be content. He was able
contentedly to go on in his work, under the hardest condition, not content
only with a little, but whether he have any thing or nothing, it is all one
with him, he has sufficiency within him; He can be abashed, and be hungry, and
suffer need, and nothing turns him out of his biasse to the work of God. How
comes he to be so unshaken? He tells us, I can do all things thorough Christ
that strengthens me. It was the Mediator that supported, putting his own neck
into the yoke, and his own shoulder to the burden, that it might not
over-charge this poor soul. Let us eye him, and overcome him by looking in
faith to him as Mediator; he cannot deny but he will do for us likewise. With
a careful eye to these directions, we may reach the mark that is set before
us, even in the midst of roaring Seas, tumultuous pressures, scorching fires,
and heartbreaking burdens, to give glory unto God, our blessing shall not then
be far behind the fruit of righteousness and peace, with abundant following
consolations.

SECT. XII. Consolations issuing from the precedent Truth.
AS the Consolations of Christ are sweet and many, in variety of conditions,
so in none more sweet and abundant, than in the state of sufferings; the
abundance of these brings forth plenty of them. It is worth our view to see
what store of them, the disposition of the rod with its appendents in the
present truth, sends forth to Gods afflicted; It will be very injurious to hide
them from the exercised wrastlers under Gods rod, seeing he has ordained them
for such; though perhaps they may receive a pinch upon the thigh, that makes
them halt, yet they shall not go away without a blessing; Though God whip
them, yet will he bless them. Every word in the Text speaks comfort unto
these, and no man may take it from them.

1. The hand of love that chastens, as a Father cheers up the souls laboring
in the furnace; Faint not poor heart, when thou art rebuked, my dear, my
darling, the child of my delights art thou; Jer. 31, 20.
I remember thee when I speak against thee, every stroke goes to my heart, my
bowels are troubled for thee, and I will surely have mercy on thee. I delight
not to afflict, but now it is needful, because I love I chasten you, and
chasten that I may save you; Rev. 3.19.
better chastened than condemned; Let not sorrow over-lay your hearts, God-love
cannot afflict his seed for evil.

2. The rod it self that smites them, speaks nothing but good unto them; scare
not, thou tossed and afflicted soul, Psalm. 23.4.
behold I will comfort thee: although I smart and wound the flesh, yet it is
but to heal the Spirit, my commission is to awaken, not to stun thee, to kill
thy sin, not to hurt thy soul, to refine and not consume thee, to take away
thy dross, and make thy gold more glorious. Lift up thy head, I am from God on
thy side, to save not to destroy; Love has sent me, to check sin, and spur on
grace, to turn thee out of the ways of death, and keep thee in the paths of
life; Had not I come, how many lusts would have preyed upon thee? How many
deaths might have devoured thee? How would hell have striven to swallow thee? I
am Gods Scepter to overpower thee, as well as his rod to discipline and guide
thee to heaven. Be not disconsolate.

3. The work it self, though hard and irksome in the very fires, yet yields
sweet comforting suggestions to the chastened and exercised soul. Three
grounds of consolation at least may hence be presented, to encourage the
afflicted heart.

1. There is life above affliction, when the rod hinders not from motion unto
God: Miserable he that can neither set hand to work, nor feet to walk in the
valley of trouble; but blessed, whose heart is not fallen, nor turned aside from
the work of God, amidst all blusters: Happy Job that could give glory by
believing unto God, Job 13.15.
though he should kill him.

2. There is strength of grace in that soul, which can so master the rod, as
not to be disquieted by it from its appointed work: As it argues small
strength for the heart to faint in the day of affliction, so it no less
evidenceth great power not to be shaken.

3. There is a reward certainly following after, and that a sweet and full one.
Jer. 31.16.
It was Rachels consolation, Refrain thine eyes from tears, thy work shall
be rewarded. No worse the issue of all Gods chastenings; It is sweet to live
the life of God above afflictions; It is honorable to be of the Worthies, and
mighty ones of God, to do excellently; Its greatest gain to have Gods
reward; Himself is the return; I am thy Shield, Genesis 15.1^.
and thy exceeding great reward, was his word to traveling Abraham; and no
less his voice to the souls laboring faithfully under his rod. Be comforted
then ye chastened of the Lord, life and honor and riches are yours, if God can
satisfy you; your work shall be well rewarded, then be comforted.

4. The promised end and certain issue both of the fathers scourging, and of
thy laborious exercise under the rod, conclude infallibly sweet consolation to
thy soul: Three expressions in the text which carry in them the gain of
affliction, are very cordial, and worth applying to the heavy heart.

1. Fruit is intailed upon Gods rod, and thy work; which issuing from God in
this line, is a notion of good and not of evil, and sounds abundance, and not
scanty measure of this sweet, that does arise from bitter; It is some comfort
to know a man's end shall be good, though his beginning and way be dark and
evil. Woe to him whose good shall end in evil, and joy in sorrow, but blessed
he whose sorrow shall be turned to joy, and tears finished in laughing: Good,
much good is reserved for thee in the latter end, thou afflicted of the Lord;
doubled sweet had Job for all his sour, and so shall thou, Job 42.12.
let not present sorrow swallow up thy hopeful comforts.

2. Righteousness, the special kind of this fruit, if serious thoughts work
on it, must enlarge thy heart, and heighten thy joy against all smart, whatever
it cost thee: It is of the kind of spiritual and heavenly good, not low,
visible and earthy, all which must perish: This is a piece of Gods holiness,
whereof by chastening he intends to make us sharers with himself; this is
fruit, this is good indeed: This heavenly rectitude helped on in man's heart by
chastenings, is the face or Image of God in a mirror, the divine nature
carrying in it the whole Set of Graces, answering to the Graces of Christ, and
Attributes of God; none so near God as these in reality of nature, and dignity
of place; These are in the Spirits expresses, the heavenly Gold, Pearls,
Diamonds, Agats, Carbuncles, Rubies, etc. Blessed soul that is fraught with
such riches! what will one scruple of saving faith, of true holiness, etc. be
worth, when God comes to seek his Jewels? Beggarly world shall then be shut
out, no worth in the Gold of Havilah or Ophir, only excellency will be in the
Gold of Heaven, a little righteousness more worth then a world, and thou,
poor chastened of the Lord, shall have fruit, a whole crop, and abundance of
this, whilst thou labourest in the fires to glorify the Lord; He will enrich,
and honor, and comfort thee.

3. If there be not good enough in that heavenly kind of fruit to comfort
thee, (excellent, because it is righteousness, the face of God, a spark from
heaven) take in it is adjunct or sweet associate Peace, that clings unto, and
kisseth the righteous soul. This is the blessing that cannot be denied thee,
thou chastened of the Lord, Peace be unto thee: The Lord himself speaks it
unto thee, John 14.27.
the God of Peace; Christ bequeathes it, the Prince of Peace, My peace I leave
with you, my peace I give unto you, even to his troubled and afflicted
Disciples; and the Spirit of peace seals it upon your hearts, designed the
only Comforter in Christ's stead to be always present, quieting and comforting
the hearts of his distressed members: Nay, the Rod it self speaks peace, and
not evil; nay, if thou will look up and see the goodness of God in his
scourge, thy heart must, and shall say truly, It is peace, God smiles on me
whilst he whips me, my smart is allayed, my fears are gone; perfect love
shines forth in chastening, Why should I be afraid? God ownes and holds me,
though his hand be heavy upon me; he calls me darling, child of his
delights, when he seems to cast me off; he rebukes me indeed sharply, yet he
remembers me; he strikes, yet his bowels are troubled for me; he has
afflicted, but he will sure have mercy on me; I will therefore cheerfully
bear his hand, because it is good, and comfort my self in my sorrows, and
sing to my God in the very fires; for the fruit of righteousness and peace
shall be with me for ever. My God and Father says so, my Redeemer says so, my
Comforter says so, yea, my afflictions say so, and therefore my heart is
persuaded to assent, and say, Surely it is so: Peace is my solace in the midst
of sufferings, though the world see it not; Consider, and be comforted, ye
chastened ones.

SECT. XIII. Cases arising from the premises resolved.
AGainst closing with these comfortable considerations, I know the troubled
hearts of Gods dearest are dissuaded, and that upon some seeming ground of
reason, which, unless removed, must make their conditions comfortless, and
their burdens doubly burthen-some. Let us hear then what they can say, and
weigh that strength of pretended reason, to see if it be forcible to keep out
comfort in this condition, if not, to take it out of the way, that it may
perplex no more.

1. Case 1.
Our soul refuses comfort, and concludes nothing but wrath from God in it is
affliction, being moved thereunto from the greatness of the evil lying upon
the flesh. It argues like Gideon, my misery is too great, to admit a dram of
love or mercy in it; As he to the Angel, J^dg. 6.13.
If the Lord be with us, why then is all this befalne us? No, no, God cannot be
favorably with a people in such extremities as are b^falne us; Never say the
Lord is with me, or upon my side: or like that widow-Jerusalem, Lam. 1.12.
Was ever any sorrow like unto my sorrow? therefore a token of the day of Gods
fierce anger, and who can comfort against this?

Surely none can bear up when God pulls down, Answ.
nor comfort, when he speaks displeasure; if he be not graciously present with
poor souls in their afflictions, no reason indeed is there at all to be
comforted; The inference is good thus far; but stay now, Does the greatness of
our outward evil argue infallibly, the absence of Gods love, or the presence
of his wrath? This is the question, which to take for granted, is a great
mistake, the Negative part of it is Gods known Truth, otherwise cast Job, and
David, and Jeremiah, yea, the Son of God in the flesh, (whom it pleased the
Father to bruise or grind with grief; so that his evils named him the Man of
sorrows) out of the number of his darlings: For in the generations of men, who
have felt heavier strokes, or more bitter pangs in body or spirit? yet the Lord
was with all these, and though he grievously afflicted, yet he hated them not;
his love and pity was with his holy ones. To satisfy this case, three
evidences of Gods love I shall show always with his in their greatest
distresses, which will sufficiently evince, that the greatness of outward
evil is not inconsistent with his love toward his chastened ones.

1. His temperance always observed in afflicting or chastening his own; It is
true, wrath in taking vengeance does over-match, and over-beare the power of
the creature; who can stand when he is angry? who can dwell with everlasting
burnings? Alas, not one, no not one among poor creatures: but love in
chastening does support; Grace metes out affliction to the strength of the
poor soul, and supplies strength to the measure of affliction. Let me in Gods
stead challenge all the generations of the righteous, from Adam unto this day,
produce aninstance if you can; did ever God over-match the spi^its of his
people in chastening? No, he will not, he cannot; for he cannot deny himself,
and of him it is spoken in the everlasting Truth, God is faithful, 1 Cor.
10.13.
who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able. It was his word
to Jacob, Jer. 30.11. Jer. 40.28.
I will corvect thee in measure, yet will I not cut thee off utterly; or, not
altogether leave thee unpunished. I conclude then hence, the greatest
affliction on Gods children is so tempered, that it exceeds not their strength;
therefore very consistent with his love, which alone tempers the Rod so sweetly
for them.

2. The presence of his Grace constantly with them in their sufferings at the
greatest, must evince his love, and not his hatred; would the God of heaven be
familiar with any soul in any condition whom he does not affect? This cannot
be; It is a translation of ours, which admitted, describes the neernesse of God
unto his chastened, or if not, it is a true Paraphrase of the letter; Isa.
63.19. Inchotib no^ (...) in Rec. ejus (...).
in all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved
them. There is one Particle in this clause that by variety of pointing, has a
very different signification; one way it is a Relative, he, or his, as our
translators read it, In all their affliction was his affliction, or he
afflicted, as before; but the other way, it is a mere Negative, and so read
here, makes this sense, In all their afflictions, was no affliction to them;
and indeed how could there, if he bore the burden, and took the affliction to
himself, as the former reading expresses? and this is warranted from the
sequel, The Angel of his presence, or of his face (which must needs carry
favor in it) saved them. It was the Messenger or Angel then, who could carry
Gods face or presence to the afflicted Church, by whose presence they were so
saved, that affliction became no affliction to them: And this in Christ is not
for the chastened Jew only, but for the Gentile also. Greater evils on the
flesh cannot be, than sword, famine, pestilence, desolation in great part, yet
in these was the presence of the Lord so to diminish, that they became no
afflictions; Gods saving presence is the undeniable evidence of his love; but
greatness of evil, not of his fury, unless absolute, and overpressing
creatures to perdition.

3. In the greatest pressure of his Saints, as God tempers the rod, and
sweetens it with his presence, so perpetually does he make it easy to them by
his assistance; and will God assist, where he does not love? It is the great
consolation which God gives unto his Church, Isa. 41.14.
Fear not, thou worm Jacob (thou worm-Church that lie in harms way under
every man's foot) nor ye men, or indeed dead men of Israel, (so oppressed, as
even past hope of life,) why should not these fear? who more in danger, or
less able to resist than the worm? who more hopeless than the dead? yet
fear not, for I will help thee, says the Lord, and thy Redeemer, the Holy one
of Israel. So theu where God helps he loves; but his help is not withdrawn from
greatest troubles; cast not then away your comforts upon this ground; God does
help his people at hardest straights, and therefore must needs love them in
their greatest miseries.

2. Case 2.
Another of Gods chastened, though he can bear up against a brunt, be it
never so great, yet repetition of evils, and frequency of bitter scourgings are
ready to kill the heart of him; so that his cry is this: God has set me as his
mark to shoot at, he breaks me with breach upon breach, from morning to evening
he is making an end of me; one blow follows another; if God did love in
chastening, his rod would not be so often upon my back; his hand is stretched
out first on goods, and then on name, and then on children, and then upon my
flesh, Gods frequent strokes strike off my comfort: This was Jobs weariness
sometimes, that made him bitterly complain.

And is all this sufficient to expunge Gods love from comforting his chastened
in their pains? Answ.
I must determine contrary; Frequency in scourging is no sure argument of Gods
wrath against his own. One or two instances will clear this, that we may
proceed: The sweet Psalmist was a tender one in Gods eye, yet hear him tell
how severely God uses him beyond his very slaves, the wicked of the world;
They, says he, prosper in the world, they increase in riches etc. But all the
day long have I been plagued and chastened every morning, or my rebuke and
chastisement was in the mornings, that is, every morning, or morning after
morning; as if he had said, I was as sure to be rebuked and whipped by God every
morning as I did rise; And this began to shake him also into perverse
conclusions, he was saying, Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, but that
he should therein have sinned against the generation of Gods children, with
whom such was his custom to deal; therefore no argument to conclude a child of
wrath. Number the days of sorrow upon Gods own Son, from the Manger to the
Grave, and stifle this objection: Nay, rather conclude good then evil from
frequent chastenings; These sweet benefits intended in, and effected by them
are forcible for that purpose.

1. The often and daily awakening of the soul hereby upon sins the weakening
of it, and bars against it; this is no sign of God, Isa. 50.4, 5.
hatred to his people: He wakeneth me morning by morning, was the Prophets
note; and what the issue? He wakened, and opened mine ear, and I was not
rebellious, neither turned away back: blessed Rod that keeps from sleep in
sin, the more blessed, the oftener it comes: It wakes the soul, nay, more, it
wakens sin; death and sin get more strength the more one sleeps in them, and
still are weakened, when the soul awakes and is in lightened; affliction wears
out the flesh, and so consumes the sin that lives in it, 2 Cor. 4.16.
when ordered by that sin-killing spirit, no wrath but love in this, sin should
decay with flesh, that spirit and grace may thrive: Yea farther, every Rod is a
bar against sin, and every affliction a thorn-hedge, Hos. 2.6.
to keep us in from roving after our enchanting lovers, our lusts that bewitch
us unto hell; who would not suffer any thing to avoid these Charms? Well,
trouble not my soul with this; my God whip me every hour of the day, if
every time thou will quip out sin; I will kiss that Rod every time it comes,
that awakes my soul, and weakens my sin, and bars against perdition.

2. The frequent and daily purging of the soul; cleanness of spirit is a
sweet frame, most like to God; Blackmoores, children of the Aethiopians in the
spiritual notion are most unlike God, and most distastefull to him;
cleanness, I say, not only privative from sin (which is touched in the former)
but positive, noting an absolute purity of spirit, unto which God provokes his
own by his counsels, draws them by his promises, and drives them by his rods:
The blewnesse of the wound cleanses away evil, Prove. 20.30.
and stripes the inward parts of the belly; outward smart may be, and usually
is inward health to Gods own chastened: By sadness of countenance the heart
is made better; that is, the Rod that makes sad, betters the spirit, by the
over-powering hand of grace, that chastens with it; such cleanness found
David, restored to his soul by the Rod, after his defilement with Vriahs blood
and Bathshebas pollution. Peace then, foolish flesh, grumble not against often
chastenings; did not God love thee, he would never take such pains with thee:
away, away repinings; My God, scourge and purge, purge and scourge me, as often
as thou will; cleanse me thoroughly, though thou afflict me hourly: Let me be
clean, though a man of sorrows all my days; then I shall know thou love me.

3. The frequent and daily trial of our graces; know we what this is, we shall
not construe hatred in often chastenings; There is something in this that one
Apostle tells us, 1 Pet. 1.7.
The trial of your Faith is much more precious than gold that perishes,
though it be tried with fire: and another, Jam. 1.2, 3. (...) as much as (...)
Count it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations, variety and so
frequency of afflictions with him is a joyous thing, but why so? Knowing that
the trial of your Faith works patience, etc. The word in both is the same,
and notes an excellent effect upon grace by the trying and discerning power in
afflictions commanded on them: Faith loses nothing by the Furnace, or fiery
trial, but gains rather, and becomes more precious, Faith of proof, Grace
of proof, no violence can pierce or spoil it: And as grace is better then gold
that perishes, so tried grace, proved faith, more precious then the tried
gold, and seven times refined in the fire; and the more tried, still the more
glorious; These advantages grace always get by trialls, more luster, more
purity, and more perfection, to beautify, enrich, and perfect souls. Hear
what one says, It is unto praise, and honor and glory, with respect to God;
and hear the other, It makes us perfect, entire, and wanting nothing: Now who
would not be whipped every day out of wants, and scourged every moment into
integrity and perfection? Nay, who would not be beaten every morning, to
praise, and honor and glory with God? If this be the worst of frequent
chastenings, give glory to God, poor Christian, and comfort thy self, he does
not hate, but mightily love in this; My soul choose this portion, and beg it
from heaven: Try, and refine, and perfect thy graces in me, O my God, and
scourge, and tear, and waste my flesh as pleases thee; This is the dross,
and that the gold most precious.

SECT. XIV. Other Cases answered.
3. YEt more hardly against comfort under the Rod, Case 3.
it is urged by other poor souls; Alas, it perplexeth not me for the
greatness or multitude of my afflictions, says another; my burden is, I
cannot exercise, I cannot work under them, I am so tossed, I can do nothing,
either about heart, or God, or Rod; I can neither pray, nor bear, nor
consider; how shall I be comforted, when all the good of chastning is entailed
upon exercise, and my hands and knees are so feeble, that I can do nothing?

But is it so indeed, Answ.
that such amazement is fallen on thee by the Rod, that thou can do nothing?
What, not pray, nor look unto God that smites thee? In good earnest thou must
be chid, for this is utterly a fault: There is support and not confusion in the
Rod, awakening, not astonishing; and do thou draw this, and not that, to
thine own undoing, and Gods dishonor? Surely, this is thy shame, to eye only
the stunning bitterness, and utterly neglect the reviving sweetness of the
Rod. Yet not to trample upon this dejected soul, whose burden as well as sin
this condition is, and therefore makes he this complaint, and refuses to be
comforted; I shall add but two words of encouragement, and advise, to remove
the difficulty of this Case, which keeps off the soul from comfort in
affliction.

1. Be not yet dismayed, poor soul, there is hope concerning this thing,
though but little action yet appearing; it may be the divine Wisdom would
abase thy pride, and make thee see thy self how low thou art, and therefore
has struck and left thee for a moment without strength; this is his goodness
sometimes, Job 2.13.
and his way to save men: thus Job sat seven days dumb before his friends in
ashes, his grief took away his speech; Yet again consider thy
self-condemning is one piece of work, thy tears and sorrows for thy deadness
another, Jerem. 31.18
suitable for thy condition and pleasing unto God; though thou can not
compass all the work, yet it is some comfort to move a little: yet further God
will give in reviving from his holiness to thy dejected spirit, and set thee
upon thy feet, and lift up thy hands to work, Isa. 57.15.
and through him, yet shall thou labor abundantly, and thy labor shall not be
in vain.

2. Be advised also, to take that course, which may strengthen heart and hands
to the desired exercise; eye therefore not only the grief, but the comfort of
the Rod; not only it is dejecting, but it is supporting virtue; not only the
wounding smart, but the healing sweet that still accompanies; This will be a
cordial consideration against fainting. (...). 27.5.
Add to this the greatest care of laying hold on Gods strength, so shall thou
make and keep peace with him in all estates, and nothing shall offend thee:
Christ is that strength of God, given out to poor believers, what can they not
do in the worst condition through Christ that strengthens them? In short,
strive against fears of future evils, as well as smart of present; cheer up
thy heart, and stir up thy self to work together with Christ, in striving
thou will find greater influence of life from heaven; This is thy duty, in a
careful performance whereof thou will find the surest cure of fears, and
answer to thy doubts; but to this, I must speak in the special use of
chastenings which the Apostle makes hereafter.

4. Case 4.
Yet another stop is put in to keep out comfort from the afflicted soul, It is
the sad complaint of some from the sense of fruitlesnesse under the Rod; Alas,
why should I be comforted in my sorrows when no good comes of all my
sufferings? I am scourged every day, but never the better; If the end of Gods
chastenings be sharing in his holiness, or the fruit of righteousness, I am a
stranger unto God, and these; therefore may I conclude, vengeance has seized
on me from my Judge, not chastening from a father, for I am unholy, and
unrighteous still in the midst of the fires, barren and vile under all the
prunings of God.

Poor soul, Answ.
more to be pitied, because so severe against thy self! But is it all true,
that thou have said, and are there no issues of good from the Rod upon thy
heart? Give me leave a little to search, and try what answer thy spirit in
truth can make to some queries. Tell me, dear Christian, after all thy
scourgings, how are thy thoughts concerning God and Christ, and sin and self?
Truly I think my self the vilest of creatures; I have cause to do so, even as
loathsome as the Devils, and sin I judge to be worse then death and hell it
self; and God I know to be that High and holy One (O that I were like him!)
and Christ I confess the only way to God; O that I could reach him, and by him
move unto the Father! Now pray tell me, are not these right thoughts? Has not
the time been that thou have had harder thoughts of God, and better of thy
self? harsh of Christ, and pleasant concerning sin? Have not thou called
sometimes sweet bitter, and bitter sweet? Is not this the rectitude or
righteousness of God stamped upon thy mind? Is not this a degree of sharing in
his holiness? Tell me then, how is thy heart, how stands thy affections? what
do thou hate, what do thou love, what do thou fear, and what do
thou desire, where is thy delight? Speak Christian; and can thou say
otherwise than thus, surely I would love God, desire after him, and delight in
him; I would fear to grieve, I would hate sin, and abhor my self for ever:
And is not this rectitude in thy affections? and has not the Rod turned thy
heart more this way? Nay, once again tell me, O thou afflicted! which way is
thy face? whither bendest thou in ways and walkings? Is not God thy mark? yea,
I would hit that, and reach him, if I could, but alas, I do not, I cannot, it is
but little, it is but little that my heart or ways are turned to Godward. Yet
a little is worth as much as life: shall we deny any, because we have not all?
Do not so poor soul, lest thou wrong God in denying his grace; acknowledge
this and kiss the rod, so will greater grace appear. But suppose the fruit
were so little, as scarcely visible; yet there is hope, by exercise, waiting
and blessing from heaven, the dry rod may blossom, and bring forth abundantly:
kill not thy self with faithles doubts, with those wretched ones, that say
there is no hope, and therefore conclude no farther labor is here useful, no,
no, there is yet hope in the latter end, the splitting of an oak by storm may
spread the life of it into new sprouts, in stead of killing it; believe,
believe and be established, abide in Christ close, and ye shall bring forth
much fruit to your fathers glory. Cast not then away your comfort.

5. Yet once more the shaking soul replies, and will not be cheered; Case 5.
Alas grant this, some small sparks of righteousness may have a little
kindling, yet there is no warmth or influence in them; if it were
righteousness indeed it would bring peace, but I am sure I have no peace, I
see frowns in Gods face, but no smiles, I find troubles within, but no ease,
heart-akings, no heart-revivings. Were they chastenings of God, they would
bring peace, but they are judgments, they are vengeance, therefore have I
naught but trouble.

I confess this case will prove hardest to satisfy, Answ.
not from the weight of reason, but from the disposition of the creature, that
feels nothing but disquietnesse in the flesh, and therefore concludes nothing
but wrath in its affliction: reason will not satisfy sense, and sense only
undertakes here to judge of peace, no more peace will it grant, but what it
feels, though to the spirit God speak never so much: yet to quiet this heart
too a little, if it will but hear, I shall present these considerations to be
digested, and weighed with the case.

1. Righteousness is the surer and the clearer fruit of chastening, bearing
witness of the love of God in it, Conscientia bona and iniquicta, Bernard.
though peace may seem the sweeter; and yet a conscience may be pure and
troubled; flight from sin, pursuit of holiness shall testify Gods grace in
every rod, though the powers of hell may rack the soul to torture; Psalm.
119.67.71.
keeping word, and learning Gods statutes, is David's evidence of the good of
his affliction, peace is not mentioned. If righteousness appear, be
comforted, though peace be not come.

2. Though peace be inseparably united unto righteousness, and given of God
together, yet are they not always coaetaneous in their existence upon the
heart: The sprouting out of both is reserved for the afterward of the
affliction in the very text; and indeed though sometimes they may rise
together, yet many times long after righteousness, does peace appear in the
soul. It seems to be so in that holy man of God, who in the height of holy
affections wanted the light of Gods countenance, and therein peace, yet thus he
bespeaks himself; Psalm. 42.5.11.
Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me?
hope thou in God; for I shall yet praise him for the help of his countenance;
who is the health of my countenance, and my God. His face or presence is
salvation, and that the health, and cheerfulness of mine, all my peace is
from it, this makes my countenance healthful: and though I see it not now, yet
I will hope, and I shall praise him for it; peace will come. Conclude not then,
dear soul, no grace, because no peace; wait, for it will come, and will not
tarry, abundance of peace to bless thy soul for ever.

3. There is peace upon thee in present, were but thine eyes cleared of tears,
and thy heart of cares, a little to consider, and look toward it. Rev. 3.19.
Can this word fail us, Whom I love Ir^buko and chasten? and can he love and
not be at peace? All this thou do not feel, and therefore wilt not believe:
Faintings oppress thy sense, and sense thy faith, that now thy hands hang
down, and knees be feeble, no strength is left in thee to see the good, the
peace of thy condition: No remedy but this to shake thy self from the dust, to
bestirre thy self to lay hold upon mirth and healing. Strive not against thy
comforts still, but yield thy self to reviving counsels; In this way
righteousness and peace shall meet upon thee, and crown thee, and kiss each
other; Only up and be doing, to make that use of the chastening Providence,
which the Apostle here commends. It is the last general proposed, and now more
strictly to be considered.

The third part of the Treatise.
Concerning the true use of Chastenings, as taught by the Apostle.
Wherefore lift up the hands that hang down, etc.

ver. 12, 13.
SECT. I.
IN these is couched the sweet closing inference from all the former discourse
had with these Christian Hebrews about their patience or suffering for Christ
under the hand of God, which teaches the duties we owe unto, and the true use
that we should make of the chastening providence of our heavenly Father. Two
things are eminently observable.

1. The term of Illation: whereabout also are considerable, 1. The true
premised ground, whence it takes its rise, which is not only the end of
chastening immediately foregoing, but indeed the whole chastening Providence,
with the pieces of it as mentioned in the former part of this Chapter. 2. The
true force of it upon the consequent duties, it lays necessity upon
Christians, To lift up, etc. To make straight or even paths, etc.


2. The matter inferred, which is a double duty upon the chastened, 1.
Encouragement, They must stir up themselves from their sad postures, Lift up
hanging hands and feeble knees. 2. Amendment, They must make crooked, straight,
set themselves to rectify and level their ways to God. And both these I
conceive jointly urged by a double Motive. 1. The danger of the neglect, It
will be greater Apostasy. 2. The benefit of the performance, It will be the
healing of the lame.



I shall take the inference with its force upon the first duty, and after the
resolution of the Metaphorical terms into their proper signification, I shall
conclude in plain terms the first use here enjoined from Gods chastenings.
Two things are obvious in the first duty, both represented in a fit Emblem.

1. The object, Hands hanging down, and knees feeble, like a palsy man.

2. (...). Descriptio hominis inertis guem (...) vocat Hesiodus, Ber. in Text.
(...) d^ eo dicitur cujus manibus nulla industria inest, cujus manus sunt
minime industriae, vel cu^us (...). 1. mambus n^hil roboris inest. Steph. (...)
The Act, which is lifting up, a fit remedy for the foregoing evil. Could I
handsomely present this man to view, with these hanging fallen hands, and these
feeble, loosened, dis-joynted knees, it were a most sweet Emblem of a most sad
and disconsolate condition. Suppose a man either by age, or weakness, or
surpassing pains so worn, wasted, and spirit-fallen, that his hands sink
down, fall from his work, having no strength, and yielding unto death; Or
again look upon an aged palsie-man, or one smitten with astonishment, as
Belshazzar at the handwriting, that his joints are loosed, and knees smite one
against another, what a picture of amazing and confounding sorrow were this?
nothing but fainting and trembling to be seen here, even to the yielding up of
the ghost. And if such be recovered, it must be by stirring, chafing, or
lifting of these fallen members up; himself rousing, his friends about him
supporting, were as fit a resemblance of the comforting part. To speak plainly,
these hands and knees intend no other but fainting and palsy hearts; when
poor souls seem to be over-wrought with affliction, so that as a wing-fallen
bird, they are stopped from motion; strength, spirit, and all even yielding unto
death; the terrors of the Almighty make them sit trembling, and drink up all
their spirits; In this conflict, what creature can hold up? yet this must not
take away our hearts, we must even now lift up such hanging hearts, support
and comfort our spirits in such palsy fits, and strive against our yielding
unto death; by no means must we give way in chastenings to uncomfortable
faintings, but cheer up and revive against the face of death it self;
spiritual liftings up there must be for spiritual faintings, and setting
hearts again in right frame of comfort and reviving for the work of God. This
then hence is the rule for that Christian use we must make of chastenings,
inferred from strong pren^ises. Doct. 3.
Gods chastening providence inf^rceth his children to comfort, and
cheerfulness under all their sufferings. Gods rod of chastening is not
intended to break, and kill, and dash in pieces, but to bind up, revive, and
comfort tender and dejected Spirits; Grief may become us under a Fathers
frown; but dejection and hopeless fainting, the rod it self gainesayeth, and
injoyneth souls to a better use of it for their reviving. The rise of this
rule here is evident, comfort is the duty, the inference lays the injunction,
and the Authority raising it is the chastening providence, with all particulars
specified therein, and declared by the Apostle in his foregoing discourse. Now
for a more fruitful treating on this, these particular quaeries must be
resolved. 1. What is that chastening providence, and wherein it does consist,
that has such influence upon this duty? 2. What is that force, which that
Providence has upon this duty concerning our hearts? 3. What that duty is,
which is with such necessity urged upon Christians from this work of
chastening? The two former will clear and evince the truth the last is
properly the use, which I shall together unfold and press practically upon our
selves, observing the Apostles scope in this place, which is to persuade to
duty, when he had touched the state of it.

SECT. II. Of the nature of Gods chastening Providence, and its force.
TO satisfy the first inquiry, 1. What is Gods chastening Ptovidence. Poslquam
docui^ Deum salut^ nostrae prospicere, dura nos cosligat, inde nos ad
alacritatem hortatur; ^^hilen^m quod n^s magis debilites, adeoque exan^^e^
prorsus quam ^um falsa imaginatione occupati, nullum gratiae Dci gustum hebemus
in rebus adversis. Calv. in Text. Heb. 12.7.
it concerning a peculiar piece of Gods special providence over his own about
their afflictions; this general description may give light enough: Gods
chastening providence is his special care toward his chosen, about the rod or
afflictions here befalling them, to order and dispense them so, that they may
not hurt, but help to bring about all that good which the faithfulness of God in
the Covenant of grace is engaged to do for them. This is a general
representation of that chastening care, which inforceth cheerfulness on Gods
afflicted, so that the Apostle injoyneth therefore or for this cause, lift up
the hands, etc. In this combination several particulars concur, all carrying
in them reviving virtue, that who so suffers in this way has reason to be
cheered.

1. The Author of this sharp discipline, it is God, as the whole foregoing
context declares, and he not only as the Father, but as their Father also in
Christ; he owns the child for his whom he chasteneth, he meddles not with
bastards; It is not a fruitless addition, Ver. 8.
that in the midst of this work he is called the Father of Spirits: These
notions of comfort at least are sweetly held forth in this fountain of
providence. Ver. 9.


1. In this Father must needs be conceived the spring or rise of the childs
being, Psalm. 68.26.
the fountains of Israel gave being to their issuing streams, even their
children; and can there issue from that same spring, any thing to hurt or
destroy the being it gives out? Surely not; but all for maintenance and
perfection of it; God that made his Children will have mercy on them, and not
by rods destroy the works of his own hands. Isa. 57.16.
Nay eye this, he is Father of their Spirits; souls had being from him,
therefore to their comfort and sustenance, he will surely look, when he
afflicts the flesh; and spirits are the fittest receptacles of joy and grief;
the father of them must therefore look unto them, to perfect not impair, to
save and not destroy them by chastenings.

2. In this Father only is the power of chastening over the child; this power
carries in it two significats, Right unto the correcting of a child, and
Strength to manage it; both are in God this Father, whence these reviving
considerations arise. (...), potestas.
1. God will not part with his right, nor give the beloved of his soul into
the hands of the Enemy, that he should have right to punish or afflict; what he
does against Gods children shall be counted greatest injury, and oppression of
Gods people. (...), pote^^^a. Ps. 17.13, 14.
2. God keeps all the power of chastening in his own hand, none can do as he
pleases but God; Now however the wicked may be Gods sword, he leaves not the
sword to hew and slay where it pleases, but gives it the charge, beyond which
it cannot go; now will God use his power and strength to destroy his children?
It is incredible.

3. In this Father is tenderness of bowels eminent toward his chastised ones;
and can a man's bowels be hardened against the fruit of them? Psalm. 103.23.
It cannot be, unles sin make unnatural: Now no Father can pity his child so
as the Lord pitieth them that fear him. Let these notions specify the spring
or Author of all chastening sorrows; how will desperate complaints and
repinings dye? how will virtue spring and issue out, to the great reviving of
Gods humbled, and chastened ones? This is one thing that inforceth the Apostles
Wherefore etc.

2. The Mediator of this providence; 2. Mediator of rod. 1 Cor. 8.6.
for as God has committed all judgment now unto his Son, and governs the
world by a Mediator, so especially all things toward his Church, his rod as
well as his staff is ordered by the hand of Christ unto them: By one Lord
Jesus Christ are all things, that is, for being and preservation of all
events, and we by him, that is, the Church in all its conditions. Now a
Mediator is a notion full of grace, and what ever passage of providence comes
through him, it must savor of grace; as the water of the sulphareous veins of
the earth, or the wine of the perfumed bottle; No rod but gracious can pass
through the hand of Christ. Now to this yet the respect which this Mediator
has to the sufferings of his Clients, carries much life for us; and it is
threefold. 1. He himself is their leader, or foregoing pattern in this hard
way; thus is he set before us to encourage in our following, Look unto Jesus,
Heb. 12.2.
etc. who for the joy that was set before him, etc. He eyed the end, and made
no stop in the way, but endured Cross and despised shame, and then sat down
at the right hand of the throne of God. Its comfort to have a leader in an
uncouth way, but excellent such a one, whose footsteps we may tread safely, and
so reach the desired end.

2. He is a guide as well as leader, he takes us by the hand as well as goes
before us; He is therefore known by those helpful expressions, Eves to the
blind, Ears to the deaf, feet to the lame, hiding place from the heat,
refuge from the storm, and guide to such as walk in darkness, in sad and
disconsolate ways: This is a reviving notion, no darkness falls upon us but by
the Mediator, and he is surely a guide in it.

3. He is a Conqueror over these harsh paths, as well as a guide and leader in
them: It is his word to his Disciples, Joh. 16.33.
In the world ye shall have tribulations, but be of good cheer, I have
overcome the world, yea and all the tribulations of it, therefore Gods children
suffer under nothing but conquered afflictions, and vanquished tribulations;
who would be dejected for these? this also makes the wherefore strong.

3. 3. Care of rod.
The Providence or care it self dispensing and managing these rods, is one
thing more considerable in this combination, to make the inference strong upon
us for the following duty; and it is eminently carried in all those acts of
chastening mentioned before the Text: Now these cordial notions are hence
arising.

1. The perfection of this special care of God, over his children, set out
sweetly in that Emblem of seven eyes of the Lord, Zech. 4.10.
the eye states the providence, it is a seeing, and a foreseeing care for good,
the number argues it is perfection, not one eye, but seven, a perfect number in
the Spirits use: which it pleases the Son of God to demonstrate by it is
effects upon Gods little ones; Mat. 10.30.
the very hairs of your head are all numbered: See the exact care of our
heavenly Father over his afflicted; he tells their hairs, he will see none of
them be missing, not a hair of theirs must fall to the ground, nor the least
hurt betide them by their sufferings: and again, he tells them, as accounting
highly and preciously of them; baser things are not kept by tale, not stones,
but gold and things of price; such are the hairs on the heads of Gods
children; therefore he numbers them, much more their tears, their prayers,
their sighs, their wanderings; should not this make us to lift up?

2. The activity of this sweet care; As God is purely Act it self, and
therefore no passion, or stop from others, can take impression on him: So is
his care about his childrens chastenings active, and always stirring to do
them good by them: It is therefore noted, that the seven eyes of the Lord run
to and fro through the earth; no rest nor stop with this providence, day nor
night, from working good to his children out of these afflictions; This is good.

3. The humility or lowliness of this providence is sweet, it stoopes to
every, the basest, poorest, miserablest condition that may befall Christ's
members; it looks to sores, and issues, and ulcers, and boyles, and stripes,
and wants, and burdens of all sorts that may be upon Gods people: if they be
in the dungeon, it is there, or in the stocks, there it is with them; in fire
or in water, or in mire with Jeremiah, thither stoopes this providence to rule
all these distresses for good. This is the care it self, which strongly
presses the consequence, wherefore, etc.

4. 4. Rule of Rod.
To these the Rule of chastening comes in yet to make the inference the
stronger, and enforce afflicted spirits unto comfort; it is wholly delivered,
according to the intimation in the context, either in counsels of
encouragement, or comforting promises, bearing up against faintings; In sum,
the Covenant of grace takes in all, wherein that excellent goodness and
faithfulness of God revealed may well enjoin to lift up hanging hands and
feeble knees.

5. Reb. 12.10. (...). Romans 8.28. (...).
The last particular in this chastening providence is the end of is, which
expressly is declared to be the profit, good of Gods children, holiness,
righteousness, peace, the very good of grace, and glory, both here and
hereafter to be enjoyed, of which with the former, much has been spoken
before, only here must it be noted, Manus, inquit, remissas habetis, genua
vestra ideo labescunt quia non agnose^t (...) quae vera sit in rebus adversis
consolatio, Calv. n text.
as giving in it is strength with the rest, to persuade Gods chastened unto
cheerfulness, wherefore, even for this end also, as for the rest, lift up the
hands that hang down, etc.

SECT. III. The force of the precedent providence and duty thence concerning
the chastised.
TO the second Quere, what force this chastening providence has upon the
following duty of encouragement in Gods afflicted? (...).
The very term of illation can conclude no less, but that there is a virtue
in that drawing out of this duty by these premises, otherwise weakly must it be
pressed, wherefore lift up, etc. Now we know the Spirit of God argues not
weakly, but upon forcible grounds. In short then, I shall reply, there is a
double force, one of nature and influence, another of reason and consequence
which hence issue out to enforce the chastened to comfort and reviving.

1. There is a power of the several concurrents of this chastening providence,
to give out naturally virtue for refreshing and raising up the heart. As the
sun gives influence to the matter it animates, and therefore it must live,
because it partakes of that quickening power: So no less, nay much more this
highest providence must necessitate the creature to express the influence of
it, and give out it is effect in return of duty, unto which it does incline. Now
in this special consideration of providence about the Rod, both the cause
ordering it, and effect upon the soul produced by chastening, must needs
incline it to receive encouragement. In the Cause we have the Father primarily
putting out in this Rod his power and his love, the Son next to him
Mediator-like, sweetening the Rod, with all the gracio^s fruits of his merit
and intercession, before he will suffer it to be laid on, or to smart upon the
flesh; the Spirit proceeding from both these, whose name is therefore eminently
the Comforter, manageth the Rod, brings all the sweetness of Christ with it to
his members, and effectually so applies the overpowering grace, that it must
needs keep up the soul from fainting, and incline it to sweet and heavenly
refreshing in the very fires. The promise the rule of this providence carries
no less the arm of God to help, and his counsels too are all inabling words
in this matter, Strengthen the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees, say
to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, Fear not. Isa. 35.3^4.
No sooner spoken thus from God by his Spirit, but it is created, and so set in
the station of comfort, unto which God calls the poor soul. In the Effect
also of this providence, which is all the souls profit, the hearts good, and
that evidently effected upon the man, eminently is this force seen, for good,
and nothing but good, of which this is the best here intended, can cheer a
soul, and that must, and will do it, if it be not mistaken; Let me therefore,
in short, thus argue and conclude with our Apostle, Your eyes are opened, and
light presented, therefore you must see; or your ears boared, and voice sent
out, therefore ye must hear; or the the Sun is now in the vernall
Aequinoctiall, therefore the earth must spring, all necessarily follow by
influence imparted. So here as strongly, Gods chastening providence has
sweetly touched you, therefore lift up the hands that hang down, and feeble
knees, be cheerful and revived; ye must be so, if the sweet virtue of that
providence have an influence upon your spirits.

2. To add to this, If strength of reason have force upon a man to persuade him
to any thing, the strongest reason is here, from sweetness of chastening to
draw the afflicted to the duty of reviving. Take a little draught of reasoning,
the Fathers love is in the Rod, therefore should we be comforted, not dejected;
The Mediator sweetens it, therefore should not we faint, but be refreshed; the
Spirit measures it, and sanctifies it, therefore should we be glad under it;
the Promise is the rule of dispensation, and the effect our true and eternal
good, therefore should we be encouraged, and live cheerfully above the smart.
If we be men, here is reason, the strongest reason of God to draw us to
revivings, when we begin to faint: if from ability to duty, and from free and
glorious mercy to duty be a strong way of reasoning, then this must prevail,
God chastens, therefore should we be cheerful, and not let our spirits sink,
when such support is given to hold us up.

To the third Quere then, 3. What is the Duty?
What is the afflicteds duty? it will now be needful to return; we see the
providence chastening, the comfortable considerations therein presented, and
their force to revive and comfort; all the virtue and force of consolation is
upon Gods side, but the duty in the use and application is upon ours; God gives
the reason of our cheerfulness in his work, and we must return performance
answerable in our duty, God gives the life, but we must lift up hands and knees
our selves. But what is this lifting up precisely? Surely it concerns us to
know whose duty it is to do it; It is an expression fitted to the former
metaphor of hanging hands, and palsy knees, however friends may be about
supporting, chasing, cheering these fallen, fainting and dying members, yet the
very patient himself must put forth the strength he has to raise these
diseased parts out of this sad and pining posture, and so strive to dispose
them that the remedies applied may bring forth the defired ease and reviving.
Resolve the precedent doleful Emblem properly into hearts fallen, trembling
and fainting under Gods chaflisement, and this lifting up must note a suitable
work in the chastened for removing this spirit-palsie, and heart-failing. The
notation of the name or word it self, may help in this; it is plainly in it is
proper significate, to erect or set upright in it is place, something
disjoynted, or fallen from it is proper station; we read it used by Christ to
express his cure upon the crooked woman, (...). Luke 13.13.
She was made straight, that is, her parts and members were restored to their
proper place, site and posture, and this was her comfort: So God speaks of the
ruined Tabernacle of David, (...). Act. 15.16.
by way of comfort to his people, I will set it up; that is, put it into it is
right state and frame again. No less here is it a Paraphrase of comfort to the
soul bowed down, and heart infeebled; to lift it up, is to set it in it is
right state and posture toward God, for receiving the comfortable influences
of his chastening providence, which it cannot do while it hangs down, and lies
in it is palsy fits: Now then a right position, or erecting of the heart, that
it may be capable of, and meet with the consolations of God in his scourging
love, is the duty concerning us; when the spirit is set right and even with God
for his revivings, then is head and all lifted up with comfort, when it
declines, or hangs down another way, it swerves from Gods intended refreshings.
The nature, subject and condition of this duty would be known to guide us to
it. First, the nature of this duty, in short, is to dispose our selves by the
help of that gracious influence given out by the spirit of the Rod, to receive
these cordial revivings which the chastening providence has ordered to us:
How unworthy is it, that God should hold out such sweet encouragements to his
chastened children, and they, in a kind of unbelieving discontent, never
regard him? So troubled are they with the smart, that they will not once mind
the sweet of the Rod: This is utterly a fault; therefore let us know Gods Will
in this, and do it.

But how must we do it? Quest.


Plainly thus, by putting out that spiritual strength we have, Answ.
into activity or motion, for setting the heart in the right frame to sure with
the consolations of God; in the Prophets phrase, Isa. 64.7.
by stirring, or rousing up our selves, or David's expression, by calling unto
our spirits in time of fainting and distress, Psalm. 42.5.11.
Why art thou cast down, O my soul? etc. This is our work, to call up, and
stir up our hearts from over-powering dejection to reach to the consolations of
a chastising father held forth in the very Rod. But whereunto should we call or
stir them for attaining this? Even to these duties following, that set them in
a right frame for comfort.

1. To believing, and by Faith, to a single and attentive eyeing of all these
comfortable considerations which the Fathers care disposes in every Rod for
the good of his chastened ones; So to view them, that Faith may make them
evident, which were formerly obscured, under smart of outward evil, and make
them really subject, which to sense seem not to be where they are; and to apply
all, and make them properly our own, which is Faiths peculiar; it does but
touch and take, God himself, and all that God has. It was the ground of the
Prophets complaint, There is none that stirs up himself to take hold of
thee; Isa. 64.7.
What was the reason, they saw Gods face hid from them in their dark and sad
condition, and themselves consumed by the hand or means of their own
iniquities; but they could believe no good in this severe hand of God toward
them; therefore they lie still in their sinking, and will not so much as stir
themselves to take hold of God. This is great dishonor to the holy One. Stir
up our hearts we must to Faith on the comforting part of the Rod, if we would
have them right and set to meet with the revivings of God.

2. To hoping, and waiting for the giving out of these cordials from the
chastising hand; Thus David calls to his soul in his perplexities; Why art
thou disquieted within me, hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, Psalm.
42.11.
who is the health of my countenance and my God. The patient soul shall never
look for help or comfort from God in vain; such hope cannot make the soul
ashamed; O stir up fainting hearts to hope we must; that sweet hand that
scourges, will give out gracious support to that good heart that hops,
activity is our duty in this also.

3. To crying, and earnest supplication to our chastening God, to send out
sweet out of the smart, and meat out of the eater, then we set our selves in a
right posture for receiving mercy, when our drooping hearts are stirred up to
pray, and cry for those gracious discoveries: It was also David's activity,
Psalm. 4.6.
when he wanted the comforts of his God, he falls to crying, Lord, lift thou up
the light of thy countenance upon me; The heart is set upright, when it can
pray under the hardest pressures; and this is duty to pray and cry for comfort:
Though we should be near the shadow of death, yet must we not let our hearts
fall down; It is a dismal fall, to be thrown from prayer; If God hold out so
much sweet comfort in his chastening government, and severest discipline, it is
the least we can do to fetch it out by prayer; Lift we up then our souls to
God, that he may lift up his favor upon us; This is the duty.

2. The subject of this duty is the chastened and dejected soul; they, even
they must rouse up their drooping spirits, and strive for comfort, God gives
the grace, but they must look narrowly to return the duty for their own
reviving; It is all I shall note here, that to them is this spoken, and on them
is only this duty pressed; the afflicted must not be only passive under
comfort, but active for it, lifting up themselves, and putting forward to it.

3. The condition of this duty I shall only touch in the property of the act,
which must needs be here free and voluntary; so that as it becoms the people of
God to be willing in all duties, no less does God expect it from them in this;
that as he is ready and willing to administer his reviving influence unto his
chastened, so they with answerable desire, should set themselves to look for
and receive it: much will in this makes the duty more obediential, and the
effect more sweet and comfortable to the distressed soul; yet from this usually
chastened souls are most averse, altogether unwilling to becomforted; therefore
unto this shall I labor to persuade the^ in the ensuing application of this truth

SECT. IIII. The application of the former point.
THe very name of duty, me things, should be sovereign and binding to them
that make conscience of all duties unto God, Use.
save only this of making after comfort; A fault surely among many, if not most
of Gods chastened, who will pray, because it is duty, and mourn, because it is
duty; and strive to the denial of themselves, to the subduing of all
corruption, because it is duty; and yet move not once themselves toward
comfort, though as necessary a duty as any of the rest. My work therefore now is
to press that obedience to Gods comforting will in his chastenings, which we
acknowledge a duty to his commanding will in all other particulars. If God
intend this in his Rod, not to kill, but to quicken, not to destroy, but save,
not to cast down, but to raise up; and therefore has spirited his Rod to
incline his afflicted to lifting up, and by all the reason of his discipline
ingageth them not to fainting, but to cheering hearts: Let me speak to you for
God, and from God in this matter, Come ye afflicted of the Lord, gird up your
loins, hearken unto me, will ye keep those hearts sad, which God will not
have kept sad? O sin not against God in this, as ye would by no means sin in
other cases; if he say lift up your hands, do not ye hang them down, if he
call to rectifying and strengthening feeble knees, let them not fall into
palsy fits; if he cheer up your hearts under the Rod, do not ye make them
faint through unbelief, and so kill your selves. I need not state the duty
again, what God would have you do in this case. Read over those cordial
considerations in the scourging Providence under which ye lie; set before your
eyes the relation, power and tenderness of a chastening Father, stir up your
selves to hope for, and call out all the sweetness in that Fountain, both of
your being, and of your affliction; view the Mediator of the Rod, and rouse up
your hearts to take hold of him your Pattern, your guide in this uncouth way of
trouble, he will bring you out: Consider the rule of the Rod, it can do no more
hurt than what the promise has in it, for this orders it, and nothing but good
can issue from the Word of promise: or, in a word, look to the end of all your
afflictions, it is righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost; now stir
up your selves, and feed and live upon these comforts, account it your work,
and as naturally a duty as any, to call up your souls out of troubles, to lift
them up in Faith, in Hope, in Prayer to meet the reviving influences of God
given out with the Rod unto you; let me overcome you but in this; that it is
your duty to be comforted as much as to be humbled; and if reason or truth may
prevail, besides the moving considerations in the Text, which I shall press
toward the close of the work, these few convincing grounds I shall lay down in
this place.

1. The command, counsels, and care of God, concerning this comfort to his
afflicted, infallibly evinceth it a duty on their parts to attend on it, and
reach forth unto it. Now, are not these commands, Rejoice in the Lord always,
Phil. 4.14. Jam 1.2. Man. 5 11, 12.
Count it all joy when you fall into diverse temptations; Rejoice, and be
exceeding glad when ye are reviled and persecuted, etc. In all which was
matter of chastening as well as trial, smart that did make sad, as well as a
cause that did support; Counsels are frequent, let not your heart be troubled,
neither let it be afraid, lift up your heads, etc. And the exceeding great care
of God to have this effected, strongly proves, it must not be by them
neglected; two evidences of this care are in sight: First, in providing a
spring of comfort for all cases of distress and dejection among his own
children, Joh. 14.16, 18.26.
therefore h^e sends Christ in the flesh full of consolation, and when he
leaves the flesh, ne procures another comforter, even the holy Spirit, to whom
he designs the office of reviving and comforting every afflicted soul, Tertul.
he comes in Christ's name, and is in Christ's stead to supply his place of
refreshing his grieved members: Will ye then resist the Holy Ghost? as ye do,
while ye refuse to be comforted: Secondly, in providing means and ministry
purposely to bring these consolations of Christ to his afflicted; How does he
call upon his Prophets, Comfort ye, comfort yet my people? Isa. 40.1. Isa.
54.11.
How does he in them call upon his afflicted, O thou afflicted, and tossed with
tempests, and not comforted? And does this care of God call for no care from
you, to see that his end be not frustrated, and your hearts left comfortless?
Reason must convince you, that ye must be like-minded with God, to suffer as
he would have you suffer, and be humbled as he would have you humbled, and be
comforted as he would have you comforted. Now then, if it be your duty, be as
conscionable and careful to dispose your selves for the comforts of God, as
for any other duties to him: So ye must be, if ye deal truly with him, for
as much as this is honor to him as much as any other service. What a reproach
cast ye upon God, to make the world judge, God cannot comfort his people? O
therefore lift up the hands that hang down, and bestirre your selves for
comfort.

2. The comforts of God are not only engagements, but inablings of poor souls
to all other duties expected from them; so that slight these, ye lose your
strength, and become fruitless. It is observable in the delegation of the
Spirit by Christ to be his Churches comforter, the mark therein specially
intended, which is still some main duty or other; for comfort is not given for
it self, but for farther ends thereby attainable; therefore when Christ would
have his disciples know his mind, and keep in remembrance his dictates, his
way is: The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, Joh. 14.26.
he shall teach you all things, and bring them to remembrance: Nothing so
powerfully instructs as comfort; for as much as it revives and ingageth thereby
the heart first unto it self, and so brings the soul with delight to hearken
to the Word made known; and none can surpass that good Disciple, who learnes
Jesus Christ with delight. So when the Lord would have his servants be
faithful and bold in the testimony of him, Joh. 15.26, 27.
or bearing witness of his truth; this is his course to effect it by
consolation, I will send the Comforter to you from the Father, he shall
testify of me, and strengthened by his comforts, Ye also shall bear
witness. Consolations shall constrain you to do that for me, not to leave my
glorious work without witness to the world. Again, If he would have people
convinced of sin in a saving way to melt them, Joh. 16.7, 8.
and to drain their souls from filth, and draw them unto God in himself, this
is his way, If I depart, I will send the Comforter unto you, It is still the
Comforter that he makes use of (a sweet and blessed notion) And when he is
come, he will convince or reprove the world of sin; See the Comforters work,
and if he reprove and make men know their sin, sure it is in a comforting way,
to separate from it, and to lead souls safe unto Christ. Nothing makes sin
appear so exceeding sinful, as comfort presented to a wretched, rebellious,
and disobedient soul; the Comforter, if any, will make them ashamed, and
abhor themselves. It is the method of all the Apostles, to engage, enable,
and fortify souls against hardest oppositions, and for greatest duties, by
the consolations of Christ; 1 Pet. 4.14.
when they would set them above fiery trialls, the C^mfort of the Spirit of
glory, must mount them, and the consolations of Christ harden them against
death it self; as for his own experience, the Apostle labors with his
Corinthians. 1 Cor. 1.3, 4, 5, 6.
Now then, ye afflicted of the Lord, whose strivings of heart are to be h^ly
under the Rod, to search out sin, to hate it, to be fruitful to Christ, to
mortify corruption, to make a good confession of Jesus Christ, to be faithful
to the death; conscience binds you to exact care and watchfulness for these,
and it is well; but how do you think to do these, if you cannot live under the
Rod? or, how do you think to live without comf^^t? I know no way. If it be duty
for a man to labor, it is no less his duty to eat and drink, and refresh
himself, without which long labor he cannot: Nay, with as ardent and strong
desires is he to reach after his refreshings, as his work; the same God
injoynes both equally. Dear Christians, know it then no less your d^ty to
strive after comfort in your saddest state, that must quicken and maintain your
life, than after any office of that life, which God calls for at your hands;
This I must endeavor to persuade it is your duty to reach after comfort, and
set your hearts in a right posture to meet with it; the soul cannot be
profitable to God, that refuses to be comforted by him; O then stir up your
selves by Faith, by Hope, by Prayer to call in the consolations of Christ into
your souls; these will be your strength, and being comforted ye shall work
michtily. The Church cries out for this, Stay me with flagons, comfort me with
apples, for I am sick of love: Support, comfort, and reviving is that she
calls for, the means were fruits cordial and effectual thereunto, as
Pomegranates, or such like; and good measure of these cordial receipts she
cries for; flagons at least; her sickness puts her upon, and not terrifies her
from it, she was sick with love, longing desires to Christ were in her, and
desire not satisfied made her sick, and sickness now makes her call for
comfort, that she may yet be streng th^ned to follow Christ; O do ye likewise,
in all chastisements, whether upon spirit or flesh, rouse up sinking hearts, ye
your selves must heartily make after comfort, unles ye mean foolishly to give
up the ghost, and become dead and unprofitable to God.

3. Ye will be more persuaded, that this is your duty to make after comfort,
if ye do rightly consider, what plots the Devil has to keep you from it;
he knows if he can keep you comfortles, he will make you fruitles, and at last
Apostates from God, as his hope was concerning Job; and he thought he put fair
for it, when he brought him to curse the day of his birth, etc. I would always
conclude this for truth, That from which the Devil drives me, is surely the
duty unto which God draws me. If he for bids me comfort, I will bele^ve that
God commands it. Let me but touch the wiles of this subtle Serpent a little,
which I observe at three states of time. 1. In bringing men into sin; 2. In
keeping men in it: 3. In killing those that do escape it, as much as in him
lies. The first the Apostle notes about Eve, that the Serpent-devill beguiled
her by his subtletie, 2 Cor 11.3. (...). Ephesians. 6.11. (...).
by his sleight of hand, turning every way for his own purpose; he is very
crafty in persuading men into sin. The second he warnes of to the Eohesians,
what wiles, methods, mazes, labyrinths, maeanders he has to puzzle men in sin,
that they should not find the way out; shrewdly guilefull is he this way to
hamper men, as the cunning hunter does his game in the net. The third is his
last fetch, that if God mightily deliver the soul, and by the power of God it
escapes out of his dominion, then his devices are, to swallow up that soul,
with hopeles fears, doubts, and unbelief, that he might never taste the good
comforts of God, but perish in a despairing way; therefore he powers out floods
of temptations after him, if possible, to destroy him. Of these inventions the
Apostle makes mention in the case of that sinner in the Church of Corinth, whom
God by his Church had chastened with that severe sentence of Excommunication;
The man was so dejected, that he was even now swallowed up of a kind of
despairing sorrow; The Apostle therefore timely interposeth, desires the Church
to pardon, and receive in this chastened humble soul; lest Satan should
overreach them, and while they thought by casting out and delivering to Satan
to save the spirit, the Devil might thereby destroy it, wilily suggesting a
desperate ejection of him at once out of the Church, 2 Cor. 2.11. (...).
and from God: It is St Paul's note, We are not ignorant of his devices; shrewd
ones they be indeed, and destructive, unless warily prevented. See then ye
chastened sons, and daughters of God, whose wile it is to stave you off from
saving comforts under chastening, if Satan's, no cause to cherish such motions,
Gods way is quite contrary, and his will and care is to comfort his afflicted
people. Say then in this case, as the Lord Mediator said to the Devil, or his
instruments, upbraiding his poor Church, to keep them in a disconsolate
condition, ^ech. 3.2.
The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem rebuke
thee. Turn him off with his wiles for God to deal with him, the Almighty
will certainly plead your cause against him: Believe God in this matter, and
ye shall prosper; lift up your hearts to take in the consolations that he
gives out; this will defeat the Devils plot, strengthen your selves for your
desired obedience under the rod, and so enable you to glorify God in the very
fires. Think it, O think it then your duty to reach after the comforts of
Christ in your afflictions, be stirring and active in it, because your
adversary night and day labors to drive you from it; cheer up, cheer up
dear souls, that ye may abound in the work of the Lord, and your reward may
be full in the latter end.

But how would you have us cheared? Quest.
Is it fit under such sad discoveries of God to laugh and sing, or to be light
and joyful? is mirth suitable for the rod?

Surely not that mirth of the world, Answ. Eccles. 2.2. Siseme^ correctus
fa^rit in no^as usm as ille crucis ^imor, and ad tolerantiarn composite simus,
nulla (...) pars nostr^ q^^ non (...) m^^a (...) su^m D^^pr^stand^m, Cal^^^ ^^
That.
which justly the Preacher calls madness; no, sober mirth, or Christian
spiritual cheerfulness, is that which is pressed on Gods chastened Children,
not carnal jovialitie, or fleshly pleasure which the world takes to throw out
sorrow; not this, but those cordial revivings of God, that may keep up the
soul from fainting and dying under the rod, and set right the heart bowed
down, to be above all discouragements that might make it halt with God, and to
fall off from du^ie which God requires of them, such raisings and ravishings of
God ye must seek after, that ye may yet be serviceable unto him.

But what soul can take encouragement, Quest.
when it sees its unevennes with God, and haltings, and imperfect walkings
under the rod every day?

Surely the more need of comfort, because thou art faint, Answ.
and of support, because thou art lame and haltest: Think thou to cure thy
fainting and heal thy halting, without the consolations of God? This cannot
be; observe the Apostles method in this verse, he aims at it by the rod to
bring us to an upright station and even walking with God, but this cannot be
while dejection is predominant over heart and flesh; first then he labors to
support hands hanging down and feeble knees, and then directs to make right
paths for lame feet to walk in. It is the natural course of curing, Nitendum
est D^i consolat^onibus, ut simus ad been agendum fortes and strenui, atque ill
a est full ura nostra. Calvin in Text.
if any have broke a leg and grows faint upon it, the Surgeon will give some
cordial to revive the patient for present, and maintain his life, afterward
he goes about to set bones right again: So Gods Spirit here aims no less at
amendment of souls by the rod, than the encouragement of them, but because
this concerns the present maintenance of life, therefore he comforts first the
wounded, and after heales. In this method must we walk; if therefore ye will
yield to be comforted in the first use, we shall proceed to better you, and
make you walk more evenly with God in the second, which now follows in order
to be pressed.

SECT. V.
The second Use of the chastening Providence, (...).
even Amendment of souls under the rod, pressed by the Apostle in this clause;

And make straight or even paths for your feet,

ver. 13.
NOw poor Christian, here is the mark thou aimest at, to be good, that thou
may be glad and cheerful, unto which by the Apostles line I shall now
labor to direct thee, that I may help thee home. Chastenings are no
deviations from this mark, but indeed directories, and helps as well as goads,
pricking on the soul horeunto. If we bring the term of illation close to this
direction (Wherefore make straight, etc.) the force of all the precedent
chastening providence runs out into this duty of the afflicted, which is also
the effect of Gods chastising: God gives through the rod a streightning power,
and then puts on the chastened soul to work by him and with him for walking
in that right and even path with himself. The matter here inferred, together
with the force of the inference is here to be weighed, that we may know Gods
mind herein, and more strongly conclude what here he teaches us. The useful
counsel here given is short and pithy, rhetorical and rational, clothed in
a metaphor, as the former, but carrying in it and pressing on us a solid truth,
and wholesome advice for rectifying our ways, and making even our hearts with
God, being put upon it by the scourge. The Act of provision or making: The
object, right paths or ways; The subject for what, for your feet, are all
express terms in the duty, and suited in this borrowed speech one unto
another. Feet are the instruments of motion, which here must note all that of
man that must move to God, (...) gre^sivae, ita op^^at^ claud^at, quondo non
sequ ^^^r r^^ula ^^gis divinae, Aquin. in tex. (...). V^bitas, S^mitas, vias,
etc. Est prae^^pt^^ (...) contentionis quasi in curri^^^^ vi^ae san^^ae and
religios^e, Can^ernr. Locus not ad^^s pro libcro arbitrio s^^^ suin moven^e ad
bona opera, Estius in text. Sern tas sac^re re^tas, hoc est, quatum in vobis
est, dare ^peram ad ^^c, sed propr^e rectificare ^si solius De^, Aquin. in
Text. Psalm. 25.4.
in the course appointed for the creature; and therefore not only affections
as one, or mind as another, nor any one part singly, but the whole man must be
here intended; which the heart may well comprehend; these also as we are guided
by the following expression, must be conceived lame feet, halting, maimed
hearts, cripple or limping souls, that walk not perfectly with God, like a
foot bruised or out of joint: then is a leg or foot truly lame, when it
follows not the rule of the going or moving faculty, which is to tread even,
and so to walk at ease; No less our hearts and works toward God are lame,
when they follow not the rule of the divine law. Again for these, right or
even paths must be prepared, that is, a right course or frame by that unerring
truth, must be set for these to move in. I should not stand critically to
paraphrase upon that word in the text (paths) which signifies strictly such a
way or tracke, that a wheel makes upon the ground, suppose of chariot or the
like; (for I am persuaded here mainly it intends a way fitted for a man to
walk in, whether drawn out by a wheel, or trodden by a foot, it matters not,
either may serve, and so do to present the way of Gods counsels to us, fitted
for Christians to walk in:) but finding it occasioning a pious conceit, that it
should press speed in the way, as well as evennes (as the charret-wheele runs
in its tracke when the foot but walks in its course) I would not reject it; yet
not concluding it necessarily from this expression; A right course to God is
the maine here prescribed. Once more, these we must make; for the direction is
to us; not favoring free will, as the Jesuit notes, as if this were presently
in our own power; their Seraphicall Doctor may teach him better from the Text;
Make straight paths, that is, so much as in you lies, endeavor to it, but it
is Gods only work properly to rectify or make straight hearts and ways, for
which cause David prays, Show me thy ways, O Lord, teach me thy paths. God
himself by the Spirit given in the rod, inclines and orders the heart to a
right frame suited to his counsels, but then the chastened soul being
quickened and acted by God, must work under him and with him to bring heart,
words, and works to this right rule, so that indeed God only rectifies, and we
are rectified by him, all our motions being only in him and by him; as he
said, Now I live, yet not I properly and of my self, but Christ lives in me;
So indeed God properly and by his strength makes straight the crooked, we are
but straightened by him, however moving in his hand; It is a certain truth, our
duties depend upon Gods promises, as the effect upon their cause. This word the
Lord of heaven speaks, Isa. 35.6.
The lame man shall leap as an Heart: and speaking does create it, the lame
stands upright, and walks and leaps in the ways of God. In short, the duty
here concerning us, is not unfitly paraphrased, Make straight running paths for
your feet, or, (...), Camerar.
Run straight and uprightly in the ways of God; this is the work charged on
us: How careful would a man be for a lame foot, to have shoe even, ground
even, all even to keep from hurt? more should we care for lame hearts, to have
frame even, and paths even for them to walk and run in, if our mark be bliss.
The former wherefore indispensably presses this upon Gods chastened ones, Gods
care in chastening must put them upon care in rectifying or making straight
their ways for him; the last rule then for our practical use of chastenings
is, Doct. 4.
Gods chastening Providence is his rectifying hand upon his halting Children;
or thus, The rod providence inforceth the chastened as much to rectitude
toward God, as comfort for themselves; no less injoyning to make even ways
for lame feet, than to lift up hanging hands and palsy knees. I shall not need
here again to state the nature of this chastening Providence, the spring that
moves to this duty, that being done above. These three things must be
dispatched, and then shall I set the period to this work. 1. A discovery what
virtue, force, or help, this rodprovidence yields for rectifying men's hearts.
2. The state of the afflicteds duty under this help. 3. The motives added in
the Text enforcing to this duty, all which more distinctly handled, I shall
then draw up the close.

SECT. VI. The virtue or force of the chastening Providence for rectifying
hearts and ways.
THat there is a force in this scourging care of God to constrain the
chastened to this rectitude of heart and ways, the illative term (wherefore)
does evidently determine, which presses from thence upon the duty: The
question here to be satisfied is the (quid sit) what force this is? Which
opened, will carry its proof within it self. The virtue or power then of this
chastening is twofold. 1. Physical or natural, which is the cause naturally
producing this duty, as the fire warmth upon that which is applied unto it;
The rod makes right in beating to it; this force constraines by inabling. 2.
Moral or rational, forcing the reason of man to command his heart to this
rectitude, and bend toward it. In all works and means of grace, as God deals
powerfully, so he does rationally also with man his creature; These deserve a
little weighing.

To the first, Take we in but those grand concurrents to this chastening
dispensation the Author, Mediator, Spirit and Rule of the rod, (not to speak
of them distinctly) they jointly give out their power to effect this rectitude
in the chastened soul, and that efficiciently necessitating the man to this
straightness of heart and way, and that in this order, God the Father, in his
Son and by his Spirit, and through his promise, or according to that word of
grace, so orders the rod, that it shall reduce the wanderer, rectify the
crooked, and help the halting to walk at ease in right and even paths,
therefore they must make straight paths for their feet; All these persons are
coordinate in the rectitude of their own being, the ground of this effect
produced in the creatures, and in their power and in their purpose of working
it this way on the afflicted; Deuteronomy. 32.4. Psalm. 19.8.
Right, or Rectitude is the Name of God in every person; No less is Right the
singular property of his word, and if so, whatsoever issues from this hand,
according to this rule, by the rod, must needs be an answerable like effect.
Now the joint power given out from this chastening Providence, to frame the
soul to this duty, is various.

1. A teaching power.
Directive, which is properly a teaching power, that dictates this uprightnes
of heart and walking to the chastened, and prompts them succesfully to it; The
rod has a voice in its smart speaking righteousness, but of it self weak,
until he that prompted it, put forth his voice in it; here the Providence
chastising, or God himself correcting, teaches by it reformation or
rectifying of a man's ways, and if he teach, he makes impression upon the
spirit, though creature teaching pass off too slightly. It is the note of
Christ, in recording that promise, Joh. 6.45.
They shall be all taught of God; Every man therefore that has heard and
learned of the Father comes unto me; God does not teach in vain, or in any
case, so not in this way of instructing by the rod; his uprightnes pricks the
lesson, and his power teaches it to the purpose: The Psalmist observes this,
Good and upright is the Lord, Psalm. 25.8, 9.
therefore will he teach sinners in the way, that is, the right way; he
expresses no less immediately, The meek, or humble, or afflicted, will be
guide in judgment, that is, the right path ordered by him, and the meek will
be teach his way. And the happy effect of this teaching is proclaimed to the
Church, Psalm. 94.12.
Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest O Lord, and teach him out of thy
law. No reason to proclaim him blessed, unles crowned with the highest good,
and attained unto God in his very uprightnes, and even thither does God draw
him by chastening and by teaching. Needs then must that soul learn to walk in
right ways, when God himself by the rod shall teach him.

2. Effective also, or a creating power is this issuing from the rod-providence
to make Gods chast^ned cleave to even paths, God himself is in the rod,
therefore must work like himself, to bring about his purpose of gra^e, that
none can let it. In his word he speaks, and it is created, and in his rod he
speaks, and his pleasure is effected; He sends his word and says to the dead
live, and they live, and to the crooked, be made straight, and they stand
upright; and no less does he send his rod, and cries to the wandering sheep
return, and it returns, and to the lame soul walk in even ways, and he
walks; The words of promise are therefore peremptory, The lame shall leap as
the Heart, etc. It in creati^g darkness and evil, afflictions on his people, he
speaks to heavens and skies to drop down righteousness, it must be, if he be
God, I the Lord have created it. Isa. 45.7, 8.
David found this upright frame really made and abiding on his soul, for which
he blesses the hour of his chastening. It is good for me, Psalm. 119.71.
that I have been afflicted, says he, the effect was evident, the learning of
Gods upright statutes; which was no other, but the framing of his heart unto
them; needs then must they walk rightly and run in even paths, for whom God
makes such hearts and ways.

3. Active likewise and a power of doing or stirring according to the bent, or
byas of the rod, does God give out to his chastened ones, that they may be
stirring and make themselves right ways. So that not only skill for duty,
and will for duty is hence brought home to them, but actively, diligence, and
earnest motion to walk in these upright ways is hence supplied; not only
outward pricks to spur on from without by the rod smarting, but inward
motions, Non aculcos addit tantum ab extra, sed impetus ab intra movet. Hos.
6.1.
quicknings and stirrings to this by the secret hand that manageth the rod upon
the heart. See this force upon the Church afflicted, they egg one another
forward to return and walk with God. Come, say they, let us return unto the
Lord. etc. This then is the first part of the power of this chastening
providence naturally inabling the afflicted to make right paths for their feet
to walk in.

To the second, the moral force of this afflicting hand upon the following
duty, is the strength of reason, which is so great, that it must needs
overpower men, and make them yield to give out themselves to the utmost for
obedience, unless they refuse to be drawn with the cords of a man, and
declare themselves unreasonable: let these strong reasons be weighed for this
purpose, issuing from this divine providence.

1. It is the will of the Chastiser, the command of the highest God, even your
amendment by the Rod, to have your feet set even in his right path; Ezck.
^3.11. D^sidero alqu^d audi^e de Cwlo.
can there be stronger reason to persuade obedience from a Law, base creature,
than that word from heaven, Turn ye, Turn ye, why will ye die? It is all
the warrant for duty which reason can require, that which he said, I desire to
hear something from heaven: unless ye are stronger then God, and can
overtop him, it is most unreasonable to resist ^is will.

2. It is the love of the Mediator to put in between God and you, and direct
the stroke through himself, to bear the bitterness himself, and to let out
only so much of the smart, as to startle you out of your wanderings and crooked
ways, and persuade you to return, and take the straight path, that ye may be
conformed unto him. Is it not the justest reason now, that ye should comply
with this love of the Mediator? is it not most unreasonable to reject his love
without a cause, and by your frowardness, return hatred for his good will?

3. It is the Spirits free motion, that as he would seal you for God with his
own character, so he would drive you to him by the Rod, and therefore rules
in this chastening, to by as your hearts to the right path; is it reason then
to deny this sweetest motion, to sadden this Spirit, to lame our selves more,
and turn out of the good way of God? The Ox and the Ass show more respect to
their guides than this. In a word, through all these hands the Rod is the last
means to rectify a soul, and if this do it not, it is perverted to perdition;
Reserving other considerations in the Text for their own place: this is the
sum of the precedent arguments. Absolutely necessary it is to reach that
conformity of heart and ways to God in rectitude, the Fathers will, the Sons
love, the Spirits motion through the Rod drive the afflicted unto this mark;
can reason deny to yield to this power, which is for the man's salvation, and
not destruction? Surely not; we shall then take it as undeniably pressed upon
chastened souls from this sweet Providence, therefore make straight paths for
your feet. But what is our duty here? That is the next part.

SECT. VII. The state of our duty in making straight paths for our feet.
THe power of Providence to help us, and reason from the Rod to convince us of
duty, have before appeared; That we are to be doing something being summoned by
the Rod, is evident, what we must do, is now the question. Make right paths for
lame feet, we must, this the Rod would have, that we set our halting feet in
Gods even ways, to make our treadings or steps suitable thereunto; Now, halting
here is an unperfect or uneven walking with God, when by fears or other
blasts, we are kept from the strict and right tract of conversation, from which
we should not swerve; Amendment then, or through reformation, is the moral of
right paths, and right feet joined together, which is our work to look unto; to
make our thoughts right concerning God, concerning sin, concerning duties, and
our affections right, suited to various objects according to the rule, and our
endeavors right, striving to keep close to the line of Christ in all our
conversations.

But who can make an old heart new? or a foul one clean, Quest.
or that which is crooked to become straight?

Surely not a creature; Therefore badly was it glossed by him, Answ.
that this is a notable place for Free Will, and little reason was there for
that note here, it being but a simple command of God here, and Gods commands do
argue the creatures debts, not their abilities; otherwise no need of the
Covenant of Grace, wherein God ingageth himself to his covenanted ones, for
inabling them to all duty, and then requires their answerable restipulation.
Our duty then answering to this command, as in all like cases, consists in two
parts.

1. A passive reception of all that influence which God has promised in his
Covenant, for rectifying our hearts; Agere nostrum est a Deo pati.
and which by correction he endeavors to bring in upon our souls; this upon
our parts is the first work of Faith, which alone is the receiving Grace, by
reason of which reception we are said to do, what indeed God properly does
alone: As by Faith we are said to become come the sons of God, as if we
moved our selves to this honor, when indeed Christ himself casts this upon
us, and we only thus receive it: So are we said to be saved by Faith, and live
by Faith, as if we were the chief movers in these, when indeed God only saves,
and Christ lives in us, we are merely in this respect receivers. So are we
commanded to redeem time, to cast off our transgressions, and make us a new
heart, etc. when alas, we cannot do the work of one day, only we receive by
Faith a double portion of grace from God, in circumspect walking, in which
respect our time is said to be bought out or redeemed: Neither can we, poor
creatures, make an hard heart soft, and an old heart new, only by Faith we
receive the impressions of him that says, I will give them a new Spirit, I
will take the stony heart out of the flesh, and give them an heart of flesh: So
here are we pressed to make straight paths for feet, and even feet and
walkings for paths; but indeed our making is primarily receiving this
impression from the hand of God, whose Name is right, who alone can rectify
hearts and ways; David therefore turns his work concerning this into a prayer
of Faith, Psalm. 51 10.
Renew a right spirit within me; he is on the receiving hand, if God will give
it. This then is the first piece of duty, Faith must open the man within and
without, to receive the impression of Gods rectitude on all; In the mind must
be received right thoughts, right understanding, right judgment; In the will,
a right bent or yielding to the Will of God; In the affections a right frame,
fear and love, and joy, and hatred, and grief, set where they should be: And
in the eye a right seeing, in the ear a right hearing; in all the members a
right moving power unto God. This, this is our work to make right paths.

2. An active expression of what is received from God; Faith works this way
also by love to God, giving out those right impressions which the soul has
received from him: Now this active part of duty Faith performs in these
particulars, intimated in the very terms of the Text.

1. By evidencing and setting before the soul the right ways, or Laws of
God, which are called his paths, and that in the power and sovereignty of them;
as being set up to command obedience and conformity from creatures to them: As
the Prophet speaks for God, The ways of the Lord are right, the just shall
walk in them; they are sovereign ways, and must have walkers in them. Faith
makes these supreme, or highest in the thoughts and esteem of Gods servants, no
less in their affections and endeavors. Now this is a great step to rectitude
of heart and walking, to acknowledge the sovereignty of the right ways of God
over our bodies and spirits; And indeed, Gods ways, as they are all higher
than man's, so are they sovereign and commanding, as himself is, which he will
not shall be under check. Thus Faith establishes, Romans 3.31.
or sets the Law in power over the believers heart, and so subjects it in right
and due order to Gods command: Here is one act toward making of right paths for
our feet, or steering a right course of life from the instigation of the Rod.
So he makes right paths for his feet, who sets them by faith to command his
feet to walk in them.

2. By setting our lame and halting feet in this right track drawn out for
them; that is, plainly, by an exact and watchful keeping of our hearts and
conversations in due order and respect unto those right and even ways of God;
thus our making right paths, is our strict attendance on them; This use David
made of the Rod, he kept Gods Word, and learned his Statures better. Now, if
Faith do so evidence the excellency of Gods right ways, and stirs up love in
the soul vehemently to them, obedience suitable must be the effect, which will
be the demonstration of that upright frame, unto which by charstening the Lord
has drawn them. I believe, therefore have I spoken, says the Prophet, We
believe, therefore we speak, say the Apostles; sure it is, Faith stirs up all
the affections of the soul and members of the body, love, fear, delight, eyes,
ears, hands, and feet to that right work which it holds forth; so he makes
right paths for his feet, that by Faith makes himself to walk in them.

3. One act more of Faith suitable to Gods care in afflicting his, as it is
hinted by an expression in the Text, I shall only touch, and that is swiftness
of it is operation, making men not only walk, but run, in this straight course
of an holy conversation; Faith makes the soul active, yea, and speedily
active, even to run in the way of Gods Commandments, or contend for conformity
to Gods uprightness, as one striving in a race. This indeed is not an Act
distinct in kind from the former, but only in degree, putting on the spirit to
a greater speed in these right ways; Faith hastens in the right, and therein a
man cannot run too fast. Such speed David promises to make upon enlargement of
his heart from God, Psalm. 119 32. It is safe enough, if (...) be carried in
that term (...); that is, if our running be employed in this track of a ranning
wheel.
by greater measures of Faith. I will run the way of thy Commandments when
thou shaltinlarge my heart: This pious conjecture from the wheel track in the
Text (suppose of a Chariot) I could not omit, to put on to speed as well as
rectitude in ways of God; so may we admit that gloss, Make right races for
your feet; that is, Run rightly in the race which God sets before you. This is
the chasteneds duty; unto which, having added the motives in the Text, I shall
labor to conform their practice, and then close all.

SECT. VIII. (...).
The first motive to both precedent duties as given by the Apostie, Lest that
which is lame be turned out of the way.
IF farther reason be desired to move the afflicted for reaching after comfort
to themselves, and rectitude toward God, I shall add no more, but what the
Apostle here supplies himself unto us, viz. Two main Considerations, both which
have strong influence upon the two foregoing duties, to persuade unto them. The
first is from the inconvenience that necessarily follows upon neglect of both
or either of them; thus he reasons; It is needful ye should cheer up your
hearts, and make right paths for your feet, to strive for encouragement and
amendment under the Rod, for ye are lame and halt already, very unevenly ye
walk with God already for want of comfort, strength, and rule, I see your
flesh is offended, and hurts it self by Gods scourge; It concerns you
therefore to get reviving and rectifying power into your souls, lest it be
worse with you, and from halting or imperfect walking, ye turn quite out of
the way to utter Apostasy; be cheered therefore, be rectified, put forth your
selves to your appointed duties, so may ye prevent another ways unavoidable
mischief. To scan the terms a little here; The lame is here a concrete, and
notes the subject ill affected with lamenesse or halting; This, as was
observed, is an imperfect going, a piece right, and a piece wrong, if we take
it as Natures common expression; Claudicatione vocat cum m^nte^ ^^mmum
alternant nec sincere so D^o add cant, Calv. in text. ^ King. 18.21. Galat. 2
14.
Here it fitly signifies a perverse or unsound conversation between the right
ways of God, and false ways of the creatures; when a man would be for God,
and yet he hankers after Idols too, as these halting Israelites, Claud^ sunt
qui nondum perspec^o ve^er is faeder is and novi discrimine, it a incedunt, ut
non in alteram part^m inclinent: Beza in Text.
whom Elijah upbraids, for this uneven dealing; or those Cripple-Christians,
that hung between Moses and Christ, as between two crutches, and walked
haltingly, not right in the Gospel-faith; of which sort is conceived by some,
that these Hebrews were, and therefore here are warned of this halting: Such
are many apt to be under the Rod, while pressed with pain, or overcharged with
fear, they seek any deviations for shelter from God, complying with worldly
devices, and not wholly shaking off their profession of the Lord. This
lamenesse or halting then, is an unsound walking with God, unto which the flesh
of Gods chastened does much incline, while it is under the Rod: A careful eye
must be then upon the hurt, lest it prove fatal, and proceed to the utter
subversion of the soul: no less is suggested in that expression, Est elegan^
haec locutio: multo enim deterius est errare quam claudicare: jam qui
claudicare incip^unt, non statim avertut se a via, sed paulatim magis as magis
ab ^a recedunt, donec in errorem abrepti in medio Satanae labyrintho haereant,
Calvin. in text. Praeceptum est cure and studii in vitus emendandis, and
corrigenda pravitate, ne ultima corruption neglecta sanatione sequatur, ut cum
claudicans pes per insignem perversitatem detorquetur, Camerar. in Text.
iurn'd out of the way, eversion, or utter falling off from God, and desperate
Apostasy is the truth of this metaphorical Paraphrase; as a lame foot is
quite undone and killed, if it have no boltering, but is wrested still into
perverse and crooked ways; the very last corruption that is, the perdition of
the soul is here the mischief held out to move the chastised to a timely
pursuit of comfort, and reformation of their hearts under the Rod, this they
must seek after, unless they mean to perish. There be two truths carried in
this moving clause, one implied, the other expressed, which must be a little
opened, that the strength of this motive may be the better given out to enforce
the former duties.

1. Note 1.
The chastened of the Lord are usually apt to be lame and halt; that is, walk
imperfectly with God under his scourge.

2. Note. 2.
This lamenesse does incline to utter Apostasy from God, and perdition of the
soul, unless prevented by timely comfort and reformation. The issue of both
these, is but to press the necessity of attendance upon the former duties.

To the first, Quid sit; that this is so, 1. Quid sit. Genesis 12.13. Genesis 20.2.
will appear in a full induction of the afflicted Saints in all ages: See
Abraham's halting with God in Egypt before Pharaoh, in Gerar before Abimelech.
In the same kind and place did Isaacs lamenesse appear under the scourge of
Famine, he walked not perfectly with God. Genesis 26.7.
So Jacob halted in the matter of Esau, worse then that was with Gods pinch;
Genesis 27.19.
and Moses halted in the Wilderness, especially at the waters of Meribah, and
poor David confesses himself ready to halt in all his sorrows; Number. 20.11.
13. and 38.17. Mat. 26.14.
and terrified Peter halts quite downright in the hight Priests Hall. I need
name no more instances of these; I shall touch only the ground, which is
universal in all Gods chastened.

The rise therefore and demonstrative ground of the Saints halting in their
affliction, 2. Cur si^.
is that sinful flesh, which is as universal as that natural wherein they
live, which being contrary to the Rod, and too weak for it, does suffer by it,
becomes offended at it, not from the intention of the scourge, but from the
corruption of the flesh; thence is it grieved and hurt, even to lamenesse and
halting, a very uneven and imperfect walking with God; These unseparable
properties of the flest, will easily evince this event under the Rod.

1. Carnal sense of the smart and bitterness of affliction; Now this can
discover nothing but evil, vexing and angring the creature; therefore turns
it to some disaffection, both to the Rod, and him that did appoint it: This
becomes dismal hatred to God, in the wicked, whose flesh is predominant, but
stirrings of disaffection only in Gods own, who have the Spirit supreme in
them, which yet unregarded may become more dangerous: See this is Jehoram, 2
King. 6.33. Jon. 4.9.
who threw off God upon it; and this in Jonah, who was something discontented
with him.

2. Gross love of the creature, which, though it cannot be in dominion where
grace is, yet may it greatly incline the man to it, especially when the Rod
comes to beat him off. How deeply this wounded Demas is sad to read the Story;
and how it lamed Peter the second time, 2 Timothy 4.10. Gal. 2.12, 13, 14.
so far, as to make him dissemble the truth of Christ before his adversaries,
is too too evident.

3. Base fear of men, and crearture terrors, proper to this flesh, do prompt
to halting with God, Men's homin's omni metu superier, tantum quod Deo probe^ur
reputa^, timor ad quaerenda diverti^^^s inge^i^^us est plus satis, Calv. in
text.
when danger appears, and smart draws near the flesh; this wounded Abraham
with a lie, as well as Isaac, and Peter by a sad backsliding from Chirst: This
has been the laming, and almost the baining of many Saints in several age^,
when Gods hand has been gone out in trial against his Church: Fear is
subtle to find digressions from God, and make the soul walk unevenly, and
full of danger, yet this the universal affection of sinful flesh.

4. Foolish hope, to ease the smart by complying with Gods enemies, and so
halting between both. This however it is not allowed in Gods children, yet are
they subject to such motions from their flesh helped on by the power of Satan,
whereby their hearts may be dampt, 1 Samuel 27.10.
their limbs lamed, their pace may faulter toward God: See something of this
in David's carriage before Christ. Thus then the Saints have been, and may be in
danger in their afflictions to be lamed and brought to halting, therefore but
need by reviving and reforming to prevent this very lamenesse; yet, if this be
neither prevented, nor healed, greater danger than this is at hand, that may
more orderly persuade to the former duties.

SECT. IX. To the second part of the first motive.
TO the second, haltters in affliction are very apt to become Apostates; if
comfort may stop, and reformation prevent this mischiese, all reason will
persuade the lame soul to make earnestly after these.

But why should such an argument as this be used to Gods children, lest that
which is lame be turned out of the way, Quest.
when it is certain they cannot fall off from God unto perdition?

It is not irrational to use such motives for duty to the most stable and
unshaken souls in the Church here Militant, Answ.
and therefore not unusefull with the Spirit of God to press them upon the
best of men, to keep them close to their obedience; These considerations may
evince the necessity of such arguing toward these.

First, they are rational creatures, grace has not swallowed up reason, nor
destroyed the man, though it overpower and innoble it for heaven. Now to all
such, all reason-foreing and convincing arguments are suitable; now prevention
from final Apostasy to perdition, is a forcible consideration to every
rational creature to take heed of the halting evil that leads unto it, and
make use of all preservatives, comforts, counsels, for rectifying and
establishing that will certainly keep the souls from it; therefore meet for
the best as well as for the worst of men.

Secondly, they are (even the best) in great part carnal, and sold under sin,
as the Apostle was, and every one is, in the first great bill of sale by man's
transgression, however in Christ redeemed, and set above the power of
corruption; yet even in this state of grace sin is in them as thorns in their
sides, and pricks in their eyes; and therefore strongly inclining them to fall
from God, however they be kept by the power of God unto salvation. This did so
terrify that holy man, that he cried out, Who shall deliver me from this body
of death? Where then diseases are, though not predominant, it is not
unreasonable to press for care to prevent death.

Thirdly, consider the ground of their establishment; That they cannot fall
away from God, is not from any strength or ability in themselves to stand, nor
indeed from any creature Consideration, for mutability and change is the
creatures adjunct, but it is merely grounded upon the Covenant of God to Christ
and to his seed, wherein his power, wisdom, justice, truth, and immutability
are freely engaged to keep these souls from perdition unto eternal life. Now,
that wisdom that has contrived the perseverance of these to glory, who are so
frail and unstable in themselves, has also cast the way whereby he will
accomplish this promised end, and deals with them, as well rationally as
powerfully to effect this purpose; It pleases therefore this God-wisdome, to
suit arguments to the state of his creatures, he sees the remainders of pride
in their flesh, that upon conceit of privilege, may puff up, and make secure,
and thence thinks fit to press some terrible considerations to suppress such
swellings, and keep the soul in an humble and believing fear, whereby it is
enabled to steer it is course directly unto God, and to reach home unto him;
however indeed the argument of it self cannot prevail, but the power of God
in it draws over the heart to yield obedience: no unreasonablenesse then to
press the fixed ones of God with such shaking reason, for this way God does
fasten them in his Kingdom. This rub removed, two things must be declared to
open the force of this motive: first, that halting does incline to Apostasy:
secondly, that there is a death-preventing virtue in the former duties, to keep
from this fall. For discovery of the first, the demonstration will be clear in
their properties of halting, which are inseparable from it, however vincible by
grace.

1. Claudicatio partim declarat tarditate, partim etiam inconstantiam in
doctrina, Beza in Text. and Rob Steph.
The slownesse or backwardness; the indisposition of the lame feet to walk,
loath they are to put forward in motion; now such retarding of an halting heart
in the way of God, does not only increase the indisposition to move, but gives
occasion to all the enemies of salvation, the world and devil as well as their
own flesh, more mightily to withstand them, and beat them back again, or
turn them quite out of Gods even track; delay or slacknesse is no where so
dangerous, as in the way of God, so many lusts and temptations there be, that
upon the least stand do overtake us; every step in Gods race is a step backward
in event. Now with this evil the halting Saints are infected, ^ King. 18.
and therefore in danger of backsliding themselves, though graciously prevented
by God. How slack these halters were in Elijahs time, and how near thereby to
be driven off from God, the Story makes very clear; they were half inclining
unto Baal.

2. The crookedness or uneven treading of the lame walking feet must needs
incline to greater wanderings; perverseness in, tends directly to aversenes from
the ways of God. A member disjoynted, and set in a posture suitable to its
misplacing, must needs grow distorted, and ugly in process of time. So does
the uneven pace of the halting heart incline to a desperate defection in the
progress, unless forbidden by the great God. The Lord therefore chideth his
Disciples out of their crooked and perverse disposition, Matt. 17.17.
O perverse generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer
you? It was but infirmity in them, yet not to be suffered, for it tended to
greater ruins, as it proved with another sort of false Christians, 1 Timothy 6.5.
from whom Timothy was advised to withdraw.

3. The weakness of the halting feet, and thence pronenesse to be driven out by
opposition, or to fall out of the way of God utterly of themselves for want of
strength; every weakness in the very entrance inclines to more habituated
distempers, and then to death; and no less infirmity in the Christians life,
and walking, tends to greater perverseness and fatal danger: The duskish
evening leads into the darkest night, and the weakest evil brings ever to a
worse, unless in time resisted. This made Paul stand up so sternly against
those at Antioch, which did not walk rightly, that is, Gal. 2.14. (...).
they did halt in the way of the Gospel, and he did resist their dissembling,
lest it should proceed to greater wickedness, and so to the ruin of their
souls. It is evident in these now, that halting does of it self incline to
pernicious Apostasy, and the souls destruction. But why this a motive to
comfort, and conformity or rectifying ways to God? The reason of this must be
the virtue of these duties for prevention of this dismal evil: The next
consideration.

To the second. The power in the former duties effectual for cure of this
evil, is twofold. 1 Primitive, to turn away those pernicious maladies that
breed and bring forth this Apostasy. 2 Positive, to keep the soul in a true
and perfect state with God: this more properly is considerable in the second
motive for healing, the former is the work for present to state that. Now these
two duties, encouragement and amendment, are sweetly fitted against two sorts
of evils, that work this overthrow of poor souls; some are weakening evils that
disable the soul to stand against it, others are perverting evils, thrusting
the soul out of Gods way into perdition: Comfort is the cure of these, and
Reformation the bane of these; whereof something would be discovered more
distinctly.

1. The consolations of Christ wheresoever they come, remove these weakening and
dis-inabling evils which lay the soul more open, naked, and obnoxious to the
mischief of all Apostarizing corruptions; the stating of those evils with the
application of this remedy will be here convenient. 1 The fading of light for
discovery of God in Christ reconciled, makes the soul very weak, apt to be
turned aside from the truth, having lost God out of the eye; for want of light
indeed many times a poor soul is turned into an hell of sin and misery; for
who can be solicitous to keep close to God, who sees him not, or at least not
reconciled? To this the comforts of Christ do give sovereign help, for which
cause it must be, that the Apostle in hsi method of bringing the Churches to
the abundant knowledge of the mystery of God in Christ, Col. 2.2.
he strives first that their hearts might be comforted: and thence would he
draw them to the riches of the full assurance of understanding to the
acknowledgement of, or insight into, the mystery of God, of the Father, and of
Christ. And truly no soul can be so intimately acquainted with the secret of
God in Christ, the great preservative against Apostasy, but that soul that
tastes of his sweet and ravishing consolations, and has his heart revived by
him: reach after Christ's comforts then they must, that desire fully to see him,
and seeing to be established by him.

2. The fainting of hope, and therewith the decay of vital spirits is a very
great weaking, and exposes of it self to death, unless a remedy be timely;
and none better than the consolations of God for removing of this dangerous
obstruction, and reviving the drooping spirit. Alas, the dying of hope leaves
the soul as a livelesse thing, turns it into a miserable state of confusion and
distraction, that it is even ready to curse God sometimes unawares and die,
and lies liable hereby to the tempters fury to be hurried into a soul-killing
despair. Now to give life to this hope, the Apostle implores God for his poor
Romans; but under what notion? hear his words, Romans 15.5.13.
once the God of consolation, or the comforting God: and again, the God of
hope, even that makes to hope, fill you with all joy, and peace in believing,
that ye may abound in hope through the power of the holy Ghost. It is then the
comforting and hope-raising God, that can create hope, and by hope joy, and by
joy establishment, for his poor creatures; Consolation and the comforting
power in God bears all this work. The Psalmist found this virtue of divine
consolation, Psalm. 94.19.
In the multitude of my thoughts within me (confusion of thoughts were within
him what course to take, whether to stick to God, or leave him) thy comforts
delight my soul; These revive and keep from sinking: Who would not catch after
these grcedily rather then die?

3. The failing of duties and vital actions are a sad presage of death, as
well as a great weakening in present to the soul; every omission or weak
performance is like a gasp before giving up the ghost; Now no way to cure this
but by cordials, and none like the comforts of Christ. When Christ himself was
in the conflict, buffeted by Satan to make him deny his Father, to let us see
that our flesh in him needed support, Angels are sent to minister to him, and
support the flesh; how much more need has our poor spiritlesse flesh of this?
Matthew. 4.12.
For want of praying, and for want of walking, the soul may be subverted
utterly, and for want of comfort it can do neither; nothing strengthens the
hands more to the work of God than the consolation of Christ, and nothing keeps
more from Apostasy, then to walk circumspectly in the ways of God, and abound
in his work. In sad distempers Jeremiah resolves to do no more work, not to
speak again in the name of the Lord, but when the fire burnt within him, and
the comforting spirit inflamed him, he could not hold his tongue. Never did
David fall fouler then when his heart flag'd, and fell off from duty; and
never was it well with him again, until Gods comforts had raised him to his
former communion. Psalm. 51.1.etc.
See how these consolations as well as convictions ministered by Nathan, put him
upon prayer again, Psalm. 42.5.11.
to recover his fall; Nay frequently is he forced to beat the comforts of God
upon his own heart to keep him from defection, and that by reason of weakness
was growing on him: duty saves from Apostasy, and comfort keeps up to duty;
It is but reasonable then, to prevent subversion we labor for strength of
action toward God, and for support in this, we strive to take hold of comfort
in our afflictions: The Gospels comfort can only cure suol-killing faintings;
seek it, then seek it ye afflicted of the Lord.

2. Other evils there are not only perverting, but indeed subverting the soul,
and separating from God, unto which the second duty carries a virtue contrary
and sovereign to destroy them. The evils so incident to halting, and so
efficient to Apostasy are such as these: unbeleef, inordinate affection, and
uneven walking, whereof we may note the malignitie in themselves, and the
remedy in the duty. 1. Unbelief is the strong inducement of a perpetual
backsliding from God; It was therefore but a reasonable Item of the Apostle,
Hebr. 3.12.
Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you and evil heart of unbeleef
in departing from the living God: Unbelief will make Apostates if it prevail;
but now conscience in making right paths for our feet, must needs drive us from
haltings in faith, and if we secure our souls from them we are safe from
falling. This is evidently provided for in the duty pressed, for if care be to
make all tracks to Heaven right, then that of faith (without which there is no
having God or life) must needs be rectified; set right upon its object God in
Christ, and right upon its work to make evident the unseen excellencies of
Heaven, and to give subsistence to, and present comfort from our hoped glory:
Where this care is exercised, lamenesse of faith will be relieved, and an utter
Apostasy sweetly prevented.

2. Inordinate affection is as dangerous a furtherance to final defection from
God; when affections break their bounds, transgress their rule, and grow
turbulent in the soul, pressing their own way, they expose the soul to all
dangerous consequences; As when fear is more of man then of God, and love more
of the creature, then of the Creator, and joy more in vanity then in real
good, that soul must be hurried to forsake God, as it fared with Demas, and
other false named Christians, in whom affections were inordinate, and out of
place; But now by this rectifying work, affections are set in their right
places, and to their right employment, to honor God only; so fear brings home
to God, and love closes with him, and joy is perfectly upon him; where these
so work, great security is given against Apostasy. The Lord Christ therefore
gives charge for right ordering affections, Matthew. 10.28. 1 Ioh. 2.18.
Fear not them that can kill the body, etc. And his beloved disciple follows
his steps, Love not the world, etc. the Fathers love is not consistent with it,
this is reason strong enough. The right state of these keep us right with God
for ever.

3. Uneven walking with God, is the usual means of bringing him in contempt
with creatures, and then of turning the heart far from him: one crooked step
allowed, stirs up the heart to quarrel with the upirght God, because his way
is too straight for us, and we willing to approve our own ways rather then
his, and if sin be suffered to proceed, it will shake off from God for ever.
One straggling step put Peter at a great distance from Christ, and had he not
been recalled, how pernicious might his slip have been? Right paths, and right
disposition of feet in them is the only way to cure this evil, and to keep
from utter backsliding. It is a sweet expression of David's, I will walk in mine
integrity, Psalm. 26.11.12.
but what course takes he for that? My foot (says he) stands in an even
place, right and straight with God, to that posture he holds it, and what the
issue? In the Congregation, I will bless the Lord, and he that blesses shall
never leave him. Ezekiels cunsell shall close up this, Ezekiel. 18.30.
Repent, and turn your selves from all your transgressions: set right, and keep
right hearts and ways to God; so, shall not iniquity be your ruin: but
crooked ways lead surely to perdition.

SECT. X. Second Motive.
THe second Motive, (...).
But let it rather be healed. It this the word of Gods own Spirit? Surely then
God had rather that poor souls, lame and halting, under affliction should be
healed, than be hurt more, maimed, and utterly turned off as unusefull for him:
And as his mind is, so is the means he uses, inclined to work the health, and
not the death of his chastened ones. His rod therefore is intended, and not
only so, but effectually commanded, to produce comfort, and correction, which
will cure any hurt occasioned by its smart. If health then, yea saving health
be in it self desirable, reviving and reforming under the rods dispensation
must be the mark to which the soul must reach; no health to be hoped for
without them.

The moving Consideration then to Conscience in former duties from the present
word may be thus proposed. Note.
Gods choice is to have his rod prove rather healthful then hurtful to his
chastened children; healing not killing is the prime intention of the rod,
which must press them to use the rod for encouragement, and amendment, who
ever desire life, and not death. Two Queres must be satisfied to open the
strength of this Motive. 1. What is this health or healing? 2. What virtue is
in former duties with respect unto the rod, for healing the lame and halting
soul. These being apparent, may put on to more circumspection in duty. Sa^itas
corporis in duobus sita est in deb^ta humorum symmeiria, secundum quant^tatem
and qualitatem, and in spongioso quodam habitu nu^lis obstructionibus impedito,
us spi^^^us and sanguis liberum per omnes pa^s^s habeat dis^ursum. ^es. de Val.
com. c. 5.


To the firs, I shall shortly reply; healing here is a borrowed expression
fitted to that lamenesse or halting mentioned before; both terms fetting out
the evil and good estate of the body, but here appiled to a spiritual use;
that nothing the bad, this the good condition of the soul: Health is the effect
of healing, and in the natural acception thus conceived. It is the good or
prosperous state of life consisting in a due proportioned temper within, as in
the right disposition of parts without, and in a free communion of blood and
spirits through the whole subject; whereby a man is said to live well, or be
well; life above disturbance, or life in peace is truly health. Let this be
spiritualized, and it may fit here; spiritual life (of which here) is the
result of the union of the soul with Christ; the health intended is the good
and prosperous state of this life, which inwardly consists in its duly
proportioned union with Christ, and free communion of spirit from him, without
fatal obstructions of sin, and outwardly in the light of Gods countenance, and
favor, expressed in external blessings, which make this life, sweetly
comfortable. Upon interruption of either, this life is weakened by inward
obstructions, Cant. 5.8.
as it was with her that cried, I am sick of Love: and by outward obstructions
also is it something impaired, whereupon in case of any outward affliction on
the Church, a seeming eclipse of Gods countenance, Hos. 5 13. Jer. 8.22.
It is said to be sick, and the health of it out gone up nor recovered. This
state of health then must needs be very sweet, therefore evey desirable; unto
which the rod by its comforting and reforming influence being duly received,
does very much advantage. The view of the several healing virtues in the
duties urged, will clear this, and more forcibly press to a due, and
conscionable observance of them, which shall now be labored.

1. The healing virtue of true comfort sovereign over all sickness,
lamenesse, or halting of spirit to Godward, caused either by sinful
obstructions, or dangerous stumblings, will be evident in these special saving
properties of it.

1. The closing or uniting virtue of it in case of any breach, or separation,
made by obstructive sin between the soul, and Christ its life; oil, and balm
are therefore sweet expressions of comfort, they close the breaches of the
flesh, and so heal; no less the consolations of God: These reviving influences
arising from God, do both give forth God unto the soul, and draw the spirit
back again to God. Christ's name, that is, his sweetness are comforts
manifested, is as ointment powered forth, Cant. 1.8.
(which is attractive upon the sense of standers by) therefore the virgins love
him, pure souls separate from uncleanness, by love cleave to him, and are
closed with him. O that broken and afflicted hearts, who refuse comfort would
but consider, every touch of comfort is a close of the soul with Christ, they
would catch for this, that they might close with him.

2. There is a gladding influence from this comfort, it chears the spirit, and
makes life lightsome and pleasant, this is health; grief makes the heart sick,
but joy restores it: The healing medicine of Christ, his comfort is therefore
styled, the oil of gladness; it makes glad the heavy spirit, Psalm. 35.7.
and by chearing heals the sad distempers of it; no cure to be hoped for him,
whose spirit is overwhelmed, and will take no gladding cordial. Consider thou
sad heart, not comforted, joy revives, and grief must kill; take heed of
self-destroying, by rejecting gladness, that will heal.

3. There is an heart enlarging virtue in this comfort of Christ, and the more
open the heart is to God, the more saving health there; Oblessed healthy soul,
where all influences of Christ's Spirit have room and passage to diffuse
themselves through the man, he must needs be well. Grief draws up the heart
like a purse, and shortens the spirit, therefore it must make sick; but Comfort
opens it wide, and gives God full scope. Life may expatiate here, and delight
it self, this is health indeed. O that the contracted heart, that cries out of
its straitness unto God, would think, to be comforted is to be enlarged; every
drop of this oil opens the heart, and gives way to the Spirit of Christ to run
to and fro freely; this is the savingly healthful man. Psalm. 27.4.5. Psalm.
119.32.
No man more hunting after comfort then David, and none more enlarged to God
then he, he calls for this, and for that also. De we the same.

4. There is a soul-quickning power in these consolations, joy inlivens, and
makes man active; not only to live, but to be lively, this is health. This
very sight of comfort, made the Spouse run to her beloved, and hasten him with
her cries unto her, Cant. 1.4. and 8.14.
Draw, and we will run, is her expression, and Haste my beloved is her call:
The active soul for God must needs be healthful: sad heart, lie not still
complaining, thou art dead and dull, it is thy sickness, drink in the
consolations of Christ, these will restore and quicken; why refusest thou to be
comforted? The God of comfort, by the Son of comfort, Isa. 57.18.
through the Spirit of comfort, out of the promise of comfort, supplies all
this to his lame, and halt, because he will have their healing, not their
perishing, and perpetuates them hereby in a good state of health, that it may
abide with them for ever. Weigh thia inducement to obedience.

SECT. XI. The healing virtue of the second duty.
2. THe force of healing in the second duty which is equally pressed with the
former, that we may no less urge it from this motive, is there considerable.
The duty is rectifying ways, or reformation, which God urges from his Rod,
not to hurt, but to heal: God would certainly have healing of souls rather
then festering or destroying; therefore his counsel is, to make straight
paths, that we may be healed, rather then subverted: The healing virtue then in
this duty, (...). Heb. 9.10.
would be discovered to encourage more earnestly to lay hold upon it; and this
will appear in the effects of this rectifying our paths, or of reformation, if
it be that through righting of the soul as is intended by it, these are a
threefold rectitude left upon the man.

1. Recta disposit to part^^m.
A right disposition of the parts considerable in this living creature, which
is the new creature, or Christian now exercised under Gods Rod. As it is in
man, or any other living creature, it is not well, unless soul and body have
a fit harmonicall union and consent; nerver can health be expected there, where
life was never well seated: so, unless there be a right cementing (as I may
call it) or disposition of the soul with Christ the fundamental life of it,
it cannot live, and therefore not live well, or be in health. These conditions
are requisite hereunto.

1. Mons sana in corpore sano.
That the parts so disposed for union between themselves be true, the truth of
Christ to the truth of men, to fancy, or make an imaginary Christ to be
coupled with man, or an imaginary man to be united to Christ, is but to err,
not to rectify. A monstrous, imperfect, or a crasie body joined with the most
excellent soul, can never make an healthy man; both true and sound make the
man found indeed. In this business wary we must be not to mistake Christ in
respect of our selves, Jo^h. 25.1, 2.
nor our selves in respect to Christ; He the true Vine, and we the true
branches, are like to make a noble plant to God: Heart to heart, spirit to
spirit must be suited.

2. That the disposition of these each to other be real; imaginary unions are
as useless here as imaginary parts, a real habitude or respect of each other
must be here; health is not in imagination, but real fruition.

3. That this disposition be immediate between Christ and the soul without any
intervening sodering; Christ for the soul, and the soul for Christ, without
other mediating causes; These may prove obstructions, and dest oy our life in
Christ, not save it.

4. That this placing of these parts be orderly, Christ in Supremacy, the soul
in subordination: That body is not well, whose members are out of place; it
must be deficient in beauty, if not in health; and indeed an uneven and unfit
disposition of members, ^s reformation puts all right this way, and makes a
good foundation for saving health, when body and soul stand in a right aspect
to Christ, all must be well to Godward there.

2. A right disposition of faculties and inward affections, Rectad sp^^tio (...)
when judgment, will and affections stand right with God in that Euange^^call
rectitude promised to, and wrought in the true members of Christ, which is a
true conformity to the mind of God, though not in present reaching in degrees,
yet to be perfected in Gods appointed time. This is quite contrary to all
crooked and perverse dispositions, and therefore must be the healing of them, if
distempers be best cured by contraries; a clean heart and a right spirit, is
that which David calls for, to recover his hurt that befell him by his fall.
Psalm. 51.10.
When minds stand right with Gods mind, and will with Gods will, and love where
God would have it, 1 Pet. 3.21.
and fear where God appoints it, and zeal where God calls for it, so that
answer of conscience is directly to Gods call, Psalm. 27.8.
according to that, when God says, Seek ye my face, the heart answers in very
terms, Thy face, Lord, will I seek; this is a sound spirit in good state of
health; rectifying therefore must be healing.

3. R^ctad^posio (...)
A right disposition of acts and conversation; exercise as it is a token and
effect of health of body, so no less a preservative of it, rightly ordered.
Surely in the present case it is very true, right ways with God are the effect
of an healing reformation, and do also perfect it; right hands, and right feet,
pitching upon right works and right ways, argue an healthy soul indeed, and
so keep it in that good condition from over-powering distempers by sin, such do
no iniquity, here security from satall sickensse or halting; Psalm. 119.3.
but whence this? They walk in his ways; This right disposal of ways and
godly exercise, p^^vents spiritual diseases, and I keeps the soul in health.
Thus far we see the sweet healing virtue of these duties, such a benefit of
them as may make them truly desirable by Christian souls: Heaving therefore
thus touched the goodness of these motives, which is their drawing force, for
a close of all, as God directs, I shall only labor to move by them to the
practice of those duties which concerns the chastened in the right use of
their afflictions.

Hear now, ye afflicted of the Lord, Does God so pity the halt and the lame,
that are any way maimed by the Rod, that he chooses healing for them, not
greater ruptures or subversions? Be then of Gods mind, and cloose your own
life, not your death; for this purpose reason will guide you to take hold on
comfort, and perfect reformation; These are the binding, hearling ways for the
sick and broken; if health, yea, saving health, in God be so good, so
desirable, catch at comfort in Christ, cheer up, lift up hanging hands and
palsy knees, pursue a through righting of the soul, a full reformation, these
will be health to the navell, and marrow to the bones. The duties have been
stated already, look there what is to be done; The rules of right prosecution
I shall only add here, that we may walk by line, and not swerve, they are
such as these:

1. Prosecute these really; true comfort, and true reformation must be truly
pursued, with real care, purpose of heart, and affection of soul, to prosper.

2. Pursue them equally; as much strenght and virtue are in one as other; seek
after reviving or consolation of Christ, as much as after rectifying or
amendment, sweetness of life, health and strength are equally promoted by both.

3. Follow them orderly, it may be needful sometimes, first to comfort and
strengthen hands and feet, before we exercise them to works or ways, but then
the inseparable issue of comfort must be amendment, and right walking; be not
shie of the consolations of God upon pretense of unworthiness, these must make
us worthy, at least, as they are unseparably united, let them be joined in the
prosecution; take one to dispose more sweetly to the other.

4. Pursue them earnestly, as a man would strive for life and health, yea, and
with that constancy, as is suitable to that desire of living ever; such
preservatives of health make a blessed life, while they are in use, health is
maintained, and life perfected; as ye desire to live, then labor to be
comforted, and rectisied in Christ; Cheerfulness and rectitude will establish
you for ever; Be eager, be constant in their pursuit; conscience in duty will
sign you the true members of Christ, and servants of the great God. Neither
will your Lord forget his promises or covenant of his truth; In your duties he
will meet you, Hos. 14.4. Zeph. 3.19.
He will heal your backslidings, and love you freely, he will save the soul
that halteth: though the Rod smart a while, your pain shall be your gain; it is
your Father that chastises, he seeks not your fainting, but reviving, not
your evil in hardening, but your good in reforming, not your subversion, but
conversion to him, not your sickness, nor your death, but your life, and
everlasting health: seek ye also and ye shall find. The chastening Father,
the mediating Son, the comforting and quickening Spirit, are all engaged to
give in the sweet and full fruit of chastening providence to your souls;
strainten not your own bowels, but open to them, and labor with them. By that
Spirit of joy and love, through the Prince of peace, and Son of love, give
glory to that tender Father, who is God-Love, blessed for ever: from him this
one God in three are all things, to him be glory in the Churches for ever and
for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

