THE INSTRVMENTS OF A KING: OR, A SHORT DISCOVRSE OF The SVVORD. The SCEPTER.
The CROWN.


Satis habet Rex ad poenam,
Quod Deum expectet Ultorem.
It Is punishment enough for the King,
That God will Him to judgment bring.
LONDON. Printed in the Year, 1648.

The Author's Apology.
I Am no Lawyer otherwise then what nature has made me, so every man, as he is
born the child of Reason, is a Lawyer, and a Logitian also who was the first
kind of Lawyer: This discoursive faculty of Reason comes with us into the world
accompanied with certain general notions and principles to distinguish Right
from Wrong, and Falsehood from Truth: But touching this following Discourse,
because it relates something to Law, the Author would not have adventured to
have exposed it to the world, if, besides those common innate notions of
Reason, and some private Notes of his own, he had not informed and ascertained
his judgment by conference with some professed Lawyers, and those the
Eminentest in the Land, touching the truth of what it Treats of; therefore he
dares humbly aver that it contains nothing but what is consonant to the
fundamental and fixed Constitutions, to the known clear Laws of this
Kingdom.

J. ^.
THE INSTRUMENTS OF A KING.
IN a Successive hereditary Kingdom, as ENGLAND is known and acknowledged to
be by all Parties now in opposition, There are 3 things which are inalienable
from the Person of the KING: they are, 1. The Crown. 2. The Scepter. 3. The
Sword.


The one, He is to carry on His Head, the other in His Hand, and the third at
His Side; and they may be termed all three the ensigns or peculiar
instruments of a KING: by the first, He Reigns, by the second He makes Laws,
by the third He maintains them: and the two first are but bables without the
last.

Crown or royal Diadem of England, there is none, whether Presbyterian,
Independent, Protestant, or others now in action, but confess that it descends
by a right hereditary Line, (though through diverse Races, and some of them
Conquerours) upon the Head of CHARLES the first now Regnant: it is His own by
inherent birthright and nature, by Gods law, and the Law of the Land, and these
Parliamentmen at their first sitting did agnize subjection unto Him
accordingly, and recognize Him for their Sovereign liege Lord: Nay, the Roman
Catholic denies not this, for though there were Bulls sent to dispense with
the English Subjects for their allegiance to Queen Elizabeth, yet the Pope did
this against Her as he took Her for a Heretic, not an Usurpresse, though he
knew well enough that She had been declared Illegitimate by the Act of an
English Parliament.

This Imperial Crown of England is adorned and decked with many fair
Flowers, which are called, royal Prerogatives; and they are of such a
transcendent nature, that they are unforfeitable, individual, and
untransferable to any other: The KING can only summon and dissolve Parliaments:
The KING can only Pardon (for when He is Crowned, He is sworn to rule in mercy
as well as in justice:) The KING can only Coin Money, and enhance or decry the
value of it: The power of electing Officers of State, of Justices of Peace, and
Assise is in the KING; He can only grant sovereign Commissions: The KING can
only wage War, and make Outlandish Leagues: The KING may make all the Courts
of justice ambulatory with His Person, as they were used of old; it is true, the
Court of Common Pleas must be sedentary in some certain place for such a time;
but that expired, it is removeable at His pleasure: The KING can only employ
Ambassadors and Treat with forain States, etc. These, with other royal
Prerogatives which I shall touch hereafter, are those rare and wholesome flowers
wherewith the Crown of England is embellished, nor can they stick any where
else but in the Crown, and all confess the Crown is as much the KING's, as
any private man's Cap is his own.

Scepter, which may be called an inseparable companion, or a necessary appendix
to the Crown; this invests the KING with the sole Authority of making Laws,
for before His confirmation all results and determinations of Parliament are
but Bills or (...), they are but abortive things, and mere Embryos; nay, they
have no life at all in them till the KING puts breath and vigor into them: and
the ancient custom was for the KING to touch them with His Scepter, then they
are Laws, and have a virtue in them to impose an obligation of universal
obedience upon all sorts of people, It being an undeniable maxim, That nothing
can be generally binding without the King's royal assent, nor does the Law of
England take notice of any thing without it: This being done, they are ever
after styled the King's Laws, and the Judges are said to deliver the King's
judgments, which agrees with the holy Text, The King by judgment shall stablish
the Land: nay, the Law presumes the King to be always the sole Judge
Paramount, and Lord chief Justice of England, for he whom He pleases to depute
for His chiefest Justice, is but styled Lord chief Justice of the King's Bench,
not Lord chief Justice of England, which title is peculiar to the KING Himself,
and observable it is, that whereas He grants Commissions and Parents to the
Lord Chancellor (who is no other then Keeper of His Conscience) and to all
other Judges, He names the Chief Justice of His own Bench by a short Writ only
containing two or three lines: Now, though the King be liable to the Law, and
is contented to be within their verge, because they are chiefly His own
productions, yet He is still their Protector, Moderator, and Sovereign, which
attributes are incommunicable to any other conjunctly or separately.

Thus the KING with His Scepter, and by the mature advice of His two Houses of
Parl. which are His highest Council and Court, has the sole power of making
Laws; other Courts of judicature do but expound them and distribute them by
His appointment, they have but Juris dati dictionem or declarationem, and
herein, I mean for the Exposition of the Laws the twelve Judges are to be
believed before the whole Kingdom besides. They are as the Areopagites in
Athens, the chief Presidents in France and Spain in an extraordinary Junta, as
the Cape-Syndiques in the Rota's of Rome, and the Republique of Venice whose
judgments in point of interpreting Laws are incontroulable, and preferred
before the opinion of the whole Senate whence they received their being; and
who has still power to repeal them, though not to expound them. In France they
have a Law-maxime, Arrest done en Rob rouge est irrevocable, which is, a
Scarlet Sentence is irrevocable, meaning when all the Judges are met in their
Robes, and the Client against whom the Cause goes, may chafe and chomp upon the
bit, and say what he will for the space of 24 hours against his Judges, but if
ever after he traduces them, he is punishable: It is no otherwise here where
every ignorant peevish Client, every puny Barister, specially if he become a
Member of the House will be ready to arraign and vie knowledge with all the
reverend Judges in the Land, whose judgment in points of Law should be only
tripodicall and sterling: so that he may be truly called a just King, and to
rule according to Law, who rules according to the opinion of his Judges;
therefore, under favor, I do not see how his Majesty for his part could be
called injust when he leavied the Ship Money, consideing he had the judges for
it.

Sword in hand, which is the third Instrument of a King, (and which this short
discourse chiefly points at) it is as well as the two first, incommunicable and
inalienable from his Person; nothing concerns his honor more both at home and
abroad; the Crown and the Scepter are but unweildy and impotent naked
indefensible things without it. There Is none so simple as to think there is
meant hereby an ordinary single sword, such as every one carries by his side,
or some imaginary thing or chymera of a sword; No, it is the polemical public
sword of the whole Kingdom, it is an aggregative compound sword, and it is
molded of bell-metall; for it is made up of all the ammunition and arms small
and great, of all the military strengths both by Land and Sea, of all the
Forts, Castles and tenable places within and round about the whole I Will: The
Kings of England have had this sword by virtue of their royal signory from all
times, the Laws have girded it to their sides, they have employed it for
repelling all foreign force, for revenging all foreign wrongs or affronts, for
quelling all intestine tumults, and for protecting the weal of the whole body
politic at home: The peeple were never capable of this sword, the fundamental
constitutions of this Kingdom deny it them; it is all one to put the sword in a
mad man's hand, as in the peeples; or for them to have a disposing power in
whose hands it shall be. Such was the case once of the French sword, in that
notorious insurrection called to this day La Jaqueris de Beauvoisin, when the
Pesants and Mechanics had a design to wrest it out of the Kings hand, and to
depresse all the Peers and Gentry of the Kingdom; and the business had gone very
far, had not the Prelates stuck close to the Nobility; But afterward poor
hare-brain'd things they desire the King upon bended knees to take it again;
Such popular puffs have blown often in Poland, Naples and other places, where
while they sought and fought for liberty by retrenching the regal power, they
fooled themselfs into a slavery unawares, and found the rule right, that excess
of freedom turns to thraldom, and ushers in all confusions. If one should go
back to the nonage of the world, when Governers and Rulers began first, one
will find the peeple desired to live under Kings for their own advantage, that
they might be restrained from wild exorbitant liberty, and kept in unity; Now
unity is as requisite for the welbeing of all natural things, as entity is for
their being, and it is a received maxim in policy, that nothing preserves Unity
more exactly then Royal Government: besides it is known to be the noblest sort
of sway; In so much that by the Law of Nations, if Subjects of equal degrees,
and under differing Princes should meet, the Subjects of a King should take
predency of those under any Republique, and those of a successif Kingdom, of
those that are under an Electif.

But to take up the Sword again. I say that the Sword of public power and
authority is fit only to hang at the Kings side, and so indeed should the great
Seal hang only at his girdle, because it is the Key of the Kingdom: which makes
me think of what I read of Charlemain, how he had the imperial Seal embossed
always upon the pommell of his sword, and his reason was, that he was ready to
maintain whatsoever he signed, and sealed.

The Civilians, who are not in all points so great friends to Monarchy as the
Common Law of England is, say, there are six lura Regalia, six Regal Rights,
viz. 1. Potestas Iudicatoria, 2. Potestas vitae and necis, 3. Armamenta, 4.
Bona adespota, 5. Census, 6. Monetarum valor:to wit, Power of Judicature, power
of life and death, all kind of arming, masterlesse goods, Sessements, and the
value of money.

Among these Regalias, we find that Arming, which in effect is naught else but
the Kings Sword, is among the chiefest; and it is as proper and peculiar to his
person, as either Crown or Scepter. By these two he draws a loose voluntary
love and opinion only from his Subjects, but by the Sword he draws reverence
and awe, which are the chiefest ingredients of allegiance, it being a maxim,
That the best mixture of government is made of fear and love. With this sword
he conferrs honor, he dubbs Knights, he creates magistrates, the Lord Deputy of
Ireland, the Lord Mayor of London with all other Corporations have their swords
from him, and when he enters any place corporat, we know the first thing that
is presented him is the Sword: With this Sword he shields and preserves all his
peeple that every one may sit quietly under his own Vine, sleep securely in his
own House, and enjoy sweetly the fruits of his labors.

Nor does the point of this sword reach only to every corner of his own
dominions, but it extends beyond the seas to guard his Subjects from oppression,
and denial of justice, as well as to vindicate the public wrongs, make good
the interests of his Crown, and to assist his confederates; This is the sword
that Edward the third tied the Flower deluces unto (which stick still unto it,)
when having sent to France to demand that Crown by maternall right, the
Counsel there sent him word that the Crown of France was not tied to a
d^staff, to which scoffing answer he replied that then he would tie it to his
sword, and he was as good as his word. Nor is this public sword concredited or
entrusted by the peeple in a fiduciary conditional way to the King, but it is
properly and peculiarly belonging unto him, as an inseparable concomitant,
perpetual Usher and attendant to his Crown. The King, we know, uses to
maintain all garrisons upon his own charge, not the peeples; he fortifies upon
his own charge, not the peeples: And though I will not averr, that the King may
impresse any of his Subjects, unless it be upon an actual invasion by Sea, or
a sudden irruption into his Kingdom by Land, as the Scots have often don, yet
at any time the King may raise Volunteers, and those who have received his
money, the Law makes it felony, if they forsake his service.

Thus we see there is nothing that conduces more to the glory, and indeed the
very essence of a King then the Sword, which is the Arms and military strength
of his Kingdom; wherefore under favor, there cannot be a greater point of
dishonor to a King then to be disarmed, then to have his Sword taken from him,
or disposed of and entrusted to any but those whom he shall appoint; for as a
minori ad majus the Argument often holds, if a private Gentleman chance to be
disarmed upon a quarrel, it is held the utmost of disgraces, much greater and
more public is the dishonor that falls upon a King, if after some traverses of
difference 'twixt him and his Subjects, they should offer to disarme him, or
demand his sword of him: when the Eagle parted with his talons, and the Lion
with his teeth and ongles, the Apolog tells us how contemptible afterward the
one grew to be among Birds, the other among Beasts. For a King to part with the
Sword politic is to render himself such a ridiculous King, as that logg of wood
was which Jupiter let down among the froggs for their King at the importunity
of their croaking; it is to make him a King of clouts, or as the Spaniard has
it, Rey de Havas, a Bean-King, such as we use to choose in sport at Twelf-night.

But my hopes are, that the two present Houses of Parliament (for now they may
be called so, because they begin to parley with their King,) will be more tender
of the honor of their Soverain Liege Lord, which, together with all his Rights
and Dignities, by several solemn Oaths, and by their own binding instruments
of Protestation and Covenant, (not yet revoked) they are sworn to maintain, and
that they will demand nothing of him which may savor of Asperte or force, but
what may hold water hereafter: But now, touching the Militia or Sword of the
Kingdom, I think, under favor, the King cannot transfer it to any other; for
that were to desert the protection of his people, which is point blank against
his Coronation Oath and his Office: What foreign Prince or State will send
either Ambassador, Resident or Agent to him, when they understand his Sword is
taken from him? What reformed foreign Church will acknowledge Him Defender of the
Faith, when they hear of this? Nay, they who wish England no good will, will go
near to paint him out, as not long since another King was, with a fair velvet
Scabbard, a specious golden hilt and chape, but the blade within was of wood. I
hope that they who sway now, will make better use of their successes: Many of
them know it is as difficult a thing to use a victory well, as to get one; there
is as much prudence required in the one, as prowess in the other; they will be
wiser sure then turn it to the dishonor of their King: it being a certain
rule, that the glory of a Nation all the world over depends upon the glory of
their King, and if he be any way obscured, the whole Kingdom is under an
eclipse.

I have observed, that among other characters of gallantry, which foreign
Writers appropriat to the English Nation, one is, that they use to be most
zealous to preserve the Honor of their King; I trust that they who are now upp
will return to the steps of their Progenitors, both in this particular and
diverse other; that their successes may serve to sweeten and moderat things, and
suppress the popular Sword which still rages; And it had been heartily wished
that a suspension of Arms had preceded this Treaty, which uses to be the
ordinary forerunner, and a necessary antecedent to all Treaties; for while
acts of hostility continue, some ill favored news may intervene which may
imbitter and disturb all: nor can it be expected that the proceedings will go
on with that candor and confidence, while the old rancor is still in action;
it is impossible a sore should heal till the inflammation be taken away; To cast
water into a wound instead of oil is not the way to cure it: or to cast oil
upon a fire instead of water is not the way to quench it; poor England has had
a consuming fire within her bowels many years, she is also mortally wounded
in all her members, that she is still in a high Fever, which has made her rave
and speak idle a long time; and it is like to turn to a Hectic if not timely
prevented. I p^ay God she may have no occasion to make use of the same
complaint as Alexander the great made when he was expiring his last, Perii
turba Medicorum: too many Physicians have undon me.

To conclude in a word, there is but one only way, under favor, to put a period
to all these fearful confusions; it is, to put the great Master-wheele in
order, and in its due place again, and then all the inferior wheels will move
regularly; let the King be restored, and every one will com to his own, all
interests will be satisfied, all things quickly rectified; till this be done,
it is as absurd to attempt the settling of peace, as if one should go about to set
a Watch by the gnomon of an horizontall Dial when the Sun is in a cloud.

Dolor Capitis est Caput Doloris.
Jam. Howell.
16. September. 1648.

