VAE-EUGE-TUBA. OR, The Wo-Ioy-Trumpet, Sounding the third and greatest woe to
the Antichristian world, but the first and last joy to the Church of the Saints
upon Christ's exaltation over the Kingdoms of the World.

UNFOLDED IN A SERMON before the Honorable Houses of COMMONS assembled in
Parliament, at their late solemn Fast, May 26. 1647.

By G. HUGHES Minister of the Gospel in Plymouth:

Published by Order of the House.

PROVE. 8.15. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice.

OBAD. V. 21. The Kingdom shall be the Lords.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for John Rothwell at the Sun and Fountain in Paul's
Churchyard. 1647:

Die Mercurii, Maii 26. 1647.
ORdered that Sir John Bampfyld do from this House give thanks to Master
Hughes for the great pains he took in the Sermon he preached this day at the
entreaty of this House at St. Margarets Westminster (it being the day of
public Humiliation) and to desire him to print his Sermon: and he is to have
the like privilege in printing of it as others in the like kind usually have
had.

H Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I do appoint John Rothwell to print my Sermon.

George Hughes.

TO THE HONORABLE THE House of COMMONS now Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Honorable and Renowned Patriots,
IT was a pretty Rhetorical strain of words, though scarce reasonable
(unless as a Paradox may be made) with Moralists or Divines, (...). Longin
(...)
To fall in great matters is a Generous and Noble sin. It is but a conceit,
that the height of materials whereabout the slip was, should innoble sin;
False coinage upon Lead will be as high Treason as that upon better metal;
and Treason upon Gold as base as that upon Brass.

In the Oracles of God, where we have words not inferior to men's, but wisdom
and truth far above them, We are thus taught, Slips in highest things are the
greatest faults, and a fall in Heaven fouler wickedness than a stumbling on
earth. Sins draw the highest aggravations from the Greatness of God against
whom, and the height of place wherein they are committed. The Angels which left
their first station, and man that sinned in Paradise, have felt the truth of
this. Zeal for God and you, and his Church, (most Noble Worthies) will make his
and your friends reckon little of their lives to keep you that are in Highest
places from such high transgression. By the grace given to me, when I was
called by you to speak from God to you, and for you to God, in the day of your
souls affliction, I had this in my greatest desires, to keep you that are in
highest places, and mannaging the highest matters of God, from sin against
him. I therefore (as became a Minister of Christ) desired to use all plainness
in setting out the Kingdom of our Lord, unto which all States must how that
would be prosperous, and in pointing at such sinful irregularities which
render God an enemy irreconcilable, and such States thereby eternally
miserable. In all which (the Judge of spirits knows) I intended not either by
matter or form of speech to be spatter such an Honorable Judicatory with false
charges, or make a Parliament vile among the people; (I have learned better of
Christ by Gods grace) my aim was only to be a faithful Remembrancer of you
from God, of the fatal diseases whereunto such Politic Bodies may be
subject, in their members; that a timely care may be had of purging your
selves, least death ensue.

I hope your hearts are as willing to bear such plainness, as God would have
them in commanding it. Never was there a more fatal character upon the State
of Israel, then that bitter speech of Idolatrous Amaziah to Jeroboam against
honest Amos, The Land is not able to bear his words. Amos 7.10.
When States cannot bear sound words from God, spoken in his Name; or not so
bear them, as obediently to answer Gods mind in them, the doom of Elies sons
will cleave to them. 1 Samuel 2.25.
The God of all grace keep off such a curse of an Impatient hardened spirit
from you, and give you the blessing of a boared ear, and a
softyeelding-obedient heart, so shall ye prosper.

Upon your Order of acceptance of these poor labors, and for publishing the
same, I have been obedient to your desire; and now in all humble duty and
thankfulness do present that to your eyes, of which your ears have tasted;
I have made a few additions for clearing some passages which straits of time
then shut out; I hope none will be loosers by them. The height of my ambition
is, 2 Cor 3.3.
that by this Inke-worke the Spirit of the living God would write the Name of
the Lord and his Christ upon this Parliament, and upon the people of the Land;
that ye may be the Lords State, ruling for Christ, and he in you, as one Party;
and they the Lords people, the lot of his Inheritance.

And now having done my work with you, I shall by the good will of our God
return to my place, and there labor for you, to help on the work of
Righteousness, Truth, and Peace, in your hands. My suit to the Thron of grace
is and shall be the Aversion of all those Woes sounded by this Trumpet upon the
wicked, and the Accomplishment of all those Woes sounded to the Church; that
Christ may be fully exalted in these united Kingdoms and reign, that the
Churches of the Saints also may sing, and always rejoice in their Lord, whose
these Kingdoms are; and all in your days, and by your power managed
graciously in the band of our Lord. By whose command I must sign my self,

Your Honors most humble and faithful servant in the Kingdom of Christ,
GEORGE HUGHES.

THE WOE-JOY TRUMPET.
Revel. c. 11. v. 15. And the seventh Angel sounded the Trumpet, and there were
great voices in Heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this world are become the
Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever.


THe Text is the Gospel of reinthroning God in Christ over the Kingdoms of
this world after the great apostasy finished: Tidings fit to be published to
all States, 2 These. 2.3.
that they may hear and fear, and honor the Lord and his Christ, and not
perish in the day of his exaltation. All fastings will be as Ahabs humblings
until this be done.

The title of this Trumpet seems cross to the nature of the event here
mentioned. It is styled the third wo-Trumpet; Revel. 11.14. V.15, 16, 17.
The event is Christ's taking the Kingdoms of this world, and the triumphant
song of the Saints celebrating this conquest of their Lord with praises. How
can these suit? Very well, if we distinguish the subjects severally concerned
in it, which eminently are two.

1. Antichrist with all his creatures and confederates, and all the wicked
enemies of the most holy God and his Saints unto these only it is a
Wo-trumpet, and the event is the last and worst of woeful destructions unto
them. Two considerations may clearly evince this.

1. It is altogether unheard of in divine revelations, that God should sound
woe to his Saints. Indeed tribulations are their way to Heaven, and bitterest
afflictions they may suffer in the flesh, Phil. 1.19. Heb. 12.6, 10.
but this is a special dignation of God to honor them, or love to chastise
them unto greater holiness; no woe properly so called, which being the effect
of Gods greatest indignation, Matthew. 23.13, 14, etc.
terrifies and grindeth poor souls to powder.

2. The three last VVo-trumpets are directed only to the inhabiters of the
earth, Rev. 8 13.
men so called in opposition to the Saints, who are Heavens people; (for by
these names of Earth and Heaven are the Antichristian world, and the Church of
Christ distinguished by the Spirit.) Rev. 18.9, 11, 20.
Therefore on these only is allotted that woeful sound of this and the former
Trumpets.

2. Christ and his Saints are concerned in the best event of this Trumpet; for
in all this time of sounding woes upon these earthly creatures, Christ is
possessing the Thrones of the world, Saints are worshipping and praising God;
It is therefore a joy Trumpet unto these. So has God set the times and states
of creatures adverse each to other; The worlds light is the Churches darkness,
and the Saints joy the worlds greatest woe. The title and event then of this
Trumpet are thus reconciled.

To make a clearer passage to the text three precognitions will be useful. 1.
Of the time. 2. Of the subject. 3. Of the matter of this Trumpets sound; which
I shall touch here but shortly for a general light.

1. What time the sound of this Trumpet does concern is not agreed on by
interpreters; some make it contemporary with the last day, and so call it the
last Trump; 1 These. 4.16.
The chief grounds of this I shall take off in another place, only for
present, these reasons evince it cannot relate to that time.

1. This Trumpet sounds only a change of the Kingdoms of this world from Lord
to Lord, not the period of them which the last Trump of God will surely sound;
at the great day of judgment they shall all expire and be no more.

2. Rev. 11.18.
Under this Trumpet sin shall abound upon the earth, the Nations shall be
angry at the exaltation of Christ and his Saints, when power shall be taken out
of their hands; but such relics shall not be when the end of all things is
come.

3. This Trumpet doubtless foundeth woe upon the earth, and that of no small
continuance, which after the last judgment cannot be. These and other
considerations may demonstrate that this cannot be the last Trumpet; yet by the
events expressed in the successive degrees of them, it may be rightly
conjectured that the sound of this seventh Trumpet teaches something near to
that of the last judgment.

2. Others conceive more rightly that the sound of this Trumpet concerns Heaven
upon Earth, that is the state of the Church below; only the difference is,
about the point of time for the beginning of these events spoken of; one
pitcheth it upon the utter fall of the Western mystical Babell, and the
coming of the Kings of the East, which though it must be under this seventh
Trumpet, yet is it not so probable to be the first effect of it. It is a fair
gloss, that from the taking of the first Kingdom of this world out of the hand
of Antichrist, the sound of this Trumpet should be heard; for if this be a
Wo-trumpet upon the Romish Babel, it must needs suppose that state to be
standing at least in the first sounding of it; And the driving of Antichrist
out of the Territories and Thrones of the world, has been and must be
contemporaneous with Christ's re-entrance upon the ruling of them: So that all
the Vials powered out upon the Antichristian state in any of the Kingdoms of
this world, seems to contemporize with this Trumpet, although indeed several
Scenes be acted, and the finishing the mystery of God be not until the last
days of the seventh Trumpet. This state of time then seems most suitable,
whereof some portions are past, and some, and those most glorious, are yet to
come.

2. The subject whom this Trumpet concerns, seems to be the Universe
sublunary, even all the Kingdoms or States in the world, which have been
captivated by that Romish Antichrist; therefore not England, nor the united
Kingdoms of Ireland and Scotland excluded.

3. The matter of this sound and great voices is a Reformation-change, of
worldly Kingdoms from the power and rule of Antichrist unto the actual
administration of the Lord and his Christ. In the whole paragraph about this
Trumpet we have observable, 1. A proposition of the Ministry of this
providence, wherein. 1. The Minister is described, The seventh Angel. 2. The
ministration, He sounded the Trumpet.
2. A proposition of the effect, which is expressed 1. Generally, There were
great voices in Heaven, saying. 2. Specially, wherein three effects are
discovered, 1. Christ's inauguration, or the Lords reassuming Kingdoms for his
Christ, v. 15. 2. The Saints triumphant song, v. 16, 17. 3. The Nations anger
at all this, with the pouring out of the wrath of God to repay them, v. 18, 19.




The first effect is the sum of the Text, to the discovery of which, and the
certainty thereof in the Trumpets sound, I shall bend the following discourse.
The ground work of all shall be laid in two propositions touching this effect.

1 A Reformation-change of worldly Kingdoms to our Lord and his Christ, is a
sure revelation from God.

2. The Lord and his Christ shall (King it) or reign over these reformed
Kingdoms for ever and ever.

The full prophecy here given is completed in these two propositions, and
both these will be understood in the opening of three main things carried in
them.

1. The true state of the subject of this change.

2. The right meaning of this Reformation-change.

3. The due account of the certainty of this Revelation.

To the first. The subject of this change here spoken of, are the Kingdoms of
the world; wherein two notions are considerable; one noting the nature, the
other giving the specification of this subject.

1. Kingdoms] note the subject of this Reformation-change, (...)
in the general nature of it, and so must import,

1. The bounds of Territories which are given by God, as the continent of all
men that live under government in them.

2. The people contained or inhabiting within the compass of such Dominions
must needs be entitled here; for not lands but souls, must be thus reformed.

3. The chief of those people, Princes, States, and Powers among those persons
seem especially to be carried in this notion of Kingdoms; Isai. 52.15. Isai.
55.5.
and they not so much considered in themselves, as in respect to government,
which they are called of God to exercise toward others; so that go verning and
governed as they concur to make up Kingdoms, are here the subject of this
reforming change.

2. (...)
The specification of these Kingdoms sets them out more fully, they are the
Kingdoms of the world; so that what the world signifies, must give us the
special nature of the Kingdoms mentioned; and that is used in a three fold
acception.

1. As opposed to Heaven the superior Globe, Matthew. 4.8.
and so it must note Earthy Kingdoms, States, and Polities.

2. As opposed to God, to Christ, to Grace, (as the whole world lies in
wickedness) so it holds out wicked Kingdoms and States formerly ruled by the
wicked one. 1 John 5.19.


3. As opposed to particular regions or climates, and so it must signify the
universe, even all the Kingdoms of the earth; there are none excepted in the
text. All these acceptions must be admitted here, and being so taken, the
present subject cannot be doubted; The sound of this seventh Trumpet then must
needs utter things touching the Church in this life, and the Lords resuming
power over his enemies here beneath before the last judgment.

To the second. The right stating of this change is not of small moment; for
which purpose these particulars must be declared, 1. The terms of it. 2. The
nature of it. 3. The time of it. 4. The exercise of it. 5. The stability of it,
when once the Lord has made it.

1. Every change or motion supposes necessarily two terms; one from whence
the change, begins, the other whereunto it is made: In the Text but one of
these is named and that the last, the Lord, and his Christ; yet the other must
needs be implied out of whose hands and power these must must be taken. First
then, the Lords that did King it over these Kingdoms of the world, were the
Devil in chief, Rev. 1^.1, 7, 12. Revel. 17.1.
and his vicegerents the two beasts, the Romish Antichrist in special, whose
state is shadowed by the whore who sat upon many waters, that is, ruled over
many people. These only gave laws to the States and Nations of the world,
revel. 13.15.
and required tribute from bodies and souls of men, and would set their marks
upon every creature, or kill those that did refuse it. Of whose reign it may be
noted.

1. Revel. 12.9.
The Devil was the father or author of it in full.

2. Revel. 18 13.
Tyranny over bodies and souls the only rule of it.

3. Revel. 13.8.
Idolatry most odious was the only tribute to their King.

4. Revel. 19.20.
The end of all this government is Hell and perdition; into the lake of fire,
they and all their vassals are thrown; from these cruel Lords are the
Kingdoms taken.

2. The term unto which this change is made is named in the Text [our Lord,
and his Christ] Two words are here absolute, Lord and Christ; and two
relatives, Ours and His, all would be understood in their propriety.

1. Lord here is equivalent to Jehovah, and notes God in his primitive
acception of Lordship not derived. For indeed, there is a Lord borne, and
derived, a mediating Lord, which is the Lord Jesus, styled afterward the Lords
Christ; Psalm. 110.1.
but here it must note that Lord which said to David's Lord, sit thou on my
right hand, etc. God the Father more punctually, who is absolutely Lord of
Lords, 1 Cor. 13.24.
and King of Kings, to whom also the mediating Lord must give up his Kingdom,
when his work is done; Revel. 14, 6, 7.
that God whom the everlasting Gospel holds out to be feared, to be
glorifined, to be worshipped.

2. The relative denoting him is Our. If it be inquired who were these
correlates to God the King; the answer must be supplied, from those great
voices before which speak these words; The voices say, Our Lord, and the same
afterward utter his praise, and sing his triumph for taking to him his great
power to reigue; now these were the 24 Elders, the usual representative body
of the true Church; so that the true Church of Christ on earth is the correlate
unto the Lord, the King, who are bold to style him our Lord: And it not a vain
addition in this place, where it is prophesied that the Kingdoms of the world
are taken into his power, and become his. How the Church is his, by election,
by creation, by purchase, by calling, by covenant, and by profession, is not
now my purpose to relate, they are known things in the Gospel; but the ground
of the Emphaticall use of it here is the thing needful to declare: Now indeed
that appears to be, that God not simply or abstractively considered in
himself, but concretely and relatively known with his peculiar ones, reassumes
these Kingdoms, and now shows himself thus to reign; that is, God so
known, so believed, so worshipped as among his chosen and true seed; the
Kingdoms are become the Lords, as he is our God, dwelling with us, and
worshipped by us, not as misconceived by the world For it might be said he
ruled in the times of Antichrists reign, and that the worshippers of
Antichrist did and do acknowledge God and Christ; (as some lukewarm advocates
will plead for them) but is it God, so known, so believed on, so worshipped, as
by the true Church who calls him ours; The Sun shows the contrary; It is a
falsified, corrupted, misbelieved God, that Papists boast of. In this concrete
sense Moses writes of God triumphing over the Churches enemies, Deuteronomy. 32.31.
Their rock is not as our rock, the enemies themselves being Judges. Did not
many of Isreal's enemies know and confess the same Rock or God for essence as
Israel did? Yea doubtless but they turned the glory of the incorruptible God
into Images, and base resemblances, and so made him a Rock distinct from
Isreal's by false worship; In which respect Moses sings, God with us, and
worshipped by us, is far above yours, he that has ruled and destroyed your
Gods and you, as your selves can witness. O how sweet a thought is this, the
Lord, no way but as the Churches Lord, known, and served by them takes
possession of the Kingdoms of the world! The Saints cannot be low, if as
theirs only God be thus exalted.

3. The next term absolute which denotes the Sovereign power to which these
Kingdoms are delivered, is Christ; (...)
in which notion the person and the unction must be carried.

1. The person here intended is the Son of God manifested in the flesh, Psalm
45.6. Heb. 1.8.
of whom it is said, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever; so that it is one
God in both expressions that takes unto him this power, yet so interpreted, God
in the Mediator, God truly, God sweetly, God sutably held out for ruling these
Kingdoms, even God and man.

2. The Unction of this person is that which the name peculiarly holds forth,
and with an emphasis in this place; the ground of this name is the anointing
which he received above his fellows; Heb. 1.9. Acts 10.38.
so it is said, God did annoint Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with
powers, which Unction notes his setting apart, and enabling for the work of
several Offices, toward the Kingdoms of his possession. These were,

1. Priestly, Psalm 110.4.
which was especially to reconcile souls to God; and so these Kingdoms were
taken under a reconciling head, which were before commanded to enmity against
God.

2. Prophetical, Deuteronomy. 18.15.
wherein he was to reveal Gods will fully and savingly, and so these Kingdoms
were to come under a saving Teacher, who before were seduced by the false
Prophet to destruction.

3. Regal, Psalm 2.6.
whereby he was to give laws to these regained Polities, and set his order
among them, which before were ruled by the beast to miserable confusion. All
these make up that Christ, whose Kingdoms these are made at this time; and the
exercise of their offices must be during the Churches imperfection in this life.

4. (...) Luke 2.26. Luke 9.20.
The relative term specifying this Christ is [His] that is, Jehovahs, the Lords
Christ, the Christ of God. It is his Christ, not ours, eminently declaring the
Author of this Unction; this note may persuade not to read Lord and Christ by
apposition, as if it were the Lord Christ; but as distinct things united, and
terms differently signifying in this place. Never thelesse this relative
addition gives honor unto Christ.

1. Nothing his Authority or Sovelaignty. Now that is Gods, Jehovah owns this
Christy that none despise him.

2. Teaching his truth and infallibility in all his administrations; so that
none may mistrust him.

3. Showing his irresistability in regard of all the Potentates in the world,
that none might contend with him. This relation only gives warrant unto poor
souls to rest wholly upon this Anointed, because he is Gods: unless he be
Gods Christ, he must not be embraced by creatures; and being his, must not be
resisted.

Q. Are there then two heads consorted in the translation of these Kingdoms,
because God and his Christ are coupled?

A. Not so, but one head only specified in this conjunction; the Lord and his
Christ here, is as much as the Lord in his Christ, or by his Christ, taking to
him this power over States to make them Christian. God in the Mediator makes
not two Lords corrivals, but one graciously disposed to rule Kingdoms unto
life; John 5 22. John 12.49, 50
therefore the Judgment, Law, and Rule of the Father and Son is punctually
said to be one. We have seen the terms of this change.

To the second, 2.
the nature of this change, I have termed it a Reformation-change, and I
conceive properly in that these Kingdoms are said to become our Lords; (...)
Now this same word (...) to be made notes some change de nove new that was not
before; for if they were the Lords before in the sense here meant, they could
not reasonably be said now to be made or become his.

Q. But were not all these Kingdoms the Lords that made them, and set the
bounds of them from the first of their being? How then can they be said to be
made his now?

A. Surely this question can be satisfied only by the right stating of the
present change, carried in that term made the Lords. Now this in its use has
a double acception.

1. (...) Genesis 1.3.
Sometimes it notes esse simplex, the simple making or being of a thing which
before was not, as in the creation God said, Let their be light, and it was
make; In this sense it cannot here be meant, for these Kingdoms were made
before of God, and so were his works.

2. (...) Romans 7.4.
Sometimes it notes esse relativum, a relative being, as the wife is said to be
made her husbands; she was before in the being of a woman, but not of a wife;
so these Kingdoms were made before the beast and false Prophet did usurp
them, but then only were they made Antichristian; Facta sunt. i. venerum in
Christi porestarem, myrannidi diaboli, and ministrorum ejus erepta. B^z.
now this making in the Text is the change of that relation of these Kingdoms
from that Antichristian usurpation and tyranny, unto the government of the Lord
and his Christ; so that now they are made the Lords by Reformation, which were
his creation before. And this new work is done by God in Christ, these ways.

1. Quoad resuseeptimem Patentie, by resuming the power into his hand, which he
seemed to have laid aside, (...). etc. Revel. 11.17.
when he suffered Satan in Antichrist to domineer over these Kingdoms, and
rule them unto perdition; so it is said in the Churches song, Thou have taken
to thee thy great power, and have reigned; that is, now he did manifest
himself, that in what those Lords had dealt proudly, he was above them, and
his permission was no approbation of them in their tyranicall usurpations.

2. Quoad vindicias juris, by vindicating his right to these Kingdoms, which
the Devil in Antichrist had denied, according to his old vaunt, All these are
mine, and to whom I will I give them. Luke 4.6.
That horrible practice of the Pope in usurping Crowns, and taking upon him to
dispose them at his pleasure, is a full proof of this. Now God at this time
breaks out the Lions teeth, makes the nations angry, and takes these Kingdoms
as a spoil for Christ, Psalm 2.8.
to whom at first God had given them. A double right is that which God now
vindicates, whereby these Kingdoms are called his. 1. Ius paternitatis, a right
of paternity concerning all them, that he had given unto Christ, which were his
seed indeed, and whom as he had redeemed, Isay 55, 5.
so now he calls to the participation of life in Christ; This right is
peculiar to some only in these Kingdoms. 2. Jus Dominii, a right of Lordship
which is his due, as well over slaves as children; So though he convert not
savingly all these states, yet he makes them take his Laws, serve his turn,
set up his Ordinances, and work his will, though in sincerity perhaps they
mean not so; Now this is reformation in its measure, though it reach not to the
truth of conversion; So God moved Cyrus, Nebuchadnezzar, Darius, etc. Psalm.
72.10, 11. Psalm. 2.9.
of whom yet it cannot be said they were converted. And such a right is
promised to Christ also in the Gospel times, by which he shall use his Iron Rod
as well as his Golden Scepter. No hope that all in all Kingdoms should be
truly converted, but that all shall be subdued, Rev. 19.16, etc.
made slaves, if not friends, not able to resist the power of the Lords, is
that which Scriptures speak and we may expect.

3. Quoad ezercitium Dominii, by exercising this power and right over these
Kingdoms that are become his; and this Lordship he does exercise several ways

1. By a powerful turning of the hearts of Princes from darkness to light,
Mojestatem red dit visibilem in ipsis regibus corda fernando etc. Brightman in
text.
causing them to consider the things of God which they had not heard, and so to
shut their mouths from gainsaying Christ, and thrice exalt him in their
hearts; of such a reformation-change the Lord seems to speak in that Gospel
promise, I will make thy Officers peace, and thy Exactors righteousness; Isay
52, 13, 14, 15.
when peace shall rule, and righteousness exact, then the Kingdom is the Lords.

2 By a powerful restraint upon others not truly called, chained up by the
devil, Revel. 20. 2. Psalm 149.8.
and binding Kings, Princes, and Nobles as with fetters, that they shall not
any longer hinder the Lord from taking Thrones and ruling; Thus the Kingdoms
of the world universally become the Lords. The King that is not converted shall
be restrained. Thus far appears the nature of this Reformation-change.

To the third, 3. (...).
which is the time of this change, the voices speak as of the time past,
saying, they are or were become the Lords, the time is expressed in this verb
also; But now where to state this time is the diffioulty, men's thoughts running
diverse ways. It has been determined to be, while time the measure of the
creatures in their changes lasts, but the special point of that time is now
desired; when those Kingdoms begin to be the Lords. For the discovery whereof,
I shall propose some help from these considerations.

1. This seventh Angel is said to sound the third Wotrumpet, which certainly
did call for execution of vengeance upon the Kingdom of Antichrist, whose
Scepter made all the Kingdoms of the earth stoop unto him, who had subscribed
to his name, and worshipped him; This was done by breaking the yoke of that
Romish Tyran the Pope off from the neck of those States, in which very moment
the Lord took possession of those Kingdoms, from which by his great power he
drove out that strong one, the devil in that man of sin. So that this Trumpet
seems to contemporize with all the Vials poured out upon States formerly under
Antichrist, dashing in pieces the great Abettors, and turning others to be
serviceable unto Christ. For however at all times God kept his secret ones
within the Territories of Babel, who ceased not in all ages to witness to his
truth, yet all this while the States and Kingdoms worshipped the beast; So
then the time of change of Kingdoms must be eminent, and from that instant that
any State returned to subjection unto Christ's Scepter in the Gospel after the
great apostasy, seems to begin the sound of the seventh Trumpet; for then was
it woe to that Antichrist and his vassals, but joy to Christ and his Saints.
Now no hard thing is it to look back so far as to find out that point of
time wherein Thrones began to be possessed by Christ, and to entertain the
Gospel. The Histories of Germany, Saeveland, Denmark, England, Scotland, etc.
may help us to know this time, when our Lord took these States from the Prince
of darkness ruling in that son of perdition.

2. This Reformation-change is graduall, and is carried on in several portions
of time, from the turning of the first Kingdom to the finishing of the mystery
of God. That the meaning of this Trumpet-sound should be a graduall susception
of Gods power to reign, I am persuaded to believe from the course of the
events; we see some Kingdoms delivered, but not all yet, which are expected to
be resumed by Christ from that Roman Apostate; Now as God performs his
prophecies, so are we to understand his meaning in them; and it is the best
help we have rightly to conceive the Prophets speaking of Christ to come, by
seeing him come, and fulfilling what was written of him. I take it, the same
help is to made use of concerning the prophesies of these times, and those to
come, of which the book of the revelations is full. So that, if we see the Lord
has taken Kingdoms of the world from Antichrist, we have the truth of this
Trumpet-sound; and if yet more Kingdoms are still under vassallage to him, this
sound declares woe unto them abiding in that slavery, but good tidings to Gods
hidden ones there, that the Lord will in his time take the prey out of the
Dragons mouth, and rule himself. And if so, then it must be a graduall change,
from the taking of the first Kingdom to the resuming of the last, which we see
is partly done in many States, and in greater part yet to be accomplished.

One word yet seems to cross this interpretation of the time; Dub. Revel. 10.7.
it is said, In the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, when he shall
begin to sound the Trumpet, even the mystery of God shall be finished, etc. And
if in the beginning of his sound all Kingdoms are changed together, and Gods
mystery finished, then it cannot be the time mentioned, but it must be wholly
to come.

To satisfy this scruple, Sell. (...) 1 Timothy 3 16.
two expressions here must be opened. 1. The mystery of God, which notion is
of various use; sometimes it notes the secret way of God by manifestation of
his Son in the flesh, etc. to make himself communicable to his creatures, so
to effect godliness in them, and save them; Col. 2.3.
This is the general use of it, so is it called the mystery of God, of the
Father and of Christ. Sometimes it is of special signification, and that two
ways: Ephesians. 3.6.
1. It notes this secret good will of God toward all the Gentiles, to bring
them into fellowship with himself, from the first preaching of the Gospel to
them by the Apostles, Romans 11.25, 16.
to the last by any Ministry. 2. It dictates this secret grace of God unto
Abraham's seed, the Jews, for the bringing them in after their long abdication,
to an ingrafting into Christ. In this last sense it is surely taken, and yet I
think not excluding the other special signification, nor the general in both,
for as much as that is finished in these.

2. When he shall begin to sound, (...).
is the passage that begets the doubt, therefore the right reading of it must
be inquired; and surely it is not necessary so to read it, when he shall begin
to sound, but vety properly, when he shall sound; (...) as in such lie
instances. (...). Apoc. 1.19. (...). I will spue thee out, not only begin to
do it. 2 Kings. 4.1.
and so is it read by good Interpreters as one word in the future tence; which
if allowable (as there is no doubt) the scruple is gone; for then the sense is,
that in the days of this Angels sounding, not in the beginning, but within the
compass of them, the mystery of God shall be fulfilled, which is included in
the former state of this time. Or if you read it, when he shall begin to sound,
we know that expression does not always note the entrance of a State, but the
continuance of it, as beginning to reign with our Tongue, is to reign in the
Hebrew. There is yet another reading of this with the context, which from a
conjunction of finishing the mystery of God with the Angels sounding, seems
reasonable; it is thus, The Angel that stood upon the Sea and Earth, swore by
him that lives for ever and ever, that Time shall he no more; that is, the
time of the Papal Antichristian Monarchy, and of the former persecuting
enemies of the Saints, (...). Ed. Compher. Bez.
But in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, when he shall sound the
Trumpet, and the my sterie of God he finished, then time shall be; that is, the
time of Christ's triumph, and his Saints prosperity and joy; so that thus this
7th verse is part of the Angels oath concerning the not being and the being of
time; though the latter be not expressed in the 7th verse, yet it is an
Ellipsis or defect not unusual in a continued speech, this being so taken.
However a sufficient reply is made to the doubt in the former interpretation,
if this reading be not allowed This completing of Gods mystery is not to be
expected in the instant of beginning this sound, but in the days of its
duration, the end whereof will accomplish all the will of God concerning his
Churches among Jews and Gentiles here on Earth.

To the fourth particular, which is the exercise of this Reformation after
these Kingdoms are become the Lords and his Christ's, (...)
(He shall reign, or Ring it:) The Lord in his Christ deems it not enough to
be a King, but to act the King in the Dominions which he takes as his own. Its
the blurre of creatures to be Kings in place and show, and yet not to King it,
nor be able to act aright; Christ Kings it in truth where he has the Throne.

Two Queries will be put in: 1. Q. 1.
What is his acting as King? 2. Q. 2.
How he acts it?


To the first. A. 1. (...). Mic. 5.2. Matthew. 2.6. Revel. 12 5. Jer. 3.15. Jer.
23.4, 5, 6.
He acts the Pastor or the good Shepherd in feeding, providing good pasture
for the Kingdoms which he rules; such Kings God promised his people when he
would do them good; but above all, this King, to rule them; I will set up
shepherds over them which shall feed them, and they shall fear no more, nor
be dismayed, neither shall they be lacking, says the Lord. Behold the days
come, says the Lord, I will raise unto David a righteous branch, etc. This is
the King Christ who shall save his Kingdoms, and make his people dwell safely;
He scatters not his flock, nor drive them away, nor hurries them, nor hunts
them with dogs, as former Lords did, but acts the good shepherd, and they go
in and out by his voice, John 10 9.
and find pasture.

2. (...). Isai. 31.22.
He Acts the Lawgiver, this is the work of a King; so is it promised to be the
acclamations of Kingdoms made the Lords, The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is
our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us. They acknowledge and he
does it; He gives Laws holy and good, even all the righteous commands of his
Father concerning man's way to eternal life; no unrighteous decrees, nor bitter
grievances nor oppressing edicts, but Statutes and Ordinances, by which they
may live. Thus he Kings it sweetly.

3. (...).
He acts the Judge in all these Dominions, and divides equally to all
according to their ways: He condemns the Lie and justifies the Truth; He
commends the good and smites the evil doer; He judges righteously between
the fat and the leave Cattle; Ezekiel. 34.20.
he breaks the oppressor, and saves the innocent ones. Thus he was
acknowledged before, Jehovah is our Judge; and thus it is prophesied of him, He
shall execute judgment and justice in the earth. He calls not light
darkness, Jer. 23.5.
nor darkness light; He justifies not the wicked for reward, neither
condemns the righteous. Isa. 11.4.
With righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the
meek of the earth, etc. Thus he reigns in his repossessed Kingdoms.

To the second. An. 2.
How he Acts thus in his regained kingdoms, whether in his own person again
manifested in the flesh, or in and by such persons whom he ma use for this
work? I conceive not by his visible, but spiritual presence; this is most
likely to be done in such Vice gerents as he shall make choice of: I propose
these considerations to be weighed.

1. There is no necessity of understanding this relative (He) concerning his
own person visibly considered; for God himself has been said to reign in
his Ministering Rulers, and their Kingdoms have been styled Gods, so long as
his fear has been upon them, Obad, v. 21. Psalm. 22.28. Ps.71. 1, 2, etc.
and his Law ruled in them. So David's and Solomon's kingdom was the Lords, and
he reigned in them and by them. This has been the Language of God, to own
the kingdoms of his servants, and their government as directed by him; Nay
sometimes to reign, Dan. 4, 32.
when his enemies are upon the Throne: why it should not be here, I find no
forcing reason.

2. If the sound of this Trumpet be already begun, as the truth of the event
already past in some degree may persuade; then some Kingdoms are Christ's
already, and he reigns, though he be still at the right hand of the Father,
by those Rulers whom he sets up. His are the Kingdoms, Psalm. 75.7.
because he orders Kings and States by his Lore; and that so still he may do,
without his own visible appearance on earth, is more then probable, because it
is so in sight already.

3. Not one circumscribed Kingdom is said here to be the compass of his
Territories, but all the Kingdoms of the earth to be his; Now if he should
appear on earth, his visible presence cannot be in all Kingdoms; His body
can be but in a place fit for a body; therefore is it at the right hand of God,
and cannot be every where present, as Ubiquitaries senselesly have dreamed: Or
if he be eminently present in one Region as a mighty Monarch, by his Deputies
ruling all other Provinces; Yet then he must be said to reign in others. And
how much safer it is, to let him alone at Gods right hand, and thence to say
he reigns by his spirit in the Kingdoms of the world, I leave unto Christian
reason to judge.

4. It seems to reason a very great derogation from the glory of our Lord in
his Christ, to suppose him to leave the right hand of the Majesty on high, to
come here and sway an earthly Scepter, whether in one or all Kingdoms of the
world: for heaven now is his Throne, and the earth his Footstool; and if he
should turn his Footstool to a Throne, it were very strange. However that
from Heaven he shall visibly appear to judge the quick and dead, Acts i. 11.
Acts 3.21. Acts 17.31
though not to dwell here in an earthly state with the Saints, the Scriptures
do affirm. And this account may suffice concerning the manner of his Reign
in the Kingdoms of this world.

To the fifth and and last thing, 5. (...) Psalm. 33.11. (...) Psalm. 17.2.5.
Ephesians. 3.21. (...).
and last thing about this Reformation-change, which is the stability of it, we
are now come, For ever and ever shall this King reign: The phrase here seems
synonomous with that Hebrew expression, to generation and generation, and
throughout all generations. Sometimes the word is used simply, for ever without
repetition, and then frequently notes absolute eternity; but in this kind of
doubling many times less, only duration of some ages or an aeviternity as it
is called: The Word (...) signifies an Age, or Generation, among other things,
and so here doubled in the plural to ages of ages, is the continuance of the
ages or generations of this world, so that such is the stable duration of this
reign of Christ over these Kingdoms even so long as the ages of these do
continue. Three things are carried in this expression.

1. Progress in his reign from age to age, He shall go forward, prosper and
grow in his Government.

2. Immutability of State, so shall he King it, that these Kingdoms shall not
change their Lord, nor any more retreat to Antichrist as in the great
Apostacy, when once the Lord has resumed these Kingdoms.

3. Eternity of duration, so long as these Kingdoms last, even for that ever
and ever, our Lord and his Christ shall reign, making friends, or keeping
under slaves: Then the end of the Mediators Kingdom shall come, and God that
was from everlasting shall rule to everlasting in whom the hope of all Saints
shall be perfected. So farte to the state of this Reformation-change.

The third and last general to be held out is the certainty of all this
Revelation, what that is, that we may have a sure ground for faith to work
upon concerning these matters, which I shall labor by some special
considerations about the context to make clear.

1. From the Author of this Revelation, it is our Lord himself in his Christ;
so it is said in the entrance of this Book, The Revelation of Jesus Christ
which God gave unto him to show unto his servants. Revel. 1.1.
Now God cannot deceive, nor be deceived; if he be the Author, Infallibility is
upon the word. There is one name mentioned in the doxologie of the Church upon
this Revelation peculiar unto God, which must satisfy reasonable creatures
concerning the truth of this event, if spoken by God, Rev. 1.4. Rev. 11.17.
It is He that is, and He that was, and He that is to come. It is He that can
always say, I am. If he had not been from eternity, if he be not now, or if
he should not be to eternity, just cause there might be of mistrusting his
Revelation; but if he was to make all things that have been, and if he be to
make things that are, and if he shall be to make all things to come in his
own time, there can be no ground of suspecting him. Thus the Church looks
on him and is comforted. Indeed were he of yesterday, and must he cease
again, his Revelation could not overvalue the Delphick Oracle; but this is
his strong reason to be believed as God, He was, and is, and is to come.

2. The means of revealing this is not despicable, it was by an Angel: Heb.
1.14.
whether so in Nature, as a ministering Spirit sent out for comforting Gods
chosen in this matter as I rather conceive; Rev. 3.1, etc.
or so only in Office, and then a Man, a special Messenger, or Minister
expressed in this vision, as it may be; Yet it is Gods own means of his own
sending to declare, and therefore none of a doubtful call, that he should be
suspected; by John it is com to us, and he had it from Christ this whole vision.

3. The clearness of the Revelation adds more strength to its certainty; Isa.
8.19.
It comes not like a whispering, or muttering of seducing spirits out of the
earth, but sounded with a Trumpet from heaven; 1 Cor. 14.8.
and Gods Trumpet gives surely a distinct sound, that we may understand his
mind in it, and suit our selves to his will. So it did in declaring wrath and
war against sinners, Amos a. 6. Hos. 8.1. Zech. 9.14.
that they might believe and tremble, and return; So also in revealing his
grace in Christ toward his people: the Trumpet sounds it, that poor souls
might hear and believe, and be comforted. A trumpet-Revelation then from God
needs not to be suspected: A loud, eminent, distinct discovery does God make of
these visions, that as they are sure in themselves, so they might be surely
known and received by his Church.

4. The sweet gratulations and doxology of the Church recorded in the context,
Rev. 11, 16, 17
must conclude the certainty of the event: It is incredible that God would give
a vision of praise to mock himself withal, and that he should receive
blessing for that which is not, nor was sure ever to be: The certainty of
praise argues undenyably the certainty of this gracious event.

5. The experience of so many Kingdoms and States already delivered from the
yoke of Antichrist, and returned from that great Apostasy to entertain the
true Gospel of Gods Son, may persuade, that the residue of the promise to be
performed is as sure as that part already accomplished in these 100 years
past, which we see with our eyes. Experience therefore should strengthen
faith, and breed an assured hope in Gods people of the Lords more glorious
appearing, to take more Kingdoms of the world into his power; that they may
mightily strive to it, and patiently wait for it. This hope shall not make us
ashamed. Thus the doctrine is opened, and confirmed: The Use follows.

1. To inform us in some truths depending; Use 1.
their Corolaries do issue from the sound of this Trumpet opened unto us.

1. If Kingdoms of the world shall have such a Reformation-change, as to be
taken from Antichrist, and subdued to our Lord and his Christ, then it must
follow, Corol. 1^
Kingdoms may be, and are the Subjects of Reformation, though not the adequat
subjects of true Conversion. The understanding of the true state of
Reformation, as well as the visible state of Kingdoms, which already are
become the Lords, will sufficiently clear this inference.

1. Reformation is a term not freequently used by our Translators, I remember
it but twice, 1. Reformation.
and in two different acceptions.

1. As respecting the matter or object about which Reformation is; And in this
sense mainely is the word translated from the Apostles expression to be
understood, as the consideration of the context will make clear. Heb. 9.1, 10.
The spirit there labors to convince the Hebrews, that by the Messiah Gods
mind was, the whole Jewish Tabernacle must be thrown down, that is, their
Church frame in all external Ordinances; He describes the Tabernacle with the
adjoined ordiances and services, which, says he, were imposed, until the time
of Reformation. (...).
Of what? Surely not of hearts, but of that Church frame and ordinances, which
were but figures for that time present, putting those which were true,
spiritual and heavenly in their places. The word here rendered reformation
signifies A thorough-righting of all things in the Church in order to eternal
life. This Christ did, by removing things shaken of God, that is, all
shadow-workes formerly in the Church, in Priesthood, heb. 10.1. (...).
Sacrifice, and other services, all ineffectuall to life, and by establishing
things unshaken, the true image-works of heaven, (...).
lively drawn, Priesthood, Sacrifice, services, etc. by which men might
certainly be brought to God, and live. This perrectification of Christ's then is
of means tending to heaven, that men might see the right line directing unto
God, in the right use of which they may be saved: It is a Reformation for
hearts indeed but not of hearts; for this reformation may truly be in a
Kingdom, and is where the true Priesthood of Christ, Sacrifice, and
spiritual services, are set up and maintained; though hearts for the most part
may not be savingly converted to God by them. The point of time in the Text
evidences this to be an ordinance-reformation, not an heart one; (...). a
singular.
for it was a single special time, even the space of laying this Church-frame
by Christ in his Apostles, and no longer, the whole work of this reformation
was dispatched then, but the time of heart-reformation is in all ages;
therefore those times are not that, nor this work that. Kingdoms then are
reformed after Christ, when his true ordinances are established and submitted
unto, and false Antichristian constitutions are driven out, though few hearts
in truth may be changed to God by them.

2. Reformation in our use respects the person or subject in whom the power of
God may be manifest for changing the man according to his mind revealed in
former ordinances, thus we read it used by our Translators If ye will not be
reformed by these things, etc. In the letter it is read, Levit. 26.23; (...).
If ye will not be chastised to me by these things, etc. That is, if by these
means, your hearts be not turned to me; So that, here the reformation of the
man must be intended, And that we know may be two ways: 1. In truth, when
Christ is formed truly on the Soul. 2. In show, when the outward man
conformes to these constitutions of God. Kingdoms may be so reformed as to
yield outward obedience to the Scepter of Christ, though few hearts have the
true Image of God imprinted on them: And thus indeed do Kingdoms become the
Lords, when they abhor the lies of Antichrist, and cleave to the truth of
Christ, though but in outward deportment.

2. Kingdoms of the world are said to be the Lords, but indeed they neither
have been, nor are, 2. Kingdoms.
nor shall be all by true conversion, yet they must be by Reformation; No
Kingdom that ever was called the Lords on earth had all Saints in it, nor ever
shall, if Christ have prophesied truly, That the last day shall find men, as
the Flood found the world in Noah's days; Marth. 24.36, 37, etc.
yet surely shall Kingdoms be the Lords, and that must be by Reformation as
declared, not by true saving conversion; And to say, that such a Kingdom of
Christ England is, I suppose is consonant to the voice of this Trumpet.

2. If Kingdoms must be our Lords, that is, Chief States, Kingly and Ruling
Powers, this teaches us, States and worldly Powers Christ will make use of to
set up his glory, Corol. 2.
they are not utterly inconsistent with his spiritual designs. Antichrist
indeed had them, and made use of them for his own purpose, but therefore
Christ will not utterly refuse them. Psalm. 82.6.
God himself was the Author of these orders of men, thereby purposing to make
one helpful to another for reaching his own glory; And Satan in this as other
things was Gods Ape to make use of them, but his enemy, to corrupt Princes and
great men of the earth to increase his own Kingdom; therefore persuaded he
them to give their power to the Antichristian Beast, Revel. 17.13.
and to make poor subjects by their Tyrannical persecutions to do so too,
that they might be damned together. But now in the restitution of all things
the Lord Christ re-possesseth these Principalities again, as a needful order
of men, instituted by God, though corrupted by Satan, and makes use of them for
his high and spiritual ends to finish his work upon the earth.

1. By putting into their hearts to ruin that great Enemy of grace, the
mystical Babylon, the Mother of Harlots, and of all abominations, as well as
all spiritual and carnal wickedness. Revel. 17.16.17.
So it is written, The Kings shall hate the whore, and make her desolate and
naked, and eat her flesh and burn her with fire, For God has put it into
their hearts to fulfill his will, etc.

2. By making them shields of the earth, a defense unto his ordinances and
people, Psalm. 47.9. Isay 49.23. 1 Timothy 2.2.
and nursing Fathers and Mothers to his Saints, that under them and by them
godliness may be perfected in his Churches. If these Scepters be our Lords,
doubtless they are so, not as Lords, but as Servants ministering for him, which
he would not own, were they not appointed of God, and so needful to help on
his work among men.

But Christ's work is heart-worke, Obj.
what can Princes do to ward that?

For answer, Sol.
let it be considered; 1. All Christ's work is not heart-worke, much of it is
upon the outward man by restraint and otherwise, in this the power of the word
may be isntrumental, being made the Lords 2. Gods outward ordinances were
intended to make way to men's spirits, his Rod, as well as his Word; Mic. 6.9.
the Preacher has no more selfe-power, nor ordinance-power, than the Prince,
God makes the Word effectual, and so he has done the Sword upon a
Manasseh-spirit. 3. The Rod for the fools back is Gods ordinance, Prove. 19.29.
as well as the Word to the obedient ear: who so denies either, sins
against that light of nature, Romans 2.12
whereby the Gentiles were condemned.

But Christ did not make use of them, Obj.
nor his Apostles, at the laying of the foundation of the Gospel; the
Kingdoms of the world were then against him: how should they be helpefull now?

I return thus: 1. Sol.
Our Lord made use of them before that time, and owned these Kings and
Kingdoms by whom his name was exalted, Psalm, 18.1, etc.
and no where has be since rejected his own ordinance. 2. At that time of
Christ's coming in the flesh, God by his Prophets had foretold the state of,
enmity, which the great Roman Monarchy and all the Kingdoms of the earth with
him should express against his Some, therefore no marvel, he made no use of
them at that time, for it was one time given to the Devil to rule in them,
Act. 41, 27, 22.
and to provoke them to crucify the Lord of glory, which Gods, counsel
determined to be done; but with more righteous and gracious thoughts than they
intended. 3. That was not the time wherein God had appointed to take to
himself his great power and to reign; but now the time is come that he has
taken Kingdoms to rule in and by them, and make his laws their laws. 4. In
that, very time of Christ and his Apostles, would I but require this, ought not
the Casers and Nero himself to have advanced the Lord and his Christ, and have
used their power to bring their subjects in obedience to him, and to have ruled
by his truth? Shall not God laugh them to scome, and they perish in his wrath
because they did not? I believe they will have no advocate for them. If so,
then let Christians argue de jure, what Rulers ought to have done then; not de
fact, what they did; and if it were the Magistrates duty then to rule men to
God in Christ, it is no less now; And sinful practice is no good president
against Divine right.

3. If this Trumpet sound the greatest Woe upon all Kingdoms under the Devil
and Antichrist, and the greatest Joy to the Kingdoms under God and Christ,
this is rightly inferred, Corol. 3.
The best Crisis or judgment of Kingdom? Weal or Woe, it by the Lord that
swayeth over them. If Satan, if Antichrist, if wicked Lords, cursed is that
State; If God, if Christ, if holy Princes and Governors, blessed is that
Kingdom. O the wickedness of Machiavillian O the folly of humane policy!
Germany has its interest, and Spain, and France, and England theirs, one in
alies, another in treasures, another in hearts of Subjects, etc. And suppose
all these kept at any time, or possible to be kept, have they secured any
Kingdom, or can they, that it shall not perish at the breath of Gods mouth?
How has God befo^led the counsels of the wisest Politicians in all ages, and
yet are we seeking for Kingdoms safety and glory within the creatures
Sphere? To have one Lord in Christ our King, were a prospering and securing
wisdom beyond all under the Saline. Did ever a Kingdom keeping its Imerost
in God perish? Obedience to the Lord and his Christ in all his discoveries, is
the laving-interest of any Commonwealth; Psalm. 144.15. Sapores King of Persia
to constintius the Emperor. Isay. 14.12. Obad. v. 4.
O blessed are the people whose God is the Lord! What though Monarchs of the
Earth write themselves Brothers of the Sunue and of the Moon, fellow of the
Stars, yet hear what the most high says, O Lucifer, son of the morning,
how art thou cut down? And, though thou set thy nest among the Stars, thence
will I bring thee down. What can a mount to the Stars help poor creatures,
when the breath of the Lord blows them down again? One true interest in out
Lord and his Christ, would prosper and perpetuate a Kingdom, and honor
Princes above the Satrres; of such would the most high say, Ye are Gods and
Sounes of the must high: Psalm. 82.6.
of such Kingdoms no end should be but of perfection. Let us then judge of our
Wealth by how much we are the Lords, and of our Woe by so much as we are not
his, or refuse him. These are the Corolaties.

2. Use 2.
If this Trumpet sound forth joy only to the holy people, and the Kingdoms
that are our Lords, and so far indeed as they are the Lords, the woeful sound
of it must concern the Kingdoms which are not his, and all Polities so far as
they are not Christ's; so that, well may a lamentation be taken up by them and
for them; Is there not cause, when Christ owne's not State, nor States him?
It Is true, that in the execution of all the dreadful Woes upon the Romish
Babel, when the Kings and Merchants of the earth are bemoaning her desolations,
Saints are called to rejoice over her; Revel. 18.20.
Rejoice over her thou Heaven, and ye Holy Apostles and Prophets, for God has
avenged you on her: But when Immanuels Land shall in any part break. Christ's
yoke, resist their Lord, provoke him to displeasure, and themselves to wasting,
who can refrain from tears? It calls a dead Grandmother out of her grave to
weep, Jer. 31.15.
Rachel was heard weeping in Jeremiahs time and would not be comforted: Why?
For her children once owned by God had sinned, and were not. Jadah was
Immanuels Land, and upon like grounds England may; if this State will not
suffer the Lord to King it over them, Isay. 8.18.
as they once refosed, an Assyrian Lord, a dreadful Oppressor the Rod of Gods
anger, may have commission to pass through, and go over, and stretch his wings
to the breadth of our Land; This will be grievous, when the iron Scepter of
wicked Tyrants shall teach us how sweet the Government of Christ was, which we
have despised.

Symptoms of this woeful sound are the graduall declinations of a people or
State from the Lords Rule. That the people have gone a Whoring from God, by
spiritual and corporal uncleanness, and the little cause of Englands
rejoicing in it, By M. T. Case on Hos. 9.1.
ye have heard sufficiently declared in the morning for our humiliation. I
confess, I hold have wondered at such severe prophesying against this kind of
filthiness, what the reason of it might be, but that I see so many characters
of unclean hearts visible on their bodies, and have been certainly informed
of most abominable Incests in several parts of the Kingdom and especially in
the County of Kent not far remote, Sir A. ^. complained of it.
where the son has married his Fathers wife, and as is believed, she was
with child by him, while his father lived. These are evils intolerable in the
sates of moral Pagans, much more inconsistent with that Kingdom where the
Lord rules. Will ye be pleased this day to be humbled for these abominations,
and put out the power which Christ has given you to cleanse the Land from
these and such like abominations* We shall then hope our Lord will not refuse
to own us; but otherwise, that he should deal with the Land as with an
whorish woman, Ezech. 23.25. etc.
slit her nose, and strip her naked, and spit in her face, and give her to
death, is all that can be expected. No more of this general State, my labor
is saved by the mornings work, I should rather crave leave to discharge the
duty of a faithful Minister of Christ unto you, being now called, I look upon
you as a State and chief Power of Christ in this Kingdom; so far as you the
Lord, and he rules in you, so much cause have his people to rejoice; and so
far as any defection appears from that Lawgiver, so much VVoe is pronounced
upon you, and upon the Land. The saddest Omen is when in Head and Rulers Christ
Kings it not. I am not come with Criminations upon out Truly Worthies, the
searcher of hearts knows, I desire nothing but true Honor from God upon you,
and that must be by his ruling in you, and your ruling by and for him: Only
deviations from this proclaim woe; and it will be faithfulness to let you
hear the general voices of the Land about you, to vindicate your Honor where
it is causelesely stained, and to be humbled for any defection from Christ in
the state appearing.

1. Its lamentable with a stat^, when foolish, childish, wicked, and ungodly
Steeres-men sit at the Helm to sway it. As wise a King and Statesman as the
generations of men knew, by the wisdom of God gave these dictates, Woe to
thee o Land, Eccles. 10.16, 17.
when thy King is a child, and thy Princes eat in the morning. Blessed art
thou, O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles, and thy Princes eat in due
season, for strength and not for drunkenness. See the Woe and Weal of States.
Happy Land whose King is innobled by God, and Princes made gracious, and taught
by him even to the use of meat and drink: there our Lord has the Kingdom
and his Christ. But woe to that State, where a King, a child, a fool shall
reign, an enemy to the Lord; and Princes lustful, gluttonous, drunken, and
lascivious, such as must have a breakfast every morning in sin, shall steer
by their Counsels, Christ is no Lawgiver there. This is woeful, Prove. 19 2.
The people must mourns when the wicked bears rule. They say there are such
among you, if I may speak in usual terms, Impious, childish, cockpit
Counselors: If so, such are bad Trustees for Laws, Liberties, and Religion; A
Roman or Spartan-State would provide against some of those, and not hazard
Kingdoms in the hands of fools; much more should that State which is
Christian. I know ye are not Electors, but the Scumme of People lend such unto
you, and will spoil all your boilings unless you take it off. It is a voice
of fear among them that love you and pray for you in the West and other parts,
that such as could not overcome you by the Sword, labor to do it by Votes,
even by sending such as will Vote God from among you. Ever Honored Worthies,
see if it be so, let the sight of one root of bitterness among you humble
you; And now show forth Christ ruling in you: Methinks its possible for a
Christian Parliament by a Law to purge and prevent such profane Paganish
leaven, and to honor Christ's Kingdom so much, as to make gross sin
incapable of a Membership among you. Surely, if that be allowed, our Lord rules
not, and this is woeful.

2. It Is lamentable with a Kingdoms, where the faces of the poor are grinded,
Isa. 3.14, 15
and the cause of the Fatherless, Winddow and Friendlesse, slighted and not
heard. The Lord in his Christ gives better Laws, and will require them, Isa.
1.17. Deuteronomy, 10.18
Judge for the Fatherless, plead for the VVidow. God does this himself,
therefore will have his Vicegerents do like to him. It is a fame, that ye
are profuse in giving to the full sonle, while the hungry and friendlesse,
which have spent and been spoiled of all for the cause of God in your hands,
are some of them ready to perish for bread. See after this, our Lord will not
do so: let not this (Honored and beloved) be mistaken; neither I nor any
honest heart can grutch the due rewards of noble-deserving spirits in these
times. My heart is toward the Governors that offered themselves willingly to
the work of God; my thoughts (I am persuaded) are the same with all those
worthy souls, who desire to concur with God. Let the hungry be fed, and
naked clothed, and fatherless sustained, and widow comforted and well
deserving men not unrewarded. Otherwise there will abide a woe.

3. It Is lamentable with a Kingdom, where judgment by Bribery or otherwise
becomes vendible, and justice is bought and sold. So Jeremiah thought, so Micah
preached, The head judge for reward, etc. Jer. 5.31. Mic. 3.11, 12. Deuteronomy. 10.17.
therefore shall Zion be plowed as a field. Our Lord takes no reward in
Judgment, neither must the Stewards that act for him; such as do he curses.
The voice of people is, there is such a fault among you. I confess it is
incredible to me, that such a Judge as a Parliament, consisting of so many
heads can be the subject of such corruption, and I am confident the body is
free in judging: But it is replied, though the judgment at last come free, yet
motions many times cost men dear. I cannot charge it upon any, and I wish that
they who complain, would testify to the faces of the guilty at your own
Bar. I am confident the just hands among you would be against such a man, to
thrust him out of your Assembly. But yet renowned Patriots, look into this
matter; And to confute the world, every one of you that desire to act for God
in your administrations, take the just complaints of the poor and oppressed,
communicate to your body, and prosecute righteous causes freely as your own.
This will be a Character of the Lord upon the Throne. The neglect will prove a
deviation from Christ, and breed so much woe.

4. It Is lamentable for that State, where Justice is delayed. Our Lord ownes
not this; His command is to the house of David, Jer, 21.12.
execute judgment in the morning; now that will pass away quickly, therefore
justice must speedily be done. It is a tried truth in ages, A just sentence
delayed has more oppressed, then an unrighteous dispatch could have done. They
that hang about your doors, and such as have waited long for sentence, enemies
and friends say, it is thus with you. I know great affairs and difficult have
been and are upon your hands that may hinder quick dispatches, and great Bodies
can move but slowly, and it may answer much for you. But (ye Rulers of God)
be active, seek no delays, Judge while it is morning; If ye do not, so
far ye deny the government of the Lord, and this will be lad.

5. It Is lamentable for a Kingdom to have perfidious and Covenant Breaking
guides: Our Lord is not so, nor inveed may his deputies be so. He is a God
keeping-Covenant, faithful and true; Neh. 9.32. Deuteronomy. 4.23.
and he leaves the charge upon all his to do so: Yet it is Printed to the
world, That ye are all perjured persons, and Covenant-breakers: I like not
reproaching of Rulers, Paul acknowledged it Gods Words, Thou shall not speak
evil of the Ruler of thy people, Acts 23.5.
He that does shall suffer from the Lord: yet ye Christian Senators, it
concerns you nearely to be humbled for all slips of infirmity about the
Covenant of your God (from which what flesh can keep free?) and vindicate your
selves from grosser evils by a true justification, or else in all the
Countries it may get a common faith. Wear the girdle which Christ wears,
Isai, 11.5.
Righteousness is the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of
his reins; Let it be yours too, and ye shall prosper, but unfaithful and
treacherous Rulers, woe to them and their Kingdom, God will ease himself of
such adverlaries, and avenge him of such enemies. This is woeful.

6. It Is lamentable with a State, to be remiss and careless of Gods affairs
in reforming his House, and settling his Ordinances, and giving up the Kingdom
to our Lord and his will revealed, yet to be active and mindful about their
own matters. The Lord made the returning State of the Jews smart for this;
and he points at the matter: Hag. 1.4, 5, etc.
It is time for your to dwell in your sieled Houses, and thu house lie waste?
Consider, this is the reason, ye sow much and bring in little, etc. A woe was
upon them, for they did not mind to exalt the Lord above themselves. And the advice to remove it is to fall about the work. Hag. 1.8.
Gods Reformation work was the end of his calling you together, that your
affairs might thrive in the prosperity of his; for suit Gods matters going well
make the Kingdom glorious, this does not make that. Let not God lost the glory
of the small beginnings visible toward that work: But is this laid to heart,
and is it contended for as your glory? It is said by some, that ye will never
reform up to Gods Word, though ye be engaged by Covenant to do so. I dare
not believe this, I pray for the strengthening of your hands to this work, and
wait working in my place, if I might there give help, and at last receive more
from you, for the purging of Congregation, and keeping the holy things of God
from being defiled. Yet great Remoraes keek back the Fabric, Carnal and
Spiritual wickednesses, though not tolerated by a Law, yet connived at, or not
reproved as God would have them, Doctrines against the eternal Sonship of the
Mediator published, and assertions against the (...), the selfe-credibility of
Scripture maintained; the very prime error that brought in the great Apostasy.
Our Lord and his Christ hate such things as these; no Laws of his Kingdom
tolerate contradictions to his own being; his prime Ministers would not
vouchsafe a God-speed to such as those: Yet the world knows, a Joh. v. 10, 11.
with what ardency the toleration of those and other Heresies as bad are
striven for. A timely Item may be given, An admission of Doctrine devilish and
destroying the saving revelation of God in his Son, is an emission of Christ,
and so the loss of him. I would not be severer then God would have me against
any that pretend Conscience in matters circumstantiall, and that divide not
from the head; therefore can I not cry, That nothing must be tolerated in
lesser differences; but this Christ says, That the woman Jezabel must not be
suffered, Rev. 2.22.
(who could not vent worse lies) under less pain then the loss of God and
his Christ, and the ruin of Churches: And I must say, that the Toleration of
all things must be a destructive principle to the State or Church wherever it
be allowed. Experience has showed us no less in Kingdoms and Churches called
by Gods Name. These are only suggested, which need a larger Treatise to State
fully. ye Servants of Christ, take heed of yielding to these pretenses of
Conscience, the Devil, and not Christ has his throne there; And no stronger
hold for him than Conscience if he once take it. Christ will not suffer him to
shelter here, therefore ye may not, so much as in you lies; if ye do, the
Lords Trumpet sounds Woe upon you.

Do not other States, Dub.
as some of the united Provinces, tolerate all these heresies, and protect
them, and yet they prosper? Who more?

I desire not to deal with other Srates, Sol.
unless I might do them good, I am now only called to our own, yet others
being made exemplary, a word in soberness and truth may not offend. I suggest
only these thoughts.

1. Can any man say, that prosperity is a sign peculiar unto Truth? Then let
Rome come in and speak more than any for outward prosperity. Ecles. 9.1.
No man can know the love or hatred of God by all that is before him.

2. Are not spiritual wickednesses as odious to God as carnal? Gal. 5.20.21.
And are not these Heresies such which God condemns as works of the flesh
inconsistent with the Kingdom of his Christ?

3. Has God made an end yet of visiting Nations for the sins of them? When
God has done judging were a better time to urge this example than now. I pray
God the evil day may not overtake those States; The good Lord cause the Cup of
trembling to pass by them, and purge their iniquities peaceably. But I am
pressed in spirit to say, 1 King. 12.26, etc. 1. King, 13.24. Qui non vetat
peccare cum patest jubet. Sen.
God has not spared such State-Polities, which have sought their own rise by
the ruin of God and his Truth. Witness Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made
Israel to sin: And he bids sin, that does not hinder it when he can. I
fear their sorrows may begin in the day of their confederacy with Spain. But
Gods Truth, my beloved, and not man's example must be the rule, strive up to the
perfection of God. If none of these lies must be in Heaven, it is man's duty
not to allow them on earth. If Heresies yet must be, let us mourn for what we
cannot help; It is a miserable necessity when not allowed; it will be
rejoicing in iniquity, either for Stute or Church wilfully to tolerate; And
then beware, the third and worst of woes which this Trumpet sounds.

3. Lastly, The sound of this Trumpet, Use 3.
and the voices thence arising, as they speak exaltation unto our Lord and his
Christ, so no less duty and counsel to the States and Powers of the world.

1. To such as are in vassalry to the Devil and Antichrist, that are still
raging and in conspiracy against the Lord and his Christ; The Psalmists
counsel is seasonable for them, Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12.
Be wise O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the Earth; Serve the Lord with
fear, and rejoice with trembling; Kiss the Sone; To love and honor, and
worship the Lord in his Christ, is better than to be raging and combining
against his Anointed. 1. God will laugh at their plots, and have them in
derision. 2. Our Lord in his Son will reign, do what they can against it. 3.
The desolating woes shall fall upon all Kingdoms that do oppose, He will
break them in pieces with a Rod of Iron, and dash them in pieces like a
Potters Vessel. It is firmly written in the Records of God, Isai. 60.12.
The Nation and Kingdom that will not serve him shall perish, ye those Nations
shall be utterly wasted. O that this Trumpet might sound in the ears of those
Kings and Kingdoms that yet give their power to the Romish Beast!

2. To those States whom our Lord and his Christ has rescued out of that
slavery, and made them his own Dominions, among whom our own may be numbered,
Thus the voices say:

1. Bless the Lord in the beauties of holiness, rejoice in the great work
that he has done, that he has taken to him his great power, and has reigned;
States, Ministers, People, give thanks to the Lord God Almighty, which was,
and is, and is to come, that he has taken poor England, and the Kingdoms
United, in any measure from the hand of Antichrist, and put his Name on them; O
bow down and worship, so the 24 Elders, the Church representative, do at the
Trumpets sound for the exaltation of Christ.

But why are not the four Beasts, Quest.
being the Ministerial Emblems, joined here in these gratulations, as in other
places? It a silence observed by some, and wondered at, Revel. 5.8. Revel. 19.4.
seeing before and afterward they are expressly named as leaders in the
Churches triumphant Songs.

It is conceived by some, Ans.
that at this time of Christ's first taking Kingdoms from the Beast, the
Ministry for the general should be so bad and earthy, lukewarm and worldy,
as that they had no heart to bless the Lord for such Reformation. And sure it
may note such a time, and experience, in the Reformation thus far manifests,
that many to one have bin repining at it. Yet let not his be cast as a
reproach to those few that are found faithful, (as too much it is, and under
the name of an unfaithful Ministry, the faithfullest are despised) for the
true laboring Ministry of Christ, are found leading the Church again in their
last Triumphant Songs over Antichrists ruins. Revel. 19.4.
Let us be humbled for former failings, and renew the first love, and labor
mightily for our Lord and his Christ, let him alone then to plead the cause of
his faithful servants, he will make their name shine forth as the Sun in
brightness out of the darkest cloud.

2. Give up your selves and kingdom (Honored Senators) more and more to the
name, Law, and Government of our Lord and his Christ. As the Lord takes not all
Kingdoms up at once, So neither any Kingdom to the Highest of Reformation at
one time, because he has set them here in a growing State; there were no room
for growth in perfection. Experience has taught us this will of God; O let us
work with God more to be his, by giving up our names to him, by owning his Law,
and honoring his Government by obedience. Psalm. 2, 12.
This is to kiss the Son eminently and abundantly, and we shall not be
despised for it.

3. Ye Worthies of this State in whom Christ reigns, act from him and to him,
feed his people in the Land in his Pastures, hold out unto them his Laws,
judge equally and impartially in his matters; justify the righteous, condemn
the wicked, maintain saving Truths, and damn those lies that lead unto
destruction. Show your selves to be deputed Gods indeed: Be, as he is,
simple, impassible, independent upon creatures; and act as he acts, freely,
powerfully, wisely, impartially, and constantly in the way of righteousness,
so shall ye be truly the Sons of the most High, and the Lord shall be seen
gloriously to reign in you. The righteous and holy people will be obedient to
you, and bless God for you: and the mouth of wickedness shall be stopped for
ever. These encouragements may quicken and strengthen your hands. And then an
end.

1. The Lord is gone out before you, and has begun to own England, matching
it out of the Dragons Paw, and Antichrists power, and for 89 years has been
our Lawgiver. Observe his presence and workings and be strengthened.

2. The time is now for bringing in more Kingdoms from Satan to God, from
Antichrist to Christ; what else make all the shakings in all the Kingdoms of
the world at this time. Study this time of God, and work with Providence, now
you have a season to help up Gods holy mountain, where no hurting nor
destruction shall be.

3. This work of the Lord and his Christ shall not go backward any more in the
whole. The great Apostasy is past, and now Kingdoms must be given to God, and
Reformation by degrees shall be finished, oppositions of wicked shall be but
strong gales of wind to drive it home the sooner: Gods Word is sure, Babel
shall fall and never rise, and Zion shall be raised and never fall.

4. The Lord Christ shall reign for eve and ever, He has overcome and sat
down in his Fathers Throne; He shall now trample upon his enemies, and make
them his Footstool, but he shall put the Crown upon the heads of his Saints.
Let you hearts then be comforted and your hands strengthened, ye men of God, to
the Reformation-work at this day; Make England more the Lords then ever, by the
power he has given you: so ye, and the people of this Land by experience will
make the Churches confession good, Isai. 26. 13.
O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have had dominion over us, but by
thee only will we make mention of they Name. Your cry will be, Lord reign
thou over us, no King but Christ for us, no People but the Saints. Now the Lord
of all Lords, the King eternal through his Christ give you the spirit of
Wisdom, Truth, Unity, and Zeal to work mightily for our God, and finish his
Will in these Kingdoms, that unto him in all the Churches of the Saints may be
given praise and glory everlasting. AMEN.

FINIS.

