THE ESSENCE AND UNITY OF THE Church Catholic VISIBLE, And the Prioritie
thereof in regard of Particular Churches Discussed.

By Samuel Hudson Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed by George Miller for Christopher Meredith at the Sign of the
Crane in Paul's Churchyard. 1645.

To the Reader.
REader, this Thesis was compiled about a year ago, for the accommodation of
private friends, and was not intended by me for public view, yet since, at the
desire and by the approbation of some whom I much respect, I am induced to
consent to the publishing of it. I confess the texture of it is more homely,
and the style more incompt then will please the tender eyes and delicate ears
of this dainty critical age. But they that handle controversies must endeavor
to speak in proper and significant words, and deal by strength of proofs and
arguments, and not stand upon neatness, or labor to deck their lines with
flowers of Rhetoric. I acknowledge this question is an unusual subject and
therefore but little trodden before me; and has many paths that cross it,
more frequently beaten, which did somewhat blunt mine intention, and dissuade
me from making of it public, even after I had yielded thereunto. For first I
find the subject of my question much questioned, yea, flatly denied by many
Divines of great worth both English, French, and Germane, who affirm that
there is no Church Catholic visible, but that the Church Catholic is the
invisible Church only. But there having come diverse tractates out lately which
have touched that subject, and prove a Church Catholic visible, especially
Gulielmi Apollonii, Consideratio quarundam Controversiarum, etc. by command and
allowance of the Walacrian Churches (some few sentences whereof I have added
hereto) and Mr Prinn his truth triumphing over Falsehood, etc. I was the more
confirmed that this is no private opinion, or strange heterodoxie, but a firm
truth, and therefore I was the more encouraged to divulge it.

And for the predicate of the question it is seldom met withal, especially
stated in these terms, and those that state it so, make the particular
Churches to be the prime Churches, which I have endeavored to refute according
to my light.

And because the question lies at the root of diverse controversies and
differences that are now abroad, I was willing to lend what light I could to
the same. Mine intention is not to provoke or exasperate any, but if any shall
receive any benefit hereby I have mine aim, and let God have the Glory. But if
any seem contentious about it, I cannot answer in Paul's words, 1 Cor. 11.16.
We have no such custom, nor the Churches of God, For the custom is every
where now to contend and quarrel about every part of Divinity, and he is no
body that cannot carp at, and wrangle against one truth or other, so that all
our practical Divinity is turned into Polemicall, and the power of godliness
runs out into disputes, and those truths which formerly seemed most firm,
plain, and smooth, are now by the crotchets of men's brains run into such
division, and become so knotty and prickly, that a man knows not where to
fasten on them, or how to hold them, but he shall prick his fingers with one
thorny objection or other. For my part I am not so inamoured on, or wedded to
mine own opinion, but if any can convince me of error, I shall be willing to
retract it, and embrace the Truth of God, or if any can afford any further
light into this subject I shall be glad to see it, and bless God for it.

I Have perused this Discourse, and finding that it handles a question of great
importance, and discusseth it with Judgment and Moderation, I do commend it
to the Press, hoping that the intelligent and impartial Reader may receive
Benefit; and Peace and Unity in the Church be furthered by it.

Edm. Calamy.

THE ESSENCE AND UNITY OF THE CHURCH CATHOLIC Visible, etc.
QUEST. Vtrum Ecclesia visibilis universalis sit prima vel orta?


FOR the handling of this question, here are these four terms to be opened.
First, What is meant by Church? Secondly, What by Visible? Thirdly, What is
meant by Universal? Fourthly, What by prima and orta? First, What a Church is?
The word Church, is taken in a civil or a theological sense: In a civil
sense, for a company of people summoned or gathered together for some civil
affairs: so even the rout met together, Acts 19. is called Ecclesia, (...).

Secondly, in a theological sense, it signifies a company of people that are
called, or to be called and joined together, standing in some spiritual
relation to God. And so the word is taken diversely.

First and most properly, for the whole company of the elect, as they are
opposite to reprobates, whether Jew or Gentile, and in this sense it is taken,
Ephesians. 5.25, 26. As Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it, that he
might cleanse it, with the washing of water by the word. So Coloss. 1.18. His
body the Church. Interdum cum Ecclesiam nominant eam intelligunt quae revera
est coram Deo, in quam nulli recipiantur nisi and adoptionis gratia filij Dei
sunt, and Spiritus sanctificatione vera Christi membra. Ac tunc quidem non
tantum sanctos qui in terra habitant comprehendit, sed electos omnes qui ab
origin mundi fuerunt. Calvin Instit. lib. 4. cap. 1. sect. 7. where you may
see more of this subject. Of these there are three sorts: The first are elect
uncalled, which are not actually the Church, but in potentia; the second part
are militant, warring with principalities and powers, with the flesh, world and
Devil, being justified and sanctified persons: the third part are triumphant
in Heaven, having finished their course, and are now the spirits of just men
made perfect. For the fourth sort which the Papists make, viz. Ecclesia
dormiens in Purgatory we acknowledge not.

Secondly, The word Church, sometimes signifies more then the elect, viz. the
multitude of believers, whether truly or in show only. So Acts 8.3. Saul made
havoc of the Church, Acts 12.1. Herod stretched out his hand to vex certain of
the Church. Now it is certain, that neither Herod nor Saul knew who were elect,
but as himself expounded it, He persecuted this way unto the death. And he
desired letters to Damascus, that if he found any that way he might bind them.
So Acts 5.11. Fear came upon all the Church. Now it cannot be conceived that
they were all elect that feared that judgment of God. So 1 Timothy 5.16. Let not
the Church be charged with them, that it may relieve widows indeed. Now we
cannot conceive, that only the elect gave collection, but the whole number of
professors, which yet are called the Church. In Ecclesia plurimi sunt permixti
hypocritae qui nihil Christi habent praeter titulum and speciem, Calv. Inst.
li. 4. c. 1. s. 7.

2d Term.
The second term to be opened is, what is meant by visible? The Church is
distinguished into visible and invisible, which yet are not two distinct
Churches, or species of Churches, but it is a distribution of the Subject by
the Adjunct, viz. a duplici modo communionis, externo and interno. Such as have
spiritual communion with Christ (...) inwardly, are said to be invisible
members, which are only known to God and not men, having this seal, the Lord
knows who are his; Such as have external communion in outward ordinance
(...), they are called visible members, because their communion is visible and
apparent. Now only the invisible company have communion for life, and are
elect, many of those that have external communion, and are visible members
shall perish. And yet by reason of their profession, are said (2 These. 1.1.) to
be in God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, as Ames also confesses. Such
was the Church of Corinth and Ephesus, etc, wherein all were not in communion
for life. And of such Christ speaks, Joh. 15.2. Every branch in me that
bears not fruit he takes away. These are said to be redeemed, 2 Pet. 2.1.
Denying the Lord that bought them. And sanctified, Heb. 10.29. And has
accounted the blood of the covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy
thing. And in Paul's exordiums of his Epistles: To the Church of God, to them
that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, 1 Cor. 1.2.

Now we are to know that this distinction of visible and invisible is a very
lame one, and the lamenesse thereof deceives many: for whereas all
distinctions or distributions should have their parts distinct, and different,
and the more opposite the members thereof be, the better the distribution is;
these two branches of this distinction interfere one with another, and the one
comprehends the other: the visible comprehend the invisible here in this world,
I mean the persons though not the notions. For though indeed every visible
member is not invisible, yet every invisible member is also visible. They that
have inward communion with Christ for life, are not taught and nourished only
by an inward unction or inspiration, but are feign to have external communion
also in the outward ordinances of God. De Ecclesia vivorum modo agitur cui
Symbolum Apostolicum praescriptum est non de coelesti. Ramus in Symb. So that
this distinction is like the old distinction of gratia gratis data, and gratia
gratum faciens, whereas omnis gratia gratum faciens, est etiam gratia gratis
data. If invisible had been taken for Saints in Heaven, and visible for Saints
on earth, it had been a complete distinction. Or if visible had been taken for
a Church conspicuous, flourishing with liberty of ordinances, and invisible for
a Church latent, as under persecutions, and general heresies, then it had been
complete; but the terms are not used in either of those senses, and therefore
the distinction halteth. So that in what is to be said, we must take heed that
by visible we mean not only such as are hypocrites and reprobates, but those
that are also truly godly: not only such as make external profession of faith,
whereby they are differenced from heathens, What a Church visible is.
but such as have inward sincerity also, whereby they are differenced from
hypocrites. The Church visible is, a company of people called by God from Idols
to the true Religion, and professing subjection to that call, which is true of
the godly as well as the hypocrites.

3d Term.
The third term to be opened is (universal.) We are to know that the Church
of God admits of several distinctions from several accidents. As in reference
to the time wherein the Church has or does exist, it is distributed into the
Church under the old Testament, and the Church under the New. And this is
distributed again, into the primitive and successive. So in regard of the
places where the Church does exist, or persons of whom it consists, it
receives the distinction of universal and particular. Now in this question,
universal is meant principally in regard of Persons, Places,
and not in regard of time. The Church Catholic existing on earth at the same
time, is compared with particular Churches existing at the same time also.
Universality is applied to places and persons in the Church at the same time.

What the universal visible Church is.
The Universal visible Church, is the whole company of visible believers
throughout the whole world. Several men give several descriptions thereof. I
shall set down some of them.

Ecclesia Dei vivi est columna and firmamentum veritatis toto orb terrarum
diffusa propter Evangelium quod praedicatur sicut dicit Apostolus in omni
creatura quae sub coelo est. Aug.

Sancta Ecclesia nos sumus, sed non sic dico nos, quasi ecce qui hic sumus, qui
me modo auditis, sed quotquot sunt Christiani fideles in universo terrarum
orb, quoniam a solis Ortu usque ad occasum laudatur nomen Domini. Sic se habet
Ecclesia Catholica matter noster. Aug. Sermon. 99.

Ecclesia est congregatio sanctorum in qua Evangelium recte docetur and recte
administrantur Sacramenta. Aug. conf.

Saepe Ecclesiae nomine universam hominum multitudinem in orb diffusam
designamus quae unu^se Deum and Christum colere profitetur. Calv. Instit. l. 4.
c. 1. Sect. 7.

Est Congregatio omnium per orbem universum qui consentiun^ in fide Evangelica.
Bulling.

Est coetus hominum Christum suum negem, sacerdotem, and prophetam
profitentium. Keckerman.

In novo Testamento, vocamus Ecclesiam pro omnibus qui Christo nomen dederunt.
Zuinglius. Vniversa multitudo Christianorum quae se fidelem censet simul ^nus
fidelis populus, una Ecclesia dicitur. Idem.

Ecclesia significat totam illam omnium multitudinem quae generatim
exvocatione, and professsione externa aestimatur. Trelc.

Ecclesia est visibilis coetus amplectentium Evangelium Christi, and recte
utentium Sacramentis. Gerard.

Statuimus Ecclesiam quandam universalem externam per totum orbem dispersans,
nobis in sacris literis describi, quae visibili quadam politia unicum
Ecclesiasticum Organicum corpus constituit, sub quo omnes Ecclesia particulares
Classicales Provinciales and Nationales tanquam parts totius continentur.
Apollon. 29. page

Vbicunque and quandocunque fuerint homines Apostolica fide informati,
Christianam Electorum rempublicam constituunt, etiamsi dispersi in omnes Orbis
parts.

Sic Antoninus Philosophus Civem Romanum dixit esse quicunque Romany legibus
viveret. Ita quicunque Christianis legibus moribusque vivit, ubicunque sit,
nihil interest, civis est Christianus, and ad publicum de regenda civitate Dei
consilium adhibendus, ut Ecclesiae Catholicae disciplina Catholica sit. P.
Ramus de Eccl. Cathol.

Sometimes, says Bifield, "Church signifies a company of men in one City or
Province, that did outwardly profess the true Religion, 1 Cor. 11.18, 22. And
so usually in the writings of Divines, the company throughout the world, so
professing, is called the visible Church. Bifield on Art. 9."

"Catholic in the most evident sense agrees to the Church now under the
Gospel, since the partition wall between Jews and Gentiles was broken down,
and yet in some sense it may agree to the Church from the beginning. Idem.

For particular Churches, either single or combined, either National,
Provincial, Classical, or Congregationall, it is not belonging to this
Question to discuss the Quaeries about them, and therefore I shall only set
down some descriptions of them positively, as they are usually taken by others,
and give you my present apprehensions of them.

A National Church.
A National Church is where all the visible, public, religious Assemblies of
a Nation, being parts of the Church Catholic, living under one politic,
civil Government, are by the profession of the same faith, and communion in
the same worship and Government, united into one body Ecclesiastic, or
Ecclesiastical Republike. Two things, as I conceive, are required to make a
National Church. First, National agreement in the same faith and worship.
Secondly, National Union in one Ecclesiastical body in the same community of
Ecclesiastical Government. The Churches in France and the Netherlands have the
same faith and worship, and kind of Government, but they are not in the same
National community thereof Vide Apollo^. p. 29.
. See proofs for National Churches under the Gospel, Isai. 55.5. Thou shall
call a Nation which thou knew not, and Nations which knew not thee shall
run unto thee. It is spoken of Christ under the Gospel: and there is set
down, both Gods call of a Nation, and a Nations answer to that call, and there
can be no more required to make a Church. Also, Isai. 19.25. Egypt my people,
Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine Inheritance. Where all those
three Nations are called three sister Churches, in effect, if you mark the
coherence. It is a prophecy of Gospel times, Psalm. 22.27. All the ends of the
world shall turn unto the Lord, and all the kinreds of the Nations shall
worship before thee, Revel. 11.15. The kingdoms of this world, are become the
kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ. Also, Psalm. 72.11. and 86.9. And by
the same reason when a part of a National Church shall join in particular
consociation and community in a City or Province, or Classis, they may receive
denomination from thence: the one containing a greater part of the Church
Catholic, the other a less. For the Church Catholic being a similar body
retains the name (Church) in what parts, parcels, or quantities soever it be
divided into, for convenient community, until it be brought in minimum quod
sic. as the Philosophers say, i. e. into the least parts that can enjoy public
communion in ordinances, which is a particular congregation.

Gersom Bucerus in dissert. de gub. Eccles. p. 11. has this description of a
particular Church, Nos particularem Ecclesium intelligimus quemlibet credentium
caetum in unam vocationem Divinam, Evangelij praedicatione, sacrarumque
institutionum observatione, adunatum, ac uni Presbyterio subjunctum, sacros
vero conventus uno aut pluribus locis agitantem. Nam paroeciarum in quibus
convenitur numerus, accidenturia res est, nihil ad Ecclesiae particularis
essentiam pertinons. Now this seems to me to be a description of a
Presbyteriall or classical Church, and so not to divide the Church Catholic
into any less parts for enjoyment of all the usual public ordinances,
especially of some parts of discipline and ordination, then a Presbyteriall
Church.

Mr Cotton tells us, that a visible Church is a mystical body, whereof Christ
is the head, the Members Saints, called out of the world, and united together
into one Congregation, by an holy Covenant, to worship the Lord, and to edify
one another in all his holy Ordinances. But (with due respect to so grave and
worthy a man) this seems to me to belong to an invisible Church, not a
visible, because the matter thereof is the mystical body of Christ, consisting
only of Saints called, not only from Idols, but out of the world, and therefore
truly godly. Neither dare I make a particular explicit holy Covenant to be the
form of a particular Church, as this definition does, because I find no
mention of any such covenant, besides the general covenant, imposed on
Churches, nor example or warrant for it in all the Scriptures, and therefore
cannot account it an ordinance of God, but a humane politic device to keep
the members together, which in some places and cases may happily be of good use,
so it be not urged as an ordinance of God, and so it be not used to inthrall
any, and abridge them of liberty of removal into other places and
congregations for their convenience. Or urged as the form of the Church. And
for the enjoyment of all the Ordinances of God in one congregation, it seems
to me very inconvenient for some of the Ordinances, and altogether impossible
for others.

First, It is inconvenient, and of dangerous consequence, that a Church
consisting of 7, 10, 20, or 30. should pass the formidable sentence of
Excommunication against any person, to cast him out of communion, not only with
themselves, but the whole Church Catholic visible, and deliver him up to
Satan. For if it be inflicted by the votes of the whole congregation, as some
would have it, many of the Members being private men, and happily altogether
illiterate, or unexperienced, through want of age, education or parts, are not
able to understand the nature of the allegations and probations, they may be so
intricate, or not able to apply the rule unto the case, for inflicting of a
just censure, and may be in danger to bear particular favor, or ill will unto
their persons, and so apt to be swayed by love, pity, or hopes from them, or to
be overawed by fear or threatenings, being poor men, servants, children,
workmen tenants, and therefore our brethren for congregationall Churches, have
of late, seeing this inconvenience, debarred the people from votes, and put it
into the hand of the Elders only See M Cottons book set out by M. Goodwin and
M. Nie.
. Yea even the Elders of one congregation may be in danger of the same
temptations, because of particular relations, and their dependence on them for
maintenance; but suppose they were as free as Angels from temptations or
infirmities, which they are not, yet the weightinesse, and solemnity of the
censure require to be performed by a college of Elders, of a combined
Presbytery, that so it being passed not by the votes of 3, or 4. only, and
they liable to so many temptations also, but by the joint consent of a greater
Presbytery, free from any such temptations or exceptions, may be done with the
more advice, and combined authority, and be more dreadful to the party, and be
the better accepted, and submitted unto, without heart burning, and grudge
against the particular Elders, or fear of revenge.

Secondly, it is impossible for one congregation to enjoy all the Ordinances of
God within themselves. First, Synods and Councels are acknowledged to be the
ordinance of God, and particularly by that reverend Divine Mr Cotton, in a late
book set out by him, and he groundeth it on Act. 15. And though some of our
brethren for congregationall Churches wave that place, yet grant the thing, and
are members of one at this time, and this Ordinance, all men will grant, cannot
be had in one congregation, but sometimes requires the help of a whole
Province, Kingdom, yea many Kingdoms. Yea secondly, the Ordinances that
nearly concern a particular congregation cannot be performed by that alone:
for how can a congregation of private Christians, try the sufficiency of an
Elder to be elected over them, and if they have a tried man among them, who
shall give him imposition of hands, which is belonging only to Elders to
perform. Neither have our Brethren of congregationall Churches ever dared (as
far as I have heard) to permit common Christians to impose hands on their
Elders, but always desired the Elders of other congregations to do it, and
therefore they cannot have this Ordinance among themselves. And though this
seem to some a thing of small weight, yea but a Quisquiliae veritatu sunt
pretiosissimae.
complement, yet is it an Ordinance of God: And the Apostle, Heb. 6.1, 2.
reckons it up amongst the Principles of Religion, and part of the foundation;
which place Hen: Jocob urges vehemently to overthrow the lawfulness of all
the Ministers of the Church of England, because they have (as he conceived)
erred in the foundation, not having right and due imposition of hands of the
Presbytery, though, by his leave, he was mistaken, for those that imposed their
hands on them were Presbyters.

And this impossibility befalls a Church, either in the beginning of it, and
first constitution, or may, at other times by mortality of Elders, or when but
one remains alive, which will be frequent.

And because it is not rationally probable that the Churches of Jerusalem,
Rome, Corinth, Philippi, Thessalonica, or the 7 Churches of Asia were merely
congregationall, but rather Presbyteriall, unles it were in their very infancy
for a little time before their numbers were increased. It seems difficult to
me to find in Scripture an express instance or example of a congregationall
Church, standing and continuing so by it self. The Church of Cenchraea
mentioned, To. 16.1. is the most probable, because of the conceived smalnesse
of the place, yet it is not certain, for it was a Port Town Oppidum
Corinthiorum navium statione c^leberrimum, et ideo frequent val^e and
populorum. Gualr. in Romans 16.
, and yet it may be, the necessity of those times, and disjunction from other
places might make it stand single for a while at least. And yet there might be
more congregations then one therein, if it were so popuous as some say.

Indeed we find, 1 Cor. 14.34. these words, Let your women keep silence in the
CHVRCHES, which word (Churches) if it does import several companies meeting in
several places, to enjoy the public Ordinances, and that these companies are
called Churches, (which is to some a Question) yet it is certain they were all
one combined Church of Corinth, often spoken of in the singular number.

But this dispute belongs not to this Question, yet the present difference of
opinions and practices have caused me to dilate a little upon this subject,
beyond the explication of the Term. And I understand by particular Churches,
any, or all the forementioned Churches, whether National, Provincial,
Presbyteriall, or Congregationall: and this last principally: for those that
have first moved this Question, mean principally, if not solely, the
congregationall Church, because (as I suppose) they hold no other particular
Churches, but such.

The fourth Term to be opened is, What is meant by Prima vel Orta. This
distinction, or at least in these terms, is not ancient, for Mr Parker in hic
Politeia Eccl. was the first that sprung it, as far as I know.

Primum in Logic is defined to be, Quod est suae Originis. Ortum quod oritur a
primo. But I suppose in this Question it is meant, which has the priority in
consideration. Whether in our apprehension of Churches we are to begin at the
Church Catholic and descend to particular Churches, or begin at the particular
Churches, and ascend to the Church Catholic. Which notion is first in distinct
knowledge, whether Ecclesia universalis, aut particularis? Which is as the
root, which the branches? Which is as the mother, which the daughter? Or to
speak more punctually: Whether the nature and privileges of the Church belong
first to the particular congregation, and so ascend to the Church Catholic, or
belong first to the Church Catholic, and descend unto the particular Churches?

I do not in this Question by primum mean absolute primum, for God only is Eus
primum, who has his being in himself, and from himself, and gives being to
all his creatures: And so the whole Church is Gods house, built by him; but,
Primum in suo genere in genere Ecclesiarum. Neither do I mean by Ortum, that
the particular Churches do arise out of the general by the sole virtue or
innate power and strength of the Church Catholic, but because the particular
Churches are made up of the members of the Church Catholic, and partake of the
benefits and privileges of the Church primarily, not because they are members
of the particular Churches, but of the Catholic.

And yet I deny not but that a Ministerial, Synodicall or Classical Church,
made up of delegated Members of diverse particular Churches, pro tempore (which
some improperly call a representative Church) may put on the notion of Ecclesia
Orta, and the particular Churches, out of which those members are chosen and
delegated, may in some sense, in reference unto them put on the notion of
Ecclesia prima, but the Question is not so stated, but between the whole Church
Catholic, and whole particular Churches.

Now I have opened the Terms of my Question, I find two Questions instead of
one, and whether of them is the most difficult, I cannot tell. For whereas the
subject of every Question uses to be taken for granted, and the predicate only
proved, I find the subject of my Question exceedingly opposed, and that by our
own Divines; and therefore I must crave leave to confirm that sufficiently, or
else whatever I shall say of the predicate, will be as a house built on the
sand, or a castle in the air; For if there be no universal Church visible,
then it is not capable of being prima, or Orta.

In handling both these Questions, I shall follow my wonted method. I prefer
one divine testimony, before ten arguments, and one good argument before ten
humane testimonies.

First then, Whether there be a Church Catholic visible? Quest. 1.


I know that our Divines in answer to the Pontificians do deny the Church
Catholic to be visible, as Zanchy, Gerard, Whitakers, Chamier and Ames against
Bellarmine, and Sadeel against Turrianus. But the Pontificians state not the
question, as I state it, and I confess their assertions of the Church
Catholic to be false. For,

First, They take visible for conspicuous, glorious and manifest, specious and
flourishing.

Secondly, They hold that the name Catholic Church belongs to one Church, viz.
The Church of Rome, and that being the Church Catholic, and comprizing the
universality of the Church in it self, all that will be members of the Church
Catholic must submit to them, and be members of that Church.

Thirdly, They hold that it is necessary that this visible Catholic Church
should be under one visible universal head, which they make to be the Pope,
Christ's Vicar General, and in these regards our Divines do contradict and
confute them. But there are passages enough in our Divines writings, that may
be brought to allow and approve visibility, aspectability and unity in all the
Churches of the Saints throughout the whole world. I will give you a taste, but
of one of the forementioned, for brevity sake, and he the most rigid in
discipline, and exact in Logical divisions and deductions of any of them, and
that is Dr Ames, who in his Medulla says: Ecclesia nunquam de sinit esse
visibilis. Which cannot be meant of any particular Church, for that may fail.
Again, he says, Congregationes illae particulares sunt quasi parts similares
Ecclesiae Catholicae, atque adeo and nomen, and naturam ejus participant. And
further says, Illi qui professione tantum sunt fideles, dum remanent in illa
societate, sunt membra illius Ecclesiae, sicut etiam Ecclesiae Catholicae,
quoad statum externum. And in his Bellarminus enervatus, he says, Nos fatemur
Ecclesiam militantem visibilem esse quoad formam accidentalem, and externam, in
suis partibus and singulatim, and conjunctim, etc.

Now though I have set down these humane testimonies first, yet it is not that
I mean to lean upon these as my maine proofs, but only to show that our
Divines in denying the Popish tenet of a Church Catholic visible in their
sense, yet all of the forementioned deny it not in my sense, if any do.

But for proof that there is a Church Catholic visible, I will first give you
Scripture, and secondly demonstration.

For Scripture, see Acts 8.3. Saul made havoc of the Church. I showed you
before that this must needs be a visible Church, for they could not else be
persecuted, and certainly Saul could not discern the invisible company, but
persecuted promiscuously all that were of that way; neither was it a particular
Church, for this persecution was in Jerusalem, and in every Synagogue, and to
Damascus, and even to strange Cities. So that by Church here is meant, an
indefinite number of visible Churches or Congregations, which were in no other
community but profession of the same faith; and an indefinite, is equivalent to
a general, and by the same reason that the word Church would reach all these
Churches, it would reach all the Churches in the world.

The same word there is, Galat. 1.13. I persecuted the Church of God, and
wasted it: and yet it is said when he was converted, then had the Churches rest
throughout all Judea, and Galileo, and Samaria, which yet were but some parts
of the Church (in the singular number) which he persecuted.

Again, See 1 Cor. 10.32. Give no offense to the Jew, nor Gentile, nor to the
Church of God: Where the word Church, cannot signify the elect only, nor any
one particular Congregation, or Kingdom, but indefinitely.

See also, 1 Cor. 12.28. God has set some in the Church, first Apostles,
secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers.

The Church there spoken of, is not the triumphant Church, nor the Invisible
Church only, for they were visible messengers, and some of them but only
visible, for Judas had obtained part in the Apostleship and Ministry, and was
sent to preach and work miracles: and many Prophets were not of the invisible
number, for many shall say, Lord, Lord we have prophesied in thy name, and yet
shall not be saved. But to be sure they were sent to afford the Saints visible
communion in ordinances.

Again, This is not meant of the Church Entitive, which is a similar, and (as I
may say) an homogeniall body, every member being equal, and of the same
capacity, as a member, but of the Church organicall, a Heterogeniall Dissimilar
body, because here are set down the officers. Neither is here meant a
particular Church, but all collectively that were within the bounds of the
Apostles commission, which was the Church in the whole world, Go teach all
Nations, etc. and all the Churches that have Pastors and Teachers over them,
which all the Churches in the world have, or ought to have, and yet all these
are called but one Church, one body, verse. 20. Now if there be officers of the
Church Catholic visible, then there is a Church Catholic visible, but the
Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists, were officers of the Church Catholic
visible, for they had no limits, and yet are said to be set, not in the
Churches, but in the Church. And this is granted by our brethren for
Congregationall Churches, that they were officers of the Church Catholic, and
therefore did not baptize into particular Congregations, or in refernce to
them, but into the general. And this Cartwright in his Catechism grants,
concerning the Church Catholic. Now certainly they were not officers to the
true believers only, seeing they censured others also.

Also 1 Timothy 3.15. These things I write unto thee, that thou may know how
thou ought to behave thy self in the house of God, which is the Church of
the living God. This Church must be a visible Church, where he and others must
exist, and converse together, and carry themselves in mutual duties. Now these
directions concerned not Ephesus alone, or in any special manner, but all the
Churches where ever he should come. It is that Church which is the ground and
pillar of truth, which holds it forth unto others more forensi, which is the
Church Catholic, unto which Timothy was an Evangelist.

Again, It is the Church visible, that is so often in the Scripture called the
Kingdom Mark. 4.2^, 30. Luke 7.28.
of God, and the Kingdom Mat. 13.24, 31, 33, 44, 45, 47.
of Heaven: Christ calls them not Kingdoms, but the Kingdom, and compares
this Kingdom, to a field of wheat mingled with tares, and himself expounds
it, that the field is the world, and this must be the Christian world: for the
other is a field of tares only; for verse. 41. Mat. 13.41, 49.
it is said, they shall gather out of the Kingdom, etc. In this field,
particular Churches are but particular ridges, enjoying the same tillage, Sever
the wicked from among the just.
seed, fencing, watering.

It is a barn floor with wheat and chafe.

It is a draw net gathering together good and bad.

It is a marriage where were wise and foolish virgins, some with wedding
garments, some without, some had oil, and some had none but lamps of
profession. Now these metaphors cannot be limited to any particular
Congregation, but agree to the Church Catholic, not as invisible but visible.

And when we say, Thy kingdom come, we pray for the good of the Church
Catholic visible, that it might be enlarged and have freedom and purity of
ordinances, which are things that concern it as visible.

In 1 Cor. 15.24. it is said, Then shall Christ deliver up the Kingdom to God
his Father: This is not the essential Kingdom which he has with the Father
and Holy Ghost as God, for that he shall never deliver up. Neither is it the
kingdom of grace which he exercises in the hearts of the elect, for that
shall continue for ever, and be more perfect in Heaven. For the kingdom of
grace here, and glory afterward, differ only gradu communionis, as Ames tells
us, here the degree is imperfect, then it shall be perfect both in graces and
joys. But it is the kingdom exercised in the visible Church, in ordinances of
worship and discipline, which shall then cease: for as the Evangelicall
external service, thrust out the legal and ceremonial, so shall the heavenly
thrust out the evangelicall.

And Heb. 12.28. Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved, let
us have grace whereby we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly
fear. This kingdom cannot be meant of the internal kingdom of grace in the
heart, for that was also exercised by Christ in his peoples hearts, in the old
Testament, but it is meant of the external ordinances of worship and
discipline, which differed from that under the Law: else the Apostles
antithesis of the Church under the Law; and the Church under the Gospel had
not been good, which are the things he compares in that place. Now nothing is
opposite to external under the Law, but external under the Gospel. It cannot
be meant of the kingdom of glory, for they had not yet received it: and it is
plain he speaks of a Kingdom wherein we may now serve God acceptably, with
reverence and godly fear.

Repent for the Kingdom Mat. 3.2. Mat. 4.17.
of Heaven is at hand. He that is least in the Kingdom Mat. 1.11.
of Heaven is greater then John. Now if these things were spoken of a
particular congregation only, which particular congregation in the world shall
impropriate these things to it self? But if true of everyone in particular,
and all in general, and these all be continually called one kingdom, then
there is a Church Catholic visible.

Again, 1 Cor. 5.12. The Apostle says, What have I to do to judge those that
are without. The preposition (...) extra, I desire to know what Noune shall be
understood or supplied unto it. Is it not (...), without the Church? And can we
think that that Church was the Church of Corinth only? Had Paul nothing to do
to judge any that were out of the Church of Corinth, when he was an Apostle all
over the Christian world? This could not be meant of the invisible company
only; What had Paul nothing to do to censure any but invisible memmbers? Why
did he then excommunicate Hymineus, Philetus, Phygellus, Hermogines and
Alexander? And says, I would they were cut off that trouble you: and therefore
it must be meant of the Church Catholic visible. What have I to do to judge
those that are without the pale of the Church? they are not under my power or
cognizance, but belong only to the civil Magistrate. And we usually speak of
the countries that are within the pale of the Church, and those that are
without. And we have an axiom, Extra Ecclesiam non est salus, which cannot be
meant of any particular congregation in the world, but is true of the Church
Catholic visible, typified by the Ark of Noah, without which ordinarily, and
visibly, there is no hope of salvation.

Also it is said, Acts 2.47. God added to the Church daily such as should be
saved; which was not a particular congregationall Church but the Catholic. For
it is not probable that those hundred and twenty that were together at
Pentecost, were one congregationall Church, for many of them were men of
Galilee, which by their habitation could not pertain to the Church in
Jerusalem, and yet the rest were added to them.

Again, Ephesians. 3.10. To the intent that unto the principalities and powers in
heavenly places, might be known by the Church, the manifold wisdom of God.
This Church here spoken of, was not a particular Congregation, but the whole
Church Catholic whereof Paul was made a Minister, as he says in the same
chapter. And this proficiency of the Angels (for ought I know) was by the
truths which it pleased God by the ministry of the word to make known audibly
to the Church.

And Ephesians. 3.21. To him be glory in the Church throughout all ages, etc. This
place speaks of the Church Catholic visible in the largest sense that can be
possible, both in respect of place, for it is the whole Church by which God
has glory, which is universal: and time, for it is the Church in all ages,
but no particular congregation, nor national Church can be sure to last to all
ages, no not by succession, but the Church Catholic shall.

Again Ephesians. 4.4, 5. The Apostle proves the Church to be but one by diverse
arguments. First he says, There is but one body of Christ, which is therefore
called Ephesians. 3.6. (...) both of Jews and Gentiles, i. e. the same body.
Secondly, there is but one Spirit in that whole body, which is as one soul in
one body. Thirdly, there is but one hope of their calling. Fourthly, there is
but one Lord or King over the whole Church. Fifthly, there is but one Faith, i.
e. one Religion, Doctrine, Worship, the same Commands and Statutes for all.
Sixthly, There is but one Baptism to admit into this Church. Now if the whole
world were under one King, and governed by one Law, and all capable of the same
Privileges, and all made Denizons by the same way of inrowlement; it would
make but one Empire, yet so it is with all the Churches in the world, they have
the same King, Law, Word, Sacraments, of admission, and nutrition, which they
visibly subject themselves unto, and receive, therefore they are all one
visible Church.

Again, Christ says on this rock Matthew. 16.18.
will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
Was this a particular Congregation? No surely, but the Church Catholic, for
any particular Church may be prevailed against, but the whole shall not. The
place is meant of a Church future, to be built, which Christ then intended to
set up, which was the Evangelicall Catholic Church, and not Catholic as some
take it for the Church past, present, and to come, for those past were already
built, and were in Heaven out of Gunshot of assault, but it is meant de
Ecclesia vivorum, de militante, de Ecclesia quam Christus erat aedificaturus.

Object. O but this place is meant of the Church invisible, for they that are
only visible may be prevailed against?

Answ. It is true, but those invisible are also visible, and they shall never
be prevailed against as visible. Ecclesia nunquam desinit esse visibilis. Satan
or persecutours shall never so far prevail as to cut off all the visible
members. And though such heresies come that shall deceive all but the Elect,
yet as long as the Elect are not deceived, there remains a Church Catholic
visible still in their visibility. If all the visible members should fail,
then all the invisible must needs fail also, for none are invisible in this
world but be must be visible also: except any be converted and fed only by
inspiration, which we have no ground for in the Scripture.

Again, Excommunication in 2 Ep. John 10. is called casting out of the Church.
What Church is that? It cannot be the Invisible Church, for all the censures in
the world cannot cast a man out of that, if once he be in, therefore it is the
visible Church; and if it be the visible Church, then I would know, whether a
man truly excommunicated in one Church or Congregation, is not thereby
excommunicated from brotherly fellowship with all Congregations? Or whether the
delivering up to Satan be only within the bounds of one Congregation, so that
if he remove out of such a circle or circuit of ground to another, he is out of
Satan's bonds again, and may communicate there safely? I deny not but that
through ignorance such a thing may be admitted, but certainly if the censure be
past against him, he needs no other Excommunication, but his first sentence
will bind him in all the Christian world, if it can be known. I am not
ignorant that I have Dr Whitakers, and many Protestant Divines against me
herein, and therefore I only propose what my light guides me to judge herein.
Herein I agree with Apollonius.

Sicut per excommunicationem legitimam excommunicatus non tantum ex hac vel
illa particulari Ecclesia ejicitur, sed ubicunque terrarum ligatur, and
excommunione fraterna universalis Ecclesiae excluditur, Matthew. 18.17, 18. Ita
and per Sacramentum Baptismi and sacrae Eucharistiae homini communio
Ecclesiastica non tantum in particulari sed, and universali Ecclesia
obsignatur. Apollon. p. 26.

If any one that is called a 1 Cor. 5.11.
brother, be a drunkard, railer, extortioner, etc. What makes him to be called
a brother? Is it because he is of that particular Congregation, or the Church
Catholic? Is it because he is an invisible member, or a visible by Profession?
Few Fornicators, Idolaters, Drunkards, etc. are invisible members.

Again, all those Metaphors which set out the Church in Scripture, show the
unity of the Church Catholic. This is the woman clothed with the Sun, Rev.
12.1.
the Righteousness of Christ, and the Moon, all terrestrial mutable things
under her feet: or clothed with the Sun, the purity of Doctrine, and the
Moon, i. e. (as some will have it) Discipline under her feet. Surely this woman
was not a particular Congregation, but the Church Catholic: for were it meant
of particular Congregations, it should have been women, not a woman.

There shall be one Shepherd, says Christ, and one Sheepfold, Joh. 10.16.
which is meant of the Church Catholic, and that visible, consisting of Jew
and Gentile.

The Church is called the Body of Christ, and that is the Church Catholic, for
Christ has but one body. Romans 12.5. As we have many members in one body, and
all members have not the same office: so we being many are one body in Christ,
and every one members one of another. This the Apostle speaks of the visible,
Organicall Church, for thereupon he falls to reckon up the several offices in
the Church, as Prophesying, Teaching, Exhorting, Giving, Ruling, Showing mercy,
which some compute to be an exact distribution of the Church Offices. So Ephesians.
4.4. 1 Cor. 10.17. 1 Cor. 12.1^, 13, 20. Ephesians. 2.16.
It is called the 1 Timothy 3.15.
House of God. How thou should behave thy self in the House of God. And the
City of God Ephesians. 2.19. Heb. 12, 22. Rev. 3.12.
. Now these things had they been meant of particular Congregations, should have
been Bodies, Houses, Cities, Sheepfolds. But as many members in a body hinder
not the unity of the whole, and many towns in a Kingdom, and many houses in a
City, and many rooms in an house, or in the Arc, hinder not the unity
thereof: so many particular Congregations, hinder not the unity of the Church
Catholic. Cant. 6.9. My Dove, my undefiled is but one, she is the only one of
her mother. She is the Lilly Cant. 2.2.
among the thorns, which is the Church militant. She is called the Spouse of
Christ Cant. 4.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
. Yea, the Holy Ghost chooses to join many particular Churches together by
Nounes collective, Nounes of multitude in the singular number, where it can be
with convenience. Remarkable is that 1 Peter 5.2. where writing to the
strangers scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithinia,
he calls them all one flock, not flocks. Feed the flock of God which is among
you. The same word Paul uses Acts 20. to the Elders of Ephesus. Est una sola
Christi Ecclesia, ^^ae ob id etiam dicitur Catholica. Particulares Ecclesia non
sunt impedimento quin una sit Ecclesia. Zanch. de Ecclesia.

A second kind of proof hereof is by argument or demonstration. If particular
Churches be visible, there is a visible Catholic Church; but particular
Churches are visible: therefore, The consequence will follow, whether you
consider the particular Churches as Species or as Parts. Omne particulare
habet suum generale, sive universale: and omne membrum habet suum integrum, and
omnis pars habet suum totum. If therefore there be particular Churches, there
is a general, and if the particular be visible, so is the general; if the
particulars be mingled, wheat and tares together, so is the general. Genus and
Species, pars and totum (similare presertim) sunt ejusdem praedicamenti. Ten
thousand particular corporeal substances cannot make one general
incorporeall. Ten thousand visible particular Churches cannot make one
invisible general Church. But all Divines, yea, our brethren for
Congregationall Churches, yea the Separation, hold that particular Churches are
visible, as consisting indeed of visible members. And Gerard though he will not
grant a Church Catholic visible, yet says, Ecclesias particulares visibiles
esse concedimus; and therefore he must grant the general Church, to which
those particulars belong, to be of the same kind.

in homine and Bruto.

Answ.
Answer, here were some color in this objection, if you consider the Church
Catholic only as a genus, and the particular as species, yet not enough to
amount to a denial of a Church Catholic visible, no more then any Logician
denies Animal, because there is no such creature, but in homine and bruto. But
the proper notion of the Church Catholic, and particular, is of integrum and
membra. And so as I said before Ames in his medulla takes it. Congregationes
illae particulares sunt quasi parts similares Ecclesiae Catholicae, atque adeo
and nomen and naturam ejus participant. And then the argument stands thus.
Vbi omnes parts existunt simul compacta, ibi totum existit; sed omnes parts
Ecclesiae Catholicae visibilis existunt simul compacta. Therefore, The minor
(...) proved Ephesians. 4.16. From whom the whole body fitly joined together and
compacted by that which every joint supplyeth, etc. This place is spoken of the
Church militant, because organicall, and organicall, because the officers are
there reckoned up, and Catholic, because it is the Church to which Apostles,
Prophets, and Evangelists are given. They have the same Lord, the same law, the
same spirit, and have influence by love, sympathy, and prayer into the welfare
one of another.

For my part I conceive the Church Catholic to be Totum integrale, and the
particular Churches to be similares parts, and so members thereof, and parcels
thereof, as the Jewish Synagogues Jam. 2 2. 2 These. 2.1. Heb. 10.25. Tilenus in
these. part. 1. disp 14. Theft. 3.
were of the Jewish Church, though with some more privilege, for both
Sacraments, etc. and that every particular Church partaketh of part of the
matter and part of the form of the whole. And these parts are limited and
distinguished from others, by civil and prudentiall limits for convenience of
meeting, and maintenance, and transacting of business: and that every
Christian is a member of the Church in whose limits he dwells, being only in the
general Covenant of Baptism. And this membership is either divolved on him by
Gods disposing providence, by reason of his birth, or cohabitation there, or
voluntarily assumed by his voluntary removal into that place allotted out by
civil prudence for such a particular society to enjoy the Ordinances of God
conveniently together. For he knew the Minister, and members, before he came
in, or might have done, at least, if he had pleased, and it is at his choice to
remove out again, if he dislike either officers, or members. But of any
Christian man's or woman's dwelling in any City, or Town, where there was a
Church, and not to be a member of that Church, or to be a member of another
Church in another town or city, and reside in his own but per accidens, as some
do distinguish, has neither example nor warrant in the Scripture. But seems
to me to imply an unchurching those places from whence they are gathered. As a
man that comes to dwell in a town shall thereby be a member of it, and ruled
by the officers thereof in civil affairs, and if he like it not he may
remove, and if they have any thing justly against him they may punish, or
restrain remove
him: so it is in the administration of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. And as
the limits of the particular seas, and their names are from the shoares and
lands they are bounded by, though a heterogeneall body, so may particular
Churches well be bounded by civil prudentiall limits though they seem
heterogeneall. We find frequently in Scripture The Church which was in
Jerusalem, Antioch, Corinth, Ephesus. Yea Cenchrea a port town some 8. miles
from Corinth, gave name to the Church therein.



Answ.
It is no more necessary then that all in a kingdom or empire should meet
sometimes: it is enough that they are under the same King, and governed by the
same laws, and inspired by the same Spirit, and walk in the same ways, and
tend to the same end, and fare the better for one another prayers; and rejoice
in the welfare, and mourn for the ill fare one of another, and help one
another as they have opportunity. And yet we read that many times the Church
Catholic visible has met in general Councels, by their delegates, or
commissioners, as a ministerial Church Catholic, which in former times of the
Church under Christian Emperors was frequent, and there is no intrinfical let
in the Church that they do not meet so still, but only extrinsicall, and
extraneous, by reason of the divisions among the civil Governors, but even in
our days a great part of this great body has met in the Synod of Dort, by
commissioners.

Dr Whitakers and Apollonius acknowledge the meeting Act. 1. to be a general
Council. The members were the Apostles who were Pastors of the Church
Catholic, and Brethren out of Galilee and Jerusalem. The work was to elect an
Apostle who was to be a Pastor of the universal Church: and they that
undertake and dispatch a business which concerns the teaching and government of
the whole Church must represent the whole Church Catholic. Yet there is so
much power given to every Presbyteriall Church at least, as may uphold it
self, and exercise the discipline of the Church, for the being, and well being
of it, ordinarily.

Yet so as it is a part of the Church Catholic, into which also the censures
there past, have influence, as shall be showed more afterward. And on some
great occasions there may be cause to fetch help further, as Cranmer appeald to
a general council. But, if that extensive power cannot be had, as now it is
very difficult, then must that particular, national, provincial, or
Presbyteriall Church rest in that intensive power that remains within its own
limits. Yea even in a congregationall Church, if it stand so as it cannot
combine with neighbors, or have recourse unto them, it must be so: but that is
an extraordinary case, and so not to be regulated by ordinary rules. And in
such cases also all civil power must rest in one congregation, as if it were
in a wilderness where there were no neighbor towns or cities to which it might
be joined: yet it follows not that it must be so in England, or any other
kingdom where there are counties, shires, cities, great towns, or a
Parliament. Yea I know not but a particular family may, yea must be in such an
extraordinary case Independent, both in Ecclesiastical, and civil matters
also, yet it follows not that there is any such inherent right in every town
or family all over the world, and that therefore particular towns and familyes
in England are debarred of an inherent privilege belonging to them, because
necessity may put such an independency on some, in an extraordinary case. As by
Shipwreck, or being cast into some Island not inhabited.

It is fit that a visible Church Catholic here on earth should

This is the maine argument of the Pontificians for the supremacy of the Pope,
Answ.
and that which made our Divines deny them a Church Catholic visible. But to
the argument, I answer that the Church has a head of the same nature,
consisting of body and soul, who sometimes lived in this kingdom of grace, in
the days of his flesh, and did visibly partake in external ordinances, though
indeed now he be ascended into his kingdom of glory, yet cease not to be a
man, as we are, though glorified, and cease not to rule and govern his Church
here below, for it is an everlasting kingdom: Isa. 9.7. As when King James was
translated from Scotland to England, and lived here, he did not cease to be
King of Scotland: so neither does Christ cease to be the head of his Church,
though he be translated to his other kingdom of glory: and as for a vicar or
deputy here below, it is not needful. We confess the government of the Church
in regard of the head is absolutely monarchical, but in regard of the officers
it is Aristocraticall.

a proper existence of its own, and existeth only in the existence of
particular Churches, on the members thereof? this objection is somewhat like a
former, only there, the existence was said to be in the Species, here, in the
members.

Answ.
So we may say of every aggregative body. A heap of stones existeth only in the
existence of particular stones: the whole element of water existeth only in
particular dropps. By this objection you may deny particular visible Churches,
because they exist not, but in particular families, and particular families
exist not, but in particular members: but as I said before, if the parts do
exist, the existence of the whole resulteth thereof.

An army existeth not but in the several brigades, and regiments, and they are
billeted in distant places, and yet having one General, the same laws
martial, the same cause, the same enemies, though they should never be drawn up
together into one body, yet are one army: So is the Church Catholic one,
though it never meet bodily, because the union is not corporeal, but an unity
of profession, of chief governor, of laws, Spirit, way and hope. Yea the
existence of it will the more appear, because it has privileges belonging
thereunto, which particulars have not, or but in part, and at second hand, as
shall be showed in the second question.



Answ.
It is possible, yet all the essence and Privileges of the Church Catholic
visible are contracted and reserved therein, and from them conveyed, and
derived to those whom they shall convert, and so shall dilate it self again. And
while the Church is but one congregation, that, has the notion of the Church
Catholic more properly then of a particular Church. Yea though it be but in
one family, as it was in the Arc in the days of Noah.

Second Question.
I come now to handle the predicate of my Question, which I may well call a
second question, and that is: Which of these two Churches is Prima, and which
Orta? Before I answer I desire you to remember, that the comparison is not
between the Invisible, and the visible Church, but between Churches of the same
kind, viz. The Catholic visible, and the particular visible Churches: And
then I answer, I conceive, the Church Catholic is Prima, and the particular
Churches are Ortae. For

First, all the names that are in Scripture given unto the Acts 7.38. The
Church in the wilderness. And the Jews are frequently called the Lords
people. So the Church is called the House of the Living God. 1 Timothy 3.15. And
the ground and pillar of truth. The City of God, Isai. 1.21. Gods vineyard,
John 15.1. wherein branches in Christ bearing no fruit are cut off. John 10.16.
Christ's Sheepfold, Matthew. 3.12.
Barn-floore, Matthew. 13.37, 38.
Drag not, Wheat-field, Kingdom of Heaven, a great house wherein were vessels
even of dishonor, 2 Timothy 2.20. These names cannot be limited to, or
impropriated by any particular Congregation, but are first true of the whole
Church, and of every particular Church as a part thereof. I must here remember
you again of that saying of Dr Ames in his Medulla. Congregationes
particulares sunt quasi parts similares Ecclesiae Catholicae atque adeo and
nomen and naturam ejus participant. Where he grants the Church Catholic to
have the first right to the name, and nature of a Church, and the particulars
only by participation.

Secondly, that is the primary Church to which the Promises Privileges of the
Church do primarily belong: but the Promises and Privileges of the Church do
primarily belong to the Church Catholic. Therefore, etc. The minor I prove,
because the first Evangelicall Promise that ever was made in the world was to
Adam and Eve, representing all mankind, and therefore consequently the whole
Church of God. This was before there was any division or distinction made of
Churches into Jew, and Gentile, National or Congregationall. Again, the maine
commission for gathering the Evangelicall Church was general. Go teach all
nations and baptize them in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And
this was before any divisions, or subdivisions, were appointed, and they were
secondarily brought in, for order and better edification, and being parts of
the whole receive particular distinction from the places where they lived and
other particularities. They all retain the general form and essential
difference from heathens; and among themselves as parts of a similar body, are
distinguished but by accidental differences.

And that Promise that the gates of hell shall never prevail against the
Church is primarily given to the Church Catholic visible here on earth, for
that in Heaven is not assailed by the gates of hell, but only that on earth.
And though it be applicable to the invisible only, yet to those as visible,
for so they are assailed, by persecutions, and heresies.

Again, He that believes, and is baptized shall be saved. This does primarily
belong to the Church Catholic, and that a visible Church, because capable of
Baptism, and though it be applicable to every member of any particular
Congregation, yet not as being a member thereof, but of the Church Catholic,
to which that Promise was made: yea, look over all the Promises in the New
Testament, and you shall find them made in general, without the least respect
or reference to the particular Congregations wherein the Believers lived. In
any similar body, as water, the accidents do not primarily pertain to this or
that particular drop, and secondarily to the whole, but first to the whole, and
secondarily to this or that drop. So the Privileges of the Church do not
primarily belong to this or that particular Church, and secondarily to the
general, but first to the general, and secondarily to this particular, being
a part of it.

The maine Privileges of the Church visible are, first Federall Holiness to
the children; secondly, right to the Ordinances, (quoad nos saltem:) now
neither of both these betide any man primarily as a member of a particular
Congregation, but as a member of the Church Catholic.

For Federall or Covenant Holiness, whereby the children are (...) betideth no
man's children, because the parents are of this or that particular Congregation,
but because of the Church Catholic, and this appears by diverse
demonstrations. I will give you but one. That which should have been, though
the particular relation had never been, and which continues when the
particular relation cease, that is not a proper Privilege of that relation,
but such is federall Holiness, in regard of relation to any particular Church.
Suppose those baptized by John Baptist or by Christ's Disciples before there was
any particular distinction, should have any children, or the Eunuch (if he were
an Eunuch by office only, and not in body) baptized by Philip, and went
immediately home into his own country, should not their children be (...)?
Suppose a Church dissolved by war, the Minister and people slain, and some
women left with child should be carried away captive, should not those
children be (...), because the particular relation is extinct? Do not those
women remain members of the Church? Are they to be counted without, in the
Apostles sense?

Secondly, for Ordinances, either of Worship, or Discipline, they are both
Privileges of the Church Catholic, primarily. For Worship, a man or a child
has right to Baptism as a member of the Church Catholic, and not of the
particular Congregation, for they had right before Congregations were
distinguished, as in John Baptists, and Christ's time, and the Eunuchs case, and
have right after that relation cease as children born in captivity, as in the
former instances, such children being holy, are capable of Baptism. Infantes
baptizandi sunt, non ut sancti sint, sed quia sancti sunt. Whitak, And
therefore no question but any Minister might baptize those children, if he
could come by them.

And for hearing the Word of God, let a Christian dwell where he will, and have
opportunity to hear the Word where he can, he has right to it, and does hear
it, not as a heathen that is without, but as his rightful portion. And even in
Congregationall Churches, the brethren in one Congregation communicate at the
Lords Table in other Congregations, as occasion is offered. And no question but
any Christian may join in prayer, and say, Our Father, etc. with any
Christians in the furthest parts of the world.

And for the Ordinances of Discipline, every one as a member of the Church
Catholic is bound to submit thereunto, and every officer of the Church
Catholic visible has right to and power in the Ordinances of Discipline, in
actu primo, every where, as shall be showed more afterward. And certainly the
Church Catholic, even in their representative ministerial body, have more
extensive authoritative power then particular Classes or Congregations, though
happily not more intensive.

Neither can it be imagined, that all the other Privileges should belong first
to the Church Catholic, and so descend to particulars, and this of Discipline
should belong first to the particular congregation, and so ascend to the
Catholic: that some should go in a geneticall method (as it were) and others
in an analyticall. Suppose an Apostle should have preached in a city, and
converted at first but two or three, or converted a company of women, as it was
Paul's lot to preach to a company of women, Acts 16.13. So that they could not
be brought in to an organicall congregation, could it be conceived that they,
though baptized, were still without? and were not their children (...)? And if
any of them should miscarry in their judgments, or practices, had Paul nothing
to do to censure them, because they were not in a Church way (as some term
it) or in a particular Congregation, though they were in the Church Catholic
visible? If they were liable to censure, or capable thereof, not being in a
particular congregation, but the Church Catholic only; then Discipline belongs
to the Church Catholic, and that primarily. The Keys of Discipline were first
given to the Church Catholic, because first given to the Apostles, who were
general Pastors, and therefore the Keys are Catholic.

Also censures past in one Congregation reach the whole Church Catholic
visible, as shall be showed more afterward. That which belongs to all and
every part of a similar body, as parts of that body, that primarily belongs
to the whole: but so does Discipline. Therefore, etc.

Christ's Offices are first intended for, and executed on the Church Catholic
here below. He is King, Priest, and Prophet, primarily in respect of the whole,
and but secondarily in respect of a particular congregation or member. Gods
aim in Redemption was to redeem the whole firstly, and secondarily
particulars. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son etc.
And so is the application of that redemption by Christ. As a Priest he
reconcileth, cleanses and intercedeth for all of the elect, and proffers it to
the whole Church Catholic visible. As a Prophet he teaches all. As a King he
rules all primarily, and particulars secondarily. As an earthly King is indeed
King of Thomas and John, etc. but not primarily, but secondarily as they are
members of his kingdom. And the natural head is indeed head to the little
finger and little toe, but not primarily, but as they are parts of the whole
body, whereof it is head: so is Christ a mystical King and head first of the
whole, and secondarily of the particular parts contained in and under the
whole. Yea Christ may be King, Priest, and Prophet to a particular convert,
brought in, and nourished by the word of God preached in a visible
congregation, before he be admitted a member of that congregation, or any other
by public consent, remaining in no Church but the Church Catholic visible,
and happily scarce being a complete member of that, being as yet not baptized.

Fourthly, the signs that difference a true Church from a false, do profession
of the true faith; the administration of the true ordinances of God, the Word
and Sacraments, for therein all the whole Church agree, and is thereby
distinguished from those that are without, not from those that are within. This
is no note to know this or that particular Church by, from another, for it is
common to the universal Church, it distinguishes not among themselves, but
from the general common opposite, the heathen, or the gross heretic. A man
being lead into a vault where were the sculls of many dead men, and
understanding that Alexanders scull was there, desired his guide to show him
that, his guide told him it was that scull with the hollow eye holes, and with
the gristly nose, and with futures crossing the brain pann, and when the man
replied that they had all so, yea says his guide, there is no difference
between Kings and other men's sculls, when they are dead. So if any man should
ask you or me which is the Church of Ipswich, Dedham or Colchester, it were a
folly to say it is the Church where the word of God is preached, and sacraments
administered, and that profess Jesus Christ to be crucified, dead and buried,
risen again, and ascended into Heaven, for so do all the Church Catholic, but
I must give some other notes to distinguish any of them, for these are not
distinctive, because common. Therefore the signs of the true Church belong
primarily to the whole, secondarily to particular parts thereof, and are
therefore not distinctive to the parts. That which is primary to any thing is
distinctive to that thing, but that which is secondary and common is not
distinctive from other particulars of the like kind.

Fifthly all the members of particular Churches are members of the Church,
Catholic, yea that relation belongs first to them. If they be born within the
pale of the Church, they have federall holiness, and are (...), not because
members of this or that congregation, but because born of parents within the
general covenant externally, and so within the Church Catholic. If they be
converted from heathens, they are not first converted into this or that
particular Church, but converted first into the Church Catholic, and then
secondarily admitted members of this or that particular congregation. A man may
dwell in one City, and hear the word of God by accident in another city, and
thereby be converted, but he is not converted to be a member of the Church,
where he was converted but into the Church Catholic. So that particular
congregations are made up of members of the Church Catholic, and therefore most
properly are said to be Ortae, for such a co^vert may join himself after his
conversion, to what congregation he pleases to inhabit among. If a man come
into a parish that is a heathen, he is not a member of that particular Church,
because not a member of the Church Catholic, but if he be a Christian, then is
he a member of that particular congregation where he resideth, or fit so to be,
and ought not to be denied admission or communion, though he had never bin
member of any other. The particular companies in London are made up only of
free men, that are joined together in some particular body or society,
belonging to such or such a hall, now the first notion that comes upon any of
these persons or companies, is that they are freemen of London, and secondarily
that they are distinct from other free men, by being of this or that particular
society, belonging to such a hall. So it is for all Churches, First, all the
members are conceived to be free of the Church Catholic, and secondarily,
distinct by their societies, in this or that particular assembly. And though
happily this similitude holds not in every thing, as the not removing from one
company to another, and being received in there, because he is a freeman, yet
is it free for any Christian to change his particular relation from one
congregation to another, because he is a Christian, and takes not up his first
freedom into a particular congregation or company, but in to the Catholic?
They are made members of the whole, by conversion to the faith, and initiated
by the sacrament of baptism externally, but are secondarily made members of a
particular congregation, by cohabitation, or consociation. Suppose a man had
abundance of sheep as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Job, who had 14000. and these
sheep had all one brand of the owners upon them, and these sheep were divided
into several flocks, under several shepherds, in several sheep-walks, of
the same owners, according to his appointment, the primary consideration of any
of these sheep or flocks, is not that they are under such a keeper, in such a
sheep walk, but the first consideration of them is that they are such a man's
sheep, either bought or bred etc. bearing his brand, and fed by his servants,
on his ground, and then the more particular and secondary consideration and
notion is that they are under such a particular shepherd in such a particular
walk. And so the first consideration of any part of Gods flock, whether person
or Congregation is, that they are Gods people, borne or converted to him, fed
and nourished by his Ordinances, and Ministers, and then the particular
secondary notion is, that they are fed by such a Pastor, in such a place.

It is an usual similitude on all hands to compare the Church to the Sea or
Ocean, which though it be one, yet as it washes upon this, or that country,
receives the name and distinction of the Germane, Spanish, Irish, British
Seas. And so when it puts in at any creek, because it is continuous with the
Sea we call it the Sea. And we say the sea comes up at Harwich, Ipswich,
Manitree, Colchester, now it were an absurd thing for any man to think that the
particular seas were the prime seas, and the maine is mare ortum. Or because
the name sea is indulged to this or that arm or creek, that therefore that
should either monopolize the name Sea, that there should be no sea but such
creekes, or that any such creekes should arrogate the name and privileges of
the sea first to themselves, and leave them but secondarily to the maine. So it
is for particular Congregations, which have the name and Privileges of the
Church indulged to them at second, or third hand, (because they are members and
similar parts of the whole) to usurp and challenge the name and Privileges
given by God to the Church Catholic, primarily to themselves, and leave them
secondarily to the Church Catholic.

the Ministers are primarily Ministers of the Church Catholic; secondarily, of
this or that particular flock or congregation: and therefore the Catholic is
the prime Church. And this appears by this demonstration. That Church to the
which the donation of the Ministry was first made, is the first subject
thereof, but that was the Church Catholic, therefore. For proof hereof see 1
Cor. 12.28, 29. God has set some in the Church first Apostles, secondarily
Prophets, thirdly Teachers. Now this Church was the Church Catholic, and not
any particular congregation, for it is the Church to which the Lord gave
Apostles. Note also from hence, that the same Church to which God gave
Apostles, and Prophets, to the same he gave Teachers also. Bishop, and Pastor
may seem to be in respect to the particular relation to some particular place,
wherein by the polity of the Church a particular Minister is set, but
Presbyter, Minister, and Teacher, more general, extending to the whole Church
Catholic. Paul an Apostle calls himself a Teacher and Preacher, 2 Timothy 1.11.
Peter also and John the Apostles call themselves Presbyters, 1 Pet. 5.1. 2 Ep.
Joh. 1.3 Joh. 1. we find also that Ministers are in Scripture spoken of under
a general notion. They are called Ministers of the Word, Luke 1.2. and
Ministers of God, 2 Cor. 6.4. And Ministers of Christ, 1 Cor. 4.1. And
Ministers of the New Testament, 2 Cor. 3.6. And Ministers of the Gospel, 1
These 3.2. And Ministers of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.21. where the Ministerial Office
is noted by the reference thereof to the Author that imployeth them, and the
subject about which they are employed, and not by the Object to whom they
preached, They are not called Ministers of the people, but their Teachers,
Rulers, Pastors, Overseers, or Ministers for them, Col. 1.7.

And if a Minister of this or that Congregation were not a Minister of the
Church Catholic visible, then he were no Minister out of his own Congregation,
and therefore could not preach, or administer any Sacrament, as a Minister, out
of his own Congregation. Yea, if any members of another Congregation should
come and hear a Minister in his own Congregation, he could not preach to
them, nor they hear him as a Minister, but only as a gifted brother. And
though he may pray and beseech his own flock as an Ambassador of Christ to be
reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5.20. yet he cannot say so to any other, except he
be an Ambassador in office unto others also; and if he be a Minister to one
member besides his own Congregation, then is he so indefinitely to all, by the
same reason. But if he deliver the Word as a Minister to his own Congregation
only, then the same Word which is delivered at the same time by the same man is
delivered by virtue of Ministerial Office to some, and to others ex officio
charitatis generali, only as a gifted brother. And if this be granted, which
is absurd, yet a greater absurdity will follow, viz. that if he administer the
Lords Supper to any members of another Congregation, he must do that also as a
gifted brother, and as a private person, which yet all men hold has nothing to
do to administer the Scales of the Covenant. And yet this communion of members
of other Congregations is frequent among our brethren for Congregationall
Churches. Neither can this be answered that it is done by virtue of
consociation of Churches, except the consociation of Churches and their members
make also a consociation of offices and officers, and so every Minister be a
general officer, and a Minister of the Church Catholic, as well as the
particular members be members of the Church Catholic. And if a Minister of one
Congregation be a general officer, and can administer the Seals of the
Covenant, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, to strangers in his own congregation
in his own meeting house, then any where else in any other meeting house, for
no man will say his ministerial office is circumscribed by, or tied unto the
limits and fabric of his own meeting house, or any especial influence or
authority afforded him in the execution of his ministerial function by the
presence of his own congregation. He whose office is limited within, and
stands wholly in relation unto a particular place, is out of office when he is
out of that place, as a Major of a Corporation, and Constable of a Parish, but
it is not so with a Minister, he is no private man, as soon as he is out of his
meeting house, or the limits of his congregation, and though he indeed be
peculiarly their Pastor or Bishop, one that has the oversight of them in the
Lord in a more immediate especial manner, yet this extends to all times, and
places, wherever he or they shall come by occasion, though never so far from
their dwellings, but so is not a Major or Constable. And besides that
particular office he is an officer, a Minister in general to all others, and
may execute his office to them as God gives him occasion, but so cannot a
Major or Constable, because they are only particular officers. Suppose a
Ministers flock by mortality, captivity, or the sword, should be dissolved,
extinct, and fail, indeed he cease to be their Pastor, because the
correlative fails, but he cease not to be a Minister of the Gospel. A King
or Major happily cease to be so any longer, if his Kingdom, or Corporation
should sink, because there is no Catholic Kingdom, or Township whereof they
were officers, but the office of the Minister cease not, because he was an
officer of the Church Catholic, which correlate sinketh not. And being an
officer of the Church Catholic, he has thereby actum primum to administer all
the Ordinances of Christ, which a single officer may or can do in any place,
only wants actum secundum, vel exercitum, pro hic and nunc which is appointed
by the polity of the Church, for order. For though their office be general,
as Ministers of the Gospel, yet they take particular divisions, and parcels of
the Church to feed, and stretch not themselves within one another line,
without a call, by permission or entreaty.

And that a Minister is a Minister of the Church Catholic visible appears by
this argument. He that can ministerially eject admit
a member out of into
the Church Catholic visible, is a Minister, and Officer of the Church
Catholic visible. But every Minister by Excommunication Baptism ejecteth
admits

members out of into
the Church Catholic visible, Therefore, etc. This argument I find more fully
laid down by Apollonius, "Pastor ut Pastor exercet multos actus ministeriales
non tantum erga Ecclesiam suam particularem cujus ordinario Ministerio est
affixus, sed etiam erga Ecclesias alias Particulares, and Provinciales, and
Nationales, imo and erga Ecclesiam Vniversalem: Nam per Baptismum membra in
Ecclesiam universalem admittit. Per Excommunicationem membra non tantum ex sua
particulari sed etiam Provinciali, Nationali, and Universally Ecclesia ejicit.
Matthew. 18.18, 19. Ex officio pastorali preces Deo offert pro omnibus aliis
Ecclesiis laborantibus: Verbum Dei in alia Ecclesia particulari praedicare
potest, non tantum virtute and ratione donorum, sed cum pastorali authoritate,
ita ut verbo suo liget and solvat peccatores, remittat and retineat peccata,
and ut legatus missus a Deo obsecret homines ut reconcilientur Deo. Gul.
Apollon. consideratio quarundam, etc." page 86. Of Excommunication I spoke
before, proving that it ejecteth a man out of the whole Church Catholic
visible: which though it be passed with the knowledge and consent of the
Congregation, (as also is Baptism) yet it is an act of the Presbyters. But
because it is an act of many (...) 2 Cor. 2.6.
, I will therefore insist more largely and particularly upon Baptism, which is
the act of a single Pastor or Minister. That by Baptism we are admitted into
the Church, I think is without doubt, for if persons baptized be not members
of a visible Church, then the Seal of the Covenant, yea the initiall Seal
thereof, is administered to those that are and remain out of the Church, which
were absurd to say. Mr Ball in his Catechism has this passage. "Baptism is a
Sacrament of our ingrafting into Christ, Communion with him, and entrance into
the Church, for which he cites Matthew. 28.19. Acts 8.38. And afterward
explaines himself. It does, says he, solemnly signify and seal their
engrafting into Christ, and confirm that they are acknowledged members of the
Church, and entered into it, though it does not make us Christian souls." And
that we are thereby admitted members, not of a particular Congregation, but the
Church Catholic appears, because we are baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12.13.
And this appears further, because he that is baptized in one Congregation, is
baptized all over the world, and is not to be rebaptized, but is taken as a
member wherever he becomes. Now that baptizing is an act of office appears
John 1.33. He that sent me to baptize: And go teach all nations, and baptize
them, was the substance of the Apostles Commission. And though Paul, 1 Cor.
1.17. says, Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel, yet that
is meant not principally, for he was sent also to baptize, else he might not
have done it. And that by virtue of this office, we are baptized into the
Church Catholic, appears, because John Baptist, baptized all Jerusalem,
Judea, and the Region round about Jordan: And the Disciples of Christ made and
baptized more Disciples then John, and that without relation to any particular
Congregations, which had it been necessary they could have combined them into.
So Peter caused Cornelius and his friends to be baptized, Act. 10.48. but no
mention is made of any Congregation into which they were baptized. And Philip
baptized the Eunuch not into any particular Congregation. And the Apostles
carried about one with them, whom they called (...), a Minister, Acts 13.5. who
was no Apostle, and he baptized for them. So Tychicus, Col. 4.7. is called a
beloved brother, and faithful Minister, and fellow servants in the Lord, yet he
was none of their Minister: and Ephesians. 6.21. he has the same style given him
again, certainly he could not be a peculiar Minister to both those distant
Churches, and I suppose he was of neither. Appollos baptized at Corinth, 1 Cor.
3.4. and yet was no Apostle, but as a Minister, and steward of the Mysteries of
God, as well as they, 1 Cor. 4.1. Hence is this distinction of Junius in his
Animadversions on Bellaerm. cap. 7. nota 7. Alia est electio sive vocatio
communis, qua vir bonus, pius, doctus, aptus, absolute eligitur ad ministerium
verbi, (...): Alia particularis sive singularis qua ad ministerium singulariter
huic vel illi Ecclesiae praeficiendus eligitur, (...).

And the truth is, the Scripture always calling the Believers in one City one
Church; even Jerusalem though there were many thousands, yea, myriads, that is,
many times ten thousands, of believing Jews therein, as James tells Paul, Act.
21.20. (...) (which were all probably of Jerusalem, as appears, first because
they were not such as could bear any witness against Paul but by hearsay:
they are informed of thee: but the Jews amongst the Gentiles dispersed having
seen and heard Paul, could have testified of their own knowledge, and would not
be blinded with Paul's present conformity. And secondly, because they only of
Jerusalem could receive satisfaction by Paul's conformity to the Law, at
Jerusalem, at that time, and not the others) And also the Holy Ghost calling
the Elders in those Cities, the Elders of the Church, in communi, it leaves it
uncertain to me, whether the several Elders were fixed over particular
congregations, or taught and ruled in communi, as the Ministers do now in
Middleburgh, and Strasburgh, and other places, yet because it makes most for
edification, and order, to have them fixed, I shall think they were, until
the contrary shall be proved. And I verily believe they ruled in communi,
though happily they did not teach so.

Seventhly, that Church to which every Christian bears first relation, and
which relation continues last, and cannot be broken by him without sin, is the
first Church: but such is the Church Catholic visible, therefore. Them nor
appears, because none can be admitted into a particular congregation except he
be judged first of the Church Catholic: so again though he change his
habitation never so often, and bear relation to never so many particular
congregations, one after another, yet in all those the general relation
holds still, he is a baptized visible member of the Church Catholic, and
therefore to be received where ever he becomes into any particular
congregation. Yea in the Interim between his breaking off from one congregation
and placing in another congregation, he retains the general relation, and
baptism, and is not a heathen or infidel, he is not one without in the
Apostles phrase. Yea suppose a man should be a Traveller, Merchant or Factour,
and settled in no particular congregation, yet being a Christian he is a member
of the Church Catholic: yea and if he broach any errors, or live
inordinately, he shall be accountable to the Church wherein he for the present
resides, or such crimes are committed, and be liable to their censure, as being
a member of the Church Catholic: which appears in that the Church of Ephesus
is commended Rev. 1.2.
for trying strangers that came among them, under the notion of Apostles. And
finding them liars did not suffer them; now prohibition is a censure. They are
not to be left to the Magistrate only, but to the Church trial, for those
crimes come not always under the cognizance of the civil Magistrates, and if
they do, he may be a heathen and will not regard an haeretick, nor can judge of
him. And if every kingdom will try murder, or treason, or any other foul
crime committed in the same, though by a stranger, or alien, because the crimes
are against their laws, and sovereign, though their laws pertain not to the
country where the forrainer was borne, and dwells, then much more shall every
Church try those members of the Church Catholic residing among them for their
crimes, seeing they have all the same sovereign head, the same laws, and are
all one body.

Again it is no sin for a man to remove from one congregation to another as
often as occasion requires, but for a man to remove out of the Church Catholic
is a sin and apostasy. No man is a schismatic for removing from one
congregation to another, but he that shall separate himself from all Church
communion, and shall rend himself from the Church Catholic, he is a
schismatic, he is an apostate. And therefore your several sects though they
pretend because of wants or blemishes to rend from the Church of England or
Scotland etc. Yet not from the Church Catholic by no means, because they know
that were a sin.

from which the particular Churches spring, and to which they are as an
additament and increase, that is the prime Church, but that is the Church
Catholic, Act. 2.47.
therefore etc. The minor appears, because first the whole essence of the
Church Catholic was in Adam and Eve, and from them spread to his seed by their
federall right from them, and their actual taking up that freedom, and
continuance therein. And so again from Noah's Arc.

And for the Church under the Gospel; that little handful which Christ left,
leavened the whole world, and brought them in as an addition unto them. They
were to be witnesses first in Jerusalem, them in Judea, and then to the ends of
the earth. For the Law shall go forth of Zion and the word of God from
Jerusalem. Isa. 2.3. It was with the Church then as was said of the river of
Eden Genesis 2.10. A river went out of Eden to water the garden, and from thence
it was parted and became into 4. heads: so the water of life flowed from Zion
into the 4. quarters of all the world. So that as there is no Sea but has
influence, and continuity with the maine Sea, and receives name from thence: so
no particular Church but has his first rise, and spiritual ministerial
influence from the Church Catholic, and received the Gospel and privileges
of it from thence. God calls no Evangelicall Churches by inspiration, but by the
ministry of those that are members of the Church Catholic, or some part
thereof, and therefore God would not have Cornelius instructed by an Angel,
though he could have done it, but by Peter, a member of the Church
Evangelicall. So that the Church is as the Sea, and particular Churches as so
many creeks, or arms, and rivers, not running into the sea, but running from
the sea, and receiving a tincture and season of her waters. The Church
Catholic is as the tree, Christ as the root, and particular Churches as
branches. She is the mother and they as daughters born of her, and receiving
from her ministerially both nature, name and privileges. Paul indeed was
called extraordinarily from Heaven by Christ himself, the head of the Church
(and not by an Angel) that he might be, as some conceive, a type of the second
call of the Jews, who (as some bold) shall be so called as he was, by the
appearing of the sign of the son of man, and therefore that Church is said to
come down from God out of Heaven, Rev. 21.2, 10. And the ground for this type
they take from 1 Timothy 1.16. For this cause I obtained mercy that in me first
Jesus Christ might show forth all long sufferance for a pattern, (...), to
them which should or shall hereafter believe on him: but these things are
mysteries, and I dare not be too confident in them, yet should they come to
pass, they infringe not the present truth, because their conversion shall come
from the head, root, and fountain it self of the Church, as Abraham's call
was; and no question but Christ did convert many in the days of his flesh when
he was actually and visibly a member of the Church here below. And if any be
converted by secret revelation, or inspiration, and neither converted, nor fed
by any external ordinances, nor joined to any visible Church, as infants of
heathens, or any of the Philosophers as Plato (if possibly they may be such)
these are (...), and not within the compass of the general rule for the
visible Church, and so not of the question.

And this is as much as the Apostles required, as in the case of the Eunuch,
and Simon Magus, and if it were sufficient then, it is sufficient still: for
those were the purest Churches. So many as gladly received the Word were
baptized, Acts 2.41. And yet this is no more then may be found in an hypocrite,
for the stony ground received the Word with joy. And we have no other rule to
go by in gathering Churches, or receiving members into a Church, then they had
then, neither may we presume to make any other to our selves. Sic omnes fere
Reformati Theologi celebres materiam visibilis Ecclesia asserunt esse homines
externe vocatos fidem Christi profitentes: namque definiunt caetum hominum
vocatione externa seu praedicatione Verbi and Sacramentorum communicatione
evocatorum ad cultum Dei and societatem Ecclesiasticam inter se celebrandam.
Apolon. page 8. Vide etiam utrumque Trelcatium in locis communibus, Loc. de
Ecclesia and Professores Leidenses, Disp. 40. These. 3. Neither is it requisite
that they should be truly godly, to make them members of a visible Church, for
then no man could tell whose child were to be baptized, or who are members of a
Church, or when he is in a true Church. And if the living members of Jesus
Christ were the only, or essential members of a visible Church, then none are
true essential members of the Church visible but they, and then a truly godly
Minister is a more essential Minister then another, and the Ordinances
administered by him are more essentially administered then by another, and the
virtue of the Ordinance should depend, not on Christ's Institution, but the
worthiness of the person administering. And happily after twenty or thirty years
living under a Minister that seemed religious, that Minister by falling away
proves himself not to be truly godly, and so all those Ordinances were null,
being administered by one that was not only no Minister, but no true member of
the Church. I conclude this answer with that saying in Ames. in his Bellar.
enervat. Falsum est internas virtutes requiri a nobis ut aliquis sit in
Ecclesia quoad visibilem ejus statum.

Integrum, and the particular Churches are membra, and therefore neither of
them can be Prima, or Orta, in reference of one to another, because being
Relata, they are simul natura, and both Integrum and membra are both of them
Orta argumenta. Vide Rami Dialecticam.

Indeed we find in Logic that both Genus and Species, Answ.
Integrum and membra, are Orta Argumenta, and that it is not meant in reference
one to another, but to those arguments which are called Prima, as Cause,
Effect, Subject, Adjunct, and Contraries. And it would be a Logical dispute,
not Theological, to define whether Integrum or membra have the primary
consideration, seeing they are Relata, Quorum alterum constat e mutua alterius
affectione. Ergo dicuntur simul esse natura: For Totum est quod habet parts,
Pars est quae continetur a toto. So that a thing cannot be said to be a whole
but in reference to the parts, nor can any thing be said to be a part but in
reference to the whole, for though it may have a being before the whole, yet it
is not a part of the whole until the whole be.

Yet for the clearing of this Objection we must consider that Integrum and
membra admit of diverse kinds, and considerations, and though in a constant
permanent or continuous body, whose particular individual parts rise and fall
together with the whole, so that it cannot consist but of so many essential
individual parts whereof it is constituted, there the whole and the parts
whereof it is constituted as they stand in relation unto one another must be
simul natura, yet the Church Catholic being, as I may say, a kind of
discreet, successive, indefinite body, always transient and in flux, some
members being always in their adding and some always in taking away, so that
even in respect of the particular parts it is not one hour every way the same
it was the last, I say, that in reference to the members that are to be added,
the whole must needs be accounted first, because it has a being before the
addition, and after the substraction, and the members must needs be first added
to the whole before they can bear the relation of parts unto it. And herein it
is like a Corporation, whose first members whereof it is constituted are simul
natura with the whole, yet all the members that are added successively find it
a Corporation before their addition, and so are not simul natura with the whole.

Orta, and they are Prima?

find (as has been already proved) that the particular Churches or
congregations do rise out of the Church Catholic, and not contrary. For the
members of a particular congregation are first members of the Church Catholic,
and admitted thereinto, before they come to be capable of being members of a
particular Congregation: for no Congregation takes a heathen in first, and
makes him a member, and then a Christian, but he is first made a Christian, and
then made a member. Yea, I conceive that there may be many belonging to the
Church Catholic, that belong to no particular Congregation, whose conversion
has been by accidental providence, as by reading, or discourse, or happily
hearing a disputation, or Sermon, and yet their habitation, or imprisonment,
slavery, banishment, travel, or other occasions may not suffer them to join
themselves to any particular Congregation, and yet are visible Christians
yielding professed subjection to the Gospel in their lives and conversations.
And are, by being of the Church Catholic, fit to be members of any
Congregation, but are actually none. Suppose a man by transplanting into
America, suffering shipwreck, should swim to some unknown land, and there
live among the natives, is that man without? or if he should convert a native
to the faith in Christ, is he without? is he not (...)? Of what Congregation
was the Eunuch, that was baptized by Philip? and yet we doubt not to say, he
was a Christian, and one of the Church members, but it must be the Church
Catholic.

So that we see the Church Catholic consists not of particular Congregations
only, but particular members, that may not happily be drawn into congregations.
As not only all Cities, Towns, and Parishes in a Kingdom belong to that
Kingdom, but all particular Persons living under, and by the same laws,
though happily there should be some that live not in any township or village, but
in some Island, forest, or in ships, as the manner is of many families in the
Netherlands, or as I have heard of some house that stands so that no Parish in
their Perambulation did over fetch it in.

And if we must account the particular Churches to be primae, because the
Church Catholic is made up of them, then we must account particular families
to be the prime Churches, because the Congregations are made up of them, and
they are called Churches in the Scripture, Romans 16.5. 1 Cor. 16.19. Col. 4.15.
Philem. 2. And we know God had his Church in families in the Patriarchs times
before it was either National or Congregationall.

But it is plain that particular Congregations are made up of a certain number
or parcel of the members of the Church Catholic, and not contrary. And so
were the Churches in families also.

Now then, seeing it is evident by the former Scriptures, and Arguments, that
there is a Church Catholic visible: And seeing that the Names, Nature, and
Privileges of the Church, the Promises, and Ordinances of God, the Offices of
Christ, and Signs of the true Church, the Members of the Church, and Ministry
of the Word, belong first to the Church Catholic visible, and that every
particular Christian bear first and last relation thereunto, which relation
cannot be broken off by any removal, or without sin, and that particular
Churches spring out of the Church Catholic, I therefore conclude according to
the light God has given me, That the Church Catholic visible is Prima, and
the particular Churches are Ortae.

From this Thesis give me leave to propound to your further consideration these
Corollaries or Conclusions,

Concerning Churches Catholic. Particular.
Persons Public, viz. the Officers. Private, viz. the members.



Concerning the Church in general.
1. That there is a Church Catholic. 2. That the Church Catholic is but one.
3. That the Church Catholic is visible. 4. That though the Church Catholic be
always transient and in flux by the addition and subtraction of the members
thereof, yet it shall never cease to be visible. 5. That if the Church
Catholic be contracted into the limits of a particular Congregation, yet that
has the notion of the Church Catholic more properly then of a particular
Congregation. 6. That the Church Catholic is mixed of good and bad, as well as
particular Congregations are. 7. That the Church Catholic is Organicall. 8.
That the Keys of Discipline are Catholic as well as of Doctrine. 9. That the
Promises, Privileges, and Ordinances of Worship and Discipline belong
primarily to the Church Catholic. 10. That the notes and signs of the true
Church belong first to the Church Catholic visible, and therefore are
distinctive to that only. 11. That the whole Church Catholic is the primary
object of Christ's Offices, and particulars but as parts thereof. Joh. 3.16. 12.
Though Christ be the only Supreme head and Ruler of his Church, yet must it
have immediate subordinate rulers over it. Ephesians. 4.11. 13. That the Unity of
the Church Catholic requires not a meeting of the whole body together at any
time.
Concerning particular Churches.
1. That particular Churches are made up of the members of the Church
Catholic. 2. That the particular Divisions of the Church Catholic visible for
convenient enjoyment of public Ordinances have the Name (Church) and the
Privileges thereof by participation (as far as they are capable) indulged
unto them. 3. That particular Churches must be distinguished by particular
accidental limits, and circumstances, though they be heterogeneall to the
Church. 4. Many Congregations may be in the same community of Discipline, and
be ruled by their Elders in communi by co-ordination though not subordination,
and so be called One Church, National, Provincial, or Presbyteriall. 5. That
which belongs primarily to the whole Church as Totum similare, and to the least
part of the whole, as a part thereof, belongs much more to a greater part
thereof. Or thus, That which belongs to a little part of a similar body, (qua
talis) belongs to a greater part much more. 6. The greater the parts of the
Church Catholic be, and the more united by co-ordination, the stronger they
be, and the smaller the Divisions be, the weaker. 7. The Division of the Church
Catholic into small parcels to stand alone by themselves without co-ordination
is dangerous. 8. Yet necessity in regard of distance of place, etc. may cause a
particular Church to be Independent in regard of actual external
consociation. 9. The constituting a particular Church by an explicit Covenant
as the essential form thereof, implies a denial of all other Churches to be
true that are not so constituted, because they must want the essential form.
Concerning the public Officers of the Church.
1. Every Minister is an Officer of the Church Catholic, and that relation is
primary to him, yet the particular relation he stands in to a particular
congregation gives him by the politic of the Church a more immediate charge to
administer the Ordinances of God unto them. 2. Any single Minister by virtue of
his office has power ministerially to admit a member into the Church Catholic
visible. 3. Although the Election of a Minister to a particular congregation be
an act of liberty in the people, yet his mission is from Christ primarily, and
ministerially by the Presbytery. 4. He does not administer the Ordinances of
God in the name of the congregation as their servant, but of Christ. As a Major
in a corporation though chosen by the people, yet executes his office in the
Kings name. 5. If he administreth any Ordinances out of his own congregation,
he does it not as a gifted brother, but by virtue of his office, 2 Cor. 5.20.
6. Although the particular flock over which a Minister was set be dissolved,
yet he cease not to be a Minister, because the Church to which he bare first
relation is not dissolved, which is the Catholic.
Concerning private members.
1. Particular Converts are first converted into the Church Catholic, and
secondarily conjoined into particular consociations. 2. Every member of a
particular Church is a member of the Church Catholic, and that relation does
primarily belong unto him. 3. External profession of the true Faith, and
subjection to Gods Ordinances is enough to make a man capable of being a member
of a visible Church, quoad externam formum. 4. By Baptism members are visibly
and ministerially admitted into the Church Catholic visible. 5. By
Excommunication rightly administered an offender is cast out of the Church
Catholic visible as much as out of a particular congregation. 6. Federall
Holiness belongs to none primarily, because borne of members of a particular
congregation, but of the Church Catholic. 7. They that are only in the Church
Catholic visible are not Without, in the Apostles sense. 8. Children of
believing parents have right to Baptism, though their parents were not members
of any particular congregation, and are debarred of their due if denied it. 9.
Every member of the Church Catholic is or ought to be a member of the
particular Church wherein he dwells. 10. The being in the general Covenant
gives right to the Ordinances and not any particular, neither do we find any
mention in Scripture of any particular explicit Covenant either urged or used
at the admission of members into a particular congregation, or at the
constitution of the same. 11. The Invisible members of the Church which have
internal communion with Christ are also visible members, and have external
communion in external ordinances. 12. The departure of a member from a
particular congregation and removal to another for convenience, or by
necessity, is no sin, but departing from the Church Catholic, and ceasing to
be a member thereof is a sin.
I know it is not usual to make uses and application to Theses of this nature,
and should I enter thereinto, I might drown my self in sorrow, to bewail the
rents, not in Christ's seamelesse coat, but in his body the Church, which
Christ preferred in some regards before his natural body, for he assumed his
natural body for their sakes, and was willing to suffer that to be buffeted,
spit on, whipped, crowned with thorns, crucified, peirced, slain, for their
sakes, yea he was willing to be made sin, yea a curse, and to bear his
fathers wrath in his humanity for his Churches sake, that they might escape and
be saved.

The divisions in the Church are of three sorts, in judgment, in affection,
and in way or practice.

For judgment, first come the Romists, and they rend away the second
commandment: then come the Antisabbatarians and they rend away the fourth,
though placed in the heart of the Decalogue, and so extraordinarily fenced by
God, with a memento before it, and so many arguments after it: then come the
Antinomians, and they pluck away the whole law from us, denying it both
punitive, coactive, and directive power, and so render it wholly dead and useles
to Christians: then come the Socinians, and they quench the Deity of Christ,
and the Holy Ghost, and deny our redemption by the blood of Christ, and so
consequently would deprive us of the benefit of the New Testament: then come
the Anabaptists, and they deny and deride our Baptism, and render us and our
children no better then heathens: then come the Separatists, and they would
pluck up our Church by the roots, and call us Antichristian, Rome, Egypt,
Sodom, Babylon, and so consequently call their own mother whore, for if they
have any conversion they had it in the bosom of our Church. Of whom that of
the Psalmist is too true, Psalm. 50.20.
Thou fittest and speak against thy brother, and have slandered thine own
mothers son. Yea there be others of our honored and beloved brethren, whom I
forbear to name among the former rabble, who though they acknowledge us true
Churches, yet deny us to be one Church, and would have us rent into a thousand
pieces and parcels, and these to stand as so many entire, complete bodies,
without any co-ordination, as so many Spouses of Christ, as so many Queens,
appointing their own orders, and officers, as their servants to officiate in
their names, with liberty to censure both officers and members within
themselves by the votes of the whole body; and not to be accountable unto any
other Church or Churches as coordinate members, except arbitrarily at their
pleasure. Not endeavoring, with us, to reform our Churches, but to gather
Churches out of Churches, by calling our best members out of our congregations,
and uniting them into several bodies, by a particular explicit covenant, urged
as an ordinance of God, and form of the Church, and as the only Church way,
and way of God: and so having fleeted off for themselves the cream of our
congregations, and transplanted all our wheat by it self into their field,
would leave us none but the tares, the lees and dreggs of men. But I forbear,
Dolor ora repressit.

Others there are, (and I wish I could say they were others,) who plead for
liberty of judgment, that every one may hold what opinions, and be of what
religion, and sect he pleases, because judgment and conscience cannot be
forced, but must be left to God only, and thereby would make England another
Amsterdam of all sects and religions; whereas our brethren in New England have
banished the Familists etc. from amongst them. Yea and generally men covet new
opinions, and count it their glory to differ from others in judgment, and he
is no body that has none but old truths, and so men under color of new light
and new truths rake up a multitude of old errors.

Secondly, our divisions are in heart and affections: for difference in
judgment cause alienation of affections, and great thoughts of heart, so that
if there prove once a clashing and crossing in opinions, though they were never
so near allied, or well acquainted, and familiar, yet then they grow strange,
and fall out, and oppose, and censure each other deeply: then they are
superstitious, or antichristian, or enemies to Christ's kingly office, and hence
come so many invectives in Pulpit and Press.

Thirdly, in way: for as men's judgments differ, so do their ways: Some are
for one way of Worship, some another; some for one way of Discipline, some
another; some for one way of constituting of Churches, some another; some for
gathering of new Churches out of the old, and yet let the old ones stand as
mock-churches, when they have gleaned out all that are good out of them; they
would take all the golden and silver vessels, vessels of honor, and leave us
none but wooden and stone, vessels of dishonor; and some are for separation
wholly, and so turn all the rest over to Antichrist; yea, some so violent, as
that they would pluck down our very meeting houses (tropically called
Churches) which they deride by the name of Steeple houses; and all are in ways
of contention, so that we are like Sampsons foxes tied together by the tails
with firebrands between them to burn up the standing corn.

I shall conclude with an earnest desire of, and exhortation to unity and
peace. The unity of the Church should be a strong motive to unity in judgment,
heart, and way. It is that the Apostle presses Ephesians. 4.3, 4. Endeavoring to
keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, for there is one body, and
one spirit, etc. This spiritual unity it is that Christ so earnestly and often
prayed for in that short prayer, John 17.11, 21, 23. That they may be one as we
are one. That they all may be one, that they also may be one in us. That they
may be made perfect in one, And this was Paul's earnest request, 1 Cor. 1.10.
Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you* but that you
be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. And
again, 2 Cor. 13.11. it is one of the last things he concludes his Epistle
with. Finally brethren, farewell* be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one
mind, live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you. And Phil.
1.27. He presses it as the only thing he desired of them. Only let your
conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ, that whether I come and
see you, or else be absent, I may hear of your affairs, that ye stand fast in
one spirit, with one mind, striving together for the faith of the Gospel.
Certainly unity of judgment is of more importance then we are aware of, else
the Apostle would not press it with such solemn adjurations, and entreaties,
so often as he does. Yea, when there were but two women that differed in
opinion (as it is conceived) the Apostle thought it beseeming apostolical
gravity, and the holy Ghost judged it meet for a piece of canonical Scripture
to take notice of it, and compose it. Phil. 4.2. I beseech Enodias, and beseech
Syntiche, that they be of the same mind in the Lord. Though it might seem but
women's brabbles, yet we know how great a matter a little fire kindles, a
little strife and error will increase to more ungodliness.

Consider we, that there is but one truth, and that is of God, and God is
truth, and error is of the Devil.

Consider that the understanding is the highest and foremost faculty of the
soul, it is as the fore-horse in the teame, the leading faculty, and as that
is informed, so the will, and conscience, and affections must needs work, and
follow that, and if that be lead into error, it must necessarily mis-leade the
whole man.

Consider that a chief part of the image of God in man consists in
knowledge, and so is upon the understanding, which by error is defaced.

Remember the solemn caveats given by the Apostle, Romans 16.17. I beseech you
brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine
which ye have learned, and avoid them. For they that are such, serve not our
Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by good words and blessed or fair
speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. And Ephesians. 4.14. That we henceforth be
no more children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness (or after the method of
error) whereby they lie in wait to deceive. Christ himself tells us, that
false Prophets shall come that shall deceive (if it were possible) the very
elect. Behold, I have told you before, Matthew. ^4.24, 25. And Paul tells us, Of
your selves shall men arise speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples
after them. Therefore watch. Acts 20.30, 31. Therefore Hold fast the form of
sound words, which thou have heard of me, 2 Timothy 1.13. They that coin new
words and new high strange expressions to amaze the people, it is a sign as
Calvin tells us, that they have some new opinion upon the Anvill.

O let us labor to be of one heart, seeing we are all but one body, and have
but one head, and one spirit, and because we are all brethren of the same
heavenly Father. This is that which God has promised his people, Ezekiel. 11.19.
I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within you. And we find
Christ inculcating this exhortation, John 13.34. A new Commandment I give unto
you that ye love one another, as I have loved you, that ye also love one
another. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples if you have love
one to another, John 13.34, 35. Again, This is my commandment that ye love one
another as I have loved you. John 15.12. And ver. 17. These things I command
you that you love one another. Acts 2.46.
And this we find practiced, Acts 4.32. And the multitude of them that believed
were of one heart and one soul. And this Paul exhorts to, Romans 12.10. Be
kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love, in honor preferring one
another. And we find the unity both of judgment and heart exhorted unto, 1
Pet. 3.8. Finally be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another, love
as brethren, be pitiful, be courteus. Divisions is the Devils music, but that
which makes the Devil laugh, should make us cry. O what a solemn obsecration
is that of Paul, Phil. 2.^, 2. If there be any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies;
fulfill ye my joy that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one
accord, of one mind.

O that we might labor to be of one way also. This is that which God has
promised his people, Jer. 32.39. I will give them one heart and one way, that
they may fear me for ever, for the good of them and of their Children after
them. And Zeph. 3.9. Then will I turn to the people a pure language, that they
may all call upon the name of the Lord with one consent or one shoulder. And
this was the blessing to Hezekiah in his people, 2 Chronicles. 30.12. Also in Judah
the hand of God was to give them one heart to do the Commandment of the King
and of the Princes, by the word of the Lord. Certainly there is but one rule
for Doctrine, Worship, Discipline. And as many as walk according to this rule,
peace be on them and on the Israel of God. Gal. 6.16. And this is the Apostles
exhortation, Romans 15.6. That ye may with one mind and one mouth glorify God.
Yea though we be not of the same judgment in every thing, yet as it is Phil.
3.16. whereto we have already attained. Let us walk by the same rule, let us
mind the same things. And this unity in way is that which we have sworn unto,
and covenanted in our late National League and Covenant, in the first branch
of it. That we shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms of England Scotland and Ireland, to the nearest conjunction and
uniformity in Religion, Confession of faith, Form of Church Government,
Directory for Worship and Catechizing; That we and our posterity after us may
as brethren live in faith and love, and the Lord may delight to dwell in the
midst of us. And we shall be forsworn if we endeavor it not. All the members
of the same body natural agree to go the same way. Yea the strength, health,
and beauty of the body natural consists in the fast knitting of all the
members together to each other, and to the head, and the luxation thereof is
dangerous: so and much more it is in a body Politic or Ecclesiastical. And
though the divisions in our civil estate be very sad, and might deserve tears
of blood to bewail them, yet I look upon divisions in the Church as a matter
of more fad and doleful consequence, and I fear, (but wish I might be
mistaken) that when the breaches of the common wealth shall be closed, the
breaches in the Church may grow wider, and the differences rise higher; which
having seized upon the understandings and consciences of men cannot be composed
by commands nor clubbed down by force. Only here is my hope herein, that he
which found a way to reconcile God and man when they were at enmity, can find a
way to reconcile man and man though they be at difference. Now the God of peace
that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, Heb. 13.20, 21.
that great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make us perfect in every good work to do his will, working in us
that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

