Ah, Ha; Tumulus, Thalamus: Two Counter-POEMS,

The First, an ELEGY Upon Edward late Earl of Dorset;

The Second, an EPITHALAMIVM to the Lord M. of Dorchester.

Invicem cedunt Dolor and Voluptas, Funera, Taedae,
Sorrow may endure for a Night,
But joy comes in the Morning.
LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Prince's Arms in St Paul's Churchyard. 1654.

An Advertizement to the READER.
IN regard there are diverse imperfect and spurious Copies of these two Poems
dispersed abroad, I obtained leave of the Author to commit them to the press
assuring the Reader that these are concordant with the Originalls.

H. M.

AN ELEGY UPON THE MOST ACCOMPLISHED, AND HEROIC LORD EDWARD, EARL OF DORSET,
Lord Chamberlain to His late Majesty of Great Britain, and Knight of the most
Noble Order of the Garter, etc.
Alluding to The Quality of the Times, His admired Perfections, His goodly
Person, His Ancient Pedigree, His Coat of Arms crested with a Star, The
Condition of Mortality, The Passion of the Author closing with an Epitaph.

AN ELEGY UPON THE LATE EARL OF DORSET.
LOrds have bin long Declining, (we well know)
And making their last Testaments, but now
They are Desunct, they are Extinguished All,
And never like to rise by this Lords Fall;
A Lord, whose Intellectualls alone
Might make a House of Peers, and prop a Throne,
Had not so dire a Fate hung over the Crown,
That Privilege Prerogative should drown;
Where e're he sat he swayed, and Courts did awe,
Gave Bishops Gospel, and the Judges law
With such exalted Reasons, which did flow
So clear and strong, that made Astraea bow
To his Opinion, for where He did side
Advantaged more than half the Bench beside.
But is great Sakvile dead? Do we Him lack,
And will not all the Elements wear black?
Whereof he was composed a perfect man
As ever Nature in one frame did span.
Such Highborn Thoughts, a Soul so large and free,
So clear a Judgment, and vast Memory,
So Princely Hospitable and Brave Mind
We must not think in have on earth to find,
Unless the Times would turn to Gold again,
And Nature get new strength in forming men.
His Person with it such a state did bring
That made a Court as if He had bin King,
No wonder, since He was so near a Kin
To Norfolks Duke, and the great Maiden Queen.
He courage had enough by conquering One
To have confounded that whole Nation,
Those parts which single do in some appear
Were all concentred here in one bright Sphere,
For Brain, Tongue, Spirit, Heart, and Personage
To mould up such a Lord will ask an age,
But how durst pale white-liver'd Death seize on
So dauntles and Heroic a Champion?
Yes, to Dye once is that uncancell'd debt
Which Nature claymes, and rayseth by Eschet
On all Mankind by an old Statute past
Primo Adami, which will always last
Without Repeal, nor can a second lease
Be had of Life when the first term does cease.
Mount noble Soul, Among the stars take place,
And make a new One of so bright a Race
May Jove outshine, that Venus still may be
In a benign Conjunction with Thee,
To check that Planet which on Lords has lowr'd,
And such malign influxes lately powered;
Be now a star thy self for those which here
Did on thy Crest, and upper Robes appear,
For thy Director take that Star we read
Which to thy Saviors Birth three Kings did lead.
A Corollary.
THus have I blubbered out some tears and Verse
On this Renowned Hero, and His Hearse,
And could my Eyes have dropped down Perls upon 't
In lieu of Tears, God knows, I would have don't,
But Tears are real, Perls for their Emblems go,
The first are fitter to express my Woe;
Let this small mite suffize until I may
A larger tribut to his ashes pay,
In the mean time this Epitaph shall shut,
And to my Elegy a period put.
HEre lie's a Grandee by Birth, Parts, and Mind,
Who hardly left his Parallel behind,
Here lie's the Man of Men, who should have been
An Emperor, had Fate or Fortune seen.
Totus in lachrymas solutus sic singultivit I. H.

UPON THE NUPTIALS OF THAT PRINCELY PAIR HENRY Lord Marquess Of DORCHESTER,
AND The Lady KATHERINE STANLEY, Daughter to the late Heroic Earl of DERBY,
An Epithalamium by way of Dialog 'twixt Philemon and Sylvius.
Alluding to their 1. Complexions, He Sanguin, She Black and Fair.
2. Coats of Arms, Both Field-Argent, His a Lion Rampant in an orb of Cinqfoyls.
3. Countries. 4. Pedigrees.

Going on with an Hymenaeum, or Vote, comprised in four Musical Stanzas, the
three first Ayrie and Poetical, the last Serious.

The DIALOGUE.
Philemon. What Object's that which I behold
Dazzling my eyes with gemms and Gold?
Her Face, me thinks, darts such a ray
That adds more brightness to the Day,
Her breath perfumes the place, Her curls and hair
Like Indian spice aromatize the Air,
A sparkling white and black breaks from her sight
Like to the Diamonds redoubling light,
As she does walk the very ground and stone
Turn to Field- Argent which she treads upon;
A Mortal sure she cannot be
But some transcending Deity;
My dearest Sylvius pray unfold
Who Is that rare Creature I behold?

Sylvius. SHe is a Princess and a Bride
Goes to the Temple to be ti'd
In Nuptial bonds, her stars will not permit
That at the Vestall fires She longer sit;
She Is Derbie's Royal blood, Derby le Gran,
And now She travells to the I Will of Man,
She of the Princely Orange is a branch
Imp'd on the high Trimovillan stem of France,
Two of the fairest Kingdoms strove, and tried
Their Utmost to complete this Lovely Bride.
It Is she which makes 'twixt gemms and gold
That Constellation you behold.

Philemon. BUt who is that comely sanguine Peer
Which on her heart-side walks so near?
He likewise makes all Argent as he goes,
Look at his feet how thick the Cinqfoyl grows.

Sylvius. It Is Wise and Wealthy Pierrpont, who renowns
With Titles, Three of Englands chiefest Towns,
A precious ponderous Lord, whose fool Estate
A Jury of new Barons might create,
Patron of Virtue, Chivalry, and Arts
'Cause he himself excells in all these Parts;
It Is He who by the hand does hold
That Demi-Goddess you behold.

Philemon. Is It so? then my Autumnall Muse shall sing
An Hymenaeum, and fetch back Her spring,
This Subject a fresh vigor does inspire,
And heats my brain with an unusual fire.

AN HYMENAEUM, OR BRIDAL-SONET, Consisting of four Stanzas, and to be sung by
three voices, according to a choice Air set thereunto by Mr. WILLIAM WEBB.
1. Chorus
MAy all Felicity betide
This Princely Bridegroom, and his Bride.
May those delights this morn shall bring
Be endless as their Nuptial Ring,
May they be constant, and exceed
Each Others Wishes, Hopes, and Creed,
May the three Regions of the air
Power showrs of blessings on this pair,
May Sol and Cynthia with their rays,
Silver their nights and gild their days.
2. Chorus*
All joys attend and best of Fate
This noble Marquis and His Mate.
2.
Ye gentle Nymphs of Trent and Dee
Make have to this solemnity,
Your streams and beds now meet in one
By this High-sprung conjunction,
Ye Wood-nymphs who green garlands wear
In Shirewood launds, and Delamer,
Ye Dames of Helicon attend,
And Graces your sweet presence lend,
Lucina com, and pray there be
Employment in due time for thee.
Chorus.
May all Felicity betide
This noble Bridegroom, and his Bride.
3.
MAy they such gallant Males produce
Both to the Rose and Flowerdeluce,
That Englands Chivalry and French
May multiply, and bourgeon hence,
Whose branches shooting over the Main
May knit, and blossom here again,
That Pierrponts Lion and Cinqfoyl
May ramp and root in every soil;
Nor may this noble Race wear out
Till Plato's Great year wheel about.
Chorus.
May all Felicity betide
This noble Bridegroom, and his Bride.
4. Stanza Closing with a serious graduall Vote.
MAy all the Elements conspire
To make them blessed in their desire,
May all the Stars on them reflect
Their mildest looks in Trine aspect,
May all the Angels them defend
From every thing does ill portend,
May Angels, Stars, and Elements
Afford Them such complete contents
That They have nothing else to wish
But a Perseverance of Bliss.
Chorus.
All joys attend and best of Fate
This noble Marquess and his Mate.
Idem I. ^.
FINIS.

