AN EXACT LEGENDARY Compendiously Containing the whole Life of Alderman ABEL,
the maine Proiecter and Patentee for the raising of Wines. His Apprentiship
with a Vintener, betrothing to his Wife, the manner of his rising, reigning,
and after Delinquencie, whereby he stands liable to a severe Censure and
Penalty in Parliament. woman and man I hope my Mate
will raise my state
Abel in this thou art like to cursed Caine.
Thou Have wronged thy Brethren and thy Chain.
I Have rackt my Wines to th full extent,
Not dreaming of a Parliament.

Noble Friend,
THe principal desire in thy Letter, which is the relation of News, I thus
satisfy. I could declare unto thee the downfall and death of him who was of
three Kingdoms the most unhappy hated Object; but I believe thou art not
ignorant of that, nor of the imprisonment of the other Great Man of little
Grace, the formers quondam Compeere, and Complotter: but this is so stale, it
cannot rightly be termed News; no more then many other matters formerly
remarkable; but now not worthy notice.

The chief and only brisk News now extant, is the downfall of Wines, that
formerly were so racked, that for want of twopence to purchase a quart of
Sack, many a true Twelve-penny servant to Bacchus was forced to retire: Yet now
(Heaven be therefore praised) their sudden fall is proclaimed; and very
probable it is that they should fall, for their Raiser himself is fallen, and
so fallen, that unless he cast up his wine again, and that suddenly, there is
no hope of his rising.

To delineate his Character, and tell thee what this Creature was in the
original was, (though it take some time in the perusing) yet it may give thee
sufficient satisfaction in liew of thy labor. His name thou know is Abel, a
name sufficient in it self to ring the Maker his praises through the world;
whether his Fathers name were Adam or no I cannot tell, although I am sure he
was a M^n. This his son Abel, being in his Nonage, and having within him a
Prophetique Spirit that told him he should in time come near to be Lord Mayor
of London; his desire was to his Father he might Vintener it; Whereupon his
Father condiscending bound him Apprentice to one of that Trade, where he was
very of ficious, and as industrious to take a broken pate, or be thrown down
stairs by a Gentleman (so his wounds might be curable within the verge of a
Shi^ling, or some such sum) as any other of his fellows could be; he would
as nimbly answer [ By, and By] to the Bar-bells time, as Whittington did to
the harmonious sound of the changing Bells that proclaimed him Lord Mayor. His
sedulity and diligence in his Apprentiship, was a sufficient sign of his after
rising. Many a Sack-posset has he and his beloved Isabel called to witness of the
integrity of his faith and troth unto her: Many a condemned dish of Mackeroll,
Anchovies and Caveare have they devoutly devoured ever a cup of Sack, and
Hypocrist. In tract of time, what by opportune dalliances, pleasing Courtship,
and amourous gestures, as servants may sometimes use Magistro absente) these
two Lovers had proceeded so far, that within a short space they became lawful
William and Isabel, Man and Wife, His time now fully expired, he set up for
himself and began to thrive amain: His habitation was sometime at the Ship in
Old-Fish street; where what with the help of his distinguishing taste abroad,
and her sure gathering and clese keeping at home, together with their excessive
gain of Friday night Suppers, they became great in repute, and generally noted
through the City. Abell, his name was rung in every man's ear, out of every
man's mouth: so highly was his Stock increased, that his ample Cellar was become
too commendious to contain his Sack: The Seas were plowed daily to bring him
in wines: and that would not satisfy him, but the poor (rich I might rather
say) Earth was dug to contain them. I Will warrant him he never thinks of
Cardinal Woolsey, but withal remembers the sweet Legatic he left behind him
in the Vault. The honest Vintener was so cautious, he would not suffer any
others industry in the discovery beside his own: He cared not for Partners in
his House, much loss in his Celler: Of all the Rooms in his Ship he most
affected the Keele: There was indeed the beginning of his glory. He is now
worth at least ten or twelve thousand pounds, and must be Sheriff: He must now
keep good Hospitality at thy City charge his White-broth proclaims it self;
and for Fish his worship commonly affects Plaice most. His Wives shoes must
not now shine with the smeering and unsightly unguent of Kitchin-stuffe; but
the purest Black that Spain affords must now cover her happy Feet: Their
Children must be nursed and bred at Hyegate, and (because the Court breeding is
not held gentie enough) have select person on purpose employed for their
better education. Her manifold Chain and Liffinie Ruff without the addition
of her Satin Gown, Hood, and round begarded Petticoat, speak her
supereminent for a City Matron-ship at least: In the mean time he (for his
part) deals much in the Court of Conscience.

His Conscience tells him that the Luxury of the times must be abated: Wine is
so cheap, that the poorest Mechanics drink it: It must be exalted (by the
help of a Monopolizing Patent, proiected and surreptitiously obtained betwixt
his Cosen Kilvert and himself) to prevent Drunkenness, Forty Shillings a
Tun is not custom enough to the King; but this seeming-honest Alderman must
break both Merchants and Retailors. This Patent for the Office of Wine (being
granted) not a Firkin of Wine can be conveyed, without a Ticket from Aldermary
Churchyard, but one of this noble Aldermans spirits will pry into it, and
because it wants hallowing with a note, it must be damned to the bottom of his
Cellar.

All this time the good fellows in every Coast and Quarter of the Land,
especially within circuit of this City, mourned most solemnly in small Beer
and were not able to climb to the Olimpus of Old Sherry or Modern Canary. The
noble Soldiers cannot drink above a Pint a day out of their pay without
prejudice to their hardly gotten Estate. The witty Poets dare scarcely
adventure into a Tavern to suck of their Hypocrene, or Aganippe. nor sit long
to sing forth the praises of Helicon, for fear of being arraigned at the Bar
for the odd twopences arising upon each several Pottle: and therefore in stead
of Encomiums on the excellency of virtuall Canary, they all write nipping
Satyrs against the base extortion of this ravenous City Member, who makes
himself merry with other men's misery: And because those of his own Function
must not make him their president of growing great, Medium Wine must be forced
upon them; He that opposes must to'th' Fleet no redemption with out
submission. He will not spare his brother Cain, tho he be certain he shall be
jeerd in the Vampt Whore fort: he has shown himself so fierce in his
Authority, that most men supposed he could not long subsist in this his wicked
way, but at length be brought to a strict Audit for all his Abuses.

And so it appeared, Tempora mutantur, etc. The whole Body of Parliament
distaste his Projects, disallow his Exaction, and are determined to pull down
this Colossus of Covetousness, or at least level him with his Brethren by the
Plane and Paring knife of Justice, though it endanger his Ears in the
pollising. Howbeit they bear a reverent respect to this Author of Project; as
may appear by the close conveyance of him to a place where he may be found
forthcomming: and lest the mad Bacchanalian Blades should wrong this good Able
Alderman if they met him in the Streets; they have provided a stronger house
for him than his Ticket-Office at Aldermaries. They Will there diet, Physic him,
and preserve him secure from further danger, till he vomit up most of his Wine
again which may be partly a means likewise to purge his Conscience. His
Physicians tell him (unless he wisely prevent it) he is like to be extremely
troubled with head ach; especially with a stopping in his throat. But he is
wise, and both knows his own disease best himself, and the most probable
Cure; which if it stop not his wesand, and hinder the natural passage of his
breath, he may happily recover, and be Abel to set up his Trade again. He is
(it seems) a man generally beloved still: for every man lonnes his Picture, and
scarce any Stationer in Town, but has some Pamphlet, Sonnet or Ballet in his
praise.

But I have held thee too tediously already in this fruitless Story; I
therefore here leave him in the soddes of his delinquencie, till he be purged
and passed away (either on Hors-back awkward, or on foot forward) by a
Parlamentary Penalty. In the mean time accept the good will of him that
presents these lines in liew of his engagement Hoping ere long to see golden
days revived; and to participate with thee in a Pint of Sack for Sixpence.

Thine obliged, in Service: A. H.

Imprinted in the Year. MDCXLI.


