The Devils Bow UNSTRINGED, OR Some of Thomas Dansons Lies made manifest, which
he has Printed and put to public view in two Pamphlets, the one Entitled,
The Quakers Folly made manifest. And the other, The Quakers Wisdom not from
above.

And in the first page of his Narrative he calls them Undoubted Truths, But
the wise in heart will not so take them, but will consider better of them, for,
The wise man's eye is in his head.

By Luke Howard.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1659.

ANd now Tho. Danson, if it be not too late, consider well what thou have done,
by shooting in the Devils Bow, and making use of the Divils Weapons, as thou
say thou have done in the 50. page of thy first Book, to the opposing of the
Truth which makes free all which lives in it, and stirs up Cains nature in
all which lives out of it, and as it is manifest it has done in thee, to the
publishing of 2 pamphlets against it, filled with the Old man's Dreams made up
of lies; And because thou have made use of my name in them both several times,
as a seal set to thy lies to blind the simple; and for the Truths sake is it
on me as a necessity to bear my testimony against thee, and to prove thee such
a one as thou have both said of, and proved thy self to be, shooting in the
Devils Bow, and making use of his Weapons who is the Father of lies.

In thy first Book, page 49. Thou say that the Quakers came to your Town and
made a challenge to the Priest to defend their Doctrines and Call; this I
witness against as a lie, or an Arrow shot out of the Devils Bow, for thou
may remember that we being met together in a place called the
Vickerage-house, thy self and many more came in and passed through our Meeting
into another Room, and there stayed until thou did hear words spoke in our
Meeting by one of our friends, viz. Stephen Huberstye, and then you rushed all
in to us, and after some time did gainsay what was spoken; but after some time
of thy gainsaying Discourse, for the Truths sake I asked thee if thou wast
willing to debate these things more at large at another time; and this is what
was propounded by us, which cannot justly be called a challenge, and this thou
was not at the first willing to, but afterward did say, that if I would
engage to bring Mr. Fisher (as thou call him) thou would appoint to meet,
and thou may remember this was my answer several times to thee, That I had
not the command of S. F. his Spirit, and so could not engage him; and besides,
for ought I know, he was many scores of miles from home, and if thou would
not appoint to meet with some other, that then it might not be: So then thou
did agree to meet with some other, and the meeting to be that day month,
witness Edward Nokes.

But thou being so well skild in shooting in the Devils Bow, That at that
instant time did shoot out one lie to all the people, viz. That I had agreed
to bring Mr. S. F. the which I denied at that present time in the face of all
the people, the which they that will be honest can witness the truth of, and I
am sure will do; yet such was thy boldness, that thou would have one shoot
more in the Devils Bow, in the old Masse-house, falsely called St. Peter's Church
in Sandwitch, and there did say that the Dispute was appointed betwixt Mr.
S. F. and thee, the which I denied again in the face of all the people, and all
who are single-hearted on both sides knows to be true, and thy self also, if
thou will not stifle the witness in thy conscience, yet in thy anger, thou
would have one great shoot more in the Devils Bow, and so puts this thy lie
in Print amongst many more to public view, as a witness against thee to the
knowledge of many who dares not but speak the truth; and this testimony I bear
to the Truth against thy lies, that no honest mind may be deceived therewith by
thy pretended fair words, whereby thou lie in wait to deceive.

And then in thy second Book thou appearest as if thou had fulfilled the
worlds Proverb, viz. To take Hell and skim the Devil, for Arrows, to wit, lies
to utter, yet so great is thy impudency, that thou do not blush to say in the
first page of thy Narrative of the last Book, that they are of undoubted
credit, (mark that) and that to the most part of them there is the witnesses
names; but that is just the Devils practice to slay the Truth with a lie, and
give a reason for it, and that will appear to be but thy arrogance and
impudency to abuse the men in citing their names, as witnesses to thy lies,
contrary to their knowledge, viz. Mr. Russel, and Mr. Davis, as thou call
them, the one Minister in Rumny Marsh, and the other at Dover, as thou have
writ them; and by them whom we do know let us measure all the rest whom we do
not know; most of them being such as thou seem to be ashamed of, or at the
best loath to name them.

And first concerning John Davis, whom thou sites to prove that a Quaker in
Dover lying sick on his deathbed, being asked, by whom he thought to be
justified, should reply, by his own righteousness, and not by the
righteousness of Christ; and I knowing of it to be a lie, as to that friend
who died, and for the Truths sake could not let it pass without going to John
Davis, and demanded of him whether ever he informed Tho. Danson of such a
thing, or ever saw that friend in the time of his sickness, whose answer was,
that he never saw him in the time of his sickness, and that he scarce knew so
much as where he dwelt, and this his answer was in the presence of John Higgins
of Dover.

And here Tho. Danson, Behold thy forwardness, and read thy wickedness, who
have made use of a man's name contrary to his will, and without his knowledge as
himself says, to prove thy lies, and with a whores forehead can call them
undoubted truths, as thou have done in thy Pamphlet, therefore lay thy hand
upon thy mouth, and let shame cover thy face, and never more call thy self a
Minister of the Gospel, having manifested thy self to the contrary, to be a
lover and a maker of lies, and all such are strangers to the Gospel which is
the power of God, but are shut out amongst the dogs.

And again thou say that in May last there having been some discourse
betwixt one Howard of Dover Quaker, and a Minister in Rumney Marsh, viz. Mr.
Russel (as thou call him) the next day was appointed for further discourse
betwixt them two, but over night the said Howard sent his man and his horse for
Mr. Fisher sometime a Minister, and now a Quaker, and suspected to be a
Jesuit, and going with him to the place of Meeting, told the people, that
seeing S. F. came accidentally there, he would now leave the discourse to him,
and one standing by should say that he saw Howards horse and man go over night,
and that S. F. rid into the Town on the same horse the next morning: And this
thou say is well enough known, that besides the lies in their Doctrines,
they have not so much Moral honesty as to speak truth in matter of Fact; these
are thy own words in thy Narrative, page the fifth, and to prove it, thou have
set Mr. Russel Minister in the Marsh in the Margent as a witness

But this I know, that thy proof is so short, that its no proof at all; But
another Arrow at large shot out of the Devils Bow, in which thou art a shooting
throughout in both thy Pamphlets, but they will return again and stick fast in
thy own sides, and as Darts in thy liver will they be thy burden; and the Pit
thou have dug for the innocent, thou must fall into thy self; for this is a
lie in every part of it, for the discourse was not betwixt me and William
Russell, neither did I send my horse and man over night for S. F. But for the
Truths sake thus it was; Edward Borough coming to Dover to get passage for
Dunkirk, and knowing that S. F. had something on him to go also, asked me, to
let my son ride down on his horse (which is a black one, and mine a ray, easily
to be distinguished by all that loves to speak truth) to carry S. F. a letter,
and E. B. sent the boy away so long before our meeting, that we did think that
the boy might be near S. F. his house. before William Russel came into our
Meeting, or we knew of any meeting to be; And besides the Dispute was began by
a Baptist who had been convinced of the Truth, and Judas like turned his back
upon it, and betrayed it into the hands of the Priest, viz. William Russel, who
was hovering about the window where our Meeting was; and after some time he
came in and intermedling with the Discourse, the Baptist left the mannagement
of it to him; so time being short, E. B. and W. R. appointed to come again in
the morning, which they did, and about the middle of the day; W. R. desired a
little time of ease, and to meet in the after part of the day in St. James's
Church (falsely so called) so E. B. met him there, and then S. F. came, and knew
nothing of the Dispute, less, or more, till he came to town, for how could he,
the boy being sent by E. B. the morning before the Dispute began, and neither
my self, nor S. F. were little concerned in it, but E. B. chiefly, by whom that
day through the Lords strength Truth was richly made manifest, and the Priests
of England proved deceivers, and this is a true Relation of this matter,
witness John E'eins, Henry Goodis.

Also here follows a true Relation taken from the mouth of William Russel.
(whom he has set in the Margent to cover his lies) and to make them appear as
truth unto the world, by which he manifested his inveterate wickedness and
rage against the Truth, which appears to be very great by his raking together
such groundless stuff, and confirming them with such swelling words, saying
that they are undoubted Truths, and that to the most of them there is the
witnesses names, but this will be also unto thy shame) for this is William
Russels own testimony that he has neither spoken, nor writ, nor sent any
manner of way any thing to Tho. Danson about that Dispute, witness hereunto
John Higgins, John Philley.

So also he has made use of William Russels name, contrary to his will, and
without his knowledge to be a false witness to his Lies, which is abomination
to the Lord. But Will. Russel said that Nath. Barry told him that he did inform
Tho. Danson of it: Now this Nath, Barry is a Priest in Dover, and Preaches at
the old Mass house, falsely called St. Mary's Church; And I asked him whether
he did Report it to Tho Danson, and he at the first was very loath to tell me,
as being conscious of evil in himself as I judged; But in his answer to me thus
he ordered his speech, saying That he heard such a Report, and only spoke of
it at a Gentleman's house where Tho. Danson was, and that he did not think he
would have printed it. And thus they report lies one to another even as
brethren therein, and strengthen themselves in darkness by making lies their
Refuge, and under falsehood hides themselves, but are afraid to bring or have
them brought to the light which is the truth, for that is their condemnation:
And thus they fulfill the Scriptures upon themselves, as the false prophets of
old did, who watched for evil, and for the halting of the Righteous, and said,
Come Report and we will report it: But why do the Heathen rage, and the people
imagine a vain thing against the Lord and against his Anointed, for surely in
vain is the snare laid in the sight of any bird, for though the priests dig as
deep as Hell to hide their counsel, and to make a covenant with hell and death,
yet Truth will disanull it all, and the overflowing scourge will and must
overtake them in their works of darkness, and he that sits in heaven will
laugh them to scorn, and shall have them in derision, for now is the Lord a
making their folly known unto all men, and they shall proceed no further, but
shall go backward and be snared and fall and be taken by the traps which they
lay, and the pits which they digg for the innocent, in which they shall fall in
the bowels of their mother the great Whore Mystery Babylon, as a millstone into
the Sea, never to rise any more, and the day is near at hand wherein it will be
seen perfectly, even the fullfilling of that which was prophesied of in ages
past, for the Lord alone will do it for his own name sake, which the Priests
have polluted, and by their lightness and by their lying have caused the people
so to do also, so that from them profaneness is gone forth amongst all people in
this present age as much as in any, but woe and misery will be the end of all
such, the workers of iniquity.

And now Thomas Danson, if we may measure all the rest of thy bitter Arrows
shot out of the Devils Bow by these thy two great witnesses, we may safely
conclude them to be such like, and this we have sufficient ground to do, and
that they (to wit) thy Arrows will never slay the Dragon nor bruise the head
of the old Serpent, which is the Devil, who rules in the hearts of all the
children of disobedience, and so in thee Thomas Danson.

Another thing thou have to say of me from one of thy brethren, like thy self
that met me near Dover Castle, at which time he had much to say of friends and
truth, but refused to tell me his name or the place where he lived, or to meet
me in a more public place to make good his charge; but now thou having raked
him up to shoot his lie out of thy Bow, he appears (or thee for him) who
call him the Minister of Word near Sandwich, and saying that I should say
that it was revealed to me by the eternal God that the Priests should be
destroyed, and that by the Quakers, and this thou bring as all thy proof to
evidence three lies, besides this, to wit, that a Quuker in Sussex (who as thou
say had taken upon him to be speaker in that meeting) called our to a
Minister of the Parish as he passed by, saying, we will have you all down, for
now our day is come; which Practice we deny.

And that another in the same County should say, that he no more cared to kill
a Priest then he cared to kill a Dog.

And that another should Justell a man on the way, having his Wife behind him,
and drew out his sword half way, which was a suspicion that he would have
killed him [a^ thou in thy suspicious mind saith] had he not been prevented;
but these three men thou do not name, so thy proof in these three thou have
not yet raked up, and except they be such as will shoot in the Devils Bow with
thee, thou will be troubled to make them enter into sober peoples
understandings, they are so groundless, and all this groundless stuff, the lie
which thou have laid on me is all the evidence thou have produced, as if we
were a people in whose hearts were blood, of which we are clear, and not like
that bloody generation of Priests, who lately made an insurrection with George
Booth and you their brethren, which were loath to read the Proclamation against
them, here read thy self.

And if such kind of proof may be taken to brand the innocent, then thy lies
may pass; but to the contrary, can I bring many witnesses, and that these were
my words to the Priest I met beside the Castle, or to this purpose, to wit,
That the decree of the Lord was gone out and sealed against the Priests to
pluck them up by the roots for their wickedness, witness John Hummerdien, of
Dover. John Marsh, Hester Warry.

And that I believe will certainly come to pass, as truly as ever your Fathers
the Bishops and Love your brothers, who lost their Heads on Tower hill for
their wickedness, which may be looked upon as true figures of the downfall of
your whole body of opposers of the truth, for now is the Lord a searching out
your hidden things of Esau, and bringing of them to public view:

Witness the late Proclamation, by which many of you were proclaimed Rebels
and Traitors to the peace of your Country. The day is come, and a coming which
shall declare every man's works, and that all shall be tried by fire, and there
is nothing which will stand in Covenant with the Lord, but what will endure the
fire, therefore let none be deceived, professors or not professors, covered or
not covered with names of Saints or Churches, God will not be mocked, but such
as every man sows, such shall he reap; if they sow to the flesh, they must of
the flesh reap corruption, but if they sow to the spirit, viz. That which
reproves them for sin, they shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting, for its
reproofs of instruction are the way to life, and also he that lives after the
flesh shall dye, but he that through the spirit (which reproves the World of
sin, righteousness and of Judgment) mortifieth the deeds of the flesh, he shall
live; for in every nation, and amongst all people, he that fears God and
works righteousness is accepted of him, and the fear of the Lord is to depart
from iniquity, and a fountain of life to depart from the ways of death, and
the fear of the Lord keeps the heart clean, so all people feel that which
keeps the heart clean, for it is the pure in heart only shall see God, and
there is none that can see his face with peace, and live in the first nature,
but as a consuming fire will his appearance be to all such who have a life in
the transgression, or trespassing against that which shows them sin and
iniquity.

And now to thy two Questions which thou make in thy Title page, viz. If it
be not so now, who will make thee a liar, and make thy speech nothing worth,
and what thou have done, is there not a cause, say thou. (No cause to lie,
say I) And all this thou have done to confirm people in a bad opinion of the
Quakers, and thou trustest that it will do it, as thou say in thy confused
preface, in the beginning of which thou say, thou art come once more upon
the Stage (and its true, more like a stage Player then a Minister of the
Gospel) not without a blush; and truly according to the Worlds proverb, thou
may indeed blush for shame to utter so many lies in the face of the Son,
which is right stage player like, whose life and trade is to lie, and this thou
have done, by which the hands of the wicked are strengthened, that he should not
return from his wickedness, but rejoice in his iniquity, and Joyneth himself
with thee against the truth, and so thou may have thy prayer answered, which
thou make in the end of this preface, viz. That the Reader may hold fast that
Doctrine which he has already learned; and if thou meanest such Doctrines as
are to be learned of thee (as no doubt thou do) which is to plead for sin as
long as he lives in the body, Then where and when must he glorify God, with
his spirit and with his body, seeing in the Grave there is no remembrance of
him, and he whose conversation is not ordered aright whilst he is in the body
does not glorify him, and also none glorifieth God but such as brings forth
fruit to his Spirit, which reproves man for all sin, and leads all out of
sin which hearkens to and obeys its reproofs, and as many as are led by the
spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, and none else, and they glorify their
Father which is in Heaven, by there conversations which is also in Heaven,
which is without covetousness, pride, or any thing which works an abomination
or makes a lie, all which fruits is shut out of the Kingdom; here read thy own
state and be not deceived with vain hopes, but read within thee, that the hope
of the hypocrite shall perish, and that without remedy; and so in truth and in
the fear of the Lord, I have proved thee a liar, and so thy speech to be
nothing worth, and this shall stand over thy head a full answer to thy
questions, and to this let the witness of God in all Consciences answer that
this reads, and I know it will do in all where it is suffered to speak, that
knows any thing as eyewitness of the matter which occasions these Lines to
be written to thee T. D. by which thou art put by thy trust, which thou in thy
Preface speak of and trustest to, to beget in people a bad opinion of the
Quakers, except it be in such as thy self is, who make lies thy refuge, and
under falsehood hides thy self: But this know, that thou and all such, that to
speak the truth is always best, every man to his neighbor, the which if thou
had learned it within thee, as plain and as well as thou can read it
without thee, then thou would have known a bridle to thy Tongue before this
time, and never have been raking abroad for lies, but for want of that thy
Religion is vain, as says the Scriptures of truth, which we believe, and
shows the life of as a witness against thee and all the vain talkers and
disputers of this World, about the husks, which is the letter, on which the
Swines do feed, who rent and tear the Lambs and lives in the liberty of the
flesh, out of the life of them wherein the Worlds friendship stands, which is
enmity against God, seeking honor one of another, and not the honor which is
of God alone, which is to live in his fear, and how can such believe or know
the faith which gives victory over the world, and in this state thou have
manifested thy self to be in a large measure, by thy lying and flattery with
those worthy persons which thou in thy Pamphlets speaks of, and this will
appear to all that have but moral honesty in them, and so much sobriety as to
ponder thy lines and the weight of thy words, and the grounds thou speak
them from, the which to him who lives and walks in the light of the Lord,
will appear to be from the bottomless pit, wherein they must go again with the
liar, the beast, and the false Prophet, which is the proper and the appointed
place for them all.

And this I have writ for the clearing of my own Conscience and the truth,
which is my life, so far as in brief it might be done, and I concerned so to
do, and have laid the lys on the liars head, and turned the Devils fiery darts
back into his own Quiver again, and in this I have cleared my Conscience, which
is a true and faithful testimony born by me, who am a knower and a lover of
the Quakers principles, because I know and feel that they lead out of sin, and
also out of the nature which pleads for sin; for he that believes has the
witness in himself, in which I rest in peace, and remain a true friend and a
lover of the Seed of God in all men, but an enemy to the seed of the Serpent,
in all without respect to the persons of any; and this testimony is true, born
by me Luke Howard against Thomas Dansons lies.

Dover the 15th. of the 10th. Month, 1659. A Postscript.
THis my testimony to the truth is true, and also thine T. D. is false, which
thou have Printed against the truth, my self, and others, and if thou would
be ^o honest as to speak the truth, thou know it is so; but if in thy
hardness of heart and boldness of face, should yet say to the contrary, let
not thy speech of it at a rich man's Table (which you Priests love to frequent
to serve your God, to wit, your bellies) serve the turn, but let the truth
appear in the face of the Son, and if thou dare affirm that thou have Printed
naught but truth, then make thy self strong, and gather together thy witnesses,
to wit, the four Priests mentioned in thy pamphlet to prove thy lies, and meet
me publicly in Dover or Sandwich Market place, and let timely notice be given,
that much people may hear of it and meet with us, and I may be ready to meet
thee in the fear of the Lord, with witnesses also to prove the truth outwardly
besides the Testimony of my own Conscience within, which is more to me then a
thousand witnesses without, and let the liar bear his own burden, and if this
be refused by thee, I say again, cease using of thy Tongue at Rich men's Tables,
for that will be thy shame to boast in lies, for the day is so far come on that
many of them see through the deceit of the Priests, though they have not so
much yet born up in them as to deny you, but your folly does appear to many of
them and it will to all men, to the fulfilling of the Scriptures; so that I say
again and again, that the decree of the Lord is to pluck you up by the roots
for your wickedness, your pride, lightness, lying and covetousness, and for
these things will ye stink as a dunghill against the Sun, and that all the
strength of Egypt shall not help you, for the Scripture will be fulfilled upon
you, viz. Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm,
when all whose confidence is in the Lord, and not in Princes, shall be as Mount
Sion, which shall never be moved, and herein lies our strength, and in him is
our joy full, and if it had not been so we had long since been overwhelmed, to
the rejoicing of you Priests who have long looked for it, who in your hearts
say against the appearance of the heir of all things in this age, as your
murdering Brethren of old did against the appearance of him in ages past, viz.
This is the heir, come let us kill him that the inheriance may be ours But the
work is in the hand of the Lord now, as ever it was, and by him carried on, who
is bringing great things to pass out of your reach and sight, but this is your
inheritance and due reward from the Lord to be filled with the fruit of your
own doings, and that will be a burden heavy enough, and too heavy for you to
bear, I am sure of it, who am one that understands well, and feels what I
say, and therefore cannot but pity you, yea I can truly say pity you all,
though abused by you and hated of you and your Generation, yet dare not render
to you evil for evil, but contrary wise good to you and all men, by which I
desire to be made manifest to you and to the witness of God in you, otherwise
by name,


L. H.

THE END.

