Preces and Lachrymae. A SERMON ON Act. chap. XX. verse. 36, 37, 38.



Paul's neck, and kissed him.



By WILLIAM HOUGHTON, Preacher at Bicknor in Kent.

(...).

Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. hom. 3. edit. Harm. p. 53. De inhabitatione Dei in
cordibus sanctorum est in ipsa facie eorum redundantia, etc.

Paris. de poenit. 555. Quanto quisque est sanctior, and sancti defiderii
plenior, tanto est ejus in orando fletus uberior.

August. de civit. Dei lib. 20. c. 17. And though the Lord give you the bread
of adversity, and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy Teachers be
removed into a corner any more: but thine eyes shall see thy Teachers.

Isa. 30. 20. LONDON, Printed by Roger Daniel, for Samuel Cartwright, at the
Sign of the Bible in Duck-lane. 1650.

TO The Right Honorable ELLENOR, Countess of Warwick, etc.
Right Honorable,
THe substance of this Sermon was delivered upon the death of a Reverend
Minister in the City; the Copy thereof has been desired by some, to whom by
promise I became a debtour. Before it pass to other hands, Duty binds me first
to present it to your Honors. Such an occasional Piece perhaps may not be so
welcome as some other, which (if God give time and strength) I shall hereafter
provide. Having nothing else for the present, I offer this, not as worthy your
Honors Acceptance, but as a testimony of the due observance of

Your Honors old Chaplain, and Servant, HOUGHTON.

To the READER.
THe reasons of publishing these Meditations, are, First, the miserable
calamity of the times, wherein every one may take up Jeremy's wish, Oh that my
head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and
night, Jer. 9.1. I will weep with the weeping of Jazer: I will water thee (O
England) with my tears, because the spoiler is fallen upon thee, Isa. 16.9. Jer.
48.32. A discourse of tears and weeping cannot be out of season, in such
weeping times. Secondly, the main scope of this Treatise, is, to show, what
love has been, and should be between Minister and People. Paul was willing to
impart the Gospel to the people of God, and to part with his life too, because
they were dear unto him, 1 These. 2.8. And they that found the comfort of his
Ministry, were ready to receive him as an Angel of God, Galat. 4.14. Such love
there has been, such should be still; though it now seems to be gone out of
the land. The Priests sigh (as Jeremy complains, Lament. 1.4.) And they
respected not the persons of the Priests, they favored not the Elders, Lament.
4.16. Perhaps the reading of these Meditations may move some to pray for the
return of that ancient love between Pastor and People; that, though the Lord
give us the bread of adversity, and the waters of affliction; yet may not our
Teachers be removed into corners, but our eyes may see our Teachers, Isa.
30.20. Thirdly, It is the saying of Chrysostom, that, The holy Scriptures are
a fruitful garden, and pleasant paradise. Would we find comfort in these sad
times; it must be in walking, and breathing in this garden of God. Some of my
brethren have of late, by their great pains and industry, brought much light to
many Chapters and Books of Scripture, for which I bless God, beseeching him to
stir up others to do the like, that the plain paths of the Lord may be made
yet more plain, and dark places of Scripture less dark and obscure. For this
that I have here opened (not opened before to my knowledge in any Sermon or
Treatise) it is indeed a plain Scripture, and easy to be understood, yet it
may be, the method I have cast it into will make it be the better remembered. If
thou have that love that is here discoursed of, thou will pass by all my
Errata's. If it help to stir up holy affections in thy heart, thou shall reap
profit by it, and I shall have my aim. Commending thee and it to Gods blessing,
and praying help of thy prayers for me; I rest

Thine, in the Lord Jesus, William Houghton.

Acts 20. ver. 36, 37, 38. And when he had thus spoken, he kneeled down, and
prayed with them all. And they all wept sore, etc.


WHen our blessed Savior was to be received up, Luke 9.51.
he set his face to Jerusalem: S. Paul is now looking that way, setting his
face to Jerusalem. And as our Savior held on his way, John 11.8.
though the Jews not long before sought to stone him: in like manner, Paul,
though his friends prayed him to stay, and strengthened their prayers with
their tears, yet they could not prevail. When they desired him to tarry longer
time with them, Acts 18.20.
he consented not, but bad them farewell, saying: I must by all means keep this
feast that comes, in Jerusalem. To Jerusalem he must, and if you ask what wind
drive him thither? He says, It was the wind of the spirit: I go bound in the
spirit. Acts 20.22.
What made he there his business? He tells you in the next Chapter, It was to
die for Christ. See here the steadfastness of holy resolutions; 2 Cor. 1.17.
When I determined to come to you, did I use lightness? The determinations of
Gods children, are not light and inconstant; their resolves hold, though there
were a bear or lion in the way; dangers they are not afraid of in this case.
Luther, being determined to go to Worms, his friends came to him, told him of
some that lay in the way for him, and sought his life; therefore desired him
not to go. Not go? (says he) Though there were as many devils in my way, Fox
page 84^.
as there are tiles upon their houses, yet Luther shall go, and by Gods grace
enter into Worms: So Paul here; Agabus told him, he should suffer bonds at
Jerusalem; the Jews would bind him hand and foot: What tell you me of bonds?
Act 5 21.13.
(says he) What mean you to weep and to break my heart? For I am ready, not to
be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. As
if he had said, There Christ died for me, and thither am I going (if it be his
will) to die for my Christ. But in his way, he takes occasion to see and salute
diverse Churches; amongst the rest, the Church of Ephesus: having called them
together, he preaches to them his farewell Sermon, set down at large from the
17. verse of this Chapter, to the words of my Text: and here, after many
offices of love, and mutual embraces, the Evangelist shows the manner of their
parting.

The words are very patheticall, Quid quaetis artem ubivides dominari affectum?
and when passion is up, sorrow stirring, method is then commonly laid aside.
As one says of Jeremy's book of Lamentations; Do you seek for art or method
amongst sighs and lamentations? So art might well be excused here, where
affection is so strong: yet because method is the mother of memory, you may (if
you please) help your memories with this division. There are presented to us
out of this Text, two things; (...), i. e, The love of Paul to the Ephesians,
and the love of the Ephesians to Paul: his to them, theirs to him.

1. His love to them is set forth in two acts. 1. Preaching. Having so said. 2.
Praying. He kneeled down and prayed.
2. Their love to him: you have it expressed in three acts. 1. Kissing. They
kissed him. 2. Weeping. They all wept sore. 3. Conducting him. They accompanied
him to the ship.

Other particulars there are, which I shall handle in their place; these
propounded are the chief, of which in their order, so as may be most pertinent
to the occasion drew me hither at this time: to wit, the decease of my worthy
friend, your good Pastor, who, having set his face to Jerusalem, I mean, that
which is above, has now finished his course, Scaligeriqu od reliquum est.
Scal. Epitaph.
his soul is at rest with God. The remains of him, his Corpse, having wept over
it, and sprinkled it with your tears, you have accompanied to the grave.
Considering this accident, I knew not what I should discourse of more
seasonably at this time, then of these two general Points my Text presents you
withal, under the persons of Paul, and the Ephesians; namely, the love of a
faithful Pastor to the people, and of their love to him. I begin with the
first, which (as was said) has two acts, Preaching and Praying. First,
Preaching, in these words: When he had thus spoken; that is, when he had
preached this Sermon unto them.

Paul's love to the Ephesians. 1 These 2.8. Romans 1.11.
We were willing to impart the Gospel unto you, because ye were dear to us. And
I long to see you, that I may impart to you some spiritual gift. What makes
men give gifts, send tokens to their friends, is it not their love? So it was
his love that made Paul so free of his spiritual gifts, Tom. 5. page 110.
because they were dear to him. Thus Chysostome, to the people of Antioch: I am
your Father (says he) and must needs instruct my children, and give them good
counsel. If the nature of the flesh, or natural love, move earthly parents,
how much more shall the grace of the Spirit move us to do this! Preaching then
is an act of love, a testimony of that affection and good will, Ministers bear
to the souls of Gods people. Simon Jona, love thou me? John 21.26.
feed my sheep. We herein show our love to Christ, our love to his sheep, when
we feed them with the word of Life. It is an act of love to feed men's bodies,
an act of love to cloathe their bodies; how much more to feed their souls with
this heavenly Manna of Gods Word? As workers together with him. 2 Cor. 6.2.
to cloathe their souls with the rich robe of Christ's righteousness? We help
to do these things, therefore, the acts we perform, are acts of the highest
love.

(...). 1 Cor. 9.18.
especially (the most loving a cheap Gospel) if he be moderate in requiring the
dues belonging to him, or let them go upon easy terms; Oh then they cry him up
for a wonderful quiet loving man, though Preaching be a thing he seldom
uses, they see no such love in that, whith is the highest of all. When
Ministers labor hard in the Word and Doctrine, and when Christ's stewards
endeavor to break the bread of Life to his household, herein they show their
greatest love; and if they minister to you in spiritual things, 1 Cor. 9 11.
is it a great matter if they reap your carnal things?

But secondly, what shall we say to those that account Preaching a sign of
enmity, and Preachers enemies, as Ahab did Eliah; 1 Kings 21.20.
Have thou found me, 1 Kings 21.8.
O my enemy? And Micaiah, I hate the man (said he) he never prophesied good to
me, he is an enemy. Many are ready to say of us, Wisd. 2.13, 14.
as they in Wisdom: These Preachers were made to reprove our thoughts, they
upbraid us with our offending the Law, they object to our infamy the
transgression of our education, they are enemies. So we are, we profess our
selves enemies to your lusts, but friends to your souls; 1 Pet. 2.11.
your lusts they fight against your souls; therefore they are your best
friends, that are ever at war with, and ever fighting against your lusts, he is
his own enemy that thinks otherwise.

O ye Corinthians (says Paul) our mouth is opened to you, 2 Cor. 6.11.
our heart is enlarged: these two will go together, an enlarged heart, and an
open mouth: Paul's heart was enlarged, and that opened his mouth. If love, as a
heavenly fire has given us a dilatation or enlargement of heart; it will be as
a key, also opening our mouths to declare Gods truth unto men. Preaching then
is an act of love, Paul out of his love came and preached this Sermon to the
Ephesians, and it was an excellent Se^mon; Oration praeclara eximia singularis
Camerar. in vita Pauli.
we have not time now to look into the contents or matter of it: but if you
cast your eyes back, and take only a general survey of it, you shall observe
four remarkable particulars touching the manner of Paul's preaching.

His 1. Painfulnesse. 2. Faithfulness. 3. Prudence. 4. Affectionatenesse.


All which set forth the excellency of this sermon. First, his Painfulnesse; 1.
Painfulnesse.
two or three days before he preached this Sermon, traveling to Miletus, he
sent away his company before, and went himself afoot, it may be Paul was then
studying this elaborate piece, however, it smells (as we say) of the lamp, we
see a great deal of pains in it. The Apostles though Divinely inspired, yet we
may think they took pains to make themselves fit instruments for the Spirit to
work by: ^om. 5. page 209.
So did Paul, as Chrysostom testifies of him, he gave himself to labor, and
to the study of virtue, that he might make himself a fit receptacle for the
Holy Ghost to reside in: how painful then should we be in this high calling
wherein God has set us? Did Paul take pains, and are we idle? Find we him at
his study, and shall we be ever from our Books? He had many things by divine
instinct and revelation, but now-a-dayes, knowledge and grace are not to be had
without travel and pains, the sweat of our brows, tugging of our brains. The
pure oil for the light of the Temple to cause the Lamp to burn, it was to be
beaten: Exodus 27.20.
so with much labor and pains, the Light of Gods Word must be prepared. Paul
bids Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.15.
Study to show himself approved unto God: Timothy was a studied man, so must we
be, Meditate (says he) on these things, give thy self wholly to them; or
according to the Original, be thou wholly in them: our whole selves must be
employed in this work. (...). 1 Timothy 4.15. Mathematica studia totum requirunt
hominem. Alsted.
Its said of the study of Mathematics that it requires the whole man; much
more does the study of Divinity, it requires the whole man, our whole strength
our whole time. It was a memorable speech of Master Calvin, when being sickly
and weak, his friends persuaded him to give over reading and preaching; What
(says he) will ye have the Lord to find me idle at his coming? It were well
therefore, if in our secular affairs, if we have any to look to in our
journeys, nay in our very walks with Paul here, if we have any spare hours; we
would have them employed, and taken up with the thoughts of our callings, what
we shall speak, and what we shall say, when we come and stand in this place:
and this is the first thing observable in this Sermon; His Painfulnesse.

I kept back nothing that was profitable; I have declared to you the whole
counsel of God; Faithfulness. Verse. 20.27.35.
I have showed you all things: This must needs be an excellent thing in a
Preacher, the Apostle goes over it so often: 1 Cor. 4.2. Heb 3.2.
It is repuired in Stewards, that a man be found faithful; he that said it,
was such, even a faithful Steward as Moses, faithful in all Gods house. Some
there are who work not at all, but are idle; others work, and take much pains*
but to little purpose, because they deal not faithfully: some beloved sin they
can espy in their hearers, but either through fear, or flattery, will not
meddle with it: much like the Persian Judges, who when Cambyses asked them, If
there were any law for him to marry his sister; made answer, There was no such
law they knew of, for a man to marry his sister; but they found another law,
That the Kings of Persia might do what they list: Pet. Martyr. in lib Judic. p.
144.
or as Camerarius writes of one Basilius Cameterus, who having a desire to be
Patriarch of Constantinople, went to one Andronicus a great man, and promised
him if he would help him to it, he would be his servant, never say or do any
thing that should displease him; nay, he would set himself against all that
should be his enemies, and gave him his hand upon it: Such trencher-Chaplains,
I believe, there are too many; willing for preferment to accept of the like
covenant, to enter into such bonds: But Paul's spirit was too high, to stoop to
such base conditions; he had rather lie in bonds, then enter into such bonds;
he could not flatter nor comply, he could not daub, nor dissemble; but declared
to them the whole will and pleasure of God. Were there any point of salvation
they were ignorant of, he would unfold it unto them: or were there any sin
reigning amongst them, they should be sure to hear of it. Act. 26 25.24.25.
If he come before Festus, he must give him leave to tell him the truth; if
before Felix, deal as roundly with him too, leting him hear of his injustice,
and intemperance. Paul would spare no man in his sins, neither Festus, nor
Felix, nor any of them all: There Is the second: his Faithfulness.

Prudence.
therefore he will not loose his opportunity now; now he will speak, That his
words might be the more fastened in their minds; that they might say when he
was gone, Paul is out of sight now, but his words shall never out of our minds.
The last words of our dying or departing friends, Solemus morientium voces pro
oraculis habere.
go for Oracles with us. This therefore is a thing further required in Gods
Steward, That as he might be found Faithful, so likewise Prudent: Our Savior
has joined them together; Luke 12.42.
Who (says he) is a Faithful and Wise Steward; or Prudent? Now Prudence is a
virtue that prescribes the right manner of our actions; points out the due
circumstances, time, and place, when and where, this or that is to be done;
Eccles. 8.5.
this we call prudence: and it is an excellent virtue in Gods Steward. Some
desire to be Faithful, it were well if they would learn to be Prudent too:
Tempus and rationem reigerendae ^ar^wright. in Pro. p. 665 666. Gregor 3 part.
Pastor. Item Hallus de conscientia. 182.
A wise-mans heart (says the Wiseman) discerns both time and judgment. The
saying of Gregory is good, One manner of admonition is to be given to men,
another to women; young men are to be dealt withal one way, old-men another:
we must address and apply our selves, one way to the poor, another way to the
rich; after one sort to the servant, another to the Lord or Ruler: one way to
the plain and simple, another way to the wise and understanding: one way to our
well-willers, another way to our enemies: one way to the modest and
shame-faced, another way to the perverse and obstinate: A Minister therefore,
Chrysostom. 10.5. p. 6.
says Chrysostom, (if that be his de sacerdotio) stands in need of a great
deal of wisdom, had need have six hundred eyes in his head to look about him,
to see and observe the several dispositions of men's minds, that he may apply
himself to them accordingly: How wisely did the same Father dehort the people
of Antioch from swearing! When Theodosius by his Officers had put a number of
them to death for defacing his statues and images, Christ (says he) is the
Image of God, yea the Son of God; and if a mortal King has thus punished you
for abusing his image, how then will the King of Heaven punish you, if you
offer disgrace to the Lord Christ, who is the image of God, and the engraved
form of his person? If you tear his blessed body in pieces by your oaths and
blasphemies, he will never hold you guiltless if you continue to do thus.
Words spoken in season, Prove. 25.11.
are like apples of gold in pictures of silver; we should therefore desire the
Lord to give us the tongue of the learned, Isa. 50.4.
that we may know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary; as when
we see a man cast down, through any sad accident, lets labor then if we can,
to make him sorry for his sins; when joyful or merry through any good
befalln him, make his joy spiritual if we can: we are Fishermen, and must
bait our hooks with such baits as may catch: Seed-men, our greatest skill
therefore is to fit every ground with seed fit for the soil, and to sow it
also at such a season, as it may take root and grow; for seed, though never so
good, cast into the ground out of season, does not fructify. To end this: We
are to endeavor to speak seasonably, both in public and in private; we must
take our fit opportunities of doing good: for opportunities are like water in a
running stream, come to a river with a rod in your hand, Aquin.
you cannot touch the same water twice, for it runs away: So is it with
opportunities, we must lay hold of them when they are offered, or they are
gone. Paul was never to preach more to the Ephesians, therefore he will by no
means hold his peace now. And this is the third thing I noted to you: his
Wisdom and Prudence. Zeal.


There is a fourth yet remaining, which is his Zeal and affection: he tells the
Thessalonians, that he was affectionately desirous of them: 1 These. 2.8.
so he was very affectionate when he preached this Sermon; he warns, he exhorts,
desires them to look backward how faithfully he had dealt with them: forward,
to consider what impostors were like to come in amongst them; now he speaks to
them that they would have a care of themselves, Act. 20. ^^.28.31.32.
and beware of seducers, then he turns to God, and craves help from heaven.
Thus you see abundance of affection is showed in this Sermon, his spirit is now
upon the wing, the fire is kindled within, and his heart inflamed with a holy
zeal: Spiritus Pauli exemplar Ministri, he should be a pattern to us in this
also. The son of Syrach says, Ecclus. 48.1. Joh. 5.35.
that Elias was like fire, and his word like a burning lamp: John Baptist was a
burning and shining light, and Chrysostom says, that Peter was like a man
made all of fire, walking amongst stubble: This holy fire of zeal will make us
like them; Zeal is a greater converter of souls to God then Learning.
Bellarmine tells us, that with them in Lent-season, there are thirty or forty
Preachers in some great Cities, Scal. ascens. p. 100.102.
daily preaching against sin, yet no change afterward appears in their
lives; the same vices remain, the same coldness, as great dissoluteness; I
can give no other reason of it (says he) but this, Their Sermons are Learned,
and very Elegant, adorned with flowers of Rhetoric, but the Soul, the Life,
the Fire is wanting, the Fire of Divine Love, which only is able to animate
the words of the speaker, and inflame the hearts of the hearers. This is not to
be understood so, as if strength of lungs, contention and loudness of a man's
voice, or the motion of his body carried it; many lay about them lustily, make
a mighty noise, but that's not the thing: Guns having no Bullets or Shot, only
Powder in them, yet make a great noise when discharged, but without doing any
thing: This therefore is the thing required, that we be affectionately desirous
of Gods glory, and of the salvation of men's souls; and that this affection be
true and unfeigned; not extorted, but flowing naturally from the fountain of
the heart. Let us labor therefore for this, endeavoring in our preaching to
get affections suitable to the matter we have in hand, that our words coming
from our hearts, may go to the hearts of our hearers; A cord ad cor.
for, all the former are in vain, if this be wanting: for admit a Minister take
great pains at his study, admit he be faithful, say he be prudent too in
taking fit occasions when, and what to speak; yet if he be not zealous withal,
his hearers will be little moved with his words, for how should he move them,
that is not first moved himself with that he delivers, Tacent plurimi eorum,
aut similes sunt tacentibus, etiamsi loquantur. Salv. 160. Oxon. Coronidis loco.
as Salvian writes: Many Ministers (says he) are silent, never open their
mouths to preach Gods word, and others are little better then silent even when
they are speaking they do it so faintly and coldly. Let this therefore be added
as the upshot and perfection of all, that we be zealous.

Thus you have heard what manner of Sermon this was that Paul preached to the
Ephesians; what labor and pains; what plain-dealing and faithfulness; what
wisdom and discretion; what zeal and affection there was in it: Paul was a
painful, faithful, wise, and zealous preacher: Shall I tell you one thus
qualified stood not long since in this place? But I know your thoughts are
quick and have prevented me, only this short application let me make of it. If
preaching be an act of love, then Preachers are to be loved; if you ask which
especially, I answer, such as I have spoken of; when God gives you Ministers
thus qualified, think no blessing under heaven comparable to it: should the
Lord give you riches as great plenty as Croesus; heap upon you as many titles
of honor as the great Turk has, filling almost half a sheet of a paper: Phil.
2.29. 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Cor. 9.7.
denying this, you wanted still the best means of your spiritual and
everlasting good. Count therefore such highly in reputation, count them worthy
of double honor, consider the equity of it, if they feed the flock, should not
the flock feed them? If they spend their strength for you, is it a great
matter, if you spend part of your means on them? If they break their sleep for
you, should not you watch all oportunities to do them good? If they for their
faithful and impartial dealing be evil spoken of, should not you stand up and
defend them where ever you come? If their zeal and affection, in delivering
Gods truth, consume their strength, waste their spirits, causing them to end
their lives in a kind of martyrdom; Magnes amoris, amor. Amor est motivum
amoris. Aqun.
do they not deserve your love? Love (they say) is loves lodestone, let their
love then being such, draw you to love and honor them.

And thus much be spoken of the first act of Paul's love, Preaching. When he had
so said, what then? He kneeled down and prayed: which is the second act of his
love; wherein, observe with me these four particulars. 1. The action it self:
He prayed. 2. The time when: When he had so said. 3. His gesture, kneeling: He
kneeled down. 4. The parties with whom: With them together.
With the extent of it in that word (All.) He prayed with them, and with them
all. My matter (you see) multiplies under my hand, I will therefore be as brief
as I can: Phil. 1.7.9.
yet he prayed too. Prayer then is an act of our love as well as Preaching.
Paul tells the Philippians, that he had them in his heart; that is, he loved
them: then he adds, and this I pray; as if he had said, I know not how better
to express my love, then by praying for you. Samuel, he prayeed for the
Israelites: Moreover, as for me, 1 Samuel 12.23.
God forbid I should sin in ceasing to pray for you; but I will teach you the
good and the right way. Teach them he would, yet pray too, else God forbid; it
is an act of love to speak for one to some great man; would thou be spoken
for to the King or Captain of the host? 2 King. 4.13.
said Elisha to the Shunamite: there was love in that, how much more when we
speak for men; that is, in their behalf, to the king of heaven! Thus Paul
prayed for those Churches which he had planted; he was continually speaking to
God for them, that he would build them up by the word of his grace. Romans 10.1.
Paul says, My hearts desire, and prayer for Israel, is, that they may be
saved: that is, he did earnestly desire their salvation; and this made him
strive so much in preaching the Gospel of Christ. Col. 2.29.
This will also make us deny our selves, and not to play the hucksters (as many
do) with Gods word, (...). 2 Cor. 2.17.
mangling it with their watery inventions, but to approve our selves to every
man's conscience in the sight of God: take a man that loves to breathe in a
popular air, such a one aims at the praise and applause of men, he desires
nothing more then a fine come off, a full and clear delivery, to utter and set
forth his matter with a good a grace as he can, this is all he regards, which
makes many Sermons to be such cold and languid discourses; but when a man has
an higher end and aim, to wit, the edification of his hearers: when that he
most desires is to do good to the souls of Gods people; then more earnest
endeavors will put forth themselves, matter will be studied as much as words,
and what may profit, as what may please; thus, in regard of our selves, prayers
and earnest desires will cause in us answerable endeavors. Joh. 15.16.
Whatsoever ye ask (says Christ) in my name, I will do it: If prayer be a
means to obtain any blessing at Gods hands, why not this? and why may not our
Prayers, as well as our Preaching, further the spiritual good of our hearers?
Let us not therefore be defective in this duty; what a blessed thing is it when
we do not only Preach but Pray for men! I am persuaded this is the reason many
find so little fruits of their labors, because they pray so little; did we
earnestly pray for them, God would cause them to hear us with greater reverence
and attention.

When he had so said; that is, when he had ended his Sermon. So our blessed
Savior, when he had taught his Disciples, he lift up his eyes to heaven, and
prayed for them; Joh. 17.1. Hora vero jam in supplicationem sermonem solvere.
tom. 5. p. 135.
Thus Chrysostom shuts up one of his Homilies, Let us now break off (says he)
for this time, and turn our speech into prayers: So Paul here, (...), as he was
saying these things, he brake off, and fell to his Prayers.

Hic taxantur qui se a precibus Ecclesiae subducunt ilico atque concio absoluta
est, non expectta tanquam concionis coronida precatione. Cartier Prove. 30.
public Assembly, craving a blessing upon what has been delivered; that what
we have heard with our outward ears, the Lord would be pleased to write the
same upon the tables of our hearts: or else, in our private devotions
commending the truths delivered, to Gods blessing; when we have preached a
Sermon to the people, desire God to preach it over again to them: What is seed
better for being sown, if it be not watered afterward; when we preach, we sow
the seed of Gods word; when we pray for the divine benediction upon it, we get
it watered with the dew of heaven, and then it prospers.

When he had so said he prayed: when we have taken pains in Preaching, then we
must Pray; and when we have prayed, Preach; and when we have Preached, Pray
again: Thus the Apostles, Act. 6.4. Redit labor actus in orbem. Frequens
meditatio, carnis est afflictio. Eccles. 12.12. Mat. 14.23.
We will give our selves (say they) to prayer, and the ministry of the Word;
these two must run in a course, and take up the whole life of a Minister:
Therefore they slander our calling, who report us idle and slothful, little do
they consider the greatness of our work that say so; you do not feel the
killing pains we endure. When our Savior had spent the whole day in working
miracles, at night he went apart to prayer: So, many a Minister, when he has
labored hard all day in the Word and Doctrine, may be found praying in his
Study at night, when othere are asleep.

Thirdly, let this also commend this duty of Prayer to you after Sermon; When
you have heard God speaking to you, then will your hearts be in good plight to
speak to him; when we have taken pains in Preaching, we pray that God would
bless our labors to you. Do you then the like for your selves, drawing that
heavenly food of Gods Word into your souls by They be the sighs of the spirit
in prayer, that fetch out the comforts of the spirit in the word. Dyke School
of affliction. Doct. 2. Lectio apponit ori solidum cibum, meditatio frangit,
oration, saporem conciliat, contemplatio est ipsa dulcedo quae jucundat and
reficit. Barthol. Comp. spirit. doct. 142.
prayer and meditation. I can enlarge nothing, having many things to speak of.

Psalm. 100.1. Ephesians. 3.14. Luke 22.41. Act. 7.60.9.40.
is his gesture; He kneeled down and prayed: he did it on his knees. The
comliest gesture for Petitioners, is kneeling. O come let us kneel. For which
cause I bow my knees. Our Savior kneeled down and prayed. So did Stephen, so
did Peter: not that a man is always tied to this gesture, Certa aliqua lege
definitum non est, qui sint ad preces gestus adhibendi liberate, fanctae
modestiae freno gubernata, hic gaudet Ecclesia. Sibel.
for we meet with examples in Scripture of many other gestures besides this:
and Tertul de Coron.
Tertullian an ancient Writer tells us, That in the Primitive Church they were
wont to pray standing. Such a custom there was from the Pasch till Pentecost,
in memorial of Christ's Resurrection; but this was but a ceremony used only
for such a time, and upon such an occasion: for the same Father commends
kneeling, as the fittest ordinary gesture that we can use: Scultet. exercit.
Evang. 143. Sedentem orare extra disciplinam.
and says, that men are not well disciplined when they pray sitting. And its
well observed, that in the Hebrew and Greek tongue, the same word signifies
praying, and bowing of the knee. (...) genu (...) of (...).
Let this therefore mind us of our duty, to make use of our knees, in the
offering up of our prayers; Scilicet nobis incumbit, centum genua (fi illa
nobis suppeterent) coram illo flectere. Cartw. pro. 886.
were they knees of gold, they were not too good to stoop to God; it fit we
should humble our selves, and lay our selves low, when we come before the
highest Majesty. You have seen his gesture. That's the third thing.

The fourth, is the parties with whom he prayed, He prayed with them: 2 Cor.
1.11.
You laboring together in prayer: so here, they prayed together, he with them,
and they with him, they joined together.

This commends joint prayers, they bear down all before them. Where two or
three are gathered together in the name of Christ, Mat. 18 20. Coimus in
coetum, vota sundimus, coelos: undimus. Tertul. Apo. Jam. 5.16.
there is he in the midst of them: How much more, where two or three hundred,
or two or three thousand! We beset God as it were by troops, we pour forth our
prayers, we rap at Heaven gates, says Tertullian. If the prayer of one
righteous man prevail much, shall not the fervent prayers of many righteous men
prevail more? This made Chrysostom prefer Church-prayers, before
closet-prayers: A man (says he) may pray in his closet, Chrysostom. to 5. p. 212.
and 254.
but not so as in the Church, where the prayers of all are sent up together
with an unanime consent: you are not so heard of God, when you pray alone, as
when you pray with your brethren: for there is unanimity and consent, the bond
of charity, and the prayers of the Minister joined with you, which are wanting
in private devotions. Thus that worthy Bishop and Father of our Church.

Luke 15.28.
The Devil is a great enemy to the prayers of the assembly: and therefore has
made many so far out of love with them: heretofore indeed, when the Surplas or
Cross stood in their way; many came not: but that since these have been
removed, they cannot yet find the way hither; surely it is the policy of
Satan. The Lord remove all stumbling blocks from before his people, and give
them eyes to see what are stumbling blocks, and what are not: for our selves,
let us follow the Apostles counsel, Heb. 10.25.
which is, not to forsake the assembling of our selves together, as the manner
of some is.

Act. 10.33.
It was the speech of Cornelius to Peter, We are all here present before God:
we cannot say so, half or a third part being away, when the Minister begins:
now comes the man, by and by, the wife, a quarter of an hour after, the
servants; so that prayers are well nigh ended, ere we can all be got together:
let us therefore have a care to come cheerfully together that so we may pray
together, let us come to the beginning. Octavius Augustus and Caligula set a
fine upon those Senators heads, Lib. 10. decret. p. 48. Absentes, tarde
venientes.
that came late into the Senate House: and in our Colleges, Presidents punish
those that come tardie, as well as those that come not at all. It is a fault
therefore this, to be so leaden-heeld in repairing hither; to come dropping in
so late into Gods courts: as you cannot go over-late to the service of Satan;
so neither can you come too early to the service of God.

with you all? We only pray with such as pray with us: intend therefore, and
mind what is done here, let your hearts go along with us from the beginning to
the end of this holy action: Officium divinum summa devotione persolvito,
oblitus omnium terrenorum quasi inter Angelorum agmina Constitutus divinas
lauds cum eis pariter cantare studeas. Barthol. comp. spirit. doct 10.
some are so far from joining with us, thnt when we have prayed, they will
hardly open their mouths to add Amen to our prayers. In the Primitive times,
their Amen was so loud, that it was like a clap of thunder; ours is so low, it
can scarce be heard: therefore when you come together, be exhorted to use that
reverence that becomes the presence of the Divine Majesty: abstract your
thoughts from all earthly things. When you sing Psalms, and set forth Gods
praise together, do it, as if you were bearing a part with the blessed Angels:
and when you pray, join spirits together, sending up the Ministers prayer with
all your strength to heaven.

He prayed with them. It follows, with them all: see how general his love was,
as he preached to all, great and Act. 26 22. 2 Cor 9.19.22. Coloss. 1.28.
small: so he likewise prayed for all. This great Doctor of the Gentiles
condescends to the meanest man in this company, and prays with him. Its no
disparagement to greatness, to be employed in offices of love to the meanest
Saint: a Ladies hands are not too fair to wash a Disciples feet, nor her eyes
too beautiful to behold the diseases of those that lie in the Spittle: nor her
feet too good to carry her to the sick-mans bed to pray with him: but it is the
fault of too many, to have the faith of Christ with respect of persons: If an
equal or Superior be sick, they may chance to lend him a visit, but an
Inferior, though he have ten times more grace in his heart, may languish and
perish ere he be visited, or have any comfort sent him for body or soul: it was
otherwise here with Paul, he preached to all, and he prayed for all: Romans 12.16.
Psalm. 119. compared with 63.74.
condescend therefore to men of low estate, be your selves never so high. King
David did it, They that fear thee, will be glad when they see me: that might
well be, they glad to see him; but the question is, Whether or no, David would
be glad to see them? for, many are ready to hide their heads, will not be seen,
when men of low degree come to present themselves before them: It was not so
with him, but (says he) I am a companion of all that fear God: not only
willing to see, or to be seen of them, but to keep company with them: and not
only with some of the highest rank, but all such: I am a companion of all
them, He would descend, as it were, from his throne, forget state, become a
companion of every one that feared God. With them all.

He prayed with them, and so left them; where you may further learn from hence,
That it is a laudable custom, that Christian friends use at parting, to pray
one for another, and to desire the prayers one of another. It Is true, we are to
pray for our friends when absent, and God can hear our prayers for them, though
they be in the remotest corners of the world: even as the exhalations that rise
out of the valleys with us in this place, being carried up into the air, fall
down in showers, and refresh those places that are further off; so those pious
exhalations and prayers, which we send up to heaven, may bring down a blessing
with them upon our friends: wheresoever they be, our prayers may find them out.
We should therefore pray for them, when out of sight, and absent from us, for
God sees them, and can shower down his blessings upon them: howsoever this be
true, yet the presence of a friend we wish well to. How does it stir up to
this duty, when as Christ prayed to his Father in behalf of his Disciples, I
pray for these whom thou have given me: Joh. 17.11.
these -- as if he had pointed to them with his finger: so when a man shall
say, I pray for these, these now in presence, these here before me, these whose
faces I now behold, but it may be shall never behold more: how forcible will
our prayers be as such a time! When a man parts from his friend, if his
presence any whit moves him, he has it, he is not yet gone; if his absence,
his thoughts now give him absent, being thus, presens-absens, having him in his
arms; yet seeing him vanishing out of his sight, how are his affections then
kindled, and inflamed! and then are our prayers most prevalent, when affections
as wings, are ready to waft, and carry them up to heaven: This therefore is a
commendable and religious custom, to have God present at our parting from our
friends: when we leave God with them, we leave them well. Thus you see here,
Paul and the Ephesians, commending one another to God in their prayers: so the
Disciples at Tire in the next Chapter, they kneeled down and prayed, Act. 21.5,
6.
and so took leave one of another. He prayed with them.

But what may we think this prayer was? That God would strengthen them by his
spirit in the inner man, Ephesians. 3.14.
was once his prayer for this Church: Such it may be was his prayer for them
now, That they might be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, that
being left as so many poor orphans, Ephesians. 6.10.
the Lord would take care of them, and build them up by the word of his grace:
Such in all probability was the effect of his prayer. It was our Saviors
prayer for his Disciples, I am now no more in the world, holy Father, keep
throught thine own name those whom thou have given me: Joh. 17.11.
Such its likely was Paul's prayer for these Ephesians, that seeing he was to be
no longer amongst them, the Lord would keep them by his power and might: And a
hint hereof he gives us in his Sermon, when he says, And now brethren, I
commend you to God, and to the word of his grace: Verse. 32.
he was then secretly lifting up his heart to God, and beginning his prayer,
which afterward he pressed, and offered up with more earnestness to the Throne
of grace: if he commended them to God in his Sermon, how much more in his
prayer! Caeterum obortae impediunt lachrymae. Transitio ad secundam partem.
But Paul can now be no longer heard for tears, sighs and tears shed on every
side, drown his voice, and carry away the sound of his prayers from us. Come we
therefore from the first general part of my Text, Paul's love to them, to the
second, their love to him: For it was not here as it was with the Corinthians,
of whom he complains, that he loved them, but not they him, Nay, 2 Cor. 12.15.
the more (says he) I love you, the less am I loved: But here was love
returned, love for love. Paul has done his part, expressed much love to them,
now they come upon the stage, and endeavor to show as much love to him: But
how? Poor souls, their words were few. As Chrysostom observes of Peter's
weeping for the denial of his Master, He wept bitterly (says he) but we hear
him say nothing: so these Ephesians wept sore, but said little. It may be they
were in the Psalmists case, so troubled that they could not speak; Psalm 77.4.
yet their love was great. Love consists not all in words: I doubt not but
words past between them ere they parted, but what they were, in that the Text
is silent; it presents us with nothing but mute expressions, such as kissing,
weeping, walking: and these, as I noted to you before, are the three acts
wherein their love was expressed; according to the three faculties or members of
the body, lips, eyes, feet; in their lips, in kissing him; their eyes, in
weeping over him; their feet, in walking with him, and accompanying him to the
ship. They kissed him. They kissed him. Prove. 24.26. (...) Home.
Every one kisseth the lips of him that makes a wise answer, says the
Wiseman: When Paul was preaching and praying with the Ephesians, his lips
seemed to drop like an honeycomb; they cannot therefore let him go without a
kiss, and herein they showed their love to him. Luc. 7.45.
Wherefore else did our Savior complain of Simon, and take it so unkindly at
his hands, that when he was at his house, he gave him no kiss? The learned
know, that to love and to kiss come from the same root; one word in the
original expresses both, and as if it were a thing known to the meanest:
(...).
when a mother speaks thus to her child, come love me, her meaning is no more
but this, that her child should turn and give her a kiss. And therefore when
it is said of the Ruler in the Gospel, that Jesus beholding, loved him; Marc.
10.21.
some will have it to be meant only of a kind salutation, that is, he saluted
or kissed him. Now this kiss, or salute, was used as a token of love, either
when men were reconciled when they met together, or when they parted: first,
when they were reconciled and made friends, as the Father of the Prodigal and
his son. Luk 15 20. Genesis 29.11.
Secondly, when they met together after a long time, as Jacob and Rachel in
Padan-Aran: Moses and Jethro in the wilderness, Exodus 18.7.
who meeting his father-in-law there, he did obey sance, and kissed him. Or
thirdly, at parting, as Elisha said to Eliah, Let me I pray thee kiss my
father and mother, 1 King. 19.20.
that is, take my leave of them, and then I will follow thee. Ruth 1.8, 9.
Thus Naomi to her two daughters-in-law, Go and return each to your mothers
house, and the Lord be with you, etc. then she kissed them, and they lift up
their voice and wept. Of this last kind was this in my Text, They hanged upon
him (says Erasmus) being now to go away from them, desirous to be filled with
his company.

Religion then you see is no enemy to civility: kisses and mutual embraces,
Religion simply mislikes not. But it condemns first, Prove. 7.13. Pangit suavium
(...) impudicitiae. Ames. cas. 3.
such kisses as wantons use: She caught him, and kissed him: Such are proems of
adultery, preparatives to lust and corporal uncleanness: as strokes are the
beginning of murder, Interim sciendum haecantiquitus porrect a oscula fuiffe
spicitualia, non carnalia quae complexu corporum animas copulant non desiderio
carnis, fed spiritus. Ambros. in secundam ad Cor. 7.
so are such kisses of adultery. These in my Text are of another nature,
symbols of that divine conjunction of souls, when the souls of two friends go
forth, as it were of their bodies, to salute each other in a Christian manner:
therefore it is called an holy kiss: 1 These. 5.26. 1 Timothy 1.5.
Greet all the brethren with an holy kiss; the other are unholy. Paul speaks
in Timothy of love out of a pure heart; but, the love and kisses of wanton
persons, come out of an impure one.

Joab dealt with Abner, took him out of the way to salute him, and then smote
him under the fifth rib: 1 Credibile est Judam colosum nebulonem ad iisse
detecto capite pileo supra modum demisso curvatoque corpore Christo procul
tedendisse manus amplexaturus vultu hilariore, voce amicitiam solito magis
profitente, labia labiis impressisse, ne quid proditionis deesset, per molle
osculi blandimentum inflixit execrabile proditionis jaculum. Bosquier theatr.
pass. p. 192. 2 1 Pet. 5.14. Vocatur osculum charitatis, quod non est
adulatorium sicut Absolonis, non simulatorium sicut Joabi, non proditorium
sicut Judae. Hereuschmidt osculolog. 82.
And 1, Judas, who in a great show of love and respect, kissed our Savior, when
he came to betray him: So there are in the world such as will embrace, and
kiss with their lips, those whom they hate in their hearts: but such are lying
lips, though they say nothing. Therefore as Paul calls it, a holy kiss; so 2.
Peter, a kiss of charity. It must be of charity, not of hypocrisy.

They wept. Verse. 19.31.
as it broke out of their lips: Consider we it now in the second place* as it
had vent at their eyes. The Text says, They wept: twice had Paul made mention
of his tears. Serving the Lord with all humility of mind, and with many tears;
and remember (says he) that for the space of three years, I ceased not to warn
every one night and day with tears. Now therefore they come in with their
tears, he powered out his prayers, and they now power out their tears: sad men
(you must needs think) they were Sermon-while and prayer-while, now they cannot
contein, a torrent of tears gushes out of their eyes, they wept: and this
likewise showed their love. Paul proves his love to the Corinthians, by this
very argument, Out of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote unto you
with many tears, 2 Cor. 2.4.
then it follows, that ye might know the abundant love which I have toward
you. Our Savior is said to weep when he stood over Lazarus grave; Jesus wept,
then said the Jews, Joh. 11.36.
see how he loved him! So, any man might see love in these tears; its evident
they loved him, by their weeping thus for him. But this was a bitter weeping,
this weeping of theirs; there is more to be said of it: Consider these four
things in the Text: the Generality, the Excess, the Place, and the Cause of
their weeping: First,

The 1. Generality of it; They all wept. 2. Excess of their weeping, or depth
of their sorrow; Wept sore. 3. Place, where; On Paul's neck. 4. Cause, why;
Because they should see his face no more


Of these in order.

all; not some, but all. Paul had warnd every one of them with tears, All wept.
his love has broken their hearts, now out fly their tears; every one has
tears now at command for him. I know not well what to say to it, how this
should come to pass, unless as it fares with us, that our eyes do often water,
when we look upon watery eyes: so its likely here, that one man's tears drew on
another: Humanitatis refugit affectum qui dolorem non sequitur alienum
Cassiodor. p. 374. Romans 12.15.
Humane affection makes us follow other men in their sorrow, and to weep with
them that weep. But what ever the cause was, certain it is, that tears stood in
every man's eyes, the Text reports it for a general weeping. And we cannot but
think, that some of them were naturally men of harder constitutions, dryer
bodies then the rest: but grace is stronger then nature, for the hardest heart
now relents, the driest body now yields tears. All wept.

2. Wept sore.
They wept sore. It had been much if every one had wept, though never so
little: had he only watered his eyes, or let fall one tear, it had been much:
here was more, they all wept; yea, and they wept sore: their sorrow therefore
must needs be great. Some say, Lachryma, quasi lacerrima, a lacerando, Camerar.
Cent. 102.
because tears are bred of a laceration of the spirit: and why may not the
English word tears have the like Etymology, from tearing of the heart?
certainly these were tearing tears, renting, as it were, and tearing the very
hearts of the Ephesians; but the original word signifies more then tears,
(...).
tears and throbs, such as use to be the pain of a woman in her travel. Paul
had been in travel with them, they are now in travel with him; they cry and
weep, and take on without measure: Great was that love that drew out such
abundance of tears.

were all one, as to go about to take away meekness from the Lamb, Evangelium
non tollit, sed vere regit naturales affectus. Beza in loc. Vid. Lactant, p.
478.481.
fierceness from the Lion, fear from the Hare; sooner may ye kill these
creatures, then take away these affections from them: even so it is with man.
But the Peripateticks allow affections to be in us, but, modice ac temperate;
they are Lactantius his words: We must rejoice, say they, but not much; grieve,
but not much: which is as if they had said. That a man must always go fair and
softly, but never run; whereas we know, that he that goes foot-pace, may go
wrong; and a man that runs as fast as his legs will carry him, may keep the
right way: So affections, if set right, though violent, are not to be
condemned. I can tell you of a sorrow, the least measure whereof is sinful: I
can instance again in a sorrow, which being excessive, deserves no blame: Such
was this of the Ephesians, They wept sore.

Paul's neck. On Paul's neck.
It is said of Joash, that he wept over the face of Elisha as he say a dying: 2
King. 13.14. Genesis 45.14.
so Joseph and Benjamin wept one upon another, when they met together in Egypt,
Joseph wept on Benjamins neck and Benjamin wept upon Joseph's neck: so here,
they wept on Paul's neck. But had they no where else to weep? I answer, this was
the fittest place they could choose, and that for these reasons.

First, Reason 1. A more nihil velocius, nihil acutius, nihil subtilius: ideo
quiescere nequit donec in intimum dilecti pectus descendat. Comp. spirit. doct.
182.
it is the desire of lovers, to express their affections in presence of those
they love: for it is the nature of love to go forth, and embrace the object
wherewith it is delighted, therefore called an affection of union, because it
unites and knits two together, and so makes them as it were, one. Therefore one
says thus, There Is nothing so acute, so quick, so peircing as love is; which
cannot rest, till it be got into the very heart of its beloved.

Again, Reason 2. Psalm. 119.159.
Tears are testimonies of our love: now friends desire nothing more, then to
have their love taken notice of. Consider (says David) how I love thy law: So
a man is not content to love his friend, but he must have his friend consider
it, and know he loves him; he comes to him with a Testentur hae lachrymae, let
these tears be testimonials of my love to you: for we may not think all that's
done openly, to be done hypocritically: The saying is, He grieves with a
witness, that grieves without a witness; yet our grief may be true, Ille
dolet vere qui sine test dolet.
though it have a witness. Indeed, Hypocrisy may and does often mingle it self;
yet you see a man may weep openly in the presence of his friend, yet those
tears be without out hypocrisy. When Saul purposed to kill David, 1 Samuel 22 41.
Jonathan went out to meet him in the fields, and they kissed one another, and
wept one with another: surely it was to testify that unfeigned love they had
one to another, therefore they vent their grief into one another bosom, and
lay their tears as nigh one another heart as they can. So the Ephesians, they
might have wept at home, and not here in Paul's presence; but then they had lost
a testimony of their love, but that may not be: they love him, and he must see
they love him, therefore come they up to him as close as they can, and weep
upon his very neck: That's a second reason.

Let a mother receive news of the death of her child, what is the usual
complaint in this case? Oh, had I been with my poor child, to have kissed it, to
have wept upon it, before God took it away; it would have eased my heart:
neither her kisses, nor her tears could do her child good; but they would have
done her good, would have been as good as meat and drink to her. Therefore
says Seneca: Excidunt retinentibus lachrymae, and animum profusae levant. Sen.
Epist. 445. Sedatur lachrymis, egeriturque dolor. Ovid. de trist.
Tears will out sometimes whether we will or no, and when they are gone, the
oppressed heart finds ease. Our Savior Christ loved Lazarus, and he wept for
Lazarus being dead: but where think you was it? at his grave: when they showed
him where he lay, Jesus wept; and he took a journey to come and weep there.
Mary she also wept, and it was thought by the Jews, Joh. 11.35, 36.
to be at the grave too: for when she rose up hastily and went out, they said
it was to weep at the Sepulcher: they comforted her in the house, now they
thought she was gone to comfort her self at the grave: Verse. 19.31.
as if it had done her good, to lay her tears near her brother Lazarus. I will
draw one spiritual meditation from this point.

Mary, to wash his feet with our tears! she came into the house, Luc. 7 37.
and stood at his feet weeping, and washing his feet with tears: her heart was
full, and she found no comfort till she came to Christ, to weep in his
presence: then she heard that joyful sentence, thy sins are forgiven thee:
so that her tears, as they washed the dust from Christ's feet; so through the
mercy of God, they washed away sin from her soul: so if we go to Christ, and
wash his feet with our tears of Repentance; he will wash both us and our
repentance in his own blood, and so cleanse us from all our sins. When we
offer up our prayers, if we then let fall a shower of tears at his feet, this
rain being fallen, there will be fair weather in our souls. Therefore we see
what a comfort it was to the Prophet David, that he could power out his tears
before God, and that God should take notice of his weeping. Psalm. 6.8.
Lachrymae pondera vocis habent.
The Lord (says he) has heard the voice of my weeping. But to return where I
was, They wept upon Paul's neck that was the place. Consider withal the manner
of it, falling upon his neck, so says the Text, They all wept sore, and fell
upon his neck. But was that good manners, all to fall upon him thus? Indeed
love loves sometimes to be unmannerly: When Christ after he was risen appeared
to Mary, she would fain have been falling upon him, and touching him; but hands
off (says Christ) Touch me not: Love made her forget duty. So the Shunamite
coming to the Prophet Elisha, caught him by the feet, insomuch that Gehezi
thought it a saucy part of her, 2 King. 4.27.
to hold his Master in that manner, therefore went and shoved her away: Oh,
says Elisha, let her alone, for her soul is vexed within her, that which she
did, she did it out of the abundance of her affection; therefore the Prophet
knew how to bear with her: Love you see made her likewise forget manners.

1 Cor. 13.5.
That love does not behave it self unseemly or unmannerly? It Is true.

(...)
Therefore I answer, It is a very seemly unseemlinesse, and (if I may so speak)
mannerly unmannerlinesse, that comes from love; love puts a grace upon
gestures, otherwise undecent; speeches, otherwise rude. When a Pagan offered
water to King Artaxerxes in the hollow of his hand, it was so well accepted,
because he did it out of love, Drexel. recta. intent. epist. Nemo succenset
amanti. Pro. 23.26.
that he put it into a vial of Gold: We know not how to be angry with him that
does any thing to us out of love: if a man does truly love me, I regard not his
tongue, but his heart. God says, Give me thy heart: That's accepted with him,
though something be wanting in the outward man, but the outward man cannot
please without the heart. So here, If I have a man's heart, whatsoever failing
there may be outwardly, I construe it but as an error of love: Neque salsum
neque suave esse potest quicquam ubi amor non admiseetur.
but without the heart, all shows and formalities are nothing worth. If a man
love me, and that from his heart, it being with me and for me; what if his
carriage be not so courtly, nor his words so starcht and set out as other men's?
I can see no indecorum in that gesture, no soloecisme in that speech that comes
from love.

Paul's neck: and the manner of it, ruentes in collum Pauli, they fell upon his
neck, and wept there. Because they should see his face no more. Verse 25. As Job
speaks, the ey of him that has seen me shall see me no more Job 7.8.
The fourth thing propounded concerning this weeping was. The cause of it. Paul
had told them that they should see his face no more, Behold I go bound to
Jerusalem, and I know not what afflictions I may live to see there; but this I
know, that these eyes shall never see you more, nor your eyes see me any more:
Hinc ille lachrymae, this was the cause of their weeping. Paul had said,
grievous wolves shall come in among you, and he had said, I am pure from the
blood of all men: Verse. 29.26. A worull change instead of the face of an
Apostle, to see the face of a wolf.
terrible sayings these, enough to make sad their hearts: but that which
grieved them most, and put them into the greatest agony, was this saying of
his, Ye shall see my face no more; as if they had replied and said, Oh blessed
Paul, who can refrain tears that hears such words as these! shall we see thy
face no more! give us leave then to weep, 1 Samuel, 30.4.
till we can weep no more: thou have often bedewed thy cheeks with tears for us,
suffer us now to shed tears for thee. They wept most of all for the words which
he spoke, that they should see his face no more: that saying was like a Bucket
let down into the bottom of their hearts, which drew up such adundance of
tears: They wept sore. Their sorrow was great, as you have heard, and no
marvel, you see here they had great cause: had there been hopes of seeing him
again, the weather would soon have cleard, and their tears dried up; but no
seeing of him after this, and that went to their hearts. When our Savior left
his Disciples, Be not sorrowful, Joh. 16.22.
says he, for I will see you again: but Paul here tells them flatly, they
should see him no more; and how could their eyes choose but water in beholding
him now, whom they should never behold more. It was one of Augustines three
wishes, that he might hear Paul in a Pulpit: no marvel then if these wept,
that heard him so often, but now should never see, nor hear him more! how are
their eyes now fixed upon that face, that was never to be seen more after this!
In some sense indeed they would see him the ofter, for that face that now began
to disappear, being withdrawn from the sight of their bodies, would
questionless be the ofter presented to the eyes of their minds: yet they
cannot endure to hear of his bodily absence.

Omnes dolores leves praeterquam. Joh. 16.6. Malvezzi David. perfec. 132.
then to have his friend taken from him. When Christ began but to speak of
going away, how sad were his Disciples! Because I have said these things,
sorrow has filled your hearts. Friendship (says Malvezzi) is an union of two
souls in one body, which in a sort inform it; if not truly, yet virtually; and
as the soul is grieved to depart out of an earthly body which it informed, so
likewise to depart from another soul which she loved. Hence it was that
Augustine tells us, August. confess.
that when his friend Alipius was dead, he thought one half of himself gone. So
Paul here, and his Ephesians, It grieved them (as ye heard) that he was going
from them; and we must think it grieved him too, to tell them, that he must
leave them: and therefore, if you mark, you shall see how mournfully, as it
were, he utters those words, I go bound -- and now behold -- ye shall see my
face no more: he brings it out with a kind of sigh -- And now behold, etc. as
it grieved them to hear it; so himself no less to speak it. Nothing then more
grievous to friends, then parting.

Paul's departure; see then here the loss of Gods Ministers, what a loss it
is: we are to sorrow most of all for that. Loss of houses, lands, goods, is
not so great as this: Ministers, though they be a burden to some, and many
ungrateful wretches cry, a fair riddance; yet Gods children know what a loss
they sustain when they are taken away. When Eudoxia the Empress took a spleen
against Chrysostom, (...) Joh. exuli Cyriaco Epise. to. 5. ep. 3. p. 287.
History of the Church of Scotland. 214.
and banish him, the people gathered to him weeping, and saying: It were better
the Sun left shining, then the golden mouth of Chrysostom be stopped from
preaching. When John Knox was called into Scotland, being to leave his flock at
Geneva, This (says he) to worldly-wise-men, may appear a small matter, but to
me it was and is such, that more wordly substance, then I will express, could
not have caused me willingly to behold the eyes of so many grave men weeping at
once for my cause, as I did, in taking my last good night from them. Acts and
Monuments. 1387.
And Doctor Tailor when he went through Hadley to be burnt, the people stood
weeping in the streets, pointing to him, and saying, There goes our good
Shepherd, what shall we poor scattered lambs do? this therefore is a heavy
case.

of a Minister so grievous; what then is the absence of Christ, when he shall
say, Ye shall see my face no more? we should think that the heaviest saying
that ever was heard, and we should be most earnest in our Hoe unum perdere
metuamus aeternum Dei aspectum; illudque assidue quisque pro se roget, ne
projicias me a facie tua. Psalm. 51.13. faciem tuam domine requiram Psalm 27.8
Ostende mihi faciem tuam demine, Exodus 33.13. Pie domine modicum illud vocas,
ob modicum immodicum.
prayers, that this may never be: that he would never cast us out of his
presence, or hide his face from us, for then what a sad and desolate condition
are we in! for if one Minister die, or go away, we can get another; or if we
lose one friend, we can take delight and comfort in another: but what comfort
can a man have, when the Comforter himself is gone? Hence it is that when
Christ shall withdraw himself a little from the soul of a Christian, he thinks
every day seven years, till he return: as Bernard upon those words; Yet a
little while and ye shall not see me; Oh Lord, call thou that a little
while? Christ indeed calls it so, but a Christian thinks it long: as David,
Return, O Lord, how long? and How long will thou forget me, O Lord, for ever?
Psa. 6.3.13.1. Psalm. 30.5.
In another place he could tell us, his anger indures but a moment: now that
moment seems eternity: How long -- for ever? Thus the Church in the
Lamentations complains and bewails her sad condition; For this I weep, mine eye
runs down with water, Lameux. 1.16.
because the Comforter that should relieve my soul, is far from me. Wherefore
if you have the presence of Christ, and of his Holy Spirit, the counsel I give
is this, that ye would labor to keep it; Mane nobiscum Domine, Luke 24.29.
say as the Disciples at Emmaus, Lord stay with us: but if he have absented
himself, up and seek him with tears: Tears indeed could not bring back Paul;
but it is possible for a penitent by his prayers and tears to regain the
presence of Christ.

And so much for the second act of their love, Their weeping; enlarged by four
remarkable circumstances out of my Text: the Generality of it, all wept; the
Excess, wept sore; the Place, Paul's neck; and the Cause why, because they
should see his face no more; that filld their hearts with grief, and made them
cry Loath to depart. As one friend holds another by the hand, being sorry that
he must forsake him: or as she said to her husband going into exile, Husband,
we will go together, we will live together, Simul hine fimul ibimus ambo, se
sequar and conjux exulis, exulero. Ovid. de trist.
and we will die together, an exiled man, and an exiled wife together: So do
these here, haerent in amplexibus, they cling to Paul, they are long in taking
their leaves, they know not how to bid him adieu -- But friends (we say) must
part. Come we therefore to the last act of their love, testified by their feet:
Their lips, their eyes have done their part, now let us see what their feet do;
they walk with him, they conduct, and bring him on his way: and how far? as far
as they could, till they came to the Ship. They accompanied him to the ship.
They accompanied him to the ship.
Chrysostom will have to be another act of their love, So greatly (says he)
did they love him, and so diversely were they affected toward him, that they
will on their way with him, Chrysostom. in locum.
and see him Shipped, before they part. It was a frequent custom among the
Primitive Christians, when their friends were going from them, to conduct them,
and bring them forward on their way, Secundum indicatos locorum situs
intervallum fuit illud inter Ephesum, atque Miletum ad stadia circiter 400,
quae efficient prope 50 millia passuum. Camer, in locum. Mat. 5.41.
as you may see by these texts, Romans 15.24. 1 Cor. 16.6. 1 John ver. 6. So here
the Ephesians do it to S. Paul: he sends for them from Ephesus to Miletus, and
there was love in that; in coming so far at his request, a matter of fifty
miles from their own houses, but they do not leave him here, they will on
further yet, till they come to the Ship. They observe that of our Savior, If a
man desire thee to go amile, go with him twain. When Elisha had notice that his
master was to be taken from him, he went with him all the way from Gilgal to
Bethel, from Bethel to Jericho, 2 King. 2.1.
and from Jericho to Jordan, and beyond Jordan, and then Eliah was suddenly
taken from him, and he saw him no more: but ye see, he went with him as far as
he could: so do the Ephesians here with Paul, they went with him as far as
they could, from Ephesus they come and meet him at Miletus, from Miletus they
go along with him to the ship, and when they could accompany him no longer by
land, they accompanied him by water so far as their eyes could reach.

2 Timothy 1.17.
Onesiphorus loved Paul, and this made him traverse the streets of Rome, and
never give over, till he had found him, and ministered to his necessities. The
Apostle calls it, 1 These. 1.3. Diligere.
The labor of love: and in the Latine-tongue, Love and Diligence come both
from the same root, to show that love is diligent. But alas, its key-cold, very
remiss, and (I may say) negligent in these days: our eyes cannot drop, nor
shed one tear for the miseries of the Saints: our hands like Jeroboams are
shrunk and dried up, we cannot stretch them forth to show mercy to the poor:
our feet lame, and cannot walk to do a poor man good: only we wagg our
tongues, saying, alack poor man, God help thee, and I am sorry I can do thee
no good, etc. call you this love? no, it deserves not the name: love is a
stirring affection. Do thou indeed love a good man? it will both move thy
lips, water thy eyes, and set feet also a walking to do him good.

Paul, and are now come to send him forth, and to be delivered of him with
sorrow, now therefore their pangs were greatest. They follow him to the ship,
as men follow the bear, when they bury their friends: Paul was now as a dead
man, never to be seen more of them; therefore now sure, their tears flowed,
they wept: and as Christ said of Mary's anointing his feet, they did it for his
burial; they wept before, Mat. 26.12. Quae verba cum audiisset multo quam
antea magis illachrymans etc. Chrysostom. de sacerd. Act. 21.1. 2 Cor. 11.26.
they did not give over now at the ship, now they begin afresh, one sea runs
into another, a sea of tears into a sea of waters: as the Israelites mingled
their tears with the waters of Babylon: so here a river of tears gliding
through their eyes, takes its course, and runs into the sea of Miletus; they
bring him to the ship, and there testify their love with new embraces: so that
well does the Evangelist say in the next verse, When we were gotten from them:
much ado it seems he had to get from them: they would have kept him still, had
he not broken from them by a kind of violence; Psalm. 56.9. Migrationes meas,
vel fugas meas, etc. quasi dicat. Tu scis domine quod multis annis sum vagus
homo, and profugus, nec usquam datur mihi quies. vid. Vatabl. in locum.
When we were gotten from them, we lanched forth. So that by all this you see
what affection people ought to bear to those whom God has set over them. Love
to Gods Ministers, when it takes in the hearts of a people, is without bounds,
without limits.

Thirdly, you may hence likewise take occasion to consider the mutable estate
of the Saints in this life; they bring him to the sea, set him a shipboard,
and there leave him; he lanches into the deep, and they return home with sorrow
to their houses: Psalm. 102.6.109.23.
he is now entering into his perils by sea, and they are as much distressed at
land. Such is the estate of Gods children here, full of miseries, full of
changes, sometimes their estates sink, sometimes friends, sometimes their
teachers are taken from them: thus like waves of the him-sea, one affliction
comes upon the neck of another. David says, Thou tellest my flittings, David
cum subinde mutaret latebras comparat se aviculae hinc inde volitanti, and
oberranti, cui nusquam nidulari conceditur. Bucol. chron. 425. 1 Cor. 4.11.
or wanderings: and compares himself to a Pelican of the wilderness, to the
Locust or Grasshopper, the Grasshopper wanders and hops from grass to grass,
from flower to flower: so do we in this world, shift and remove from place to
place, and have here no certain dwelling place, we never continue in one stay,
nor find any rest here, till we arrive at the haven of happiness.

They accompanied him to the ship. We have now set Paul to Ship, and our selves
a shore: I am come to the end of my Text, I have done with that. Only give me
leave by way of general Application, to commend to you two or three duties,
such as I conceive, are both proper to the matter that has been delivered, and
the present occasion. The title of the 45. Psalm, is, A Song of loves: so
might the title of this Text be, which I have opened, a Text of love; for
therein you have seen Paul's love to his Ephesians, and the return of their love
to him: The first duty therefore I would commend to you, is this of Love; but
such a love as my Text commends, that is, operative. When you look upon the
Ephesians; you see that their lips, eyes, feet, spoke nothing but love: So that
devout Mary Magdalen, our Savior says of her, That she loved much; but how
did it appear? (if it were the same Mary spoken of afterward) every member
almost of her body showed it, her eyes in weeping; feet, in carrying her so
early to the Sepulcher, to seek him whom her soul loved; her tongue, saying,
They have taken away my Lord: and how can we think we love Christ, or our
brethren, if neither our feet, eyes, nor tongues express it!



Mary, make both our tongues, our eyes, our feet, and our hands also witnesses
of our love; our tongues, in warning, reproving, comforting: our eyes, in
weeping in secret for the sins of others, and for the miseries of Gods people:
if this heavenly fire of love be once kindled in our hearts, our eyes as
Limbecks will be sometimes dropping and distilling tears. Again, our feet in
carrying us to the house of God, Our feet (says David) shall stand there;
Psalm. 122.2.
and in carrying us to the beds of the sick to visit them; and lastly, our
hands in giving to the necessities of the Saints: This love of the hand I would
especially commend to you that are rich, and have wherewithal to do good. God
loved the world, and gave his son: think of that, Joh. 3.16.
his love was a giving love: so should yours be: remember the words of the Lord
Jesus, how he said, It is more blessed to give, then to receive; (they are the
words immediately preceding my Text,) for, the former binds others to us; by
the latter we become bound and obliged: Vid. Combis compend theo. p. 444.
the former is a man's own virtuous act, and the former goes away with a reward
from God; therefore more blessed. I beseech you therefore, suffer this word of
exhortation, be ready to distribute, willing to communicate, so shall you make
to your selves a glorious way to heaven. He that has so often stood, and spoken
to you out of this place, were he now here to speak, and take his leave; what
duty would he rather commend to you, then this? Cranmer, a Martyr in Queen
Mary's days, as he stood upon a Scaffold in Paul's, immediately before he went
to the stake to be burnt, commended three sentences of Gods word, to the rich
Citizens that were about him: the first was this; Luke 18.24.
How hardly shall they that have riches, enter into the Kingdom of God! a hard
saying (says he) but he that spoke it, is the God of truth. The second, Who so
has this worlds good, and sees his brother in want, 1 John 3.17.
and shuts his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God
in him? And the third sentence was, Jam. 5.1.
Go to now ye rich men, weep and howl, for the miseries that shall come upon
you. This was all his farwell-Sermon, to desire them to think of these Textes,
when he was gone: So the Apostle Paul here, parting with the Ephesians, leaves
this memento behind him; (...). Verse 33.
support the weak, remember the poor; and mark how he brings it in, I have
showed you all things, how that ye ought to do thus, that is, to remember the
poor, and to support, or shore up the weak. He tells them he had showed them
all things, yet mentions but one thing, charity to the poor: for that indeed
is instar omnium, the end of all our preaching, and the end of all your hearing
too: charity is the sum and perfection of all. I have stayed the longer upon
this, being so necessary a duty; and the Text I have opened, gave just occasion
to mind you of it. I will be briefer in the rest.

John, to the Church of Thyatira, That which ye have already hold fast: Rev.
2.25.
great pains has been taked amongst you, let it not be like water spilt on the
ground: Blessed (says Christ) are such as hear the word, and keep it: Luc.
11.28.
not they that only hear, but they that hear, and keep: you have often heard the
word from his mouth, now therefore hold it fast, keep it. The seed has been
sown amongst you, now the Lord water it with the dew of his grace, that it may
grow, and be fruitful.

Paul; and Paul, his Ephesians; and after a short time, all of us leave this
world. Oh therefore let our hearts be, where our treasure is, where no change
of weather shall alter us: Ego ipse, dum loquor mutari ista mutatus sum, etc.
Senec, epist. 330.
here are changes without, and changes within: we are not the same in our age,
that we were in our youth: nor to day, what we were two or three days ago:
Joh. 14.2. Heb. 12.28.
here we remove from place to place: above are mansions, A kingdom that cannot
be shaken.

Paul says of the Thessalonians whom he had won to God, and who were a comfort
to him in his life, 1 These. 2.19.
that at the presence of Christ, at his coming, they should be his glory, and
joy, and crown of rejoicing: that is, he should take far more comfort in them,
then ever he had done in this world. The like he says of the Corinthians: We
are your rejoicing, 1 Cor. 1.4.
and ye ours, in the day of the Lord Jesus. Think of it beloved, think what a
happy meeting, and what a happy greeting it will be, when Ministers and people
shall come together, and greet one another in this manner, we are your
rejoicing, and ye ours; Isa. 8.18.
When Ministers shall say, Here am I, Lord, and the people whom thou have given
me: and they shall answer, Here are we, Lord, and he to whom thou have given
us, by whom thou have converted us. When Ministers shall turn, and speak thus
to their converts, Ye are our glory and our joy: and they shall reply and say,
and ye have been our faithful guides, that have brought us into these joys;
Then there shall be no taking ship, or horse to part any more: but we shall
continue together, enjoying a heavenly communion one with another, and
following the Lamb wheresoever he goes.

FINIS.

