LINGVA TESTIVM: WHEREIN MONARCHY IS PROVED, 1. To be Jure Divino. 2. To be
successive in the Church (except in time of a National desertion) from Adam
until Christ. 3. That Monarchy is the absolute true Government under the
Gospel. 4. That immediately after extraordinary Gifts in the Church ceased, God
raised up a Monarch for to defend the Church. 5. That Christian Monarchs are
one of the witnesses spoken of Rev. 11. 6. That England is the place from
whence God fetched the first witness of this kind. 7. England was the place
whither the Witnesses, ( viz. godly Magistracy and Ministry) never drove by
Antichrist.
Where is Proved, First, that there has been a visible Magistracy, (though in
sackcloth,) these 1260. years in England. Secondly, That this Magistracy in
all Ages (since Antichrists being visible) has witnessed for Christ against
Antichrist. Thirdly, That the late King who was cut off with the Axe, was the
lawful successor of Gods witnesses, who for these 1260. years have been
Witnesses in Sackcloth for Christ against Antichrist, whereby it is evident that
he is the slain Witness that finished his Testimony. Fourthly, That his Son
the K. of Scotland who is the Witness expected 3. years and an half after the
slaying of (the Witnesses to rise again) is by an unquestionable title Emperor
of Rome, and that Prince expected to be the ruin of the Antichristian Monarchy
of Rome.


Amongst these things are proved that the time of the calling of the Jews, the
fall of Antichrist, and the ruin of the Beast of the Earth is at hand, Where
in you have the hard places of Mat. 24, and Rev. 17. explained with several
other hard Texts: Together with a description of the last Enemies which slay
the Witnesses, whereby it is evident that England is the place where the
Witnesses are slain, and no place else.

Written by Testis-Mundus Catholicus, In the year of the Beasts of the Earth's
reign, 1651.

READER:
I Have taken upon me one of the hardest Taskes this day in the World, and who
am I that undertake it? but the weakest that ever traveled in this high way. I
find Giants in learning, stumbling, falling, straggling, and quite tired in this
way: many mighty men durst never adventure to put foot therein, and few that
ever entered it can say they came to their journies end; there was still a pus
ultra which they all acknowledged.

This only was my encouragement to enter into this sacred Thicket of Divine
Mysteries, that that Divine Essence which gave it to the world, delights to
reveal it to Babes and Sucklings in the world. I am sure my Lord and Master
the King of Heaven and Earth delights to have it so; The great God usually
magnifies his grace this way, by doing great things by the weakest means, He
made a poor, weak, despised Maid, alone, to bring forth the mighty Monarch of
Heaven and Earth.

Indeed, in this great work I have been, (as the blessed Virgin) both (...)
alone. Whiles I was big of what I have here brought forth in both these
Tracts, I was enforced (like Elizabeth) to hide my self; for so grievous were
the thrumps and kicks of my friends against it; whiles I went in pain of it,
that I could not endure them, and now it is born, the Herod's of the times do
seek its life. I must confess it goes adroad in a homely dress, yet it is
never the less, nor never the worse truth. The Harp is David's Harp, though the
Method and the Style (which are as the strings and the fingers) are mine; which
I could heartily wish were better. The rudeness of them I do acknowledge may
give occasion to my enemies to make me the morrall of Lucians Fable who
(deriding illiterate sauce-boxes) tells us of a Supercilious Asses whose
aspiring mind (looking at least five Sphere above his reach) made his rude
fingers itch to be playing on Orpheus his Harp, snatching it therefore from
Apollo to whom 'twas dedicated, to work he went, and made therewith such an
hideous noise, that instead of making wild Beasts tame (as Orpheus was wont)
he made the tame Dogs of the Town mad, who ran upon him and tore him in
pieces.

I do not desire to make the morrall of this Fable, let if I must, because my
enemies will have it so, if I make such harsh music of that Sacred Harp the
Bible, that I inrage the Dogs of this age against me, but my enemies remember
that my unskilful fingers make harsh music only in Dogs ears; and however,
the harp I play upon is still the same, and none but Dogs thereat will be
enraged.

I confess of all Instruments this of Sigionoth is the hardest, and I may
truly say that many excellent Musicians (otherwise) have made such harsh
music on this Instrument, that the Romish Dogs have had to Just a cause to
bark at them; but as for the Romish party I fear them not, because I am sure
they cannot come at me for their own Authors, they must thrust them through to
touch me, and so must the Independents likewise: so that I have the least cause
of any man to fear either of them; and as for others, I expect by the Law of
gratitude fair dealing at their hands: if it be asked why this Preface is made
a book distinct and not joined to [Manus Testium] as it ought. I answer, 1.
It Is not my fault but theirs that print it, these are times of separation. 2. I
committed them to several hands, that if one miscarried, the other might
possibly have safe arivall; and if either, there might be light enough in that
alone to tell the the world who the witnesses are, where they shall be slain,
when they shall be slain, and who shall slay them, and when and where he shall
be overcome that slayes them; For this cause have I handled many things in this
Preface which I have touched on in the Book, and touched many things here which
I have handled in the Book; that (in this Tract I have handled more clearly)
which I lest obscurely [through over much brevity] in the Book, especially that
of Monarchy, and that of the Beast which slayes the witnesses in Rev. 17. where
I have endeavored to answer all the hard questions in that Chapter which is
the mystery of the Revelations, as yet to me never by any one fully and
clearly opened.

I have not studied loftiness but plainness of speech in these Tracts, I have
not (as most Scholars do) eyed only Scholars, but herein (playing the
Jesuit of our times) I have eyed the Vulgar ^ort most, and writ to their
capacities, that so (counter-workking the Jesuit of our times) I might
undeceive poor misled souls (who are stung with those Jesuitical Independent
Scorpions) and bring them to the knowledge of the true Church, a lawful
Magistracy and ministry, and discover to them the true Antichrist. For this
cause (reader) do I run a corporal hazard on purpose to save thy soul
harmless by pulling thee by timely repentance out of Babylon that is now
falling. I beseech the therefore since I have not counted my pains, purse,
person nor life to much too prepare it and present it to thee, do not think
thy pains to much to read it, read it as I writ it with much diligence and
fervent prayer, and I pray God grant that it may be so effectual by the
operation of the Holy Ghost upon all that read it, that the drooping feebl
soul may be encouraged, the blind enlightened, and the obstinate so terrified,
that the Devils kingdom may be shaken by it Antichrists kingdom may be
confounded by it, and the Beast of the earth who supports them both may be
speedily and utterly ruined by it: this is the daily and hourly prayer of him
who studies nothing more then thy spiritual welfare.

The Author to his Book.
MY little book (I only call thee mine,
because in these dark times I Am only thine)
Go quickly through the world, and boldly say,
that mighty Monark's coming to destroy
The church her enemies; let proud Rome know
from thee she is near her last great overthrow;
And tell the earth-Beast when the seven Trump' sounds,
his death's designd: that Trump' his power confounds.
Then let the Dragon also understand,
Christ's coming, and his chaining up's at hand
And let the house of Austria know, and Spain.
Their sun shall set, and never rise again
This message don, (my Book) go to the Jews,
and with a cheerful voice proclaim this news
Our Lord is their Messiah, and their eyes
shall weep ore him whom now they do despise.
Their Native King our Lord, shall by his hand
restore the twelve Tribes to their Native land.
They shall put eye to eye, Isay 58. 8.
that is, shall see
their Prophets and the Apostles to agree.
This don, go to the Gentiles Church which lies,
this day o'rewhelmed with deep Calamities:
Comfort her thus, tell her the Scriptures say,
her witnesses shall rise that Beast to slay,
In whose destruction the grand power of all
the three last Gospel Enemies shall fall,
Tell her this earth-Beast reigns, this hours that day
which slayes her witnesses, the Scriptures say.
Bid her not fear, those Offices now slain
in Church and State shall shortly rise again.
Whose glorious rising shall the world affright
and slay this earth-Beast with his men of might.
Then shall the Vialls run, Gods wrath shall rise
and ruin his three last Grand enemies.
Let then that Northern Kingdom understand
by this, it is day of triumph is at hand.
It Is now distressed Ministers and King
shall mourn no more, but Hallalu-jahs sing.
That church no more her sackcloth shall put on,
she shall be clothed with salvation.
Her King shall Reign in righteousness, and make
Gods enemies throughout the world to quake.
He shall be nursing father to the Jews,
and shall no acts of grace to them refuse
They shall flock in to him, he shall destroy
their foes, that bard them from Salvations way.
Immediately before this come to pass
her troubles shall be such as never was.
The prefixed symptoms of this day must be
her low State and her foes prospertie.
Hence it is this great days prophecies allude
to each great Church deliverance since the flood
She sings the Song of Moses and the Lamb;
'cause out of such deep misery she came.
Lift up thine eyes (O Zion) then, and see,
in this great day thy foretold Enemy. Dan. 7. 25.

Three years and half thine enemy must rage
ore thee, by war which he with thee does wage.
One thousand two hundred sixty days just
O LaVer Us CroMweLL's name makes, who must
50 5 5 100 1000 50. 50
D. 7. 25.
Three years and an half by his D. 11. 38
sword-power reign;
which is that time the Rev. 11. 9
witnesses lie slain.
Jf (who he slayes) by ought demanded be,
it is Kingly Offfce, and the Ministry
This Beast's that Da. 7. 8. 9
little horn that pulls away
three horns ot'h ten him R. 19. 10. 20.
Christ comes to destroy.
This Beasts R. 13. 13. 14.
deceitful, perjured, base, Love's lies,
and bears Re. 17. 7.
up Rome with all her blasphemies,
This is that enemy which does divide
Mount Za. 14. 4. 7
Olvet, and makes the breach so wide
Twixt North and South, and makes one day like night,
but when its evening comes, it shall be light,
That is; this Beast in Scotland shall rage there
but one prophetique day, that is, one year
Jn'th' evening of which year it shall be light Da. 11. 45.

toth' Church, and to this Beast Eternal night.
This beast betwixt
the seas in Scotland must
incamp, and there be scattered as the dust.
Share then my book twixt Zions friends and foes,
their unexpected lots of joys and woes.
Tell Zion now in the dust full fraught with sorrow,
her bloody tears shall bring forth joys to morrow.
Haste then toth' Scots, tell them the prophets say,
their war is Christ's and he will give them the day.
And this shall be the sign even this alone,
when the enemy seems most strong, they most undone.
Reader, What is deficient in this, thou shall find supplied in Manus Testium.



THe method of Gods afflicting providence in the Church since the Creation, is
worthy the observation of all; but more especially of him who undertakes to
interpret the Holy Scriptures.

The method of God in his acts of providence toward his Church are:

1. To bring them exceeding low before he deliver them.

2. After he has delivered them from their great troubles, and put them in a
hopeful way of peace, for ends best known to himself, he oftentimes dashes
their hopes, and darkens the way by sad and heavy afflictions: As the former is
undeniable, so the latter is clear in the Scriptures. See this verified in
Jacob, the Father of the twelve Patriarchs; Jacob being newly gotten from a
Heardmaster, and passed the River with his wifes and substance, he resolved to
go into the Promised Land: when he was got seven days journey (in all
probability, out of Labans reach) on a sudden the storm rises, Laban pursues
him with his forces, and Esau prepares to stop him in his flight with 400 men;
so that we may see here Jacob, like Christ on the Cross, a miserable object
betwixt two Thieves. To this, Jeremiah alludes, when he prophesies of the great
troubles of the Church, immediately before the conversion of the twelve Tribes,
He calls it the time of Jacob's trouble, none has bin like it. So likewise
when the Church was delivered from Egypt's Bondage, and all their Enemies
drowned; and when they had seen and tasted of the goodness of the Lord from
Heaven, in raining Manna, and of the sweet and spiritual love tokens of God
from Mount Sina, when God had given them Laws and Ordinances, and began a
glorious Reformation; and when they were going into Canaan, then rises Corah,
Datha^, and Abiran, against the Witnesses, Moses and Aaron; and then the people
rebel, and that glorious Sun of a Reformation went retrogade many thousand of
degrees by Asa's Dial.

So likewise David, when he went to fetch the Ark home, he went forth like his
son Solomon's ships for gold, with great pomp; but came home broken and
tottered with loss.

He went with the Priests and the people to fetch the Ark to Jerusalem its
resting place; he made a new Cart and Wheels, and prepared the Beasts to draw
it; he got the Ark upon the Cart, and the Beasts did draw it toward Jerusalem:
but in the way, what an unexpected storm of cross winds rises, the Beasts
stumbled, the Ark tottered, Gods wrath arises; and this stops the Ark that it
came not then to Jerusalem. To this does Ezekiel (Chap. 1.) allude, Where he
seeing in a Vision, that glorious day of the twelve Tribes conversion to Christ
in the last days; immediately before that day, he sees the Gospel-Magistracy
and Ministry, drawing the Ark of a Reformation to his settled place: There the
Magistracy (as in Revel. 4.) is compared to the Beasts which draw the Ark, and
the Ministry to the Wheels full of eyes, which support the Ark. These Ezekiel
saw carrying on a Reformation with much boldness, and through many
difficulties: When the Beasts went, the Wheels went, and they turned not: When
one was lifted, up, the other was lifted up: When the Magistracy went on, the
Ministry went on in a Reformation; but when they stood, they let down their
whings, there was the great stop: the Magistracy was taken away, their whings,
after the war, Ezekiel. 1. 24. were let down: and immediately follows, ver. 25. a
voice from Heaven, which is the same with the seventh Trumpet, Matthew. 24. Rev.
11. Rev. 16. 17, 18. when the great day of the Jews conversion shall begin, and
the great obstruction of their conversion shall be removed: Likewise after the
captivity, that joyful Reformation begun and carried on so successfully, how
did its evening come upon it (as I may say) at noon tide? How was all dashed,
and that happy work retanded on a sudden? And how great a Muntain the Devils
Pioneers raised in Zerubbabels way, Ezra 4. Look we further, and we shall see
the greatest and gloriousest Reformation in the world, retarded in the middle
of it, and in the height of it, even that blessed Reformation, which is the
standing rule of Reformation to the end of the world, that of our Lord Jesus in
the flesh here on Earth, when he had called the Apostles, sent out the seventy,
two by two; and when he had preached, healed, converted many, when his Enemies
thought all the world would follow him, when they sang Hosana to the highest,
and when his Enemies were confounded before him, being unable to gainsay his
truth, when all the Countries round rang of his fame, and came to see him, and
hear his Doctrine, and to be healed, then on a sudden comes Judas, and betrays
him with a kiss: the King is taken and bound, and falsely accused, unjustly
sentenced to death, scourged, buffited, spet on, mocked, carried away to be
crucified: his Disciples fled, he nailed to the Cross, and a spear thrust into
his heart; he taken down from the Cross, carried to the grave, and there seated
in his grave: and thus to the eye of the world was that glorious Reformation
destroyed, the King being cut off, and his Officers dissipated. This
Reformation, though to the eye of the world at that time it was quite put out,
yet it suddenly and unexpectedly rose again, and broke out into greater and
more glorious flames throughout the world then ever: For two Angels in glorious
brightness appear at the grave of the slain Jesus, that Martyr of Martyrs, and
immediately follows a mighty Earthquake, whereat the soldiers that slew him
trembled: the Lord Jesus arose, called together his dispersed and hopeless
disconsolate Disciples, led them to Galilee, and there proclaims his Imperial
Power and Sovereignty, that all the Kingdoms in the world were under his power,
and all the mighty Dominions in Heaven were subject to him: And that those his
Enemies that slew him, might know this, he ascended from Mount Olivet, which
Mountain was on the East of Jerusalem exceeding high, looking directly into
Jerusalem; so that they that slew him in Jerusalem, might plainly see him in
that glorious bright Cloud ascending to Heaven: and immediately after this
ascension of his to his Imperial Court in the Heaven of Heavens, where he is in
full possession of his Royal Purchase, He like a Conqueror in full possession
of his Dignity, gives to his Officers, especially to his Apostles, magnificent
gifts, beseeming so great a Prince to give, and Officers so near him to
receive: these twelve spiritual Princes, like so many Monarchs of Unity
amongst themselves, divided the world amongst them, and went forth conquering,
and to conquer, from sea to sea: The glorious spiritual Victories that these
Champions got, and the mighty Conquests over the Devils Kingdom which they
made, is not unknown to the whole world: Their Government and Laws still stand,
and shall remain for ever. Apostacy from which has been the miserable ruin
of all those famous Eastern Churches to this day. Great has been the apostacy
of both Eastern and Western Churches from the Laws of the Apostles: and sore
have their spiritual afflictions (proportionated to their sins) been; the
Eastern Church is drove into the Wilderness by Mahumatisme, and the Western
Church by Popery: Of this grand apostacy, and most abominable hypocrisy of
the Western Churches, not only the Apostles, but the Prophets in the Old
Testament have prophesied. In the Church-Histories the dissipation of the Jews,
and the driving of the Gentile-Church into the Wilderness, seems, to me, to
begin near about one time; and their rising again to a flourishing state, seems
to me to be both at one time, by the Prophesies of the Old New Testament.

Now the rising again both of the Jews and Gentiles to a flourishing state
under the Gospel, is that great and last day ( i. e.) of Reformation, so much
spoken of both by the Old Testament-Prophets, by Christ himself, by the
Apostles, and especially by John in Revelation.

Of this last Day, there are not only gross mistakes amongst the Ancients, but
many absurd conjectures among the Ancients. Many of the Ancients looking into
the Prophesies, which are to be fulfilled in the end of the Roman Monarchy; and
reading those high prophetic expressions of that glorious Day, wherein Christ
promises in a most glorious powerful manner to appear for his Churches
alvation, and his Enemies ruin; conceived that it should be by the personal
reign of Christ on Earth a Thousand years; conceiving (rightly) that the
Thousand years binding of Satan, begins when Antichrists reign is accompl^shed
(for it is absurd to think otherwise) but misunderstanding, Rev. 21. as if that
Chapter were meant of the state of the Church in this life, which is against
the clear and manifest light of the Holy Ghost in the prophecy: This gross
mistake (I humbly conceive) made not only Papias (the first Anthor of the
abominable Opinion of Christ's reign on Earth a Thousands years) of this
opinion; but many others more moderate as Irenaeus, Turtullian, Lactantius,
Victorinus, Apolonius, Severus, Justinus, and several others: These did not
hold as Corynthus did, that they should reign with Christ in corporal, but in
spiritual delights, after 6000* years were accomplished from the Creation, may
not I say Augustine (lib. 20. de Civit. Dei, Cap. 7.) is of this opinion, and
Jerome on Dan. 7. where he says, In uno Romano imperio propter Antichristum
blasphemantem, omnia simul regna delenda sunt, and nequaquam terrenum imperium
erit, sed Sanctorum conversatio; a saying much harped on (though not quoted) in
these times, to further the design of slaying the Witnesses. And upon the same
mistake (as it is conceived) the Councils, though they were for the most part
against this opinion; yet they could never unanimously agree to condemn the
Opinion as heretical.

Others of our recents, very learned men and pious, thinking to confute this
error of the Chiliasts, run into more absurdities then the most of those whom
they endeavor to confute; for not knowing how to remove that Mountain betwixt
the Chiliasts, and them, about the first Resurrection, and the reign of the
Saints, and the 1000. years binding of Satan: they say that the reign of the
Saints is part, it being before Antichrist comes into the world: Of this
opinion is Hortulanus, and (as I am informed by Scholars) Pereus; Galianus
that learned Romanist is of the same opinion; as appears by his Manuscripts in
the Vatican, by Antichrist, they mean that Beast of the Earth, Rev. 13. 12.
which shall arise, Rev. 11. 7. and slay the Witnesses: few of the Romanists
concur with them in their opinion; but very many Protestants, in the main; jump
with them: but as contrary to the light of the Scriptures, as darkness is to
light.

But there are other learned men of great renown, who decline both these
opinions, as Bullinger, Beucer, and Seraphin who affirm that the great and
magnificent promises made to the Church in the old Testament and in the new,
are not yet fulfilled, but are to be fulfilled after the downfall of
Antichrist, after which (say they, and others with them) the Devils kingdom of
darkness, heresy and blasphemy shall be ruined, and the Church shall no more
be afflicted with heresy, but the heavenly form of government shall be set up
in the Church, which shall suppress all its enemies: with these learned men,
so far as I have quoted them, I shall concur.

For, this I do affirm (yet not I, but the Scriptures) that there is another
great day of reformation to be in the world before the day of judgment, besides
that great day of reformation already past, which Christ when he was on earth
began: this shall be a more glorious day then any that ever yet was on earth: I
do not say that Christ shall reign on earth personally, I abhor that extreme
with that learned Father B. Hall, in his tract called the Revelations
unrevealed: but I (or rather the Prophets) do affirm, that in this great day of
reformation to come, after the downfall of Antichrist, the twelve Tribes shall
be converted to the Gospel. Here therefore I must with my reverend fathers good
leave be his dissenting son, notwithstanding all he has said to the contrary:
For first, whereas he says, the promises in the Prophets are spiritually to be
taken, and not literally, concerning the twelve Tribes; but concerning the
Gospel Church, I briefly reply, this argument is invalid, because he neither
backs it with reason nor Scripture: with reason he cannot, for it is a non
sequitur to say, because the Prophets sometimes are to be understood, therefore
always; I am sure this is neither true in Logic nor Divinity.

2. There is no probability in his assertion: for though indeed Jerusalem be
sometimes in the Prophets put for the GospelChurch, yet where the Prophets speak
of the house of Judah, and the house of Joseph, there I believe 'twill be hard
for the Doctor to prove that they are spiritually to be understood of the
Gospel Church, as Zach. 10. 6, 7, 8. so in several other places: had the
Bishop instanced in any place of the Prophets, we should have grapled then for
probability. But I pass on.

3. If these Prophecies do nothing concern the restoration of the Jews in
these latter days, then to what purpose did God send his Prophets to sing
songs in their ears, if it nothing concerned them? Certainly these Prophecies
were prophesied amongst them to no purpose; if all those Prophecies belonged to
the Gentiles, then certainly God would have sent his Prophets amongst them, but
they principally concerned the Jews, and therefore they were prophesied
amongst them, and to them, to whom they belonged; for God never sends his
Prophets out of order, all Gods Prophets prophesied to the people to whom they
were sent, but the Prophets of the old Testament were appointed Prophets for
the twelve Tribes (except those that had special Commission, as Jonas, to go
to the Gentiles) and therefore to them principally these Prophesies belong, and
therefore that hard question is thus resolved, since in Luke 21. Jerusalem
shall be trodden underfoot until the time of the Gentiles be fulfilled; and
the time of the Gentiles reign continues ( Rev. 11. 2.) 1260. years, how coms
it to pass in Dan. 12. that the time of the Church's dissipation shall be
1290. days? To that it is thus answered; Daniel was a Prophet principally
designed for the Jews, and therefore God declares to him how long the
dissipation of the Jews shall be, which (as M. Brightman and other learned men
say on Dan. 12. 11.) began Anno 360. therefore their time is up about this
year 1650. their time of dissipation being to continue 1290. years: but now
our Savior in Luke 21. 24. respects the Gospel Gentile Church, as well as the
Jews, which shall be (as Rev. 11. 1.) drove into a sack cloth condition until
the time of 1260. years be accomplished.

Now many learned men count, that the time of Antichrists appearing to be
formally Antichrist, and the time of the Witnesses going into the Wilderness,
and putting on sackcloth, was in, or near about the year 390. So that
Antichrists reign, and the witnesses sackcloth condition, is expired in Anno,
1650. Now if Daniel, in his Prophecy, should only respect the Gentile Church,
how could John, Christ, and Daniel, be reconciled in their prophefies? To
return therefore to the thing in hand, we affirm, that the Prophets in the Old
Testament, prophesied of the futurehappy state of their own Kindred and Nation,
and not of the Gentile Church; but accidentally and occasionally for the most
part; as showing what shall come to pass in the Gentile-Church, immediately
before the great Day of the Jews conversion, which is the sign that the Jews
shall have of their approaching glorious Day: And therefore the Old Testament
prophesies of the uniting of the house of Joseph and Judah together under one
King, and bringing them back again to their own Land, can be meant of nothing,
but of the restoring of the Twelve Tribes to their own Land, under their
ancient government, as in David's time.

As for his alleging a seeming inpossibility, that they that have been
outcasts so long from the Covenant of Grace, should now be called home to the
Gospel (which is it seems beyond the Doctors faith) to that we answer, and he
acknowledges. 1. Nothing is impossible with God. 2. God has promised to call
the dispersed outcasts of Israel, from the four corners of the Earth, Esa. 11.
12. and they shall be so hopeless in the eye of the world, that before their
conversion they shall be as dry bones in Golgotha, Ezekiel. 37. 1, 2. Yet God will
call these dry bones together: Therefore their conversion is also expressed,
Ezekiel. 37. 11, 12. under the notion of raising dead men out of their graves God
will first open their graves, and then lead them out of their graves: so that
to the world they shall seem dead and buried, when God intends to convert them:
so that that which upon a bare principle of reason the Bishop makes his
argument against the Truth, I upon a principle of faith, built upon Gods
promises, make the argument to confirm this Truth; and who stands on the Beasts
bottom (whether he on bare Reason, or I on a divine promise) I Will leave
Christians to judge: But that which the Bishop most derides, is the opinion of
those, who say this year, 1650. the Jews shall be converted; he bids us show
him a thrave of Jews as yet converted, which are now to gather, professing the
Gospel.

To this it is answered: 1 We can show in this year, 1650. more probability for
the conversion not only of a few, but thousands of the Hebrews to the faith of
Christ, then the Bishop can against it: In the year, 1650. there is a book that
makes mention of 5900. East-Indians converted to Jesus Christ, by Mr. Robert
Iunius.

Now there are more arguments to prove these of the Seed of Jacob, then the
Bishop can bring to prove the contrary. Again, look into the West Indies, and
this year 1650. tells us of a glorious Harvest begun, in the conversion of
those Natives there; and there is more probability that they are of the stock
of Jacob, then the contrary. For there have been Jews that traveled those
ways, who have found some of the Ten Tribes in America: some learned Travelers
have rationally conjectured, that those Natives in New England are some of the
Ten Tribes: For upon diligent observation of the people, their Customs,
Language, and Ceremonies, have brought these arguments, to prove them Hebrews;
for (say they) 1. They have a traditionall knowledge of God, which they say
their forefathers which were wise, and endued with knowledge, taught them:
they say that God made the world, and this God is but one God.

2. They say this God is the Author of all the good that is dispensed in the
world, and the author of all the evil that is inflicted in the world.

And hence is that custom amongst them to this day, When any evil is inflicted
on them, either by immoderate weather, whereby their corn is spoiled, or by any
other judgment, they solemnly meet together under a green tree, and weep before
him who has inflicted all that evil upon them, whom they acknowledge to be the
Maker of the World.

3. They preserve their pedigree, with all the care they can, as far as their
memories will go, and are careful to promote their kindred after the manner of
the Hebrews.

4. The chief of them are exceeding reserved, and keep themselves from
strangers, so that the wisest of them are hard to be met withal, whereby
further discovery might be made of their Original; but much of the golden oar,
of the Hebrew Language, is found among the drossie Language of the vulgar
Natives.

5. It Is said that they are excellent in expressing themselves parabolically,
after the manner of the Hebrews: By all which there is probability, that they
are of the dispersed of Israel, whom God is now calling home to the knowledge
of the Gospel.

Menasseh Ben-Israel says, and also Montezinus, (both Jews, and learned men)
that the first Inhabitants of America were the Ten Tribes: if so, I think I
have the greatest probability on my side, that these many Thousands that we
have heard of already converted, and the many more Thousands which we expect
and pray for, are Hebrews of the sons of Jacob, to be converted to Christ in
this age of the world.

But suppose there were never a Jew converted, must this make the purpose of
God of none effect? God forbid, it is true that from posse to esse there can be
no certain consequence; but from Gods promise to his purpose, we may conclude
affirmatively.

If God have promised to convert the Jews, it is his purpose to call them: all
his promises are yea, and amen: if God promise that Israel shall be no longer
then 40. years in Egypt, they shall be there not a day longer, though nothing
more unlikely in the world then their deliverance: so shall it be in their
conversion in these latter days, though there be nothing more unlikely, yet
there shall be nothing more certain; for God has promised it, Romans 11. 25, 26.
All Israel shall be saved i. e.) all the Tribes shall be converted: the
precedent verse tells us the time when ( viz.) When the fullness of the
Gentiles is come in, that is, (as in Luke 21. 24.) when the time of the
Gentiles is fulfilled, which Rev. 11. 2.) is 42. moteths, i. e. 1260. days, i.
e. years.

Observe, Paul writes to the Church of Rome, forbidding them to boast of their
Gospel-priviledges, in a proud insulting way over the rejected Jews.

Paul foresaw to what impudent insulting pride the Church of Rome would rise;
therefore he bids the Church not to be high-minded, but fear; for if God spared
not the Jews, the natural branches, much less would he spare the
Gentile-church of Rome: for this end Paul would not have the Gentile-church
ignorant of this mystery, which mystery of God ( Rev. 10. 7.) shall be finished
at the seventh Trumpet, and that is when Antichrist that sits in Rome, when the
fullness of his time shall come in, then shall Israel be converted: Here Israel
is put in opposition to the Gentile-church. Now this Paul acquaints the Roman
church with, lest they should be wise in their own conceit, or overmuch puffed
up with pride: so that from these texts it seems clear to me, That the Jews
conversion shall be at that time when the Roman Pontifick state shall go to
ruin; and if in this sense we may understand Romanum imperium, the Bishop
knows better then my self. I have many thraves of ancient and latter Writers to
support me against him.

Lastly, I answer, That the conversion of the Jews shall come in on the sudden:
they shall come like the Doves to the windows, that is, swiftly and in great
numbers; and this shall be ( Ezekiel. 37. 11.) when Israel gave themselves for
lost, and their hopes were cut off, then the whole house of Israel, like bones
exceeding dry, came together, and they that were in the Valley of dry bones (
v. 1.) became an exceeding great Army, ver. 10. How clear there does the Holy
Ghost prophecy of the conversion of the whole house of Israel, that is, the
twelve Tribes.

Now if it should be objected, 'twas prophesied of their restoration under the
second Temple, to that I answer, it cannot be, because only the two Tribes
returned, and not the ten Tribes, to the second Temple, as Manass-Ben-Israel
affirms; and generally all Historians hold, that very few of the ten Tribes
returned with the two.

But now this Prophecy extends to the whole house of Israel, ver. 11. (i e.)
the twelve Tribes: So that from the time of the Prophecy, until this day, it
has not as yet been fulfilled, and therefore it is to be fulfilled; and when
it is fulfilled, it will be suddenly: as Romes ruin will be sudden, so the Jews
conversion will be sudden, and therefore our Lord Jesus, and their true
Messia's prophesying of their conversion, Matthew. 24. in ver. 24, 25, 26. he
tells them Antichrist shall be busy with his false Prophets immediately before
the day of Christ's coming to destroy Antichrist, and to convert the Jews; and
then shall he come, as the lightning which comes from the East, and is quickly
in the West, so shall the coming of Christ be.

This coming of Christ cannot be meant of his coming to judgment, but of his
coming to call the Jews to repentance, and to destroy the Roman Monarchy, or
the Roman Antichristian Pontifick state in ver. 29. the destruction of Rome is
prophesied, and ver. 30. prophesies of the repentance of the twelve Tribes in
the day of his spiritual appearance to them in the Gospel, ver. 31. prophesies
of the time when this shall be; it shall be at the sounding of the great voice,
and the Trumpet, that is, at the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, Rev. 11. 16.
when the Witnesses shall rise, Antichrist shall fall, and Euphrates shall be
dried up, ver. 32, 33. tells us, that the Tribulation of the Gospel Church
under the rage of Heretics, as Separatists, Blasphemers, Seducers,
Antichrists, and false Prophets, is as sure a sign of the downfall of Rome, and
the conversion of the Jews, as the budding and sprouting of the trees are of
the approaching of the summer.

Now these Heresies, and these false Prophets shall be eminent in the
Gospel-Gentile Church, which shall be the true sign of the Jews conversion,
ver. 34. plainly tells us, this cannot be meant of the day of Judgment; for
this generation (says Christ) shall not pass, that is, the stock of Israel
shall not be extirpate, until they have seen all these things fulfilled; this
day is called Luke 21. the day of the redemption of the twelve Tribes: Now if
this day (as some would have it) be the day of Judgment, this day would be the
damnation of the Tribes, if they must be in the world until this day, and
unconverted; therefore this day is the day of the Jews conversion, not the day
of Judgment. ver. 25. The next verse is to confirm the certainty of the
Prophecy, For heaven and earth shall pass away, but not one title of the Word
shall pass away. ver. 36. But of that day, and of that hour (i. e.) (of the
heavens and earth passing away) knows no man: by this it is manifest, that
Christ in the whole Chapter speaks not one word of the day of Judgment, until
ver. 35. which he forbids any to pry into; for God only knew that; but of the
day of his coming to ruin Rome, and convert the Jews; he bids us by the
foregoing signs know for certain that it was near, even at the doors. ver. 33.
Now this glorious coming of Christ in his spiritual and corporal punishments
on his enemies; and his spiritual and corporal favors to the Jews, shall be
as the lightning which is swift in it is motion, it gives light from East to
West presently, so shall all the Kingdoms in this world become the Lords, and
his Christ's on a sudden: Therefore far be it from any Protestant to have such
a malignant thought, as that God has forgot to be gracious, or that his hand
is shortened that he cannot help the poor Jews, which are this day, many of
them, looking, listening, and admiring at us in England and Scotland, whose
eyes, I trust, shall see some glorious sign of good to them ere long.

Forty times more may be said in vindication of this manifest truth, concerning
the twelve Tribes conversion; but considering how little is said against it, I
shall say no more, but proceed.

The subject of my ensuing Discourse in this, and Manus Testium which should be
joined with this is, concerning this great day.

My opinion is, that the three grand Enemies of the Church shall near about the
end, or within a year of 1650. begin to rise, and never fall more: at this time
also the morning of the Jews conversion shall begin, and shall shine more and
more until it come to a perfect day.

These Opinions the Reader shall find bottomed on Scripture, which Scriptures
are not of any private interpretation, but such as are matched with Scripture,
which illustrate the things proved by them, and also have several learned
Authors concurring, in the confirmation of the same thing; so that if I am
laughed at for my opinion, I doubt not but in that particular (what ever it be
of moment) I shall make the Remonstrant confess, he scoffs not only at me, but
at his betters.

I write not this to deter any from endeavoring to confute this ensuing Tract:
for one end of my writing so briefly on so large a subject, is, that I may have
a speedy answer, and a seasonable confutation; which if it be clear from
Scripture-grounds, I shall readily and willingly submit, and return a thankful
Reply to my Corrector, and promise him to retract my Errors.

As for the time of Antichrists fall, which I conceive to begin presently after
1650. it is well known that it is no new opinion; for Brightman, and several
other learned men have so conjectured, upon this ground, which is humane,
because it is drawn from humane story: for he begins the Jews great afflictions
in An. 360. so that their 1290. years afflictions must necessarily be expired
in this year, 1650. and Dr. Homes, and several others well-versed in the study
of the Revelations, and of History, do gather, that Antichrist appeared visibly
in the Church in Anno 390. so that the Gentile and Jewish church afflictions
seem both to expire at one time; for Antichrist is to rage over the Gentile
church but 1260. years, which by the compute is accomplished Anno 1650. Now (as
Dr. Homes says very well) in so many years, possibly, there may be lost-time
in the account; so that he takes a grain of allowance (that is) a year over to
his 1260. years: Upon the same ground, in this thing, I shall follow him, and
comply with him, though there is no necessity for it.

Others (as Clavis Apocalyptica, written by a German) draw water from the same
Springs, quote the same texts, as Dan. 12. and Rev. 11. and looking into
History, say, that these texts of 1290. days, and 1260. days, are not fulfilled
until 1655. so that these agree with the former in explication of the texts,
but not in application of the Histories to the text: in which difference, he
that has the clearest Histories to show the time of Antichrists rising, and
the time of the Witnesses going into sackcloth, as relating to the Gentile
Church; and likewise he that interprets that text ( Dan. 12. 11.) most clearly,
and by history can clear it exactly, and tell when the daily sacrifice was
taken away, and the abomination of desolation set up be doubtless, will gain
the greatest credit from the judicious Reader.

In my jndgment learned Brightman on Dan. 12. 11. is most clear and rational,
and none do, I find, guess nearer the time (in print) of Antichrists visible
appearance in the Church, then Dr. Homes, let me give the Devil his due. But of
the main point, which is concerning the slaying the Witnesses at, or near the
end, (or whether at or near the end) of Antichrists 1260. years Reign, he
speaks not a word, which makes me think, that his Sermon, October. 8. 1650. was
preached against the light of his own conscience; For in the Revelations the
Holy Ghost has so linked Antichrists reign, and the Witnesses slaying in the
end of Antichrists reign, that he that studies the one, must necessarily take
notice of the other; and indeed he that can show us the Witnesses slain, may
easily point at the end both of the Gospel Church afflictions and the Jewish
States dissipation: but here is the difficulty, and here are the gross mistakes
of men, who studying application of history to the text, more then the
explication of the text it self, have given most ridiculous ghesses, to the
great scandal of the Protestant.

My Antagonist speaks not one word to this text; but the German Divine in his
Clavis Apocaliptica, p. 87. tells us, that three years and a half before
Antichrists reign is out the Witnesses shall be slain; for (says he) they both
expire together, both Antichrists reign, and the Witnesses slaying: and
therefore he renders, Rev. 11. 7. (...), in futuro simplici, when they are
about to finish: so Cloverius and Mead reads the text: In this I shall not much
dissent from them; yet I think they render it best, who read it from the words,
as it most naturally drops into English, and that is when they shall have
finished their testimony: for it will nothing at all clash with ver. 2. where
they prophecy 1260. days in sackcloth: for the finishing of their testimony
does not cause their prophesying to cease: their suffering, and their slaying
is the gloriousest part of their sackcloth prophecy; for then says the Holy
Ghost, Here is their faith, and here is their patience.

The finishing of their testimony is the joint concurrence of the two Witnesses
( viz. the Magistracy and the Ministry) in establishing the Doctrine and the
Discipline of the Church of Christ against Antichrist the Beast of the Sea ( i.
e.) the Pope that keeps the Witnesses in sackcloth on the one hand, and against
the Beast of the Earth that slayes the Witnesses on the other hand; now when
was this testimony finished? the sum of this testimony you shall find in the
Covenant; but when they finished this testimony I leave Christians to judge,
Whether when the Assembly of Divines had finished their work, that of the
Doctrine, and Discipline of the Church, and when the Parliament ratified their
work, resolved to disband their Armies, and bring home the King on honorable
covenant-tearms; and then the Beast of the Earth arose, made war against them,
and drove them out of the house: since which that Reformation has lain dead.
Or whether it began then when the Magistracy were fully agreed to establish the
Doctrine and the Discipline of the Church against Popery, on one hand, and
Heresy on the other, when the King gave his royal assent, and the Parliament
voted the Kings concessions to be a sufficient ground for the establishing the
peace of the Church and State; then the Beast arises and makes war against
them, and overcomes them, and kills them: how kills them? Rev. 20. 5. makes
answer, beheads them, (says Beza) cuts them off with the Axe.

Now which of these times it is, is no easy thing to determine; but the former
act seems, to me, to be the time when they finished their testimony: For then
the Beast set up his Sword-power, and then the Magistracy and Ministry
finished their Church-work: and immediately after they had finished it, this
Beast of the bottomless put threw it down, and then followed that abominable
Vote of non-addresses to the King.

Now this fell out near about October, 164^. (as I remember) if about that
time, then the Witnesses must ^^^e about May or June in the year, 1651. or
thereabouts, for then his three years and an half is up: but if we begin to
account the Witnesses s^aying, their finishing their Testimony, and the Beasts
of the bottomless pits reign not to begin, unti^ December, 1648. when the King
was slain, and the Offices of the Two Houses slain, and the Assembly scatterd,
for not subscribing to the Beasts mark, then the witnesses will not rise until
June, 1652.

Now that these Witnesses are the Magistracy and the Ministry, there is
nothing so clear as learned Woodcock on Rev. 11. makes it appear, and several
others; besides the ferenity of the holy texts themselves, which makes it most
clear: This is most certain, that the two Witnesses are two lawful Offices ( i.
e.) a lawful Magistracy, and a lawful Ministry.

Now their Opposites who slay them, are Usurpers in the State, and Usurpers in
the Church (that is the Beast of the Earth and the Beast of the Sea, with their
followers) now the Witnesses rising shall be these Usurpers confusion ( i. e.)
the ruin of the Pope, and the Beast of the Earth, with their seven thousand
men of name: so that the Battle shall be fought betwixt lawful Magistracy, and
lawful Ministry, against Usurping Magistracy and Ministry; but more of this
in its place. The greatest difference (betwixt those that come near the time of
their slaying is concerning the place where they must be slain: Now there are
many groundless conceits that we find in print, about this place, where they
shall be slain, I shall not repeat what others have said, but endeavor to
prove that the Witnesses must be slain in these three Islands of England,
Scotland, and Ireland.

This I shall prove: 1. From the Offices that are slain. 2. From the person
that slays them.

The Offices that are slain are Two; a lawful Magistracy, and a lawful
Ministry. The lawful Magistracy is that which has the Christ and his Apostles
ordained in the Church, and established, until his second coming for to teach,
instruct, rebuke and comfort the Church.

Now these two must be slain in that place where they have all their time been
in sackcloth; but a lawful visible Magistracy, and a lawful visible Ministry
have since 390. been visible in England, though in sackcloth under the Popes
tyranny, treachery, and oppression: Now let these Countries that brag of the
slaying of the Witnesses, amongst them first show me for these thousand two
hundred and sixty years.

A lawful Magistracy and Ministry, and then those so long in sackcloth if
they show me not this, I Will not believe the Witnesses shall be slain where they
are not; but confident I am, England can only show these Witnesses, and no
Nation else, so long together in the world; as God continued Monarchy in the
Church from the Creation, until the mighty Monarch of the world came: So that
mighty Monarch the Lord Jesus after his Ascension, chose him his first
Vicegerent here in England: Lucius hy name, who swaid the Scepter for Christ;
from that Christian Race the Romans received their Christian Magistracy (as
Constantine) and Christian Monarchy (except in a National discertion) has
continued visible in this Kingdom of England, well nigh 1500 years; so that
England above and before all other Nations since the profession of the Gospel
has retained Gods Witnesses, a lawful Ministry being established by that
good King Lucius, that Christian Monarch; let us then look for the Witnesses
where God has placed them, and never till this day totally plucked them up: I
say, I here challenge all the Historians and Antiquaries in the world, to show
me where, or when since these fourteen hundred years past; that the two great
Offices in the Church and State (the lawful Magistracy, and the lawful
Ministry) were in so sad a slain abject condition, as at this day in England;
let Historians bring me the blackest night that ever came upon these two
Offices, and I dare undertake to make it appear, that this day is seven times
blacker and sadder to these great Offices, then any heretofore; may I not add
one thing more, to prove that the Witnesses have only been in this Kingdom
visibly in sackcloth, before William the Conquerors time, our Chronicles make
mention of godly Kings, which for their piety were called Saints: Th^se you
shall find them opposing the insolency and wickedness of the Church of Rome,
King Edgar acknowledged no supremacy in the Pope, but says, that the care of
the Church of Christ, ad nos spectat, it belongs to the King, not to the
Pope; and this he did (says Hoveden) by the advice and means of Ethelwood,
Bishop of Winton, and Oswald Bishop of Worcester; so that seven hundred years
since we have had Magistrates and Ministers, against the Popes supremacy, and
before that as is evident in Malmsbury de Gest. Reg. lib. 2. P. 57. afatrwards,
from William the Conqueror to the last King of England, we have it clear, they
have testified against the Popes usurpation, and have in every Age suffered
much, and been put into sackcloth, by the prevailing treacherous, rebellious
factions of the Popes raising against the Kings of England, no Kingdom in
Europe can say the like, and which is one of the remarkablest passages in the
world; the King that wast cut off when he had finished his testimony, was the
only Protestant King in the world; therefore the only Witness (say I) yea he
was, as learned Sir Robert Naunton proves in his fragmenta regalia, cap. 1. p.
2. the lawful Successor by lineall dissent of the ancient British Kings, so
that if any Magistracy in the world be the slain Witness, it is that of
England, which is lawful in it is self, has been visible for Christ before
Antichrist, in sackcloth visible under Antichrist, and in the sight and hearing
of all the world cut off with the Axe, for finishing the testimony against
Antichrist. Now as for the Ministry of England, the other Witness of Christ's
against Antichrist, that it has been as ancient as the Christian Magistracy,
and as visibly suffered under Antichrist, and now lies under the greatest
reproach ignominy, and slain condition, is as clear as the former.

I shall say nothing to this Office, that Office will speak for it self, I am
sure it is of age and ability enough to gainsay all his opposers, you see how
much probability we have from the persons that are slain, that the English
Magistracy and Ministry are the Witnesses.

Now we proceed to show what probability, there is, that these Witnesses are to
be slain in these Northern Islands, I will say the less of the Beast that
slaies them, because I portrayed him in the ensuing tract, I shall only discover
him where he is to be found in Scripture Prophecies, and then what those
Scripture Prophecies say of his downfall in Rev. 11. 7. he is called the Beast
that ascends out or the bottomless pit after the Witnesses have finished
their testimony, where note that this Beast that slaies the Witnesses, is not
the Pope, but one that rises when the Witnesses have finished their testimony,
and his reign is but three years and an half, and this all the Greek and Latin
Fathers assent unto, and it is as clear as the Sun from this text.

In Rev. 13. 11. he is called the Beast of the Earth, to have us to observe,
that he is one distinct from the Sea, ver. 5. it is wonderful to behold how
many learned Protestants join these together in one, when God by his Word has
severed; they are distinguished by their original; the one arises out of the
earth, and the other out of the Sea.

The Holy Ghost calls the Beast of the Earth another, and many Protestants
(though not all of them, for Bishop Cooper says, it is one distinct from the
Beast of the Sea) make them notwithstanding the same, the Beast of the Earth
has but two horns, and and the Beast of the sea ten: more arguments may be
picked out of the texts to prove the Beast of the Earth which slays the
Witnesses shall rise and reign but three years and an half during the time the
Witnesses shall lie slain, as it is clear, Rev. 11. 7. 12. this Beasts rising is
the Witnesses falling, and the Witnesses rising in this Beasts ruin, That the
Beast of the Earth, and the Beast of the bottomless pit are one, and the same
is clear, for Rev. 13. 10. 11. he rises then, when the faith and patience of
the Witnesses are exercised, here is the faith and patience of the Saints,
their suffering graces, when the Beast of the Earth arises, are exercised, and
the Beast of the bottomless pit, is he that exercises their defensive graces,
so Rev. 11. 7. he makes war with them and overcomes and kills them.

This Beast of the Earth, or bottomless pit Beast, is called in Rev. 17. the
Beast bearing up Babylon with all her blasphemies murders. In this sevententh
Chapter the Holy Ghost gives us a view of the last Scene of the last Act of the
Romish Antichristian Factors: I Will beg the sober Christians earnest attention
here, for it is the hardest Chapter in the whole Revelation, in Rev. 17. 1. the
Angel tells you what time of the day it is with Rome, it is near her judgment day
at this time: John saw a woman sitting on a scarlet beast: Here are three
distinct names mentioned in the Chapter, the Woman, the Beast, and the great
Whore: Now the great Whore sitting on many waters, v. 1. is expounded v. 15. to
be that spiritual Whore that has enticed the kings of the earth to commit
idolatry (which is spiritual fornication) with her: this Whore is the Pope of
Rome which inhabits the City with seven hills, which is Rome. The woman
mentioned v. 3. is expounded v. 9. and v. 18. it is the city standing on seven
hills as Rome does, v. 18. it is the Metropolitan city as Rome is. But now the
scarlet-colored beast, v. 3. which bears up the city Rome, is not so plainly
to the eye of the Reader unfolded, though there be most spoken in this Chapter
of this Beast and his party, this Beast is one part of the mystery which John
wonders at. Observe therefore in v. 3. this Beast is called a scarlet colored
Beast, because of his bloudinesse: This Beast cannot be the Pope, for the Pope
is the great Whore that sits upon many waters, and is born up by this Beast, 2.
It cannot be the Pope, for the Pope came not out of the bottomless pit, but
fell from heaven, and got the key of Independency into his own hands, which is
the bottomless pit there spoken of Rev. 9. 1. But now this Beast coms out of
the bottomless pit, to show that this Beast is the selfsame that slayes the
Witnesses, Rev. 11. 7. who also coms out of the bottomless pit. 3. This Beast
cannot be the Pope upon any rational account from any Expositor, because this
Beast is the eighth, and is of the seven: Now the Pope by every Protestant
account makes the seventh distinct head of government in Rome, but this Beast
is of the eighth: now lest he should be taken for the eighth head of Rome, the
Holy Ghost (as it were with a Prolepsin, v. 11.) tells us he is of the seven,
and how he is of the seven; it may be because he bears up the Woman with seven
heads, and ten horns: he is none of the ten subjected to Rome, neither is he
one of the seven heads of Rome, but he is the eighthdistinct from the seven of
Rome, and of the ten horns subject to Rome, and yet he is of the seven, that
is, he has something of all their wicked craft and subtilty, he is of the seven
(says Haymo) because this Beast shall seven times more persecute the Church of
Christ then the other seven: this holds good; for to prove him to be the Beast
that slayes the Witnesses. Says another of this text, he is the eighth,
because regnum ejus distinctum a singulis, and he is of the seven, Quia in
omnibus septem existit. I humbly conceive the Holy Ghost uses this expression
[he is of the seven] to take us off from imagining that this Beast (though he
be the eighth) is the eighth head of Rome: No, says the Holy Ghost, he is of
the seven, and that you might not imagine this Beast, on the other hand, to be
one of the ten horns subject to Rome; says the Holy Ghost, He is of the seven;
and what follows? And goes to perdition. Twice you have the perdition of the
Beast mentioned in this Chapter, I humbly conceive, for two ends: 1. To note
that this Beast is the last enemy of the Church, which bears up Rome with all
her blasphemous hypocrites, which vent their poison, and profer it to the world
in the golden cup of glorious Gospel truths, when they are full of all
abominations, and filthiness of fornication; when Romes judgment day is near,
then v. 3. does that scarlet colored blasphemuus Beast arise, then is it a
year of Jubilee with Rome, v. 5. she is richly adorned and decked with all
outward pomp, and has a golden cup in her hand, out of which she vents her
abominable blasphemies. Then has Rome, v. 5. a name written on her forehead,
Mystery Babylon, now Mystery Babylon is legible in her forehead; we shall see
Babylon in a mystery, when Rome is near her downfall, as to cry down with
Antichrist, and murder a King that engaged to pull down Antichrist: To pretend
to promote the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and pull down the godly Ministry. To
exalt the Kingdom of Christ, and to grant a toleration of all Religions against
Christ: to plead liberty of conscience, and devise spiritual wracks and
tortures for men's consciences: For the Brats of Rome to cry Down with the Pope,
and down with Rome, and down with Antichrist, whilst they promote Rome and the
Pope, and undermine the Gospel? What is this but Mystery Babylon, written upon
Rome's Politicians foreheads: this is the comfort, Mat. 24. 24, 30. these are
the forerunners of Romes ruin By these mysterious plots, the Wolves of Rome
get into the sheepfold of Christ, and suck the blood of Christ's Flock; and
therefore ver. 6. John saw Rome drunk with the blood of the Saints at this time
when she was going to ruin: to note, that immediately before Rome goes to
ruin the Witnesses must be slain, for she is now found drunk with the Saints
blood: And when is this that Rome is drunk with the Saints blood ( ver. 7.) it
is when this Beast bears up Rome, that otherwise had fallen by the hands of the
Witnesses, whose blood they now drink: In as much as this Beast throws down
those that would have ruined Rome, and had covenanted so to do, he may well be
called the Beast that bears up Rome. For certain the tenth part of the City
Babylon had fallen, had not this beast bore it up, by slaying those that had
finished their Testimony, and were fully resolved to pour out their Vials on
Rome: Now when this beast goes to perdition that bears up Rome, certainly then
Rome will fall, when the pillar that props it up falls, then down it falls: and
therefore it is said, in Rev. 19. 19, 20. When the Witnesses arise, and put
themselves under the wings of Christ: this Rome-supporting beast John saw, when
the Pope and his party, v. 20. with him, And when the beast by the Witnesses
(for I have proved already, that the battle is only betwixt the Beast bearing
up Rome, and the Witnesses) is overcome: in ver. 20. the Pope is taken, and
with him the false Prophet that wrought miracles: This false Prophet is the
Beast of the Earth that slays the Witnesses, who is called a false Prophet,
because Rev. 13. 13. He does great wonders (ver. 14.) on purpose to deceive: so
that this eighth Beast bearing up Rome when Rome is going to Judgment, when he
goes to perdition, Rome must necessarily fall with him.

2. The Holy Ghost in that he calls him ( Rev. 17. 11.) the eighth Beast, and
tells us twice in that Chapter, that it is he that goes to destruction. I
humbly conceive the Holy Ghost points at Daniel 7. 8. which Daniel calls
another little horn. Daniel longing to know the meaning of him, the Holy Ghost
tells him, It Is that horn that shall rise after the ten horns, under the Roman
Monarchy, and shall pull three of the ten horns up by the roots, ver. 8, 21.
makes war with the Saints, and prevails against them: just as in Rev. 11. 7.
This horn (ver. 24.) shall arise after the ten Kings subject to Rome and shall
be diverse from them: In this respect he is said to be the eighth, Rev. 17. and
he shall subdue three Kings (i. e.) Kingdoms, and ver. 11. By the setting up of
Christ's Kingdom, the Beast shall be slain, and given to the burning flame; as
Rev. 19. 20. and 25. He shall reign until a time, times, and the dividing of
times; and then by the coming in of Christ's Kingdom, he shall be destroyed to
the end, utter ruin shall befall him. Now who should this little horn be that
rises in the end of the Roman Monarchy, and throws down three Kings, that is,
usurps the Dominion of three Kingdoms, purely professing the Gospel, where the
Saints whom he persecutes are, and reigns tyrannically over the Saints but
three years and an half, and must be destroyed by the erecting of Christ's
Kingdom, and putting the Saints in possession: but only the Beast which John
Rev. 11. 13, 17. and 19. sets forth in his rising, reigning, and ruin.

Object. But how comes this Beast to have seven heads, and ten Horns, since he
is none of the Roman Heads? in Revel. 17. 3, 7.

Sol. I thought, till I looked into the Original, that the seven Heads, and ten
Horns, had related to the Woman, and not to the Beast; and I thought ver. 9.
would have born me out as well as the vulgar Translation; but I perceived it
not only clashing with ver. 12. and v. 16. but confounding the Syntaxis of the
words in the Greek Copy; for the Participle in v. 3. and the Article in v. 7.
are of another Gender: as in v. 3. how can (...) and (...) agree together; but
(...) and (...) agree together: so likewise in v. 7. how can (...) and (...)
agree together, when as it agrees with (...), therefore learned Beza reads v.
3. vidi mulierem insidentem bestiae Coccinae plenae nominibus plasphemiae
habenti Capita Septem; so that habenti agrees with bestiae, which is agreeable
to the Greek Copy; the vulgar renders it doubtfully, but the Greek Copy decides
this clearly, by referring the Horns to the Beast, not the Woman.

Ob. How comes it to pass then, if the Beast be not the Pope, but he that
rises and slays the Witnesses (when the Popes time is drawing near to an end)
that he is said Rev. 13. to have but two horns, and here to have seven Heads,
and ten Horns?

Sol. The subject I am now upon is exceeding mysterious: so mysterious, that
John wondered, with great admiration, to see Babylon in a mystery, devouring
the blood of the Saints, v. 5, 6. to see men, under the name of Saints, and
tender conscientious men, drinking exceedingly of the blood of the Saints: This
is a great mystery, and a mystery to be wondered at; now this mystery v. 7.)
the Holy Ghost tells us is double: there is a mystery of the Woman, that is,
Rome; and the mystery of the Beast that at this time (now Rome is going to
ruin) bears her up. Now this Beast is not the Pope, for the Pope sits as a
Whore upon many waters: This double mystery then is in thishow the Woman Rome
should come to be drunk now with the blood of Saints, when she is going to
ruin; and the other part of the mystery lies in verse 7. how the Beast that
had horns like a Lamb, and a fair smooth tongue like a Dragon, Rev. 13. 11.
should now have the feet of a Bear, and the jaws of a Lion; how he that had
covenanted to throw down Rome, and professed himself a great friend to the
Saints, and yielded all his assistance to throw down Popery, Superstition, and
Idolatry, and holds the same Religion in profession that the true Saints do:
how this Beast should become the Beast bearing up Rome, here is the mystery,
and such a mystery as is to be in the Church when the Witnesses shall be slain,
and when Rome is near to utter ruin, which mystery being this day in our eyes
revealed, is a sure prognostic to me, that Rome is not far off from her utter
ruin.

Now I humbly conceive that the Beast is said to have the seven heads, and ten
horns, because he supports Rome with seven heads, and ten horns: Now as the
Heathen Emperors were called the red Dragon with seven heads, and ten horns,
Rev. 12. 2. and the Pope is the Beast of the Sea with seven heads, and ten
horns, because they kept up the Emperial pomp and state of Rome: so this Beast
of the Earth is said here to have seven heads, and ten horns, because he
supports the pomp and state of Rome, when the Witnesses had finished their
testimony, and were ready to pour out the vialls upon it.

This Beast is therefore the Eighth, ver. 11. because he is distinct from those
seven Kings, v. 10. and yet he is of the seven because he is an Usurper and a
Tyrant, who rules by his Sword-power, as the seven before him did, who bore up
the woman with seven heads: the refore this Eighth Beast ^^^d to be of the
seven, because of the likeness of the Government he sets up to theirs before
him. Hence it is that in v 8. the Beast that bears Rome is called the Beast that
is not, and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit: He was in the Idaea of his
Government, in the Usurpation of Caesar, but [is not] because he is to come out
of the bottomless pit, Rev. 11. 7. where the 1260. years reign of Antichrist
draws toward an end, and then slays the Witnesses: the next words cleers it,
that this Beast is also the Beast of the Earth mentioned Rev. 13. 12, 13, 14.
Hence he is called the Beast that was, because Rev. 13. 12. he makes the people
to worship the first Beast whose deadly wound is healed, that is, he makes
people subject to a Government as Caesar set up in Rome, which was a packt
company of Senators, whom he at his command could sway, to what he pleased
after he had drove away, and secluded the faithful members of the
Senate House: But by what power does he do this? the same ver. of Chap. 13.
tells us, He does it by the power of the first Beast before him, that is, the
Pope, (as we have showed) these two first Beasts mentioned in the same verse
signify.

1. The Pope, in whose presence the last Beast acts, and by whose power he acts.

And the other is Caesar, whose Government he endeavors to set up: Now he does
it by the power of the Pope, that is, by treachery, lying perjury, treason, and
lying wonders: Therefore in Rev. 17. 8. the time when this Beast shall be in
the world shall be a time of wonder, the people shall wonder at him, wonder at
the changes he makes in Times and Laws, and wonder at his proceedings; and the
reason is in Rev. 13. 13. because he does wonders in the sight of the men of
the Earth (that have not rooting in Christ) by his glorious successes, and his
specious pretenses; and also his boasts of the prevalencies of his prayers with
Heaven, how providence guides him, prospers, and protects him: thus he cheats
the Pope, and makes them to admire him, for his acting by the first Beasts
power, that is, by the Popes power, so that this Beast is after the Pope, and
to be expected (as the Fathers say) when Rome is to go to ruin, and to be
destroyed.

Thus this Beast is the Beast that was, and is not, and yet is.

Ob. How is he the Beast that is?

Sol. He is [the beast that is] because at that time when John had this
Revelation, Rome had the government of Caesar, though Caesar and that Family
were extinct, there was a Senate in Rome, and that Senate curbed under the
power of the sword, swordmen bore the sway, the General of the Army was the
Emperor: though they had the name of the Senate, they sat and voted in the
Senate, but it was the General and his soldiers acted what they pleased; and
in this sense, this beast was in John's time, that is, in the Government; and in
this sense also the eighth is of the seven.

The hardest knot still remains to be untied, and that is Rev. 17. 12, 16.
where it is said, That the ten Horns are ten Kings, which have received no
Kingdom as yet, but receive power as Kings one hour with the beast: What should
these ten Kings be who have no Kingdom, nor power, until this beast arise, and
then they have but power as Kings one hour with the beast?

1. We must answer negatively these ten Horns here mentioned cannot be meant
the ten Kingdoms subject to Rome (as some would have it) for that is expressed
in ver. 25. Otherwise, then by ten Horns there the head of Rome, the pontifick
state, is called the Whore, and the powers subject to Rome compared to Waters,
which Waters are by the Holy Ghost in the same verse interpreted Peoples and
Multitudes, Nations and Tongues.

2. We answer possibly, yea most probably, ten Horns may have a double sense
and meaning; the one, to set forth these Kings subject to the Roman Empire, and
so Dan. 7. 7. is to be understood; and so the most learned Protestant Writers
understand these ten Horns: It Is also the opinion of learned men, that by ten
Horns is meant the Senate of Rome, subordinate to the Imperial power of Rome:
so Alcazar understands these ten Horns, he calls them Poliarchiam Senatorum.

And (not rejecting the common interpretation of the ten Horns) I conceive this
may be the meaning of Rev. 13. 1. where when the state of Rome was changed from
Emperors to Popes, the seven Heads had blasphemous Names on them, and the ten
Horns were crowned. The Senate of Rome under the Emperor had no Crowns; but
when the Pope came up with his ten Horns, that is, his Conclave of Cardinals
(resembling a Senate) they had their Miters on; here the ten Horns are crowned:
As I do not dote upon this interpretation, so I dare not despise it, for it
hangs upon as much reason as the other, if not more, and I know no reason, but
why these ten Horns may have a double signification, as well as the seven
Heads; but the seven heads ( Rev. 17. 9, 10.) signify seven Mountains, and
seven Kings.

Therefore by these ten Kings here, Rev. 17. 12. I conceive is meant those
Senators, or that packt party, that this Beast sets up by his sword power; and
as Caesar conquered under pretense of subjecting people to his packt-senate in
Rome: so does this subdue Nations and Kingdoms to his packt-party of Senators.
Observe how clearly this appears in the Text, v. 12. 1. The Holy Ghost does not
say these Kings shall receive Kingdoms, but a Kingdom [Ten] is but indifinitly
for many; as ten Virgins, ten Talents; and now these many shall not reign in
distinct Kingdoms: for John says they have not received a Kingdom, noting
these many Kings shall be in one Kingdom.

2. They are not absolute Kings, but receive power as Kings; they rule and
tyrannize, and make Laws, and exact obedience from the people as Kings.

3. It Is but one hour that they have this power, three years and an half is the
utmost extent of their duration in this power, for they come in with this
beast: now this beast continues but three years and an half.

4. These all make but one vote, v. 3. (...) that is, in English, make one
vote. I do not know how better to express it in English: therefore I conclude,
that these are not distinct Kings, but such as vote together in one Council to
propagate the beasts designs; and in so doing, ver. 14. they are by the Holy
Ghost marked for those who fight with the Lamb, and the Lamb overcomes, so that
hence I gather, that the great battle spoken of to be fought ( Rev. 19. 19,
20.) by Christ against the beast, and the false Prophet, is the battle that is
to be fought against the beast, and these ten Horns: For on the Churches side
the General and his Army are one and the same in both; here he is called the
Lamb, and Rev. 19. 7, 8. he is called the Lamb; here he is called the King of
kings, and Lord of lords, and there, verse. 16. he is called King of kings, and
Lord of lords: here his Army is called faithful and chosen, and in ver. 11.
there their General (who makes them like him, by calling them to him) is
called faithful and true. This battle is set forth, Rev. 11. 13. by a great
Earthquake, and Rev. 14. 19, 20. by gathering the Vine of the Earth into the
Vinepress of Gods wrath: a usual metaphor to set forth the ruin of the
Enemies of the Church by, like that in Judges, The gleanings of Ephraim are
better then the Vintage of Ebiesar, that is, the little Conquests of Ephraim in
taking these two Princes, were greater then (the Vintage) the great Conquest of
Gideon over that vast Army.

But here is another hard question comes in, and that is from v. 14. and 16.

Q. How can it be said in v. 13. that the Horns make war with the Lamb, and the
Lamb overcomes them; and in v. 16. The ten Horns shall hate the whore, and make
her naked, and eat her flesh, and burn her with fire.

Resp. To this we answer, Those ten Horns cannot be the same in person, in v.
14. with these in v. 16. 1. Because these in v. 14. make war against the Lamb;
but those in v. 16. make war for the Lamb. 2. Those in v. 14. are destroyed and
overcome by the Lamb, and therefore cannot be the same in person with those in
v. 16. because they shall hate the Whore: Now comes in the Judgment of the
Whore spoken of, v. 1. and in this, v. 16. the Officers that shall bring her to
Judgment are set forth. Observe but the opposition that the Holy Ghost puts
betwixt the person and persons in one Office: by the ten Horns (as I have
showed) signifies a Senate, a Parliament, or a supreme power consisting of many
Members: This v. 14. and 16. (if seriously perused) show us, that there shall
be a great Rent amongst persons conjoined in one office; the ten Horns, v. 12.
arise with the beast; but the other ( v. 17.) give their Kingdom (through their
oversight to the beast; so that these clearly are distinct: for these last ten
Horns had a Kingdom, or else they could not give it away; but the other v. 12.
come to be Kings, or as Kings with the beast: so that the coming up of these is
the casting down of those ( verse. 17.) until the words of God be fulfilled:
Those ten Kings verse. 13. give their power and strength (which they received
from the beast) to the beast against the Lamb. But those ten Horns v. 17. give
but their Kingdom for a time, and when that time is fulfilled ( i. e.) when the
seventh Trumpet sounds, when the mystery of God shall be finished or fulfilled,
then those shall hate the Whore, and shall make her desolate, and eat her
flesh, and burn her with si^e: This gives us a most clear description of the
slain Witnesses, by a party atising out of their own bowels: Here are the same
ten Horns for the beast against the Lamb, and the same ten Horns for the Lamb
against the Beast, and the Whore: This is a mystery which has been locked up
from former ages, and is now in the eyes of all the world revealing it self:
these ten Horns therefore are distinct in their persons, and the same in
office, only the one party sides with the Beast who gives them his power to
slay the Witnesses: so that these reigning, keep the name and power of a
Parliament, and so they are called the ten Horns, and this Rome they keep till
the true Parliament (which pretendedly was on the beasts head) arise, and by
their powerful prosecution of their Covenant-Reformation, show their hatred to
the Whore, make her desolate, eat her flesh, and burn her with fire: For
certain the rising of the slain Witnesses shall be the downfall of the Beast,
the Pope, and the Devils Kingdom: I am not ignorant how remote I am from the
common received opinions of the Protestants; neither am I ignorant, how far
they are from the clear light of sacred Text, which gives too much occasion to
the Romish party in their writings, to scorn at their interpretations: It were
easy to show the contradictions that they make, who interpret these ten Horns
to be the ten Kings of Europe: but I forbear, and only make this the excuse of
my prolixity, because I easily perceive the great stone which the Protestant
Writers stumble at, is this last beast that is to rise and reign three years
and an half, in which time he slays the Witnesses: This Beast few of them (for
ought I can perceive) ever dreamed of; therefore they mistake the Beast rising
out of the bottomless pit, Rev. 11. 7. the Beast of the Earth, Rev. 13. 11. and
the eighth Beast, Rev. 17. 11. to be the Pope, and these ten Horns to be the
ten Europian Kingdoms, which are all gross mistakes, and the causes of greater
in most of their Writings. Having thus (by the good grace of the Holy Trinity)
by these mysterious Texts discovered this last Beast, and these last Enemies of
the Church, I trust he that is not spiritually blind will say, Surely these
Scriptures are fulfilled in our eyes this day. Was there not a glorious
Reformation began, and though with much danger and difficulty, yet) clearly
carried on: Read but the Assemblies Works; read the good Ordinances made by the
Parliament for the carrying of it on; read the Covenant, and then say, whether
there was not a glorious Reformation began: nay did not the King give his
Royal assent to this Reformation, and did not the Parliament close with these
Concessions; and then, even then, on a sudden when these Witnesses had finished
their Testimony, then arises this Beast, and over throws this Reformation, by
slaying the Witnesses which had finished their Testimony: By this the Reader
may see my confidence, upon Scripture-bottome, that these are the times, and
this is the place, and the Magistracy, and Ministry of England, are the
witnesses that now are slaying; and this Power now tyrannizing over the Church,
is that Power that slayes the Witnesses; and the Beast that set up this Power,
together with the Power that he has erected, shall gather all their strength
against the Lamb, that is, against the true Saints, which in sincerity worship
Christ; and there the mighty hand of God shall appear to the utter ruining and
confounding of them; then shall the Witnesses arise and take up that
Reformation which has lien dead three years and an half, and shall carry it on
without any more opposition; and all this shall begin to be done (I do not say
finished) near about this present year, 1651. These I have more largly
discoursed of in the ensuing Tract, yet not at large, because I expect to have
it answered by some of the Time-serving Champions, especially Docter Homes,
whom I take to be the learned Saint of them all in this study; and he has
got him almost as great a name amongst the ignorant Crew for a Prophet, as
Lilly the Hedg-Prophet, who Jispsie-like gets his living by telling fortunes:
as Lilly, so does this Doctor make his Oracle speak to the humor of the
Times: as that infamous Priest of Apollo, out of base flattery made the Oracle
(...). So does the blasphemous wretch endeavor to make the Holy Oracles of the
Scriptures (...), that is, to humor the usurping Traiterous bloody Heretics
of the Times, and with more subtilty then any of his fellows.

It behooves Christians to observe some men's Designs more then others, and to
observe how they carry on their Designs; as for this Doctor he undertakes to
prove the foulest actions that ever were committed by Christians, to be the
gloriousest and greatest actions that ever were performed by Christians, and
pretends to fetch all his proofs from sacred Scripture, from Prophetical
Texts; and it is commonly taught, That King Charles who was cut off was the
Antichrist, and London the city that must be destroyed with seven hills; and
the Presbytery the Locust that must be destroyed; so that ere long we shall
have Protestants massacred as Antichristian; it is therefore time to look after
such fellows. Indeed there are many in print, who assume scribendi libertatem
(as Scaliger says of the French) but have not scribendi facultatem. I think
the Writers of these times upon this subject, edged with the Doctors designs,
may be distinguished, as maladies are amongst the learned; some are privative,
some are positive; in some there is seminarium stultitiae, in other some
seminarium invidiae: Now the later of these is most dangerous: From hence
proceeds heresy and apostasy from truth; if we mark it, error is a positive
act; and where it meets a malicious heart, and a subtle head, it does infinite
hurt. Now I shall sooner prove the Doctor one of these, then style him one.

As for that other sort of Prophetic time-servers, though it is true there be
unus utrique error, yet, poor souls, they make such ridiculous nonsense of
what they steal from learned men, that every man of ordinaryparts cannot but
cry out of them as eruditi fures, and deserve as much to be slighted, as John
Goodwins Songs to be laughed at. The truth is, such self-conceited idiots
deserve better to be met with a Lacedemonian whip, then to be corrected by a
sober pen: They are such as Hierom complains of, Qui loqui nesciunt, and tacere
non possunt; I do not mean only such tinkling cymballs and cracked trumpets as
Sterrey and Powell, Durie, Feake, the Furriers Boy, Will. Sedgwick, John
Goodwin, Simson, and Carpenter the converted Jesuit, with his Brother Tillam
the blasphemer; but many others, poor souls, who are great Zealots against
Antichrist, but know not what he is: a man that hears the contradictions,
absurdities and egregious falsities that they impudently utter sometimes in one
hour, would conclude as ( Lactantius does against the Philosophers) Aut stulti
aut in any, nullus enim ager, nulla anus, ineptius deliravit; these
empty-headed fellows, whose privative malice proceeding of ignorance, makes
them belch forth such indigested crudities, I would entreat good Christians to
pray for them, for they know not what they say.

But while I am viewing the followers of the Beast: There is a third sort of
time-servers, the worst of all, by how much the more eminent they are for the
profession of the Protestant Religion; for that of Iuvenali is true: Omne animi
vitium tanto conspectius in se
Crimen habet quanto major qui peccat habetur.
These are not such lascivious Goats as the Doctor that I deal with, nor such
silly hogs as those I pass over, who like those possessed run in a Herd
together down the precipice of Ruin into the Sea of perdition, without remorse
or stop: But these are men of gravity, men of sobriety, men professing
outwardly godliness, men that, like Judas, kiss Christ with their lips, and
embrace Christ's murderers in their arms, that have their lips in Heaven, and
their Arms in Hell: they are like the Air in their constitutions, which
Element, though it proceed ex duobus Elementis a symbolicis, yet
notwithstanding it is utrique symbolicum; and so are they, I mean such as Mr.
Nigh, Mr. Thomas Goodwin, Mr. Shadrack Simpson, Mr. Bridge, Rows of Eaton; who
though no Priest, yet may well be styled a Franciscan Apostate: and I would I
could leave out Mr. J. Car. and M. Ob. S. I am loath to name them, because I am
ashamed that the world should know that two such eminent-godly-learned men are
amongst such an Antichristian abominable Faction: but who knows that Mr. Caryl
is amongst them, and that Mr. Obediah Sedgwick keeps public Thanksgiving days
for the overthrow of the Scots, our Covenant-keeping Brethren, Hi sunt illi
(says Tullie) qui non solum vitia concipiunt, sed etiam infundunt, in
Civitatem plusque exemplo quam peccato nocent: These are those adultae patriae
pestes, that, if it were possible, would seduce the Elect: How much mischief
have these men done by their evil example, by their open apostasy from their
Church and State-principles, by their Covenant Breaking, and by their elegant
pleading (like Job's acquaintance) against a righteous Cause; and most
shameful extolling and complying with wicked men, cursing the righteous whom
God afflicts, and blessing the wicked whom God abhors: These (...) (as Greg.
Nazianzen calls them) such as will truck away their Religious principles, and
break their Covenants, for the gain of the world, notwithstanding their former
Writings and Opinions, fight with their present actings, like the soldiers of
Gadmus to their own confusion.

These men going in the way of Cain, and running after the error of Balam for
a reward, have provoked me, unworthy me, like Balam's Ass, unexpectedly, though
out of the anguish of my heart, to reprove the madness of these Prophets.

I no whit wonder that Heretics, and scandalous loose fellows, such as Doctor
Homes, and John Goodwin, keep Thanksgiving Days, and make Ballads at the
overthrow of the Church and State of Scotland; for they know that Scotland is
the greatest Enemy to Heresy and Lechery in the world: These go upon that
newfound Maxim, self-preservation, and so have some ground for what they do:
for doubtless Homes had been hanged for his uncleanness, and abominable
lewdness, had the Scots Laws been put into English practice, and such as
Goodwin had been justly banished, for open apostasy and obstinate heresy, if
not hanged for a blasphemer: Therefore I the less blame them for what they do,
and the rather, since their own former Writings save me the labor: Does the
Doctor call the Church of Scotland, and the Presbyterian Church whore by craft?
Poor man, we very well know that this is not his first mistake; it is not the
first time that he has mistaken an honest woman for a whore, witness his
Congregation that excommunicated him for such gross mistakes, and to this day
for the same stands excommunicated: Were it not therefore through this Doctors
sides, that I intended to wound the whole Rabble of Deceivers, and false
Prophets, who most egregiously abuse prophetic Texts, to the defaming of the
true Church; and that the Time-servers may know I dare encounter their
sturdiest Champions, I should have been ashamed to have entered the list with so
scandalous a man as Doctor Homes: But why should I be ashamed to confute him,
when the Lord Major of London was not ashamed to make him his Teacher.

Let no man think that I do (...), meddle with that which concerns me not; for
by my Covenant I am bound timely to make known and discover, whatsoever Church
or State-evill: I am not able to suppress, and I do no more here, I know that
this my young Lamb must pass through the midst of Wolves and Lions, who will
endeavor to devour it: and therefore I have armed it with Armor of proof, the
Holy Scriptures. I do not (as Cromwell in his Letters falsely says the Scots do)
use weapons of a foolish shepherd, I fetch all my weapons out of David's Armory,
the Scripture: here hangs a thousand Bucklers, all the shields of mighty men, I
draw no Arguments from Conjurers Dreams, or from Astrological Predictions, such
really are the weapons of a foolish shepherd; I offer no such poisonous water
to the thirsty Traveller in this Road; all that I draw comes clearly up
exprofundissimis Scientiae fodinis, from the Scriptures, the Wells of living
Water: Here are no Texts crook't (though cross to the common interpretations)
by any private interpretation, to particular self ends: Indeed I do swim
against the stream of common Interpreters, but not without just cause given, I
protest it is not out of a desire to be singular, as not a few in this Age do,
who think no Fabric of fame stands so stately, as that which is built exruinis
alienae existimationis, esteeming it no small piece of honor to be counted
novae alicujus rei Authors, Let it be what I will, for my own part, I protest
against such folly. I only follow the Ark; which way it goes, I go; and when
it stands still, I stand still. I shall submit my self wholly to the censure of
learned Texts men, whether I have wracked any Texts to stretch it beyond the
lawful bounds of interpretations, or whether I have made any (...), or not
made my (...) to be (...) only. This I will assure the Reader, that he shall
find nothing in this book either prater fun lamentum salutis, or contra a
fundamentum salutis: Nor scarce any one Text (of these many) unfolded, but what
learned Writers do concur with me in; for I walk upon the learned heads of at
least fourscore Interpreters, and if I fall from ones head, I presently fall
into another arms, so that my sense falls not to the ground.

Indeed my style and my method may justly be blamed, I am heartily ashamed that
it should go so tattered with its rags into the world; but indeed the reason is
because it was done in have, not that it was studied in have, but scribed in
have: it is well known this piece proffered to the Press within a month after
the Doctors Sermon was printed, and from that time, to this day, it has waited
at the Press (like the Cripple of Bethesda) expecting daily some one to put it
in* indeed my book (if it could) should not go like Independents wives (...).
Now the Church is in her winding sheet. The first part of it proves Monarchy to
be Jure Divino, and to be visible in the Church from the Creation to Christ's
Incarnation, who was both Monarch (by a right of succession from Adam) of the
whole world, and by right (of succession from David) King of the Jews,
according to the flesh: I have not handled this point, or any other, so fully
as I might and could, I intend it not, until I hear what my Antagonists say
against me; and then I shall (by Gods good grace) say more upon this subject,
if need require, not otherwise; for I hate coming in print, except in a case of
necessity; and in that case only privately. I heartily praise God that I have
so fair an opportunity to declare my self in this of Monarchy, for at least
seven years ago, I was unjustly slandered by those ungrateful wretches whose
family and goods I protected) that I should say that I would kill the King.
This news, and my name, was carried to the Court, where it met with His
Majesty's ear as He was at dinner: there it was told him that I (naming me by
name) was the man that had vowed the Kings death where ever I saw him.

This doubtless had died away, and never come to my ears, had not this accident
happened; he gouty good Gentleman of the house (where the King at that time kept
his Court) though he could neither stir hand nor foot, by reason of his age and
disease, yet was so enraged at the news, that he vowed, as decrepit as he was,
to be the man to fight with, and kill such a rebellious villain (meaning me) as
would attempt such a thing. I never had an opportunity to vindicate my self
from this foul aspersion, nor so much as to present hearty thanks to the Gowty
Gentleman for his hearty and loyal affections to his Sovereign the King, in
that he would adventure his life to kill a villain that should attempt to kill
the King. I profess before God and Men, that I, when I was so aspersed, was of
this opinion, That he was both a Villain and a Traitor and deserved sudden and
cruel death, that would presume in his heart to think so evil a thought as to
kill the King: for my own part I had rather be a slave to my Liege Sovereign,
then a Ruler amongst the Rebellious.

I am througly convinced, that Monarchy is that Government which God has
ordained and set his stamp upon; and all other Government is the Ordinance of
man immediately, though approved by God, as the Seventy were under Moses, and
that no person upon earth can by Gods law question or bring to punishment the
person of a Monarch. This we all know, both Jews and Gentiles, that hold the
Divinity of the Scriptures, that the Church of God (before Christ) was
beholding to a Monarch, both for their Church-Laws and State-Laws. For the
Revelation of the Will of God, and the manner of his Worship, Moses the Monarch
was the first mediator, into whose hands the first glorious Gospel
dispensations were put. God revealed himself immediately to Moses, and the
people received Gods mind immediately from their Monarch Moses. The first
Revelation of the Covenant of Grace was given to Adam the Monarch of the World:
The second manifestation of the Covenant, with a Seal, was given to Abraham the
Monarch of the Church, and the Gospel Church received all their spiritual
Laws and Ordinances from Christ the natural Son of both: But now the question
will be, Whether Christ ordained Monarchy in the Gospel Church, as well as the
Ministry: if so, show us the Monarchy, I acknowledge this a difficult question,
I do not find any of the Learned so much as touch upon it: indeed I find many
men in the Negative, but scarce one Affirmative in this Question; I find
(though not directly) Hierom and Calvin negative in the Question, That Christ
ordained a Government, and that potestas and ordo, power and order, are
essential in that Government, ^o Divines do deny; but the Modus and titulus in
this government, is that which as yet lies disputable. Some say this government
ought to be Aristocraticall: Of this opinion is that holy and learned Calvin
(which I wonder at) his grounds for it are because he thinks the ancient
government of the Jews was Aristocratical: but the sandy foundation of this
opinion. shows us the weakness of this Argument: For there is nothing more
clear, then that Isreal's government, from their deliverance out of Egypt, to
their captivity in Babylon, was Monarchical, if Supaemacy in one be Monarchy;
so that out of the rains of Calvin's Argument will arise a firm Argument: Thus
if the examples of Civill-government, under the Gospel, must be according to
that under the Law (for there the force of Calvin's argument lies) then Monarchy
is the government that must be erected in the time of the Gospel: but we pass
this. Hierom is of opinion, which he grounds on Dan. 7.18. That when the great
Day of Gospel-Reformation shall come ( i. e.) when the Roman Monarchy is
destroyed, then (says he) all Kingdoms shall be thrown down, and there shall
be no government at all, only the Communion of the Saints. But this Opinion
(as it is much built upon these Times, so) it is built on a sandy foundation,
upon a mistake in the interpretation of Dan. 7. 18. and it is absolutely
contradictory to these prophetic promises of uniting the two Tribes, and the
ten Tribes, under one King or government, ( i. e.) making them, as at first,
one Kingdom under one King; and against those Texts which promise to the Jews,
That in the Gospel-dayes amongst the Gentile-Gospellers, He will raise up Kings
to be their nursing Fathers, and Queens to be their nursing Mothers, and many
other texts: therefore we pass this also. The noble and most learned Hebrews,
for the most part, conclude, That God will call them again, and make them a
famous Monarchy: So that the worst of them hold, that Monarchy shall continue
until the end of the world: indeed Levy Ben Gerson, an Hebrew, upon the first
of Sam. 8. pleads for Aristocracie; and to advance it, he (like the Serpent)
bites Kingly-Government by the heel: like as the Prelates on the one hand, and
the Independents on the other hand, plead against Presbytery, so does he
against Monarchy: For he picks up the excrements of the Kings of Judah and
Israel, and from their illsavouring infirmities conclude, therefore their
government is such as their infirmities were, which is such a childish weak way
of arguing, that it deserves no answer: As if because the Priests were naught,
therefore their Office must be naught: or because a Sacrifice was lame,
therefore the Temple was naught: or as if because the image on the gold is
defaced, therefore the gold is naught: this is peevish-childishness, therefore
we pass that also, and come to the question, Whether Christ ordained Monarchy
to be in the Gospel Church? To that we answer negatively, as to the Title.

1. No King on Earth since Christ's incarnation, to this day, can show an
extraordinary or immediate Call from God to be King, as David could, and
Solomon could, for he was chosen King, by God, before he was born.

2. There is no King, since Christ, that can say he has a natural right to
his Kingdom. Succession, that ended in Christ, who had a true Title, by natural
succession, to be Monarch of the World, as descending from Adam, Luke 3. and a
natural right to the Monarchy of the Jews, as descending of Abraham, Matthew. 1.
So that Christ only is naturally according to the flesh, by succession, the
King of the Jews and Gentiles; and in this sense is Romans 5. 14. to be
understood, where Adam is said to be a Type of him to come, that is, as he was
Monarch of the World by divine institution, and natural right: so that he that
claims since Christ's incarnation, by a natural right, the Monarchy of the
World, or Kingdom of the Jews, usurps the Office of Christ; for Christ only is
Monarch of the world by a natural descent, and in this respect he is both King
and Priest after the order of Melchisedeck; for Melchisedeck was without
beginning of days, or end of time, in respect both of his Priestly and Kingly
Office, without beginning of days, that is, in respect of his pedigree; for he
was both King and Priest by natural succession from Seth the son of Adam,
which was time out of mind; For none at that time were able to tell the
antiquity of his descent, who by birth was both Monarch and Priest; and then
this Melchisedeck was without end of time: For neither the Kingly Office, nor
the Priestly Office were extinct in the Church until Christ came, in whom met
both the Kingly, the Priestly, and the Prophetic Office: this Christ was
according to the flesh the natural son of Melchisedeck, who having carried up
to heaven with him his humane nature, sits a King, a Priest, and a Prophet in
that nature in heaven for ever, on his Churches behalf; and in this sense
Melchisedecks offices are without end of time; for our King and our Priest is
ascended up into heaven, where he makes continual intercession for us; so that
since him there is no succession of Monarchs by lineall descents: but
Magistracy is not made null under the Gospel, because it cease in respect of
a natural title by succession For God has ordained by his approving
providence, other ways of erecting Monarchs then by succession or immediate
call, as David was Monarch over the countries round about him, not by
succession, nor by an immediate call from God, but by conquest; so that the
great Office of Monarchy may lawfully come in at other doors, though the door
of succession and immediate calling from God be shut. But this is not the
question.

That Christ has not abolished Monarchy under the Gospel, nothing is more
clear: For government is a moral thing, and stands as sure as the fifth
Commandment: Now Monarchy is Gods government, therefore it stands firm with
the fifth Commandment, which Laws he came not to make void, but establish.

We may truly argue therefore for Monarchy under the Gospel by an argument taken
a fortiori: For if under the Law God gave to his Church Monarchical
government, much more does that great blessing belong to the Gospel Church,
Paul exhorts that prayers especially be made for Kings, that they might be
converted, that so under them the Church might lead a peaceable life, so that
Kings were to be brought in under the Gospel as well as others. It is true
indeed, there was not immediately after Christ's ascension a visible established
Magistracy in the Church, because the Church was not then established: Besides,
there was no need of Magistracy at that time, for Christ the absolute Monarch
of heaven and earth by a true and unquestionable title, both by succession and
conquest, after his ascension, according to his promise, sent his holy spirit
in an extraordinary way upon his twelve Apostles, who dividing the world
amongst them, went forth in the power of the Holy Ghost conquering the people:
During their time there was no need of any Magistracy, for their protection;
for the Holy Ghost protected them beyond all the Magistracy in the world; it
released them out of the strongest prison, brake open the strongest gates, and
knocked down their stoutest enemies, as Paul, who was doubtless some great
Magistrate amongst them; for he was the companion of Herod, and when he was
converted, the Church had peace round about; which argues, there was none
before his conversion greater then he: he punished the scandalous, as Ananias
and Saphira: it gave (like a Monarch) large boons to those that desired it; it
healed the sick, gave limbs to the lame, raised the dead, and by its imperial
power made spirits of men in every Nation bow down to the Apostles commands:
this extraordinary presence of the spirit with the Apostles, was beyond all the
Monarchs in the world; for this Spirit saved all the passengers in the Ship,
when the Ship was broken all in pieces, which all the Monarchs in the world
could not do; this Spirit raised Paul from death to life after he was stoned,
which all the powers in the world could not do; therefore there was no need of
a Magistracy to protect them in that Age, the power of working Miracles was
their Magistracy at this time (say some.)

We may truly affirm, that since Christ's universal conquest on the Cross,
after his Resurrection, from that day ( Matthew. 28. 18.) that he divulged this
universal power in heaven and earth; the Church has not been left without a
true Monarch, for Christ is that Monarch who gave Commission to his Disciples
to divulge his Laws, and command the world to observe them, and he would be
with his Ambassadors to the end of the world; so that the true Church cannot be
without a Monarch, who by a natural right according to the flesh, raigns over
them, and will reign in the midst of his enemies, and make all their designs
promote his honor, and his Churches good; this grand privilege only the
Gospel Church injoys, for the Jews had only temporal Monarchs, according to
the flesh, who died away, but they had not a spiritual Monarch, who by right
of Succession came, whom (through unbelief) they reject to this day, though for
certain he is their lawful natural King, by a natural right of Succession,
being of the Lineage of David, and he is our natural King (we being Gentiles)
by a right of Succession from Adam; and he is spiritually the King, both of the
Jews and Gentiles, by that spituall infinitely glorious Conquest, which he got
over the Wrath of God, and his Divine Justice, over the Powers of hell, and all
their malice, and over the souls of the Elect, and all their sins; so that he
is by Conquest the Monarch of the Gospel Church, so that the Church under the
Gospel can never be without a Throne, and one to sit upon that Throne.

In the last place, this we do affirm, that soon after extraordinary gifts
ceased, and that extraordinary Succession of Ministers which Christ promised to
be with til the end of the world ( Mat. 28. 20.) succeeded, God raised up a
civil Magistracy for the protecting of the Church, propagation of the Gospel,
and preservation of the Ministry: This Magistracy was visible in England
before any other part of the world; and as Rome furnished our Magistracy with a
godly orthodox Christian Ministry, so not long after our Magistracy furnished
Rome with a godly Magistracy, to rescue the Ministry out of the Jaws of those
Heathen Dragons: Lucius about 170 years after Christ (being a British King of
this Nation) was called to be Gods Vicar (as Elutherius Bishop of Rome terms
him) this Christian King sets up Christ's Laws and Faith in his Kingdom,
pulling down Paganism, and setting up Christian Bishoprics in the room of the
Pagan Flamins.

About 130 years after, out of the same Royal British blood, God raised up
that famous Witness for his Truth Constantine, who became the first great
protecter of the Christians throughout the habitable world; he was the first
that made Rome, which for a long time had been the Devils Throne, to become
Gods Throne, Rev. 12. He threw down the bloody Dragons, the Emperors, and Rome
afterward became famous in her Magistracy and Ministry for Christ, beyond all
the world, until Antichrist arose, and drove these Witnesses into the
Wilderness, and made them war sackcloth; since which rising and tyrannizing of
Antichrist, there has been a visible Magistracy and Ministry in England, as
Witnesses to the Truth of Christ, though many times in great obscurity through
outward persecutions: it would be here too tedious to relate what might be said
of the Magistracy and Ministry of England, we will only say thus much, that
the Kings and Bishops of England testified to the Truth against the Popes
Antichristian Usurpation more then others, and before any other Witnesses; for
about the time, Anno 800. when the Popes were swelled to their height, even
then shall we find (when other Kings kissed the Popes feet) the Kings and
Bishops of England opposed their Usurpation.

What if I did assert this? That the first lawful Christian Magistracy under
the Gospel arose in England, from England it went to Rome; wherefore a little
while (half an hour) it flourished and caused great peace in the Church; but
when Antichrist arose, he drove the lawful Magistracy and lawful Ministry of
Rome into Sackcloth, and into the Wilderness, that is into some remote place
from Rome; observe it, Rev. 12. 14. The Woman, that is, the Church that brought
forth such a happy Son as Constantine: this Woman by Antichrist is drove into
the Wilderness (says the Text) into her place; whence I conclude that England
is this Wilderness. For first, this was the place from whence a godly
Magistracy went unto Rome: and secondly, this was the place unto which the
Witnesses were drove again, where I say have been visible in sackcloth since
the Popes usurpation of Rome: nay, let me add this to my assertion, that the
lawful Monarch of Rome by a true Line of Succession was Charles the King of
England, who was beheaded on a lofty Scaffold at noon at his own door, January
30. 1648. For if noble Sir Robert Naunron that learned Antiquary, and noble
Lawyer say true in his Fragmenta Regalia, cap. 1. p. 2. whose words are these;
Remarkable it is, (says he) concerning the violent desertion of the Royal
house of Britains, by the invasion of the Saxons, and afterward by the conquest
of the Normans, that by the vicissitude of times, and thought a discontinuance
(almost a thousand years) the Royal Scepter should fall back into the Corrent
of the old British blood, in the person of Henry VII. together with whatsoever
the German, Norman, Burgundian, Castalian and French achievements, with the
intermarriage which eight hundred years had acquired, incorporated, and brought
back into the old Royal Line.

Hence then I prove, if Henry VII. were the lawful Successor of the British
Kings, then he was the lawful Successor of Constantine King of England, who
conquered Rome; and if Henry VII. be the lawful Successor of Constantine, then
those lawfully descended of Henry VII. but this lawful Family of the Stuarts
are lawfully descended of Henry VII. ergo. The Stuarts are the lawful
Successors of Constantine the Great, the first Christian Emperor of Rome: there
are very many other ways which to some seem clearer, whereby to prove this
truth? If so, know! Oh Rome, that the Lion of the North, thy lawful Emperor
and true Christian Magistrate, will suddenly arise to the utter confusion of
that bloody usurping Prelate, which by his subtle treacheries has caused the
lawful Magistrate, the lawful Emperor of Rome (drove into this Wilderness,
where in sackcloth the office has continued, having finished that prophetic
testimony in the year 1648.) to become a slain Witness for Christ: the other
office of the Ministry lying dead ever since, but the three years and an half
of their lying dead is almost expired, and then the same Offices shall arise to
the eternal ruin of the Pope, and Popish Idolatry: but no more of this in
this place, I hope some Antiquaries will be so truly Noble, that they will
plead a distressed Kings cause, and clear this Title of his, which is
doubtless to them an easy thing, and may procure them great renown in after
Ages; for my part I shall say no more of it in print, unless I am challenged,
and then if no body will take up the Cudgells in the Quarrel, I am resolved,
neque clipeum objicere, neque causam deserere, though indeed I have as much
upon my weak arm as I am well able to bear, well able to do I say? I
profess my self (as in the undertaking, so in the defending of so great a
cause as I have taken in hand) utterly unable without the Divine hand to
support me: The reason why I have discoursed so much of Monarchy is, because I
am fully persuaded that the great Reformation to be wrought amongst Jews and
Gentiles, shall be wrought by Monarchs, when God shall open the eyes of the
Jews, to know assured that the Lord Jesus is their true and natural Monarch
according to the flesh, and their natural Priest, that is, by Birthright, as
Melchisedech was; then shall they look on him whom they have pierced, and mourn
over him, they shall then be converted: Now this conversion is designed in that
Gospel Epistle written to the twelve Tribes, called the Epistle to the
Hebrews, As the knowledge of their true Monarch and Priest shall work
wonderful conversion amongst the Hebrews, so the knowledge of a lawful
Magistracy and a lawful Ministry shall work a wonderful change at the same
time amongst the Gentile Churches, who are now overwhelmed with the cruel
tyranny of the usurping Prelaticall power of Rome: A lawful Monarch rising
shall be the instrument of a glorious Gospel-reformation, of restoring the
Witnesses, and of the overturning of the Roman Empire in its pontifick Head.
Much of this opinion is that Dutch Divine in his Clavis Apocalyptica, to whom
John Durie the Scotch man binds himself as in a Dutch duel, where he falls to
stick and snee with him; for says the Dutch Divine in page 89. A high
Potentate amongst Evangelicall Professors shall arise, and be exalted, to the
terror of the Papists, and shall open again a free course to the Gospel, and
reestablish the exiled and oppressed Gospellers. And John Durie out of the
sootie region of a dark intellect, gives us this dark notion in p. 70. (which
he calls the Preface to this Dutchmans Book, intending that the Reader should
put on his black spectacles to read the Dutchmans white Book withal.) I
believe (says John Durie) that we shall not have any great earthly Potentate
at all ever to appear for the Lamb in this battle, but that they shall join
always against the lamb-like nature of the Saints, to oppose and destroy it.
How can two be more contrary? I must leave them, though I leave John in the
dark, who participates more of the man of his country, then of the nature of
his Countrymen.

There are some questions that betray ignorance, rather then discover wit, as
this; say some, How can it be said that in Henry 8. days when the Abbeys were
pulled down; in Q. Elizabeth's days, when the Kingdom it flourished, and
Religion prospered and was countenanced; and so in King James's time; How can
the Witnesses be said then to be in sackcloth?

In part we have answered to this elsewhere; but let such take this as one great
part of the answer, let them read diligently the history of our Nation since
Henry the sevenths time, and observe the counterworkings of the Pope against
the Protestant Reformers, and they will say they were in sackcloth.

I shall conclude this Preface with a short discourse of our former
reformations, not so much by way of information, as premonition to him whom it
concerns.

The objects of every reformation have either been civil (...) ^^clesiastick
matters. A civil reformation has respect either to the offices in the State,
or to the Laws in the State: the office of State in the Head has been
unquestionable in all ages, except in times of rebellion or usurpation; and
then, not the office, but the persons in the office have been aspersed and
questioned; In all which ungodly actions, the Pope, and the Popish Clergy
always had a hand. Indeed the Popes have grapled with the supremacy of Kings,
and usurped a supremacy in this Kingdom over the Kings in Ecclesiastic
affairs, and in that respect their offices have been questioned, but the Kings
of England never yielded up their right to the Pope, but kept the supremacy of
Church and State affairs in their own hands, not only since the Norman line
came in, but in the time of the Saxon Kings, as appears by many of their Laws
and Charters which respect the Clergy, wherein the King, as Head of the
Church, does Ecclesiastica authoritate dispose of the Rites of the Church, and
the great Offices thereto belonging, promoting some, and debarring others, whom
they please, from the office of Archbishop or Bishop. This supremacy the Norman
Kings kept, which was mostly the ground of this quarrel betwixt the Kings of
England and the Popes; who were the cause of the English Kings wearing
Sackcloth; for the Popes never suffered them to live quietly, but always
either raised their own subjects to rebel against them, or foraigne Princes to
invade them; but most commonly the Pope sets the Religious Houses against the
King; for there the Pope kept the Banddogs to werry Royalty, when it opposed
this supremacy.

The insolency, strength and wealth of the Clergy caused accidentally a
reformation in the Church, (which is the proper object of a reformation) now
this must be premised before we can proceed. We must know that Lucius the first
Christian King, when he erected Bishoprics, he gave estates to those
Archbishops and Bishops which he placed in the Kingdom: he did but according to
the light of nature in it: For the Pagan Priests had means allowed them: The
three Archflamins and the twenty eight Flamins of the Pagans the King turned
into so many Archbishopricks and Bishoprics: Afterward the Saxon Kings
erected many more religious Houses, Chanteries, Monasteries, Hospitalls, and to
which livings were given for the maintenance of the Ministry, and relief of
the poor, the giving of these livings was not the person that was sowed in the
Church as some have erroniously conjectured. These Church Lands anciently were
called by their right name, Appropriations, because they were appropriate to a
particular Succession of Clergymen, which were of several Orders and Houses,
each of which made a body Politic, and obtained either of the Pope or of the
King, that their Successors (suppose the Incumbents, Priors, Abbots, or
Prebends) might without institution or induction of the Ordinary be perpetual
Incumbents* so that as one of them died his Successor might forthwith enter
into his place: Hence they were called Appropriations. When the Clergy had
appropriated these livings to themselves, they grew idle, lascivious, proud,
rich, and rebellious, insomuch that the Pope for the most part, making them of
his Faction, curbed the King of England in his own Dominion: whereupon Henry
VIII. partly to secure himself from the enraged Pope, but chiefly for the
profit of the Abbeys and religious Houses pulled them down, which that he might
do effectually, and with much applause he engaged the Lords and Commons against
them, who envying their pride and wealth, were easily drawn to concur with the
King in the same: And that they might gain a party in the Clergy, this work of
pulling down Abbeys was reported as the only high way to a Reformation of
Religion, (and indeed there was a great alteration in Religion for the better)
Hereupon the Magistri novae Disciplinae, the Masters of new Discipline (these
were the Protestant Divines) they were embraced by the King, (just as the
Presbyterians were by the Parliament, when they took away the Bishops lands)
the King made large promises, until the Parliament had conferred the
Church-land upon him, and then the Masters of the new Discipline were as much
slighted as the Presbyterians are now; and thus appropriations become
impropriations, justly so called, because they were put into improper hands;
Laymens hands. From this Discourse, I draw these two inferences.

1 All the Reformations, as yet, have been but sackcloth Reformations.

2 It Is a land-devouring, King destroying, God-provoking, Soul-damning sin, to
be guilty of Sacrilege: Let that King then that looks for a blessing from God,
make conscience of restoring that to the Church which is her due,
notwithstanding long detained from her: Let no man think that I plead for my
self in this, for I am no Clergy man: I must break off here abruptly, for the
Printer grutcheth at my prolixity. The blessing of the eternal Trinity be upon
thee ( Reader) in reading this and the ensuing Tract, that from it thou may
receive light and comfort in these dark and disconsolate Times.

FJNJS.
REader, since nothing is more common, and nothing more dangerous then Erratas,
to prevent that common danger I have given thee here the Erratas, to keep thee
from error: thou have only here those in Lingua Testium, and not all those, but
only the gross ones, such as upon a swift perusal I found most gross: I
durst do no otherwise, lest the Printer should (as those unworthy fellows that
printed Manus Testium) totally neglect the printing of the Erratas sent them,
whereby the book suffers exceedingly; as also in the leaving out of many
clauses misplacing stops, Commas, and Parentheses, and crowding together
distinct matter in a confused heap, with mistaking of Texts, as in p. 14. there
Hebrews is put for Revel. and in f. the fourth seventeen for seven Psalms,
which seven relate the Church her great distress, and her glorious deliverance
by the mighty hand of God; and in f. fourth Papists is put for Pa^^ias, p. 21.
for this present r. the Protestant. p. 16. ex ejus r. ex ciis. for...endatiae
r. mendariae p. 17. for Sybillae fraudulentia predicet, r. sub illa
fraudulentia perdidet. and in p. 81. the fifth and sixth lines are confused,
and several other places which I have forgot, having not the Erratas by me.
This I give thee to free my self from the censure of tolerating errors;
especially in that which so nearly concerns me.

IN the Title in Proposition 7. for never read were. in the last words in the
Title page, for beasts read beast. p. 5. l. 24. r. Petrus Galatianus. p. 6. l.
21. understood, r. understood so. p. 7. l. 25. 1650. r. 1650. per their
account. p. 8. l. 21 beasts r. best. p. 10. l. 7. 40. r. 400. p. 16. l. 6
October r. December. betwixt p. 16. and 17. three words are left out. p. 25.
penult. Pape r. people. p. 30. Rome r. powers. p. 31. eruditi r. ineruditi. p.
32. l. 6. malice r. maladies. l. 23. a symbolicis r. a symbolis. l. 32. r. who
knows not. p. 37. l. 4. raines r. ruins. l 25. worst r. most. p. 38. l. 26.
from Seth the son of Adam r. from Adam. p. 42. l 3. wherefore r. where, for. l.
14. I say have r. I say they have. l. 24. thought r. through. p. 44. l. 24. man
r. name. l. 45. l. 27. this r. his. p. 46. l. 3. person r. poison. betwixt p.
40. and 41. two or three words are omitted.


