Charles par la grace de Dieu Roy de la grande Bretaigne,
P. St^nt excudit


THE DIVINE RIGHT OF GOVERNMENT: 1. NATURAL, AND 2. POLITIC.


More Particularly of Monarchy; the only Legitimate and Natural spece of
Politic Government. Wherein the Phansyed State-Principles Supereminencing
salutem populi above the KINGS Honor: And Legitimating the Erection of
Polarchies, The popular elections of Kings and Magistrates, And the
Authoritative and compulsive establishment of a National conformity in
Evangelical and Christian duties, Rites, and Ceremonies. Are manifested to be
groundless Absurdities both in Policy and Divinity.

By MICH: HUDSON.

(...).

Mat. 22.21. And Paul said, I have lived in all good Conscience before God
until this day.

Act. 23.1. But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call
Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things which are
written in the Law and the Prophets. And herein do I exercise my self, to have
always a Conscience void of offense toward God.

Act. 24.14.16. Printed in the year 1647.

To his most Sacred Majesty, Charles, by the grace of God, King of Great
BRITAIN, France and Ireland; defendor of the Faith, etc.
Most Gracious and dread Sovereign:
WHen I behold the prodigious preposture and confusion which reigns in your
Majesty's Dominions (where servants ride on horseback, and Princes walk on
foot; where subjects are clavered up into the Kings Throne, and the King
debased below the condition of a freeborn subject) me thinks the wisdom and
goodness of God (whose castigations of his children are his ordinary Heralds
to proclaim his Commands of Reformation) does by these sacrilegious
usurpations upon your Majestyes Sacred Prerogatives, (which have produced these
National calamities wherein your Majesty is the principal sufferer) Intimate a
National guilt of the like usurpation upon the more Sacred Prerogatives of God
(wherein your Majesty, to whom God has delegated the Supreme Authority, has
been (in a Legal construction) the principal actor) and that God has permitted
your Majestyes subjects to possess themselves of your Throne, and act as Kings
in those things, whereunto no King did ever by any Commission Authorize a
subject, because Your Majesty has formerly possessed your self of Gods Throne,
and acted as a God in those things, whereunto God did never by any Commission
Authorize a King. Pardon (I beseech Your Majesty) my audacious and rude
expressions (extorted from my pen by the Nature of the matter charging the
guilt upon Your most Sacred Majesty of a Crime, whereof, I dare be deposed Your
Majesty was never any way conscious. For the most Sacrilegious Champions of
these times, have experimented Your conscientious resolutions to be so
completely postur'd in the Militia of Sanctity and Religion, that neither their
fiercest assaults, nor subtillest temptations could ever make them accessory to
the least thought of alienating those things, which Your Majesty did believe to
be made Sacred only by the Temporary dedication of men: which is an obvious and
evident Demonstration to the world, how horrid and abominable the very thought
of a Sacrilegious Intrusion would be to Your Majesty, (if rightly understood)
upon those Divine prerogatives which were made Sacred by Gods own institution,
from the foundation of the world. And that therefore Your Majestyes Aberrations
in this kind, have been Circumstantiated with no less innocence of soul, no
less zeal to the glory of God, the prosperity of his Church, and the Spiritual
welfare of his and Your people, then the Resolutions of David were for building
the Temple, or of Uzzah for saving the Ark of God. So that I cannot but expect
these unexpected expressions to breed an amazement in Your Majesty; for
prevention whereof, I shall in plain terms declare what I understand this
Sacrilege to be: And that is,

All usurpation of Power over conscience in the enactment of Laws and Statutes
for the Regulation thereof in matters which are not of Political cognizance;
And under the sanction of Personal or Pecuniary mulcts to enjoin a National
conformity in confession of Evangelical and Christian Faith, and in Evangelical
and Christian forms of worship, Government, and Discipline.

Which were neither duties, nor indeed things in rerum Natura, when Politic
Government did first receive it is Institution from God; and therefore cannot be
directly of Politic cognizance, nor any fundamental or Essential part of the
object of Politic Government; as the tenth Chapter of the second Book does
more clearly manifest.

The design of which Chapter (being the due limitation of the Kings Power in
ordine ad extra Regalia and Metapolitica;) And of the subsequent Chapter (being
the due extension of the subjects obedience in ordine ad Regalia and Politica)
were the principal Inducements that gave life unto this present discourse, and
is indeed a service whereunto I do acknowledge my self able to bring more zeal
and good affection then any other abilities: yet I could not choose but (like
Balaams Ass) Employ the utmost of my pore endeavors to secure both my Master
and his subjects from the fierce wrath of that angry Angel, which me thought I
saw standing in the way with a drawn sword in his hand, ready to take
vengeance for both their sacrilegious exorbitances: And thereupon resolved
rather to hazard the crushing of my Masters foot against the wall of worldly
reputation by an humble and dutiful representation of his error (which I knew
to be committed in the Innocence of his soul) then by an undutiful silence or
palliation thereof, to prompt or permit him (quantum in me) to gallop on into
mischiefs (in my apprehension) destructive both to his temporal and Spiritual
welfare.

Sr, God is my record, I do not plead this exemption of Conscience from the
Jurisdiction of Regal Power, for mine own sake; out of any design that I have
thereout to suck the least advantage unto my self, either by gaining a
toleration to profess or act contrary to any Law, Statute, or Ecclesiastical
Canon; enjoining a conformity in these Evangelical duties. (For I do
acknowledge mine own conscience so fully satisfied, concerning the
Orthodoxnesse of the Faith professed, the Religion of the forms of worship
practiced, the warrantablenesse of the Ecclesiastical Government established,
and the Comodiousnesse of the Ecclesiastical Discipline exercised in the Church
of England, (as to my self, and all others of my persuasion) in the Reign of
queen Elizabeth; Your Royal Father, and Your Sacred self (til these late years
of frenzy) that mine own Conscience would witness all such designs in me, to
be designs for gaining a toleration (not to be Conscientiously devout and
pious, but) only to be unconcionably profane, licentious, and Atheistical;) Or
yet by engratiating my self with any of the Spurious Grandees of these times,
(who now soar aloft in the highest Region of Pomp and Magnificence, through a
supportment from those feathers which they have with Sacrilegious hands plucked
from your Majesty's wings: And (like ambitious Icarus) have Artificially
cemented and fastened the same unto their own arms with the wax of Serpentine
Policy; which (me thinks) I see ni danger every minute to be dissolved and
melted by the heat of Gods Wrath and Fury against their Sacrilegious
exorbitances, and themselves (in danger to be precipitated (like that ambitious
Aspirer) into a sea of perdition and misery.)

For (Notwithstanding I do profess the concurrence of my own judgment with
theirs (concerning the justice and Religion of the desires of such, who out of
an innocent zeal do seek the liberty of Conscience in the exercise of those
duties which are not directly and perse of Political cognizance; That so
(after Paul's example, Acts 24.) they may preserve their Consciences void of
offense toward God, though the way and form whereby they worship that God,
may be censured for Heresy; (and that happily also, not unjustly) in the
judgment of other men * yet) I hope both my precedent practices and my pen at
present, will sufficiently attest my detestation of their Illegal and Impious
practices, to compass these Legal, honest, and warrantable desires; and
thereby Vindicate the innocence of my thoughts from all such unworthy
Sycophancy and Temporizement. For The searcher of all hearts knows, that when
I first put pen to paper for the composure of this discourse, I did expect to
make mine account for the same in another world; (where there is no hope to
find any place for such Pusillanimous Arts and Insinuations) before it should
be exposed to the censure of this.

So that my only design in arguing for this pre-eminence of Conscience above
all Regal Power and Authority in order to these Evangelicall and supernatural
duties, was the discharge of mine own Conscience, in my last (as I then
supposed) office of duty and service to Your Majesty and my fellow subjects, by
an humble representation of the dangerous (though I well hope, Innocent)
Aberrations of both; For in diseases springing from a cause of that nature; tam
ultimus quam primus ad sanitatem gradus est novisse morbum. And therefore my
purpose was (out of a sense of my duty toward Your Majesty and my country,
who have so just a Title to any service of mine, which may be any way conducent
to Your happiness and welfare) to bequeath (as a Legacy) unto each of You, a
Sovereign Recipe, proper for the cure of each of Your present distempers. And
to that purpose,

1. To Indigitate the (...) unto Your Majesty, that so Your Majesty might act
in the duties of Your Sacred calling within Your proper sphere, without any
sacrilegious Intrusion upon the Sacred Rights and prerogatives of God.

2. To Indigitate the (...) unto my fellow subjects, that so they might act in
the duties of their calling within their proper sphere, without any
sacrilegious Intrusion upon the Sacred Rights and prerogatives of Your Majesty.

And that so both Your Majesty might permit Your subjects to enjoy those
Immunities, And Your subjects permit Your Majesty to enjoy those prerogatives,
which neither can deny unto other without guilt of sacrilege.

And this indeed was the very scope and design of the whole Treatise, which
though it be ultimum executione, and obtained the last place in my Book (the
common fate of all ends) yet was Primum Intention, and had the first place in
my thoughts; So that whatsoever is spoken in the former book of this Treatise
(concerning the Divine Right of Natural Government and the several species
thereof) or in the latter book (concerning the Divine Right of Monarchy (the
only Legitimate and Natural spece of Politic Government,) and the several
acceptions thereof) was but intended for an Introduction to facilitate the true
understanding of those precautionary Muniments against these two sacrilegious
Intrusions, which are the subject of the four last Chapters of the second book,
treating of Monarchy in its last and Theological acception.

I hope my discourse will not be offensive to Your Majestyes great Council of
State, or the learned Lawyers of either Tribe, because it endeavors to make
Divinity speak the Prerogative of the King, and liberty of the subject. For
though some Ignaros pretend these things to be the peculiar business of
Statsts and Innes of courtmen, and not of scholars and churchmen: yet the more
learned sort are not Ignorant, that all municipal Laws are or ought to be
grounded upon the External part of the Moral Law (which is the direct and
proper object of Politic Government, and which is the just bounds and limits
of all humane Power and Authority, whether Ecclesiastical or civil;) And
therefore will not censure the pen of a Divine treating of Monarchical duties,
to rove Extra crepidam. For there is no case in the Civil or Common Law which
is not reducible unto some precept of the Moral Law, and therefore must needs
be capable of a Theological, as well as of a Political cognizance; and to be
made a case of Conscience, as well as a Case in Law. At officiis quis Idoneus
istis? It is only the narrowness of our sufficiency, and not of our
profession, which secludes the Interest of Divines from any humane
concernments, whether of Religion or justice. I confess the External sanction
(which is the coercive part of a Law or Statute) to be peculiar unto their
Political cognizance. But the fundamental and directive part of that Law or
Statute is no less of our Theological cognizance then of their Political.

For it is manifest by Chronology of Scripture that there was a King and a
Priest, (the one to Rule, the other to direct;) many hundreds of years before
there was a Lawyer in the world, and that both the Regal and Sacerdotal office
and dignity were conjoined in one person, viz: MelchiZedeck, who was of greater
Antiquity, then Noah's flood; after whose death (within less then one hundred
years) this Legislative honor (I do not mean that which relates to Power and
Authority, and is peculiar unto Kings: But that which relates to advice and
Council, and is an honor whereof subjects are capable) is by Jacobs prophecy
entayled upon the Tribe of Levi, (as well as the Sacerdotall honor) until
Shiloh come. And therefore I hope they have no cause to be angry that I plead
this near affinity of their profession with Theology. And surely if those
smatterers in State Policy (whose Ignorance makes them apt to carp) were as
much masters in the mysteries of their own Art, as Bodin, Berclay, and other
learned Lawyers have been who have writ of this subject, they would acknowledge
Divinity (and more peculiarly the Holy Scriptures themselves) to afford a more
exact and complete model of Monarchy, and more perfect Rules of Government and
obedience, then can be cul'd out of the writings either of Aristotle, Plato,
Xenophon, Cicero, Livie, Tacitus, Bracton, Moor, Smith, or any other Grecian,
Roman, or English Politician; who by act or story have been most renowned in
this way.

To exhibit a glimps of which truth, I have purposely endeavored to confine my
pen within that Sacred Cirumferancce (in a manner) through my whole discourse
of Monarchy: The defects whereof do not proceed from any barrenness or
unaptnesse in the soil, to bear a crop of this kind of grain, answerable to the
expectation of the most Critical Statist, but merely from the insufficiencies
of the Husbandman, whose Indexterity has reaped this sorry Crop, out of that
fruitful and Luxuriant soil.

And to the intent Your Majesty may take a superficial survey of the whole
Treatise; I have thereunto prefixed a brief Analysis, representing both the
sum and Method of the same, purposely thereby to direct Your Princely eye
unto that part which Your Majesty shall judge worthy Your perusal, though
indeed the part, which above others I designed for that honor, was the tenth
Chapter of the second book; in the penning whereof, I had a more particular eye
upon Your Majestyes Immediate service, then in any other: Because I conceived
the subject thereof (being the due limitation of Regal Power in ordine ad extra
regalia) to be of the most Immediate concernment to Your Majesty.

And thereupon also presumed that it would not disgust Your Majesty, although
it was served up from the hands of an unskilful Cook, no way gifted for
seasoning a discourse to relish a Palate, so exquisitely judicious as I know
Your Majesty's to be. Only my former experience of Your Majesty's gracious
indulgence (in vouchsafing me the honor to taste of such homely fare as my rude
pen and fancy (which Nature did never aptate for courtly flourishes of wit or
eloquence, the proper food for Princely eyes) have made an Extemporary
provision of) has grounded a confidence in me to present unto Your Majesty
this unpolished publication of mine own judgment, in a business so far
transcending my mean abilities, that I prognosticate a necessity of my
betraying much weakness and insufficiency therein; which I resolve rather to
expose to the worlds censure, then to betray the least want of duty or
affection to the service of a Master who has honored me with so high a trust
as sometimes Your Majesty was pleased to repose in me: whereof (I conceive) I
could not show my self any way more unworthy, then by my silence in a
business (seeming to my apprehension) of so great importance to Your Majesty's
present and future happiness.

And therefore to insinuate the promptitude and devotion of my soul, to make
true payment unto Your Majesty of my due debt of duty and service, surmounting
the proportion of ten thousand Talents (though the summa totalis of my
abilities did never equivaliZe) account to one hundred pence) I have compiled
this trifling Treatise, for the Patrocination whereof I have presumed to make
my addresses to Your most Sacred Majesty. For though I know nothing wherefore
it should find acceptance or entertainment in the world either for its own
sake, or its Fathers; yet I doubt not but the Relation of so Illustrious and
eminent a Godfather may put an estimate upon it in those eyes, from which it
could never otherwise expect an auspicious glance.

But lest I should add the irksomeness of Impertinent prolixity unto my other
innumerous exorbitances; I will conclude these Dedicatory addresses with that
short Petition which Your Majestyes customary Indulgence has taught me to ask,
viz: That what Your Majesty shall herein find to be ill spoken, you would be
graciously pleased to interpret to be well meant, By

From my Close Prison in the Tower, 9. Sept. 1647. Your MAIESTYES Most Loyal
subject, and most humble and dutifully affectionate Servant, Michael Hudson.

The Analysis of the Whole Government 1. Natural, which is the subject of the
first book. Analysis Lib. 1.
Concerning Natural Government,

Two things are considerable.
1. The Nature and Original thereof, of which, Chap. 1. The species thereof
which are 1. Internal Government over the Immediate acts and effects of the
soul; or Internal form of the Creature; The exercise whereof, does pertain
only unto God himself. Chap. 2. and 3. 2 External over the External actions
and motions. Of the creature, which is twofold. 1. Extraordinary and
Miraculous, the exercise whereof does pertain likewise only unto God himself.
Chap. 4. 2. common and ordinary, which is twofold. 1. Primitive and Original,
the which kind God himself also does Immediately exercise in his External acts
of providence over all his creatures. Chap. 5. 2. Deriv^tive and Instrumental,
which one Creature by Divine Ordinance does exercise over another. And this is
twofold. 1. General, which is the order and Government established by God
amongst the three Immediate species of the universe. viz. Angels, men, and
Natural Agents. And of this there are two sorts. 1. That which Angels do
exercise over both the other two species. viz. Intellectual and n^turall
Agents. chapter 6 2. That which the Intellectual Agents do exercise over the
natural Chap. 7.
2. Particular, which is the Order and Government established by God amongst
the particulars of each of these three species of the universe, wherein is
declared the degrees of subordination amongst 1. The Angels themselves. 2.
Natural Agents themselves. 3. Intellectual Agents themselves; which is the
ground of Politic Government, the only Legitimate spece whereof is
Monarchy, as is declared in the second book. Chap. 8.




Treatise, manifesting the Divine Right of 2. Politic, (the only Legitimate
spece whereof is Monarchy) which is the subject of the second book. Analysis
Lib. 2.
Monarchy is considerable in a

Triple capacity.
1. Moral, is it relates to the habit of prudence, (which is the abstract
consideration thereof according to its Essence) in which sense it is the
subject of the five first Chapters of this second book, wherein is showed. 1.
The nature of Monarchy, and of that Jus Divinum whereof it does participate,
and that Monarchy in its Moral and Natural capacity is June Divino implicito,
and in its Theological acception Iure Divino Explicito. Chap. 1. 2. What those
six several Divine sanctions are, which entitle Monarchy to this Ius Divinum
Implicitu^. Chap. 2. 3. The nature of Polarchie (which is the opposite curse
and privation of the blessing of Monarchy) and of that ^us Divinum whereof it
does participate. Chap. 3. 4. What the six several Maledictions are, which
declare Polarchie to be ^u^e Divino Vindica^ivo as Monarchy is Gratios^. Chap.
4. 5. The laudable expediencie of reducing every Polarchie to a Monarchy, and
the criminal inexpedience of translating any Monarchy into a Pol^rchie. Chap.
5.
2. Natural, as it relates to that supremacy which is the ground and matter of
Monarchy, and of the Monarchs title to the Crown^ in which sense, it is the
subject of the three next Chapters, wherein is showed, 1. That the title of
Popular Election is absolutely and in every case unwarrantable and unlawful.
Chap. 6. 2. That the title of Birthright and Hereditary Succession is the
only title which is ordinarily Lawful, and which can pretend to warrant from
the Ordinance of God. Chap. 7. 3. That the title of Conquest in it self is
neither lawful nor warrantable, nor cannot create a just and lawful title to a
Crown, but only in such cases where it is legitimated either a Priori, by an
Immediate warrant and Command from God, or else a Posteriori, by the extinction
of the issue Royal. Chap. 8.
3. Theological, as it relates to the end of Monarchy, which qualifieth all
Monarchical duties both in King and subjects; in which sense it is the subject
of the four last Chapters of this second book 1 wherein is showed, 1. The
nature and species of the end of Monarchy, and what is meant by God and the
Kings honor, which is the principal end of Monarchy, and what by Salus
populi which is the less princip^ll; And wherein these ends do consist. Chap.
9. 2. The duty of Kings in the due limitation of their power in Ordine ad extra
Regalia and Metapolitica. Chap. 10. 3. The duty of subjects in the due
extension of their obedience in Ordine ad Regalia and Politica. Chap. ^^ 4.
What influence, oaths, and Covenants may or ought to have upon the mutual and
Monarchical duties either of King or subject Chap. ^^

The Scope and Substance of the whole TREATISE.
ALl Authors (whose judgments and intentions have fitted their pens for the
communication of a complete and grounded knowledge of the subject of their
Treatise unto the apprehension of their Reader) have endeavored to frame their
discourses in that method, which deduceth things from their Original causes,
grounds and principles, the right understanding whereof has, by the
approbation of the most judicious Writers of all sorts, and in all ages, been
constantly applauded for the most profitable guide and introduction to the
right understanding of the matter principally intended to be insisted upon in
the sequel of their discourse. My purpose therefore being in pursuance of that
duty, service and affection, wherein, by the law both of God and nature, I
stand obliged unto my King and Country; to present them with an Idea of that
unparalled policy, which the providence of God and the prudence of our
Ancestors has established and continued for many ages together in this
kingdom, to the unspeakeable comfort, benefit and happiness of all those, who
live under the protection thereof, if they were truly sensible of the abundant
manifestation of Gods mercies toward them in the establishment and
perpetuation of Monarchiall Government in this nation, being the only policy
honored with Divine institution and many other sacred sanctions, whereof no
sort of Polarchie whatsoever is capable (all Polarchies being only corruptions
and opposite curses and privations of the blessing of Monarchy and the fruits
of Divine malediction for sin, as I shall demonstrate in the sequel of this
discourse) and that also of such a Monarchy as is grounded upon Hereditary
succession (the only ordinary title to sovereignty and Royal power, whose
justice and Legality is warranted by Divine Ordinance. Conquest (in its best
attire) being the most eminent of curses, and all popular elections most
Sacrilegious sins, (as the latter book of this treatise will fully manifest)
I shall endeavor (in imitation of the most judicious Authors) to facilitate
the right understanding of the Divine Right of Monarchy, by observing this
Method in my ensuing discourse.

1. To lay the foundation and Basis thereof in a brief explication of the
nature and Species of Jus Divinum, which I shall premise for an introduction to
this treatise.

2. To proceed in the superstructure, by declaring the Divine Right of Order
and Government in general, together with the several kinds thereof, as it
has its effects in all the three species of the creatures of God, completing
the immediate composure of the universe (whereof, the first sort, are
Celestial as Angels, the second intellectual, as men, the third merely
natural, as al other inferior creatures, whose actions and motions are framed
and ordered merely by the Law and light of Nature. First, in their General
Relation to God their Creator, Secondly in the specificall relations of the
different kinds of creatures to one another, and thirdly, to the mutual
Relations of the particulars of each of these three species among themselves)
which shall be the work of the former book of this treatise.

3. To finish and consummate the work, by manifesting the Divine Right of
Monarchy (which is the only policy or humane Government warrantable by God
and Nature) First, in its Original and Efficient. Secondly, in its Form and
Essencie. Thirdly, in its ground and matter. And Fourthly, in its end and use,
which shall be the business of the latter book of this Treatise.

An Introduction to the Treatise, declaring the Nature and Species of Jus
Divinum.
IN regard the Divininy or Divine right of Government (and particularly of
Monarchy) is the principal scope and intendment of this Book, It will be
requisite in the first place to premise a description and series of the Nature
and species of Jus Divinum, to the intent the Reader may more perfectly
understand what this Jus Divinum means, and thereby the better judge what
sort of Jus Divinum may justly and properly challenge a place in each sort of
Government, and particularly in Monarchy.

Jus or Right is that which is conformable unto and warrantable by some Law.
And Jus Divinum or Divine Right, is that which is conformable unto and
warrantable by some Divine Law. The General and Universal Divine Law is the
will of God: Which is the General and Universal cause of all things that
have, or ever shall have a being: (both in their esse, and their modo essendi,
Whether it be happy or miserable) so that there is nothing exempted (be it good
or bad) from the participation of some kind of Jus Divinum, because the will of
God (which is the only ground of a Jus Divinum) does extend unto every
entitie, both in its being, and manner of being.

And therefore to guide the Readers apprehension in a more Methodicall path
unto that Jus Divinum which properly claims a place in Monarchy, I shall
endeavor the Investigation thereof, through all the several degrees of
entities, (and that also in all their several states and conditions relating
to Order and Government) till I come to that Jus divinum from which this
natural blessing of Monarchy does derive its Divine Sanction, and the
opposite Curse of Polarchie its Divine Malediction: Divis. Genesis
beginning at the first and general division of Jus Divinum, in Jus Divinum
Absolutum, and Relativum.

Absolute Divine right is that which is grounded upon the eternal will of God
concerning himself, considered in his absolute and abstract capacity as he was
before all worlds without relation to any creature, as a subject, object or
instrument of his glory, either in its Creation or Government; in which sense
it is the very Essence of God, for in God the Law which guides, the light
which shows, the right which emanateth, and the Object which participateth,
are all of them Really and Essentiallie Identicall with the subject. Which Jus
Divivum is defined by God himself, in that most absolute definition of
himself given to Moses Exodus 3. in that transcendent expression I AM. And this
Jus Divinum has no place at al in Government, which relates Universally to
the creatures of God.

2. Relative Divine Right is that which is grounded upon the perpetual will of
God concerning the world and the creatures therein. And this Jus Divinum is
twofold, viz: Creativum and Preservativum.

Creatiue Divine Right is that which is grounded upon the will of God
concerning the manifestation of his power in the Creation of the world, and the
creatures therein, whereby he gave an Original being to the whole Universe,
upon which ground he is most appositely termed by Aristotle Natura Naturans,
because he gave to every kind of Creature, First such a Nature and being,
Secondly, such a degree of Natural excellence in that being, Thirdly such a
Natural understanding and will proportionable to that perfection and
excellency, as was most conducent to his own glory; And the creature which
received all these from that Divine fountain (the will of God) is upon that
ground termed by Aristotle Natura Naturata, whereof there are three several
kinds and degrees.

1. Natura Naturata Angelica, whose being is purely spiritual and celestial,
and the perfections and excellencies proper unto Angels in that being, are
likewise spiritual and celestial; And therefore the understandings and wills
of Angels do reach unto Celestial and spiritual matters, viz. Those high and
transcendent excellencies concerning God and Celestial joys, the transcendant
love and praises of God, and other Celestial blessings and duties: whereof no
other creature is capable in that nature and measure as Angels are; although
even Angels themselves are not capable of these things in their proper native
and Infinite capacity as they are in God, the Natura Naturante, but only in
such a finite proportion of perfection and excellency as is suitable to their
created and finite (yet most excellent and glorious) nature. But yet the
understandings and wills of Angels are not so precisely limited to these
Celestial and spiritual matters (which is their proper object) but that they
participate also of whatsoever either Intellectual or Natural Agents are
capable, and that also in a more eminent degree of perfection.

2. Natura Naturata Intellectualis, whose being is mixed, viz. partly spiritual
in relation to the Rational soul, and partly Natural in relation to the
humane body and accordingly the perfections of humane nature are partly
Spiritual which are proper to the soul, and partly natural which are proper
to the body. And therefore they have both spiritual understandings and wills
which are Essential to the rational soul, and capable of spiritual and
Celestial objects, and natural knowledge, and natural Inclination, whereby
they judge of the objects which are proper unto natural Agents, and that also
more exactlie then the natural Agents themselves are able to do.

3. Natura Naturata Naturalis. Whose being is merely natural, and accordingly
their perfection is merely Natural, and therefore their Analogicall
understandings and wills are only vers't in natural objects, for though there
be three degrees of natural agents, (viz. 1. Sensitive, which is the most
noble kind of all natural Agents, because they participate of sense and
appetite, which do most resemble the faculties of understanding and will in man.
2. Vegetative, which is in the second degree of Excellency, because (though
they want sense and appetite, yet) they participate of some natural light and
inclination, whereby they know and desire things which concern their vital
being, nourishment, and augmentation.

3. (...) natural which participate only of a natural light and inclination
to direct and excite them unto their natural and proper actions and motions)
yet none of them do ever reach unto any Celestial or spiritual matters,
either in their knowledge or inclinations: but only unto natural and
corporeal objects. Now this Jus Divinum Creativum (in regard it concerns the
creatures only in their Original esse and Reception of a being) cannot
properly claim any place in Government which concerns the creatures only
in their perpetuation and continuance.

2. Preservatiue Divine Right is that which is grounded upon the will of God
concerning the manifestation of his providence in the preservation of the world
and the creatures therein, and this Divine Right is that which does properly
claim a place in Government and all the several species thereof, for the very
nature and Essence of providence consists in the Government, guidance, and
disposal of the creatures of God in their being, actions, and motions. And
this Jus Divinum is twofold, Nativum and Redemptivum.

Native Divine Right is that which is grounded upon the will of God concerning
the Manifestation of his providence in the preservation and Government of the
Creature in its Native Original and created state of being. And this again is
twofold, Gratiosum and Vindicativum.

Gracious Divine Right is that which is grounded upon the will of God concerning
the manifestation of his native grace and favor unto the creature in the
preservation thereof in its Native and happy state of being, by the Regulation
of its actions and motions according to the rule of those native Divine Laws
given unto each creature severally according to those several degrees of
parfection wherewith he had enabled them for the performance of their several
duties required by those Laws. And this Jus Divinum is twofold, Primitivum
and Derivativum.

Primitive Divine Right is that which is grounded upon the will of God,
concerning the manifestation of his Native Grace and Favor in the preservation
of the creature in its native and happy state of being, by an Immediate
influence of his gracious providence in the Government and Regulation of all
its actions and motions both Internal and external. And this Jus Divinum
before the Apostasy of men and Angels did enjoy a place in the Government of
all the creatures in the world, but from the Epoche of their disobedience and
Rebellion, (whereby their native state of happiness was converted into an
adventitious state of misery) this Jus Divinum retained a place only in Gods
gracious government of the persevering Angels, who by their continuance in
their native duty and obedience to God, did make a just return of Gods native
grace and favor unto them in their native Investiture with those Divine graces
and blessings which did enable them unto the performance of those duties.

And therefore God does still continue his native Grace and Favor unto these
Angels, by preserving and continuing them in their native state of happiness,
and by his immediate guidance and Regulation of a^ ^ther actions and motions,
according to the Rule of that native Divine law, which they received from Gad
at their first Creation.

2. Derivative Divine Right is that which is grounded upon the will of God,
concerning the Manifestation of his Native grace and favor in the preservation
of the creature in its native and happy state of being, by the mediate
Subordinate and Isntrumental agencie of the more excellent kind of creatures,
in the Government and Regulation of the external Actions and Motions of such
of their fellow creatures as it pleased God to make inferior unto them in
perfection and excellency. By virtue of which Jus Divinum Angels were invested
with a power and authority over all their fellow creatures, the Intellectual
Agents or men over all natural Agents which were naturally subordinate, and
subject both to men and Angels. And these were the native and Divine Degrees
and Orders observed in the Government of the world at the first creation,
wherein the Lord himself was the King and Generalissimo, Angels (whose
Superlative perfections did constitute them in the highest degree and rank of
creatures) were as the great Council and Nobility of this King, and Gods
imediate Captain Lieutenants in this great Army of creatures. Men (whose
perfections were of a middle rank and degree) were as the inferior Magistrates
and gentry of this great King, and the subordinate officers in this great Army
of creatures. And natural Agents (whose mean and low condition and quality
made them Incapable of any interest in the active part of Government, or of any
power and command in Relation to the two former sorts of creatures) were as the
yeomanrie of this great King, and the body of this great Army of creatures. And
therefore in all their external Actions and Motions were subject and
subordinate to the Orders and Commands, first of God, secondly of Angels,
thirdly of men. But this Jus Divinum (by virtue whereof these admirable degrees
of Order and Government were observed amongst the creatures) was but of a short
continuance (as to the greatest part thereof) for Beelzebub and his
confederates presently renounced their Alleagance to their King and General,
and by their subtilties seduced all mankind from their duty and Obedience,
whereby all of them became guilty of high treason, and forfeited their Native
and Original Right and interest, in all the prerogatives and blessings which
they held in Capite of this great King, and in all that power and authority
wherewith they were invested by Commission from this Generalissimo. Whereupon
the second sort of Jus Divinum Nativum obtained a place in the Government of
these Apostate Angels and men, and all the natural Agents which were created
for the use and service of men, viz. Jus Divinum Vindicativum.

2. Vindicative Divine Right is that which is grounded upon the will of God
concerning the Manifestation of his justice and equity in the preservation of
the creature in that adventitious state of misery, whereinto it is elapsed by
its voluntary and ungrateful transgression of that Divine Law, for the
performance whereof he had enabled them in their native investiture with those
Divine graces and blessings which were requisite thereunto. Which misery of the
creature does consist in the just and due punishment inflicted by God, for its
most unjust and undue disloyalty and Rebellion. Which punishment is twofold,
Spiritual, and Personal; 1 The Spiritual punishment is the General
disenablement of the creature for the performance of its native duty to its
Creator, by the General devestment of the creature of all its native graces
and blessings, in place whereof does succeed the opposite and unnatural curses
and privations which dispose the creature to all manner of unnatural
wickedness and rebellion against God. And this spiritual punishment in Devils
is the Universal depravitie of their wills, (whereby their native transcendent
love of God, is transmuted into the like proportion of hatred of God, and their
transcendent zeal to immitate God in doing good, to the like zeal to oppose God
in doing evil.) And in men this special punishment is the Universal
obscurity of their understandings, and the Universal depravitie of their wills.

Quaere. It may be demanded why God should punish the Apostasy of man both in
his will and understanding, and the Devils only in his will?

Sol. That understanding and knowledge which the Devil still retains in its
native perfection, is not left him by God for a blessing but a curse, to
aggravate his guilt in sinning against the clear light of his Conscience, in
so perfectly hating that God, whose goodness he so perfectly knows, and so
obstinately acting that evil, which he knows to be opposite to that
goodness. Whereby he contracts a greater guilt upon himself then man does in
his disobedience, who though he sin will ll^^, yet he sins partly
Igno^antlie in this state of Apostasy. And therefore as the Malignan^y, both
of his Original and Actual sins, are less then the Devils, (in regard the
Devils Original sins did proceed immediately from his own will, and man's
partly from the Devils temptation. And the Devils Actual sins of perfect
knowledge (and so are directly sins against the holy Ghost) but man's partly
of Ignorance) so shall man's judgment and condemnation be less severe and
rigorous then the Devils.

2. Personal punishment is the torment and execution, whereof the creature is
made sensible for the just punishment both of its Original and Actual
delinquencies. And this consists of two parts, viz: a positive and a primitive
part. The positive part is the paena sensus, so frequently inculcated by the
Schol-men: for though spirits (as Devils and damned souls) cannot be sensible
of pains in that manner as bodies are, yet doubtless they shall be truly
sensible of pains and torments of a higher nature, in that eternal fire of
Hell prepared for the Devil and his Angels. The primitive part is the paena
Damni, which is the sense of the loss and privation of those joys and
comforts whereof they participated in their native state of Innocence. And
this is that Jus Divinum which still has retained a place in the Government of
the Apostate Angels since the first instant of their disloyalty and Rebellion,
and shall for ever continue the same place to their everlasting woe and misery.
Wherein man had likewise deservedly participated, if the wisdom of God (out of
the abundance of his Grace and mercy toward man) had not erected a new Jus
Divinum purposely to anticipate the wrath and vengeance due to man for his
disobedience, and to redeem him from Hell and damnation. And this is Jus
Divinum Redemptivum.

2. Redemptive Divine Right is that which is grounded upon the will of God
concerning the manifestation of his mercy in the preservation of Mankind
(together with the creatures made for his use) not in his native state of
happiness, nor in his Apostate state of misery, but in a new estate of Grace
and mercy, whereunto he is advanced by the mediation of Christ, and thereby
re-invested with a capacity of all those blessings and graces, which he enjoyed
in his state of Innocence, for performance of the same duties required by the
native Divine Law. And this Jus Divinum Redemptivum (like the former Jus
Divinum Nativum) is twofold, viz: Gratiosum and Vindicativum.

1. Gracious Divine Right is that which is grounded upon the will of God
concerning the manifestation of his mercy in Christ, by the restitution of all
men unto such a proportion of natural blessings and graces as may re-invest
them with a capacity of performance of those Divine duties in such a proportion
as they are required unto Salvation now under the Gospel. And this again is
twofold. viz: Intrinsicum and Extrinsicum.

1. Intrinsecall Divine Right is that which is grounded upon the will of God
concerning the manifestation of his mercy in Christ, by making those natural
gifts and graces wherewith he has re-invested any man, or any other external
means which he has vouchsafed unto any man, effectual unto life and
Salvation, by infusing into his heart those three Internal and Supernatural
Graces of his Spirit, viz: Faith, Hope, and Charity, without which the most
excellent gifts and blessings of nature, and the most glorious outward means
that ever any Christian did participate of, cannot be effectual, and through
whose superveniencie, the meanest gifts and blessings of nature do become
sufficient to make a man Eternally happy. For surely less glorious outward
means did never appear in any man then the believing Thief, for we never
read that ever he heard a Sermon in all his life, nor that ever he received the
Sacrament, or did a good deed, or frequented any good and Religious company
till that hour when he came to be hanged; yet was he saved, when Judas who had
enjoyed the benefit of all these outward means was damned. But in regard this
Jus Divinum does not relate unto men as they are parts or members of any humane
or politic society, (but only as they are such new and strange kind of
creatures, as Nicodemus (though a ruler in Israel) could not imagine how or by
what means they came to be such, that is, such as in that respect are selected
and separated from the world, and become Mystical members of Christ's Mystical
body, and his invisible Church, and subjects of Christ's Kingdom, which is not
outward of this world, but inward, spiritual, and Mystical) It cannot
possibly make claim unto any place in that Government which concerns men
only in their Politic and sociable capacity.

2. Extrinsecall Divine Right is that which is grounded upon the will of God
concerning the manifestation of his mercy in Christ, by vouchsafing unto men
the outward material and occasional means of life and salvation by Christ.
And this Jus Divinum is twofold, Remotum and Immediatum.

1. Remote Divine Right is that which is grounded upon the will of God
concerning the manifestation of his mercy in Christ, by vouchsafing unto men
the Remote and Mediate means of life and salvation by Christ, in the
Renovation of the Original and native gifts and blessings of nature in the
creatures in such a measure and proportion as is most conducible to those three
General and common ends and uses for which he has destinated all creatures
capable of the benefit of this Grace and Mercy of Redemption by Christ, and
these are, 1. To be monuments of Gods infinite mercy and goodness toward
mankind in this great work of Redemption by Christ, for whose sake God has
reprinted some of the obliterated Characters of nature in the soul of every
Intellectual and natural Agent.

2. To be Instruments and Ministers of the good and benefit of Gods Elect, to
whom alone the Spiritual grace and favor of God does make these outward and
material means, formally effectual unto life and salvation. 3. To be
witnesses against themselves at the day of judgment, for their inexcusable
Ingratitude in the Renovation of their former disloyalty and rebellion against
God, after the publication of so general and gracious a pardon of mercy,
being notifyed unto all men in the common gifts and dispensations of the
Spirit, the Characters whereof every man may find written in his heart, Romans 2.
v. 12. and that sufficient to leave him without excuse. Romans 1.20. Now although
these common gifts and graces of renewed nature in man, be most properly
Spiritual and not Natural, in regard all of them do proceed ab Extrinseco
from the Spirit of God, and none of them all ab Intrinseco from the corrupted
nature and Essence of man, for then they should now be parallel and similer in
all men as they were in our first Parents, and had been also in all their
posterity, if they had persisted in their Original Integrity. Whereas now we
see they are distributed variously according to the good pleasure of God, to
some one sort of gifts, to some another, and those also in different degrees of
perfection. For Plato, Aristotle, Hipocrates, and Galen, did much exceed most
men in the perfection of their Intellectuals. Diogenes, Cato, Fabritius, and
Scevola did much exceed others in the powerfulness of command over their
affections.

And Hercules, Hector, Achilles, and Alexander did as much exceed others in the
Magnanimity of their Heroic spirits, yet are these spiritual gifts usually
termed natural (and that not without warrant of Scripture) in two respects. 1.
In respect of the subject which is the nature of the creature which by these
common gifts and Graces of the Spirit is renewed in all men in some degree of
perfection, though never in any unto that height of perfection wherein they
were communicated unto men in their native and created state of happiness
before the fall. Noe not in the most absolute knowing natural men that ever
lived, for we see with what great difficulty Aristotle and Plato (though the
most learned amongst the heathen Philosophers) attained to an Imperfect and
obscure knowledge of the esse, the Unity, and Eternity of God. All which Adam
in Innocence clearly and punctually understood by nature. 2. These common
gifts and Graces of the Spirit are termed natural in respect of their object,
which is only natural and created Entities in their natural and created
capacity: Of which natural things S. Paul speaks, Romans 8.1.2. But as for
Christ the Mediator and ground of the new Covenant of Grace, in regard he was
no natural creature, he could not possibly be the object of any natural
knowledge whether native or renewed. Nay the natural knowledge of Angels
themselves could not reach him before it pleased God of his special Grace and
mercy to reveal him. For after God had completed that Royal opifi^e of
nature (his six days work) there was not such a creature as Christ to be heard
of amongst all those numerous and wonderful varietyes of nature. Neither could
men or Angels possibly imagine how or by what means such a person as Christ
should receive a being. For as Christ was not an ordinary work of nature, but a
new miraculous work of mercy, so neither was the manner of his production
natural (either by Creation or generation) but supernatural and Mystical, by
an incomprehensible O^^mbration of the Holy Ghost. And as the person and
conception of Christ did transcend the knowledge both of men and Angels, so
likewise did the offices of Christ, and all his Acts of Mediation and all those
Divine Graces (viz: Faith, Hope, Charity) which invest it with a real Right
and interest therein. And therefore there was never one syllable so much us
muttered by any heathen Philosopher or other profane writer concerning any of
these, nor is it possible to attain the least glimps of knowledge concerning
them by any other means, then the Immediate revelations of the spirit of God.

Quaere. It may be demanded how these mere natural gifts and blessings in
heathens should be a means of salvation, seeing no man by them can possibly
attain the knowledge of Christ, the sole fountain of life: And therefore why
heathen men should be damned, to whom God never (since the publication of that
General pardon by Christ) Imparted the means to be saved?

Sol. Though these natural gifts and blessings in heathens be not the direct
and Immediate means to attain the knowledge of Christ, yet they are the
Remote and occasional means, because they are sufficient lights to discover
unto men the insufficiency of their own abilities, to perform those duties
which the Law of God and nature exacteth. And by that means to occasion to
seek for life and Salvation elsewhere; as the Ethiopian Eunuch did, and the
converted Thief, who acknowledging his own unrighteousness sought to Christ
for refuge, and (according to the rule of Petenti Dabitur) obtained what he
sought, though he never knew the Scriptures.

And therefore it is but justice that those heathens who do not rightly employ
that one talent (which S. Paul affirms they have received from God. Romans 1.)
should receive their wages with the evil and sloathfull servants, though these
woes shall not be equal to the woes of those Caytiffes who have mis-imployed
five talents. viz.

1. The talent of natural gifts and blessings, 2. The talent of Religious
Education, 3. The talent of Gods Word and Sacraments, 4. Of Religious
Magistracy, 5. Of a learned Ministry.

Now this Jus Divinum is that which does properly claim a place in that
Government which concerns heathen men without the bosom of the Church, and
Ignorant of the will of God Revealed concerning Christ the Mediator. Which is
the ground of Jus Divinum Immediatum.

2. Immediate Divine Right is that which is grounded upon Jus Divinum is
twofold, Extraordinarium and Ordinarium. 1. Extraordinary Divine Right is that
which is grounded upon the will of God concerning the Manifestation of his
mercy in Christ, by the Immediate and extraordinary revelations of his spirit,
concerning the mystery of salvation by Christ, which was the means which God
vouchsafed unto Adam, and diverse of the patriarks, Prophets and Disciples of
Christ, and the converted Thief also, before the knowledge of Christ's Gospel
was fully completed in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles: of which the
Apostle makes mention Heb. 1. And this Ius Divinum in regard it relates
either to particular times, particular persons, or particular occasions, cannot
properly claim a place in Government, which concerns the constant Ordering
of a society of men. 2. Ordinary Divine Right is that which is grounded upon
the will of God concerning the Manifestation of his mercy in Christ, by the
Ordinary Revelations of his Spirit, declared in the writing of the Prophets
and Apostles, which we commonly call the Scriptures, which were published by
the special mercy of God, for a light and guide to his visible Church, in all
truths requisite to Salvation by Christ. And this Jus Divinum is twofold,
Supernaturale and Natural.
Supernatural Divine Right is that which is grounded upon the will of God
revealed in the Scriptures concerning those Supernatural truths which are the
proper and Immediate means of Salvation by Christ, and not attainable by any
other means but only by Divine Revelations. And these are of two sorts. 1.
Such truths wherein Christ has expressly made any of his love to us. And these
again are twofold, 1. Such as are the object of Christian faith, and those are
such things as Christ has done and acted for our sakes, for the Reconciliation
of us to God, as the assumption of our nature, and the offering it up again
for a sacrifice to God, and all other natural acts of Mediation, which is the
substance and contents of a Christians Creed. 2. Such as are the object of
Christian hope, and those are such blessings as Christ by his act of Mediation
has made us capable of, and which for his sake we expect by prayer to receive
from God, and those are the Supernatural blessings and habits of Faith, Hope,
and Charity; which enable us for the performance of our Christian duties, and
all those Supernatural blessings which are the reward of those duties, and
these are the substance and contents of our devotions. 2. The second sort of
Supernatural truths revealed in Scriptures, are such wherein we retain an
express of our love to Christ, proportionable to those blessings which we have
received of his love to us. And those are such truths which are the object of
our Charity and rules of Christian duties: of which truths Christ meant when he
said, If you know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. Now these Christian
duties are of two sorts, viz: either merely or mixtly Evangelicall. 1. Merely
Evangelicall, are those which consist in the right use of Evangelical and
Supernatural gifts and blessings, such as are the gifts of prophesying,
healing, working of miracles, and the like mentioned by Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 12.
which duties were of no use at all under the old Covenant of works, but were
instituted by God since the fall of man for the benefit of his Church, and for
helps and furtherances to Christian men in the performance of Christian
duties. 2. Mixtly Evangelical duties, are those which consist in the right use
of Natural blessings, and which received their first sanction from God in
Paradise before the Apostasy of man: upon which Apostasy, that law of nature
was absolutely abolished as to that use, to be a Rule and ground for the
Salvation and damnation of man; For no man is now damned because he
transgresses that law of nature, but because of Infidelity, Despair, and
hatred of Christ; which are the opposite vices to Faith, Hope, and Charity,
which consist in the knowledge, confidence, and love of Christ, which that law
never any way related unto.

But yet the same law and Rule received a new Evangelical sanction from God the
Redeemer, who as he renewed the nature of man, so did he also renew the same
law of nature for a new Evangelicall law and rule, whereby to measure these new
Evangelicall duties, which are as necessary to Salvation now under the Gospel
(as S. Paul proves 1 Cor. 13.) as the Legal duties were under the Law and old
Covenant of works, which several duties are the same in substance being
measured by the same Law and Rule, but different in circumstances. First in
their Objects. For whereas under the old Covenant of works, God the Creator was
the adaequate and Immediate object of our love and duty: Now the Immediate and
adaequate object thereof is Christ the Redeemer, 2. Circumstance wherein they
differ, is in the manner of performance; which under the old Covenant was to be
proportioned to the utmost exactness of a most perfect Law, but now under the
new, to the utmost exactness only of our most Imperfect abilities. And this
new Evangelical Law is that whereupon Christ will pronounce that fatal sentence
of Eternal life or death upon all men at the day of judgment, as himself
affirms: Mat. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you; will Christ say to them on his Right hand. Not because they
were Wise, or valiant, or Rich, or Noble, nor yet because they had preached and
wrought Miracles, and cast out Devils, and prophesied in Christ's name; but
because they had fed the hungry, clothed the naked, comforted the sick,
relieved the stranger, fatherless, and widow. And therefore because this new
Commandment of Charity, which is the ground of these duties, is of so necessary
concernment for the Salvation of all men: The Holy Ghost did always express
those practical truths which relate to Charity in plain Grammatical words and
precepts, as well before as after Christ's Incarnation, whereas these speculative
truths, which are the Object of our Faith, and these blessings also which are
the proper Object of our Hope, were commonly represented unto the Church in the
old Testament by Types and Figures.

Ob. S. Paul in disputing this point of Faith and works in his Epistles to the
Romans, and the Galatians, concludes Faith alone to be sufficient to
Salvation; and excludes works as Impediments rather then helps thereunto.

Sol. There be three sorts of works grounded upon three several Laws. 1.
Ceremonial works which were grounded upon the Ceremonial Law which was
abrogated by Christ, and these S. Paul utterly excludes as altogether
unprofitable. 2. Legal works, which were grounded upon the Law of Nature,
which was the ground of the old Covenant of works. And these S. Paul excludes
as altogether Impossible. 3. Evangelicall works which are grounded upon that
new Law, which Christ prescribed, John. 13.34. A new Commandment give I you,
that you love one another. Which new Commandment cannot be understood of that
Love which was the complement of that law which was the ground of the old Cov.
of works, for that was an old Commandment given by God at the first Creation,
before Christ was thought on either by man or Angels, but must necessarily
concern this Evangelical love and Charity which relates to Christ the
Redeemer, and is the Complement of this new Evangelical Law, whereupon this new
Covenant of Grace is grounded. And these Evangelicall works are as necessary to
Salvation as either Faith or Hope, from which it cannot possibly be separated,
as is evident in the converted Thief. For I am sure the Salvation of that Thief
was achieved by as great a mercy from God, and as little merit in himself, as
could be expected in any man that is saved. For we never read of any grace that
he had, or any good work that he did, till he was upon the Gallows; when the
shortness of his life could not afford opportunity for many: and yet in that
short history of his short life, we shall find a record of his Charity, as
well as of his Faith and Hope: For in the first place he rebuked his
blasphemous companion, there was an act of his Charity; Secondly, he justified
Christ's innocence, and acknowledged his power and donimion, there was an act
of his Faith; Thirdly, he prayed to receive the blessing of life by Christ,
there was an act of his Hope, Luke 13.39. And therefore by reason of the
inseparable connection of these three Evangelicall Graces, the holy Ghost does
sometimes attribute salvation to one of them alone, but that is in opposition
to all Ceremonies or legal duties and perfections, but never in opposition to
any one of the other two concomitant graces of the Gospel.

Before I pass from this point of Charity, I shall crave the Readers leave to
digress a little in the recommendation of her results, (arising from the
circumstances observable in Christ's new Commandment of Charity) to the
observation of our new Pharisaicall Gospellers, who disdain all men of a
different persuasion from themselves as Heathens and Publicans.

1. That the Traitor Judas was amongst the twelve when Christ gave them this
new Commandment to love one another: and therefore it was never Christ's intent
to prohibit communication in public and Christian duties with any who did
publicly profess themselves members of Christ's Church, unless where the
parties obstinately either persevere in such heretical opinions as are
manifestly destructive to the grounds and principles of Christian faith: Or
else obstinately persist in such notorious and scandalous courses of life, as
publicly declare them void of Christian Charity. For after this Commandment,
Christ himself did administer the Sacrament of his body and blood to Judas,
as appears Luke 22. although Christ himself was not then ignorant that Judas
intended to betray him that night.

2. That Saint Paul was not amongst the twelve when Christ commanded them to
love one another, though he was then a Chosen vessel, and Judas then a
Reprobate. And therefore Christ did never privilege us to Judge or Condemn
any man (much less to injure or defraud any man under pretense that he is a
Reprobate, and an Enemy to God) for such presumptuous Intrusions into the
Counsels and secrets of God, is an Idolatrous Arrogancy, which the very
Angels of God dare not adventure upon. For what man could have judged Saint
Paul to be a member of Christ, at eleven of the clock that day which was the
day of his conversion, when he was posting to Damascus with strong Commission
from the high Priest, and a stronger Resolution in himself to persecute all
people of all sexes, who professed Christ, Acts 9. And when Christ told the
twelve of that abominable treason which should be acted that night against
himself by one of them, the eleven no more suspected Judas then they did one
another, as appears John 13.2^. And therefore seeing these high Saints could
not determine either of the salvation of Paul, or damnation of Judas; no not
six hours before the Lord himself publicly declared his own determinations
concerning the same unto the world, What a prodigious and horrid pride and
arrogance is it in the petty Saints of our fanatic age, to pass a definitive
sentence in these points upon their Brethren? I could willingly permit my pen
to expatiate in the further Illustration of Evangelicall Graces and Immunities
(to resolve the doubts, and prevent the mistakes of many poor deluded Souls,
who only understand, or rather indeed do only misunderstand, sufficient
concerning the same, to be a ground for the erection of many erroneous and
prodigious fantasies and Chymera's) if the point were as pertinent to my
purpose as to these times. But my Resolution is with all studiousnesse to avoid
impertinent digressions in this discourse. Now this Jus Divinum supernaturale
although it concern Christian men within the verge of the Church, yet in
regard it does concern them only in their Christian and spiritual vocation
as members of Christ's visible Church, does not properly and Immediately claim
a place in Politic Government which concerns men as members of a politic
society.

2. Natural Divine Right is that which is grounded upon the will of God
revealed in the Scriptures concerning those Natural truths which are the
Remote and mediate means of Salvation by Christ, of which truths Christians
and Heathens are equally capable by nature, and whereof Adam in innocence
participated in full perfection, and since his Apostasy the same are renewed
unto all men in some proportion, yea even unto the most ignorant and savage
Indians: but yet are made more clear and manifest unto Christians by
Revelations of Scripture (in those particulars which the holy Ghost has judged
necessary to communicate for the benefit of the Church.) And this Jus Divinum
Natural is twofold: Implicitum and Explicitum. But I shall refer the more
punctual discussion of this Jus Divinum together with the species thereof,
unto a more proper place for an Immediate Introduction to the latter book of
this Treatise, which shall Demonstrate the Divine Right of Monarchy.

2. Vindicative Divine Right is that which is grounded upon the will of God,
concerning the Manifestation of his justice, in the due Retribution of a
proportionable vengeance upon those, who have not made a due return of those
Talents, which they have received by the mercy of God in Christ. 1. To Heathens
(who have missapplied that one Talent of natural gifts and blessings, which
they have received from the Spirit of God, by the Renovation of the obliterated
Characters of nature in every one of their souls in some proportion) a
proportionable measure of truth and nourishment. 2. To Christians (who have
received and misimployed the two Talents, one of Natural gifts and blessings,
which they enjoy in common with the Heathens: and another of the benefit of
Gods Word and Sacraments, a double proportion of wrath and vengeance. 3. To
Christians (who have abused that great trust of their Lord and Master, who has
committed unto them five Talents wherewith to traffic for Gods glory, the good
of their brethren, and the Salvation of their own souls. (viz. 1. The Talent
of natural gifts. 2. Of the Word and Sacraments. 3. Of a Religious Education.
4. Of a Religious Magistracy. 5. Of a Learned and Religious Ministry) For an
exceeding measure of wrath and vengeance; surely those souls which have been
watered with the dewes of all these Divine and Celestial Graces and blessings,
and yet bring forth nothing but the brambles and briers of sin and iniquity,
shall receive a most heavy and dreadful Doom of wrath and vengeance at the
great day of account. Heb. 6. And this Jus Divinum is twofold, Supernaturale
and Natural.

The further explication of which division, I shall refer unto that part
which declares the nature and Maledictive properties of the curse of
Polarchie, and in the interim proceed in the Treatise of Government.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE Divine Right of Government in its General acception, as
it relates to the three Jmmediate species of the Universe. viz. Angels, Men, and
natural Agents.
CHAP. I. Of the nature of Government in general.
THe first thing my Method leads me to insist upon, is the nature and
Original of Order and Government in general, which may be appositely thus
described.

Government is the Administration and exercise of that power and authority
which the Superior has over the Inferior; Where we may observe that
Government is a word of Relation, which, by the rules of Logic, necessarily
requires a Correlatum, and that is subjection, each of them being grounded upon
several qualities, the former upon Power and Authority, the latter upon
Submission and Obedience the one of which cannot exist without the other: And
therefore before the Creation whilst there was nothing in being but one only
God (whose unity could not admit of any degrees of Superiority or
subordination) there could be no manner of Government or subjection. But upon
the very instant of the first Creation, this Relation took place in the world;
For God neither did nor could make any thing, either in nature and Essence
Identicall, or in perfection and excellency equal, or in power and authority
parallel himself; so that the very first creatures which God made, which (by
reason of the Independancie of their subsistence upon any other creatures) I
suppose were the most glorious Angels (for the Rule and Method which God
observed in the work of Creation, was to frame that last, whose subsistence
depended upon the former, and that first which had no such dependancie upon the
latter) being inferior unto God both in glory and power, became subject unto
his guidance, rule, and Government, as likewise all the rest of the Creatures
did as soon as they received a being from him, whose Actions and motions were
altogether ordered and disposed by his wisdom and providence. And therefore
the Grecians do upon very good grounds use this word (...), to signify
principality or Government: which in its proper and native acception signifies
Principium, thereby expressing the Antiquity of Government which had its being
as soon as the world had a beginning.

CHAP. II. Of the diverse kind of Government, and first of Internal.
BUt that we may further Illustrate the nature of Order and Government in
general, it will be requisite to take a view of the several Species or kinds
of Government the first and Immediate division whereof is into Internal and
external Regiment.

Internal Regiment is the Administration and exercise of that Power and
Authority which God has over the Intrinsecall Acts and Effects emanating
immediately from the form and Essence of the Creature: (which form in man we
know to be the soul, and in all other creatures an Intrinsecall form
Anologicall to the soul in man.)

And this kind of Regiment is proper and peculiar unto God alone, and in no
sort communicable unto any creature whatsoever, for the knowledge and trial of
the heart and Reins is a prerogative which the Lord does claim entirely to
himself. Psalm. 7.10. Jer. 17.10. And therefore in relation to this Internal
Government, our Savior Christ himself does expressly inhibit his Disciples
Mat. 23.9. to call any man father upon earth, for (says he) you have one
Father which is in Heaven, to whom alone that Religious and inward honor which
reaches the very thoughts and cogitations of the heart is properly due. And in
the same sense also he Interdicts them the Arrogation of the title of Rabbi or
Master in the subsequent verse of the same Chapter, because that kind of rule
and mastership over the Intrinsecall thoughts and conceits of the mind, or the
inward desires and affections of the heart would be an usurpation upon Christ's
own right and prerogative, even as he is God Omniscient and Omnipotent, and the
same with the Father. And S. Paul in the discussion of a case of Conscience
concerning meats offered unto Idols makes this more plain, 1 Cor. 8. Though
there be many (says he) that are called Gods and Lords, by reason of an
external and worldly power and pre-eminence over the external and corporeal
actions of those who are under their Jurisdiction and Government: yet to us
(says he) us, who are Spiritual, and whose profession relates principally to
the Intrinsecall affairs and acts of the soul and conscience) there is but one
God the Father, and one Lord Jesus Christ: who has any Right or Power to judge
us, as concerning these matters pertaining only to the soul and conscience.

A further confirmation of all which we have in the extent of that obedience
which the Moral Law prescribes, beyond the obedience exacted by any humane
laws, of what quality soever they be, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, or
by what wisdom soever they be composed, whether Divine or Humane. For even
when God himself did institute both the sorts of humane Laws in the Mount,
and commanded Moses to write them (for a perfect rule of worship and policy to
the Israelites, and for a perfect pattern for all other Nations, whereby to
frame a Government both in their Ecclesiastical and Civil affairs) he
therein taught only the Orderings and Regulating of their outward actions,
which the Ecclesiastical and Civil Magistrate (to whom the execution of these
Laws pertained) were able to judge of, proportioning the extent of these
humane Laws, according to the extent of that Government, which he was pleased
to communicate unto humane creatures, whom he does constitute and ordain his
Lieutenants and Duputies for the external Government of this inferior and
Sublunarie world: And therefore does refer the execution of all humane Laws
unto them, yea even that part also of his Moral Law which relates to outward
actions. For indeed the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws of Moses are no other
but (as it were) Commentaries upon that part of the first and second Table of
the ten Commandments, which relates to outward actions, setting down more ample
and particular rules of instruction, whereby to order and regulate the outward
actions of Public Societies in matters concerning worship and policy,
according as the Moral Law had done in brief and general terms, for
regulating the external actions of every private man in particular, in
relation to the same end. But when the wisdom of God did compose that
complete and absolute Law, which should be a Rule for his own Immediate
Government and our Universal obedience, he therein prescribes us directions,
(not only for outward actions, of which also he is the Supreme Lord and
Master, as I shall demonstrate hereafter, but even) for the most secret and
inward desires and cogitations of the heart, whereof he is the sole and entire
Judge and Ruler: all which is more fully declared by Moses (who received that
Law Immediately from the hand of God himself) in his exposition thereof Deuteronomy.
6.5. Where Moses thus Comments upon the first Table. Thou shall love thy Lord
thy God, 1. with all thy heart, this imposes an obligation upon the will and
affections to submit to the commands of God, expressed in the first Table of
the Moral Law. 2. With all the soul. This extends the same obligation to the
understanding. 3. With all thy might and strength. This lists all the outward
members of the body under the same command. Yea and our Savior Christ himself,
who best knew the intent and scope of his Fathers Law, affirms this brief
exposition to be the very sum and substance of the first and greatest
Commandment. Mar. 12.31. In which text our Savior likewise recites Moses his
brief Commentary upon the second table expressed in Levit. 19.18. in these
words, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: which second Commandment
Christ affirms to be the very sum and substance of the second Table,
exacting an obedience parallel to that which is mentioned in the first) by this
short but sweet and effectual expression (as thy self) which prescribes the
proportion of that affection which must be exhibited to our neighbor. Now we
al know by experience, that self-love cannot be confined within the narrow
limits of outward respects, but has its constant influence upon both the heart
and soul, and every faculty thereof, as well as upon the outward members of the
body. Nay this Internal obedience (which relates to that Internal Government
which is peculiar unto God himself) is the only acceptable sacrifice unto God,
and that which he accounts his chiefest honor and glory, and wherein he would
never admit of a partner; for it was never known since the Creation of the
world, that ever God Imported this power and command over the heart and soul
unto any creature whatsoever, though never so dear a Saint and favorite. Godly
Samuel mourned greatly for wicked Saul, but had not power to make him good. 1 Samuel, 15.35. Wise Solomon perceived the pernicious and destructive folly of his
only son Rehoboam, but had not power by reforming his understanding to
prevent the mischievous effects which ensued thereof. 1 Kin. 12. The Prophet
Elisha foresaw, foretold, and lamented with tears (even unto Hazael himself)
the horrid and inhumane cruelty which Hazael should afterward practice upon
the children of Israel; yet could not by that Patheticall premonition prevent
Hazaels future fury and dogednesse unto them; although at the present Hazael
seemed to abhor the very thought of such Inhumanities. 2 Kin. 8.12.13. Nay our
Savior Christ in the parable of Dives and Lazarus expressly affirms, that
though a Saint should descend from Heaven to preach and admonish Impenitent and
wicked men, yet could not his words be effectuail for their conversion, or to
secure them from these flames wherein Dives was tormented; If the Lord himself
did not effect it by that word of truth which Moses and the Prophets had left
upon Record for that very purpose. For Paul may plant by Miracles and
Documents, Apollos may water by Learning and Eloquence, but God alone must give
the increase of sincere and saving Faith and repentance. 1 Cor. 3.

Only it pleased Almighty God to Invest his own dear Son with this Royal
Prerogative, giving all things and all power over all creatures into his hands,
and such a Kingdom and Dominion as should have no end. Esai. 9.6. Psa. 2.
Luke. 1 32.33. John. 13.3. Which places as likewise all other places of
Scripture which attribute any Sovereignty or Dominion unto Christ, are to be
understood only of this Internal government: for of all external and worldly
power and authority, Christ utterly declined and disclaimed the administration
and exercise, reproving the giddiness and precipitancy of the peoples
affections, who would have obtruded the honor of a King upon him, when they
were transported with admiration of his miracles, feeding of five thousand men
with five loaves and two fishes. John. 6.15. For his kingdom (as himself
acknowledged to Pilat) was not of this world, and therefore he taught his
Disciples by his own example to eschew the affection of that kind of power and
domination, which the Kings of the Gentiles exercised over their people,
leaving them a perfect president of meekness and humility in himself, by
taking upon himself the form, and practicing the duties of a servant, not
disdaining to wash the very feet of his Disciples. John. 13.

Whereby it is evident to whom the propriety of Interest and title to this
Internal Regiment of Right appertains; and upon a further scrutiny and
inquisition concerning particulars, it will appear that the practice thereof
has always gone accordingly, and the actual administration and exercise of
all power and authority over the Intrinsecall Acts and Effects of the soul,
has always been the peculiar privilege and prerogative of God. But for an
Introduction hereunto, it will be requisite to premise the several sorts of
divisions and Subdivisions which are Incident to this Internal Regiment, by
reason of the various circumstances whereunto it does relate with one Objectum,
modus, media and finis. 1. The first Circumstance is the object or matter
whereupon God does exercise his power, and that is upon the Intrinsecall acts
and effects of the soul. 2. Circumstance is the manner how God does exercise
his power upon these acts and effects of the soul. 3. The means whereby God
does exercise his power upon these acts and effects of the soul. 4. The end for
which God does, in this or that manner, by this or that means, exercise his
power upon these Intrinsecall acts and effects of the soul.

1. The first division then of this Internal Regiment is taken from the
diversity of the object or matter thereof: viz: the Intrinsecall acts and
effects of the soul, which are differenced by virtue of the different faculties
from whence they proceed, which are, the understanding, and the will, each of
whose acts do likewise admit of a Subdivision, by reason of the diversity of
the subordinate object or matter whereunto they relate, which may be either
Spiritual or temporal matters. So that from this first division and
Subdivision do arise these four kinds of Internal Regiment. 1. That kind which
respects the understanding in reference to Spiritual matters. 2. That which
respects the same in reference to temporal matters. 3. That kind which
respects the will in reference to Spiritual matters. 4. That which respects
the same in reference to temporal matters.

2. Again every one of these four sorts of Internal Regiment (being
considered in relation to the manner how God does exercise his power upon the
Intrinsecall acts and effects of the Soul) are capable of a second Subdivision,
for God does work upon the several acts and effects both of the will and
understanding after a twofold manner: upon the understanding, either by way of
Illumination, or by way of Infatuation; upon the will, either by way of
Obduration, or by way of Mollification and conversion, by virtue of which
several sorts of operation upon the understanding and will, These four kinds
of Internal Regiment above mentioned may be Subdivided into eight subalternate
species.

3. Again every one of these eight sorts of Internal Regiment, may yet be
Subdivided in reference to the means whereby God does work upon all these
several objects, after all those several ways: for either God does operate
immediately by the special and extraordinary means of his Spirit, or
mediately by the common and ordinary means of the Creature: Each of which
means being applicable to every one of the eight species of Internal Regiment
before recited, may branch out those eight species into sixteen particulars.

4. As for the last Circumstance to which this Internal Regiment does relate.
viz. The end for which God does exercise his power upon the Intrinsecall acts
and effects of the soul, I conceive it does rather qualify then multiply the
seveall species or kinds of Internal Regiment: for the end is the very reason
and cause wherefore, and the very rule and square whereby God does by this or
that means, in this or that manner exercise his power upon the several acts
and effects, either of the understanding or the will, whether it be in
Spiritual or in temporal matters. And this end being primarily his own glory,
It is the very Primum Mobile which gives motion and action to all the wheels
of Gods providence: for as in all other reasonable Agents, so in God the most
reasonable; The end is Primum Intention (though ultimum executione) and that
which incites his will to every action. Now Gods glory as it respects humane
creatures (of which we now speak, as being the object wherein both the nature
and parts of Gods internal Regiment are made most conspicuous to us) is
manifested two waves. First by his mercy. Secondly by his justice: which two do
constitute two several ends of Gods internal Regiment. viz. First the
manifestation of his mercy and goodness in the exhibition of blessings and
benefits to the godly, Secondly, The manifestation of his power and greatness
in the accumulation of curses and judgments upon the wicked. And therefore
wheresoever we find any particular acts of Gods internal Regiment (in any of
all the forementioned kinds thereof) recorded in Scripture (as indeed there is
no one kind amongst all the sixteen several sorts whereinto it is
distinguished, but God has upon some one or other occasion left us an express
from his own Spirit to evidence his Right and Title thereunto, materia, modo,
and medijs predictis, as I shall demonstrate in the next place) there we shall
find likewise one of these two ends recorded for the ground and cause of that
particular act of Government and providence in God.

But least the reader should imagine these divisions and Subdivisions of
Internal Government to be some mere Logical or Metaphysicall Notions, it will
not be Impertinent by instances in particular acts of Gods providence, relating
to every particular kind of Internal Government, to demonstrate all the
foresaid divisions to be expressly grounded upon the word of God. And because
the first eight of the foresaid species of Internal Regiment relate unto the
understanding, the latter eight species unto the will; I shall (for a more
distinct and Methodicall proceeding herein) give you first a brief Analysis of
that part of Internal Government which relates to the understanding, whereunto
I shall suit the instances of Scripture.

God does Govern the Intrinsecall acts of the understanding either by way of
Illumination. Immediate. 1. In spiritual matters. As in Revealing unto Adam
that blessed seed which should break the Serpents head Genesis 3. and reiterating
the same unto Noah, Sem, and Abraham in the same manner: Nor was the Immediate
power of God less seen in inspiring the minds of the Apostles, (most of whom
were rude illiterate men) and thereby enabling them not only to record the
mysteries of Salvation for edification of his Church, and to prescribe rules of
faith and manners, which should be oracles of instruction and direction unto
all future ages, but also to utter extemporarie words of wisdom, against which
all their adversaries were not able to reply. Mat. 10.19.
2. Or in temporal By revealing unto his Prophets even all those temporal
afflictions and deliverances which should befall his own people, long before
they came to pass, as the bondage of and deliverance from Egypt unto Abraham.
Genesis 15.13. The beginning and ending of the captivity of Babylon unto Jeremiah.
Chapter 25.8. unto John in Patmos al those imminent calamities which should befall
the Church of Christ til the time of his second coming in the end of the world;
As we may read in the book of the Apocalyp^.

Or mediate 3. In spiritual matters. First by sending visions unto Daniel, and
after sending the Angel Gabriel to expound them, and thereby to let Daniel
understand the number of the years which were determined for the persecution of
the Jews by several Tyrants, for the space of 490 years after their return
from the Captivity of Babylon, at the end whereof Messiah the Prince should
work that great deliverance for all that did or should believe in him. Dan. 9.
4. Or in temporal So Moses became learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians.
Act. 7. And Daniel had Caldean Tutors, by whose Lectures he attained unto
wisdom, learning, and understanding in all visions and dreams. Dan. 1.17.


Or infatuation. Immediate 5. In spiritual matters. As in those who made a
dumb idol by their own act, and then worshipped the same: Esaias 44. in the
Scribes and Pharisees and obstinate Jews, whose eyes the Lord blinded that
they could not see nor understand those things concerning Christ, which many of
the Ignorant people knew and believed. Ioh. 10.42.
6. Or in temporal For it is the Lord who frustrateth the tokens of the
soothsayers and makes Diviners mad: making that knowledge (which they would
seem to have in future events, for the prediction of good or bad success in
men's affairs and fortunes) appear to be foolish and vain. Esaias 44.25.

Or mediate 7. In spiritual matters. As in those false Prophets, and ignorant
Priests which prophesied lies, and neglected the instruction of the people: of
whom the Lord vehemently complains in the Prophet Micha 3.5. Mal. 2.8.
8. Or in temporal As in Absaloms embracing the destructive counsel of Hushai
the Archite, and rejecting the safe and politck counsel of Achitophel, for
(says the text) The Lord had determined to destroy the good counsel of
Achitophel to the intent the Lord might bring evil upon Absalom. 2 Samuel 14.



Now as concerning Gods actual administration of Power and Authority in
ordering and regulating the acts and effects of the will of man (whether by way
of obduration and perseverance in evil, as in Pharaoh, Nabuchad-nezzer, and
Belshazzar. Or by way of mollification and conversion unto good, as in
Manasses, Mary Magdalen, and Paul) the Maxims of Philosophy (declaring the
necessary dependence of the will upon the understanding, and the irresistible
power of the understanding over the acts and effects of the will, by enforcing
(as it were) the will to embrace or refuse whatsoever the understanding shall
propose unto the will, under the notion of a good or evil, truly eligible or
avoidable) do so plainly demonstrate all the power and command over the will of
man in every respect, both of matter, manner, and means, to be the right and
prerogative of God (in regard of his absolute power and command over the
understanding which is the master and guide of the will) that I conceive it not
pertinent to produce any expresses of Scripture, (though it be plentiful in
instances to that purpose) to evidence a truth so clear and obvious. For I
desire to avoid prolixity where the perspicuitie of the matter does rather
recommend brevity to my judgment.

And here I should conclude this chapter of Internal Regiment and the parts
thereof, and enter upon a Polemicall discourse, concerning some important
doubts arising from the premises. But that our former division (extending the
power and authority of God unto the Intrinsecall acts and effects issuing from
the form and essence of all other creatures as well as of men) does require
that for method sake we should in this place speak a word or two of the actual
administration and exercise thereof, both in Supernatural and natural Agents.
As for the absoluteness of Gods power and command over the acts and effects of
Angels, our Savior Christ himself is a sufficient witness thereof, teaching
his Disciples Mat. 6. to pray that their obedience here in earth, might be
parallel to the obedience which is performed to God in Heaven. And the prophet
David makes it the very property of the Angels in Heaven to fulfill the
Commandments of God, and to hearken unto the voice of his words. Psa. 103.20.

Neither are the Devils less subject unto the commands of God, as appears by
their attendance thereupon, concerning the trial of Job, Chapter 1. and the
seducing of Ahab, 1 Kin. 22. their worshipping of Christ, and proclaiming him
to be the Son of the most High God. Mar. 5. Luke 8.28. And by that testimony
which the evil spirit possessing the Damsel of Thyatyra gave unto the callings
and Doctrine of Paul and Sylas: Act. 16.16. And by the different respects of
the evil spirit unto the adjurations of Paul, and of the seven sons of
Scaeva: Act. 19. And as for Gods actual Administration of power and authority
over the Intrinsecall acts of the natural Agents, the holy Ghost does
sufficiently demonstrate it, in recording the readiness of many of them to
execute the commands of God, even in such particular acts as are no way suitable
to their natural Inclinations: as in Ravens to feed Elijah: 1 Kin. 17. In the
whales attendance to receive Jonah and transport him safe to dry land: Jonah
Chapter 1. and 2. In that fire which exercised its natural heat and fury upon the
Kings Officers, and yet altogether restrained the same toward the three
children: Dan. 3. And those hungry Lions which would not touch Daniel in a
whole nights space, yet devoured his accusers in an instant: Dan. 9.

CHAP. III. Of the resolution of some doubts arising from this Doctrine of Gods
Internal Regiment.
Dub.
THE subject of that Polemical discourse, which I mentioned in the last Chapter
to be grounded upon the premises, is a quaere concerning the causality of
sin, which our former proofs and assertions do seem to fasten altogether
upon God, by investing him with the sole and total power and authority over
both the understanding and will of man, in reference to all their Intrinsecall
acts, of what sort or kind soever they be, or in what manner, or by what means
soever they be performed, from whence undoubtedly do proceed all manner of
sins, whether they be sins against the truth and verity of God, as Errors
and Heresies, which are acts of the Infatuated understanding: or against the
justice and Sanctity of God, which are acts and effects of the vitated and
obdurate will.

Sol. The Schoolmen are much perplexed to steer an equal course (in the
solution of this doubt) between the goodness and the Omnipotency of God. And
out of a seeming solicitude to avoid the Charibdis of impiety which makes God
accessory to the least circumstance of sin, they fall into that Scylla of
Heresy, which makes man master of his own will, conceiving that without such
freedom of will, man could not be capable of sufficient guilt, to render God
sufficiently innocent: and so out of an ignorant and impious zeal to defend and
Vindicate the Honor of God in relation to his goodness and Sanctity, they
dangerously wound the same in derogating from his Power and Omnipotency.

But the examination and confutation of these Scholastical Impertinencies would
be too great a digression from my purpose, and therefore I shall seek no other
solution for this doubt, then what the Scriptures themselves suggest: which
presents all Moral actions under a capacity of the two opposite qualifications
of good and evil, the former proceeding from the principal, the latter from
the Isntrumental Agent: and therefore the former must of necessity be a
Positive and Essential property of every humane action, whether i^ relate to
the understanding or the will, because (as we have already prooved) both of them
are wholly guided and ordered by the wisdom and providence of God, the
principal Agent. For which cause, even the most sinful and wicked actions are
good in their substance and essence, and effectually tend to the manifestation
of Gods glory, either as acts of mercy to the Godly (in whom sin produces
punishment, punishment repentance, repentance Faith, Faith the favor of God,
and the favor of God life and Salvation) or as acts of justice to the wicked
(in whom sin produces punishment, punishment hardness of heart, hardness
of heart Incredulity, Incredulity hatred of God, and hatred of God death and
destruction) all which is manifest in the different effects which sin
produced in Godly David, and in wicked Pharaoh. David's murder and adultery
occasioned many reproves and corrections from God. 2 Samuel 12, Psa. 6. Psa. 22.
And these corrections and punishments wrought sorrow and repentance in David's
heart. Psa. 5. that repentance faith and trust in God. Psa. 30. Psa. 31. Psa.
52. Psa. 23. That faith and trust obtained love and favor from God. Psa. 27.
And that love and favor an assured hope of life and Salvation. Psa. 12. Again,
Pharaohs oppressions provoked God to send his judgments and plagues upon him:
Those plagues and judgments hardened Pharaohs heart: That hardness of heart
caused incredulity: And that incredulity the hatred of God: and that hatred
occasioned Pharaohs ruin and destruction in the Red Sea. All which appears in
the first fourteen Chapters of the book of Exodus: Yea the goodness of God,
made the very drunkeness and incest of Lot, the ensuing Incest of Judah, the
malice of the Jews, the treason of Judas, and the injustice of Pilate the
happy and blessed means of life and salvation to man. Yea even Adams fall, the
Original cause and fountain of epidemicall corruption, sin, and misery in
man, was by the wisdom and providence of God, made a means of greater glory
and happiness to the godly, Seotus.
then his perseverance and continuance in innocence could have been. For (as
the wittiest of the Scoolmen most wittily argues) if life had been given as a
reward of our just works; the reward must have been proportioned according to
the work, and our works being finite, could not have merited the infinite joys
of Heaven for their reward: the enjoyment and fruition whereof for one minute,
would have far exceeded the proportion of the merits of our works; whereas
life Eternal and the Infinite joys of Heaven being now conferred upon the
faithful and elect children of God, not by way of debt, or recompense of
merits, but by the free grace and mercy of God; this Infinite gift is
proportioned, not according to the mean and invalid merits of the receiver,
but according to the Infinite and unvaluable grace and mercy of the Donor.

Nay it is most certain, that all sins in the Saints do through Gods wisdom
and providence become a means to increase their sanctification and glory, in
the wickd to increase their woe and condemnation, in both to increase the glory
of God, and are in all these respects perfectly and purely good. But yet we do
not deny but the Scriptures do record all these for transgressions of the Law
of God, and do thereupon pass sentence of death and damnation upon all those
who do such things, or are the Authors of such evils; But then we affirm, all
this obliquity and irregularity (which adds this secondary and accidental
qualification to these actions) not to be any thing Essential to the action,
but a casual and Extrinsecall defect, occasioned by some malignity in the
means whereby, or some imperfection in the object whereupon God does work in
these irregular actions; All which the Apostle makes more plain, James 1.13.
God (says the Apostle) is not tempted of evil (all his intentions and actions
are good,) But then comes the evil when man's lust or wrath (by the temptation
and instigation of the Devil) interveneth and entiseth man to filthiness and
superfluity of naughtiness; And from this malignity in the Devil, and
corruption in our selves, proceeds a constant deficiencie in respect of some
circumstance, which entitles all our actions (even the most upright and best)
unto some Degree of sinfulness and irregularity.

Repl. But then hence again you will infer, that the actual administration
of Gods Power over the understanding and will of man is not absolute in
relation to every circumstance; For that which is already spoken makes it plain
out of Saint James, that partly the Devil, and partly our own lusts have a
share in the guidance and government of all our actions.

Sol. It is true they have a share, but not in the substance of the action, but
in some accidental and Extrinsecall circumstance, and in that also not as
principal, but as isntrumental Agents only, being ordered and regulated by a
superior Agent, even in that very vitiousness whereby they work, and from
whence all evil actions derive their denomination, God so restraining or
permitting the course and fury of their vitiousness and irregularity, that it
shall work its effects in the action, only to such a Degree of evil, as may
serve best for Gods own end and purpose therein. As we may observe in the
Devils malice against Job, Chapter 1. And Labans and Esaus against Jacob: Genesis 32.
None of which could effect the intended destruction, either of Job, or Jacob:
So in Absaloms against David, which did not ruin David, but himself: 2 Samuel
18. And in the malice of the Jews against Christ, which could not (with all
their care in watching and sealing the sepulcher) detain Christ's dead body in
the grave one minute beyond the appointed time of the resurrection. So that as
Austin and Thomas Aquinas rightly observe, All actions, (even those which are
most vicious and irregular in regard of their deviations from, and their
inconformity unto the particular Law of Gods precepts, yet) are righteous and
regular in respect of their conformity unto the general Law of Gods
providence. And the same Deviations.
Father in his confessions, sums up all this in these few words. Deus non est
causa efficiens and positiva peccati operando malitiam, sed causa sine quae non
and permissiva, non Impertiende miseri^ordiam. Which answer suits directly with
Christ's own words, Mat. 18.7. where he fully stateth this very question. It
m*st needs be that offenses do come. There is a necessity that God should
permit such enormities in the world, in regard of that Essential goodness
which arises from Gods ends in all these offenses and evils. But woe be to
that man by whom the offense comes. Mark it, woe to the man, who is the author
of the sin: There lies the blame, thence comes the evil, and there falls the
curse and punishment.

Repl. But this answer occasioneth yet a further doubt concerning the sin of
the Apostate Angels, for though the vitiousness and irregularity of humane
actions might proceed from humane corruptions; And those corruptions from Adams
sin, occasioned likewise through the lies and temptations of the Devil; yet
we cannot possibly find any precedent evil, whereunto to impute the sin and
Apostasy of the Angels but the very Innate and Original imperfection and
vitiousness of their own proper wills and inclinations, which must needs be the
sole and Immediate work of the Creator: for if God had made their
understandings and wills Originally good and perfect, the fruits thereof could
not have been corrupt and vicious. Mat. 7.18.

Sol. God made all sorts of creatures whatsoever absolutely good and perfect in
their kind, and according to such a Degree and measure of perfection as was
most suitable to their own natures and those ends for which God created them:
And therefore the Angels as they exceeded all other creatures in the excellency
of their Nature, and eminency of those high offices to which God had appointed
them, so did they also far exceed all others in the excellency and eminency of
their perfection and goodness; But yet all this was but a created and dependant
perfection in Angels, it was not such an absolute Essential and inseparable
perfection as God himself is possessed of, and which should exempt them from the
acts of Gods continual and everlasting providence: For all creatures (because
creatures) have still a dependancie upon their Creator, not only in their
actions, but even in their very being and existence: And therefore the wisdom
of God (to demonstrate his own perfection and glory to be absolute and
Essential, the creatures only dependant and of an accidental continuance,
durante suo beneplacito) left both men and Angels (at the instant of their
fall) unto themselves, not absolutely, (for then they must have been absolutely
Annihilated.) But in such a measure as God himself thought fit to proportion
the greatness of their fall, (even as a Nurse does sometimes partly let slip
the childs sleeve, purposely to make it understand the better who supports it,
that it may not grow too proud and confident of its own strength) for no sooner
had God thus deserted the Angels, but their Universal self-insufficiency and
impotency appeared; For whereas a principal part of their office and service
appointed them by God, was the Admiration and praise of the Excellency and
Omnipotency and Glory of God in all his works, these Angels Immediately upon
this desertion, diverting their thoughts from Gods glory and excellency, fixed
the same upon their own; And forgetting God their Creator, began to Deifie
themselves his creatures: which was their sin, which caused their ruin:
Which ought to be an Everlasting Caution both to men and Angels not to Deifie,
or place any idolatrous trust or confidence in any created Entitie, although
beautified and enriched with Angelical and Celestial perfection and glory.

CHAP. IV. Of External Regiment, wherein First of Miraculous Regiment.
HAving finished the tract of Internal Regiment, my method in the next place
presents the delineation of External; wherein I shall not vary from my former
Order, declaring first the nature and Original, Secondly the parts thereof.

1 External Regiment is the opposite species to Internal, being distinguished
from Internal by the difference of its object, for whereas the object of
Internal Regiment was the Intrinsecall acts of the soul, the object of
External is the Extrinsecall acts of the body or External substance; so that
External Regiment may be appositely thus defined. External Regiment is the
exercise and Administration of that Power and Authority which the Superior
Agent has over the External actions and motions of the substance or External
members of the Inferior. Which External actions and motions are guided and
Governed immediately by the intrinsecall acts of the soul in man, and of that
intrinsecall form in other creatures which is Analogicall to the soul in man,
(for it is an Infallible rule in Philosophy, that no free or voluntary Agent
does move or act in any appetible object, but what the understanding first
presents, and the will receives as good and elegible, nor in any Inimicitious
and detestable object, but which the understanding first presents, and the will
resents as noxious and avoidable: and in natural Agents it is more manifest,
that their External motions do proceed from the Intrinsecall acts of their
form and nature, as in the ascent of light things, and the descent of heavy.)
And therefore in regard these Intrinsecall acts are the proper and peculiar
Right and Prerogative of God (as is already proved) it follows by the rules of
Logic, that God must needs have a principal share and interest in the guidance
and Government of the Extrinsecall actions and motions, which are only fruits
and effects of the former. But this will be made more plain in the species or
parts of this External Regiment: Which (by reason of the various manner after
which God does exercise his power in ruling and ordering the Extrinsecall
actions and motions of the creature, sometimes doing it in an extraordinary and
miraculous manner, sometimes only in a common and ordinary) is distinguished
into these two species. 1. Miraculous and Extraordinary Regiment. 2. Common and
Ordinary.

1. Miraculous Regiment is the exercise* and Administration of Power and
Authority over the External motions and actions of the Creature, after an
extraordinary and miraculous manner. Concerning which it is not difficult to
determine in whom the propriety of interest and Title remains; For even the
Magitians of Egypt themselves (although they used their utmost endeavor before
Pharaoh to advance the reputation of their Magical art and power derived from
the Devil, and to make that power whereby the Devil wrought in them, seem as
great and miraculous as that power whereby God wrought in Moses) yet did they
at length acknowledge Moses his miracles to be wrought by the finger of God,
and to exceed their own and all other created power whatsoever. Ex. 8.18. For
all these seeming miracles which are done by Magitians and Witches through the
Devils assistance, are but mere fantasies and delusions, and are either nothing
at al in reality, or at leastwise nothing such as they seem to be. For though
the Devil be conscious of the limitation of his own power by God, and of his
own Inability to do any thing exceeding the limits of Art and Nature, yet has
it always been the Devils greatest ambition to work an opinion in man of his
own Omnipotency, and in that particular to share with God in his glory: And
therefore the Devil is more Gods Ape in this kind of Government, and more
diligent and solicitous to Imitate God in his miraculous works, then in any
other. And whereas the object of Gods miraculous power is either substances, or
quantities, or qualities (which three indeed comprehend all things which have
absolute being and existence, for all those relative Entities which are placed
in the other seven predicaments are but only circumstantial superadditaments
grounded upon one of these three) in every one of which we find by the Records
of Scripture, that God has exercised his power after a miraculous and
extraordinary manner. 1. In substances, and that either by a miraculous
creation (as in the several sorts of noxious creatures which God produced upon
a sudden for the plaguing of Pharaoh and the Egyptians. Exodus Chapter 8.9. and 10.
And the Manna and Quails which fell amongst the tents of the Israelites. Exo.
16. and those Pillars of fire and cloud, which conducted the Israelites in
their way both by day and night. Exodus 14) or else by a miraculous Annihilation
(as in Elijahs sacrifice, and the twelve stones upon which he offered it, and
the twelve barrels of water which he powered upon it. 1. Kin. 18.38.) or else by
a miraculous transmutation, (as in the water of Egypt changed into blood. Exodus
7. and in that water which Christ changed into wine. John. 2. 2. In quantities,
and that either by a miraculous Augmentation (as in the multiplication of the
loaves and fishes. Mat. Chapter 14. and 15. and of the oil and meal of the widow
of Sarepta by Elijah. 1 Ki. 17. and of the oil of the Prophets widow by
Elisha, to pay her debts. 2 Kin. 4.) or else by a miraculous diminution (as in
reducing that overplus and exuperancie of Manna unto the appointed measure of
an Omer, which some of the Israelites out of greediness had gathered, far
exceeding that proportion. Exo. 16.18.) or else by a miraculous division (as in
dividing the Red sea for the passage of the Israelites. Exo. 18. and the waters
of Jordan for the passage of Elijah and the return of Elisha; 2 Kin. 2.) 3. In
qualities by a miraculous alteration (as in turning floods into wilderness, and
the wilderness again into a standing water: making also a fruitful land
barren, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. Psa. 107. In
interrupting the course, and stopping the motion of the Sun and Moon. Jos.
10. In inverting the Suns usual course, causing the retrogradation of ten
degrees. 2 Kings 19. In Converting the rudeness and simplicity of the Apostles
into a Superlative eloquence in variety of Languages, and most profound
knowledge in the mysteries of Salvation, as their own writings testify. In
reunion of Soul and body, and raising the dead to life, as in the widows
son. 1 Kings, 17. The Shunamites son, 2 Kings, 4. and in Lazarus, John,
11.) Now although the Devils power really extend not to the production of the
least of these miraculous effects: (unless it be by way of subordinate and
Isntrumental Agency, as the Prophets, Apostles and other creatures have done
and still may do, when and where it pleases God for the promotion and
advancement of his own glory, to make use of their ministry and service to
that purpose) yet does he (by delusive virtue of his art and dexterity, and
those transcendant faculties wherewith God has enriched his Angelical nature,
wherein the Devil is not inferior to the persevering and Celestial Angels)
endeavor to possess men with an idolatrous opinion of his ability to effect
the greatest; whether it be in substances, or in quantities, or in qualities.
1. In substances, as in those phantasmes which he presents before witches, and
those which be in Covenant with him, to satisfy their desires and wishes:
which he does either by assuming the shape of such a Creature (for that power
the Devil has, though the form thereof be never so beautiful or Angelical,
as when by the conspiration of the witch of Endor, the Devil appeared unto
Saul in the form of Samuel, 1 Samuel 28. but such spectra's and apparitions are
no real bodies, but only appear such to the sight, as Christ himself proves
by that Argument which he alleges to satisfy the fears and doubts of his
Disciples concerning himself, when they supposed him to have been a spirit,
Luke 24.39. handle me and see (says he) for a spirit has not flesh and bones
as ye see me have, or else by entering and actuating in the real body of some
other corporeal Creature; and so indeed the Devil may appear in a true and
real body (as he did in the Serpent which deceived Eve, Genesis 3. and thus he
entered, and moved, and spoke in the dumb Idols which were the Oracles of the
heathen: And so he sometimes acts in the very bodies of dead or murdered men
and women: Which he does, not by way of information, but of inlocation only:)
neither the Devil nor any created power is able to make one real body or any
part thereof, no not so much as one hair white or black, for that Christ
himself intimates to be the very prerogative of God alone, Mat. 5.36. 2. In
quantities (as when the Devil makes witches believe that he reduces their
bodies into the forms of such minute creatures as may pass through key holes
like Bees or flies, or other small passages like Cats or Hares, which is done
merely by possessing their fantasies with such conceits; and the Devil himself
acting for them the same things which the witches believe that they act
themselves; for as the Devil cannot add one cubit unto a man's stature, so
neither can he diminish any thing thereof, Mat. 6.27. For the very reason which
Christ uses in that Text to persuade men to a confidence in God, is, because
he alone is able to do those things for us.) 3. In qualities, wherein the
Devils delusions are most common and frequent, partly by reason of his Art and
dexterity, whereby he effects things (though feasible in their own nature,
and by Humane art) so far exceeding our capacity and apprehension, that we
through our ignorance account them Miracles, partly by virtue of such
transcendant faculties as God has enriched his Angelical nature withal,
whereby he has power not only to move himself with incredible swiftness, but
the bodies also of other creatures; as when he transported Christ from the
wilderness to a pinnacle of the Temple, and thence again to an exceeding high
mountain. Mat. 4. Or by virtue of his power over Inferior Devils, and so he
helps the Demoniack. Mat. 9.34. Bat the accurate discussion of these points
(concerning the miraculous power of God, and the manifold delusions of the
Devil in Imitation thereof) would require volumns, whereas my purpose is but
only for Method sake, to touch upon these things by way of preface and
Introduction to that which follows.

CHAP. V. Of Ordinary Regiment.
THE second sort of External Regiment which is the opposite species to
Miraculous Government; whereof we have already spoken, is Ordinary and Common
Regiment, which may be thus described. ORDINARY REGIMENT is the Administration
and exercise of that Power and Authority which the superior has over the
Extrinsecall Actions and Motions, of the inferior, after a common usual and
Ordinary manner. Now this Ordinary and usual sort of External Regiment may be
considered two ways, 1. In its Primitive and Original capacity. 2. In its
Derivative and Executive capacity. 1. I say in its Primitive and Original
capacity; and so it is the peculiar Right and Prerogative of God, who is the
principal Agent, and by his constant and continual wisdom and providence
does guide, order and dispose all the Extrinsecall actions and motions of the
Creature, for his own glory and the good of his children, without which no
humane wisdom or experience, no humane care or circumspection were able to
direct or bring them to those ends.

And in this sense the Prophet David in that Psalm of providence, Psa. 107.
attributes the Regency of all Extrinsecall actions and motions in the creature
totally to God, demonstrating all the affairs both of the Godly and wicked
(whether at sea or land, whether in City or wilderness, whether in or without
the body) to be ordered and regulated by God, according to his rules of mercy
and justice. And Christ himself, Mat. 6. does exhort us diligently to cast all
our care upon God, for two reasons, First because God does provide whatsoever
is necessary for the sustenance of our lives, whether it be food or raiment,
(as he proves by instances in his providence and care for creatures of far
less value and estimation then men: For he plentifully feeds the very
Sparrows, and does sumptuously cloth the very Lillies) Secondly, because God
does carefully protect us from all injuries, in regard he has taken the number
of the very hairs of our heads, not one whereof without his will and pleasure
can be pulled away by our most potent and violent enemies. Nay the Lord himself
in his disputation with Job, alleges many unanswerable Arguments to convince
his judgment in this point, by Instances in his own Regency of the
Extrinsecall actions of many creatures, who therein are wholly exempted from
the Rule and Dominion of man, as we may read at large in the latter part of the
book of Job from Chapter 38. unto the last.

2. This usual and Ordinary kind of External Regiment, may be considered in
its Derivative and Executive capacity, and so it is Communicated by God unto
the creatures, to whom he has delegated an Instrumental power, for the
Immediate execution of his will and pleasure, in the actual Government and
Rule of the Extrinsecall actions and motions of the creatures of this inferior
world, A further Illustration whereof is presented unto us in the explication
of the several parts of this second sort of External Government, arising from
the several degrees of superiority and subordination amongst the creatures,
which considered together with the Creator do constitute a complete Category of
this Ordinary sort of External Government, wherein we have the very form and
Method of Gods usual and ordinary Government of the world and the creatures
therein, and in what manner God does make use of the Ministry and service of
one sort of creatures in the rule and Government of another in relation to
their Extrinsecall actions and motions; the series of which Categorie
comprehends these four degrees of superiority and subordination.

1. The summum Genus, and that is God, who has the superiority and
pre-eminence over all other Entities, in relation to this External Government,
but has not any superior to command or Govern him. 2. The first subalternate
species, and that is the supernatural and Spiritual Agents, which are the
Angels, who in relation to God are subordinate, and have a superior Guide and
Ruler over them: But in relation to all other creatures, themselves are the
supreme Guides and Rulers, and do always give, but never receive any commands
from any other creature. 3. The second subalternate species, and that is the
Intellectual Agents, viz: Men, who in relation both to God and Angels are
subjects and inferiors, and are by them ordered aad commanded: but in relation
to mere natural Agents are Kings and Governors, receiving sufficient
Commission from God for that purpose, Genesis 1.28. and Cha. 9.2. 4. The last and
lowest (and indeed the Infima) species in this predicament is the natural
Agent, which comprehends all other particular kinds of creatures of this
inferior world, which in relation to all the three former sorts of Agents, are
altogether subordinate and inferior, neither have they any other specificall
kind of Agent subordinate to themselves, who does receive and obey their
Commands: but yet I deny not but they are capable of many particular degrees of
subordination amongst themselves, of which in its due place, after we have
spoken of these more General and Eminent degrees and distinctions of the
creatures mentioned in this predicament.
From all which it is evident that God (being a God of order and not of
confusion) as he did not in the beginning Constitute all his creatures in a
parity of Excellency and perfection in respect of their nature, so neither did
he constitute them in a parity of Power and Dominion in respect of their
policy: So that whereas the Naturalists do generally distinguish the creatures
(by virtue of their several degrees of Excellency and perfection observed in
their natures) into three general kinds, viz. 1. Celestial, 2. Intellectual,
and 3. Natural. The Moralists in relation to policy do ascribe unto each of
these a several degree of order and subordination; the Supreme and highest to
Angels. 2. to men. 3. to Natural Agents: For Angels as they exceed all other
creatures in perfection and Excellency, so do they also in power and
Sovereignty, concerning both which, we have a most evident Demonstration in
that vision of Ezekiel, mentioned in the first Chapter of his prophecy, where
likewise (besides the degrees of superiority and subordination, arising from
the different perfections of the creatures) we have another direct ground for
that Category or Predicament of Government formerly premised: for this vision
represents unto us a perfect Idea of the two first kinds of this External
Government. 1. By God, the Supreme King and Ruler, 2. By Angels, his Immediate
Deputies and Vicegerents, neither of whose Persons nor yet their Immediate
ways and actions being obvious to humane eyes; we could not attain to any
knowledge or judgment of their manner of Government, by any sense or
experience or any other means, but that which God has revealed Immediately
unto us of his special Grace and Favor: Wherefore for our better instruction
and Information herein, It pleased God by these sensible and visible forms, to
make known unto his Church and People these two first kinds of this External
Government. For in this vision there is presented unto Ezekiel an Appearance of
four beasts, of four wheels, and of a Spirit which had power and preeminence
over both the beasts and the wheels, 1. The principal and chiefest of these
then must be the Spirit, which is the Lord himself, whose power and Maj. is set
forth in the latter part of that Chap. by the sensible similitude of a glorious
Throne, and a glorious man sitting thereupon; For the glory of God does
infinitely more exceed the glory of all the creatures in the world, then the
glory of the most puissant Prince sitting in his Throne of Majesty, does
surpass the glory of beasts or Inanimate bodies.

And therefore by reason of the surpassing glory and Majesty in God beyond all
the creatures in the world, this vision does represent him as the Supreme and
absolute King and Governor both of the beasts and wheels, of all things both
in Heaven and earth, but yet God (as a Lord and Prince of so great a family and
Kingdom) does exercise this External Government either Immediately by himself
over those creatures which are of greatest perfection and eminency, or
mediately by the Instrumental Agency of the creatures, the Lord ordaining those
creatures whom he has made superior to others in Wisdom and Excellency, to
be his Agents and Officers in the Rule and Government of those whom he has
made inferior to them in those respects: And therefore (because the Angels are
more Excellent and Glorious then all the rest of their fellow creatures, and in
that respect nearest unto God) God does Rule and Govern them Immediately by
himself, and does also constitute them his Immediate Lieutenants and Deputies
for the Government of both the Intellectual and Natural Agents: Which Order
and Method of External Government is by the Holy Ghost admirably and
completely represened unto us in this vision of Ezekiel's, wherein the four
beasts (signifying the Angels) do express their diligent observance of the
orders and commands of the Spirit, whereby they Immediately framed their own
Actions and Motions: And wherein likewise the four wheels upon the earth
(signifying all other creatures of this inferior world) do express their
diligent observance of the actions and motions of the four beasts, as a Rule
whereby to frame their own, whether in Station or Elevation, whether in
Progression or Retrogradation: All which we shall more fully explain, in
handling the three several kinds of this External Government: 1. that which
God does Immediately exercise over the Angels, 2. that which the Angels do
Immediately exercise over men, 3. That which men do Immediately exercise over
the Natural Agents.

But because the exercise of Gods Immediate Power and Authority in the Rule and
Government of the Extrinsecall actions and motions of the Angels, is not
directly our purpose in this book, but only as it were a preface (as I said
before) unto that kind of Government which we intend principally to insist upon
in the body of this Treatise, and in regard also we have in all the former
Chapters of this book insisted principally upon Gods Immediate Government, as
well of Angels as also of all other creatures, not only in their Intrinsecall,
but partly also in their Extrinsecall actions and motions: I will omit all
further discourse concerning this first kind of Ordinary and External
Government, lest I should seem to be unnecessarily and Impertinently
voluminous; And so proceed in the next Chapter to the exposition of the latter
part of Ezekiel's vision, wherein is fully represented the Nature and quality
of this second sort of External and Ordinary Government, and of that Power and
Authority which the Angels do exercise over the Extrinsecall actions and
motions of all Terrestrial and Sublunarie creatures; the true and lively
Portraiture of which kind of Government, is indeed the very scope and intent of
the Holy Ghost in this vision.

CHAP. VI. Of the second sort of External and Ordinary Government which Angels
do exercise over all other Creatures.
ANgels may be considered two ways. First according to their Nature and
Essence, Secondly according to their Office and Ministry; the former
consideration of Angels does not fall within the scope either of Ezekiels
vision or this Treatise: Both which intend only to declare that Power and
Authority which they exercise in Ordering and Ruling the External motions and
actions of all the creatures of this Inferior world: For the Government whereof
God has constituted and ordained the Angels his Immediate Deputies and
Vicegerents: All which will more fully appear in the explications of the
particulars of this vision: Wherein by two sorts of visible things, are
represented, First the Celestial creatures Governing, Secondly the
Terrestrial creatures Governed. The Celestial creatures which are the Angels
of God, are here represented by four Beasts; in the description of whose
persons the Holy Ghost does diligently set forth unto us those perfections and
excellencies wherewith God has enriched their Angelical Nature, purposely to
fit and enable them for the execution of that office and service which he has
appointed unto them in the Immediate Rule and Government of this inferior
world: For which purpose in the description of the persons of these four
Beasts, there are five things observable: 1. The substance of their proportion.
2. Their faces. 3. Their wings. 4. Their feet. 5. Their hands.

1 The substance of their proportion, wherein the Beasts are said to resemble a
Man, whereby is expressed the Majesticall and glorious presence of the
Celestial Angels; beings quality requisite in the carriage and demeanor of a
Governor.

2. Their faces which are many and several, to signify the multiplicity and
variety of those gifts and faculties wherewith God has endowed the Angels; and
that also in such an eminent degree of perfection as is fit and requisite for
the Immediate officers and ministers of so great and glorious a King, to enable
them for the performance of that service and duty which he has appointed unto
them; for which cause every one of the four Beasts are said to have four faces,
resembling those four living creatures which are most eminent in those four
several properties and qualities which are required in a compleatly-qualifyed
Governor (viz. Knowledge, Prudence, Valor, and Diligence) as necessary for
the judicial part of his office and calling. One of their faces is the face of
an Eagle. Whereby in the Excellency of the Eagles sight, is represented the
perfection and exquisiteness of the Angels knowledge in all worldly affairs,
where nothing is done or acted, which can be hid from their eyes, which can be
concealed from the Angels knowledge; my meaning is only concerning outward
actions; for I formerly showed, that the knowledge of the secret thoughts of the
heart, is Gods own prerogative; and does not fall within the compass of the
Angels privileges, nor of their Government: 2. Face is the face of a man,
whereby is signified their prudence discretion and wisdom to order and dispose
all the External actions and motions of the creatures committed unto their
tuition and Government for the honor of their Lord and Master, and the good of
his children.

The third face is the face of a Lion, whereby is signified their Courage,
Valor and Ability to conquer and subdue whatsoever is repugnant to their
masters will. The fourth face is the face of an Ox, whereby is signified their
constant Industry, Labor and travel in their Masters service, for the Angels
are ready and attendant day and night, every hour and minute upon their Masters
business, which they diligently perform and dispatch without wearisomnesse,
without grudging, or Complaining.

3. 4. 5. As for the three last parts to be observed in the composition and
description of these four Beasts: viz. 1. Their wings, 2. Their feet, 3. Their
hands. They signify those three properties which are requisite in a Governor,
as to the executive part of his office, which is after judgment is passed, to
act and execute the decrees thereof. And these properties are 1. quickness, 2.
Deliberatenesse, 3. Accuratenesse. In each of which respects the Angels are
provided to act as occasion requires: 1. If it be a Decree of sudden vengeance
to the wicked, or like deliverance to the Godly, they have wings to speed the
execution thereof. 2. If it be a Decree of Patience and long suffering, till
the transgressions of the wicked have fulfilled the measure of their sin: Or
the afflictions of the ungodly have exhibited a sufficient trial of their
Faith; they have Calves feet to proceed with slower paces. 3. If it be to sever
and segregate the Godly from the wicked, in the exhibition of mercies to the
one, or judgments to the other: they have men's hands to use such accuratenesse
in gathering the Tares into bundles to be burnt, that not one of them shall
escape the fire of Hell. And in gathering the Wheat into Gods barn, that not
one corn shall be scattered, which shall not be carefully laid up, and reserved
unto Eternal happiness in the Kingdom of Heaven. Nay not one Righteous Lot
shall be lost or neglected amongst millions of Sodomites, as appears by the
declaration made by the two Angels of their own disability to do any thing
against Sodom and Gomorrah till Lot was separated and safe in Zoar. Genesis 19.22.

The last particular of this vision of Ezekiels is the four Wheels upon the
earth, which represent all the Creatures of this inferior world, as well
Intellectual as Natural Agents, whose External actions and motions are
Immediately Governed and directed by the Ministry of Angels: In which
description the Holy Ghost does set forth the grounds of the Insufficiency of
these Terrestrial creatures, to order and direct their own actions and
motions, and thereupon with what readiness and reverence they submit themselves
unto the rule and government of Angels. For which purpose in the description of
these four wheels, there are three things observable, viz: 1. Their figures, 2.
Their order, 3. Their Ornaments.

1. Their figure, and that is Circular, suitable unto the things of this world
in two respects. 1. Of various inconstancy and alteration in relation to
particulars. 2. Of similar revolution and Renovation, in relation to the
Universe. Their first similitude is in alteration and inconstancy: For as in a
wheel sometimes one part is up and sometimes another, and that which was just
now the highest, is turned down into the place of the lowest, and the lowest up
again into the place of the highest: So it comes to pass in the affairs of
this world, whether they relate to particular persons or to public states, as
is amply and perspicuously declared in the prophecy of Daniel, both in the
Prophets exposition of Nabuchad-nezzers Image. Chap. 2. And then the Angels
expositions of the Prophets own visions, representing under the forms of
several beasts, all the most eminent rises and falls in the Empires of the
Babylonians, Persians, and Grecians, both in Alexander and his successors, the
Lagidae and the Seleucidae, from Chap. 7. to the last. A confirmation whereof
we may find in every National Chronicle. Nay alas, even the present experience
of our own Nation is unhappily plentiful in miserable instances to this
purpose; upon the relation whereof, I need not here insist, they having been
too obvious to the eyes of all men in every corner of this kingdom. The second
Analogy and resemblance between the sublunary things and these wheels in
relation to their figure, is their Circular revolutions and Renovations: For of
a wheel, the same part which is now the highest, after some Degrees of turn and
change, obtains the same place again, and the lowest after many rises falls
down by Degrees likewise to the same place again; so experience shows us the
like circular returns and revolutions to obtain a place both in Natural and
Politic affairs: For we see that days, and nights, and months, and years,
and summer, and winter, and seed time, and harvest, do we come and go and
return again according to the Ordinance of God. Genesis 8.22. And the reason of
this Circular order observed in their motions, is the like order observed in
the motions of the Sun, the Moon, the rest of the Planets, and all the
Celestial Orbs and fixed Stars, which God did ordain to guide and rule these
times and seasons. Nay the Astrologers (who attribute the Rule and guidance of
all humane affairs unto the Stars) do affirm every fourth, eighth, twelfth
and nineteenth year to renew the like misfortunes or successes unto men, by
reason of the similar conjunctions and aspects of the Planets, which are
Incident to these Revolutions, as is at large expressed in Whickerus. But
though I acknowledge the Celestial bodies to have an influence upon all
sublunary bodies, yet I do not make such Astrologicall conclusions any part of
my faith, for that Sapiens Dominabitur Astris, was the persuasion of a learned
heathen, which the Lord himself confirms out of his own mouth, wishing us to
observe how he himself does manifest his own prerogative in all humane
affairs, by frustrating the tokens of the Soothsayers, and making diviners
mad, Esaias 44.25. And therefore we see that all the Astrologers and Soothsayers
in Caldee could not foretell the septenarian madness of Nabuchad-nezzar,
inflicted by God for destroying that septenarian work of Solomon (his holy
Temple.) Neither when he was mad could they Divine when he should be restored
either to his senses or his Kingdom. Dan. 4. Nay though the fertility of the
earth does manifestly depend upon the influence of the Heavens, and the
sterility of the earth proceed of the undue obstruction of the Heavens, as
Moses declares. Deuteronomy. 28. Yet could not all the Astrologers in Egypt foretell
the preceding plenty of the first seven years, and the succeeding famine of
the next seven, prefigured in Pharaoh's dream, Genesis 41. But though these
Revolutions in humane affairs, do not so necessarily depend upon the Stars,
yet that such do come to pass, we have Solomon's own Testimony. Eccles. 1. and
that also grounded upon his own experience; wherein ours also cannot be
wanting, if we observe but the courses and changes falling out amongst our
selves in the fashions of habits and other matters, wherein we alter from one
to another, til that which was the furthest out of date, become the most in
request again.

2. The second thing observable in these Wheels, is their order which is very
confused and Intricate; For the Text says, that the appearance of the Wheels
and of their work, was as it were a Wheel in the middle of a Wheel, thereby
representing the darkness and confusedness of man's understanding and knowledge
in the mysteries of Gods providence, being far unable to apprehend or discern
all the turnings and windings of the Wheels, that is, all the waves and courses
which the wisdom of God does pursue in the Government of the inferior world:
For men, (the wisest of all earthly creatures) do only discern things that are
present and near at hand, and those also, but only in a superficial and
imperfect manner, and accordingly they judge. We see Joseph sold into a strange
country, and there cast into a desolate Dungeon, and like his evil and
unnatural Brethren we judge him as surely lost, as if he had been indeed
devoured by some wild Beast. We see just Job miserably afflicted and tormented
by the Devil, and left as naked of all worldly helps and comforts, as he was
the first minute which God took him out of his Mothers womb: And like his three
miserable comforters, we judge him to be made an exemplary president by God,
not only of worldly misfortune and misery, but even of Gods Eternal wrath and
fury. Yea what man (Ignorant of future Events) would not have judged Hamans
estate happier in the Kings palace, then Mordecai's who begged at the Kings
gates: Proud Herod securer upon his Throne, then Peter a prisoner in Chains
and fetters: And Pilates condition better upon his Judgments seat, then
Christ's when he was nailed to the fatal Cross? For alas, the judgment and
knowledge of man in all worldly matters, reaches no further then the very
present and outward face thereof; As constant experience daily Demonstrates.

3. The third and last thing observable in these Wheels is their Ornaments, and
those are the numerous eyes in the Rings of the four Wheels. For the Text
says, Their Rings were full of eyes, which eyes do not signify any
foresight, wisdom or knowledge to be in the earthly creatures, for the Rule
and direction of their own actions but their vigilant observance of all the
actions and motions of the Angels, as a rule whereby to order and frame their
own actions and motions of what nature soever, whether it concern their
station, or progression, or elevation: For says the Text, When the living
creatures went, the wheels went by them, when the living creatures were lift up
from the earth, the Wheels were lift up, and when those stood, these stood:
which passages express the exact and diligent conformity of earthly creatures
to the commandments of Angels, and the Angels power over them to guide them in
all their ways, whether good or evil: yea and that in evil of sin as well as
evil of punishment. First for evil of sin, there are evil Spirits to seduce
and mislead men: An evil Spirit led the men of Shechem into Traitorous Attempts
against their King. Jud. 9. An evil Spirit seduced Ahab: 1 Kin, 22. Satan
provoked David to number the people. 1 Chro. 25.1. Again in the punishments of
the wicked, the Angels are the executioners of Gods judgments, as upon the
Sodomites, Genesis 19. upon the Adulterous and Idolatrous Israelites, Number. 22.
Upon the blasphemous Assyrians. 2 Kin. 19. Nay Christ himself giving a caution
concerning the offending of little children, Mat. 18.6. alleges this ground
for it, that the Angels (whom God appoints for the tuition and guard of these
little ones) are continually solicitors to God in their behalf, Imprecating
vengeance upon such pittylesse injustice, and severely revenging the injuries
done to such Innocents, so that (as it is expressed in the Text) It were better
for a man to have a millstone hanged about his neck, and to be drowned in the
depth of the sea, then to undergo the punishments inflicted by the Angels upon
such offenders. Lastly the Angels are not less solicitous for the preservation
of the Godly in all their ways, though it be in the midst of the fire, as in
the three children, Dan. 2. Or in a Den of hungry Lions, as in the Prophet
Daniel himself, Dan. 6. Nay the Prophet making a large declaration of Gods care
and providence toward his children in all sorts of dangers, as in war, in
pestilence, and all manner of Epidemicall judgments, inflicted by God for the
Epidemicall sin of a nation, Psalm. 91. recites this as a sure ground of
confidence for their safety in the midst of all dangers (Even when thousands
fall beside them, and ten thousand at their right hand) that the Angels of God
have a charge to protect his children in all their ways, (not only in the
time of imminent and (as it may seem) inavoidable dangers, when their
preservation is miraculous, but even in every common and cursory action, as in
their walks and footsteps, that they do not at any time hurt their foot
against a stone, verse 11. whereas David's progenitors had a satisfactory
experiment in that Angel which God appointed for their guide in the
wilderness, who through care of their security provided a Pillar of fire, and
a Cloud to guide and direct their wandering steps in unknown paths, both day and
night. Ex. 14. and Chapter 23. But yet the Angels are but only Instrumental Agents
in this External Regency, acting always by the order and appointment of their
Generalissimo the Lord of Hosts, whose Host and Army the Angels are; for as the
Wheels are regulated in their motions by the four living creatures; So are the
four living creatures by the Spirit of him that sits upon the Throne, to whom
alone appertains the Entire knowledge, disposal and management of all
designs and destinies concerning the earthly creatures; whereof the Celestial
joy expressed for the conversion of one penitent sinner, rather then the
perseverance of ninety and nine just persons, Luke 15.7. is a manifest
Argument: For if the knowledge of the Angels concerning the fate and destiny of
that repenting sinner, or their Power and Ability to order the same, were
equivalent to Gods, they would no more have doubted that Sinners future
happiness, or the future fruition of his society in Heaven, in the very midst
and height of all his Impieties, then after his conversion, nay then after his
glorification. But these profound secrets and Eminent abilities are Gods own
prerogative. And therefore the Holy Ghost (to prevent our sinful mistakes in
this isntrumental Regency of the creatures, who through our own Ignorance and
the Devils subtle temptations, are apt to look with an idolatrous eye upon the
Immediate and Isntrumental Agents, (as appears in the men of Lystra, who
could scarce be restrained from offering sacrifice to Paul and Barnabas; Acts.
14.18.) Especially when those Agents are the glorious Angels, as appears in
the Idolatrous zeal of the Apostle S. John, who fell down at the Angels feet
which declared to him those High and wonderful Mysteries and Revelations John
22.8) does most usually attribute the whole Regency of our actions unto the
principal Agent the Lord himself, who by his Omnipotency, Wisdom, and
Providence does guide, order, and dispose all the particulars, fates, and
accidents which befall the earthly creatures, (according to the general and
infallible Rules of his mercy and justice) unto such particular ends as are
most commodiously subservient to his own glory, the good of his children, and
the shame and confusion of his enemies. Wherefore in the fore-recited stories
of Joseph and Job, the Scriptures mention no other Agent but only the Lord
himself, who by his wisdom and providence in fine, made Joseph's bondage and
Imprisonment a means of his advancement in Pharaoh's Court, for the
preservation of himself, his Father, and undeserving Brethren: and Jobs poverty
a means to double his wealth, and the approbrious contempts and reproaches of
his friends a means to advance his honor; Nay indeed the Scriptures impute it
solely to the justice and mercy of God, that all the afflictions of the
Righteous conclude in joy and happiness, all the prosperity of the wicked in
sorrow and misery. Psa. 73. Romans 8. etc.

Q. Happily the Curiosity of some may occasion yet a further quaere concerning
this vision, viz: Why the Holy Ghost should represent the Universal society of
Angels and earthly creatures by a quaternarian number, as four beasts, and four
wheels, rather then by any other number.

Ans. The reason I conceive is, because all Authors, as well Divine as humane,
do both divide and complete both the Globes of the world by four dimensions,
viz East, West, North, and South; as well the Globe of the Heavens, which are
the habitations of Angels, as of the Earth, which is the habitation of all
Terrestrial creatures. An instance of the latter we have 1. In Gods Universal
providence over his children in the whole earth, which the Prophet David
expresses in extending the same unto the East, West, North, and South. Psalm.
107.3. And 2. In the Persian conquest of the whole earth, represented by a Ram
pushing and subduing Northward, and Southward, and Westward, where the East is
to be presupposed, because the Persians were Emperors of the East before. Dan.
8. And an instance of the former we have in Psalm. 75. Where the Prophet David
(proving God alone to be the fountain of all Honor and happiness, (and no
creature in the world) which the vain Idolaters of his time, Notwithstanding
expected, from the Sun which they therefore worshipped as their God) tells
them, that Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor yet
from the South, where the North is to be understood for the fourth dimension of
the Heavens, wherein the Sun moves, though it be not here expressed, because
the land of Canaan, when those Idolaters lived, was situated Northward from the
Tropic of Cancer, and therefore they did never turn their faces toward the
North to behold the Sun, but only toward the other three parts of the Heavens.

And thus you see by the Exposition of this vision of Ezekiel's what the nature
of this second sort of External Regiment is, and in what sort it pertains to
the Angels, and what the grounds are, why God has delegated this power unto
the Angels over all earthly creatures, as well Intellectual as Natural Agents.
It follows now (by the Rule of our premised Method) that we should speak of
the third and last sort of External Regiment, wherein God does make use of the
Instrumental Regency of the Intellectual Agents, for ordering and directing the
Extrinsecall actions and motions of the Natural Agents, of which very briefly.

CHAP. VII. Of Man's Dominion and Power over Natural Agents.
THough God made man lower then the Angels, Psalm. 8.5. yet did he make man
superior to all other sublunary creatures, putting all them in subjection
under his feet, even all sheep and oxen, and the Beasts of the field, the
fowls of the air, and the fishes of the Sea; as it is expressed in the four
last verses of that Psalm. By virtue of which Divine Ordinance, all the
creatures of this Inferior world became subject and serviceable unto man; with
the remembrance whereof, the Lord himself does solace Noah and his three sons,
after their twelve months and ten days Perigrination in the deeps. Genesis 9.2,
3. For indeed the end why God made all these Irrational and Inanimate
creatures, was that they might be useful and serviceable unto man. And
although there now be many noisome and noxious creatures in the world, who have
utterly rejected this yoke of obedience and subjection unto man, and do
express a certain Antipathy and malignancie in their dispositions toward him:
Yet none of those creatures were such in their native and Original constitution
as they were created by God; which appeared by their readiness to come before
Adam and do him homage, and in further token of their subjection, to receive
names from him: For Imposition of names was always amongst the Ancients a
Cognizance of Power and Authority (which was the cause why Conquering Kings
usually gave names unto such as they subdued; so the King of Egypt when he had
vanquished Joachaz, and made his brother Eliakim King, he changed his name to
Jehojakim. 2 Kin. 24. And when the King of Babylon carried Jehojakin, that man's
son, into captivity, substituting his Uncle Mathanias in the Kingdom, he
gave him a new name with his new Kingdom, changing his former name of
Mathanias into Zedekias, 2 Chronicles. 36. And the same custom he observed in
giving new names unto Daniel and the three children, Dan. 1.) Whereby it is
evident that the fierceness and cruelty of the savage Beasts toward man, is no
Natural but merely an adventitious quality, issuing from that Divine
malediction which was the fruits of Adams disobedience, whereby man lost part
of that Prerogative wherewith he was Originally invested by God: who punished
the Rebellion and Disloyalty of man to himself, by the like Rebellion and
Disloyalty in these creatures to man to become Masters over us, making them
whom he had ordained to be servants to us, because we disdaind to be servants
to him, who by Right was Master both over them and us.

You will say, if the Antipathy and Malignancy in those Beasts toward Man were
not natural, then the preservation of Daniel from the hungry Lions, had not
been miraculous; for if Daniel had been shut up for a nights space with so many
Oxen, Dogs or Horses, King Darius would not have been so ravished with
astonishment to have found him alive the next morning.

Qualities may be termed Natural in two respects, 1. Proprie ratione causae. 2.
Analogice ratione consuetudinis. In the former sense those are only termed
Natural, which flow from the very nature and Essence of their subject,
receiving both their being and Annihileation together with it, and so the
Antipathy and Malignancy in these evil beasts toward man, cannot be termed
Natural: For when all the beasts came to do Homage unto Adam, these noxious
creatures were as absolutely void of these Malignant qualities as Sheep and
Oxen, and Adam might at that time with as much safety and Indemnity have
accompanied or been shut up with Lions and Bears, as we may now with Lambs and
Pigeons. But in the latter sense, those adventitious qualities which proceed
only from some Extrinsecall cause, may be termed Natural; by reason of that
similitude which they have with Natural qualities, in respect of custom and
continuance, and Inseparability from their subjects: In which sense sin is
said by the Holy Ghost to be Natural unto man, which had its birth the same
day with the other, these Malignant qualities in the creatures being only the
effects of that Divine Malediction which Adams sin had contracted upon
himself, his posterity, and all those creatures which God had made for his use
and service: By reason whereof, the influence of this Divine Malediction is
more or less effectual in the creatures, as man is more or less defective in
his native and Original Innocence: As Moses does at large declare, Lev. 26.
Deuteronomy. 28. In the promises of blessings, which the Lord by means of these
creatures will confer upon them who observe his Laws, and of curses which
the Lord by the same means will inflict upon them who contemn and despise the
same. An experiment whereof we have in the Martyrs of the Primitive times, and
in their persecutors; For as these blessed Martyrs had this native and
Original Innocence renewed in their souls by grace, (the fruits whereof
appeared in their diligent observance and obedience unto Gods Commandments,
which they earnestly preferred before the safety of their own lives) so
accordingly did these savage beasts express their native Reverence unto these
Martyrs, refusing to touch or hurt their naked bodies, being thrown to them to
be devoured: And yet at the very same instant exercising the fierceness of
their rage and fury upon the bodies of the persecuting Tyrants, who had cast
off all fear and reverence to God, all regard to his truth, all humanity to his
servants, as you may read at large in Rabanus, Eusebius, and other
Ecclesiastical Historians.

By all which we may see the Original donation of that power and Dominion which
Man has over all other earthly creatures, (which was by Divine Ordinance) as
also the ground of that donation (which indeed is the very same with that which
was the ground of Gods delegating a Power and Authority to Angels over both men
and them) and that is the perfection and Excellency of man's nature, which by
the mercy of God does far exceed the perfections of other earthly creatures;
for only man amongst all earthly and sublunary creatures obtained the
prerogative favor from God, to be made after his own Image, whereby is meant
the native Majesty, understanding, and goodness which man then received of the
bounty of his Maker, which made him worthy and capable of this Rule and
Dominion over all other Corporeal creatures. But when man by sin defaced
that Image, God in justice recalled that Grant, and deposed man from that
Prerogative Office: Which yet of mercy God renewed again to all such of man's
posterity as would list themselves under the Command of his Son Christ Jesus:
From whom we now derive all the Right and Interest which we have in the
creatures, witness S. Paul, 1 Cor. 3. last. All things are yours (that is,
yours who are in Christ, for to such alone the Apostle intended that Epistle)
because you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

Now the result of all the expresses contained in the precedent Chapters of
this Book, (declaring the Divine Right of Order and Government in General, as
it has its effects in the Immediate species of the Universe, viz: in
Angelical, Intellectual, and Natural Agents,) is but briefly this; That the
God of Peace and Unity to the end to establish and preserve Peace and Unity
amonst his creatures of different kinds and natures (without which it had been
impossible for them to have continued their being and existence in the world,
but that a confusion in their order should have Introduced a dissension in
their natures; and that dissension in their natures, the destruction of their
persons,) did by his Wisdom and Providence create all their several kinds in
several degrees of Excellency and perfection, to be a ground for several
degrees of Superiority and subordination, to the intent, that as one kind did
even Naturally exercise a Rule and Government, so the other might as Naturally
yield their Submission and Obedience.

And thus having finished that part of this discourse which concerns the Divine
Right of government in the three Immediate species of the Universe, both in
their General relation to God, and also in their specificall relation to one
another: My Method in the next place requires the Manifestation of this Divine
Right in that Government which concerns the particular societies of each of
these three species, in their particular and mutual Relations. Now in regard
the Original Impresses of the footsteps of nature do still remain perfect and
conspicuous in the Angelical and natural Agents, (or at least not so
Immeasurably and in a manner so totally defaced and blotted out, not in the
most corrupt natures of either of their societies, as they are in the natures
of humane and Intellectual Agents, (for even the very Devils retain the native
Integrity and perfection of their Intellectuals, though their wills be totally
depraved, and deprived of that Divine and native blessing; whereas the
depravity and corruption of humane nature has a proportionable influence upon
both their wills and understandings,) the scrutiny of that Jus Divinum which is
proper to the Government observed in the mutual relations of Angelical or
natural Agents) cannot be obstructed with the like difficulties, as are
Incident to humane policy. And in regard also the External Government observed
in the mutual relations of Angelical and natural Agents is not so appositely
pertinent to my purpose, as that which is participated by humane societies
(which is indeed the principal scope and intendment of this Book, I will only
in the next Chapter (for Methods sake) briefly touch upon these two more
Natural Governments, wherein this Jus Divinum is more apparent, and so proceed
to the third and last policy, wherein the scrutiny of a Jus Divinum is of
greatest difficulty, but yet for our purpose of greatest necessity.

CHAP VIII. Of that Government which is observed by the society of Angels,
Natural Agents, and men in their particular and Mutual Relations.
THE Wisdom of God which saw the preservation of the Universe, to have a
necessary dependence upon the mutual Peace and Unity of these three several
kinds of creatures ( viz: the Angelical, Intellectual, and Natural Agents)
whereof the Universe was composed, and that Peace and Unity to have the like
dependancie upon their Order and Government, did likewise see it necessary that
the same means should have the same efficacy in the particulars of each of
these three species, least confusion in particulars should through their mutual
dissension produce the destruction of the species, and by consequence also of
the Universe: Lib. De moderatione in disput: servand.
For that saying of Nazienzen is a most divine Maxim of truth. (...) Order is
the mother and preserver of all things. And therefore the Lord (out of his care
and solicitude for the preservation of particulars which are the very
foundation of the Universe) did not terminate the influence of Order and
Government in the species of any of the three several sorts of creatures, but
did also Originally constitute the particulars of each in different degrees of
superiority and subordination, purposely as a ground of that Order and
Government which he ordained to be a means of their safety and preservation.

Amongst the holy Angels we find Archangels, 1 These. 4.16. And amongst the
Devils Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, Mat. 9.34. Yea the title which is given
in Scripture to the society of Angels, is a manifest Argument of different
degrees of Superiority and subordination amongst them, where they are called
the Hosts of the Lord, and the Armies of the living God: For every Soldier
knows that Order and Government is even essential to an Army, where some must
necessarily command, and others as necessarily obey. And the obedience of
Angels (I mean not the general obedience of the whole species unto God their
Lord and Maker, but also their particular and mutual obedience to one another)
is strongly Intimated by Christ, in the third petition of that Prayer, (the
practice and use whereof he enjoined to all Christians, Luke 2.11.) wherein we
desire that our observance of Gods will here in earth, may be such as that
which is performed by the Angels in Heaven. Now our observance of Gods will is
not terminated in the obedience of the species unto God, but comprehends also
the mutual respects and duties between Inferiors and superiors, whether it be
in Political or paternall Government; For which we have an express in the first
Commandment.

And these degrees of order and subordination are yet more manifest in the
natural Agents, which in all their actions are by that Divine Law of nature
subservient to each other, as the Heavens to the earth, both the earth and
Heavens to the plants, and all these three to sensible and Animate creatures,
(only where Divine Malediction, the fruits of man's wickedness, to which all
these creatures are subordinate, does occasionally subvert their Natural
courses, for a punishment of man's unnatural wickedness, turning the Heavens
into brass, and the earth into iron; Deuteronomy. 28.)

Neither has Divine providence left the Inanimate and sensible creatures
destitute of degrees of superiority and subordination, to be a warrantable
ground for Order and Government amongst themselves: The Lion is invested with a
certain natural Power and Authority over the Beasts of the field, who
naturally express a certain Dread and Reverence to that courage, Might and
cunning wherewith nature has endowed him. And the Eagle is invested with the
like prerogative over the fowls of the Air, and the Leviathan or Whale over
the fishes of the sea. And Ad Rusticum Monachum.
Jerome affirms the same order to be observed amongst every particular
society of sensible creatures: The dumb beasts and wild herds (says he) do
follow their leaders, yea the Bees have their King, and the Cranes fly all
after one, like an Alphabet of letters.

But this Wisdom and Providence of God in the constitution of degrees of
superiority and subordination amongst the particulars of the Immediate species
of the Universe, is most manifest in the species of the Intellectual
creatures, which is the ground of Politic Government, concerning which he that
had an ambition to be voluminous, might here meet with sufficient and even
wished opportunity for the accomplishment of his desires (this point being the
subject of all Histories and Chronicles) both sacred and profane.) which have
been penned since Moses the Prothistorian of the world. But that some
Government has always been observed amongst all nations and societies of men
(yea even the most Barbarous and Savage Indians) the undoubted Authorities both
of Experience and Authentic Historians have engrafted an Indisputable
persuasion in the minds of men. From which very fountain they likewise derive
as strong an assurance, that one and the same Government has not been always
observed amongst all nations and societies. For though we find no other kind of
Government but Monarchy, so much as once mentioned either in the Old or new
Testament, (both which are stored with variety of passages concerning Monarchy
and Kings) And surely if any Polarchie, even the most laudable sort that ever
was devised, either by the Athenians, Lacedaemonians, Syracusans, or Romans, had
been capable of any of those Divine sanctions whereof Monarchy does
participate, the Holy Ghost would never have past over all them in such a
profound and Universal silence, and have mentioned only Monarchy, the only
received Policy, both amongst the Jews and all other Nations, who upon any
occasion are honored with a place in those sacred Records) but though no
Polarchie be honored with any Divine sanction, either native or Redemptive,
(being in it self a mere curse in Nature, inflicted upon a Nation by Divine
Malediction for a punishment thereof; as War, Famine, or Pestilence is, (as I
shall show more at large in the Subsequent Book;) Yet in Regard many sorts of
Polarchie have been honored with the humane sanction of practice,
Prescription, and Custom, (both before the Incarnation of Christ by those
famous and Renowned Commonwealths prem-entioned, and also of late years by
some Christian Commonwealths.) Although there be no more Divinity in any sort
Polarchie, or any more warrantable grounds in Scripture, Nature, or Reason, for
any man to attempt or endeavor the Erection or institution of any Polarchicall
Government, then there is for men to contend for Ignorance, Diseases,
Mutilations, Poverty, or any other Curse and Punishment) It will be requisite
to speak something concerning the Nature and Original thereof, as a vice,
corruption, and Privation of Monarchy (the only Divine and Native Policy) The
Divine Right whereof is declared in the next Book.

FINIS Libri Primi.
THE SECOND BOOK Declaring the DIVINE RIGHT of MONARCHY.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature of Monarchy and that Jus Divinum whereof it does
Participate.
MY Pen is now at length arrived upon that wished coast, whereunto it has with
constant pace directed its course through all those obscure and uncouch paths,
wherein it has wandered in the several Chapters of the former Book, for the
Investigation of a Jus Divinum in every kind of Order and Government which God
has established amongst his creatures.

1. In their General Relation to himself their Creator,

2. In the specificall relations of the three different kinds of creatures to
one another,

3. In the mutual relations of the particulars of each kind amongst themselves.

Each of which several kinds of Government I have already manifested to
participate of some such species of that Jus Divinum (whereof I promised an
explication in the Introduction to this Treatise) as was most proper and
suitable unto the nature of those creatures which were therein concerned. In
which precedent expresses, if either my brevity seem culpable, or my obscurity
(the Individual attendant thereof) unsatisfactorie (although I will not
Apologize for mine own disabilities, whereof I am too abundantly conscious,
yet) I desire the Reader to consider that my first Intention was to premise
only a Cursory explication of these parts and species of Natural Government,
as procognita for an introduction to the treatise of Monarchy; (which I shall
manifest to be the only sort of Politic Government, warranted either by God
or nature.)

Divine Right, whereof I shall endeavor to Demonstrate in the sequel of this
Book, in all its several causes, parts, and capacities according to the Method
proposed in the Frontispice of this Treatise, representing the scope and
substance thereof, wherein we promised a manifesto of the Divine Right of
Monarchy, in Relation unto; 1. Its Original and Efficacy. 2. Its Form and
Essence. 3. Its Ground and matter. 4. Its end and use. Which several
particulars do present us with a superficial survey of the nature of
Monarchy, which may be described two ways, 1. Grammatically, by the
derivation of the word. 2. Logically by the prementioned causes.

1 The derivation of the word Monarchy, is of (...) solus and (...)
Principatus; Which word relates to the active and more noble part of
Government, according whereunto Monarchy is described to be a Politic
Government, wherein one person is supreme and chief, and this indeed is the
usual description approved by most Authors.

2. But that description which is more expressive of the nature of Monarchy,
may be Logically thus completed of the prementioned causes thereof.

Monarchy is a politic Government Instituted by God for the preservation of
humane society by the Administration and Exercise of the Supreme Power and
Authority of one person over all others in the same society. The former part of
which description expresses the two External causes of Monarchy; the latter
the two internal; but yet the External causes thereof are not herein
expressed in that just extent and Latitude as to be an entire and adequate
ground of all the parts of our ensuing discourse in this Book, concerning the
Divine Right of Monarchy; For Monarchy does not only derive its institution
from God the Efficient cause thereof, but also many other Divine sanctions: Nor
is the preservation of humane society the adequate end for which God did
institute this Government. And therefore (though this description reaches the
most, and indeed more Divine and transcendent expressions of Monarchy then are
Recorded by any Author that I have read upon this subject, yet) least I should
incur the guilt of that absurdity in my present discourse, as to extend my
superstructures further then my foundation: I shall present the Reader with
another description, which shall reach all that my pen does aim at in this
present discovery of the nature and Divine Right of Monarchy, which is this.

MONARCHY is a Politic Government Instituted and approved by God, consisting
in the prudentiall administration and exercise of the supreme Power and
Authority of one Person over all others within the same society, for the
preservation of Peace and Unity in Order to Gods glory, the Kings honor, and
the peoples welfare.

Which description I conceive to be a full expression of all the parts and
causes of Monarchy; the explication whereof, I purpose to be the entire
business of my ensuing discourse, wherein I shall observe the same Method
expressed in this present Description.

1. Showing this blessing of Monarchy to derive its Original from God the
Efficient cause thereof, and that the Holy Ghost has also honored the same
with many recommendatory sanctions, whereby to evidence the Divine Right
thereof, and the true and proper distinction of this blessing of Monarchy,
from the curse of Polarchie; all which particulars I have designed for the five
first Chapters of this Book, which shall declare the nature and Divine Right of
Monarchy in its Moral capacity, as it is grounded upon the habit of Prudence,
(which though it be not directly a Moral habit, yet is the fountain of all
Moral acts) wherein I hope the Reader shall receive satisfaction concerning the
Divine Right of Monarchy in Relation to the efficient and formal causes
thereof, which are the first two particulars expressed in the definition of
Monarchy

2. In the next place I shall speak of this blessing of Monarchy in its natural
capacity, as it relates to that supremacy which does pre-eminence the Monarch
above all others within the same society, which I term natural (not so much
because it is the material cause and ground of this Natural blessing of
Monarchy, (every Monarch deriving his title to the Crown from this supremacy.)
but rather because Supremacy it self does ordinarily proceed from a mere
Natural cause, viz: Birthright and hereditary succession, and not from the
peoples election or any other means ( i. e. justly and Legally, for conquest
is unlawful, unless where it is Legitimated by Gods special warrants, as I
shall demonstrate in the eighth Chapter of this Book.) And this I purpose to be
the errand of the three following Chapters.

3. In the third and last place I shall speak of Monarchy in its Theological
capacity, as it relates to those ends which qualify al Monarchical actions,
concerning which I shall declare, first their nature, what the Monarchical
honor due to God and the King is, and wherein both that honor and salus
populi does consist; Secondly their due order, and that the Kings honor is to
have the pre-eminence above salus populi in all the Monarchical actions both
of King and subjects; in the former of which I shall Intimate the duty of Kings
in the due limitation of their Power in order to all Extra Regalia and
Metapolitical matters, and in the latter, the duty of subjects in the due
extension of their obedience in order to all matters within the sphere of
Political cognizance: The explication of which particulars shall be completed
in the four last Chapters of this Book.

The first point which my Method invites me to insist upon in this Chapter,
has an influence upon all our ensuing discourse, and that is the Jus Divinum
Natural, which I mentioned in the Introduction to this Treatise, but referred
the more punctual explication thereof unto this place, purposely thereby to
usher the Readers apprehension into the more facile and perfect understanding
of that Divine Right which is incident to Monarchy in all the prementioned
Respects.

I shall not need to make a repetition here of the several divisions and
subdivisions of Jus Divinum specified in the Introduction, for if the Reader
please to reperuse the same, there he may find to what species of Jus Divinum,
this Natural Divine Right which does claim a place in Monarchy properly
appertains: Which there he shall find to be a species of Jus Divinum
gratiosum, and thus described.

Natural Divine Right, is that which is grounded upon the will of God revealed
in the Scriptures, concerning those natural truths, whereof Heathens and
Christians are equally capable by nature, only the same are made more clearly
known and Manifest unto Christians by Revelations of Scripture,) in those
particulars which the Holy Ghost has judged requisite to be communicated for
the benefit of the Church) then they can now in this Elapsed and Apostate
condition be possibly known unto man by any natural means and helps. And this
Jus Divinum Natural is twofold, viz. Implicitum and Explicitum.

1. Implicit Divine Right is that which is grounded upon the will of God
revealed in the Scriptures, concerning natural blessings conferred upon us by
God, as pledges and expresses of his love to us, which blessings are notified
unto us in Scripture by clear and manifest intimation of the acceptability
thereof unto God, and Recommendations of the vtility thereof unto man: Which
sanction does not make a thing absolutely and Essentially Divine and necessary,
excluding all humane option and prudence, and not admitting of any case,
wherein the Conscience may dispense with the contrary, without manifest guilt
of sin.

But only it makes it naturally and Religiously eligible, and desirable of a
means and help to the performance of those duties which are absolutely and
Essentially Divine and necessary, and those blessings which are capable of this
recommendatorie sanction, are the same whereof Adam in innocence did
participate, as natural helps and means for the due performance of his duty
unto God, (The curses or opposite privations of which blessings being the
fruits and effects of that Divine Malediction which Adams prevarication and
Apostasy contracted upon himself and his Posterity.) Now though every man be
not obliged in conscience to have and enjoy these blessings (in regard they are
no proper and Immediate part of our duty unto God) nor yet to eschew the
opposite curses (in regard they are not properly sins against God) yet is
every man obliged in conscience to desire and pray for these gifts and
blessings, and to attempt and endeavor the attainment of the same, by all such
lawful and warrantable, ways and means, as do not transgress any of Gods
Precepts and Commandment (which do impose a sanction of a higher nature upon
all such matters as are capable thereof) so that those gifts and blessings are
the proper and Immediate object of our natural desire, and the Remote and
Mediate object of Christian hope. And therefore are included in a part of that
Divine Orison composed by our Savior himself, for the General use of all
Christians, summarily comprehending the whole matter of all devotions: In the
fourth petition whereof, we pray for these natural gifts and blessings in that
expression of daily bread. And in like manner also every man is obliged in
conscience to deprecate the curses which are the opposite privations of these
blessings, and to endeavor the avoidance thereof by all such lawful and
warrantable ways and means as do not transgress any of Gods precepts and
Commandments, because in their own nature they are mala poenae, that is curses
and punishments for sin, and Impediments to the exact performance of those
duties which are absolutely and Essentially Divine: And therefore the last
petition of the prementioned Orison deprecates these curses in this expression;
Deliver us from evil. Now these natural blessings which participate of this
Implicit Divine Right are of two sorts, viz. Internal and External.

1. Internal blessings, are those which Aristotle terms bona animi: And these
again are of two sorts. 1. Moral habits which are seated in the will. 2.
Intellectual which are feated in the understanding.

The Intellectual habits are of two sorts. 1. Speculative, which are three,
viz. Sapientia, Intelligentia, and Scientia. 2. Practical, which are two, viz.
Ars and prudentia.

Which habit of Prudence according to Aristotle is Recta ratio in agendis,
directing the disposition, and guidance of humane affairs. And this habit of
Prudence is threefold.

1 Prudentia Ethica, which directs the Moral actions and matters of
particular Persons.

2. Prudentia Oeconomica, which directs the actions and matters of a
particular family consisting of diverse Persons,

3. Prudentia Politica, which directs the actions and matters of a public
society consisting of diverse families, which kind of Prudence is termed in
Greek (...) of (...) multus and (...) esse, because Politic Government is the
very esse and being of a multitude, without which it cannot subsist: And is the
very form and Essence of Monarchy, which orders and directs the actions
and matters of a public society by the Prudence of one supreme person: Who for
this cause is termed in Greek (...) quasi (...), that is, the very foundation
of the people, because the subduction of the King produces necessarily the
ruin and destruction of the people.

And this Jus Divinum Implicitum, which relates to these internal blessings,
or bona animi, and particularly to this habit of Prudence (the fountain of all
Moral acts) is that which directly and properly claims a place in Monarchy
in its Moral Capacity.

2. External blessings, are those which Aristotle terms bona corporis and
fortunae, the blessings of the body are temporal life, health and beauty, the
blessings of Fortune, Riches and Honor: Whereof one particular is a Royal
descent, and another part of that honor is Primogeniture, which does entitle a
man to that supremacy which is the material cause and ground of Monarchy.

Now this Jus Divinum Implicitum, which relates to External blessings and
particularly to the blessing of Primogeniture in a Royal Progeny is that
which does properly claim a place in Monarchy, in its Natural capacity.

2. Explicit Divine Right, is that which is grounded upon the will of God
revealed in the Scriptures concerning those duties which we are to perform to
God as returns of the former expreses of his love to us; the Revelation of
which duties is contained in express precepts and Commandments. Which sanction
does make a truth absolutely and Essentially Divine, excluding all humane
option and prudence, and admitting of no case wherein Conscience may dispense
with the performance thereof, without the guilt of Eternal death and Damnation:
the least deviation from such a precept, being malum culpae, that is, an evil
of sin; And therefore this sanction imposes an obligation upon every man's
conscience for the performance of such duties as are thus precisely commanded
in what estate or condition soever he be, whether Rich or poor, sick or
healthful, bond or free, in time of war, or in time of peace. And these
truths which are capable of this preceptive sanction, are such whose entire
perfection both Immediate and ultimate, consists in action, and are the
returns of Gods love to us, and the very expresses of our love to him, Of
which truths Christ meant, when he said, If you know these things, happy are ye
if ye do them. For knowledge of these truths without performance does but
aggravate our guilt, it being only our performance of them which can make us
happy. And these are the duties of every man's calling, wherein he is obliged in
conscience so to demean himself, that every action which relates thereunto,
may be a Testimony of his love to God and his neighbor, by squaring it
according to that Rule which God has prescribed for the Regulation thereof.

But for the further Illustration of this Jus Divinum explicitum, you must
observe that there are two sorts of express precepts and Commandments recorded
in Scripture, which do impose two sorts of Explicit and Essential Divine
sanctions upon these practical truths. 1. Are absolute and General precepts of
the Moral Law, which concern the duty of man toward God and his neighbor,
which is still the same in Essence both under the Law and Gospel, and do
Generally oblige all men in all places and at al times, and this kind of
precepts it is which adds an absolute and general sanction unto those duties
which are the end of Monarchy. 2. are particular and Circumstantial precepts,
which are not Universally obligatory, but do concern either some men at al
times, as the judicial and Ceremonial Laws did the Jewish Nation, and Jewish,
Profelites, or some men only, and at some times only, as all personal
Commands given upon particular occasions; As that to Saul for destruction of
the Amalekites with all their substance. 1 Samuel 18. And that to Jonas, for
Proclaiming the destruction of Nineveh. Jonah Cha. 1. And that to the Prophet
which God sent to Bethel, for abstinence both from meat and drink in that
place. 1 Kin. 13. Now though these precepts be temporally or personally
obligatory, and therefore the contempt or neglect thereof, a sin which
strikes at the very face of God in his prerogative Royal, yet (in regard the
performance of them is not a natural, but only a preternatural duty) they are
not equally obligatory to the Conscience as the precepts of the Moral Law are,
nor does the transgression of such Commands render a man equally guilty or
liable to those punishments of Eternal death and Damnation, which the
transgression of Moral precepts does, and therefore the severest punishments
which any Scripture does annex to such offenses, is, that the transgressour
shall be cut off from his people: As it fell out in that disobedient Prophet
slain by a Lion, 1 Kin. 13. But I have no warrant of Scripture to judge him
damned for that offense; A confirmation whereof, we have from Gods express
declaration of his different regard to the duties of the Moral and of the
Ceremonial Law, 1 Samuel 15.22. Hos. 6.6. Where God preferres Mercy and Obedience
before sacrifice and burnt-offerings.

Querae Seeing the precepts of the Moral law are more absolutely obligatory
then any other, and the transgressions of those precepts more severely
punishable then any other; Whether ought Gods particular and Extraordinary
Commands to be obeyed, when they enjoin an Act contrary to the precepts of the
Moral Law, as in Abraham's offering of Isaac for a sacrifice to God?

sol. The will of God being the ground of all Law, when it is declared
concerning any particular Act, does dispense with the obligation of any Law as
to that particular, and exempt the party commanded both from the guilt and
punishment. And therefore the Lord Commended Abraham's Resolution to kill his
son in obedience to his particular Commands: although the very thought and
resolution of homicide, be directly a transgression against the Moral Law.

Querae. But is not God then the Author of sin in such commands; for seeing
there is a transgression of the Moral Law which must necessarily be a sin,
and seeing that sin is not imputed to the man that acts the transgression,
because Gods Commands do exempt him: Must not this sin then be imputed to God?

sol. God in such cases is a Judge which passes the deserved sentence of death
upon that person who is to suffer, (for neither Isaak, nor the justest man that
lives, is innocent in the eyes of God) the party who obeyes these Commands is
the executioner. And therefore, as neither Judge nor Hangman is guilty of
murder in the homicide of a Malefactor deserving death, so neither was God nor
Abraham guilty of sin in that resolution of Abraham's to kill his son at the
particular Command of God. And this Jus Divinum Explicitum does properly claim
a place in Monarchy in its Theological capacity, in Relation to those duties
which are the proper and Native ends of Monarchy, which are Gods glory, the
Kings honor, and salus populi, or the peoples good and welfare.

And thus you see of what sort of Jus Divinum Monarchy is capable: 1. In its
Moral capacity as it relates to the habit of prudence: 2. In its Natural
capacity, as it relates to the supremacy of Power: 3. In its Theological
capacity, as it relates to those duties which are the end of Monarchy.
Concerning every one of which acceptions I shall exhibit a more particular
explication in the subsequent Chapters of this Book: Whereof the next four shall
finish the discourse of Monarchy in its first acception, the first whereof
shall declare the several sanctions wherewith this blessing of Monarchy is
honored in the Scriptures, from whence the Reader may receive satisfaction
concerning the Divine Right of Monarchy; in Reference to its Original and
Efficient cause. The second shall declare the Nature, Original and grounds of
Polarchie, which is the opposite privation of this blessing of Monarchy; the
third shall declare the several Divine Maledictions Incident to the curse of
Polarchie: the fourth shall unscruple two material difficulties or cases of
Conscience concerning Monarchy: 1. How far every man is obliged in
conscience to endeavor the Reducement of a Polarchie to a Monarchy: 2.
Whether any man may lawfully and salva Conscientia endeavor the alteration of
a Monarchy into a Polarchie.

CHAP. II. Of the six several sanctions whereof Monarchy does participate.
AMongst all the Natural and common gifts and blessings of the Spirit, I do not
find any one honored with greater variety of Implicit sanctions then this of
Monarchy, which I shall demonstrate (in this Chapter) to participate of as
many, as any such blessing is capable of, (the Holy Ghost thereby manifesting
the excellency and pre-eminence of this blessing of Monarchy above all other
natural blessings whatsoever.) And those sanctions are six, viz. 1. Divine
Institution, 2. Divine prescription, 3. Divine Stipulation, 4. Divine
Assimilation, 5. Divine Accommodation, 6. Divine Regulation.

1. The first sanction Incident to Monarchy is Divine institution, God himself
being the Original Author of this blessing of Monarchy, in the very first
beginning of the world, Investing Adam with a Monarchical Supremacy, not only
Oeconomicall over that one created family in Paradise, but Political over a
society consisting of many families which were to descend of Adam: For the same
Law which Commanded obedience of children to Parents, servants to Masters and
subjects to Kings in Paradise did oblige all Adams posterity for the space of
930. years, to perform this duty of obedience to Adam, within which space Adam
became a Father and Governor not only Oeconomicall of one family, but
Political of many families, (which as we showed before, is the very ground of
Political Government, and particularly of Monarchy. Now although this
Government be styled most commonly paternal, because all Adams subjects could
derive their Pedigree from the blood Royal: Yet is it the very same in
substance with that which we term Regal, ( Monarchy or Regal Government,
being described by most Authors to be a Political Government over a society
wherein one person is supreme and chief.) And the Holy Ghost to demonstrate
unto us that the name did not create any real difference between this Paternal
Government, (which continued til the confusion of Languages) and Regal
Government (which style the Scripture uses for the policies observed by
societyes, after the dispersion of the seventy families of Noah's posterity,
being divided by so many several Languages) did afterward in the penning of
the Decalogue upon Mount Sinai, use only the word Father, to express all
sorts of Governors, as well Kings and Monarchs as others.

But to unscruple all vocabular doubts and difficulties, let us but look into
the fourteenth Chapter of Genesis and there we shall find a King of Gods own making,
and his Regal Power of Gods own Institution. For Sem, alias Melchisedech was by
Gods special Ordinance a Type of Christ, both in his Regal and Sacerdotall
office: Heb. 7. And therefore is styled by the Holy Ghost, the King of
Righteousness, and King of Salem, which is Jerusalem, where this Melchizedech
reigned til Jacobs time, who at his death (though then a bondman in Egypt) did
in his last Will and Testament declare the Ordinance of God concerning the
establishment of a Monarchy amongst the Israelites his own posterity, and that
Judah should sway the scepter of the Kingdom, and Reign in that very City,
whereof Melchizedech was King, Genesis 49.10. Of which Royal tribe, that great
King (the true Lion of Judah) and the true Shiloh, our Savior Christ himself
should descend, who by Gods own Ordinance likewise was to be born truly and
Legally King of the Jews: As the Angels declared to the Wisemen, who by the
Angels direction enquired at Bethlem, for him that was born King of the Jews.
Mat. 2.2. Which is also Manifested by the Holy Ghost in the derivation of
Christ's Pedigree from Abraham and David. Mat. 1. and even from Adam himself.
Luke 3. And this also was acknowledged by Christ himself unto Pilate. John
18.37.

Again we shall find that several persons received their Regal Investiture
from Gods Immediate and particular consignation, who had no other title to that
Monarchical honor and supremacy: As Saul, David, and Solomon Kings of Israel;
Jeroboam, and Jehu, Kings over the ten Tribes: And amongst the heathens also,
Hazael was made King of Syria by Gods particular appointment; And Cyrus was
both named and ordained by God to be the Monarch and King (which should erect
that Monarchy, which Historians make the second of the four Monarchies of the
world) above seventie years before he was born. Esaias 45.1.

Ob. God was angry with the Israelites for asking a King. 1 Samuel 8. And did
further declare his dislike thereof by a miraculous Thunder and Rain. 1 Samuel
12.18. Whereupon the people did acknowledge their sin in asking a King, and
desired Samuel to pray for them. 1 Samuel 12.19.

Sol. Two things are observable in that desire, 1. The object of the peoples
desire, which was Monarchy, or a Regal Government: And in relation to this,
the desire was good, being the very Ordinance of God himself. Deuteronomy. 17.14. And
therefore was also sanctified unto the people with the promise of a blessing, 1 Samuel 12.14. and was afterward also confirmed unto them by God himself in his
own particular Election of another King (even King David a man after Gods own
heart) to succeed Saul, and also in his son Solomon to succeed him, both
which two were Types of Christ, and Prophets of God. 2. The end of the peoples
desire, and that was Idolatrous and sinful, the people therein looking upon a
King as the only means whereby they might attain deliverance from the fears
and pressures under which they groaned at that time, through the Tyranny of the
Philistines, who had subdued them; which was the very end why they desired a
King, looking for deliverance from him, and not from God: As God declared unto
Samuel, 1 Samuel 1.7. They have not rejected thee (says the Lord) but they have
rejected me; Imputing more to the power of a King for their deliverance, then
unto my Power. And therefore to punish this Idolatrous trust of this people, he
gave them then a King of that Tribe which Jacobs prophecy did make Tyrannical,
viz: of the Ravening Wolf of Benjamin. Genesis 49.27. To whom alone that
prophecy of Samuel's relates, 1 Samuel 1.10. concerning the Tyranny of the King
that should Reign over the people who desired a King for this Idolatrous and
sinful end. For neither David nor Solomon were such Tyrants.

2. The second sanction whereof Monarchy does participate is Divine
prescription, God himself continuing that Government to his Church and people,
from the very beginning of the world, til their sins made them incapable of
any Policy, and condemned them to perpetual captivity.

For Monarchy began in Adam, and so continued in his posterity successively
til the flood, when Noa'hs Monarchy was reduced by the deluge to an Oeconomie.
And after the earth was again replenished by his three sons, the Church, (by
Noah's blessing) was limited to Sem and his posterity, which Sem was king of
Salem alias Jerusalem, where he reigned til Jacob, who was the twelfth from
Sem, was fifty years of age. Jacob and all his posterity the twelve Patriarks
and their wives and children, went down into Egypt, where they lived in bondage
and slavery, til God raised up Moses, whom he made their Monarch, Judge, and
Ruler, by whose hand he delivered the Israelites from the bondage of Egypt.

And this Moses did Govern them for the space of forty years in the
wilderness; upon the death of Moses, God ordained Joshua to succeed him in
that Monarchical Regency, Number. 27.18. By whose hand the Lord settled the
Israelites in the land of Canaan within the space of seventeen years after the
death of Moses: From Joshua to Saul the Israelites were Governed only by
occasional Judges and Monarchs, which God raised up for some special and
particular deliverance. In Saul God restored that formal Monarchy or Regal
Government which the Church enjoyed in the days of Melchizedech, which the
Lord himself transferred from Saul and the Tribe of Benjamin, unto David and
the Tribe of Judah according to Jacobs prophecy: Where the supremacy of Regal
Power continued whilst God continued his favor unto that people: til their
sin and Ingratitude made them unworthy and incapable of the great blessings
and favor of Monarchical Government, and brought upon them that heavy curse of
Anarchy and want of a policy amongst themselves, and made them slaves and
captives under Monarchs and Kings of other Nations, according to Moses his
prophecy, Deuteronomy. 29.28. which Anarchie was that very mark and Stigma of Gods
wrath and vengeance, whereby all Nations (whither they should be led captives)
should know them to be a people abhorred and forsaken of God, as Moses
declares in the latter part of that Chapter.

3. The third sanction Incident to Monarchy is Divine Stipulation, God himself
honoring this blessing of Monarchy with many gracious pactions and promises
to those who were partakers thereof, as to David, 2 Samuel 7. to Solomon, 1 Kin.
3. yea even to wicked Saul, 1 Samuel 12. and Idolatrous Jeroboam 1. Kin. 11.
conditionally they did make a right use of this high and honorable calling,
whereunto they were advanced by God. Which sanction is an infallible token of
Gods approbation of that calling of Monarchy, as a natural gift and blessing
requisite to humane perfection, for the Lord did never thus directly declare
his approbation of any curse or privation of these blessings, which was an
effect of sin; nor of any calling which was directly grounded thereupon, such
as that Monkish mendicancie, which is used in the Church of Rome. For that
Command of Christ's to the young man in the Gospel was principally probatory,
and all Christ's promises made either to him or his Disciples, for Remuneration
of their Piety who forsake all for his sake, relate primarily and properly to
the love of Christ, and to such disvaluations and disertions of worldly and
Natural gifts and blessings, only accidentally and in a secondary sense, when
they come in competition with Christ, who is to be preferred above all other
things whatsoever, though they be as dear and precious to us as Brother or
Sister, or Father or Mother, or even as our own eyes, or our own lives, Mat.
16.25. But I say such curses and privations of worldly and Natural gifts and
blessings were never directly and positively honored with the sanction of a
Remunerative promise (as Monarchy is in the prementioned Text.) being in
themselves properly a part of Jus Divinum Vindicativum.

4. The fourth sanction whereof Monarchy does participate, is divine
Assimilation, Monarchy being a resemblance of the most exact Model, in
Divinity, Nature, and Art.

1. In Divinity, or divine policy, and that both creative and redemptive, For
first when God had framed the world, and stored it with such a numerous variety
of creatures; God claimed the Prerogative of an Universal Monarch to himself
alone; consigning both Devils and men to everlasting torments, for entertaining
but a thought of competition with him in this his Monarchical honor. 2. When
he Redeemed the world, and transferred the Government thereof unto his Son,
yet was the same policy still retained, nor did Christ ever admit of any
competitor in his Government. Phil. 2.10, 11.

2. Monarchy is a resemblance of the most exact Model in Nature, and that is
man, both in his numericall and specifical capacity: First in his numerical
capacity, (whereby I understand the frame of his own body, termed by
Philosophers Microcosmus) by reason of the Analogy the body of man has with
the Universe in relation to order and Government: For though it be composed of
many parts of different qualities, and which are subservient to the body in
different offices, yet it has but one head for the guidance and direction of
all, unless it be in Monsters, which are therefore justly termed Errors in
Nature, as all Polarchies are in Policy. Secondly in his specifical capacity,
(whereby I understand the multiplication of his seed and issue, which is the
continuation of his species) which though never so numerous yet is but one man
the Father of al; even as a Monarch is one Ruler over many subjects. I confess
indeed the unlawful, various, and insatiate desires of the Mother, may be a
means why the children of one family may have many Fathers: And indeed the
very like desires in a country (which is our politic Mother) I conceive to
have been the very first ground for the erection of Polarchies, by the
constitution of many Supreme heads and Fathers in one Commonwealth.

3. Monarchy is a resemblance of the most exact Model in Art, and of that
Policy which is the Masterpiece of the most Artificial Imitator, and the most
curious Artist in the world viz. the Devil. And I confess it is an Argument
which has no weak or mean influence upon my understanding and judgment to
persuade the Divine Excellency of Monarchy, that Satan does make it the object
of his option, as the most glorious disguise for that grand Impostor the man of
sin, wherein to act his Antichristian and blasphemous tragedies in the latter
days: which Saint Paul speaks of 2 These. 2. For though Satan be the greatest
Maligner of all Divine truths, yet we are sure he is the most exquisite knower,
and the most Artificial Imitator thereof. And therefore to create the greater
esteem and Reverence in men's hearts, of the Power and Majesty of his Eldest and
best beloved Son, he will be sure to usurp that form of Government which is
most glorious, Divine, and plausible in the eyes of men, to make his delusions
more Potent and Effectual.

Now the Text plainly declares that Antichrists Government shall be
Monarchical, and that he will admit of no competitor, but will exalt himself
above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, so that he as God, shall
sit in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God: The meaning is, that
Antichrist shall Reign as an Universal and absolute Monarch here on earth.

And the same happiness which the erroneous expectations of the Jews are
fixed upon, and hope to receive by the Government of the Messiah at his
coming, (who as they conceive shall be absolute King and Monarch of the whole
world, and exercise an absolute Power and Authority over all Kings and Nations
both in Spiritual and temporal matters, as Priest and King to fulfill the Type
of himself prefigured in Melchizedech, and as King and Prophet to fulfill that
Type of himself prefigured in David and Solomon) the same will Antichrist
pretend to communicate by his Government to all his Disciples and subjects,
both Jews and Gentiles: Usurping the same temporal and Spiritual Power and
Sovereignty, which the Jews through misinterpretation of Scriptures Attribute
unto Christ: And practicing all the lying Miracles and Delusions, which the
power of Satan can effect, for confirming the belief of his Monarchical and
just Power and Majesty in the minds of men.

5. The fifth sanction whereof Monarchy does participate, is Divine
Accommodation; God himself sitting and apportioning this blessing of Monarchy
for the most commodious Instrument and means to advance virtue and Piety, and
more especially unity and concord (the Basis and foundation Salutis Populi)
and to suppress vice and iniquity, more particularly civil discords and
dissentions (the very Morbi laethales populi, and Rei publicae) whereof the
Lord himself exhibited a manifesto to the Israelites, after they were settled by
Joshua in the full possession of the land of Promise, when the Lord (to the
intent the Israelites might take a more full and perfect Estimate of this
blessing of Monarchy) did (after his customary Method in conferring blessings
upon his people, by making first the opposite curses or privations thereof an
Introduction thereunto) first make them sensible of the mischiefs and
inconveniences which accrewed to a Nation through want thereof, whilst there
was no King in Israel. For in those days (says the Text) every man did that
which was right in his own eyes, which right was measured by the law of their
own lusts, as appears in the Theft and Idolatry of Micah, Jud. 17. In the
Idolatry and Rapines of the Danites, Jud. 18. In the abominable Beastialities
of the men of Gibeah, Jud. 19. And those bloody Intestine dissentions and
civil wars which accrewed thereupon between the Benjamites and the rest of
their brethren, Jud. 20. All which enormities the Holy Ghost justly imputes to
the want of a King and Regal Government in Israel: Notwithstanding the
Sanhedrim or great Counsel of the Israelites was not wanting in those days, as
appears Jud. 21. Where mention is made of that Court of Elders which was
composed of the select Elders of every tribe, which only had cognizance of
those High and Capital offenses; from which they undertook to free the six
hundred exiled Benjamites, which none of the Inferior Courts of justice could
do, which yet were not then wanting neither in all or most of the Cities in
Israel, as in Succoth, Judge. 8. And in that City which Boaz inhabited. Ruth 4.
But although all these subordinate Magistracies and Courts of justice were then
in Israel, yet the Holy Ghost in every passage inculcateth the defect of a King
to be the cause of those many and grievous enormities and offenses incurred by
the People, which were the cause of many grievous judgments upon that Nation:
For when they forsook the ways of God and followed their own inordinate lusts,
God likewise forsook them, giving them over to the lusts of heathen tyrants,
and making them which hated them lords over them.

Now after God by his judgments had humbled them, and made them capable of the
renewall of his mercy in their deliverance, it pleased the wisdom of God
always to raise them some one man to be a Judge, Monarch, and Captain over
them, by whose hand he wrought that deliverance for them; No doubt God could
have wrought their deliverance by diverse other means, as he did in the days
of Hezekiah, when he delivered both King and people by an Angel, 2 Kin. 19. Or
in the days of Joshua when he slew the Amorites by hailstones from Heaven,
Ios. 10. Or in the days of Samuel, when he slew the Philistines by thunder. 1 Samuel 7. Or as Christ delivered himself from the first attempt of the Soldiers
who came to apprehend him, whom he overthrew with a blast of the breath of his
mouth, John 18.6. As he shall likewise overthrow Antichrist and all his power at
the last day, 2 These, 2. But yet it pleased God in all their captivity's and
distresses, during those sinful times wherein they wanted a King and Regal
Government, to raise them up occasional Monarchs and Judges for their
occasional deliverances, thereby to manifest unto them the benefit of
Monarchy, and how conducent Regal and Monarchical Government was to their
constant security and happiness.

6. The sixth Sanction whereof this blessing of Monarchy does participate is
Divine Regulation, God himself prescribing Rules and Laws for the mutual
deportment of the parties interrested in this Relative blessing of Monarchy,
which are the Relatum or Monarch, and the Correlatum or Monarchists and
subjects: and that first concerning the Monarchs consignation and election unto
that Dignity, Deuteronomy. 17. (but the punctual discussion of this point pertaines
more properly to another place, where we treat of Monarchy in its Natural
acception as it relates to that Supremacy which does pre-eminence the Monarch
above all others within the same society.) Secondly concerning the Relative
duties of Monarchs and Monarchists, in which point both the old and new
Testament are very plentiful, but the punctual discussion of this also,
pertaines properly unto that part which speaks of Monarchy in its last and
Theological acception, as it relates to those duties which are the end of
Monarchy.

And these are the grounds whereupon I conclude Monarchy to be Jure Divino,
(not Explicito, which is proper only unto duties, whose Immediate esse
consists in action, but) Implicito, which is proper unto blessings, whose
Immediate and proper esse consists in enjoyment, (although their ultimate and
principal esse does also consist in action; For the end and reason why God does
confer any blessing upon man, is that the same may be useful unto him, and
enable him for the performance of some duty) an honor which no Polarchie in
the world is capable of, not the most laudable sort that ever was devised by
any Polarchicall Commonwealth; For as I declared before, there is no kind of
Polarchie so much as once mentioned in the Scriptures from whence we must
derive all Divine sanctions; but of this we shall speak more fully in the next
Chapter, which is designed purposely for manifestation of the Nature, Original,
and Maledictions Incident to this curse of Polarchie.

CHAP. III. Of the Nature of Polarchie, and the Divine Maledictions Incident
thereunto.
IN the Introduction to this Treatise, I demonstrated every thing, (whether it
were good or bad, whether it were curse or blessing) to participate of some
sort of Jus Divinum (because it did proceed from the will of God, which is the
Universal cause of all things except sin, of which it is only a permissive
cause, but of all other things an Efficient and Positive cause) which will of
God is also the true and proper ground of Jus Divinum.

And therefore least any man from thence should erroniously imagine the curse
of Polarchie to be capable of some Divine sanction, I will here premise a more
punctual division of that Jus Divinum Vindicativum which is Incident to
Polarchie, which I mentioned in that Introduction, but referred the more
punctual explication thereof unto this place, for the very same reason which I
there omitted the explication of Jus Divinum Natural, which was a species of
Jus Divinum Gratiosum, whereof Monarchy does participate, as we have already
showed.

You may remember that Jus Divinum Redemptivum (which is the only Jus Divinum
which has now any Right or Title to a place in the Government and providence
of God over both the Intellectual and Natural Agents) was distinguished in that
Introduction in Gratiosum and Vindicativum.

1. Gracious Divine Right is that which is grounded upon the will of God,
concerning the Manifestation of his mercy, partly in the Renovation of those
Natural gifts and blessings unto man, whereof Adam in Innocence did
participate, as helps and means for the performance of his Natural duties to
God: Of which Jus Divinum Monarchy does participate, as we have already
manifested.

2. Vindicative Divine Right (which indeed is properly a Divine Malediction) is
that which is grounded upon the will of God, concerning the manifestation of
his justice in the infliction of those curses and punishments which were the
fruits of Divine Malediction, for the Apostasy and disloyalty of our first
Parents. And this Jus Divinum is twofold, viz: Supernaturale and Natural.

1. Supernatural Divine Malediction, is that which is grounded upon the will of
God, concerning the Manifestation of his justice in the Infliction of Spiritual
and Supernatural judgments and curses, which are the opposite privations of
those Supernatural and Spiritual blessings which Immediately relate unto
Christ. And this sort of Vindicative Divine Right cannot claim any place in
Polarchie, in regard it concerns men only in their Spiritual and not in their
Politic and sociable capacity.

2. Natural Divine Malediction is that which is grounded upon the will of God,
concerning the Manifestation of his justice in those judgments and curses,
which are the opposite privations of natural gifts and blessings, whereof Adam
in innocence did participate, as helps and means for the performance of his
Natural duties to God. And this is that Divine Malediction which does properly
claim a place in Polarchie.

Dub. If either Monarchy be a blessing of God, or Polarchie a curse of God,
why then is not Monarchy Recorded amongst the blessings which Moses promised
to the Israelites for the recompensation of their obedience? Nor Polarchy
amongst those curses wherewith Moses Menaced their disobedience to Gods Laws
and Statutes? Lev. 26. and Deuteronomy. 28.

Sol. The holy Ghost in those two Chapters mentions only those beatitudes and
curses, which the Israelites were at that time sensible of, that so the one
sort might be a Motive to the performance of their duties to God, the other a
Caution for the avoidance of the contrary offenses against God. But as yet the
Israelites were not truly sensible of the blessing of Monarchy (in that
capacity which Jacobs prophecy had designed it for that Nation, which was that
Royal Government wherein Judah of whom Christ was to descend, was to be
honored with the scepter and Supremacy.) Nor yet of the opposite curse of
Polarchy, and the manifold mischiefs and inconveniences of the same;
concerning which, God did afterward tutor them by many experiments in the
Interregnums of their Judges, for that space of three hundred thirty nine
years, wherein the Nation was Governed only by occasional Monarchs and Rulers.
But afterward when the appointed time was come, wherein God had determined to
felicitate that Nation with the blessing of a constant Monarchy or Regal
Government, you shall then find that Government honored with many gracious
promises: Only indeed for the curse of Polarchy, there is no species or sort
thereof, so much as once mentioned in the whole Scripture, neither before, nor
in, nor after the time of their Regal Government. The reason whereof, was
because God had promised to preserve the Prerogative Royal entire unto Judah,
(and particularly unto David's family) until Shiloh came, as it is manifest both
in Jacobs prophecy, and Gods particular promises unto David; from whose son
Nathan, who was Solomon's younger brother, Christ descended, whose Right and
Title to that Kingdom of Judah, the Holy Ghost does clearly manifest, showing
how Solomon's house ended in Ieco^iah, and then how Christ descended from
Zorobabel who was the rightful Prince of Judah, as descended of Nathan, who was
next heir to Solomon. And therefore though the Prophet Esaias, Cha. 3. and
diverse others of the Prophets did threaten many heavy judgments to fall upon
the Jews for their sins by wicked and Tyrannical Kings, which accordingly
came to pass by Ahaz, Manasses, Ammon, Ioachaz and all his successors til the
captivity; yet did none of them ever mention this curse and judgment of
Polarchy, and that for this very cause.

Ob. But you will say that cannot be the cause, for the scepter did depart from
Judah and the family of David long before Shiloh came, for Atheliah the
daughter of Ahab reigned six years in Judah upon the death of her son
Ahaziah; and the conspirators who slew Amaziah either reigned themselves, or at
least did not suffer Vzziah the true heir to that crown to reign, for the
space of eleven years. 2 Chronicles. 26. Nor was there ever any King of Judah which
reigned over the Jews after the captivity of Babylon, which fell out five
hundred twenty six years before the birth of Christ: and yet within that time
the Jews sometimes had Kings over them, as Aristobulus who was of the family
of the Machabees, and of the tribe of Levi, whose posterity was rooted out by
Antipater an Idumean (and a servant to the Machabees) of whom descended Herod,
who was King of Judah when Christ was born.

Sol. There are two things to be regarded in all Gods temporal promises to the
Israelites, 1. The substance of the promise, which was the Spiritual blessing
principally intended by God, and in this God was always very punctual in every
Circumstance; and of this principally the promise of the scepter, and of the
perpetuity of David's Throne is to be understood, that is, of a Spiritual
Kingdom; For such a King Christ was, and such a Kingdom Christ only claimed,
that is a Kingdom of Righteousness, and of this Kingdom of Christ's, there
shall never be an end. And this scepter and the Prerogatives thereof, never
departed from Judah til Christ came, for that Tribe enjoyed the Spiritual
Prerogatives of the Gospel (though under Types and Figures) and was not
transferring from the Jews to the Gentiles, til after Christ's death. 2. The
shadow and type of the promise, which was the temporal blessing prefiguring and
pointing out that Spiritual blessing, and in this God purposely failed the
Israelites expectation oftentimes, thereby to draw their minds from temporal to
Spiritual matters (which was the cause also why Christ never pretended to as
earthly Kingdom, although he was truly and really heir to the Crown of
Judah.) And though the actual administration of the outward scepter and
supremacy promised to Judah was often Intermitted, for the foresaid reason, yet
was his actual Right and Title still manifested by God, not only by exact
records of the genealogies of the Royal family, whereof Christ descended, but
also by severe judgments upon those who presumed to usurp the scepter: For all
the brethren of the Machabees dyed by the sword, and their posterity was rooted
out (as you read before) by their own servant; And Herod in his latter days
lived a miserable life, and dyed a miserable death. So that even the temporal
part of that promise of supremacy to Judah (which was the Type of the
Spiritual) was performed exactly in the realty, though not in the Modality
thereof, that is, in the manifestation of a clear and undoubted title to the
crown, though not in the actual administration of Power and Authority, and the
outward pomp which is an appendage thereof. For Christ was proclaimed by
Angels, King of the Jews, as soon as he was born: Which must needs relate to
his temporal Right, For in his Spiritual Right, he was King of the Gentiles as
well as the Jews.

And thus you see what that Jus Divinum is, whereof Polarchy does participate
viz: Jus Divinum Vindicativum, which is indeed a Divine Malediction, for the
further Illustration whereof, I will show you first what Polarchy is in this
present Chapter, secondly how many several Maledictions are Incident thereunto,
in the ensuing Chapter.

Polarchy (in its proper genus) is neither described by Aristotle nor any of
those Statists, who from his principles have framed discourses thereupon,
because all of them proceed upon that principle in Policy, which Divinity
manifests to be false and erroneous: For all of them generally take it pro
Concesso, that these kinds of Polarchies (which Aristotle places amongst the
laudable sorts of Policy) are gifts and blessings of God as well as Monarchy,
and different only in degrees of goodness. All which Polarchies out of the
principles of Divinity and warrant of Scripture (the only infallible Rule and
ground of truth) (and wherein a judicious Textuary shall find a more exact
prescript and Model of Policy and Monarchical Government, then ever was set
forth, either by Plato in his phansied Republique, or Aristotle in his
Politiques, or Xenophon in Cyropaedia, or Cicero, or Livie, or Dionysius
Halycarnasseus, or Cornelius Tacitus, or the most exact Politician that ever
writ purposely of this subject.) I place amongst the curses and judgments
which God does inflict upon a Nation for sin. And if Aristotle had well
considered the nature of a Polarchy (although he constitute but two species
thereof, viz: (...), which is the Rule and Government of the Nobles. and (...),
which is the Rule and Government of the people. The opposite privations whereof
by his Doctrine are, (...) and (...). Yet) he should have found Polarchy
directly capable of that boundles multiplicity which himself makes the
reciprocal property of an evil, and Monarchy of that simplicity which himself
maks the reciprocal property of a good, according to that Maxim of his own
Eth. lib. 2. Chapter 6. (...). Now it is apparent there can be but one sort of
Monarchy (I mean in relation to the subject of power and supremacy, which is
the ground of variating the species of Policy.) But there may be as many sorts
of Polarchies as there are People in a commonwealth. For by the same Rule that
Rome erected three sorts of Polarchy, they might as Legally have erected thirty
thousand sorts: For when they constituted two Consuls, why might not they have
constituted three, or four, or ten, or a hundred, or indeed a hundred
thousand? and so in their Decemvirates, and Triumvirates, which were but mere
devices without any grounds either in nature or Religion. But though they do
not set down any exact definition thereof, yet I shall endeavor to describe
the nature thereof, by those properties and causes which are the principle
ingredients of that unnatural composition, thus; Polarchy is a Politic
Government, invented by the Devil, for the destruction of humane society, by
the Administration and exercise of the Supreme Power and Authority of a
multitude over the rest of the same society; the disputable part of which
description expressed in the former clause thereof, I shall make good in the
ensuing Chapter, declaring the Divine Malediction incident to Polarchy.

CHAP. IV. Of the sixth Malediction Incident to Polarchy.
COncerning the Divine Maledictions Incident to this curse of Polarchy: It is
necessary by the rule of contraries, that as the blessing of Monarchy does
participate of six several sanctions, so that the curse of Polarchy should
participate of six several Maledictions; opposite to those sanctions. 1. Cursed
Institution. 2. Cursed Prescription. 3. Cursed Stipulation. 4. Cursed
Assimilation. 5. Cursed Accommodation. 6. Cursed Regulation.

The first Malediction incident to Polarchy is a Cursed Institution and
Original. I have often admired the gross mistake of all those Authors which I
have read upon this subject, concerning both the time and manner of the
Institution of Polarchies, but especially of that learned and judicious Statist
Sir Commonwealth of England: lib. 1. Cap. 13. and 14.
Thomas Smith, who makes all those three kinds of Government, (which Aristotle
terms the just and laudable sorts of Policy) to be indifferent and Arbitrary,
as if they had all an equal ground both in Divinity and nature, and that the
sole pre-eminence amongst them, were only in precedence of time: As if an
Aristocracy had even naturally and of necessity succeeded a Monarchy in the
second age of the Patriarks, and Democracie upon the like grounds obtained the
like honor amongst men of the third generation. Whereas first concerning the
difference of their Antiquity, I am most assuredly confident that the
learnedest Antiquarie in the world, cannot produce any Authentic Record to
evidence the Original of any Polarchy, within the space of three thousand
years, after the first Institution of Monarchy by God in Paradise. It is true
indeed that God did Institute the Synedrion or great Counsel of seventy Elders
in the time of Moses, as also other particular orders of Magistracy in every
Tribe and City, consisting of different numbers of Elders: but none of these
were ordained with any intention to sway the scepter of the Kingdom or to
exercise the supreme Power and Authority of the Commonwealth: but only for
Inferior Courts of justice a subordinate to that supreme and Regal Honor and
Power which God had designed for the Tribe of Judah. And therefore from the
time of their first Institution under Moses, they were always subject to such
occasional Judges, Rulers, and Monarchs, as God appointed to be supreme Rulers
and Governors over his people, as Joshua, Othniel, Ehud, and the rest of the
Judges.

Indeed the first face of any Government which looks like a Polarchy, presents
it self upon the death of Amaziah King of Judah, who was murdered by a
conspiracy of some of his Nobles, in the fifteenth year of Jeroboam King of
Israel, (which was about two hundred and fifty years after the first
institution of a Regal Government in that Kingdom) whose son Vzziah was not
admitted to his just and rightful inheritance, till the seven and twentieth
year of the said Jeroboam: During which time there was an Intermission of Regal
Government in the Kingdom of Judah; but who the Traitors were that withheld
the King from his Right, and usurped the Royal Power, the holy Ghost does not
specify; how ever, it is not Improbable that those conspirators who slew his
Father, might (according to the usual Policy of Traitors) seek to secure
themselves from the punishment due for their offense, by their voluntary
incurment of a more criminous guilt. Only thus much I am assured of, that if
this were the first Institution of a Polarchy, the Devil was the Author of it;
for the foundation of it was laid in Rebellion, Murder, Usurpation, which were
never any of Gods works; or if no Polarchy can pretend to so great Antiquity,
yet whenever the first was erected, I am sure it had neither other
foundation, nor other Author: For every lawful Monarch (which was the Ancient
and Primitive Government in every Kingdom of the world) was as Legally and
justly possessed of his Crown, as any Private Gentleman is of a Lordship
descended from his Ancestors, or otherwise made his by any just and warrantable
course of Law. And therefore as no Gentleman's Tenants can without manifest
Injustice possess themselves of their Landlords lawful inheritance upon any
Allegation that he is a hard master, or a deboist and lewd man, or any the like
pretense, how true and just soever, no more can any subjects (having a greater
obligation upon them of obedience to their King then any Tenants have to a
Landlord) upon the like Allegation depose their Sovereign; and possess
themselves of the Supremacy and Royal Power; without manifest guilt of
Rebellion, and Sacrilegious usurpation in the highest Degree. And therefore all
Polarchy must needs proceed from that old grand Rebel and Author of all
mischief the Devil; and whether he was not of council with those Senators who
erected the first Polarchy in Rome, (which was one of the most ancient in the
world) I shall desire the Reader to judge by one act of those Senators;
concerning the business of that pretended Reformation of Government; for (ex
pede Herculem) by their prudence, justice, and conscience expressed in this
one, you may judge of their grounds and reasons for other of their actions.
After these Reformers had banished Tarquinius superbus the Tyrant, they found
one Tarquinius a Nobleman in Rome, who was a man of an exceeding upright and
unblamable conversation, whom those reforming politicians would not permit upon
any entreaties or means that could be used, to live in Rome, although no man
in the City could bring in any accusation against him; but immediately banished
him also, because they judged him to be a man of a dangerous and Tyrannical
name, and therefore would not be persuaded that Tyranny was sufficiently
extinguished, whilst there was any man of that name living in Rome, wherein
they expressed as much justice, as if, because John of styles had killed a man,
the King should hang all John's in England to prevent homicide.

2. The second Malediction Incident to Polarchy is cursed prescription; For we
never find the curse of Polarchy received by any nation before Christ's time,
but only Heathens and Infidels, to whom God never vouchsafed the understanding
and knowledge of divine Mysteries revealed in his word, (containing the
Immediate outward means of salvation) Nor after Christ's time, neither till of
late years, which Ecclesiastical Historians make the declining and languishing
age and state of Christianity, when Christian societies abounded with
blasphemous Heresies in Doctrine, and Idolatrous Innovations in Discipline, for
the just punishment whereof God did send this curse of Polarchy amongst them;
so that some Christian societies have now of late (through giddy fanatic
humors) by Heathenish presidents erected some sorts of Polarchies in their
Commonwealths (which yet are none of the most eminent.)

3. The third Malediction Incident to Polarchy is Cursed stipulation, Christ
himself menacing the Eradication and utter extirpation of every plant which his
Heavenly Father has not planted, Mat. 15.13. And that Polarchy is one of these
unnatural and spurious plants declared in the cursed Institution thereof And
though neither Polarchy in General, nor any species thereof, be once mentioned
in the Scripture, (the reason whereof I formerly showed) yet are those cursed
sins which are both the foundation and associates of all Polarchies (in any
Kingdom of eminency and Antiquity) Stigmatized with many dreadful Menaces and
Maledictions in several parts of Scripture, especially Rebellion (which is the
constant foundation, and pr^p of every Ancient and Eminent Polarchy) which the
holy Ghost compares to witchcraft, which is an utter renunciation of all
Relation to God, and obliging our selves by Covenant to be the children and
servants of the Devil. And what rewards can such men expect of their cursed
vocation and profession, but horror of conscience here to and horror of Hellish
and everlasting torments hereafter?

4. The fourth Malediction Incident to Polarchy is a cursed Assimilation,
Polarchy being a resemblance of the grossest absurdities both in Divinity,
Nature, and Art.

1. In Divinity, A multiplicity of Gods was an Absurdity which not only the
Jews and Christians, but even the wiser and more knowing sort of Heathens (as
Plato and Aristotle) did abominate and deride. And the Supreamacy in Government
is the most Immediate resemblance of Divine Majesty upon earth, (For which
cause the Kings in Scripture are styled Gods) And therefore a multiplicity of
Supreme Rulers must needs be an abominable and ridiculous absurdity even by the
judgment of the wiser sort of Heathens.

2. Polarchy is a resemblance of the greatest Absurdity in Nature. For though
the body of man, which is the most exact Model of Nature, consists of two hands
and Arms, and two feet and legs, and though each of them also have five toes
and fingers, yet does one head direct the actions and motions of all these. Nay
though a man have more fingers or more toes then usual, yet is not that esteemed
such an absurdity in Nature, as to have two heads: And certainly, the more
heads that a man has, the greater monster he is; And the more Supreme
Governors there are in a state, the more prodigious is the Government.

3. Polarchy is a resemblance of the greatest Absurdity in Art. Ad Rusticum
Monachum.
Saint Jerome when he endeavored to persuade the necessity of a Monarchical
Government in the Church, and thereupon the necessity of Episcopacy, he showed
how both in Nature and Policy, and Arts, all things tended to Monarchical
Government. The dumb beasts (says he) and wild herds follow their leaders.
The Bees have their King, and the Cranes fly after one another like an
Alphabet of letters; one Emperor and one Judge of each province: Rome as soon
as it was built, could not admit of two brethren to be Kings, and Jacob and
Esau fought in one womb. In a house is but one Master, in a ship but one Pilot;
in an Army (though never so great) the sign of one General is expected. And
what inconveniences may accrue from diversity of Generals in an Army, or the
diversity of Masters in one family; the same and greater do accrue from
diversity of Supreme Governors in one Commonwealth. By the Representation of
which Inconveniences to the Authors own consideration (who Importuned Lycurgus
for the erection of a Democratical government in the Lacedemonian Com: wealth)
that prudent Prince quickly altered his desires. (...), (says he) do thou
first make trial of that kind of Government in thine own family, and if thou
find it advantageous to make thy servants Masters of thy family, then renew
this suit, and I will hearken to it. But this injunction quite altered the case;
For he that desired to be advanced above his own Master, had no desire that his
own servants should be made Masters and Rulers over himself.

5. The fifth Malediction Incident to Polarchy is Cursed Accommodation, Polarchy
being the most Commodious Instrument whereby the Devil may work discords and
divisions (which as I said before, are the very morbi laethales populi and
Reipublicae.) For it is one of Christ's own Maxims, that a Kingdom divided
against it self cannot stand, Mat. 12.24. But every Polarchy must necessarily
divide a Kingdom against it self. Ergo. No Kingdom can continue under such a
Government but must necessarily be brought to desolation. The minor of that
Sillogisme is proved from another of Christ's own Maxims, Mat. 6.24. No servant
can serve two Masters, (much less three or four or four hundred Masters) but
in every Polarchy there are (at least) two Masters (and sometimes many more.)
And therefore no man can be a true subject or servant in such a Commonwealth,
but (as Christ says there) must necessarily be factions, by loving one and
hating all others, and adhering to one, and rebelling against others.

Ob. Though a Polarchy be constituted of many Natural bodies, yet all these are
but one Politic body aggregated of those many Natural bodies, and so in that
sense but one Politic Master, and so may be served: Because though some differ
in opinion and so in votes, yet the laws by which they rule, being concluded
by the Major part, are the Act of the entyre body, and so obeyed as an
unanimous Result.

Sol. If ever God had created one entire Politic and aggregate Soul, to act in
that enitre Politic body, without a difference of opinions or affections; Or
had by his laws enjoined us obedience and honor only to an abstract Power,
and not to the subject in whom it is: Then such a Politic body might be
capable of a Supreamacy of Power, to which men might exhibit obedience without
necessity of Incurring the guilt of disobedience to any person Invested with
that Supreamacy upon their strifes and dissentions: But Gods Commandments
enjoyne honor to Parents, not to paternity: to Kings, not to Regality: And
therefore (seeing diverse Kings have diverse souls, and diverse minds, from
whence do issue diverse commands, which are always inconsistent with a perfect
obedience) it is impossible for one man to serve and obey both as a faithful
and dutiful subject and servant.

And this is that known principle which is asserted both by in Cap. 1. ad
Titum, and Ep. ad Evagrium.
Jerome and lib. 1. De vnitate Ecclesiae lib. 1. Cap. 3.
Cyprian, and even judicious lib. 4. Instit. Cap. 4.
Calvin himself, (although a favourer of Polarchy) to be the ground of al
mischiefs and Intestine dissentions in Polarchies, Diverse men have diverse
minds and diverse meanings, and therefore amongst a multitude of Governors,
Emulation and Dissension are no rare springs. Nay (both Jerome and Cyprian)
record it for a probatum in daily experience, that so many leaders, so many
followers; so many Rulers, so many factions do tear and rent in pieces the
Peace and Unity of all societyes: To which agrees Calvin, affirming an equality
amongst Governors to be the Mother of Factions. And therefore it is observable
that in Christ's time, when Esaias had prophesied that there should be an
Universal peace over the whole earth, that then there was not any kind of
Polarchy in any Kingdom of the world: Because a Polarchy in its own nature is
inconsistent with Peace and Unity: And therefore the end and conclusion of all
Polarchies is Ruin and Desolation, (the common fate of all divided Kingdoms)
if the mercy of God do not prevent the same, by the opportune Reducement of
that Polarchical Government to a Monarchical; a manifest experience whereof we
have both in the Athenian, Syracusan, Lacedemonian, and Roman Commonwealths;
whose Polarchical dissentions occasioned many Intestine wars and Tragical
conflicts, which in fine must necessarily have produced the Ruin and
Desolation of them all, if the Reducement of those Polarchies to Monarchies had
not prevented it. For if Cesars Monarchy had not been established by the
overthrow of Pompey (one of his fellow triumvirs, as peremptorily resolved to
endure no Superior, as Caesar was to admit of no equal.) And the Monarchy of
Octavius Augustus, by the overthrow of Anthony (a similer competitor) what can
any man imagine in probability to have proved the conclusion of those
Polarchical differences, but the utter ruin and desolation of that flourishing
and renowned Commonwealth? For if you read Lib. 6. De Bell. Juda^.
Josephus, you shall find that the ruin and desolation of that famous nation
of the Jews was occasioned rather by the civil, Intestine and bloody
dissentions of the three factions in Jerusalem, created by the Tritarchie of
Simon, John, and Eleazer; then either by the valor or policy of the Romans.

Ob. Solomon (himself a King) says, that where no Council is the people fall,
but in the multitude of Councillors there is safety. Prove. 11.14. Whereby it
appears that the security of the people is more or less, according to the
greater or lesser number of Counselors. Now you know, in a Monarchy the
people are ruled by the wisdom and prudence of one man, but in a Polarchy by
the wisdom and prudence of a multitude. Therefore salus populi is better
provided for in a Polarchy; And by consequence a Polarchy is the better
Government.

Sol. There are two sorts of Councillors. 1. Subordinate and obeying
Councillors, the approbation of whose Councels depend upon a superior Monarch;
and a multitude of these Councillors Solomon found by experience to be
exceedingly conducent to the safety of the people, and the honor of the King.

2. Supreme and ruling Councillors, the results of whose Councels were
sufficient for the constitution of a decree or Law, without the approbation of
any Superior Monarch. And such Counselors as these Solomon had no experience,
nor thought of. Now there are two reasons why the Councels of the former are to
be preferred to the Councels of the latter sort of Counselors.

1. Because those Councels which proceed from subjects, have the advantage of
two opposite dangers, of each side one, to guide their Councels in the safe way
of Moderation, between the Kings Prerogative, and the Peoples safety and
benefit. First the danger of self-prejudice, being equally interested with the
People in the grievances and sufferings which proceed from the Tyranny of an
unlimited (or rather an unduly limited) prerogative, by Laws which may tend to
the oppressions of the subjects in their estates or persons, not warrantable by
any Law of God, which obliges the King in a Reciprocal bond of love, to regard
the peoples safety as well as they are obliged to regard his honor. And
therefore no wise men will administer any Council of this nature, which is
destructive to themselves as well as the people. Secondly the danger both of the
Kings displeasure and the frustration and rejection of their Councels, if they
should present any advice to the King which tended to his own dishonor, or to
disinable him for the protection of his people. But the Councels which proceed
from a multitude of Governors have neither of these bridles to guide them in
an equal and moderate way. For though their Councels be never so prejudicial to
the Commonwealth, yet they have no Superior whose displeasure they are afraid
of. And as for the sufferances and oppressions of the people, it is the Basis
and support of their greatness and Power.

Repl. Whatsoever the Councels be which are given to a King, yet his
Resolutions may be as exorbitant as the Results of these ruling Councelours:
For the oppressions and grievous impositions which are laid upon the people,
are his benefit, as well as they are the benefit of Ruling Counselors.

Sol. The case is much different. For the Honor and Power of a King (says
Solomon) is in the multitude of his people, and the wealth of a King in the
prosperity and riches of his people, because they have all an equal relation of
subjection and friendship to the King. But the Power and safety of the Supreme
Rulers is in the multitude of their factious friends, and paucity of their
adversaries of a contrary faction. For (as we formerly demonstrated from
Christ's own words and Maxims) it is impossible but there must be some
differences and divisions in every Polarchy, which though they be smothered for
a while, (either through fear of a common enemy, or some other respects of
common advantage) yet will burst out at length; when the different care and
regard of the different Governors, will not be to see the people numerous or
wealthy, but their friends numerous and wealthy; and their enemies few and
miserable. And the prevalency of malice makes always this latter their
greatest and chiefest care: so that by the several Governors of different
factions, the calamity and overthrow of the whole Commonwealth, comes at last
to be the chiefest and Universal care and endeavor in every Polarchy.

2. The second reason why the Councels of a multitude of subjects are more
conducible to the happiness both of the King and people, then the councels of
a multitude of Rulers, is because the Laws which are compiled and framed by
their councels, are grounded upon the validity of their reasons and grounds
which satisfy the Kings judgment, though they proceed but from the single
opinion and vote of one, and one though the opinions and votes of four hundred
others be contradictory thereunto; whereas the Laws that are framed by the
other Councels are grounded only upon the multiplicity of votes, although they
be never so absurd: and how absurd the votes of the Major part may be in a
multitude, yea even of the chief and principal amongst them, the Scripture
affords us plentiful testimony; For in the case of the two Angels, all the men
of Sodom voted against one Lot. Genesis 18. And six hundred thousand Israelites
voted against one Moses, for the Deifying of the golden Calf. Ex. 32. Baal had
four hundred and fifty votes to be the God of Israel, when the Lord himself had
only Elijah's. 1 King. 18. And Ahab obtained four hundred votes for his safe
return from Ramoth-Gilead, when only Micajah did vote against it, 1 Kin. 22.
Nay did not all the Priests and Elders and multitudes of people vote Jesus
Christ himself to be a grand Malignant and Delinquent, even worthy of death?
Mat. 27. And therefore you see where the energy of a Law does depend totally
upon the multiplicity of votes, how ordinary and frequent it is, even for the
most absurd Impieties, and the most detestable injustice to attain the
pre-eminence, either through the simplicity or partiality of judgments, which
is never wanting in a Polarchy.

6. The sixth and last Malediction Incident to Polarchy is cursed Regulation:
Every Polarchical action in the Polarchs (who are Interested in the active part
of Government) being rebellious and intrusive both in the Institution and
management of a Polarchical Government, (in Relation to the lawful Monarch, who
is by them deposed from and deprived of his just and Legal inheritance and
birthright) and factions and seditions in relation to the subjects. And
directly contrary to Gods Law and Commandments. And the actions of the
Polarchists (who are interested in the passive part of Government) must needs
be of the same nature, so far as they are consenting and assisting unto their
usurping Governors in these Polarchical and sinful actions. But I desire the
Reader to consider that my discourse relates to Ancient Commonwealths, and
not to our new Plantations, who may indeed erect a Polarchy without any guilt
of Rebellion or intrusion upon another man's right, because happily the places
may be void of Inhabitants, and so void of all Government: But yet those
Polarchyes cannot be free from such factions and divisions as our Savior
Christ does make Essential, even to the least Polarchy, (though it be but only
Oeconomical) And a minore ad majus the common principles of a Logic make a
valid Argument.

And upon these grounds I conclude all Polarchies of what kind soever, to
proceed from Divine Malediction, and therefore to be directly a curse and
judgment of God upon a Nation. And that therefore the vocation and profession
of Polarchs is cursed, unlawful and unwarrantable by the word of God, either in
themselves or their partakers. And I hope there is sufficient matter alleged
in the premises, to warrant this conclusion. And yet to add a greater luster
to this truth, I shall in the next Chapter resolve two queries or cases of
conscience concerning these two opposite kinds of Government viz: the blessing
of Monarchy and curse of Polarchy.

CHAP V. Of the Resolution of two Quaeries concerning a mutual transmutation
betwixt these two opposite kinds of Government.
I Confess the cases of conscience which may be proposed concerning these two
opposite kinds of Government are very numerous: But yet I suppose a judicious
Reader may frame a resolution of any one, or all of them, out of the premises,
together with what I shall further add in the resolution of the two subsequent
quaeries.

1. Quaere Whether a Monarch or King and his people may not (either severallie
or by joint consent) endeavor the change of that Government into a Polarchy
(salvis utriusque partis conscientijs) when there appears a manifest cause for
so doing. As in the King, a consciousnesse of his own disability to execute the
duties of his calling. In the people a sense of their own sufferings, under an
evil and Tyrannical Government, the fruits of that disability.

Sol. This querae consists of 3. parts. 1. Concerns the King severally. 2.
Concerns the people severally. 3. Concerns both King and people jointly: unto
each of which parts I shall frame a several answer.

1. The Kings sole endeavors for such a change, do render him guilty of a
five-fold injury.

1. To himself, which is the most unnatural kind of obloquie, and therefore an
offense of the highest nature amongst those which relate immediately to man.

2. To his posterity, wherein the Holy Ghost declares him more notoriously
criminous then an Infidel. 1. Tim. 5.8. For an Infidel is even naturally
studious to preserve the honor both of himself, his posterity and family.

3. To the faith of Christ, the renunciation whereof, Saint Paul (in the
prementioned Text) imputes to him who does renounce that Legal Authority and
Power, wherewith God has invested him for the just defense of that faith;
according to Esaiah's prophecy, Cha. 49 23. Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers.

4. To the Saints and Church of Christ, whose wants ought to be supplied out of
his abundance, 2 Cor. 8. and 9. Chapter

5. To his people, changing their blessing into a curse.

As for the Kings disabilities, It was never intended by the Law either of God
or man, that they should be the ground and measure of his Power and
Prerogative, for then most Kings should transfer their Supreamacy in matters
civil unto the Lawyers, and in Ecclesiastical unto the Divines; whereas both
Divine and humane Laws invest the King with a Supreamacy in both, presupposing
the supply of his defects in either, by a Council composed of the most knowing
men in both Laws, Civil and Ecclesiastical. For which the Lord himself
supplied us with a president in the Jewish Sanedrim, which was the great
Council instituted by God himself, (to assist Moses in matters of Importance
and difficulty (when such grew numerous) and after him all the Judges,
Monarchs, and Kings of Israel) which Council consisted both of priests and
Princes or chief Elders in every tribe, as you may read 2 Chronicles. 19.

2. Sol. The peoples sole endeavor for transmutation of Monarchy into
Polarchy cannot be free from a triple guilt. 1. Of injustice to their own
selves, in depriving themselves of that which God ordained for a blessing and a
means of their happiness and security, and contracting upon themselves that
curse, which is the fruits of Divine Malediction, and ordained by God for a
Punishment of sin.

2. Of Manifest Disobedience to the Kings Power and Authority, in acting things
contrary to his commands.

3. Of Manifest injustice to his person, by intruding upon his just and lawful
Inheritance.

As for the peoples sufferings by the Kings evil and Tyrannical Government,
that can be no ground or warrant for them to act any thing prohibited by the
Laws of God; For though such sufferings be Mala poenoe, that is afflictions
and punishments, from which we are taught by Christ to pray deliverance, and
from which we ought also to endeavor a deliverance by all such lawful means
as are warrantable by the word of God: Yet in regard all Mala poenae are a part
of Gods justice, whereby he is honored: And all Mala culpae (such as
disobedience and rebellion against Authority, and the endamagement of our
neighbor (much more of our Sovereign) in his estate or honor) are
transgressions of Gods precepts, wherein God is dishonored, and the Devil, the
flesh, and the world preferred before and above him. No man ought to endeavor
a deliverance from the most horrid Tyranny and oppression, by the least act of
injustice or rebellion.

As for the arguments and objections alleged by the oppugners of this doctrine
to legitimate their acts of injustice and rebellion, under the pretenses of
self-defence; I shall recite and resolve the most material of them in the
eleventh Chapter of this book, which speaks of the subordination of the ends of
Monarchy, manifesting also the Kings Honor to have the Right of pre-eminence;
ante salutem populi, that is, above the peoples welfare.

3. Sol. The joint endeavors of both (although they carry the fairest show of
equity and conscience, in regard there is no injustice done, but to those that
are willing to receive it, who by Aristotle's rule, are incapable of an injury;
(but that must be understood ab Extrinseco, and in foro judicij, yet) are
altogether unwarrantable in this case; For first they are directly felons de
se, and as guilty of self-robbery as he that kills himself, is of self murder.
As we showed in the two former answers.

2. They are guilty of most notorious Ingratitude and unthankfulness to God, in
despising his blessings, and preferring those curses before them, which are the
badges of their sin, and of Gods wrath and vengeance for the same. Just like
the murmuring and ungrateful Israelites, who (whilst they were fed with bread
from Heaven) cried out for returning to the fish, garlic, onyons, and
cucombers of Egypt. Number. 11.5.

2. Quaere. Whether both Polarchs ( that is, the Governors and Rulers in a
Polarchy) and Polarchists, (that is, the subjects who live under such Rulers)
be jointly and severally obliged in conscience to endeavor the Reducement of
that Government to a Monarchy.

Sol. To frame a resolution to this question, we must premise some distinctions
of Polarchy; For though all Polarchies in their proper constitution be mala
poenae and curses for sin, yet do they admit of diverse qualifications in
relation to their Institution and Original. For some sorts are erected upon a
more Legal and warrantable, or rather indeed a less sinful ground then others
are.

The safer and more warrantable grounds are two.

1. First, Plantation where there are no Inhabitants, nor former kind of
Government, but the Election and Resolution of any kind, is free and Arbitrary
to that society (who consent for the population of the place, and the
Institution of a Policy) without the dissent or prejudice of any other in
Authority.

2. Consent of the Monarch or Governor in Authority, to chang that Government,
either in part (as when any City, Province, or Kingdom under the command of
some great King or Monarch, does obtain (either by composition or donation) a
freedom from all subjection unto the jurisdiction of that King, and thereupon
do confer the Supreme Power over that society upon more then one) or in whole
(as when both Monarch and subjects by joint consent do change a Monarchy into
a Polarchy.)

In all which sorts of Polarchy, both Polarchs and Polarchists are obliged in
conscience to endeavor the reducement of that Government to a Monarchy by all
lawful means; But in this case all endeavors are not lawful; For,

1. First indeed all Polarchs which are interested in the active part of
Government, are obliged in conscience to endeavor this transmutation by any
means which are conducent and effectual thereunto; because first, their
actions are not liable to the guilt of rebellion, 2. They are Entrusted by the
people, (who are their Electors) to council and act those things wherein they
may best provide for the peace and safety of the people: Notwithstanding
happily those things which they resolve and council, sometimes may not arride
the Major part of the ignorant multitude.

Ob. Every man is bound in conscience in the first place to regard his own
honor and benefit, and therefore these Governors cannot be obliged to
endeavor this mutation, thereby to divest themselves of the honor and benefit
of such a Government, out of a care to provide for the good and benefit of the
people rather then of themselves.

Sol, It must be in things lawful and warrantable that men must seek honor and
benefit; for no man ought in pursuance of those ends, to make a vocation and
calling of any thing which is in it self a curse and punishment, (as Polarchy
is already demonstrated to be) neither ought any man to endeavor a private
good, out of that which is a public and National damage and mischief.

2. The endeavors of all Polarchists, (who are Interested only in the Passive
part of Government.) For such a Reducement, must be only prayers to God, and
petitions to Superiors, and such means as do not transgress the rules of
obedience; For all Polarchists are equally engaged to the obedience of all
those Polarchs, as the subjects of a Monarch are to their King, they all being
Invested with a supremacy of Power, in which respect they represent the Majesty
of God, and therefore all acts of resistance or dishonor to them, are
dishonorable to God, and damnable to the resisters. Romans 13.2. Now all such
acts being Mala Culpae and Essentially evil: And Polarchy, (which we seek to
avoid) being but Malum poenoe and accidentally evil; nor the blessing of
Monarchy (which we seek to attain) but accidentally good, we ought not to
endeavor the attaining of any such good, or deliverance from any such evil, by
acting any thing which may be prejudicial to our neighbor, or dishonorable to
God; For we may not do evil that good may come thereof.

Quaere. But put the case, that there happen a division and dissension between
the Polarchs about this Reducement of such a Polarchy to a Monarchy, some
consenting to it, others not: Ought not the subjects in such a case to assist
that party whose endeavors they judge to tend to the good of the Common
wealth, against those Governors who Impede and oppose it?

Sol. These divisions and dissentions are the very calamities which our Savior
himself affirms to be the Inseparable accidents and individual concomitants
of Polarchy. Mat. 6.24. But for the subjects assistance of such divided parties
in a Polarchy (whether the dissentions spring from that or any other occasion)
it is utterly unlawful and contrary to the commands of God. For though both
parties be our Superiors; and we obliged to the obedience of both, yet not to
the active obedience of either party, where both their Commands enjoin a sinful
action. Now that assistance of one party cannot be free from the resistance and
opposition of others, who are invested with an equal Power and Authority over
us, and by consequence not free from sin: And therefore we may not assist in
such a case, by any other endeavors then our prayers, nor is any way safe and
free from sin in such a case, but a passive obedience to both, by suffering
with patience (as from the hand of God,) whatsoever shall be inflicted upon us
by either party amongst such divided Powers.

2. The most unwarrantable and wicked grounds for the erection of a Polarchy,
are Rebellion and injustice, when subjects revolt, and renounce their
alleigance to their lawful King and Monarch, either in part (by the rebellion
and disloyalty of some particular City, Province, or Kingdom under his
command) or in whole (by the violent deposition of the King or Monarch, from
his total Power and Authority, and the absolute deprivation of him, of all his
Rights and Dominions.) In both which the case is the same.

Again, a Polarchy which is thus erected may be considered three ways. 1. In
order to those Polarchs and Polarchists, who are the Original Authors thereof,
in all and every one of which that foundation is wicked and sinful, proceeding
from a transgression of a precept comprehended within the first Table of the
Moral Law, which is not capable of Legitimation by any pretense se defendi (as
I shall fully demonstrate in the eleventh Chapter of this Book,) from whence I
conclude, that all those Polarchs and Polarchists are jointly and severally
obliged to employ their utmost endeavors for the Reducement of that Polarchy
to the Pristine Government, by restitution of their Lawful Sovereign to his
just Power, and his proper Rights and Revenues; The detaining of the latter
being manifest injustice, and the usurping of the former manifest Rebellion,
for suppressing whereof (in regard (as I said before, and shall in the eleventh
Chapter fully prove) it is a sin Immediately against the Honor of God) every
man ought to engage both his life and fortune.

2. In order to those Polarchs and Polarchists, who are the maintainers and
managers of such a Polarchy, during the life of that King or of any other of
the Blood Royal; who, (by descent from him) can make a just claim and title
unto that Crown. And all these are partakers of the same sins with their
predecessors; who were the Original Authors thereof; and therefore equally
obliged to the like reducement which the Authors themselves are.

3. In order to those Polarchs and Polarchists who are survivers to all the
Blood Royal, in whom the case comes to be the same with those which we formerly
mentioned, living under a Polarchy erected without opposition. For where the
Blood Royal is absolutely extinct, God does thereby declare his will concerning
the deposition of that family from the Government, as in the cases of Jeroboam
and Ahab, (though it be effected by never so wicked instruments) and the
subjects thereby freed from all obligation of obedience to that family, and
obliged to such an obedience to the present Governors (though Polarchs) and
such a Reducement of that to a Monarchy, as may not render them guilty of any
act of resistance or opposition to those Polarchical Governors, For as he that
is lame in his legs and feet (which are gifts of nature) may lawfully use
crutches, til it please God to restore him to his native perfection. So must
subjects be content to undergo this curse and punishment of a Polarchy, til it
please God to restore them unto the blessing of Monarchy; but we must not seek
to regain it by rebellion or any sinful means, for that is to forsake God, and
to run to the Devil for help and deliverance from our griefs and afflictions.

CHAP. VI. Of the true ground and cause of that Supremacy from which all
Monarchs do Derive their Titles to the Crown, where first of the Title of
popular Election.
IN Crowns as in all other (nay much more then in any other) possessions, he
that enters not in by the door of Right and justice, but climbeth up another
way by an Illegal usurpation or intrusion, is a Thief and a Robber; and what
Pious pretenses soever he make for justification of his wickedness (of zeal
and care for the peoples security, in their persons from Tyrannical violence;
in their estates, from Illegal invasions; in their liberties from Arbitrary
innovations, yet) certainly his intent is but to rob and to steal, whereby to
satisfy his own ambition and avarice, as the constant event has manifested in
all usurping Traitors, as Abimelech, Absalom, Baasha, Zimri,, Omri, and many
others.

But whether it be lawful to compass a Crown per fas aut nefas, is not the
point in question; for all men (who understand any thing in Religion and
Christianity) do acknowledge that no man ought to usurp the Crown or Regal
Government, but he who is Legally invested with that supremacy, which creates a
Right and Title thereunto. But from whence the investiture of that supremacy is
derived, is the point in difference. For the true stating and decision whereof,
we must observe in the first place, that there is a twofold ground and cause
of this supremacy, viz: Principal and Instrumental.

1. Principal, and that is God; by whom all Power is ordained, Romans 13.1. For
he is the Universal principal and primary cause (both efficient and final) of
all things (sin only excepted) Romans 11. last.

2. Instrumental, which is the secondary means which God does make use of, for
the Immediate collation of this supremacy upon any man, whereby to entitle him
to the Regal diadem: and this again is twofold, viz: Extraordinary and
Ordinary.

1, Extraordinary, when God does declare his will and pleasure concerning the
advancement of any person to this Sovereign Power and pre-eminence by
Extraordinary revelations, and this again is twofold, viz: Gracious and
Vindicative.

1. Gracious, when the Lord does thus declare his will by Angel or Prophet, or
some such Extraordinary means, for the advancement of a person to this honor;
for a blessing to his people, by making him a Minister of favors and mercies,
as in Moses, Joshua, David, Solomon.

2. Vindicative, when Gods will is so declared concerning the advancement of
such a person, whom he does make the executioner of his curses and judgments,
for a punishment of their sins, as in Jeroboam, Jehu, Salmaneser King of
Assyria, and Nebuchad-nezzer King of Babylon.

2. Ordinary, when God does advance a man to this Regal dignity and honor by
those ordinary ways and means which are constant Rules for us to judge of,
whereby to acknowledge this sovereignty and yield our obedience, and this
likewise is twofold, viz: Gracious and Vindicative.

1 Gracious, when the sovereign Power is attained by those ordinary ways and
means which are approved and warranted by the word of God, and the Rules of
reason and equity.

2. Vindicative, when the same Power is attained by violence and Injustice, and
such cursed ways and means as are Repugnant to the word of God, and the Rules
of justice and equity.

The dispute of the former would be arrogant and impious, for the Extraordinary
ways of God are far above our judgment, and further above our Imitation.
For God never intended such for a president whereby to frame our actions, but
only our submissions thereunto. And therefore passing over them, I shall
insist only upon those ordinary means which God has ordained to be a Rule
for our actions in this kind (i. e.) both for a ground of the Monarchs claim
and Title to the sovereignty, and also for the peoples submission and obedience
to the person, who is distinguished from, and preheminenced above all others in
that society, by a lawful Right and Title to the same.

The ordinary means (as you heard) is twofold, viz, Gracious and Vindicative.

1 Gracious, when the means are approved and warranted by the word of God,
concerning which there are two different opinions.

1. The former (which I confess is attested by some Authors of eminency) is,
that the Right of the Royal Investiture pertains to the people: Whereof in
this Chapter.

2. The latter more truly does impute it to Birthright and Hereditary
succession: Whereof in the next Chapter.

The Arguments whereupon they ground the former opinion, are partly Instantial,
partly Rational.

1. The Instances alleged for the propugnation thereof, are the Inaugurations
of those Kings which the Scriptures mention to be made or anointed by the
people, as Saul concerning whom (the Text says) that all the people of the
land came to Gilgal to make him King. 1 Samuel 11.15. And David, which all the
men of Judah anointed King at Hebron. 2 Samuel 2.4. And who afterward was
anointed King over Israel at Hebron by all the Tribes of Israel. 2.5.3. And
Solomon, who was likewise anointed by the people. 1 Chronicles. 29.22. And Jeroboam,
whom the people made King over Israel. 1 Kings 12, 20. And Vzziah whom the
people of the land made King. 2 Kin. 14.21. And Iehoahaz, who (though he was
but the second son of Josiah, younger then Eliakim) was made King by the
people in his fathers stead. 2 Chronicles. 23.20. And Christ, whom the people
intended to have made a King. Ioh. 6. And it must needs be presupposed they had
a power to do so, otherwise their attempts had been ridiculous. And to add
further weight to this Argument, we find this act of the peoples in making and
anointing of Kings to be mentioned sometimes with an express approbation
thereof from God, as upon Saul's Investiture. 1 Samuel 11.14. And David received
this honor from the people by the Lords express Command, enjoining David to
go to Hebron, there to be anointed King by the people. 2 Samuel 2.2. And David
himself called all the people to the anointing of King Solomon. 1 Chronicles. 29.

2. The reason alleged for the ground of this opinion, is, that the honor and
submission which Kings receive, is Originally in the people, (for honor est in
honorante, and non in honorato, according to Aristotle's principles) and from
them derived unto the King. And therefore they do not conceive it just or
reasonable that the people should be obliged to yield honor, and submission,
and perform duties of obedience to any person, but him whom themselves shall
judge worthy of it: And so attest their judgment of his worth, by their
election of him to be their King and Sovereign.

3. To these we may add Saint Peter's testimony, who terms Regality an
Ordinance of men, 1 Pet. 2.13. which were false, if it did proceed from God,
and not from the people; for then it were an ordinance of God and not of man:
And therefore though God be the Universal cause of Royal Power, as he is of all
things else, yet the people must be the Immediate and particular cause.

Now from these gounds they deduce two damnable and detestable Inferences and
Corollaries to justify Rebellion, and Dethronement of Kings.

1. That though the King be Major singulis, yet he is minor Vniversis; and
therefore that it is no Rebellion but duty in the people (meaning the Major
part) to resist or depose the King, where the people judge it necessary in
relation to the defense of their own safety, which (according to their
Doctrine) is Suprema Lex.

2. That the King does receive and enjoy this honor only by virtue of a
stipulation or Covenant between himself and the people, (the sole ground
whereof they conclude to be salus populi.) And therefore if the King does
violate this Covenant, and break the trust reposed in him by the people, by any
acts which are destructive ad salutem populi, (whereof they presuppose the
people to be the Judges) that then the people are absolved from their
Alleagance grounded upon that trust and Covenant, and may lawfully provide for
their own safety and welfare, either by resistance, deposition, dethronement,
or any such means as themselves judge to be most conducent to their own
security.

Before I return particular answers to these Instances, and the reason
alleged for the peoples right to confer this supremacy, (which does
pre-eminence the King above all others in the same society, and is the ground
of the Monarchs title to his Crown) and the two damnable Inferences thence) I
will premise those grounds and reasons which enunciate the error and absurdity
of this opinion. And thereupon frame answers to all that is or (I suppose) can
be alleged for the support of that popular prerogative.

The Arguments declaring the error and absurdity of this opinion are partly
Instantial, partly Rational.

The Instances of Scripture are of two sorts; the first manifest the peoples
disprobations not to be Authentic to Illegitimate the title of a lawful King
or Monarch. For the Books of Exodus and Numbers record ten several
disprobations and murmurings of the people against Moses, yet did not all these
disannul Moses his Title; For we see with what fearful judgments upon the
people, the Lord himself did Vindicate the same. Exodus 32. Number. 12. and Chapter 14.
and Chapter 16. And all the people of the land from Dan to Beersheba rejected David
upon Absaloms conspiracy, yet did not that nullify David's Right and title to
the Crown, for he was justly and truly King when he fled but with six hundred
of his servants, and the Lord did afterward Vindicate his Right and title
thereunto by a mighty destruction of his enemies. 2 Samuel 18. Neither did the
peoples disprobation of his just Power (when the ten tribes forsook David and
followed Sheba the son of Bichri) unking David, or Illegitimate his Right and
title to the Kingdom of Israel: For the Lord did quickly judge his cause by a
sudden vengeance upon that traitor, 2 Samuel 20.

The second sort of Instances, manifest the peoples approbation and endeavors
not to be Authentic or effectual to create a lawful title to the Crown, for
the golden Calf was honored and received, and proclaimed a God and guide in
Moses stead by Aaron and all the Israelites: Yet did not that popular election
legitimate that Calves power and title. Exodus 32. Absalom was proclaimed King by
all the thousands of Israel, yet did not that act of the peoples legitimate
Absaloms title to the Crown. For the holy Ghost terms it but a conspiracy
when it was in the very height. 2. Sam. 15.12. Sheba had ten Tribes for him,
when David had but one for him; and yet was he never termed a King, but a man
of Belial. 2 Samuel 20. Adonijah confesses that (although the faces of all
Israel were set on him, to make him King, yet) he never had any just Right or
title to the Kingdom, because the Lord had designed it for his Brother
Solomon. 1 Kings 2.15.

2. The reasons evincing the error and absurdity of this opinion are four.

1. The first is taken from the nature of Monarchy, to which this opinion is
absolutely destructive: For it is the very Essence of Monarchy, that one man
should enjoy the supremacy; but if the supremacy be delegated to the King from
the people, and may be resumed by the people at pleasure upon their own
judgments, then the supremacy is absolutely and primarily in the people, and
but derivatively and secondarily in the King, and by consequence all Government
is virtually Democratical; nay indeed every Government is properly (...) which
is generally acknowledged to be the worst kind of Government, the end and
conclusion whereof all Statists (even the most zealous for Polarchy) agree to
be confusion and desolation.

2. The second reason is taken from the Relations which persons invested with
Regal Honor, have unto God; by virtue whereof they are styled in Scripture the
children of God. Psa. 82. Ministers and servants of God. Romans 13.4. Jer. 27.6.
But we have no warrant or ground either in nature, reason, or Religion to
privilege the people to elect and appoint children or deputies and servants
unto God: or to consecrate a person (for the person of the King is sacred) And
therefore the election of Kings cannot pertain unto the people. For a sacred
effect cannot proceed from a profane cause.

The third reason is taken from the nature of the Kings office, which is to
judge the people, for no Judge ought to receive any gift or benefit from those
who are to be judged by him, because all engagements occasion partiality in the
judgments even of the wisest men. Deuteronomy. 16.19. But he that receives a Crown,
receives a gift, (...); therefore no King ought to receive his Crown from the
people, nor be elected by them. Nay and for this very reason, Moses appointed
all the officers who were to judge the people under him. Deuteronomy. 1. And David,
those who were to judge them under him, either in Ecclesiastical or civil
affairs. 1 Chronicles. 23. unto the 27.

The fourth reason is taken from the peoples Incapacity and unfitness to
manage such a prerogative manifested by God himself in three particulars: First
in their Ignorance, Secondly their Seditiousnesse, Thirdly their Inconstancy.

1. Their ignorance and want of judgment to discern between good and evil,
and that also in this particular point of Government. A manifest whereof is
exhibited in Solomon, who (though he was an Idolater, and so grievously peccant
in his duty toward God, yet) does receive an ample testimony from the holy
Ghost, of his justice and munificence toward his people, which was the ground
of that Panagyrick pronounced by the Queen of Sheba concerning Solomon's
Government. In which particular he was also a Type of Christ. And the object of
the Jews expectation til this very day concerning the Messiah, is the
enjoyment of a happiness under his Government, Parallel to that of Solomon's.
Yet were not the people in the days of Solomon contented with his Government,
but desired an alteration; complaining of his Tyranny and oppression. 1 Kin.
12.4.

2. Their factiousnesse (a constant effect and consequence of their Ignorance.)
For there was never any pretense against a present Government, and men in
Authority, so absurd and unjust, which did not relish with, and obtain support
from the multitude. Witness the conspiracy of Korah against Moses, Numb. 16.
Of Absalom against David, 2 Samuel 15. Of the High Priests and Rulers against our
Savior Christ. Mat. 26. Of Thoudas and Judas against Caesar. Acts 5. And indeed
the innumerable and horrid mischiefs which ensued upon the peoples tumultes
about the election of their Bishops (which in the Primative times was (for some
reasons) permitted to the people) were the very cause for which the Emperor
Novel. Constit. 123.
Justinian translated that privilege from the people to the Priests, and some
few of the Citizens; (which afterward for the like (and some other) reasons
the Monarchs assume to themselves.) For he that reads In Epitaph Patris.
Nazianzene, concerning the peoples absurdities about the election of Eusebius
Bishop of Cesarea. Or Lib. 1. Cap. 24.
Eusebius concerning the peoples outrage about the election of a Bishop at
Antioch; which sea was eight years together vacant, by reason the peoples
differences could not be reconciled in all that space. Or Lib. 2. Cap. 5.
Euagrius, concerning the horrible murders committed by the people of
Alexandria, about the election of a Bishop to that sea, upon the deposition of
Dioscorus. Or Eccles. Hist. l. 2. C. 1^.
Ruffinus, concerning the bloody Intestine wars amongst the people of Rome,
about the election of Damascus (where the places of prayer overflowed with the
blood of men) will never Judge it safe nor convenient, that any such prerogative
as the election and constitution of Kings and Monarchs should pertain to the
people: whose factions and distempers occasioned such horrid and barbarous
mischiefs and murders about the elections only but of their own Bishops.

3. Their inconstancy; (an inseparable effect and consequence of the two
former) For God himself could never please the people long with any of his
blessings, though he gave them bread from Heaven, yet their souls soon loathed
it, Numb. 11.6. Though the Lord appointed the weakest man upon the earth for
their Ruler and Judge, yet they complained of his Tyranny. Numb. 16.3. And you
see what great joy they expressed upon the desertion of Moses, and the
exaltation of the golden Calf, which Loc. Com. Class. 4. Ca. 20.
Peter Martyr makes the ground of his result concerning the Illegality and
Injustice of the placing such a Power in the people in the collation and
arbitrary reassumption of this Supreamacy. For says he, If any such Power were
in the people, the most just and gracious Kings could not be safe; For though
they Rule never so well, yet they shall never long satisfy the people.

And now to complete the confutation of this opinion concerning the peoples
right unto and power in this Royal investiture, I shall return an answer to the
Arguments alleged for the propugnation thereof, and to those damnable and
execrable Inferences grounded thereupon.

1. To these Instances of Scripture mentioning the peoples making and anointing
of Kings, I answer, that these acts of the people were performed two ways, 1.
Sometimes as acts of homage and duty, by way of acknowledgement and
testification of the Supreamacy already Legally confirmed upon the person to
whom these duties are performed. And such acts are expressed upon two several
occasions.

1. Where God did confer this Supreamacy and Regal honor, by any
extraordinary ways and means, as in Saul, David, Solomon, and Jeroboam: 2
Where God used their means for the Vindication of the Kings just Title against
an usurper. As in Joas, whom Jehoiada the Priest, and the Captains and people
crowned and anointed King in the Temple; restoring him to his just Rights which
had been usurped by his Grandmother Athaliah. 2 Kin. 11.12.13. And in Vzziah
the son of Amaziah, whom the people restored to his just Power, which the
conspirators (who flew his Father) had usurped: And in both these cases the
acts of the people are good and lawful, and approved by God; being declared to
be the will of God, upon the former occasion extraordinarily, upon the latter,
ordinarily.

2. These acts of the people are sometimes acts of power and Authority,
collating this Supreamacy and Regal power upon some person, who has no other
right or Title thereunto; neither of Birthright, nor of Revelation from God:
As upon Absalom, Adonijah, Jehoahaz, Judas, Theudas, and Barchozba (who
professed himself the Messiah, and drew the people into rebellion against the
Roman Emperor, which occasioned those wars wherein Jerusalem and the Jews
were destroyed.) And these acts of the people are sinful and rebellious, and so
declared by Gods judgments thereupon: For wheresoever the Scriptures mention
the constitution of a King after this manner, you shall find that they likewise
record (not only the frustrations of the peoples endeavors, but also) that
they were frustrated by some heavy and sudden judgments from God, both upon
the usurper (whereby he was degraded from his undue honor) and the people who
presumed to confer that honor upon him without a warrant from God, and so by
that means to obtrude a deputy upon God of their own, and not of Gods election.

And you may further observe for satisfaction in this point, that these acts of
the peoples in a King, and anointing of Kings are only mentioned where some of
these occasions happened, (that is, where there was an Interruption of the
ordinary means of conferring this Supreamacy by Birthright and Hereditary
succession; either by the Interposition of Gods just Prerogative in the
advancement of some person by extraordinary and Immediate Revelation, or else
by the usurpation of some who had no right or Title at all, but force and
violence, (either private of themselves and some few partners, wherein God
stirred up the people to Vindicate the Kings Right, or public of the people)
but where the Supreamacy and Sovereign Power, (with all the appendages)
descended by Birthright, there is no mention at all made of the people, though
the acts of duty and homage was as necessary to be performed to such Kings, and
were also actually performed to all who enjoyed the Crown by Hereditary
succession, (as Abijah, Asa, Iehosaphat, Iehoram and the rest, to whom the
people were no less subject and obedient, then to those who were appointed by
God) but yet I say in those cases, the peoples act of submission and homage are
not expressed but presupposed as known acts of duty to those Kings who attained
the Supreamacy by those ordinary and known means, of Birthright and
Hereditary succession.

2. To the reason alleged for the peoples Right to this Royal Investiture. I
answer, that the honor and submission which the people exhibit to their King,
are not acts of favor to be conferred and disposed voluntarily at their own
will and pleasure, but acts of duty whereunto they are obliged by the Law of
God. And therefore must be performed to such as God esteems worthy of the
honor to be his Deputies; and not upon such as themselves judge worthy to be
their Ruler. For as it was not necessary that God should require our consent to
make us, so neither is it necessary that he should require our consent to
govern us. For though the Angels be Invested with a Supreamacy over men, and
men over natural Agents, yet neither did the natural Agents elect or constitute
men their Lords and superiors, nor men the Angels. And therefore that God who
did constitute and ordain these degrees of superiority and subordination
amongst the species of the Universe without their consent, may by the same
right and justice constitute the like degrees of distinction amongst the
particulars of any species, without any concurrent Act of theirs. For you know
the people are obliged to exhibit acts of honor and reverence to the Judge,
but it does not therefore follow, that the people make that man a Judge, but he
is made such by letters Patents from the King, without asking any consent from
the people.

3. To S. Peter's testimony, I answer, that the Apostles expression there does
relate partly unto the subject of sovereignty, and that is the King, who in his
natural capacity is properly a man, and patrly to the object of Royal power,
which is the people, upon whom that power is exercised. In both which respects
it may be properly termed an ordinance of man; But it does not at all relate
unto the Original and Efficient cause of that power, which is God himself, and
neither King nor people.

3. To that former inference, that though the King be Major singulis, yet he is
minor Vniversis. I answer, that it is a distinction, 1. Absurd and ridiculous
in nature. 2. Senseless and destructive in Policy. 3. Groundless and damnable
in Divinity.

1. In Nature, for a Kings Power must needs be the same with a Fathers in
substance, (only the Kings is more absolute and more obligatory, as I shall
show hereafter) both being grounded upon the same precept, and expressed in the
same words: And can any believe, that, if a Father have thirteen sons, seven of
those mayby joint consent renounce their Father, and depose him from all
Authority; either over themselves or their other six brethren, seize his
estate, and lock him up in a close rooms. I believe if the observator, the
Author of this Corollarie should be so served by his own sons, he would not
commend them for dutyful children.

2. In Policy, It is senseless and destructive. For if the Major part of the
people be superior to the King, then the Government is not Monarchical, but
Democraticall; and that also a Democracy of the basest sort. For every species
of Policy, derives its denomination and nature from those who are Invested with
the Supreamacy. And that confusion and destruction is always the conclusion of
such a Government, both experience, and the general consent of Politicians,
does declare.

3. In Divinity, It is groundless and damnable, being directly contrary to that
express Rule which God himself has prescribed in this case. Exodus 23.2. Thou
shall not follow a multitude to do evil, nor speak in a cause to decline after
many. Where God plainly declares that the universality of the offenders cannot
legitimate the fault; as appears also in the sin of erecting the golden
Calf, Absaloms conspiracy, and the forecited Instances. For though it be a
maxim in Policy, that multitudo pecca^tium tellit peccatum. (i. e.) poenam
pec^ati. It is as true a Maxim in Divinity, that multitudo peccantium aggravat
peccatum (i. e.) culpam, the guilt of sin: and the more I seduce, the more
guilt I contract; and though the multitude of partakers may secure me from
punishment in foro Judicii humani, yet I am sure to receive the just reward of
that sin at Gods Tribunal; from which the whole society both of men and Devils
cannot secure me.

4. To return a direct answer to the second Corollary we must distinguish the
parts of that stipulation or Covenant which are three, viz: Materia, Finis, and
Forma.

1. The matter of the Covenant is twofold. 1. Ex qua, and that is the Laws
and Rules of justice: 2. Circa quam, and that is the people who are the objects
of al Acts of justice grounded upon these Laws.

2. The end of that Covenant is twofold. 1. Principalis, which is either
primus, and that is Gods glory; or a primo-ortus, and that is the Kings honor;
who is Gods Deputy. 2. minus principalis, and that is salus populi.

3. The form of the Covenant, which is the obligatory part, and (as they truly
alleged) implies a mutual engagement of the parties therein concerned. Now
the parties Primarily and Originally concerned in this Covenant are two, viz:
God upon the one party, and the people upon the other party; as Moses declares
when he recites that Original and general Covenant, (which is indeed the
ground of all other particular Covenants) Lev. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. And therefore
Solomon makes this Covenant a ground why people should obey the Kings
Commandments, not as the Kings, but as Gods Commandment, which he terms the
oath; Eccles. 8.4. is not so much between the King and people, as between God
and the people; For the King is only the Deputative party (assigned by God,
and entrusted by him for the performance of this Covenant upon Gods part.) And
therefore the Lord does make the King gracious or Tyrannical to the people
according to their own deserts, and their regard to this Covenant upon their
own part: as Solomon declares, Prove. 21.1. The Kings heart (says he) is in the
hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water, he turns it which way soever he will.
viz: either for a vengeance or recompense to the people, as the Lord himself
judges of their merits. And though the King may spare the wicked, and
persecute the Righteous even unto death, as Pilate did our Savior, yet even in
that the King does but execute Gods decrees, as the holy Ghost declares
concerning that unjust judgment of Pilates, Acts 4.28. For Pilate did nothing
but what God had determined before to be done. And therefore when the King
passes a judgment which we imagine to be unrighteous, we must not look upon
the Kings judgment, and consider that it comes from him, and still refrain
both our mouths and hearts from cursing the King. Eccles. 10.20. For when the
King does that which by the public law is not warrantable and just, he is not
therein unjust to us, but to himself; For though he do not observe the Rule
which God has set for him to judge by, (and therefore must account to God for
the breach of the trust received from him) yet he cannot transgress the Rule
of Gods Eternal Decrees which God has appointed us to be judged by; According
to which Law, God (by the Kings mouth and sentence) does punish even our most
secret sins: For every man's judgment is from the Lord, and not from the
Judge or Ruler. Prove. 29.26. So that in a word the King may do male, (that*s a
wrong to himself, for which he is accomptable to God;) but he cannot do malum,
that is, any wrong to us, by inflicting any thing upon us, which is not just,
and according to our deserts from God; whose place the King supplies in
judgment, which is the ground of Solomon's assertion, that The Kings lips do
pronounce Divine sentences, and that his mouth transgresses not in judgment.
Prove. 16.10. Now therefore upon these grounds of Solomon's, it is manifest, that
there is no sense, why the people should claim any power over the King by
virtue of this Covenant. 1. Because he is not their Deputy but Gods, and every
man must account to him for his actions, who does constitute and depute him; As
when the King does depute a Judge for any Province or City, the people under
his command have no power to question him for any act which they conceive
unjust, but either by petition to that Judge, or else by their addresses to the
King his Master, whose trust all corrupt Judges do deceive, and not the trust
of the people; For they never received any Power or Authority from the people,
but from the King: And in like manner the people for redress of their
grievances from the kings oppressions, must address themselves to the King by
petition, and if that prevail not, then to God by prayer, (who is the Kings
Lord and Master, and from whom he receives his power, and whose trust he breaks
by acts of injustice) which is ultimum Refugium, as Samuel declares when he
prophesies of Saul's Tyranny, whereby the people should be grievously
oppressed, as the Prophet foresheweth, for redress whereof the people (when the
King would not hear them) should cry unto the Lord. 1 Samuel 8.18. Other means
of remedy then which the prophet Samuel did not dream of, nor could not
prescribe to the people to make use of, and whereas if he had conceived
resistance to be lawful, he might soon have found out that way, and have
advised the people so to provide for their own security.

2. Because the people never received injustice from the King if they look upon
themselves, for the judgment is the Lords who cannot do injustice, nor break
the Covenant upon his part, although the minister or Deputy may fail and offend
in the execution of his office in his own particular, which is his own guilt.
As a Hangman that executes the just sentence of death upon a malefactor, if in
doing his office his intentions have not reference to the sentence of justice,
but the satisfaction of some private grudge, or some covetous design or the
like; that officer is guilty of murder, although the Malefactor receive from
his hands nothing but his due deserts.

And thus much I hope may be sufficient to declare the error and vanity of
that opinion that the peoples consent and approbation are the ordinary and
Instrumental means and causes of that supremacy and Sovereign power, which
does pre-eminence the Monarch above all others within the same society, and
from whence he derives his title to the Regal Diadem. I shall in the next
place proceed to speak of the just efficacy and virtue of birthright as to
this purpose.

CHAP. VII. Of the Title of Birthright.
THE second opinion concerning the efficient cause and means of this Supremacy
and Regal Dignity, is that which Imputes it to Birthright and Hereditary
succession. The efficacy whereof as to this purpose the Scriptures do set forth
in five p^^ticulars.

1. In the prerogatives of the firstborn, who were ho^^ (...)by God with a
double fanction. 1. Ceremonial, which did merely Typical, and common to man and
beast, Exodus 13.2^ (...) this sanction did not qualify a man in relation to
any temporal honor, but prefigured only the Spiritual prerogatives of Christ,
the firstborn amongst many brethren. 2. Natural, which sanction did
pre-eminence the firstborn above all his brethren in honors and possessions,
as the Lord declared to Cain Genesis 4.7. And Isaac to Jacob, who (although he was
younger then Esau, yet) obtained that prerogative by promise from God. Genesis
25.23. Which by composition was confirmed from Esau himself. Genesis 25.33. which
was the ground and cause why those prerogatives of honor, Sovereignty, and
possessions were confirmed unto him by his fathers blessing. Genesis 27.28.29. And
Jacob acknowledged the same honor and Supremacy to pertain unto Reuben his
eldest son; but because Reuben had forfeited that honor by defyling his
fathers bed, and Simeon and Levi (the second and third brothers) by their
bloody cruelties upon the Shechemites: Therefore by special Inspiration from
God, Jacob conferred it upon Judah, as the next heir and successor. But it was
not in the Fathers power either for love or hatred, to alter this Law of the
firstborn, and to transmit the honor and inheritance due to him, to his
younger brother. Deuteronomy. 21.15.

2. In that statute which the Lord himself made for ordering the descent of
honors and possessions, Numb. 27. which the Lord directed to be conferred by
birthright upon the next in blood, and not by the election or discretion
either of Moses or the people. For you see if a man had sons, God had
declared the supremacy and prerogative to pertain to the eldest. And now here
in Zelophehads case, he prevents all further scruples about the right of
inheritance, in case of defect of Issue male. For where a man has no son
(says the Lord) the Fathers inheritance (whereby we may understand both honor
and possessions; For the Israelites were to regard the preservation of the
honor of their families, as well as their possessions, that the Royal de^^^t
of Christ might be manifest to the world) shall pass unto (...) daughter, (from
whence by the way we may note the Inju^^^ ^f the Salique Law:) If he have no
daughter, then ye shall (...) is inheritance to his brethren, if he have no
brethren, then you shall give this inheritance to his Fathers brethren; and if
his Father have no brethren, then to the kinsman that is next in blood, v. 7.
unto 12.

3. In the Lords promises of perpetuating these honors and royal dignities
unto any family, which were always grounded upon the perpetuation of the Royal
Issue, in giving sons that should sit upon the Throne, as appears in his
promises to David, 2 Samuel 1.7.12 Psalm. 98.3. to Solomon, 1 Kings 9.4. to Iehu, 2
Kin. 10.30. And most manifestly in Jacobs prophecy, which upon this very
ground does entail the Crown and Scepter unto Judah until Shiloh came. Genesis
49.10.

4. In the Lords performance of the same gracious promises by perpetuation of
the Royal Issue, who inherited the Crown by virtue of this birthright, without
the concurrence of any other Instrumental cause or means: So Abijah succeeded
Rehoboam, and Asa him, and Iehosaphat him, and Iehoram him, and so in the rest,
as the Sacred Chronicle does at large relate.

5. Lastly Gods approbation of this Title of birthright, is further manifested
in his distribution of the Kingdoms of the earth unto those seventy families
of Noah's posterity, which the Lord divided by seventy languages, observing a
most wonderful order in that confusion. For when the Lord determined to
frustrate their design for building a Tower, (which should secure them from
such another deluge, as had swallowed up all the Inhabitants of the earth about
a hundred years before) by confounding their languages, Genesis 11. The Lord did
not give one language to the Father, and another to the Mother and children;
but gave to every one of those families mentioned in the tenth Chapter a
several language; so that every entire family upon this dispersion inhabited
together, and erected a Kingdom, wherein the Father of that family was the
King and Ruler, who enjoyed that honor by Birthright, and not by election;
which thereupon is an order observed amongst the Heathens to this day: And the
Lord to evidence to the world that these principal Fathers did enjoy this
honor and prerogative by birthright, did cause the several Kingdoms which
these families did plant and erect, to be recorded under the names of those
men, who are mentioned by their genealogies, chief of the families, as we may
read in Esaias 66. Ezekiel. 27. and Cha. 38. and Jer. 51. Where we shall find
several Kingdoms mentioned by the names of those very men, who are Recorded in
Genesis 10. to be chief of the families, upon the confusion of Languages.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Title of CONQVEST.
THE second Isntrumental cause and means of this supremacy which creates a
Right and Title to the Crown, is Vindicative. And that is sword and Conquest,
which the Lord declares to be one of the severest and heaviest of his Curses
and Judgments upon a Nation. Lev. 26. Where you shall find this Curse placed
in the fifth and highest degree of Gods judgments. And in Esaias 10.5. the Lord
styled the victorious King of Assyria the rod of his Wrath, and staff of his
Indignation; because by his sword he was resolved to pour out the Vials of his
fierce Wrath upon the ten tribes for their Idolatries and Abominations.

Quaere. It may be here demanded, Whether Conquest be a lawful and good Title,
and Whether any King who does claim from thence be a lawful King, or only an
usurper?

Sol. Conquest in it self makes no better Title to a Crown, then Ahab had to
Naboths vineyard, or then the Robber has to the travelers purse. For as it is
an affliction and punishment to the passive party, so it is a sin and
injustice in the active party; and directly contrary to the Law of God which
prohibits all injuries to our neighbors. But yet such a Title may be
Legitimated and made lawful by the declaration of Gods will (which is the
ground of all Law) concerning the same. Now Gods will in this case is declared
two ways. 1. Extraordinarily by Immediate Revelation. And so Jeroboam's, and
Jehu's, and Nebuchad-nezzer's Titles were Legitimated. 2. Ordinarily, by the
extinguishment of the Issue Royal, which is a declaration of his wrath and
vengeance upon that family; And so the Lord did Legitimate Baasha's Title, as
himself acknowledges, by the exstinguishment of Ieroboams house. 1 Kings
15.29. and Cha. 16.2. Now where the Lord has declared his will by either of
these ways, the Conquerers Title is good and Legal; and all those who claim
from that Conqueror, are good and lawful Kings. But where the Conquerors Title
is not Legitimated by one of these two ways, the Conqueror is but a mere
usurper, and it is not only lawful, but a necessary duty in the people to
resist him, and to use their utmost endeavors for the deposition of that
usurper, and the restitution of their Lawful Sovereign to his just Rights, as
Jehojada and the people restored Jehoash, by the deposition and murder of
Athaliah, after she had reigned peaceably for six years. 2 King. 11. And as
the people restored Vzziah by the deposition of those Conspirators who slew his
Father Amaziah, after they had reigned peaceably eleven years. 2 Chronicles. 26.

Ob. Christ was the true heir to the Crown of Judah, as is sufficiently proved
both Mat. 1. Luke 3. Ioh. 18.37. Yet he both taught and acted obedience to
Caesar, who was but a Conqueror, and therefore the Conquerers Title may be good,
and our subjection due to him, though the Royal Issue be not extinct.

Sol. Christ himself answers this objection, John 18.36. denying his Kingdom
to be of this world, meaning the actual administration of an earthly Kingdom;
For though his Title was just and good to such a Kingdom, yet he, to express
his humility and contempt of all worldly pomp, for a pattern to his Disciples,
would not seek nor endeavor the attainment of that honor, although if he had
endeavored the same, yet it had been no rebellion in him, for if he would have
claimed it, his servants would and might lawfully have fought against his
enemies, but the reason why they did not, was because Christ did deny them a
commission, Joh. 18.11. But for the justness and Legality of Christ's Title to
the Crown of Judah (Notwithstanding Cesars title of Conquest) all those places
cited out of Matthew, Luke, and John, do sufficiently declare it. And therefore
seeing Cesars conquest of that Kingdom, could not so, Legitimate his Title, as
to destroy Christ's Right to the Crown; I do thence conclude that Conquest is
not a lawful Title in it self, nor a sufficient warrant for us to withdraw our
obedience from our lawful and native Sovereign, before God has declared his
will and pleasure concerning the same by one of the two prementioned ways,
unless, where it pleases the Prince himself to submit, as Christ did to Caesar,
and then our submission to that Conqueror, is a part of our duty to our own
Prince, and an act of obedience Primarily to his Commands, and by virtue of the
Princes Commands to the Conquered. For it is our duty to honor them whom the
King will honor.

Quaere If it be not lawful for the people to elect their own King, nor any
other means assigned by God for collation of this honor, but either
Birthright or Conquest; What is to be done where the Royal Issue is extinct,
and no Conqueror does Claim? Or else where a mixed multitude (amongst whom
there is no relation of blood to pre-eminence one above the rest) do consent to
make a Plantation, and to erect a new Commonwealth?

Sol. Samuel has set us a president in this Case. 1 Samuel 10.20.21. For
though the Lord had revealed his will to Samuel concerning his own election
and appointment of Saul to be King. 1 Samuel, 9.15. Yet because Samuel knew
that King should be a Tyrant to plague the people for their Idolatrous trust in
a King, 1 Samuel 10.18. he concealed that Revelation, and would not nominate
their King, least the people should afterward (when they suffered by Saul's
oppression) blame Samuel for appointing him: But used the means of lots to
declare the will and pleasure of God unto the people. And the like course was
used by the eleven Apostles, when they had no warrant from God to appoint or
elect another Apostle, nor durst presume to confer that high calling upon any
man without a warrant from God, as you may read, Acts 1.23.

So that in both those cases mentioned in this question, we are to use the
means of lots; For that means is likewise warranted by God, where his will is
not otherwise declared. Proverbs 16.33. But the peoples election is absolutely
unlawful (as the premises (I hope) have sufficiently manifested) either in
those or any other cases.

And thus much of Monarchy in its Natural acception, as it relates to that
supremacy, which does Supereminence the Monarch above all the rest of the
society; and thereby entitle him to the Crown. My Method now in the last place,
presents the consideration of Monarchy in its Theological conception, as it
relates to those ends which qualify all Monarchical Actions; And these are
Gods glory, the Kings honor, and salus populi.

CHAP. IX. Of the nature and species; of the ends of Monarchy.
IN the sixth Chapter of this Book, I distinguished the adaequate end of
Monarchy into Principalem, and minus principalem.

1. The principal end is that whereunto both Monarchs and Monarchists are
principally obliged to have a regard in all their Monarchical and mutual
duties; and this again is twofold: viz. Primus, and a primo ortus: Or
according to the scholasticall expressions of others, Originans, and originatus.

1. The originant principal end (which indeed is the end paramount, and the
Alpha and Omega of all other ends, and the very (...) of all politics) is the
glory of God. 2. The originated principal end (whis does spring from this) is
the Kings honor.
2. The less principal end (which is the result of both the former) is salus
populi.

Now concerning the ends there are two things considerable.

1. Their nature, and wherein they do consist; whereof we shall speak in
this present Chapter. And for a further explication of this point, we shall in
the next Chapter insist upon the Resolution of an emergent Quaere concernning
the due limitation of Regal Power. 2. Their order and subordination amongst
themselves, where we shall demonstrate the pre-eminence of the Kings honor
above salus populi, or the peoples safety; and therein also declare the just
extension of the subjects obedience: whereof, in the eleventh Chapter. And for
the further illustration of all, we shall likewise declare, what influence,
oaths, and covenants, ought to have upon the duty either of King or Subject;
In the last Chapter of this Book, which shall conclude our discourse of
Monarchy.
Now concerning the first principal end which is Gods glory, it is to be
understood, that we do not speak of it here in that sense which the Apostle
does Romans 11. last; that is, in its extent and latitude, as it is the
universal end of all things, but only as it is limited to Monarchical
actions and duties; in which sense, Gods honor and the Kings, are not really
but only modally and circumstantially different, like the substance and the
shadow, or the waters in the fountain, and the waters in the channel. And
therefore, both of them do consist in the very same duties, and are of the
very same nature, in all their speces, in reference to Monarchy, as the
ensuing divisions will manifest; whereof, the first is the division of Honor
in Fundamentalem and Symbolicum.

1. Fundamental Honor, is that true and real excellency, worth, and
goodness, which does make the Subject truly honorable, and is twofold: viz.
Originans and originatus.

1. Originant and radical Honor, is that excellency, worth, and goodness,
which is in God the honorante, or person giving honor; whereunto that
Doxologie of David's does allude, 1 Chronicles. 29.10, 11, 12. And those words of
Christ's to the young man, Mat. 19.17. denying any to be good but one, even God,
i.e. radically and essentially good: for the persevering Angels participate of
a derivative goodness without the least mixture of evil; but only God
himself of a radical, primitive, add essential goodness. For some Angels
lost their goodness, but it is impossible for God to be divorced from his
goodness. 2. Originated and derivative Honor, is that excellency, worth, and
goodness, which God does communicate personae honoratae, or to the person
receiving this honor; and this again is twofold: viz. Ethicus and Politicus.
1. Ethicall Honor, is that excellency, worth, and goodness, which God does
communicate unto men for the Regulation of their own private affections, and
the exercise of a pious and virtuous life; of which Honor, every man in the
Commonwealth is equally capable. 2. Political Honor, is that excellency,
worth and goodness, which God does communicate unto men for the Regulation of
the external actions of men, in order to the preservation of society, and the
exercise of a peaceable and quiet life: which is that Honor which the King
does receive from God, and which does supereminence him above all others in the
same society and Commonwealth. And this is also two fold; viz. Primarius, and
Secundarius.
1. Primarie Honor, is that excellency of power and authority which does
enable the King for execution of the duties of his Calling, in the Rule and
Government of his people and Subjects. And this is twofold: viz. Legislativus;
and Judiciarius. 1. Legislative Honor, is the power and authority to
constitute and enact Laws and Statutes for the Public good, and benefit of
the Commonwealth. And this again is twofold: viz. Ecclesiasticus, and
Civilis. 1. Ecclsiasticall Honor, is the power and authority to enact Laws
and Statutes for the Regulation of men's words and actions, in order to the
external performance of the duties of the first Table of the Moral Law;
according to the pattern exhibited by God in the frame and composure of the
Ceremonial Law instituted by God for that purpose. 2. Civil Honor, is the
power and authority to enact Laws and Statutes for the Regulation of men's
words and actions, in order to the external performance of the duties of the
second Table of the Moral Law, according to the pattern exhibited by God
himself in the frame and composure of the Judicial Law; Instituted by God
likewise for that purpose.
2. Judiciarie Honor, is the power and authority to put all these Laws in
execution. And this is twofold: Compensativus, and Vindicativus. 1.
Compensative Honor, is the power to encourage and remunerate the integrity of
pious and just men, with titles of Honor, and offices of state, and the like;
according to the merits of their service and obedience: which is the pastoral
duty and office of Kings, signified principally by their Scepter, which is is
called in Christ's Govenment, A Scepter of righteousness, because of Christ's
Government over the Saints and Church triumphant, wherein there is no use at
all of the Sword, but only of the Scepter; and by the exercise of his
pastoral office, to reward the faith and patience of the Saints. Which passage
I do here insert to show, that the Scepter does principally import the
Pastoral, and not the Imperial and Magisteriall office of a King, which
relates properly to his Military power. 2. Vindicative Honor, is the power
to correct and punish the delinquences of disobedient and evil men; which is
the Magisteriall office and duty of Kings, signified by their sword.
2. Secondarie Honor, (which is a spece also of Political Honor) is that
Honorable and Magnificent maintenance, which God has assigned unto the King
for support of his Royal power and dignity; for (as our lives, Genesis 5.9. so)
our estates and fortunes, are not ours but Gods: For heaven and earth are his,
and all riches and honors come from him; and he is Lord over all, 1 Chronicles.
29.10, 11, 12. Psalm. 50.10, 11. Psalm. 95.4. For a manifest of which
Prerogative, God in all his distributions reserved some part, which he ordained
to be sacred and holy unto himself; as in that charter and grant made unto
Adam in Innocence, (when there was no King or Priest but only Adam himself,)
the Lord in that grant reserved the Tree of Knowledge. So that the law for
honoring God with our substance, Prove. 3.8. was an eternal law of nature, and
not any positive emergent law; for before the Institution either of the
Ceremonial or Judicial laws of Moses,

This Prescript and Rule was observed by the Patriarchs; as Cain and Abel, both
which did render unto the Lord a tribute out of their several possessions, Genesis
4.3, 4. And Abraham by this law paid Tithes to Melchisedec, Genesis 14.20. And by
the same law, Jacob vowed unto the Lord the retribution of a Tenth of that
which the Lord should give him, Genesis 28. last; as an acknowledgement that he
received it from God the Lord of all: for Jacob had nothing of his own at that
time but a staff, Genesis 32.10. Now as God did delegate unto Kings a power over
our persons in his ordinance for their Primarie honor of power and authority;
so did he likewise give them a power over our estates for support of that
honor, which is their Secondarie honor of Maintenance and Revenue: which was
the ground of Christ's command, to render a tribute of our goods unto Caesar,
Mat. 22.21. intimating that this temporal honor of tribute was (by virtue of
Gods delegation) as due unto Caesar, as the spiritual honor of praise and
worship was unto God. And upon the same ground Saint Paul commands to render
custom and tribute to Kings, not as a gift and favor, but as a due and just
debt, Romans 13.7. and gives this reason for it, because they are Gods Ministers
appointed to supply his place in Ruling and Judging us. And seeing God has
transferred the greater power to Kings; viz* a power over our lives, by putting
the sword ( i. e. the Militia or Military power of the Commonwealth) into his
hands, Romans 13.4. the Apostle thence concludes their Investiture with the
less: viz a power over our estates, Ver. 6. And this power was all the title
which Christ had to that Asses-Colt, which he sent his Disciples to fetch for
his use, Luke 19.30. for it appears, in the Text, that Christ was not the
proprietour of that colt, yet he did not give order to his Disciples, either to
buy, or hire, or beg, or borrow the colt of the owners; but only to tell any
that proffered to interrupt them, that the Lord had need of him: for it was a
sufficient title to dispossess the private owner, that the public Lord of all
did command him; and upon that answer, the private owner did not resist the
Disciples in taking him away, Ver. 34. And the like power we see exercised by
Pharaoh in that ordinance for storing up a fifth part of all the Corn of Egypt
for seven years together; which law was enacted by Pharaoh upon the single
Counsel of Joseph, with the approbation only of Pharaoh's servants or
Council, and not by the general consent of the people, Genesis 41.34. Neither
can we pretend this law to be Tyrannical, amd contrary to the law of God and
Nature; for it proceeded from the wisdom of God, which in this business
directed the mind of Joseph, Genesis 45.57. Psalm. 105. Nor can any man imagine,
but the state and magnificence of Saul, David, Jeroboam, and others, who of
private persons, were advanced by God himself to Regal honor and dignity, was
supported by this means of Custom and Tribute, (for their own private
patrimonies could not be sufficient for maintaining such Kingly magnificence)
nor do we find any particular Law or Statute for the particular endowment of
these Kings, but only that general Right and Prerogative which they derive
from God, investing them with a power over both our estates and persons: which
was the cause that God prescribed not in the Law any settled or certain
maintenance for Kings, as he did for Priests. For though both were his anointed
Servants and Deputies, (and Kings also in a higher degree, for they had power
over the Priests as well as the people; for Moses was not only a god to the
people, but to Aaron, Exodus 4. And Moses, David, Solomon, Jehoshaphat, and
other godly Kings exercised this power over both Priests and Levites; yea, even
over the high Priests themselves, and that in the highest manner, deposing one
and advancing another to that Pontifical honor, 1 King. 2.26.) Yet in regard
Kings had power to provide for themselves in that manner as themselves judged
requisite, for their own honor, and the peoples safety; whereas the Priests
had no power at all in any secular matters, but what the King did delegate unto
them by Commission; therefore it pleased God to consigne a set portion for the
Priests maintenance, and not for the Kings.

Ob. The Lord blamed the Kings of Judah for imposing taxes upon the people,
Ezekiel. 45.8, 9. And when Moses prescribed the Kings duty, Deuteronomy. 17. he
prohibited the multiplication of horses, and of gold and silver, whereby to
spoil and oppress the people.

Sol. The Lord both in these and many other places prohibiteth the imposition
of all Illegal taxes and exactions, such as Tyrannical and wicked Kings
usually laid upon the people, for the support of their own insatiate lusts and
vanities; and such as Samuel told the Israelites would be imposed upon them by
Saul, in his Tyrannical government, 1 Samuel 8.10. But never prohibited such as
were intended for the honor of himself and the King, and the benefit and
welfare of the people, though they seemed never so heavy and grievous, (as that
tax was which Pharaoh by Joseph's advise imposed upon the Egyptians for seven
years together) which use and end is not to be determined by the people's
discretion, but the Kings; as appears in that instance concerning Pharaoh's
act. And therefore though it be unlawful for the King to demand such taxes,
for any other intent but the honor of himself, and the good of his Subjects;
yet is it not lawful for the people to deny them, or resist the Kings
authority, when they suppose and judge them to be demanded for other wicked
ends: as appears by those addresses which Samuel told the people they should
make unto the Lord for redress of Saul's Tyranny, by prayers and tears, 1 Samuel
8.18. For neither Samuel nor the people in those days dreamed of these means
of resistance and dethronement of Kings, which the Devil has since suggested
unto his disciples. For surely had those ancient Statists understood these new
redresses of Tyranny to be just and lawful, they would never have enslaved and
subjected themselves unto such pressures, as are recorded in that Text.

Repl. Naboth did justly deny his vineyard unto Ahab, 1 King. 21.3. and
therefore the peoples disobedience to the Kings unjust demands of any part of
their estate is not unlawful but commendable.

Sol. That denial of Naboth's was grounded upon a particular law of Gods
concerning Inheritances in Israel, as Naboth there declares: God forbid,
(says Naboth) that I should give the Inheritance of my fathers unto thee. For
God had prohibited by his Law that any man should alienate the hereditary
possessions of his family, which by his appoitntment were to be reserved
entire, to continue the distinction of the families in Israel, Numb. 36.

And again, Ahab did not command that vineyard from Naboth as a King, but as a
private purchaser, entreated Naboth to exchange or sell it to him for a private
convenience, and not for any public use: in which case, Naboth might justly
deny it. For though a King be always a King, yet he does not always act as a
King in his Politic capacity, but sometimes as a private person in his
natural capacity; as in the scholasticall discussion of any point in question,
or in any contentious recreations; as in Wrestling, or Tennis, and the like: in
which cases it is not unlawful to oppose the King, both in words and actions.
And of this nature also are such private bargains for private uses and
conveniences, as Ahab desired to make with Naboth, and as David did make with
Araunah for his threshing-floore, which he would not take by his power, but
bought with his money, 2 Samuel 24. because it was to pacify God for his own
private offense, and not for the peoples, Ver. 17. (For though the people were
punished, it was David alone that offended. Delirant Reges, plectuntur Achivi.)
But in whatsoever the King acts in his Politic capacity as a King, he may not
be resisted or opposed, either in words or actions, or denied any service,
either from our estates or persons: because in that capacity he is a God over
us, and may claim the same obedience from us, which is due to God himself, in
all Political matters whereunto his Commission does extend, (as the eleventh
Chapter of this Book shall more fully manifest.) So that if Ahab had demanded
this vineyard of Naboth for any public use concerning the Kings honor, and
the peoples safety; Naboth's pretense of Inheritance could not have warranted
and justified his denial thereof to Ahab. (For inheritances might be sold in
Israel till the year of Jubilee, in case of private necessity, as appears.
Lev. 25.25. and therefore much more might be commanded by the King, in case of
public necessity: For a public necessity must needs be a stronger super sede
as for any Law, then a private can be. As also the description of Saul's
Government by Samuel does further evidence, 1 Samuel 8.10. for what that Tyrant
did to satisfy his lusts, a good King may do to preserve the public.) And it
is not improbable that the pretense of such a denial, was the blasphemy
whereof Jezabell caused Naboth to be falsely accused; for the Text does not say,
that it was blasphemy immediately against God but against God and the King;
which argues, that those witnesses accused Naboth of some disloyal speeches
not consistent with the duty of a Subject: which for ought appears in the
Text, might relate to Naboth's denial of that vineyard, which the false
witnesses might pretend to have been demanded for such uses, and in such a
manner as that the denial thereof might render Naboth guilty of a capital
dishonor and disobedience to the King.

And thus much briefly of the nature and spece's of Fundadamentall Honor, the
other spece of Honor opposite to this, is Symbolicall, whereof in a word.

2. Symbolicall Honor, is the signal exhibition of respect and reverence unto
any person, whose merits we conceive to make a just title thereunto: and this
is that Honor whereof Aristotle's Maxim is to be understood, that honor est
in honorante, and non in honorate. And this Honor is twofold, Fictitius and
Verus. 1. Fictitious Honor, is that which is grounded upon a mere pretense of
some excellency, worth, and goodness in honorato, the true ground thereof
being indeed only interest and selfe-respects in honorante, which is properly
Adulation and not Honor; the affectation whereof was reproved by our Savior,
John 5.44. and was the crime of the ambitious Pharisees, who loved the praise
of men more then the praise that comes of God, John 12.43. regarding the
(...), more then the (...), the shadow more then the substance. 2. True and
real Honor, is that which is grounded upon a real persuasion of some
excellency, worth, and goodness in honorato, and is a result of Fundamental
Honor, relating thereunto, as the shadow does unto the substance. And this is
twofold: viz. Ethicus and Politicus. 1. Ethicall Honor, is that which is
grounded upon a persuasion of personal virtue, in honorato, either
Intellectual, as wisdom, knowledge, prudence, and the like: or Moral, as
liberality, temperance, fortitude, justice, and the like. 2. Political Honor,
is that which is ground upon a persuasion of those Royal excellencies in
honorato, which do supereminence him above all others in the same society. And
this again is twofold: viz. Primarius and Secundarius. 1. Primarie Honor, is
that which is grounded upon a persuasion and knowledge of Supremacy of power
and authority, in honorato. And this is twofold: viz. Activus and Passivus. 1.
Active Honor, is a willing endeavor to perform all his commands expressed in
Ecclesiastical, or Civil Laws, and Statutes, when we conceive them to be
just and honest, and agreeable to the Law of God. 2. Passive Honor, is a
voluntary submission to his Judiciarie decrees and censures, for our
nonperformance of those Commands which we conceive to be dissonant to the Law
of God.
2. Secondarie Honor, is the payment of Tribute, Custom, and the like
contributions out of our estates for the maintenance and support of the
Royalty, and Magnificence of the Person invested with Royal power and dominion.



And thus much briefly of the nature and species of the principal end of
Monarchy, which is God and the Kings Honor. It follows now that we should
declare the nature and species of the less principal end, which is Salus
populi.

2 Salus populi, which is the less principal end of Monarchy, (though it be
really distinct from the Kings Honor, as the Relatum is from the Correlatum,
yet) is an individual Concomitant thereof, and indeed a mere result and
product of the same; for salus populi can never be effected by any other
means, but those which in the first place do effectuate and energate the
Kings Honor whether we look upon the Monarchical actons of King or Subjects,
both which are vers't about the same object and matter, only in a diverse
manner. For the King by reason of the Supremacy of his power and authority, is
interested only in the active part of Government, and therefore he acts for
his own honor and the peoples welfare, by composing Laws and Statutes,
wherein he commands things tending to the preservation of peace and unity in
that society, (a principal ground of both the former ends.) The people are
interessed only in the Passive part of Government; and therefore they act for
the Kings Honor and their own welfare, by their obedience and submission to
the Kings commands expressed in those Laws and Statutes; the violation whereof
is a direct means of dishonor to God and the King, and of ruin and
destruction to the people. For which cause Jeremy exhorted the captive Jews in
Babylon to pray for the peace and prosperity of that King, because their own
peace and welfare depended upon his, Jer. 29.7. And Paul also pressed Timothy
and the Ephesians unto the practice of the same duty (in behalf of their Kings
and Magistrates) for the same reason, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.

Now though this salus populi (being a result of the Kings Honor) be capable
of the same parts and divisions with the Kings Honor, the fountain thereof;
yet to avoid prolixity, I shall refer the actual specification of its parts
unto the Readers Meditations, it being no difficult matter to judge of the
species of the Relatum, by the divisions of the correlatum reprepresented in
the premises.

And this brief Analysis of God and the Kings honor, and ( salus populi, or)
the peoples welfare, I hope may be sufficient for a general survey of the
nature and parts of the ends of Monarchy; for a more full and perfect
explication whereof, I shall in the ensuing Chapter insist upon the resolution
of a Quaere prescribing the due limitation of the Kings power.

CHAP. X. Of the due limitation of the Kings Power.
THe Quaere conducing to a plenary narration and exegesis of this point, are
both numerous and weighty; one whereof I purpose to insist upon in this
Chapter, which I do acknowledge, was not the meanest inducement that gave life
unto this present discourse of Monarchy; the Solution whereof, I suppose will
present the Reader with a glimpse of some of those national crimes, which have
drawn upon us these national calamities, (a subject fitter for an entire
Tract, then a particular Chapter;) But my design at present is rather to start
then state this Question, hoping a more learned and judicious Pen may supply
the defects of mine, by a more punctual and satisfactorie discussion and
determination of this point, so profoundly mysterious both in Divinity and
Policy.

Quaere. What matters are within the sphere of Political Cognizance, and what
are res extra-regales, and metapoliticall matters wherein the King cannot
exercise either his Legislative or Judiciarie power, without guilt of
sacrilegious intrusion?

Sol. This Quaere consists of two parts; the latter consequentiall of the
former, and both of them immediate expedients to enunciate the quality and
extent of the Kings Commission from God; the sole ground both of the Kings
Power and the Subjects Obedience. For though Kings be styled Gods in Scripture,
Psalm. 82.6. and are indeed really so, (...), i. e. in their Politic capacity,
referring to their power over their Subjects: yet we all know that they are
not so (...), i. e. in their physical capacity, referring to their nature and
essence, for they shall dye like men, Psalm. 82.7. And therefore the right
understanding of the nature of the Kings Commission, and Deputation from God, I
conceive to be a point of necessary concernment. 1. For Subjects, that they may
more perfectly understand the just extent of this Commission, and in what
things God has thereby delegated a Power unto Kings over Subjects, for
direction of their duty, of (...), i. e. reddendi (aesari, quae sunt Caesaris.
2. For Kings more especially, that they may truly understand the due
limitation of this Commission, and in what things God has reserved the power
entire to himself; and to conscience, (his highest and most immediate deputy
and substitute) for direction of the Kings duty, of (...), i. e. reddendi Deo
quae sunt Dei. For as it is sacrilegious in Subjects, to intrude upon the
sacred Rights and Prerogatives of Kings, and to act in any thing as Judges or
Commanders, without Commission from him; so is it much more sacrilegious in
Kings, to intrude upon the more sacred Rights and Prerogatives of God: and to
act as Gods, Lords, and Masters over their Subjects, in those matters whereunto
their Commission from God does not extend, nor invest them with a right of
power and dominion over their Subjects.

Now to give a direct answer to this Quaere, it will be requisite to premise
some distinctions concerning the object of Political Cognizance, which is
twofold: viz. Objectum per se, and Objectum per accidens.

1. Objectum per se, which is the direct and immediate Object of Political
Cognizance, consists in the Fundamentals and Essentials of Politic Government;
being such causes and matters wherein the King may lawfully exercise both his
Legislative and Judiciarie power over all persons within his Dominions, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil.

2. Objectum per accidens, which is the indirect and accidental Object of
Political Cognizance, consists in the Contingentials of Politic Government,
being such causes and matters, wherein the King may lawfully exercise both his
Legislative and Judiciarie power over some persons of both sorts, whether
Ecclesiastical or Civil: but not over some of either sort, although they be
his native Subjects, inhabiting within his own Dominions.

The discussion of which two points, manifesting what does fall directly, and
what ex accidenti, within the sphere of Political Cognizance, will be a full
and direct Solution of the former part of this Quaere: from whence it will be
easy to conclude, what are extra-regalia, and Metapoliticall matters. The
judgment whereof, God has reserved immediately to himself, and conscience,
(his immediate Deputy and Vicegerent in all humane affairs) and wherein the
King cannot exercise, either his Legislative, or Judiciarie power, without
guilt of sacrilegious intrusion; which will be a direct and full answer to the
latter part of this Quaere.

The point which our method presents unto our scrutiny, in the first place, is
the Objectum per se of Political Cognizance; which (as we said) consists in
the Essentials and Fundamentals of Politic Government: which are twofold; viz.
Nativa, and Praeternativa.

1. The Native Fundamentals and Essentials of Politic Government, are such
causes and matters as were of Political Cognizance upon the first original
Institution of that Government, when man's innate knowledge, and native light of
understanding, was sufficient for the direction of his duty, without the help
of positive Laws and Statutes; and the native rectitude and inclination of
man's will, was sufficient to excite the performance of his duty, without the
help of any Judiciarie inducements, either Compensatorie, or Vindicative. But
for the more full, and facile investigation, and discovery of these
Fundamentals and Essentials; these two expedients are conducible. 1. The
consideration of the time when. 2. Of the grounds whereupon Politic Government
was first instituted by God.

1. The time when Politic Government was first instituted, was immediately
upon man's first creation in the state of Innocence, and under the old Covenant
of Works: for Politic Government, (as we formerly manifested) is a natural
blessing, enabling man for the due performance of his natural duties, and
grounded upon the fifth Commandment of the Moral Law; prescribing honor to
Parents, which commenced upon man's first creation, before Adams Apostasy: by
virtue of which law of Nature, the Herauldrie of Sub and Supra did then receive
a being amongst men; and Parents by virtue of that natural law, were invested
with a power and dominion over their Children; and Children obliged unto the
duties of subjection and obedience to their Parents: So that though Adams
sinful prevarication had never divested himself and his posterity of their
native Prerogatives, yet this graduall Herauldry of Sub and Supra
(supereminencing Parents above their Children) should have had its due and
natural influence upon mankind. For even Christ himself (although totally
exempted from all manner of enormous guilt, both actual and original, yet)
was not exempted from this duty of subjection to his parents, Luke 2.51.

Whence it is manifest in the first place, that the Native Fundamentals and
Essentials, are only natural duties, consisting in the right use of those
natural blessings, wherewith God did invest man upon his first creation,
before his Apostasy, purposely to enable him for the exact and due performance
of those duties, which God required of him in the state of Innocence, under the
old Covenant of Works. And therefore, as the duties which God did then require
of man, were partly Internal, partly External; so did he confer upon man
two sorts of natural blessings correspondent unto these duties. 1. Internal
blessings, which are bona animi, or the blessings of the soul. 2. External,
which are bona corporis, and fortunae; the right use of which two sorts of
natural blessings, is the very sum and substance of all the natural duties
expressed in the Decalogue or law of Nature, which was the Rule of all humane
actions before Adams Apostasy.

For the regulation of all Internal acts of the understanding and will, (which
are the faculties of our souls) was prescribed in the first and last precepts
of that law of Nature. And the regulation of all External actions concerning
the body, and those natural creatures which God made for the use and service
thereof, was prescribed in the other eight. And other duties then these, were
not at that time either known unto man, or required of him by God; so that no
Political or Monarchical power, could possibly at that time be extended to
any other matters, but only these natural duties prescribed in the Decalogue.

A further restriction also of which power is prescribed in the second
expedient, conducing to the Investigation of the Native Essentials and
Fundamentals of Politic Government, which is the grounds whereupon it was
instituted.

2. The grounds of the institution of Politic Government are two: viz.
Primarie, and Secondarie.

1. The Primarie ground, is the power of communicating a being and existence,
which indeed is the very ground whereupon the Holy Ghost does demonstrate the
Deity, and prove the Lord alone to be God, and to have the sole right of power
and dominion over man; because God alone does communicate life, and being, and
all things unto man, Acts 17.24. For because it is he that made us and not we
our selves, therefore we must wholly devote our selves to his worship and
service, as his people and servants, Psalm. 100.2. And the reason why the Holy
Ghost prohibited the exhibition of any honor or reverence unto Idols, is,
because they cannot give any being unto man nor frame any man in the womb, Esaias
44.24. so that the primarie and original ground of Politic Government is the
power to communicate a being and existence; which power God delegated unto man
immediately upon his first creation, by that propagatorie benediction, Crescite
and multiplicamini, Genesis 1.28. From which fountain did flow the other
secondarie and immediate ground of Politic Government.

2. The Secondarie ground is the graduall and distinctive Herauldry of Sub and
Supra (above mentioned,) supereminencing one man above another: For as God did
ordain parents to be his instruments in the communication of a being unto
their children, so did he likewise ordain, that children should be so far
forth subject and inferior unto their parents, from whom they do derive their
being, as they do depend upon their parents for the same. For whereas God
himself by way of creation did communicate unto Adam the entire being both of
soul and body, (in both which respects, Adam is styled the son of God, Luke
3. last;) so did he thereupon ordain, that Adam should be subject and obedient
unto himself, in all the actions and motions both of soul and body: and
whereas God did ordain Adam and all his descendents to be Gods instruments,
(by virtue of that propagatorie benediction) in the communication of the
corporeal part of being unto their children, so did God likewise ordain the
subjection and obedience of children unto their parents, to be extended unto
all the extrinsecall actions and motions of the body; (God reserving still the
power and command over the intrinsecall acts of the soul of every man entire
to himself, because every soul does still derive its being immediately from
God, and not from our parents.)

Whence it is manifest in the second place, that those Native Fundamentals and
Essentials (which are the proper and adaequate Object of Political
Cognizance,) are only the External duties of the Moral law, consisting in the
right use of the External blessings of nature: viz. bona corporis, and
fortunae, which are the only blessings hereditarily descendable, and
communicable unto children from their parents. For seeing all Politic
Government is grounded upon paternall, (as a Policy is upon an Oeconomie, which
are not essentially, but only circumstantially different, (both of them
regulating the same duties and actions, only whereas an Economy does regulate
the actions of one family, a Policy does regulate the actions of many
families.) And seeing all paternall Government is grounded upon this Herauldry
of Sub and Supra, established between Parents and Children by the fifth
Commandment; and this graduall and distinctive Herauldry upon the power to
communicate a being and existence, delegated unto parents by Gods propagatory
benediction, Genesis 1 28. which benediction reaches only the corporal, and not
the spiritual part of man: It does necessarily follow, that no Political or
Monarchical power can be directly extended to any other matters, but only the
corporeal and external duties of the Moral Law.

Ob. If the communication of a being and existence were the ground of this
Herauldry of Sub and Supra, then all children should be subject and inferior
unto their parents; but Asa King of Judah was not subject to his grandmother
Maacha, but did depose her, and yet was not reproved but commended for that
act, 2 Chronicles. 15.16. And so was Joash for the deposition of Athaliah his
fathers mother, 2 Chronicles. 23. and therefore, the communication of a being cannot
be the primarie ground, either of that subordination, or of the institution of
Government.

Sol. All men as men, and in their natural capacity, are inferior, and ought
to be subject unto their parents; but men as Kings, and in their Politic
capacity, cannot be children unto any man, nor have any father but God; and
therefore are styled by the Holy Ghost, the children of God, Psalm. 82.6. I have
said, Ye are children of the most high, and therefore in this sense they cannot
be inferior or subject unto any but God alone, and so by consequence must be
above their own natural parents, in Rule, Dominion, and Power: and in case of
justice, must not respect that natural relation, no more then Asa did respect
it in his grandmother Maacha, who in this Politic relation was not a Parent or
Judge, but a subject and child to her own natural grandchild; and so was
Athaliah to Joash. And the Virgin Mary to her son Christ Jesus, who rebuked
his own mother when she presumed to command in matters above her sphere, for a
miraculous supply of the defect of wine, John 2 Woman what have I to do with
thee? He does not here give her the style of Mother, but of Woman; as if she
had no relation of a parent and governor to him: because that command or
desire which she transmitted to him, could not be performed by him, as he was a
man, and her natural son, but only as he was a God, and so a spiritual
father to his own natural mother.

And thus much briefly of the Native Fundamentals and Essentials of Politic
Government; the next point to be spoken of is the Preternative.

2. The Preternative Fundamentals and Essentials of Politic Government, are
those matters which fell directly within the sphere of Political Cognizance
upon the restitution of that Government, when that blessing (amongst others
which are the ground and object thereof) was renewed unto man by the mercy of
God in Christ, after Adams sinful prevarication had divested both himself and
his posterity of all those blessings wherewith God had enriched his created
nature: which blessings of nature were not renewed unto man in their native
integrity and perfection, but only in such a measure as the wisdom of God saw
most expedient to immind man of his own infirmity, and selfe-insufficiency:
whereby to occasion the application of himself to seek for happiness in the
mercy of God in Christ, and not in any natural perfections, worth, or
excellency of his own. For which purpose, God was pleased to leave the
understanding of man in statis suo restituto, so much obnubilated, that his
natural knowledge is not sufficient for direction of such natural duties, as
are requisite to peace and unity, the means to preserve humane society, which
is one of the ends of Politic Government: which defect therefore in natural
knowledge, God ordained to be supplied by the exercise of the Kings Legislative
power, in the composure of Laws and Statutes for man's direction, both in
Ecclesiastical and Civil affairs. And for the same purpose, did likewise
leave the will of man so much depraved, that his natural inclination is not
sufficient to excite him to the performance of such natural duties, as are
requisite unto the preservation, peace and unity of humane societies; (though
he did know and understand them) but rather unto those opposite sins and
transgressions, which tend to the dissolution and destruction thereof: which
defects in our natural inclinations, God ordained to be supplied by the
exercise of a Judiciarie power, whereby to excite us to the performance of
these natural duties, either by the remuneration of our merits of obedience,
or the punishment of our crimes of disobedience, unto the Laws and Statutes,
composed for man's direction, both in Ecclesiastical and Civil affairs: so
that the exercise both of the Legislative and Judiciarie power of Kings, were
mere emergencies of man's Apostasy. Before which time (though Government was
established amongst men by that law of nature, yet) in regard that Law
whereupon this Government was founded, was so principled in men's hearts, that
it was sufficient to direct all Political and Monarchical duties; and the
natural rectitude of their wills, to excite the performance of them) there was
no occasion at all for the exercise, either of the Legislative or Judiciarie
power for direction of Political and Monarchical duties, or restraint of
Political and Monarchical exorbitances: neither should there ever have been
any more occasion (if man had persisted in that his native Innocence and
integ^^^y) for any such direction or restraint, then there was to direct the
duties, or restrain the exorbitancies of Christ himself, (whose innocence and
integrity, both in his nativity and conversation, was parallel to Adams in his
created, and native state, and condition:) the conformity of whose active
obedience to authority in omnibus licitis, and passive in illicit is, neither
was nor could be any way defective to the most exact rules and laws of God and
nature.

Whence it is manifest, that (though Magistrates in the state of Innocence,
were invested (by the law of nature) both with a Legislative and Judiciarie
power in actu signato, yet) the actus exercitus, or exercise thereof, was a
mere emergency of man's prevarication and Apostasy, which did not occasion God
to ordain and institute any new sort of humane policy, or any new laws, for
direction of Political duties, but only to ordain the actual use and
exercise of his Legislative power, to supply and help the defects,
imperfections, and infirmities of his understanding, in the laws of nature, by
the composure of Positive Laws and Statutes: and of his Judiciary power, to
correct and regulate the depravities of his will, by remunerating the merits of
his obedience, and punishing the crimes of his disobedience to those Laws and
Statutes.

The result of all which, is but briefly this, that the Objectum per se, or the
direct and immediate Object of Political Cognizance, (consisting in the
Fundamentals and Essentials of Politic Government) is only the external
duties prescribed in the Moral Law; in reference unto which duties, Kings both
may and ought to exercise both their Legislative and Judiciary power, over all
persons within their Dominions, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil.

Ob. Some do object against this, that Christ has suffered for the sins of the
whole world, and therefore that no man ought to be punished for sin; for it
would be a point of direct Injustice to require satisfaction of us for that,
for which our surety has already paid, and given plenary and perfect
satisfaction to our Creditour: so that the exercise of the vindicative part of
Judiciary power in Magistrates, inflicting punishment for offenses, must needs
be unlawful, and destructive to the principles and privileges of the Gospel
of Christ.

Sol. I answer, that the punishments inflicted by Magistrates, are not intended
for the satisfaction of Gods justice for our offenses against God, but for the
instruction of our obedience in order to the public peace: for no temporary
punishments or tortures how extremely inhumane and barbarous soever, can
possibly be satisfactory for the least sin against the law of God, whose
merits in the court of Gods Justice, are eternal death. Neither does any man
suffer now in earth, nor shall any man suffer hereafter in hell, for any sin
against God and his law of nature, but only for sins against Christ, and his
law of the Gospel; that is, for infidelity, despair, and want of charity, or
the love of Christ, (as I have already intimated in the Introduction.) So that
the punishments inflicted by the Magistrate, is not intended for satisfaction
of any sin committed against God, (for that satisfaction is peculiar to the
sufferings of Christ,) but for prevention of future mischiefs, either in the
offender, or others, or both, that men may live together in peace and unity,
following all godliness and honesty, according to the commands of the Gospel,
and law of Christ; which, as I said before, is not different from the Moral
law, (given by God at the first creation) in Essence, (for both of them enjoyne
the same duties) but only in circumstance and the manner of performing these
duties. For whereas the law of God does require an exact and legal
performance, according to the letter of the law; the law of Christ does require
only an equitable and Evangelicall performance, according to the measure of
our abilities. And therefore, whereas the offenses against Gods law were
determinable only in a Court of Justice, and so punished according to the
quality and merit of the trespass; the offenses now against Christ's law, are
determinable only in a Court of Mercy and Equity; and so punished according to
the measure of our abilities, and the mis-imployment of such talents and
blessings as we have received by Christ, (who has renewed by his Spirit in
every man's soul, some of the obliterated characters of nature, whereof they
were deprived by Adams sinful prevarication.) And according to this law of
Christ, are all the Nations and Kingdoms of the world now governed, as well
Heathen as Christian; for all Government was by his Father transmitted unto
him, John 13.3. Phil. 2.10, 11. so that now all Kings and Rulers, as well
Heathen as Christian, are Christ's Lieutenants and Deputies, (for what Solomon
attributed to Christ's power indefinitely in the consignation of Kings, Prove.
8.15. By me Kings reign: David expressly extends to Heathens as well as
Christians, Psalm. 2.8. I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance. And
Saint John expressly affirms Jesus Christ to be Prince of all the Kings of the
earth, Apoc. 1.5.) And therefore, all Kings do now order and decree all things
in a Court of mercy and equity, which looks upon the abilities of the
offender; and not in a Court of Justice, which looks only upon the quality
of the offense: For no Prince in the world, whether Heathen or Christian, do
punish Idiots and Madmen for the same offenses, which sometimes are made
capital in men of understanding; the reason is, because these are capable of
Reformation, and to be made better by punishments, the other not so; and
therefore, though the offense be the same in both, yet the punishment is not
so: whence it is manifest, that the exercise of the Kings Judiciary power, is
not intended for satisfaction for sin, (for which Christ died) but merely
for restraint of such enormities, as are destructive to peace and unity, and by
consequence, to all Politic Association.

2. The second spece of the Object of Political Cognizance, is Objectum per
accidens, which is the indirect and mediate Object of Politic Government,
consisting in the Contingentials thereof, being such causes and matters,
wherein the King may exercise both his Legislative and Judiciarie power over
some persons, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, but not over other some of
either sort: And these are those supernatural and Evangelicall duties, which
were never known nor any way useful upon the first institution of Politic
Government under the old Covenant of Works; but were instituted afterward, and
made ordinances of the new Covenant of Grace, (not directly for helps of
Politic Government, but) for the immediate means and helps to life and
salvation by Christ, and the advancement of his mystical kingdom. Such as
were the Sacraments both of the Old and New Testament, which were symbolicall
ordinances, instituted by God, merely, as seals and confirmations of this new
Covenant of Grace: and also, all Evangelicall forms of Worship, Government,
and Discipline, relating immediately unto Christ. All which, are supernatural
duties, wherein the light of nature (though it were restored to its native and
pristine purity) is no way conducent to guide or direct us, without particular
revelations of the Spirit of God, declared either by Scripture, or some other
extraordinary and supernatural means: which duties therefore cannot be known
to Heathens, to which God never vouchsafed the benefit of such revelations, nor
be possibly capable of any legal sanctions, from the most prudent and
intelligent Legislator, that ever sat at stern in any Heathenish
Commonwealth.

And yet though Heathens cannot be good Christians, they may be good Kings, as
the Holy Ghost testifies of Cyrus, whose Government is much magnified, Esaias
45. although he understood nothing of these Evangelicall duties which relate to
Christ: the like Panegyricks are recorded (not only by the Heathenish, but
also) by Christian Authors, of the government of Solon of Athens, Lycurgus, of
Lacedemon, and Servius Tullius, of Rome. And this is further manifested by that
judicious and rational answer, which Gallio the Roman Deputy returned to the
complaints of the Jews against Paul, for preaching against the Jewish
Ceremonies, and the outward form of worship prescribed by Moses, Acts 18.14,
15. If it were a matter of wrong or injustice, (says Gallio) (which imports
sins against the law of the second Table) or of wicked lewdness, (which
imports sins against the law of the first Table of the Moral law) then
reason would (O ye Jews) that I should bear with you. But if it be a Question
of your law, look ye to it, for I will be no Judge of such matters. Whence it
is observable, that though this wise Heathen was persuaded, that it was a part
of his office and duty to judge of offenses against the law of nature, (whether
they were transgressions of the first Table, and so immediately against God; or
of the second Table, and so immediately against our neighbor,) ye he did
conclude from the principles of sound reason, that the judgment of these
Jewish Ceremonies, (which were not natural but Evangelicall duties) did not
pertain to his Office or Calling: So that these Evangelicall duties cannot be
directly and per se the Object of Political Cognizance, or the subject of any
positive Law or Statute, generally obligatory unto all persons.

But yet these Evangelicall duties, may and do fall within the sphere of
Political Cognizance indirectly, and per accidens, that is, in such persons to
whom God does vouchsafe the benefit of these supernatural revelations; for in
regard the service and worship of God, ought to be the first and principal
care of all Kings, as well Heathen as Christian, (according to the Maxim of
that Arist. pol. lib. 7 c. 8.
knowing Heathen, (...), Religion must be the foundation of all Policy, being
the most important business amongst the affairs of State, cementing all
societies, and energating all laws, as Plutarch well observes, (...).) And in
regard also, that they to whom God has vouchsafed the knowledge of these
Evangelicall and supernatural duties, cannot with a safe conscience, serve and
worship God after any other manner, but that which in their opinion is most
consonant to his word and will: therefore it is both lawful and expedient for
Kings to exercise both their Legislative power in composure of Laws and
Statutes, for directing a laudable conformity amongst these persons in the
religious observation and practice of these Evangelicall, and supernatural
duties, of the Religion and piety whereof they are already sufficiently
persuaded and satisfied in their consciences: and also their Judiciary power,
in punishing the contempt or neglect thereof; because to such persons there is
no medium, between the practice of these duties, and that wicked lewdness or
profaneness; the restraint and reformation whereof, Gallio did acknowledge to
be directly a part of the duty of the Magistrates office and calling.

But for other persons, who are not of the same persuasion concerning the
Religion of these Evangelicall duties, but believe the practice thereof to be
superstitious and dishonorable to God, and another form of worship to be the
only acceptable service unto him: in regard the practice of Evangelicall
duties in such persons, cannot proceed from faith and trust in God, whereby
they may expect a blessing from him upon their service and devotion, but rather
that curse and damnation, which Saint Paul affirms to be the just merits of
all acts of worship which are not of faith, but either of doubtfulness, or
(which is worse) of perfect hypocrisy and dissimulation, Romans 14. last; The
enforcement of such a conformity by the Magistrate in Evangelicall worship and
service in such persons contrary to their consciences, must necessarily render
him guilty, not only of their sins, (and thereby liable to that curse and
damnation which is due to their hypocrisy and dissimulation, whereof he is in
some sense the efficient cause) but also of sacrilegious intrusion upon those
sacred prerogatives which God has reserved wholly unto himself, (that is, the
command and power over men's consciences, over which, he never appointed any
lord or master besides himself; as the expressions and exhortations both of
our Savior, Mat. 23.8, 9. and of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 8.6. do purposely
insinuate) and whereunto the Kings Commission did never extend.

Whence it is manifest, that Christian Kings may exercise their Legislative
power in the composure of Laws and Statutes, to direct a conformity of
Evangelicall worship and service in those persons, unto whom God has
vouchsafed the true understanding thereof, and thereby satisfied their
consciences of the Legality and Religion thereof: and also his Judiciarie
power, in rewarding the pious and due observance, and punishing the impious
contempt and neglect of such duties in the same persons; But may not exercise
either his Legislative or Judiciary power, to prescribe Laws for to enforce the
practice of such duties upon other persons, to whom God has not vouchsafed
that understanding and knowledge concerning these duties.

But now for a further illustration of the premises; and to frame a more
direct, full, and satisfactory answer to the Quaere concerning the due
limitation and extent of the Kings power, I will here set down a brief
Analysis of the whole duty of man; the regulation whereof, is the very design
of that Power and Dominion which God has either delegated unto the King, or
reserved unto himself and conscience, touching humane affairs: And from
thence demonstrate,

1. Unto what duties the Kings power does properly and directly extend, so that
he may lawfully exercise the same over all persons within his Dominions,
whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, for the regulation of such duties.

2. Unto what duties the Kings Power does extend only indirectly and per
accidens, so that he may lawfully exercise his power over some persons within
his Dominions of both sorts; but not over other some of either sort, for the
regulation of those duties.

3. Unto what duties the Kings Power does no way extend, neither derectly nor
indirectly; so that he may not exercise the same over any person within his
Dominions, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, for the regulation of those
duties.

The duty of man is twofold,
1. Natural, which is the duty of man, qua homo rationalis; and is expressed
in the law of nature, divided by Christ, Mat. 22. into two parts, or tables. 1.
Contains the duty of man toward God, and consists in a love exceeding all
self-love Ver. 37. And this duty is twofold, 1. Internal, consisting in the
service and worship of God by the inward acts of the soul, ( i. e. of the
understanding, will, and affections of man) and in a due return of the bona
animi, which God has conferted upon man. And this part of man's duty is
prescribed in the first Commandment. 2. External, which consists in honoring
God by outward actions, and in a due return of those hona corporis, and
fortuna which God has conferred upon man: And this is twofold, 1. Original
and Primarie, which is that honor, worship, and service, which both Moses,
Deuteronomy. 6.13. and Christ, Mat. 4.10. ^mits solely unto God And is twofold, 1.
Private, consisting in personal honor and worship of God: which is twofold,
1. Corporal, consisting in the outward gestures of the body. Prescribed,
Commandment 2. 2. Vocal, consisting in reverent speeches and praises of God.
Prescribed, Commandment. 3.
2. Public, consisting in the practice of these duties at solemn times, and
in solemn assemblies. Prescribed, Commandment 4.
2. Representative and Secondarie, which is the honor, worship, and service,
due unto Parents, Kings, and Magistrates, as Gods Deputies and Lieutenants:
Prescribed, Commandment 5. which I shall fully demonstrate in the next
Chapter, to be a Precept of the former Table of the Moral Law; and that Kings
and Parents (in that capacity as Kings and Parents) do relate unto their
children and Subjects as Gods, and not as Neighbor.


2. Contains the duty of man toward his neighbor, and consists in a love
inferior unto the love of our selves: And is twofold; 1. External, which
consists in the performance of external offices of love, and restraint of
external injuries to our neighbor, 1. In his own person. Commandment 6. 2.
In his second self. Commandment 7. 3. In his god's Commandment 8. 4. In his
good name, Commandment 9.
2. Internal, consisting in the inward inclination, and desire to perform
these duties, and in the restraint of all inward motions to the sins
prohibited in these precepts. Commandment 10.
2. Evangelicall, which is the duty of man, qua homo Christianus: And is
expressed in the Gospel or Law of Christ. Which duty is twofold, 1. Merely
Evangelicall, which consists in the right use of Evangelicall and supernatural
blessings conferred upon particular men for the advancement of the Gospel of
Christ; as the power of working miracles, of prophesying, and the like,
mentioned by Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 12. 2. Mixtly Evangelicall, which consists in
the right use of those natural blessings which enable men for the performance
of the law of nature; (And therefore these mixtly Evangelicall duties, are the
same in substance (as I showed before) with natural duties, and are
differenced after the same manner, and regulated by the same precepts of the
Moral Law) but the difference consists (as to our present purpose) in the
Object and terminus ad quem, whereunto these Evangelicall duties do refer,
which is Christ the Redeemer, whereas natural duties do relate unto God the
Creator both as their object and erd.

Now from these premises, I shall return a direct answer to the Quaere
concerning the extent and limitation of Regal power in three brief Theses or
Corollaries, showing, 1. What are omnimodo Regalia. 2. What are partim Regalia,
and partim extra-regalia. 3. What are omnimodo extra-regalia.


Only by the way I shall premise another brief praecognitum to facilitate the
understanding of these ensuing Corollaries; Note.
viz. That (in regard the opinions of Heathens, Jews, and Christians, do
generally concenter in the due extent, and limitation of Regal power, in order
to the duties of the second Table,) my present discourse shall only refer
unto the duties of the first Table of the Moral Law, for two reasons:

1. Because the people are most subject to offend in these duties, and that two
ways: 1. Through error; because these duties do most transcend their natural
reason. 2. Through zeal; because they conceive these duties most nearly to
concern their eternal, and spiritual happiness, and welfare.


2. Because Kings and Magistrates are, or at least wise ought to be most
diligent in the reformation and punishment of offenses, which immediately
concern God and Religion; because the promotion of Gods honor, worship, and
service, is the principal part of the office and calling of Kings and
Magistrates; the direction of whose precipitate zeal in this point, is the
absolute design of this Chapter.

The first Thesis declaring what are omnimodo Regalia, is this. Thesis 1.
All External duties prescribed in the four last precepts of the first Table
of the Moral Law, are directly and properly of Political Cognizance; so that
the King may lawfully exercise his Legislative power in the composure of Laws
and Statutes, for direction of honor, worship, and service, both to God and
himself, and that concerning both public and private acts of honor and
worship, whether of the body, or of the tongue: and here the disposal and
ordering of our estates, ( i. e. the bona fortunae, as well as bona corporis)
must be presupposed to be directly of the same cognizance, and to pertain to
the same power. For Solomon commands to honor the Lord with our substance,
Prove. 3.9. and God ordained parents and Kings to be his instruments in the
impartment of these outward blessings of fortune, as well as the blessings of
the body, unto their children and subjects: and therefore it is lawful for
them to command in the one as well as the other, in order to all outward
duties. And in whatsoever he may lawfully exercise his Legislative power, in
the same he may likewise exercise his Judiciary; for that is the life of the
Law, which without execution, is but a dead letter, like a man without a soul.

I shall not need to insist upon the confirmation of this Corollarie, because I
presume the grounds already premised in the former part of this Chapter, may be
sufficient to warrant this conclusion. And besides the professed design of this
Chapter, is not so much the extent as the limitation of the Kings power, in
order to Evangelicall duties, which are extra-regalia. and Metapoliticall
matters, whereof we shall speak in the two following Theses.

Thesis 2.
The second Thesis which declares what are parti Regalia, and partim
extra-regalia, relates to matters of Evangelicall worship, Government, and
Discipline; which is this.

No Evangelicall ceremonies or forms of worship, nor any Ecclesiastical
Government or Discipline which relates unto Christ, is directly, and per se of
Political Cognizance, but only indirectly, and per accidens. And therefore
the King cannot lawfully enact any Laws or Statutes concerning these matters,
which shall be generally obligatory unto all persons within his Dominions; but
only unto such persons whom God has enlightened by his spirit, and thereby
satisfied their consciences of the lawfulness and Religion of such Worship,
Government, and Discipline.

The Reasons are two.

but only the Contingentials of Politic Government.

The second Reason is, because conscience is the only law Paul declares, Romans
14. last; where speaking of Evangelicall Privileges and Ceremonies, he
enjoyneth the dictates of conscience to be observed under no less sanction
then damnation to him that disobeyeth: of which doctrine, his own practice
concerning the Sacrament of Circumcision is a manifest confirmation; for though
he caused Timothy to be circumcised because of the Jews who were persuaded,
that none who contemned that Ceremony, were members of the true Church, or fit
for their association, Acts 16.3. yet he would not permit Titus to be
circumcised, because the Grecians should be satisfied, that he did not esteem
these Ceremonies so essential to life and salvation, that they ought to be
obtruded upon those, whose consciences were not satisfied concerning the same,
Gal. 2.3. And you may observe, Acts 15. that when the Apostles consulted of
sending decrees, concerning the observation of Ceremonies to the Gentiles; upon
whom the Jews would have obtruded the observation of Circumcision, as
necessary to salvation; they were careful to enjoyne neither Circumcision nor
any other Ceremony, but such as those, of the Religion whereof the Gentiles
were formerly satisfied in their consciences. And therefore, if the Magistrate
shall by any Law or Statute compel men to practice those Ceremonies or Forms
of worship, concerning the Religion and lawfulness whereof they are not
satisfied in their consciences, he does compel them to sin, and thereby
render himself guilty of that damnation, which Paul affirms to be the merits
of all injuries done to the conscience.

Ob. All the godly Kings of Judah; as, David, Solomon, Asa, Jehoshaphat, Joash,
Hezekiah, and Josiah, did impose the observation and practice of the Jewish
sacraments, and other Evangelicall forms of worship upon the whole nation of
the Jews, and also punish the neglect thereof: and therefore Kings may
lawfully exercise their power in these matters, over all subjects within their
Dominions.

Sol. God had revealed, and expressly enjoined the use of these Sacraments, and
set Forms of Worship, Government, and Discipline, unto the whole nation of the
Jews; and therefore the Jews were obliged thereunto, (not by the Laws of the
King, but) by the immediate law of God, within whose cognizance, both these
Evangelicall ceremonies, and conscience it self also, the Judge of all these,
does directly fall; over which, God only, and not the King is Judge: so that
when these Kings did exercise their Judiciary power concerning these Jewish
rites, it was only in pursuance of the law of God, which made these duties
generally obligatory unto that Nation. But it was not lawful for those Kings,
to force the practice and observance of these duties upon any other people,
though they lived within their Dominions; nor do we find in Scripture, that
any of these godly Kings did force the Gibeonites who were their subjects, (but
no Israelites) either to be circumcised, or to eat the Passover, or observe
any other Jewish Rites. Only indeed, if any stranger became a Proselyte, and
so a professor of that Religion, not by constraint, but of their own
voluntary inclination and desire, then it was lawful for the Magistrate to
force such to observe the Jewish Ceremonies, Exodus 12.48. because then the
neglect thereof, was an act of profaneness in such (as well as in the Jews)
which is directly of Political Cognizance, and pertaines to the Magistrate
both to judge and punish.

But in regard the inward satisfaction of conscience concerning these
Evangelicall Forms of Worship, Government, and Discipline, is that alone which
does naturalize these supernatural duties, and thereby quarter them in
praedicamento Regalium, and transform them into matters of Political
Cognizance. And the inward dissatisfaction of conscience that which impedeth
their naturalization, and the removal of their quarters de praedicamento
extra-regalium, the proper sphere of all Metapoliticall matters; (which inward
qualification of conscience is properly a point of faith, and so a duty of the
first Commandment of the Moral law:) for till we be so fully satisfied
concerning the Religion of these Evangelicall Ceremonies, and Forms of
Worship, that the practice thereof may proceed from faith, neither can we
adventure upon the voluntary practice thereof, or the Magistrate enforce the
same upon us, without the incurment of the guilt of damnation to both.) I shall
therefore refer the more punctual discussion of this point unto the next
Thesis, which concerns the omnimodo extra-regalia, whereunto it does more
properly appertain.

The third Thesis declares what are omnimodo extra-regalia. Thesis. 3.
And this relates to Internal duties and matters of Evangelicall faith and
doctrine, which is this: No internal duties prescribed in the first
Commandment of the Moral Law, do either directly or indirectly fall within
the sphere of Political cognizance, so that the King cannot lawfully exercise
either his Legislative or Judiciarie power in matters of faith and doctrine;
nor by any positive Laws and Statutes, determine what points shall be
Orthodox, and what Heretical: neither may he under the sanction of any
personal, or pecuniarie mulct, or penalty, enjoyne his Subjects to profess
and swear such Creeds, and Articles of Faith and Religion, as those Laws
shall make Orthodox: or by virtue of those Laws punish any of his Subjects,
who out of conscience do profess themselves of another different Faith and
Religion.

The Reasons for confirmation hereof are three.

The first whereof appears partly in the premises, declaring

Ob. Saint Paul exhorts (not every body, but) every soul to be subject to
the higher powers, Romans 13.1. thereby importing the Kings power to extend unto
the acts of the soul, as well as the acts of the body; so that not only the
External, but also the Internal duties of the Moral Law, must come within
the sphere of Political Cognizance.

Sol. That exhortation of Paul's is not directed unto Kings, but unto Subjects,
and therefore does not relate unto the Kings power, but unto the Subjects
obedience: For though the King cannot judge the acts of the soul, or punish
the thoughts of the heart, (how unjust, impious, or Atheistical soever;) yet
does not that privilege the Subjects to perform their acts of obedience out
of hypocrisy, and dissimulation, and with eye-service, (as the Apostle
speaks, Ephesians. 6.6.) And not out of sincerity and singleness of heart: for
wrath and not for conscience sake. The Reason is, because this duty of
obedience and subjection to Kings, is not merely a service to Kings, but
principally to God himself, (whose person the King does represent) who sees
and judges the secrets of our souls, and measures the merits of our duty,
not by our outward work, but by our inward faith and love. And therefore
(though the Kings power cannot, yet) our obedience must be extended even to the
acts of the soul, that it may be an acceptable sacrifice to God, as well as
the King; but this does not authorize the King to exercise his power over the
acts of the soul.

Mark 16.15. Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel. This is all
the commission which the Apostles had, (and which other Ministers still have)
for the conversion of men to the Faith and Religion of Christ. And yet they
were sent to convert the Gentiles, a people who neither understood or believed
any thing at all, either of Christ, or Scripture, or any principles of that
Faith and Religion; nor were any way inclined to seek after such knowledge.
It Is true indeed that Christ endowed his Apostles with a power far beyond the
power of Magistrates; for it was a power to work miracles, but that was not
for the punishment or destruction of any, but for the benefit and preservation
of all such, upon whom they were showed, which was a fit means to persuade and
convince their understandings: but we never read that Christ did delegate any
Legislative or Judiciarie power unto his Apostles, to punish any mis-beleevers,
or enforce the profession of those truths and points of faith, which they could
not persuade; nay indeed, he peremptorily inhibited them the affectation of any
such power, Mat. 20.25. whereupon Saint Peter charge Presbyters, not to
demean themselves in the execution of their office as lords over Gods
heritage. And yet it is the duty of Ministers, and not of Magistrates, to
reform errors in matters of Faith and Doctrine; for we do not read that ever
Christ gave any rule or command to Kings, or Magistrates, to plant or propagate
his Faith and Gospel: and therefore in relation to these duties, the
Ministers, and not the Magistrates, are styled Fathers, because it is the duty
and office of Ministers, and not of Magistrates, to beget men in Christ Jesus
through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15.

Ob. Esaias prophesying of the flourishing estate of Christ's Church among the
Gentiles, under the Gospel, recites this for a special means of the
increase thereof, that Kings shall be the nursing fathers, and Queens the
nursing mothers of the Church in those days, Esaias 49.23. whose office it is by
power to compel, and not by preaching to persuade men to forsake the error of
their ways: And therefore Kings being fathers to the Church of Christ, may
execute the duties of their calling over the members thereof; and by
consequence, may exercise both their Legislative and Judiciarie power in
matters of Christian Faith and Doctrine, which is that which constitutes men
members of this Church, and gives the nomen and esse to a Christian, qua talis.

Sol. The attribute which this Text gives unto Kings, does admirably express
the duty of Christian Kings toward their Subjects, in reference to their
Christian, and spiritual vocation, and profession. For Kings are not here
simply styled fathers, as in other places of Scripture, which relate directly
to their power and sovereignty over their Subjects; but with the addition of
this Epithet of Nursing, they shall be (says the Text) Nursing fathers: now a
Nurse you know does not beget a child, but only protect and nourish it, after
it is both begotten and borne.

And such a power indeed, a Christian King may, and ought to exercise over his
Subjects; that is, after they are begotten and borne children of the Faith and
Church of Christ, by the preaching of the Gospel; he both may and ought to use
his power to protect them from the wolvish enemies of Christ's Church, and to
nourish them by gracious expresses of his Royal favor. But I cannot find any
warrant for the King in that Text, to enact any Laws or Statutes, to compel
men of another Faith and Religion to become such as himself, or to punish them
that will not; nor can I believe it to be any part of his commission or calling.

Repl. It may be replied against this, first, That such a liberty, for every
man to profess and believe what his own fantasy does suggest and judge
Orthodox in such high and sacred mysteries will fill the Church with absurd,
and blasphemous errors, and heresies; and by consequence, the Commonwealth
with distractions and divisions. For it is a probatum of daily experience, that
when the people are madded and instigated by mad Sheba's and Sectaries, they
will adventure upon any mischief, sparing neither Scepter nor Mitre, Ephod nor
Diadom, fancying the cause to be Gods, and that themselves do God good
service, when they rage against his Anointed, and kill his Prophets with the
sword, in the furious pursuit of their fanaticke opinions.

And therefore, there is a necessity that Kings should exercise their power to
settle an Uniformity in matters of Faith and Doctrine, because the peace, and
unity, and preservation of the Commonwealth, does so directly depend
thereupon. Secondly, The Primitive Church has afforded us many laudable
presidents to this purpose, in many Creeds, and brief forms of Confessions,
purposely composed by the Fathers and Councels of those times, to the end, that
a professed Uniformity of Faith and Doctrine in such Fundamentals, might
preserve the peace and unity of the Church, and by consequence of the
Commonwealth. And therefore, there wants neither reason nor authority to
warrant the exercise of Regal power in matters of Faith and Doctrine.

Sol. This Uniformity of Faith and Religion, is more to be desired then hoped
for; for Saint Paul has expressly declared the necessity of such a dissonancie
amongst Christians in the principles of Faith and Religion, as shall also
introduce divisions and discords amongst them, 1 Cor. 11.18, 19. in which Text,
the Apostle alleges the providence of God to be the ground thereof, who
thereby provides for the manifestation of the sincere and faithful, and also
for their better information and knowledge in matters of faith. And surely the
Gospel had never been so perfectly radicated in the minds of Christians,
without oppositions and disputes concerning the same; and therefore it
proceeded from the wisdom, providence, and goodness of God toward his
children, that these divisions should be the fruits and effects of the Gospel,
(as Christ himself did forewarne his Disciples) for Christians are always best
principled in those points which are most controverted; for the disputes
concerning Jewish Ceremonies in the times of the Apostles; concerning the
Trinity in the times of the Fathers; concerning the nature of Justification, of
the Sacraments, and other points of Popery, of later times; and concerning
forms of Worship, Government, and Discipline of the Church, in these present
times, has begotten a more exact understanding in Christians in all these
points, then ever they had in probability attained unto, if Satan had not sowed
these seeds of discord amongst them. As for the dangers and inconveniences to
Church and Commonwealth, pretended for the necessity of the exercise of a
Regal power in these matters; it is but a piece of Jeroboam's policy, in
erecting golden Calves to secure his kingdom: for to pretend a necessity of
unwarrantable means, for the security of Church or State, is but to appeal
from God to the Devil for succor; which will certainly bring our fears upon
us: For it is just with God to power down those judgments upon the true
Professors, which are due to such Heretics, when the former sort out of
diffidence of Gods wisdom, power, and goodness, will anticipate his Justice
in the latter, and out of a precipitate zeal to Gods honor, obtrude their
undesired, (and therefore unwelcome) help and assistance upon him. Whereas if
we could but let them alone (as Christ exhorts, Mat. 15.14.) and wait Gods
time with patience, the Lord will not fail to root out such spurious plants,
which are not of his own planting, but of the Devils, as all such Heresies
most undoubtedly are. Yet I deny not but the Magistrate both may, and ought to
exercice his power for the restrain and punishment of those divisions, (which
are the fruits and effects of these erroneous and Heretical opinions,) when
they come to be of Political Cogni^^n^^ i. e. a^^^ of violence and injustice,
disturbing the peace of the Commonwealth; but the errors themselves which are
the causes and productives of these mischiefs in State, are not at all of
Political, but of another higher Cognizance. As for the concise forms of
Faith and Confession, mentioned in the latter part of the Objection, I do
acknowledge such short Creeds, (as that of the Apostles, of the Nicene
Council, of Athanasius, and many other Orthodox Creeds, devised, some by
Councels, some by particular Fathers, against such particular Heresies as
reigned in their times,) to be of admirable use and expediency for the Churches
edification: but for any Magistrate to constrain his Subjects by virtue of any
Law or Statute, to swear the truth of these Creeds, or of any other Article of
Faith, of the truth whereof the deponent is not first fully satisfied in his
conscience, (but does either believe or doubt the same to be false) must needs
be an offense of a very high nature in any Magistrate; because he does not
only render himself accessory to the perjury of him that swears, but guilty
also of a sacrilegious intrusion and usurpation upon those sacred prerogatives
which God has reserved entire unto himself: viz. of the power and command
over the conscience, which God never imparted unto any Creature, Man, or
Angel; neither of whom (how great and glorious soever) is able to pacify an
injured, incensed, and wrathful conscience.

Paul's exhortation to Timothy, concerning his demeanor toward those who
should oppose themselves against the truth and Gospel of Christ, not only of
infirmity and ignorance, but of obstinacy and maliousnesse, 2 Timothy 3. toward
whom he exhorts Timothy to be gentle, and instruct them with meekness, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. And yet we know that Saint Paul did not want experience of the
efficacy and virtue of compulsive and violent courses to force a conformity in
others, to his own faith, belief, and profession: and therefore, surely he
would never have so carefully prescribed this rule to Timothy, if he had found
persecution, and the exercise of secular power to be a better expedient to
convert men to the faith of Christ, or to convince an erroneous conscience; the
incongruity of which means also, the Lord himself has further manifested, by
rendering all such inordinate endeavors, (not only fruitless and
inefficacious for the eradication of Heresies, but also) advantageous to
confirm them in the parties persecuted, and to multiply the professors of the
same Heretical opinions; as the Histories of the Primitive Persecutions do
sufficiently declare. For there is so much disproportion between an
immateriall conscience and a material sword, that the weakest judgments are
apt to conclude, that those who make use of such absurd and improper arguments
to convince the consciences of others, are not provided of better grounds and
reasons whereupon to build their own Faith and Religion. And he that
consulteth the Narratives of the Spanish proceedings in the Conversion of the
Indians, shall find that Saint Peter added more souls to the Church of Christ
by one Sermon, then the Spaniards were able to do by seven years persecution,
although it was not defective in any point of savage and inhumane cruelty.

Ob. Many perverse natures have been converted to the faith of Christ by
rigorous means, upon whom persuasions and argumentations could have no such
influence: and we find by daily experience, that correction and stripes are a
means to infuse documents into some children, in whose souls the most
rational instructions with meekness could make no such impression.

Sol. Balaams Ass spoke when she was beaten three times with a staff; and
yet a man would esteem him an Ass, that should endeavor to make an Ass
speak by beating her three times as often. I grant that corrections and
punishments may be efficacious to engraft knowledge and belief in men's minds,
of those principles whereof nature does make them capable, and where negligence
or lewdness are the only impediments, as it happens in some children; but for
a Magistrate to endeavor the engraftment and plantation of Christian
principles in the heart of an Infidel, (who is prepossest with a prejudicate
opinion of their fond and superstitious vanity) by rigor and extremity, would
be an absurdity no less ridiculous, then to endeavor to make an Ass speak,
by beating her three times with a staff. In regard nature does afford no more
capacity in men for the belief of these points of faith, then it does in Asses
to speak, or in stones to live, whereof only God (who enabled Balaams Ass to
speak) is able to raise up children unto Abraham: That is, God is only able
to implant the faith of Abraham, in the hearts of Infidels, who are as
incapable thereof by nature, as stones are of life and motion. And the means
which God has ordained for this purpose, (and whereupon therefore we can only
expect a blessing from God to make them effectual) is not rigor and
compulsion, but meekness and persuasion, as Saint Paul declares, 2 Timothy 2.25.

Repl. Though the Magistrate may not punish the misbelief or incredulty of his
Subjects, concerning Articles of Christian faith, the understanding and belief
whereof, is a supernatural gift: yet he ought to punish all idolatrous forms
of worship, because the light of nature is sufficient to monstrate the
absurdnesse and impiety thereof; as Saint Paul declares, Romans 1. where the
worship of Images is demonstrated to be a sin against the light of nature:
upon which ground also, the Judicial Laws of Moses, (which are mere
Commentaries of the external part and duty of the law of nature) did decree
all Idolatries to be punished by death. And therefore the Magistrate may
exercise both his Legislative and Judiciary power, for the restraint and
suppression of all Idolatrous worship, and particularly of Images, which is the
Idolatrous form of worship practiced by Papists.

Sol. There is a twofold fountain and original of Idolatrous Worship.

1. The will: when the error and obliquity does proceed either from a wicked
lewdness, or else from a perverse and wilful negligence; and such were all
the Idolatries of the Isralites, because God himself had published Laws and
Statutes for the information of their understandings in that point; the Justice
and Religion whereof was not disputable, because they were immediately from
God: And therefore, these Idolatries were punishable in the Israelites, because
they did proceed from the error and obliquity of the wilt; the Reformation
whereof, is indeed the very absolute and adaequate end of all punishments, and
of the exercise of all Political power.

2. The understanding: when the error and obliquity does proceed from an
invincible ignorance, and misapprehension of the Religion of the duty; (as in
the Papists, whose forms of worship, (how Idolatrous soever in the eyes of
Protestants, yet) in their own eyes appear to be the only service acceptable
to God: And in the Gentiles, whose ridiculous and senseless Idolatry, was had
in the like religious and reverent estimation amongst themselves;) the
punishment of which Idolatry is no less incongruous, then to beat a natural
fool for liking his own painted coat better then my rich suite, or a blind
man for judging that to be white, which I that have eyes can discern to be
perfectly black. For though the light of nature in its perfection (in which
sense Saint Paul speaks of it, Romans 1.) be a sufficient guide in all these
particular things, (that is, to discern the errors of these Idolaters, as
well as the mistakes of fools and blind men) yet is it not sufficient to do
that in these particular men, who do not participate of such a perfection of
natural light and knowledge: and therefore (till it please God to enlighten
their understandings) it is as impossible to cudgel these Idolaters out of an
opinion of the Religion of their own forms of worship, or to make them
believe any other to be more innocent, and acceptable unto God, as with a
hammer to drive wit into a fools head, or sight into a blind man's eyes. And
therefore (seeing punishments were never ordained for the Information of the
understanding, but merely for the Reformation of the will;) it cannot be just
nor equitable in Magistrates, to punish the errors and obliquities of Papists,
or any other Idolaters, (which have their foundation and ground in the
understanding,) till first their understanding be rightly informed, and
themselves convinced of the error of their ways. And to warrant this
Doctrine, we have first a president in Saint Paul's own practice, in the
conversion of the Athenians, who did not make use of powder and bullets, but of
demonstrations and arguments, to effect that great work of Reformation in
those Idolaters; as we may read, Acts 17. Secondly, the testimony of Claudius
Lysias who judged no accusations concerning these Ceremonies alleged by the
Jews against Paul, to be worthy of death, or bonds, or any punishment, Acts
23.29.

Repl. Papists have the benefit of Scripture for their information, which
apparently condemn their Idolatrous forms of worship: and therefore their
Idolatry cannot be excused by the pretense of an invincible ignorance, no more
then the Idolatries of the Israelites could be.

Sol. The Ethiopian Eunuch had the benefit of Scripture too, when he
understood little enough of Christ; and for ought I know, might have continued
an Idolater all his life, if Philip, in stead of expounding and reasoning, had
fallen upon cudgelling that ignorant Eunuch into a right understanding thereof.
And therefore it is requisite, that they should first be convinced by reason,
that the Scriptures do condemn their forms of worship as Idolatrous, before
they be punished for the practice thereof. Neither again, is the reason and
equity of that Law for punishing Idolatry the same in the Papists, as it was in
the Israelites, for two causes.

1. Because of the different nature of the sin; for the Idolatry principally
intended by that Law to be punished in the Israelites, was the worship of an
Idolatrous object, (as appears, Deuteronomy. 13.) whereof the Papists are no ways
guilty, (for they worship the same God in the Unity of Essence, and Trinity of
Persons, which the Protestants do.)

2. Because of the different nature of the guilt, (though the sin should be
acknowledged to be the same in both, and the Idolatry punishable in the
Israelites, to relate to the forms of worship of the true God, which is the
only spece of Idolatry that can be charged upon the Papists.) For the
Israelites under the Law, had set forms of worship prescribed by God, from
which the least deviation was inexcusable in them; but under the Gospel, those
Ceremonies were abrogated, and all forms of worship left unto the discretion
of the Church: Now the Papists presuming their Church to be both the true
Church, and infallible, and that also by warrant of Scripture, (as they
suppose) it cannot be imagined, that they can possibly understand or believe
those forms of worship which they practice by the direction of their Church,
to be Idolatrous: and therefore their errors in this kind, deserve rather to
be the object of our pity, then our wrath.

Much more is requisite to complete this discourse, concerning the limitation
of the Kings power in order to these extra-regalia, and Metapoliticall matters;
and more particularly, concerning the limitation thereof, in order to the
calling and office of Ministers, which is not subordinate, but of a different
degree and nature from the office of Kings, both of them being the Anointed of
God, and neither of them depending directly and properly upon the other, but
only in ordine ad aliquem tertium: viz. God, unto whom they both are servants,
and from whom immediately they do both receive their commissions, and neither
of them from other. For as the King has no father or superior but God
himself, in his Politic and sacred capacity, (as we have already
demonstrated) so neither has the Minister in his Ecclesiastical and sacred
capacity, as Christ himself declares, Mat. 23.9. And therefore, though the
Apostles both taught and practiced obedience to Magistrates, in all matters of
Political Cognizance, wherein it was lawful for the Magistrate to command;
yet did Peter and John refuse to obey the commands of the Jewish Rulers, in
matters which immediately related to their office and calling, Acts 4.20. and
so did other of the Apostles also, Acts 5.29. For surely, if Ministers were
obliged to obey the Magistrates in the execution of the duties of their
calling, the Gospel of Christ had never attained unto such a degree of
perfection and maturity, nor Christianity ever taken root in the world,
especially amongst the Jews; for the two prementioned Chapters of Acts 4. and
5. and many other Texts in the Acts, do sufficiently manifest, by what strict
laws and commands, the Jewish Rulers and Magistrates, interdicted the
publication thereof. But the accurate discussion of this point, concerning the
Kings power over Ministers, in reference to their persons, estates, and
callings, would swell this Chapter into a larger volume, then was designed for
the whole Treatise. And therefore I will conclude this Chapter, with a
cautionary supplication to the Reader, concerning the premises thereof, which
is that my expresses therein, pleading the exemption of conscience from all
secular power, (in reference, first, to matters of Faith and Doctrine, which
are neither directly nor indirectly of Political Cognizance: Secondly, to
matters of Evangelicall Worship, Government, and Discipline, which are only
indirectly, and ex accidenti of Political Cognizance,) may not be so
understood, as if thereby I should intend to make the pretense either of
conscience, or of an Ecclesiastical calling, to be a sufficient warrant to
authorize the resistance of Secular power by any Subject, whether
Ecclesiastical or Civil. For as the Kings commands in Metapoliticall matters
whereunto his Commission does not extend, do render him guilty of sacrilegious
intrusion upon the sacred prerogatives of God; so the Subjects resistance, and
denial of a passive obedience, though even in those Metapoliticall mattees,
do render them guilty of a sacrilegious intrusion upon the sacred Prerogatives
of the King, to whom God has delegated an absolute, and unlimited power, over
both our estates and persons: in resistance whereof, we become guilty of
rebellion both against God and the King; as the next Chapter will more fully
manifest, speaking the due extension of the Subjects obedience.

CHAP. XI. Of the due extension of the Subjects obedience.
THe ninth Chapter presented the Reader with two proposals concerning the ends
of Monarchy: The first whereof concerned their nature; the explication whereof,
was the errand both of that and the tenth Chapter.

The second concerns their order, in the discussion whereof, our principal
design is, to declare in this present Chapter, the due extension of the
Subjects obedience, and that it is their duty to prefer the Kings honor
before their own welfare, in all matters of Political Cognizance.

You may remember that in that ninth Chapter, I distinguished the adaequate end
of Monarchy into principalem, and minus principalem.

The principal end, is either primus, which is Gods Glory, or a primo ortus,
which is the Kings Honor.

The less principal end, is salus populi.

Now concerning these three ends of Monarchy, we must observe, that they are
not coordinate, but subordinate, and ought all of them to have an influence
upon every Monarchical action, whether it proceed from Monarchs or
Monarchists; amongst which three, the first and principal is the Glory of God,
which both parties ought principally to look upon in all their relative
actions, whether of power or obedience: for that is the final cause for which
God ordained the King to rule and govern, and the people to be ruled and
governed. So that the degrees of order and subordination amongst these three
ends of Monarchy, in reference to the duties both of King and people, stands
thus.

1. The King ought to consult and endeavor (by way of power) the peoples
safety, in order to his own Honor; and to endeavor both his own Honor and
the peoples safety, in order to the Glory of God.

2. The people ought to endeavor (by way of obedience and submission) their
own safety in order to the Kings Honor; and to endeavor both the Kings
Honor, and their own safety, in order to the Glory of God.

Now because the true understanding of this order and distinction of degrees
amongst these ends, does much conduce to the right understanding of the
Subjects duty; I shall endeavor to manifest this subordination by proposing,

1. The most material Objections and Arguments, which seem to disprove it.

2. The most material Grounds and Reasons which do confirm it.

3. By framing Resolutions upon these grounds, to those Objections.

Indeed the pre-eminence of the first of these ends (which is Gods Glory,) is
not a point disputable amongst Christians. But whether the Kings Honor may
justly claim the second place, and ought to be preferred before the peoples
safety in all Monarchical actions, is not so unanimously agreed upon; for
(though many believe that the Monarch may observe this method in his own
actions, yet) that the people both may, and ought to prefer their own safety
before the Kings Honor, is an opinion that has not wanted store of Patrons in
these times: And the principal Arguments whereupon they ground the same, are
three.

i. e. humane,) or the Law of the rational nature. Thirdly, that part of Gods
will which concerns natural Agents, is termed the Law of Nature, (...), or
the Law of the corporeal Nature.

Again, this second sort of Law, (which is the Law of humane or rational
Nature, and is grounded upon the will of God concerning mankind,) is divided by
Christ himself into two parts, which he terms two Commandments, Mat. 22.27.
Which two are differenced by two different Objects, and two different sorts of
love required of us, for the due performance of our different duties, unto
these two different Objects. The first Commandment relates to God, whom we
must love above our selves, and all that we call ours; for God does not allow
any man to value, either life, limb, liberty, or estate, above himself, Mat.
10.37, 39. Luke 14.33. Mark 8.35. and of this nature are all the particular
Commandments of the first Table, which are comprehended under this general
and great Commandment; the duties whereof are grounded upon a love exceeding
the love of our selves. The second Commandment relates unto our Neighbor;
whom we are not obliged to love either above our selves, or equally with our
selves, but only like our selves; so that the love of our selves in this
second part of the Law of Nature, is allowed the first place; and we may
lawfully value our own life, limbs, estates, and liberties, above our
neighbors, and prefer the indemnity of our selves, before the indemnity of
our neighbor, in each of these several respects, (when they chance to come in
competition.) And therefore no Law, either of God or man, does make homicide
capital, (no nor culpable) where it is necessitated se defendendo. And of this
nature are all the particular Commandments of the second Table, which Christ's
exposition comprehends under this second general Commandment, (Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self) the duties whereof are grounded upon a love
(not exceeding, but) inferior unto the love of our selves.

Now the Kings Honor being grounded upon the fifth Commandment, (which they
take pro concesse to be a Precept of the second Table) and therefore grounded
upon a love which must not exceed the love of our selves; the people are
obliged by the Law of God and Nature, (in all their duties toward the King,)
in the first place to look upon their own safety; and by consequence, the
Kings Honor is (not a superior, but) a subordinate end to salus populi; so
that the people may resist, yea and kill the King also, if they be necessitated
se defendendo.



Rehoboam from his dominion over the ten Tribes, 1 King. 12.24. And sometimes
countenanced by holy men of God, which themselves have been the principal
actors therein: (as David in the defense of himself from the rage and fury of
Saul, 1 Samuel 22.1, 2. and Chap. 23.7, 8. And Elisha in his advise to the
Elders, to resist the messengers sent by King Jehoram, to take away his head, 2
King. 6.32.) and yet neither of them reproved by God for preferring their own
safety, before their obedience to the Kings commands: And therefore the
Subjects may provide for, and regard their own safety, rather then his Honor.

That Doctrine which I shall here premise, as a ground for the solution of
these Arguments, and to evidence the pre-eminence of the Kings Honor above the
peoples welfare, is such a principle in Divinity, as I presume will (prima
facie) hazard the repute of a Paradox, being directly opposite to the opinions
of all Christian Authors who write of the Moral Law; who distinguishing the
Ten Commandments into two Tables (according to Christ's rule, Mat. 22.37.) do
generally conclude the fifth Commandment, (prescribing honor to parents) to be
a Commandment of the second Table, which contains our duty toward our
neighbor; as if Kings and parents related to their Subjects and children, as
neighbors, and not as Gods. And that the duties therefore to be performed to
Kings and parents, are grounded only upon such a love, which must not exceed
the love of our selves: which being granted for truth, the Argument taken from
the Law of Nature, to prove the pre-eminence of the peoples welfare above the
Kings Honor, (and thereby to legitimate the resistance of Kings, as well as of
any other men, when the people do judge their commands to be destructive to
their own safety and welfare,) is altogether unanswerable. For Christ in that
prementioned division of the Moral Law, Mat. 22.37. makes but two objects of
man's duty; one superior, whom we are obliged to love and respect above our
selves, and that is God: another inferior object, whom we are obliged to
respect only as our selves; that is, in the respect of the degrees of
extension of our love equally to our selves; (for we must have a regard unto
our neighbor, in his person, and life, chastity, goods, and good name, as well
as our own:) but yet we are not obliged to an equality, in reference to the
degrees of the intension of our love to our neighbor in any of these
particulars; for we may, and ought to love and respect our own life, goods, and
good name, above our neighbors: so that every man is set in the middle
between these two objects; to the one he looks upward as an object above
him, to the other downward, as an object below him: So that if Kings and
parents relate to us only as neighbors, and not as Gods, (for there is no
other third object of man's duty,) then they are not our superiors but
inferiors; nor may we respect their persons, goods, or good name, above our
own, as things sacred; but beneath, and after our own, and so to preserve our
own, may destroy theirs: which Doctrine does plainly legitimate rebellion by
the Law of Nature. And therefore, to prevent both this, and many other
dangerous and damnable inferences, which may be deduced from this fundamental
error, (placing this fifth Commandment under a wrong genus of the Moral Law,
and thereby putting a wrong construction upon all the duties therein
prescribed;) I shall endeavor to rectify this Epidemicall error, by twelve
Reasons or Arguments, demonstrating this fifth Commandment, to be a Precept,
not of the second, but of the first Table of the Moral Law. Whereof,

The first four do conclude the Negative part, that it is not a Precept of
the second Table.

The latter eight the Affirmative part, that it is a Precept of the first Table.

The Negative part, that it is no Precept of the second Table, appears,

1. By Saint Paul's exposition of that lesser Commandment, whereby Christ
divides the second Table from the first; viz. (Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self,) under which Commandment (says the Apostle) are comprehended all
the Precepts of the second Table, relating to our neighbor; and
particularizing them, mentions only the last five, Romans 13.9.

Ob. You will say, though he specify no other but the five last Precepts of
the Decalogue, yet he intimates in that verse, that some other Commandment is
also comprehended in this saying, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self;
which other Commandment must needs be this, of obedience to parents.

Sol. By other Commandment, the Apostle does not mean any of the other five
which are specifically distinct from these five, but other particular branches
of these five Negative Commandments of the second Table, each of which
comprehends many particulars under them: and that he does not thereby
understand this fifth Commandment, which is an Affirmative Precept, is manifest
from the Reason alleged by the Apostle in the subsequent verse; showing why,
and how this love of our neighbor is the fulfilling of the Law of the second
Table: For (says he) love works no ill to his neighbor; therefore is love
the fulfilling of the Law, Ver. 10. Where you may observe, that all the duties
of the second Table relating to our neighbor, are grounded primarily upon the
Negative effects of our love, which is the not doing ill to our neighbor; (for
not our neighbor, but our selves, are the immediate object of the positive
effects of our love,) and so the Precepts are all expressed by way of negation.
But the duties of the fifth Commandment are of a different nature, and consists
primarily in the positive effects of our love; and therefore this Precept is
expressed by way of affirmation, both in the Decalogue, Exodus 20. and by Saint
Paul in the first verse of this Chapter. For first he commands us to submit our
selves to higher Powers, (that is, to perform and execute their commands, when
they are not contrary to Gods Precepts,) and this is the immediate and primary
duty of this fifth Commandment: and in the next verse he prohibits all
resistance, (though their commands be such as we judge to be contrary to Gods
Precepts,) and this is the consequentiall and secondarie duty of the same
Commandment.

honor and obedience due to Kings and parents, were duties of the second
Table, then they should be grounded upon such a love as is inferior unto, and
to be measured by the love of our selves; and we should yield our obedience
and submission to their commands only, when we judged them to conduce unto our
own good and benefit; whereupon it would follow, that the honor due to Kings
and parents should be no other, then what is due to our friend, or servant, or
any other neighbor: (for nature teaches us to obey and execute their
commands, when we conceive them to conduce unto our own advantage,) and so
this fifth Commandment should be altogether superfluous: And therefore cannot
be a Precept of the second Table.

The third reason why this fifth Commandment cannot be a Deuteronomy. 13.6, 7, 8, 9,
10. yea, if it were a whole city that were guilty of this sin, it was to be
destroyed, Ver. 15. Yet in this strict charge concerning Idolatrous neighbors,
of so near relation, the Text does not mention any man or woman, who has the
relation of a father or mother to us; thereby differencing them from all
neighbors whatsoever. And Solomon's exposition of this fifth Commandment, makes
this more clear and evident, Eccles. 10.20. where he extends the honor and
reverence due to Kings, unto the very thoughts and imaginations of the heart,
(notwithstanding they were both Fools, Tyrants, and Idolaters,) (for when
Solomon prohibited the cursing of the King, yea even in the thought; he was not
ignorant that Saul had been a Tyrant, himself an Idolater, and that his son
Rehoboam, who should succeed him, was a Fool.) But it was never prohibited to
speak, or think evil of any friend or neighbor, who was guilty of these
crimes; nay, we are commanded to accuse them of evil.

Ob. You will say, What? must men then think and believe manifest lies? Must
we neither say nor think that those Kings are evil and wicked, which manifest
themselves to be such in all their actions; such as Jeroboam, Ahab, Manasses,
Nebuchadnezzar, whom the Scriptures record for most infamous and notorious
sinners: and may not we speak or think that, for which we have the warrant of
Scripture?

Sol. Kings, in reference to their duty toward God, may be more wicked then
any other men, because they may offend in a double capacity; 1. In their
natural, as men, and professores fidei, by transgressing of Gods
Commandments, which do oblige them equally, as they do other men. 2. In their
Politic, as Gods Deputies, and propugnatores fidei, by breach of that trust
which God has reposed in them, for ruling and judging of the people committed
to their care and protection, according to Justice and Equity. But in reference
to their duty toward us, (though themselves may be wicked, yet) they cannot
do wicked things, (as I showed in the last Chapter,) that is, they cannot
inflict any thing upon us, but that which God has decreed to fall upon us for
our sins; as the Holy Ghost testifies of Pilates sentence against Christ,
Acts 4. so that the evil which they do to us, is just in respect of us,
though it be never so unjustly executed by them. So that the words of Solomon
are to be understood only of Kings, in reference to the exercise of their
power upon us; which whether it be for good or hurt, is still from God, whose
Deputies all Kings are, and whose heart the Lord rules, either for our benefit
or prejudice, Prove. 21.4. And therefore we may not think them evil or unjust
to us; for the Judgment is not theirs but Gods, Prove. 26.29. who cannot be
unjust. And if we look in Esaias 3. you shall find that God owneth all the
grievous oppressions and violences, which Tyrants exercise upon their Subjects,
for judgments and punishments sent upon that people or nation by his own
self; and to demonstrate, that all Kings act by his immediate direction, he
has made the decrees and ordinances of Heathen Kings subservient to his glory,
and his peoples good, not only on accidenti, by his providence, but ex
proposito, in their own purposes; as is apparent in the decrees of Cyrus and
Darius, to build the Temple of God, whom they knew not; and of Nebuchadnezzar,
to honor his name: all which three were mere Heathens.

The fourth and last Reason why this fifth Commandment

I confess indeed that parents are engaged to perform duties to their
children, as well as children are to parents; but those are only such
paternall duties of protection and provision, as God himself is also obliged
to perform unto his dutiful children, by his Covenant for conferring
blessings upon them, when they truly honor him, Deuteronomy. 28. and 29. for
performance of the external part of which Covenant, God does substitute Kings
and parents as his instruments, to convey these blessings unto Subjects and
children; but these duties are not so much as intimated in the fifth
Commandment, but are enjoined only in that general Covenant between God and
his people; who therefore does make Kings and parents indulgent to subjects and
children, whereby to express his care for performance upon his part, when
Subjects and children are obedient unto God and his Deputies, and thereby
careful to perform upon their part.

The Reasons concluding the Affirmative part, that this fifth Commandment is a
Precept of the first Table, are eight.

Mat. 19.18. Mark 10.17. Luke 18.20. In all which places, this Precept, Honor
thy father and thy mother, is intended by Christ to enjoyne all the duties of
the first Table of the Moral Law; for God you know is often in Scripture
styled Father: as in Mat. 6. we find him styled Father twelve times, but we
never find him styled Neighbor in all the Scripture; for to love God but in
the same manner which we are bound to love our neighbor, (that is, like our
selves,) were self Idolatry. And besides our duty to God is oftentimes
enjoined in this very expression of Honor: as, 1 Samuel 2.30. where this word
Honor imports the whole duty of man toward God: in which sense this word
Honor is also used by our Savior, John 8.49. And therefore it is manifest,
(seeing God is capable of the title of Father, and that this expression of
Honor may be properly extended to all the duties due unto God, (which are the
duties of the first Table) that this Precept of Honor thy father and mother,
may comprehend all the duties of the first Table; and that it does so in this
place, I do prove thus: Christ in his answer must needs mention all those
duties which are necessary to salvation, (for else his rule were not perfect:)
but the duties of the first Table are equally, (if not more) necessary to life,
then the duties of the second Table; and cannot be included in any other
Precept which Christ recites in those Texts: therefore, all the duties of the
first Table, must necessarily be comprehended in this Precept, Honor thy
father and mother; upon which premised grounds it does necessarily follow, that
this fifth Commandment is a Precept of the first Table. For,

That Precept which comprehends all the duties of the first Table, must needs
be a Precept of the first Table; but this very Precept comprehends all the
duties of the first Table, as the premises demonstrate: ergo.

The second Reason is grounded upon the nature of God, being and existence; for
in Exodus 3. he defines himself by this expression, I am: and upon this ground,
both David, Psalm. 1^0. Isaiah, Chap. 44. and Saint Paul, Acts 17. proves the
Lord alone to be God, because no creature, no not the Angels themselves, are
able to give a life, or motion, or being unto man, but only God, whose essence
life, and being is, and therefore communicable only from him: so that
whatsoever has a power to communicate a being, does supply the place of God;
but parents have a power to communicate a being unto their children, ergo, they
relate unto their children as Gods, and not as men; and by consequence, the
duties performed by children unto parents, must be duties of the first Table;
and so likewise the Precept which enjoynes them, must be a Precept of the same
Table.

The third Reason, (as likewise all the five following, Paul, Romans 13. for
motives to persuade submission to higher Powers, (every one of which Reasons,
do demonstrate Kings and Magistrates (who are Politic parents) to have the
relation of Gods unto the people) is taken from the Author of the Kings power,
and that is God, Ver. 1. For there is no power but of God. Though the men
invested with that power be as unjust and wicked as Pilate, whose power Christ
himself acknowledged to flow from that sacred fountain, John 19.11. upon
which ground, the King in the exercise of his power, is always styled the
Minister of God Ver. 4. yea, and oftentimes also a very God; as, Psalm. 82.6.
And Moses is styled Aarons God, Exodus 4.16. And of these Gods Saint Paul meant,
when he affirmed many Gods to be in earth, 1 Cor. 8.8.

Now in regard the King does represent the person of God, he is to be honored,
not according to what he is in himself, and in his natural capacity (that is,
as a man) but according to what the person is whom he represents, and that is
God. For you know the respects which we exhibit to the Mayor of a town,
(which happily may be a Cobbler) are not proportioned according to the worth and
honor of that Cobbler, but according to the worth and honor of the King whom
he represents: and therefore within those limits (where that Cobbler does
represent this Majesty, and exercise this power derived from the King,) he is
in all respects preferred above all other men of what quality soever, (though
Knights or Lords,) and therefore our duties to the King, cannot relate to him
in his natural capacity, as a man; but in his Politic, as he represents the
person of God; and by consequence this fifth Commandment must be a Precept of
the first Table.

Some Jewish Writers upon this very ground and reason, do concur in this
opinion, that this fifth Commandment pertains to the first Table; because
Kings are styled Gods, Psalm. 82. and Ministers of God: whereunto that learned
and reverend Divine In his Tract upon the Moral Law. p. 105.
Bishop Andrews, returns this answer, That not only superiors, but also
inferiors are included in that Commandment, which excludes it from the first
Table: But with reverence to his great learning, and humble submission to
better reason, I cannot in this particular captivate my assent either to his
answer, opinion, or reason; for if that were sufficient to seclude the fifth,
the same reason would exclude also the fourth Commandment out of the first
Table; because both son, and daughter, and maid, and manservant; yea, even ox
and ass also, are therein expressly mentioned. But that which distinguishes
the two Tables, is the object of the duty to whom it is to be performed, and
not the subject who is to perform it. And we do not find that the duties of
the fifth Commandment are to be performed to any inferiors, but only to
superiors. And besides, this judicious Divine himself (who is deservedly
honored, both for piety and knowledge) (although he dissent from this opinion,
and in his division of the Commandments, does make this fifth Commandment a
Precept of the second Table; yet) in that Argument which he alleges to
persuade the sincerity of submission and obedience to Princes, he proves it
directly to be a Precept of the first. It pleased God ( In his exposition of
the fifth Commandment.
says he) to give this Commandment room before our goods, yea, before our
life, to show that obedience to Princes, must be preferred before either our
estate or life: Now if Princes must be dearer to us then our selves, how can
they have the relation of neighbors, upon whom the law of God does not enjoyne
us to set any such estimate?

The fourth reason is taken from the nature of the sin For he that resists
the power, resists the ordinance of God, Ver. 2. and therefore Rebellion
against the Prince, is termed a Rebellion against God; as appears, Numb. 14.2,
3, 4. where the Lord does threaten the punishment of the peoples Rebellion,
upon the report of the ten spies; not as a sin against Moses, but against
himself. And so likewise the Rebellion of Korah is termed a Rebellion, not
against Moses, but against God, Numb. 27.3. And Christ says, those that
despise his Messengers, despise him, Luke 11.16. And the Prodigal
acknowledges his disobedience to his father, to be a sin, first against
heaven, Luke 15. And Saint Paul says, that he that despised the Apostles,
despised not man but God, 1 These. 4.8. because their calling was Gods
ordinance, as also the Kings is. And this was the ground of Gamaliels Argument,
whereby he dissuaded the Council from using violence to the Apostles; because
if their power were from God, in fighting against the Apostles, they should
fight against God, Acts 5. And therefore the transgression of this
Commandment, being a sin properly against God, as the immediate object; this
fifth Commandment must needs be it Precept of the first Table.

The fifth Reason is taken from the nature of the punishment damnation, Romans
13.2. which is Saint Paul's third motive to obedience; for that punishment is
generally due to all the sins against the first Table, but not to all the sins
against the second: For by damnation here in this Text, the Apostle must needs
understand the punishment of temporal death, which the Judicial Law ordained
to be inflicted for every trespass against God, and the offenses against the
law of the first Table; which were judged (not according to the damage which
ensued upon the offense, like the offenses against our neighbor, where a man
was to loose eye for eye, tooth for tooth, and the like; but) according to the
quality of the person, against whom they were committed; for he that transgrest
the fourth Commandment, by gathering only a few sticks, was commanded to be
stoned to death, Levit. 24.15. And he that blasphemed or cursed God, was to
die the death, Numb. 15.35. Now all transgressions against our parents were to
be punished after the same manner, and not according to the damage which
ensued; for he that did smite his father or mother, was to be put to death,
though no damage ensued, Exodus 21.15. Nay, if he did but curse them, he was to
suffer death, Ver. 17. which punishments were not due by the Law, for any such
offenses against our neighbor, but only against God, and sins of the first
Table; and therefore this fifth Commandment must be a Precept of the first
Table. And the reason why I do judge this damnation to be meant of a temporal
punishment, which is inflicted by the Magistrate, and not of eternal, which is
inflicted by God; is, because in reference to Gods eternal punishments, all
sins are alike damnable and punishable with eternal damnation; and so Saint
Paul's reason should not be any motive more proper to persuade this duty then
any other; but in reference to temporal punishments inflicted by the
Magistrate, the sins only against God and the first Table, are made
generally and universally capital by the Law of Moses, and the same were also
made capital by the laws of other Nations; for men's words against the King,
may render them guilty of treason, and so of death, which men's words against
their neighbors do not do.

revenge and recompense, Ver. 3, 4. which is Saint Paul's fourth motive to
obedience. The Argument is this, To whomsoever the power of vengeance and
recompense pertains, he is a God; for God himself affirms those
prerogatives to be peculiar to himself, Deuteronomy. 22.35, 36. But both these
prerogatives pertain unto the King, as Saint Paul affirms in this Text;
ergo, Kings are Gods, and by consequence the fifth Commandment which
prescribes our duty to them, must be a Precept of the first Table.

conscience, Ver. 5. which is Saint Paul's fifth motive to obedience. Wherefore
ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake.
Which reason Saint Peter alleges also, to persuade this kind of submission to
Kings, 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit your selves for the Lords sake, because the
submission is not to man but to God, Ephesians. 6.7. whose Majesty and Authority
the King does represent: and in the latter part of this second Chapter, Saint
Peter presses this kind of submission, for conscience sake, and the Lords
sake, by Christ's example, who needed not to have submitted to Pilate or the
Jews for wrath, (for he was able to overthrow them all with a blast of the
breath of his mouth, as he did the officers, John 18.6. and shall do
Antichrist at the last day, 2 These. 2. Or to have obtained twelve legions of
Angels from his Father for that purpose, Mat. 26.53. whereof one single Angel
was able to destroy 185000. Assyrians in one night;) but yet to honor the
Substitute and Deputy of his Father, he submitted to their power, knowing it
was his Fathers will, and that the judgment was not theirs but Gods, Acts
4.28. which is the ground of Nazianzens advise, (...). We must submit to good
Kings, as to the Lord himself; to bad Kings, for the Lords sake. Upon which
grounds it is easy to prove the King to have the relation of a God to his
subjects. For he that can command the conscience, is a God; but the commands of
the King do oblige the conscience, ( i. e. in licitis and politicis, whereunto
his Commission does extend,) and therefore, in reference to all those matters,
the King is a God to his Subjects: And by consequence this fifth Commandment
prescribing the Subjects duty, must be a Precept of the first Table.

The eight and last Reason is taken from the nature of those Ver. 6, 7. which
is Saint Paul's fixed motive to obedience; which acts do refer either unto the
Kings power, or else to his maintenance.

1. The acts of obedience relating to power, are Fear and Honor, which are
due only to God, Deuteronomy. 6.13. Mat. 4.10. Mal. 1.6. But Saint Paul commands us
to perform these duties unto the King in this Text, (to which Solomon adds
another precept, Prove. 24.21. My son fear God and the King. And David
likewise commanded the people to worship God and King Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 29.20.
so that God and the King are made a joint object of these duties which are
peculiar to God;) ergo, the King must supply the place of God in reference to
his Subjects; and by consequence, the fifth Commandment must be a Precept of
the first Table.

Ob. Christ forbids us to fear them that can kill the body only, but cannot
kill the soul, Mat. 10.28. but Kings can only kill the body and not the
soul; ergo, we may not fear Kings.

Sol. That command of Christ's is not Positive but Comparative, (as appears in
the Text) and only prohibits us to fear the King more then God.

Repl. Then when the Kings commands are contrary to Gods, we may resist.

Sol. We may resist his commands, but not his power; for in those cases we must
obey God by an active, the King only by a passive obedience: for which we
have the president of the Apostles themselves, Acts 4. and 5. who did refuse to
obey the commands of the Rulers, prohibiting them to preach in the name of
Jesus; but yet submitted to their power, in yielding themselves to be
imprisoned and beaten, according to the commands of the Rulers: so that they
obeyed both God and the Magistrate; the first by doing, the latter by suffering.

2. The acts of obedience, relating to the Kings maintenance, are Tribute and
Custom, whereof I spoke at large in the ninth Chapter of this Book, in the
point of Secondary Honor due to the King; where I demonstrated these to be due
to God, only Primarily, and to the King, only Secondarily, as he supplies the
place of God in Ruling and Judging his people. And therefore seeing we are to
perform those acts of submission and obedience to the King, whereof God
himself is the proper and immediate object; it follows necessarily, that the
fifth Commandment which prescribes those acts, must be a Commandment of the
first Table.

Now upon these grounds it is easy to frame an answer to the three Arguments
alleged for the preheminency of the peoples safety above the Kings Honor,
whereby to legitimate the resistance of Kings, in order to the peoples safety.

Deuteronomy. 5.6. Mat. 22.37. and therefore, though the King be a man in his natural
capacity, and therefore in that sense has the relation of a neighbor; yet in
his Politic capacity, (in which sense only, he is the object of the duties of
the fifth Commandment) he has the relation of a God to us, and not of a
neighbor: and therefore we ought to regard his Honor above our own safety,
and rather to suffer the loss both of our estates, friends, and life, then
dishonor him.

Solomon witnesses, Prove. 16. that judgment is Gods* and the King is sent by
God to destroy those cities, for the Tyrannical Prince is Gods servant, for
the execution of his judgments, and has his heart guided by God, Prove. 21.1.
as well as the good Prince is for the dispensation of Gods mercies: And
therefore to resist a Tyrannical King, is to resist God, from whom that Tyrant
does derive his power, (as Christ testifies of Pilates power, John 19.11.)
which we may not do, to save either our lives or estates.

Abraham's lie to the Egyptians, Genesis 12. David's Murder and Adultery, Solomon's
Idolatry, and Peter's Perjury. Yea, and sometimes we find their sins passed
over without reproof: (as in the Polygamie of Jacob, David, many of the Kings,
and others,) yet the silence of the Holy Ghost in passing by this sin of
Polygamie without reproof, did not make it lawful. But for the instances of
resistance in David, and Elijah, they are all particularly answered by several
Authors, who have writ of this subject. Only the resistance and deposition of
Rehoboam, is legitimated by Gods express approbation; but if you observe the
Text, you shall find that approbation relates to Rehoboams punishment, and
loss of the ten Tribes, and not to the peoples act of resistance. For (says
the Lord) this thing is from me; that is, the renting the ten Tribes from
Rehoboam, according to his own words to Solomon, 1 King. 11.11. but for the
peoples act of resistance, it is termed a Rebellion, 1 Kin. 12.19. For though
the deposition of Rehoboam, and exaltation of Jeroboam, was good and just in it
self, (in regard it was the decree of God, and accordingly declared to be his
will, 1 Kin. 11.31.) yet in regard the people had no warrant to execute that
decree, and in regard Jeroboam did not act in order to Gods decree; looking
upon the execution of that decree against Rehoboam, (but upon the satisfaction
of his ambitious desires,) it was sinful, both in Jeroboam and the people. And
that this was Jeroboams end, appears plainly, because he durst not trust God
for the preservation of his Honor and Dignity, (although God had promised the
perpetuation thereof in the same Chapter, Ver. 38, as well as the donation,)
but run to the Devil for the security of his Crown; erecting two Calves for
the people to worship, lest, if the people should go up to Jerusalem to
worship, the Lord should not be able to continue their affections to him, nor
perform his promise, Chap. 12.28. So that God did never approve the act of
resistance against the King, unless by those who had a particular warrant from
himself, as well for the manner, as the matter, as in Jehu's case, 2 King.
10.30. without which, it is not lawful for any man to endeavor his own
safety, by any resistance or opposition of the Kings power, or any other acts
of dishonor to the King.

CHAP. XII. What influence Oaths and Covenants, ought to have upon the duties,
either of King or Subjects.
Quaere. SUppose the King have consented to the making of Laws destructive to
his own Honor, which prefer the peoples Safety before it; and have also
obliged himself by Oath, for the observance of those Laws; whether may the
King break that Oath, and Rule contrary to those Laws, for the support and
vindication of his own Honor?

Sol. This was the case of the Israelites with the Gibeonites, with whom the
Israelites made a Covenant, Josh. 9.15. contrary to a former express command
from God, Exodus 23.32. Cha. 34.12. Deuteronomy. 7.1. which Covenant therefore was (not
oney prejudicial to the Israelites, but also) unlawful in it self, yet after
it was confirmed with an Oath by the Israelites, they might not break it,
Josh. 9.19. (although it was gained by fraud and subtilty, as appears in the
Text;) For when Saul did ignorantly, (out of zeal to the children of Israel
and Judah,) (imagining the former command of God to lay an higher obligation
upon them, then their own Oath so fraudulently procured,) break that Covenant,
and destroy the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel 21.1, 2, 3. the Lord revenged that
perjurious act of Saul's, upon the whole land of Israel, by a constant famine,
year after year, till the Honor of God was vindicated by the satisfaction of
the Gibeonites, in the blood of seven of Saul's sons, Ver. 9. And the Prophet
David further resolves this case in express words, Psalm. 15.5. Attesting Gods
regard of that man's happiness, who does regard Gods honor, (being thus
engaged) above all selfe-respects, by performing what he has sworn, though it
be to his own hinderance: and therefore, the King may not break a Law
confirmed by an Oath, although it be destructive to his own Honor. The reason
whereof is, Because Gods Honor by that Oath is made an hostage for the Kings
fidelity; and therefore, the King is bound to regard the performance of that
Law, as he regards the Honor of Gods Name, which must have the pre-eminence
above his own Honor. Although all other Laws (not ratified with this high
sanction) may, and ought to be revoked by the King, if they be prejudicial to
his own Honor; for all such Laws are supposed to be fraudulently procured,
like the grant of Mephibosheth's estate to Ziba, 2 Samuel 16.1. (for no man would
willingly dishonor himself, for that were against the Law of Nature,) and
therefore may be revoked, as that Law of David's was, by himself, upon better
information, 2 Samuel 19.19. But a Law confirmed by Oath, though fraudulently
procured, may not be revoked upon better information, (for that Joshua received
concerning the Gibeonites, Josh. 9.16.) yet all this must be understood of
matters capable of this sanction; that is, such as are not destructive to the
Honor of God, formerly engaged by himself, even from all eternity; for
Holiness is the very Nature and Essence of God, and all wicked Laws which are
opposite to this, are destructive to his eternal Honor, and therefore not
capable of this sanction of an Oath, for thereby Gods Honor is opposed to
itself: but where these two do come in competition, the less evil is to be
made choice of; we must rather break our Oath, (though that be destructive to
Gods temporary and adventitious Honor) then act a wicked thing, (which is
destructive to his essential and eternal Honor.) But in all matters of
indifference, which are capable of this sanction of an Oath, that is the
highest temporary sanction, and therefore ought to be regarded above all former
promises or resolutions of our own, although they be grounded upon a temporary
command from God, which is manifest in this case of the Gibeonites.

Quaere. Seeing the Laws preferring salus populi, before the Kings Honor,
(being confirmed by the Kings Oath) do oblige the King to act accordingly;
whether do not they likewise privilege the people to act things prejudicial
to the Kings Honor, in order to their own safety; especially if the people
have covenanted and sworn the same Laws?

Sol. The acts of the King, and the acts of the people in this case, are of a
far different nature: For the acts of the King in observance to those Laws,
are only prejudicial to himself, and his own Honor, and so are only mala
poenae, and therefore capable of this sacramental sanction from him. But as
for the acts of the people in this case, they are destructive to the Honor,
both of God and the King; which are sins prohibited in the fifth Commandment,
(which enjoynes us to regard their Honor above all selfe-respects, (as I have
formerly declared,) and therefore all acts of the people, either in the
procurement or observance of such Laws, are mala culpae: For it is a
sacrilege of an high nature, to violate) and invade the sacred Power and
Prerogative of Kings, and therefore incapable of this sacramental sanction
from them. For all Associations and Covenants, against any of Gods
Commandments, are directly Covenants with Death, and agreements with Hell; and
all the Oaths, Vows, and Statutes, made and framed thereupon, are directly
mischiefs, framed by a Law, and Obligations sealed to serve the Devil: And
whether it be safer for us to continue in the service of such a Master, (by
acting according to such hellish Oaths and Covenants,) or to forsake his
service, (by renouncing our sacrilege, and giving Caesar his sacred right and
due,) is not a case of any great difficulty to those, who value God and
salvation, above the Devil, and the damnation of their own souls.

FINIS.

