A Brief Representation AND DISCOVERY Of the notorious falsehood and
dissimulation contained in a Book styled, The Gospel-Way confirmed by Miracles.

Published by Nicholas Ware, and Matthew Hall, for the use of the Church of
Whatfield in Suffolk. BEING The substance of the Informations, and free
confessions of Anne the wife of the abovenamed Matthew Hall, (formerly called
Anne Wells) and others, taken before Brampton Gurd^n Esquire, Justice of Peace
of that County; and now (not without the same Justice his consent) set forth,
for public satisfaction concerning the same Book.

Jer. 17.9. The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked,
who can know it?

Jude 17, 18, 19. Remember the words of the Apostles -- that there should be
mockers in the last time -- walking after their own ungodly lusts. These be
they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit.

Imprimatur. Edm: Calamy, June 4. 1649.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Philemon Stephens, at the gilded Lion in Paul's
Churchyard. 1649.

To the Reader.
Reader,
THis ensuing Relation might sooner have been exposed to public view, had not
the different Affirmations of some of the parties therein concerned, (for a
season) retarded the same; but those obstructions (being by mutual d^scussion)
removed, thou shall find nothing therein related, but what in substance the
same Parties (before a Justice of Peace) have seemingly yielded to be freely
divulged. Which affirmations are methodically penned, and distributively set
down in this following Treatise: Together with a brief collection of the most
material passages contained in the book styled, The Gospel way confirmed by
Miracles, which Book it may be, thou have heard of, though not seen or read:
All which (by the consent of that Justice) are now published to no other
intent, then to reduce wandering sheep that decline their careful and painful
Shepherds, to run after the voice of strangers: and likewise to be
instrumental in restraining others from such unwarrantable Stragglings; lest,
they receiving not the truth in the love of it, from the mouths of Gods
Messengers, be deservedly given up (as these Parties were) to believe Lies
uttered by seducing Imposters. If that which follows effect not this only aim;
yet (if the Light of Conscience be not totally extinct) those dreadful
threatenings of the Apostle cannot but work upon ingenuous Spirits, namely. Heb.
6.4, 5, 6.
*That those which have once tasted of the heavenly gift, and the Powers of the
world to come, if they fall away, it is impossible to renew them again by
repentance: As God cast down the Angels that sinned, drowned the old world, and
burnt Sodom for their uncleanness: So his infinite Majesty knows how to
reserve the unjust unto the day of Judgment to be punished. I shall detain thee
in the Porch no longer, but leave thee free passage to that which follows;
only, that the Relation following may attain its forementioned end, shall be
the daily suite and request of him, who desires to approve himself

A Real friend to thy precious soul, T. J.

The Preface.
THe Serpent at first beguiled Eve, wounding the man with his own rib; since
(finding that way prevalent) he has used the same Method in all ages of the
Church. Josephus observes, that the Pharisees had their Gynacea, Colleges or
meetings of women; and Jerome, that Marcion had his female forerunner;
Apelles, his Philumena; Montanus, his Maximilla; Donatus, his Lucilla;
Elpidius, his Agape; Priscillian, his Galla; Arrius the Prince, his sister; and
generally all Arch-Hereticks, some strumpet or other, by whom they spread the
poison of their heresy. Eusebius notes, that Simon Magus had his Helena that
wandered to and fro with him, and was termed the principal understanding: of the
like practices, Paul speaks, 2 Timothy 3.5, 6.8, 9. Having a form of godliness,
but denying the power thereof; from such turn away. For of this sort are they
which creep into houses, and lead captive filly women, laden with sins, led
away with diverse lusts: Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these
resist the truth; men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith: But
they shall proceed no further; for their folly shall be manifested unto all
men, as theirs also was.

The same part does the Devil act in these times, and in this thing,
instigating these impostors, to make use of this female deceiver, for the
propagating of their Errors. The confession of Anne Wells, compared with
others, of her Anabaptistical society, do evidently declare the things
contained in that book, called, The Gospel way confirmed by Miracles, to be but
juglings and collusions. That they may be the better understood, something
shall be premised of her former, and something of their later practices, being
those things briefly, which are contained more largely in that book.

She was born and brought up in Stoke by Nayland in the County of Suffolk, of
very mean parents; she was always (though able of body) indisposed to labor,
and therefore (as since it appears) attended unto the Ministry of the Word,
and pretended great trouble of conscience for some years together, that she
might be pitied and relieved by others. When those among whom she lived,
suspected her trouble was not real, because (though she frequently made a show
of hanging and drowning her self) she seldom

(...) raise up some in the room of Hall and Ware, to perfect the work of God:
A member present, interrupts her, and desires she may have liberty to call over
Anne Wells in the name of Jesus, which being done, she recovers.
Margaret, and others, came to this Anne Wells, saying, they were more
confirmed now then ever, acknowledging her dream to be a They say, Anne Wells
made them believe she had a discovery from God, that they were coming back, and
that the book was began to print: which was so.
discovery.

About a fortnight after the return of the aforesaid Ma. Hall, and Nic. Ware,
this Informant says, that she did counterfeit a dead fit; and Ma. Hall
speaking to her, as formerly, in the name of Jesus, and she receiving no
benefit, he then confessed to her in private, that it was revealed to him at
London, that she should not be perfectly recovered of those fits, until she
was These inform, that the marriage was carried on by a pretended Revelation
from Anne Wells, as a thing tending to the work of God: this discovery was made
to her about the 4th day of the week that she must be married to Hall, and it
must be dispatched upon the next first day without delay: the suddenness of
which (they of Whatfield say) was opposed by them: then arguments were brought
by them for it, that they had been in a work of God together, and so were
still; and that they were to travel together: and put it to their judgments,
whether it were not better to be married, then to travel single: they did also
urge the marriage of Isaac and Rebecca: and that of Sampson, Judge. 14.
married unto him. Accordingly they were married the next Lords day, in John
Pods house of VVhatfield, by Nich. Ware, in the presence of their members; who
then told them, that he found nothing in Scripture concerning marriage, but
only giving and taking: then asking the people whether they were willing the
match should go forward, he joined them together. The same day after marriage,
(as she informs) Ma. Hall her husband was taken very sick, and throwing himself
upon a bed in the room, pretended himself to be in a strange condition, his
legs seeming very stiff: until Nic. VVare had called over him in the name of
Jesus, upon which he rises up. This was done, (as she says) that the marriage
might be confirmed to be of God: though afterward he (the said Hall) confessed
unto his wife, (as she informs) that this was only to delude the people.

She further informs, that the ordinary subject of their preaching, was
chiefly about love, the personal reign of Christ, etc. affirming, they needed
not to preach The seduced people of Whatfield do acknowledge, that their Pastors
taught indeed, it was needless to preach faith and repentance to their
members; but yet they preached it to the world, as they occasionally did come
in among them.
faith and repentance, the foundation being already laid: and she further
says, that in all their discourses, they never fail to rail against the godly
Ministers, as Antichristian, and preachers of false doctrine; and that none are
admitted to be a member of their Church, before public profession made to
hear none of them, except purposely to cavil against them, and disturb them:
backing it with this Scripture, Withdraw from every brother that walks
disorderly; applying this to the Ministry of the Church of England: further
saying, they do maintain false worship.

About a month after the marriage, Nic. VVare had a They acknowledge such a
Revelation, but it proceeded (say they) from Anne Wells, who tempted Ware to
lie with her, saying it was revealed to her, that she should have a child,
which should be borne at three months end, and at a year old should speak with
tongues, and then they should all speak with tongues: and that if he had no
part in the child, he should have no part in the promise.
Revelation, that this Anne Wells (now Halls Wife) was a Type of the Church of
the Jews, her husband of the Gentiles, and he the said Ware a type of Israel,
and that Judah and Israel should be all one flesh, as well as spirit: and
looking into the Bible, and finding in Esdras, that women had untimely births,
that spoke with tongues, he told her, that she should have a child within
three months, which should at a year old speak with tongues; but not unless he
might have the carnal knowledge of her: whereupon, she asked her husband how she
should yield to him, her husband bad her be willing; for if it were for the
glory of God, why should she withstand it. The night following, Ware (lying in
another bed where she and her husband lay) came to bed to them, but had not his
desire of her, although her husband thrust her several times toward him, and
bad her be willing. The next morning she said that she was much troubled,
because Ware had lain in the bed with her, telling her husband, that he should
never do the like again: whereupon her husband said, he should not; for it was
revealed to him, That, as when Abraham was willing to offer up his son Isaac,
God accepted the will for the deed; so he being willing that one night to offer
his wife to the said VVare, God had accepted the will for the deed, and it
should be so no more: whereupon, acquainting Ware with the said Revelation,
Ware smote upon his breast and wept, saying. What, shall I lose another wife
thus?

This Informant further confesses, that it being told them, that they should
come into trouble for their delusive book, called, The Gospel Way confirmed by
Miracles, Nic Ware brought this Scripture, when you are persecuted in one city,
flee into another: accordingly this Informant and her husband, and the said
Ware, went to Woodbridge: where it was Those of Whatfield inform, that it was
Anne Wells, that pretended she had it revealed to her, that there was plotting
in the Army against the honest party, to destroy them, and then England should
be destroyed; and therefore it was discovered to her, that they must go into
Holland three years and an half: she said further, that she was a Type, and to
that end, had fine habit bought her, that so she might be admitted into the
Jews Congregation: being come thither, she and her husband wrote a letter to
the Church of Whatfield, that she could understand the Jews language, and that
the Jews spoke the true language, but mixed: The Copy of which letter follows,
as it was taken out of the Original.

Dear sister, my kind love to you remembered, hoping of your discerning spirit
in the things of God: I shall send you a few words concerning my hearing of the
Jews: I could understand them, and see abundance of God: they speak the true
language, only mixed. And concerning brother VVare you know in many things
already, I might have found them to be true by experience, which have caused a
sad burden to me and my husband, it being the cause of one tempest: so now
desiring your prayers to God for him and me, lest it hinder the work of God:
and now desiring you to consider my condition in spirit and body, for my
burden is very great, and I have no work I can do. So in haste, desiring to
hear from you with all speed; by the Post at London, (you may send to Rotterdam
every week) with my prayers to God for you, I rest,

Your sister in Christ, Anne Hall.
Dated at Rotterdam, October. 29. 1648. Postscript.
You may send by any, and let no body see this letter.




They inform further, that in the time of the absence of Ware, Hall, and Anne
Wells, they sent an Epistle to the Church of VVhatfield: the original copy of
which, is here set down in their own spelling English, letter for letter, as
follows: An Epesele to the Church of Whatfelede.
UNto the Church at Whatfelede, beloved of god, caled to be Saints, grace,
marcy and pease be multiplied unto you; our love in the Lord commended unto you:
we are bound to give thinks to God always for you, and destringe you may
gr^^^w to perfecktion, for (...) we ware presante with you, we dead indener to
exorte you, and now being absente, we deffer you that you would exorte one
another daily, and endeuer to quicken the grace of God in you, and intreatinge
you that you would walk worthy of the gosple where unto you are caled,
l^^^eringe is kept the unity of the sprite in the band of pease, and the God
of pease shall dwill in you, and among you; and ferder we intrete you to
stand fast in the leberty of the gosple wherein Christ have (...) you fre,
not suferinge youer selves to be mesled by int^^^nge words, for you cannot be
ignorante of the confermationes you have had in the (...) of God, by that
mighty power of God manifested among you by sines and ^^ricles, you ha^^^i^ege
more case to rejoyse then any in the world: though for the preseante you may
sufer by Satan or his instruments, who will labere to darken that lights,
that have sh^^^ fo^th among you, whom reses^e stedfastely in the faith; for
which case if you be caled to sufer, for you know that Christ have sufered
before you, and the servant is not grater then the Master, and allsoe you have
a grate cloud of wetneces who have gone before you as valiente Conquerers
threw Christ that strenthened them; what if Sathane should cast some of you
in preson, or take away your life, you have a life in Christ fer beter, and
we know that god will strenthin you woe will be with you in all your
suferinges, for it is not you that sufer, but Christ in you, for it is for his
sake: therefore let not the rage of men, nor the temtation of Sathen frighte you
nor desharten you, or Case you to draw back, for if you do, the Lord will
take no plesur in you; for you may know that this is noe place of a bideinge,
for we are as pelgrumes and strangers, and owre in heritance is not here, but
in the world to come: and we seek a Country, let us not fainte nor be wary,
but be ye faithfule unto the death, and Christ shall give you a Crown of
life: and you must know, that the days of trouble is at hand, for the Lord
has a Contravercy with ingelande, and they contemning his love, they must
drink deep of the Cupe of Gods anger, and there abominations ripen apase, and
god will cut them down, and that shortly; but seek ye judgment and rightous,
it may be you may be head to the day of the Lords anger; and you that are the
Elders home God have Caled to that place, we entreat you that you loocke over
the family of god, which he have perchased with his blood, strenthininge the
weak, and comfortinge the feeble, and reprouinge those that walk desorderly,
and we, as owre duty is, shall pray, that god would suply all youer wantes, and
strenthinge that work that is begune in you, until the Cominge of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Brethren and Sisters, we salute you all in the Lord, with an Epesle of love,
destringe your perfection, as you are owre Epesele wreten in owre hearts, and
we shall reioye to hear of your walking together in all things well plesinge
to god, and destringe that he would fell you with all joy in sprete, and coe
remaye your pasters to Command,

Nicholas Ware. and Matthew Hall. and Anne his wife, salute you all in the Lord.





Revealed to the said VVare, that this Informant (being a Type of the Jews)
should go into the wilderness; and that she should have Earrings, and jewels,
and costly apparel, such as the Jews had: which were accordingly bought for her
at Woodbridge, by VVare and her husband. Their money being spent, Mat. Hall
went thence to John Pods at Whatfield; and (as he told her) he reported there
to the Church, that it was discovered to him, that the members should maintain
their Pastors in their travels, whereupon he obtained three pounds, with which
returning to Woodbridge, he told his wife, that he had gained that three pounds
by telling an untruth; with this, and other moneys her husband had procured of
his friends, they went all three of them into Holland, (which they termed the
wilderness) where (as the said VVare alleged) they should continue the whole
three years and an half. At their coming to Rotterdam, an Englishman presented
them with a quart of sack and Suger-cakes, and other dainties, which (they
said) was a confirmation to them, that this Informant was a Type of the Jews,
in regard that as the Jews had gifts presented to them, so had she.

But after they had been in Holland three weeks, and all their money was spent,
they bethought themselves of their returning into England, and at the end of
seven weeks they were returned: and this Informant demanding how three years
and an half could be made up of seven weeks, her husband reckoned every
fortnight for a year, and the odd week for half a year, and so made up the
three years and an half.

After their return from Holland, this Informant further says, that meeting
with one Sudbury Deekes a Member of VVhatfield Church, (whose wife lives at
Hadley, and he with one Goodwife Webb of Briset) he told her, that more
miracles had been wrought in her absence, by himself, and one Henry Hagur,
another member of the said Church, (who has one wife at Norwich, and They say
that Hagur was first contracted by promise, to one living at Norwich, and
afterward married to another, that lives now in Holland.
another wife in Holland) and instanced in one Miracle wrought upon Goodwife
Pod, who was miraculously cured of a great pain in her Chest: And the said
Goodwife Pod did likewise tell this Informant, that when the said Deekes spoke
unto her, she had much ease; but when the said Hagur said unto her in her pain,
In the name of Jesus, Sister arise and walk; then she was fully cured of that
pain. The other Miracle was wrought upon Goodwife Webb, who was miraculously
cured of a disease in her Ears, called the Weennes, (as she told this
Informant) upon their calling over her in the name of Jesus: but they have both
(since the discovery of the falseness of their book, called The Gospel way,
etc.) denied any miracles to be wrought upon them; though formerly they had
acknowledged it to this Informant.

This Informant does further declare, that she having a brother, a poor boy,
about 15. years of age, her husband procured for him a red gaudy They inform,
that this suit of apparel was sold to them by Hall, before he went into
Holland, and after his return, Hall requested it again of them, because (as he
said) it was discovered to his wife, that her brother must have that suit,
being appointed to power out a vial, spoken of in the Revelation.
suit of apparel, having it revealed to him (as he said) that this boy should
do some strange things.

Thus for a time they went on smoothly in their wickedness, blessing
themselves, and making others believe (by their horrid delusions) that they
were even miraculously blessed by God, in these most accursed practices; until
Gods wonderful patience (which though it be often long bearing, yet will not be
ever bearing) could no longer bear with these notorious impostors: his
righteous soul, in seeing and hearing, being vexed from day to day with their
unlawful deeds: which he would now suffer to proceed no further, manifesting
their folly unto all. For God (who in his infinite Wisdom, never wants means
to bring about his ends) so ordered it,

The seduced people of Whatfield, fully agree in this information about this
breaking out among them, that it was thus occasioned by her dream, as she
relates: and further in form, that upon examination before them, Jan. 23. 1648.
there was so much beastliness, uncleanness, and unheard of wickedness
discovered and brought to light, (viz. that before marriage she counterfeited a
pain in the lower part of her belly, which by Revelation VVare, and Hall must
cure, by touching it, in the name of Jesus. As also after her marriage to Hall,
that Ware did sundry times lie with her, which (as they inform) he has
testified to them with his own hand; with much more notorious villainy) which
they say they tremble to relate: as being altogether unfit for a sober pen to
write, or a modest eye to read; for it is a shame to speak of those things done
by them in secret. Hereupon (they said) they dealt with them according to the
command of Christ.
That upon January 16. 1648. this Informant Anne Wells (as she further
confesses) had a most terrible dream in the night, that the day of Judgment
was come, and that the balls of fire fell thick about her ears, to her great
terror and affrightment. When she awoke, she told this dream with abundance of
horror to her husband; further telling him, that if she did not discover those
notorious falsities and dissimulations contained in their late book, called
(The Gospel way, etc.) she should go to the Devil: all that day following she
lay in a sad despairing condition, still confessing their delusions. Then Nic.
VVare was sent for, to whom she affirmed, that she must now declare, that all
that was done, was but delusion. In this perplexed condition she continued for
the space of 4 days, before Ma. Hall, or Ni. Ware, (to whom she had discovered
her self) would declare it unto any, hoping to smother it; but when they could
conceal it no longer, (her horror of conscience still continuing) it was made
known to other of their members: hereupon the Church (she says) was called
together: the whole business was examined, she acknowledged, that sundry
unclean practices (called by them the Bawdy Miracles) were acted upon her by
Hall and ware; (which though confessed upon her information, yet are judged
unfit to be turned into public expressions to any modest reader.) Her husband
much displeased at the carriage of this business, frames complaints before the
Church against her: among other things, informs the Church of Nic. Wares lying
with her, alleging, that she had committed whoredom with the said Ware; and
hereupon, did, in the presence of the Church, disown her for his wife.

This Anne Wells being thus cast off, both by her husband, and the Church, she
was necessitated to return to her poor mother at Stoke; where being taken
notice of by the Inhabitants, as one likely to become presently chargeable to
the Town, (being, as she confessed, with child) she was brought before the
next Justice of the Peace, before whom she (upon her free confession) gave in
these abovementioned Informations, relating to the proceedings of the seduced
people of Whatfield, together with the most remarkable occurrences, during the
time of her entertainment among them: hereupon, her husband appearing with many
members of the said Church of Whatfield, (who labored, as much as shame would
let them, to clear both him and Ware their Pastors,) it was ordered by the
Justice, that this Ma. Hall should take care to provide for his wife: which he
showed much unwillingnesse unto. But when he saw there was no other way, but he
must either suffer, or secure the Town of Stoke aforesaid; upon some private
consultation with some of the said members then present, he was counseled by
them, to own her before the Magistrate, though he ran away from her presently;
which advice he accordingly followed: for engageing before the Justice to take
her home, and maintain her as a wife, the very same evening returning homeward
together, he ran away, and left her in the open fields.

Thus have I as succinctly and impartially (as a relation of this nature would
admit) drawn up the most material passages, (and as near as might be in their
own words) concerning these Diabolical practices, collected out of their own
Informations taken before the Justice; (without any prejudice to the persons of
any) aiming only at Gods glory, and the prevention of others from being led a
way with such Satanical Revelations and delusions, forsaking the written Word
of God, which should be a light to our feet, and lantern to our paths:
desiring all to whose hands these papers shall come, seriously to read over,
and deliberately to ponder these following Scriptures, (...) Esaias 8.20. To the
Law, and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no LIGHT in them: again, 2 Pet. 1.19. We have also a more sure
word of prophecy whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a LIGHT that
shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your
hearts: and to name no more, 2 Pet. 3.17, 18. Ye therefore beloved, seeing ye
know those things, beware lest ye also being led away with the error of the
wicked, fall from your own steadfastnesse. But grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ; to him be glory both now and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

