THE REBELS WARNING-PIECE; BEING Certain Rules and Instructions left by
Alderman HOYLE (a Member of Parliament) being a Burgess for Yorkshire, who
hanged himself January 30. within half an hour after that day twelve-moneth he
and his Sectarian Brethren had murdered their KING.

This seasonable Caveat being written by his own hand, was found lying by him
in the Chamber where he hanged Himself.

ALSO The sudden madness of Sheriff Wilson, a perjured, relapsed, and apostate
Alderman of the City of London, who was carried mad from Guild Hall, so soon as
he had taken the new Engagement, and now desperately seeks to end his life.

With a new EPITAPH on Alderman Hoyle, and a new Ballad on the loathed Life and
sudden Death of Sir Philip E. of Pembroke.

Printed for the good of the State. 1650.

THE REBELS VVarning-Piece:
1. I Confess and acknowledge to all the World, that I have these six years
to the terror of my Conscience, sided with a desperate, wicked, ungodly, and
Schismatic Faction of men, in this present Parliament, walking in the Name
of Independents; who have led me blindfold to this Destruction; first by
making me guilty of laying violent hands upon the sacred Person of my KING.

2. To usurp the Power and formallity of lawful Justice.

3. Against the Laws of God and Man, to depose him, and imbrew my impious
hands in his Royal Blood.

4. Against my several Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, League and Covenant,
etc. besides the light of my own Conscience, to make approvall of all this by
signing my hand, or consenting to so high and horrid a Treason, above all that
bears the name or thought of wickedness.

5. That contrary to my former Oaths, I have perfideously signed to the new
Engagement, and made approvall of a new Government without King or House of
Lords, though but for suspicion of some going about to change the said
Government, I have been one that have sentenced others to Death.

6. I have been brought to think, I was so perfect, that I was above all
Ordinances of God, or Laws of Man, and might my self do what I list, and not
give an account for any of my actions to God or Man: and whatsoever I did or
should do (though never so wicked and desperate) was already forgiven, and so
not accountable for.

7. I have believed that the Soul of Man is mortal, and a mere composure of
the four Elements, and at the disolution of my body, shall return to the
first Principles or Elements it was made of, viz. Fire, Air, Water, Earth, and
of no other celestial matter whatsoever.

8. I have believed that it is lawful, where minds cannot simpathise between
a Man and his Wife, to put away one Woman, and take another, without any
consent of the Temporal or Spiritual Authority; which has blown up the fire
of Lust in my boiling veins, and made me commit Adultrey, and Whoredom, etc.

9. I have believed it lawful to Equivocate, Lie, Blasphemy, etc. or to act
Regicide or murder on any Person (though never so sacred) to gain my self
superiority, and reign over the rest; which has caused me with ranck-mouth'd
Slanders to do my utmost to blast the Fame, and Integrity of my late King, his
Queen, and their Progeny; and by Ambition, Pride and Covetousness have used all
frawdulent ways and means to enrich my self out of the ruins of the late King
and his Faithful subjects.

10. I have accounted Chance or success to be my God, and have varyed and
fitted my evil Principles thereto, acknowledging no other Power, and with the
same resolution armed my self to hinder all good in others, and commit any
evil my self.

Thus walking in this Laborinth of sin, and crooked Meanders of wickedness my
blind guides had led me into, being destitute of a right Guide, having nothing
but a false light, in stead of bringing me out, to mind and bewitch me further
into more imaginary mischiefs, groaping with one hand this way, and the other
that way, at last I fell headlong into the deep pit of desperation, the snare
of the Devil, and darkness of hell, whereupon many idle Imaginations came
hourly into my head, that I could neither, eat, drink, nor take rest;
sometimes I thought a man all in black offered me a Knife, and pointing it to
my Throat, which presently put me in mind, that to ease my troubled
Conscience, it was my best way to out my own throat; whereupon I provided me a
sharp Knife, and assayed to do the same about Christmas last, but was then
prevented by my servant, and Mr. Peter's, Dell, and others sent unto me by both
the House and the Army, whose Exhortations and Prayers wrought no whit upon me,
but rather drove me to greater despair, in which I continued till the Devil
presented before me (as in a glass) all my forementioned Errors that I had
maintained, and the bloody crying sins I had formerly committed, and showed me
a glass of wine, seeming to out poison therein, and drink it off: presently I
apprehended it must be a poisoned cup, must allay that scorching fire of hell
that consumed my blood-guilty conscience; I presently called up my man telling
him I was trobled with a Rat that knaw'd my writings, and commanded him to buy
me two penny-worths of Ratsbane; but my man (observing former distempers in me)
came back without, saying the Apothecary questioned what he would do with it;
and brought up a Trap in his hand to catch the Rat, when indeed it was nothing
but my own rotten, and scared Conscience tearing and devouring my more rotten
soul: being out by this time; I became a little quieter, and took Physic for
my body, which but prolonged the pains of my soul; sometimes I had some good
motions to read, and taking up my Bible, accidentally opened it upon the fourth
Chapter of the second Book of Samuel, verse. 10, 11, 12. which when I had read,
I presently fell into my old distemper; me thought I saw Judas, Absalom and
Ahitophell hanging themselves; pre -- I suggested (on the Devil in me) that I
could find no rest till I did the same; methought my mind ran presently on
the bed-coard, and I did think it a comfort, that I was so well provided; I
kneeled down, but could not pray, nor had I power to think of any thing but
hell and damnation, so that night I went to Bed; where I no sooner slumbred,
but I saw pass by my bed the late KING attended with the Earl of Strafford,
the Bishop of Canterbury, the Lord Capel, and numbers before and behind Him
bearing Palms in their hands singing this Anthem; He that is faithful to the
end, and overcommeth, shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he
shall be my Son; but the fearful, the unbeleeving the abominable, the
Murderers, Whoremongers, Sorcerers, Idolaters, and all Liars shall have their
parts in the Lake which burns which burns with Brimstone and fire. I
awaking in a great passion flung my self toward the wall, my arm hanging down
between the wall and the bed, and pulling up my hand, brought a piece of the
Bed-cord up in my hand which hanged by, which I cut off with my knife and laid
by me, and rise up and betook my self to write these few Items, which I leave
as a Legacy to those to whom it does belong.

Woe unto you O bloody Cities of London and Westminster, for your Pride has
ruined the King, his children, and the whole Country round about you; Vengeance
is now reigning down upon you, because of your sin, you have been both Mothers
and Nurses of Rebellion, Cities of Murderers, robbers and Spoilers; therefore
because you do spoil, you must be spoiled, and that suddenly, even in less
then two full years.

VVoe unto thee thou black Perjured Parliament, for you have taken upon you the
Office of the Almighty, judged, condemned, and Martyred your rightful King
over whom you had not the least Power to wrong one hair of that Head you
presumed to separate from the body of Gods Anointed, in which accursed blow,
you smote off your selves from the Protection of the Almighty, denied your
faith, and are no more Christians but Infidells, more blood guilty then Cain or
Judas fearful and terrible, shall be your ends before three times three Moons
shall go their circuits, you shall be many of you with me, if not by the same
manner of death, by a worse.

VVoe unto you Apostatizing and backsliding Army, for you have made many widows
and Fatherless you and your Armies shall rott away like dung, you shall be a
stink in the nostrills of all People to the worlds end.

VVoe unto thee Fairfax, Cromwell, Bradshaw, etc. ye spared not the Lords
Anointed, neither shall you be spared. Thus Lucifer fell; so must you all, and
sink to hell.

Yours, HOYLE.

THe writing of this took him up near till dinnertime, about which time his
Landlord came to him, and asked him, if he pleased to come down to dinner; He
answered, he was drawing up some Instructions for the Counsel of State, which
he must finish by two a clock, yet to cover his desperate intention, bid him
preserve him some meat, and sent down Ten shilings to the servants of the house
to buy Powder to make fireworks to solemnize the day, which was received
thankfully by them, and St. Regicides Holy Day made by master and servants, who
all went abroad to spend the Burgess of Yorks money, which administered him the
better opportunity to hang himself, which before they came in again, (by the
help of the Devil) he had effected with a Bed-coard; A fearful Example to all
desperate Regicides.

Behold! Here is a Warning-Piece for all Rebels, if their Pride will give them
leave to ponder the end of this desperate wretch; This foregoing Paper came to
my hands by his Servant, which I seriously perusing, thought it worthy the
revealing in print; to dehort others from the like, yet finding great
difficulty in the Press (which is tied up from delivering Truths in this
nature) I at last prevailed with the Printer, (notwithstanding any Act to the
contrary,) to Print and publish the same, in which I have not added nor
deminished a word; only adding to his own last and seasonable Advice, this
Epitaph following.

An EPITAPH on Alderman HOYL (a Member of Parliament) who hanged himself
January 30. 1649.
AHitophel and Hoyle did Counsel well,
And so does Fairfax, Bradshaw and Cromwell,
But all against their KING; These did effect
That Counsel that Ahitophel did direct;
They did pursue with Thousands, smote the King,
And their dark Plotts did to conclusion bring:
Hoyle had no cause as the other had to swing,
Who hanged because he could not kill the KING.
What difference is in Traitors, when in despair,
They Will hang before the Act, to end their fear:
So far from home too! Had thou never an Ass
To saddle? or did the House deny thy Pass?
To set thy own in order? was there no way
Thou perjured wretch to stay another day:
Thy Conscience the next day might calm, and save
Thy Name and Honor from a putrid grave:
How desprate was thy Act? how bloody, vain
To take a Halter for thy SOVEREIGNS Reine.
He needs must go (it seems) the Devil drives,
Traitors and Rebels never end better lives:
Who aims by Treason to usurp a Grown,
Unlese his halter holds, he tumbles down;
But if they all should hang, it is but until
With Lucifer they be cut down to Hell.
Since which, Row Wilson, a perjured revolted Alderman of London, so soon as he
had taken the new Engagement fell desperately mad in their Guild Hall, the very
place he had forsworn himself, and now seeks but the same opportunity as his
brother Hoyle, to hang himself.

You that with bloody-fraude did scourge and tear
Astrea's sides without least dread or fear,
Committed now your Prisner, in irons, pent
Up close during your black Parliament,
Whilst sweet-lip'd- fraud, with her divided-face.
Acts Justice part, usurps Astrea's place,
Whilst Royal CHARLES his Scepter's flung aside,
Hell is broak loose, and all her Fiends untyde:
But let them do their worst; there is none
But Charles can rule in Charles his Throne.
Philip the Crab-fish Earl of Pembrok, that crope backward to his Honor, and
forsaking the head, till he had taken new degrees in the tail, in his sickness
dreamed he was in heaven, where he saw the King, who fell upon him, and kic'kd
him out, asking him, what he made there? That the lordly Gemmoner awaking,
swore Dam him and Sinck him. He had rather go to hell to Col. Rainsbrough and
Mr. Pym, then go to heaven to the KING and Cavaliers Because he deserves not an
Epitaph, you may be beter satisfied, to sing his Dirge in a New Ballad, To the
Tune of Chevy-Chase:

GOds blessing guide our Royal King
with Health and Victory,
and all his Foes to Justice bring,
or else like Pembroke die.
(...) whose late and I now must write,
^ut all his ^^ng may know,
^he desperate end attends each wight,
who ^^^es his Sovereigns Foe.
Treason was still his only guide,
he steered his Actions by,
A Fool he lived, a Madman died,
may all the rest so dye.
The daily Prayer that he made,
with Curses were attended,
Began with Oaths what ere he said,
and with God dam me ended.
Now lest the world should misconceive
the reason of his death,
A brief account I here shall give,
what stopped his stinking breath.
A Counceller he long time had,
besides his Oldisworth still,
By whose advice grand projects laid,
and acted by his will.
The Devil in man's shape appeared,
each Evening at his bed,
And every Morn his Knight-ship reared,
and him to counsel led.
But now by chance it so fell out,
they too Familliar came,
And taking leave, ere he went out,
for which he was too blame.
He needs would stake him by the hand
but that proved something warm,
which made him curses swearing stand
it poysond all his arm.
And tumbling back, the devil by chance
troad on his Lordships too,
Which cast him in a sudden Trance,
and proud his final woe.
Both leg and arm did Gangrene straight
black as his durty Soul,
A subtle trick it was in faith,
and made his heart soon cold.
And then upon his bed heed laid,
but yet no rest can take,
His conscience cries, his souls betrayed
even for his moneys sake.
And now he raves like one distract,
or madman out o^s wits,
(His brains before long time being cracked,
now swears, now prays by ^^ts.
No sooner can he shut his eyes,
but straight he starts again,
Take heed take heed, aloud he cries
the Kings alive again.
His gasping groans Alarums giv^
unto his Brethren dear,
The cursed crew that yet do live,
that they their ends might fear.
Mild may take heed, the Scots are co^
the King will hang us all,
In England we shall have no room,
and great will be out fall.
Nothing at all could ease his mind,
a Legion him possessed,
His treacherous Conscience could no^ find
one hour or minutes rest.
Until at last a Christian Priest,
this Jew came to convert,
Who had before bin long oppressed
for being a Loyal Heart.
The Common Prayer too must be,
the Prayer that he must hear,
Which er'st so persecuted he,
neither must come him near.
Which now himself he curses for,
and sees his Treasons all,
Scarce hoping any Mercy, or
Compassion at his fall,
Now Rebels all a warning take,
of this your Noble Peer,
Consider what an end they make
that live so dambly here.
And Royal hearts be constant still,
your Sovereigns Cause (...)
The Evening crowns the day, and w^^^
reward your present chance.
FINIS.

