The Innocence of the righteous seed of God cleared from all slanderous tongues
and false accusers.
IN answer to a printed paper set forth by Frederick Woodall, wherein he goes
about to render the truth of God odious, and by a clack of maliciousness to
cover those lies which he has formerly published: but in the light of God, I
do him see and comprehend, and in it he is made manifest to all the children of
light to be no minister of Christ, and to the light of Christ in all
consciences I speak that in it they may read these things which from the light
is declared that so occasion may be cut off from all who, seek occasion against
the truth; that so peoples minds may not be Insenced against the truth of God
by his refuge of lies set forth in his paper, called natural and spiritual
light distinguished.

But in the light of Christ, which is but one, which is not natural but
spiritual, is he seen to be natural, and his distinction to be natural and
so in the light, the natural man with his natural doctrine, and natural
distinction is denied, and Christ Jesus we do witness, who is the true light
which lights every one that comes into the world John 1. 9.

I am come a light into the world that whosoever believes in me should not
abide in darkness, John. 12. 46. and this is the condemnation of the world that
light is come into the world and men loved darkness rather then light, because
their deeds were evil Joh. 3. 19. 20. 21.

Now all you who are enlightened by Christ Jesus and can read in the light, and
with understanding, to you there is no occasion of stumbling, but all stumbling
and the occasion of it is in them who hates the light and calls it natural,
which light is Christ for him a witness, I am against all such who deny Christ
to be the true light, which lights every on that comes into the world.

Who is of the world called Richard Hubberthorne,
NOw as in answer to thee Frederick Woodall, who has put a stumbling block
before the eyes of many, by thy lies and deceit to keep them from receiving
the pure truth of God, which the Lord is now spreading abroad and making
manifest to gather to himself his own from the mouths of all false sheppards,
that Jesus Christ the true sheppard they may come to witness, who is the true
light and is not natural as thou would make him to be; nor that light in the
conscience is not natural, which Jesus Christ has enlightened every one with
all, but all who in it dwell shall witness against thee, and thy malicious
spirit, who has uttered forth thy bitterness and venom against those who
walk in the light, and who witness the truth of God in the life and power of
it, and against all false accusers. In the beginning of thy Epistle to the
Reader thy enmity thou utters forth against those, who for the name of Christ
do bare his reproach in the world, in whom the Scripture is fullfilled, which
says they shall speak all manner of evil of you falsely for my name sake, and
thou art one of them who art speaking evil and encouraging others to speak
evil against those, whom thou and the rest of the scorners call Quakers, and
calls them a nest of stinging wasps, and says that they have leavened a dear
Brother and Sister of thine and made them prosylites unto them.

This accusation is returned back again upon thy own I answ.
head for the poison of asps is found under thy tongue and forth of the venom
does proceed, as all who has understanding may see and discern, and those whom
thou calls thy dear Brother and Sister are made able in the light of Christ to
testify against thee and thy ly, and to witness that they are brought out of
the prosilites condition, and out of the leaven of the false profits and false
teachers, which they were in so long as they followed thy doctrine, but now
that doctrine they do see whichdoth leaven and draw peoples minds from the
light of Christ within them, and so makes prosilites and children of the
devil, but in the light of Christ art thou and all that uphold that doctrine
seen and denied.

In the first page of thy paper thou would make people believe that thou makes
no defense against my reply to thy answers, and yet in the second page thou
replies against mine, concerning the tenth Query, and charges me in reputing
thee the author or father of aly, in returning to thee again thy own words in
answer to the tenth Query which words are these, it is intolerable that Christ
should be the prince of peace.

I answer, let every on who has a desire to know, whether this be so, read thy
own words in thy printed paper in thy answer to the tenth Query, in the twelft
page, whether these be not thy own words, the tenth is Intolerable that Christ
may be the Prince of peace, and here to all whose eyes are opened may see that
thoudenies that Christ may be the Prince of peace, and says it is
Intolerable, and the rest of thy words which are in answer to that Query are
full of confusion, and all who reads them may see it, so I leave thee to be
Judged of all and condemned of all, who in the light of Christ do see thy
confusion which proceeds out of thy own mouth.

It Is a previledge we have cause to bless God for every Priest.
day, viz. that unto us are committed the Oracles of God.

Here I charge the to prove when ever the oracles of Answ.
God was committed unto thee, or to the Priests of England: unto the Jews they
were committed which was before Christ came in the flesh, and they who had the
oracles of God committed unto them did seek to kill and crucify the Son of
God, as you the priest of England who, go in the way of Cain and after the
error of Balaam, do now seek to destroy the Son of God, where he is made
manifest and the Oracles of God were never committed unto you, nor the
ministration of the Gospel, but in the steps of those you are found, who ever
persecuted the righteous seed of God, as you have made it manifest in this
generation. And again thou art bringing scriptures to prove the letter to be
the word of God: which Scriptures will witness against thee, for the Scripture
says that God is the word, John 11. and thou art diminishing, from some and
adding, to others and perverting the Scriptures to thy own ends, thou brings
that scripture in Titus 2. 10. 11. 12. 13. and these words thou speaks from
them, this is the grace of God bringing salvation; when the Apostle says for
the grace of God that brings salvation has appeared to all men teaching us
that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts we should live soberly, righteously
and Godly in this present world, and here though thou bring this scripture in
thy paper, yet it thou can not own, that the grace of God which brings
salvation to all men has appeared, who denies Christ to have enlightened every
one that comes into the world.

This word for the manner of delivery unto us is called Priest.
scripture, and we are commanded to search it, Joh. 4. 39. and laid under the
promise of blessing in that way, Psalm. 1. 2.

Here thou have numbered thy self amongst those whom Answ.
Christ commanded to search the scriptures, and amongst them shall thou be
numbered, and in that scripture thou may read thy condition and the rest of the
priests with thee, as John 37. 38. 39. 40. ye have neither heard his voice at
any time nor seen his shape, and ye have not his word abiding in you for whom
he has sent ye him, believe not, search the scriptures for in them ye think to
have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me, and ye will not
come to me that ye might have life, now al you who are in the same condition,
the same command is unto you. But there is no promise of blessing promised unto
you in that way, no more then was to them, which was so commanded, but never
prove your selves ministers of Christ, for they were no ministers of Christ
that this was spoken, unto nor no Saints, but such as received honor one of
another as you do, who are in that generation. And they were such as did not
believe that which they did profess, Moses and the Prophets, but Christ tells
them plainly they did not believe Moses nor his writings, and all you now that
profess Christ you cannot believe Christ's words, who says he is the true
light which does enlighten every one that comes into the world. Therefore out
of the doctrine of Christ you are shut, and out of the scriptures which you do
profess, for the Sons life which witnesses the scriptures you deny, and are
strangers unto, he that has an care to hear let him hear.

Satan has from the beginning envied a people this Priest.
privilege, and says, at Christ's first coming the commandments of God was
made of none effect through tradition, Mat. 15. 6. and says, at Christ's second
coming the commandments of God will be of none effect through revelation.

Here thou have uttered forth words without knowledge, Answ.
but it is that thy Ignorance and folly may be laid open unto all, for it was
they that made the commandments of God of none effect through tradition, which
precryed standing in the Sinagogues had the chiefest places in the assemblies,
and was called of men master, and in these steps art thou and the rest of the
priests in England who art the same things, for at Christ's first coming he
cried woe against such, and the same Christ cries woe against the same things now,
and whereas thou say that at Christ's second coming the commandments of God
will be of none effect through revelation, here I charge thee to be a
blasphemer and do speak that thou have no scripture for and contrary to the
scriptures and contrary to the Apostles doctrine, for Paul did witness Christ
second coming which was in the spirit as in Gallatians 2. and 2. and says I
went up by revelation and communicated unto them that Gospel which I preached
amongst the gentiles and he did witness the Son of God revealed in him and all
the Apostles who did witness him to be come again to them, the second time to
reveal the will of the Father unto them, this did not make the commandments of
God of none effect, and the same Christ we do witness to be come and has
revealed the Fathers will unto us, for no man knows the Father but the Son and
he to whom the Son reveals him, this we do witness, eternal living praises
to him for ever more and by his revealing his Son in us his commandments are
fulfilled, and so all such we do deny that say by the revelation at the second
coming of Christ they shall be made of none effect.

Certainly many old Testament Saints saw into the Priest.
glory and liberty of New Testament times, yet durst not cease from that
worship which was burdensome worldly and carnal, till the Lord did come in
person and call them out.

Here I do charge thee to prove where ever any of the Answ.
Saints before Christ was made manifest in the flesh did continue in that
worship which they saw to be burdensome worldly and carnal, but did declare
against all false worship sacrifices and services which was worldly and carnal,
and against all who drew near to God with their mouths, whose hearts was from
God and against all Idolitrous worships which were carnal and did cast of
every burden, as is witnessed in the prophets, which were before Christ came in
the flesh, and here all the prophets and holy men of God shall witness against
thee, as Isaiah, Jerem. David, Ezekiel, Mica, and the rest who worshipped God and
their worship was not carnal nor worldly, neither did Christ come in person to
call them out of their worship for they had finished their testimony before
Christ came in the flesh, who did fulfill their testimony and did bear witness
unto it, that it was of God, and did declare all that were out of that worship
which the Saints were in who worshipped God before Christ came in the flesh,
who was the end of the Law and the end of the Prophets, let him that has
understanding read these things: now here does Christ, the Saints and the
Scriptures all bear witness against thee and thy doctrine, which would make
people believe that the Prophets and holy men of God who were before Christ
came in the flesh, did live and continue in that worship which was burdensome
worldly and carnal, which here is proved against thee by Christ the Saints and
the Scriptures that shame may cover thy face and that thy mouth may be stopped
and that the simple may know the truth, for whose sakes this is given forth.

So New Testament Saints may se into that liberty and Priest.
glory, which is to be revealed but let them not go forth before the time but
abide in New Testament worship till the Lord come in person and call them out,
and then they shall go out all together, Matt. 24. 27. it is indeed a worthy
life which we live in the spirit, but it is an unworthy deceit that except we
live out of the Gospel we cannot live in the spirit.

O be ashamed for ever to profess thy self a minister Answ.
of Christ and of the Gospel: why do thou preach at all, or what art thou a
minister of, if that Christ be vet to be revealed or uncome in person, which
thou houlds forth to the people, and how many souls have thou led into that pit
of darkness and blindness as to believe that Christ is yet to come in person,
he that confesses not Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh is an antichrist
and he that preaches any other Gospel or any other Christ, then that which
did come in the flesh and was made manifest in the Saints, and is now made
manifest and witnessed to be come in the flesh, let him be accursed, now the
Scripture which thou brings in Matthew. 24. 27. proves no such thing as another
Christ coming in person for the same Scripture we do witness to be fulfilled
in us and in his light do we see all those who are in the desert, and who are
in the secret chambers whom they go out, unto who turn from the light of Christ
within them, to harken unto those who cannot witness the coming of the son of
man as the lighting from the East shines even unto the West, but talks of an
expectation of the appearance of Christ in person, and professed to be
ministers of that Christ which yet is to come in person, and here thou art
rased out from the Apostles doctrine who did not preach any other Christ but
that which was come and made manifest, and did never tell of Christ second
coming in person nor of his personal reign, and thou that tells of such a
deceit that except ye live out of Gospel, ye cannot live in the spirit, here
thy deceit is indeed made manifest and thy life, who would separate the Gospel
from the spirit, but against that life and deceit we bare witness who by this
spirit do, and according to the Gospel: Again thou art teaching people how to
set up popery as follows.

If they will prove the pope supreme Monarch this way Priest.
it may be done; God made two lights the greater to rule the day viz. the Pope,
the lesser, to rule the night viz. the Emperor.

Here thou who had professed thy self, long to be a Answ.
teacher and preached against popery and have not been ashamed to accuse others
of it, who stand clear in the truth of God, witnessing against all such ways
of darkness, but now thou art here found teaching people how to make the Pope
supreme Monarch, by saying God made two lights the greater to rule the day,
viz. the Pope the lesser to rule the night, viz. the Emperor, and so makes the
Pope and Emperor to be those two lights, here I charge thee to prove where
ever the ministres of Christ taught any such thing to the people or did so
contemn, and despise the ordinances of Heaven, and the lights which God made
to rule the day and the night, which thou compares to two carnal men like thy
self, and here thou have perverted the scriptures and made thy folly and
deceit manifest to all, that they that can but read in the natural heavens
will condemn thee, and out of thy own mouth, thou art condemned, for in thy
paper thou have said that which is not scripturall is not spiritual, now for
that which thou have said thou have no scripture to prove it, and the Scripture
will testify against thee, and the Son and the Moon which are in there course
in the Firmament of Heaven, will testisie against the and so these we do deny
and thy doctrine with the Pope and his supreme Monarch, and all who worship the
host of Heaven, we deny being clear from there doctrine and deceit.

If they will establish simplicite faith thus it may be Priest.
done Job 1. 14. it is the oxon we are plowing, and the asses feeding besides
them (in East, the priests were preaching and the people believing this is to
Crucify the word of God.)

Here thou art proved and made manifest to be a false Answ.
teacher who art teaching people how to establish implicit faith, and to blind
the eyes of people thou brings that scripture Job 1. 14. when as there is no
such word as implicit faith spoken of there, nor in the scripture thou finds
no such word, nor did ever any of the ministers of God teach people how to
establish any such thing, and those priests who preach that, and that people
which believes it do make the word of God of none effect, through tradition.

Thou art charging and accusing some to hold forth Priest.
the mystery of iniquity in principles, and to affirm a community of persons,
and things.

The mystery of iniquity we know, and them in whom Answ.
it works, in all deceivablesse of unrighteousness, and from it and its
workings we are separated by Christ Jesus, and in his light do see, and
comprehend its workings in the children of disobedience, and all vile, and
unclean persons, who are in the lusts of uncleanness and in the mystery of
iniquity, and all things which are separated from the light we have no union
nor fellowship, with and all these practices we do deny, which are unclean,
which is acted contrary to the light which is pure in which we are called, not
unto uncleanness but unto holiness, and to this God is our witness and our
consciences also bears us witness, against all false accusers, so I charge the
who has put forth this accusation to turn thy mind to the light of Christ in
thy conscience, and with it thou may see in thy self the ground where this
mystery of iniquity works, and thou may see in thy self, that which has
unity, with that which is unclean the lusts of uncleanesse, in ordinate
effections, and evil concupiscence the ground which the mystery of iniquity
works in, is yet standing in thee, and so, of the same things of which thou
accuses others art thou found guilty, which is for condemnation with the light.

It Is pity Christ should be the foundation, and wood Priest.
hay stubble built there upon, yet this is possible, 1 Cor. 3. 15.

Here thou have perverted Paul's words, and speaks thy Answ.
own invention contrary to the scripture, for Paul did not say it is pity
Christ should be the foundation, but said other foundations can no man lay then
that is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11. now if any man build upon
this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, wood hay stubble, every man's
work shall be made manifest, now in the light art thou made manifest, that
Christ is not thy foundation, who takes Paul's words out of their place, who
witnessed Christ to be the foundation, but thou art found building upon this
foundation, gold, silver, hay stubble and making a refuge of lies, which is for
the fire, whose work is to be burned in the day of the Lord.

Thou say wisdom is grown up to perfection, amongst Priest.
that people called Quakers.

In the light of Christ we dwell which comprehends thy Answ.
wisdom, which is earthly sensual and divelish, and from that wisdom these
things published forth in thy paper do proceed which is full of lies and
confusion, but in the light of Christ made manifest in those thou call Quakers,
art thou seen to be in that wisdom, which is not perfect and so thee, and thy
word we do deny, which is for condemnation with the light, which is contrary to
thy earthly wisdom.

Thou Priest Woodall art accusing me for numbering thee Priest.
amongst those who are guilty of preaching for carnal things, who reap carnal
things, and this thou makes thy defense, saying this is my cause, more then
seven years I have served in the Gospel, where I am receiving what a people
freely give for my family, reproath in outward things refusing a considerable
settled maintenance else where.

Such as thou so west such shall thou reap, and all they Answ.
who have given thee money for preaching such things, as thou have here
published forth in print, they have given thee money for that which is not
bread, and so bought the carnal with the carnal, but their souls are yet made
merchandise of, and that unjust gain which thou have received this seven years
from that people will rise up in judgment against thee, who has not only used
it for thy necessity and support in outward things, which were needful for the
use of the body, but have spent it upon thy lust and pride in thy family,
spending more in lust and pride and gay apparel, then those whom thou receives
the gift from, and thou who ha^h professed thy self to be a servant to that
people, and they having given the ways so long for that which did not profit
them, thou after the manner of the gentiles has exercised authority and
lordship over them, and where as thou should be their hired servant, they
call thee master, thou which should be the least of all amongst them, art
greatest of all exceeding them all in pride and high mindedness in ease in
pleasures in idleness and fullness of bread, but as the Lord does open the eyes
of those whom thou have kept in blindness and ignorance, they will come to see
thee and thy doctrine to be contrary unto the Gospel of Christ, as they may
plainly see and read thee in those things, which thou have published forth in
print, which is servisable unto all who has understanding that thy confusion
and folly, and lies against the truth against Christ against the Saints, and
against the Scriptures they may see, which has been long hid, but now is made
manifest in the light unto all, who are come to know the free teachings of God,
who will no more give the money for speaking a divination of thy own brain, and
not from the mouth of the Lord.

Who knows not that tithes and gleebs were under that Priest.
dispensation by divine law ordained for the maintinance of the priests.

Here thou would make people believe that thou denies Answ.
tithes which was for the maintenance of the Priests of the law, but as for the
gleebs which thou speaks of there was never any such things ordained in the
law, here thou have made it appear that thou art ignorant of that which was
ordained for the priests maintenance under that dispensation, for they had no
inheritance nor gleeb lands to maintain them as some of the priests of England
have, and yet those priests in England, which do receive tithes, and so upholds
that which thou seems to deny, yet thou owns them as thy brethren, and to be
ministers of the Gospel, and here your deceit is so plainly made manifest
that you accuse one another, and condemn one another all your hearts being
exercised with covetous practices preaching for filthy lucre, all being greed
together to persecute ruile and slander the pure truth of God, where it is made
manifest in his servants to declare against all your deceits: that out of your
snares the righteous seed of God may be delivered to testify against you and
your ministry under which the seed of God is keept in bondage.

Reader I have done our heavenly Father, takes Priest.
sleeping disciples at the best, Matthew. 26. 41.

Here thou have uttered forth aly, that all may plainly Answ.
see, which says, thou have done, and in the next words says our heavenly
Father takes sleeping disciples at the best now from this Scripture in Matthew.
26. 40. thy words are proved to be false, for in that condition the disciples
were then in they were not at the best, who could not watch with Christ one
hour and the comfortor was not then come, which afterward they did witness
and travel and labor and fasting and prayer and watching day and night, they
did witness and we who do witness the same condition, now do testify against
thee and all who make lies of the Apostles who did witness Jesus Christ in
truth and uprightness of heart and the same Christ do we witness and does
freely preach him to every nature being made manifest to that of God in every
ones conscience to be witnessed.

Now as my first Query is printed in thy paper the latter Priest.
part of it, I deny which was not given forth nor spoken so by me in thine, it
is printed thus, how can that be said to be a natural light which witnesses
unto God, ^^ against the things of the spirit of God, which is false but in
mine it is written thus, how can that be said to be a natural light which
witnesses unto God in that which is holy, and against the natural inclinations
of fallen man seeing the scripture says the natural man receives not the
things of the spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. How as every one has a desire to
know the truth of these things, that the occasion of stumbling may be taken
away, they may read the Query as it was given forth from me in the sixteen page
of that printed paper, called David's enemies discovered which was put forth in
print to be seen as it is there written before Woodalls paper, which is now in
print was given forth, and this I have given forth that the truth may be
cleared, owning that which did proceed from me and denying, that which is not
mine, and as for Frederick Woodalls answer to the Queries they are replied unto
in the paper above mentioned, and to the rest of this printed paper an answer
is here in returned that he may not boast in his folly, but may be ashamed and
repent.

Now as in answer to that in the latter end of thy book which thou directs the
reader unto thou seeing that thou have holden forth these things, which thou
can not prove, as the first Adam to be the fountain of all natural good, and
so to blind the eyes of people that they may not see thy ly, and says thou
means not primitively, and here thou speaks on thing and means another, but
this covering is two narrow for thee and under it, thou can not hide thy self
but thy nakedness and shame appears to all whose eyes are opened and by them
thou are seen.

And where as thou would cover over thy shame of that thou have formerly
spoken in telling of two images, the image of God and the image of Christ, and
that the first was natural and the second spiritual, and here thou speaks
contrary to the Scriptures, which says, he is the express image of the
Father, and here in all who do witness the Scriptures to be true must witness
against thee who speaks contrary to the Scriptures, and now to blind peoples
eyes, thou tells them thou understands it thus, Adam was made after the Image
of God, God the Father, Son and the holy Spirit, come let us make man after
our, not my image. To this I answer here thou have added to the Scripture, for
God did not say, not my image, as thou does charge him to say, for the
Scripture says God created man in his own image in the image of God created he
him, as Genesis 1. 27. and thou calls that image in which Adam was created, the
essential image, and the image of Christ thou calls a personal image, and
here by them who dwell in the light thou art seen out of the substance in the
images making to thy self images, and likenesses from thy imaginations, but in
them thou can not know God and Christ nor the image of God in which Adam was
created in innocence, and there is no such word in Scripture as essential
image, and here thou goes about to make three images, and so amongst the
image-makers thou art who art out of Gods commands, and there thou may read thy
self.

But now the Lord God is gathering his own seed by his eternal light out of
all images and likenesses to be conformed to the image of his Son, and to bear
his image who is invisible, which all the imaginers cannot enter into, who
stumble at the light, but all such are seen by the children of the light and
denied for now do they witness from the Lord, the day of redemption yea
plentious redemption is now witnessed by them who dwells in the light which
comprehends the world, and out of the world, and out of the worlds teachings,
and out of the worlds ways, and out of the worlds worships into the pure
teachings of God and into the Covenant, where they know God and are taught of
him, and no more can they be led by the blind guids for their eyes are opened
which were blind and now in the light of Christ the way is seen, which leads
unto God the Father of light, and in it all false prophets and false teachers
they do see, and by them cannot be deceived, who come in sheeps clothing and
are beautiful outwardly decked with the Saints words, but inwardly ravening
Wolves, and now their covering comes to be taken off which was none of there
own, and now the Wolf appears ravening against the Lambs of God, for the day
has made them manifest and of them the Lambs of God are aware, and in
Innocence is preserved, and in the pure wisdom, which is not of this world in
it they see and comprehend the serpents wisdom and subtility, and craftiness,
and snares, which for the righteous seed is laid but in the eternal lightmade
manifest to the seed, a way is seen out of then all, and by the eternal power
of the pure living God of life deliverance out of them, all is witnessed,
eternal pure living praises to him for evermore,

Given forth from the Love of God, to the souls of those, who desire to know
the truth to take away all stumblings, and cut of all occasions from all minds,
that in the light of Christ the truth they may see to be clear from all
slanders and false accusations, which from the unclean spirits proceed, which
goes out of the mouth of the Dragon to devour the innocent, but from the
dragon and all his floods, the innocent is preserved, Given forth from him who
a witness stands for the truth of God against all deceit Richard Hubberthorne.
Written from Mendlesham in Suffolk, the 29. day of the 3. Month 1655.
FINIS.

