THE ART OF EMBALMING Dead SAINTS, discovered in a Sermon preached at the
Funeral of Master William Crompton, the late Reverend and faithful Pastor of
the Church in Lanceston Cornwall.

January the fifth, 1641.

By G. Hughes B. D. Pastor of the Church in Tavistocke Devon.

Mors lucrum,

Phil. 1.21. Sepulchrum cubile,

Esaias 57.2. Infernum nihil,

Heb. 2.14. Fides victoria,

1 John 5.4. Imperatrix sanctitas.

Esaias 49.7, 8. Dei, and Christi. Hac sunt Sanctorum trophaea. LONDON, Printed
by A. N. for John Rothwell, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's Churchyard,
at the sign of the Sun, 1642.

To the Worshipful the Major, Recorder, and Aldermen of the Town of
Lanceston in Cornwall, with all in that place, who love the LORD JESUS in
syncerity.
Worthy, and beloved Friends,
IF question be, Why comes this in print? I will truly tell you; not my
Ambition to be public by the Press in this Work: when I preached the sum
of it unto you, my thoughts were not in the least motion this way (God knows
it.) But as by stroking, and by wringing the milk is drawn from an
hard-milch't beast, so has it fared with me. The love of Friends, who thought
better of it than I my self, has been stroking it out: but however a motion
was made, yet did it not come by that: Shortly after, false and uncharitable
aspersions upon the dead and living, with defective copies of my Sermon flew
about the Country; and these did wring me, so that I resolved to hold back no
longer: Having therefore desired at the throne of Grace, that not my self but
God might be eyed in it, I set upon the perfecting of my Notes, and yielded,
that the World should see, what doctrine I delivered, and whether I spoke any
thing of your deceased Pastor that was not deserved. My friends thus have their
desire, but the Enemies perhaps an Eyesore, I shall pray it may be an
Heart-healer to them, if they vouchsafe to use it?

Now having thus prepared it, as I send it to the World, so have I thought good
to direct it with a special Dedication unto you, not for patronage over it,
but for a believing Entertainment of it. If it be truth God is the Patron of
it, he will defend it, if it be falsehood, it is not worth the countenance of a
man to shelter or abet it: And for my own part, I thank God, my prayer and my
study is, not to get Patrons to my self, but to make Friends and Favorites in
the World to Christ. Upon this condition, this work is yours, Dear Friends,
truly yours, all yours, and I am yours, and shall rejoice to be so, if you be
Christ's. I have but one word more unto you to stay you in the entrance, and it
is of humble request not for my self, but your own precious souls. The hand
of God has bin against you in breaking and burying one famous Chariot, wherein
you were carried swiftly toward Christ; And no less has it been for you, in
a sweet providence repairing that loss, and sending you a Man of God, to carry
on his saving work among you. Now therefore I beseech you, Forget not your
loss, let his name be precious to you, let his labors live in your hearts and
ways, fulfill his dying desires, that ye be holy: and undervalue not this
great mercy in your repair. In many places Wolves watch over the poor flock
of Christ, that hurry them, and suck the blood of their souls. What a mercy is
it to have a Pastor after Gods own heart to keep and feed them? Such has God
given you: Accept this blessing and rejoice in it; Love, honor and obey him
that is set over you in the Lord to watch for your souls, that he may give up
his account at last with joy to himself, and abundant profit and gain to you.
This I beg of you, for this cause I shall pray for you. The Lord of Glory, who
is exalted to show mercy to his people, from his High throne and boundless
fullness, power out upon you the riches of his grace, he strengthen, perfect,
and stablish you. To him be Glory for ever, And in him I am,

From my study in Tavistock, March 28. 1642. Your obliged friend and servant
for Jesus sake, George Hughes.

To the Reader.
Honest Reader,
I Should not stay thee with the shortest Preface to so small a work, but that
it is something needful for me, and may not be unprofitable unto thee. It is
not by subtle Apology to palliate any error, but by a plain confession to
prevent prejudice, which may arise in a good heart upon harmless grounds.

1. It may be perhaps suggested to thee, this Sermon was preached twice; I
confess, these which I publish, are my second thoughts upon this text; My
first were vented not yet a year since at the Funeral of a dear Christian
Friend once of my Flock in London, which though for substance they were the
same with the last, yet these in form and inlargment are much different:
however confitentem habes non reum, I account it no crime to preach one Sermon
twice, neither I hope will thou pre-judge it for this reason, if it were so.

It glad's me now that by this I have occasion to make mention of the name of
that deceased member of Christ Master John Underwood, whom I had cause to prize
living, (as I have to carry dear and precious in my heart. Many good souls in
All Hallows in Breadstreet.
that place surviving, whose I account my self yet to be for Christ's sake, if
my life can do them good.) And of him dead I cannot be unmindfull; It was his
charge to me before his death, Speak not a word of me, and I obeyed his voice,
yet now I hope it will be no impiety to write a word. If of truth and
inlargednesse of heart to Christ, Matthew. 25.
the living and great expressions to his members may be an evidence as Christ
makes it; Let the World then judge of him by the following character. He was a
very free and open-hearted man to Christ's cause and members, because they were
Christ's. J speak of my own knowledge, every year when he made up his books, and
had summed up his debts and gains, constantly he would reserve the tenths, and
write himself, so much debtor to God; for many years together he made me his
Almoner, to relieve imprisoned, impoverished, and sick Christians by these
portions, with trust in me not to reveal his name, which J kept unto his death:
The better tenth of his estate he gave to God also in his last Will. I mention
this for a spectacle to the World, who think all lost that is spent upon God,
but in this Christian let them see, by liberal things is the liberal man
established. Isai. 32.8.
He died enriched with a full estate. J believe he is at rest, let him sleep
until the morning; Reader pardon this digression, it was a godly Friend led me
aside.

2. It may be also muttered, much other phrase more inlargments are Printed
than were spoken. J confess it, J promise the same things to thee, good
Reader, not the same words through out that I preached: If J could do it, yet J
know a difference observable in phrase and style between writing and speaking;
Our people desire the lowest words we can speak in hearing, but our Readers of
all sorts are not so pleased; Life put's a working luster upon the me anest
language being sooken, when the best words will not move being dead only in
the letter: I hope the phrase throughout is Gods, if any thing different from
the voice, hanc veniam date, I must beg this courtesy if ever J come to the
Press again. As for inlargments they are no more, but what by straits of time
I was forced to conceal and jumble with the rest, or else which were added for
more perspicuity, whereby J hope thou shall be no loser.

3. It may be said these many Authors alleged were silenced in the Pulpit. J
acknowledge it; J am never much in mentioning humane authorities in my Sermons,
not to obscure their worth, nor to be unthankful to them, for I am much
beholden to them. But these considerations make me mute in this, First, Our
people skill not of them, Secondly, One Word of Christ is worth a thousand for
him who preaches to save souls. Thirdly, Their names and words with less
loss may fit a margin, than fill a Sermon, which being but for an hour should
be full of God for the souls to whom it is sent. These stops removed, J shall
stay thee no longer from the work: Read in conscience, read in love, read to
gather, read to live. The Lord Almighty, the God Holiness, while thou art
reading and looking deliver thee up unto his truth, and change thee into the
same Image from glory to glory; to glory over sin here, to glory over death and
the grave hereafter. Thus powers he out his soul for thee, that presents this
Book unto thee. Pray for him whom thou art sure to have,

Thine in Christ Jesus devoted for thy good G. H.


THE EMBALMING OF DEAD SAINTS.
Psalm 16.10. For thou will not leave my Soul in Hell: neither will thou
suffer thine Holy one to see Corruption.


THe title of this golden Text may be The embalming of the dead Saints; the
force whereof is to free the Souls from dereliction in the state of death, and
to secure the bodies of Gods Saints from Corruption in the grave. It is the art
which I desire to learn, and at this time, teach upon this sad occasion, even
the preparing of this confection against our burialls, after I have touched some
general things about the Psalm.

1. The Penman of it is undoubtedly David, his name owne's it in the front.

2. The excellency of it is set forth in a golden title, it is Michtam of
David, or a Psalm worth Gold, even the purest Gold of Ophir, yea better than
Gold.

3. The parts of it generally are two, 1. Prayer with the arguments of it from
the 18. to 5.2. Praise with the reasons thereof to the end, in which part the
Text falls as a reason of his forenamed joy and exultation.

4. The subject of whom all this is spoken, which is the Master-vain running
thorough the Psalm: whereabout may we put that question, of whom speaks the
prophet, of himself or of some other man? and thereunto reply truly, both of
himself and others also: for fuller satisfaction hereunto, know we, that a
threefold subject is here spoken of in various respects, 1. Typically the
Psalmist speaks here of himself, it is David here as the figure of Christ,
who says, I will bless the Lord, and I have set the Lord always before me,
and therefore my heart was glad, etc. for thou will not leave my soul in hell;
only note here, Types as in their nature they are weaker, (as men in respect
of Christ) so in the efficacy of events, and privileges attributed to them,
they fall fatre short of the verities and real subjects which they Typifie
unto us; Take that instance for proof, Heb 9 13.14.
in the Comparison which the Apostle makes between the blood of Bulls and
Goats and the blood of Christ, so here the privilege expressed must be less
and weaker in the Type than in the truth.

2. Antitypically, principally, and in primary intention Christ the substance
and truth of this figure speaks of himself, in all the forenamed
expressions, and throughout the Psalm; an infallible interpreter, by the
mouths of two Apostles, has warranted this. The same spirit which indicted
this Psalm, Acts 2.25.30.31.
has spoken expressly by Saint Peter, that David being a Prophet, and knowing
that God had sworn with an oath to him that of the fruit, etc. He seeing this
before spoke of Christ in this Scripture. Acts. 13.35.
And no less by Saint Paul in his Sermon at Antioch, is this verified, that
Christ speaks in this Scripture: David then concerning Christ especially, and
Christ in David, as the Truth gives this reason of his hope and his rejoicing.

3. Analogically and mystically every united member of Christ, even every
Saint, 1 Cor. 12.12.
whose head Christ is Ac si dicat, Ecclesia, quae est caro mea, modo requiescit
in spe, id est, in spe resurrectionis, ut ubi caput praecessit, membra
sequantur. Hieron. in Ps. 16.9.
his whole body the Church, which in the Mystery is called Christ, that is the
subject also to whom these privileges do belong in their due measure and
proportion, being partners of all the communicable excellencies of Christ both
in life and death, living with him, crucified with him, dying with him, buried
with him, incorrupted with him, until they arise with him, never to dye
again, and be perfected with him in his glory. The Type is now resolved into
the truth, and perfected in it, This truth is Christ Neque sanctificatum
corpus, per qued and alii sanctificandi sunt, corrumpi patieris. Aug. in text.
who extends the sweet influence of all his privileges to every holy member:
This Text therefore as the reason of Christ's hope and gladness as well as of
his Saint-Church, I shall now labor to hold out, and so would blazon the glory
in it, to win your hearts to Christ, and to raise up prevailing resolutions
in you to be Saints.

Now at the very entrance into the explication of this Scripture, concerning
Christ, there is no little trouble moved, to obscure the truth by the unhappy
gloss of them, who maintain the Local descent of Christ's soul into Hell,
for the space of its separation from the body, and therefore force this text
against its own mind to speak it for them. I may not now fall upon the
controversy, it will not suit with the season and present duties, yet this I
will boldly say, that if the Abettors of this opinion have no better proof of
it, than this Text will give (as is more than suspected, they have not) it was
not worth their Labor so much to trouble the Church of God with it. And for
the Negative, that this Text cannot favor any such opinion as this, I shall
lay down these three reasons, and afterward labor in the affirmative, to give
the natural meaning of the words: Salvo tamen fidei Articule, not denying, but
earnestly affirming the Article of Christ's descent into Hell in a right and
sound sense.

1 I argue from the end of Christ's local descent into hell, which by
confession is two fold. 1 some say Bishop Bilson
it was for triumph over the great enemy of man's salvation. 2 Christus sicut
cum summo dolor mortuus est, it a videtur and dolores post mortem in infer no
sustimufle. Luth. in text.
others maintain it was for a further suffering of his soul in that place:
Now to the first, if it were for triumph, it is impossible that this Text can
favor it; for it speaks expressly of a state of humiliation and suffering,
and is therefore the reason of the gladness of Christ's heart: that he should
not be left in it, My heart is glad and my glory rejoices, for thou will not
leave etc. And had it been a State of triumph, honoring the Son of God in
hell, there could be no fear of dereliction in it, nor joy for deliverance
from it; for it was a good condition.

To the second which seems to have more favor from this Text, I answer, it
cannot be the meaning of it consistent with the truth of other Scriptures; for
as touching all the Torments that Christ endured himself tells us, where
they ended, Joh. 19.30.
when he said it is finished, and that was before his soul could be in hell;
he could not then go to be tormented there. Act. 2.24.
And whereas it is suggested that the pains of death which are said to be upon
him, seem to note his sufferings in hell; it is irrational so to conceive,
for they were pains of death, or as some read Cords of death, and not of hell;
and these must be those, which he suffered while his life was in him tending
to death, or deadly* or only the evil of the state of death in the separation
of soul and body; whereof I shall speak in another place, Neither of these
ends then can suit truth or this Scripture.

2. This Scripture must be so interpreted concerning Christ, that it must have
its truth in David, and all the Saints; but David's soul was never Locally in
hell, the place of the damned, neither is it possible for the souls of the
Saints to be there; Luke 16.26.
for then there could be no transplantation of them to heaven: if therefore
this be a state incompatible with the Saints, it cannot be consistent with
the glory of Christ, for to triumph, there is not one word of God that appoints
him thither, but notes his triumph in another place; if therefore his soul
went into that place it must be to suffer, than which to say, there can be no
greater blasphemy, for as much as the suffering souls cannot come thence into
the place of the blessed.

3. The deep silence which the best and most infallible interpreter, makes
concerning this gloss of Christ's Local descent into hell, in the true and
full opening of this Scripture, in the new Testament; and the bearing of this
Text another way, puts it out of doubt that this is but man's conceit, and not
Gods meaning: for that spirit of truth by the hand of two Apostles evinceth
nothing out of this Text, but the certain prediction of Christ's resurrection
from the grave, that God would not give over his soul to the state of death,
and separation, nor his body to see Corruption; surely had there been such a
remarkable thing, as a Local being, and triumph of his soul in the place of
the damned, it is incredible, that such an interpreter, Acts 2.31.
that knew the mind of God, should omit such a notable matter, and mention
only the resurrection of Christ from the grave, as the sole burden of this
Text: if then the spirit of God who interprets this Scripture declares nothing
from hence of a Local descent of Christ's soul to hell, we may well conclude,
it is the vain fancy of man's own brain, and not Gods mind revealed to us.

Having thus laid sufficient ground for the Negative to turn off that forced
sense from the text; it will be convenient to touch a little upon the letter,
and consider now what it affirms unto us, the words being the reason of the
gladness of Christ's heart, the rejoicing of his glory, and the hope of his
flesh in this deep abasement, thus must we conceive the son speaking to his
Father, Thou will not leave, that is, thou will not cease to be what thou have
been to me, thou will not desert nor forsake me, My soul that is either
properly my soul Genesis 37.35. Ezech. 32.21.27.
my better part, in hell or Scheol that is in the state of death, and
separation from my body; or Metonymically Genesis 1.20.
my life in the depth and shadow of death, for the life of any thing is
frequently set forth by that word: or Synecdochically my Soul that is, my
Carcass, or body in the grave, as it also used undoubtedly one part for
another, Psalm. 1 18.18.
neither will thou suffer, or more nearly to the word, thou will not give (for
the Sovereignty of life and death is in Gods hand, the grave and corruption are
at his command; and it must be an efficacious permission, if any in God, which
is a giving leave to Corruption to dominere over his creatures) but thou will
not so give thine holy one, Acts. 13.37. Psalm. 49.9. Psalm. 89.48.
that is, as the Apostles punctually interpret Christ's body, that holy thing,
(the whole being put for part) to see Corruption, that is, Videtur mihi
spiritus, in his verbis simpliciter loqui, and magis ad tempus respicere, qua^
ad locum vel aliam circumstantiam, ut sit sensus, Non derelinques me tanto
tempore, quanto naturaliter solent corrumpi cadavera, sed intra tempus, quo
solent incipere corrumpi. me suscitabis. Luth. in text. Esaias. 9.6.
to be so long in the grave, as to be corrupted or lie under putrefaction,
and rottenness which eminently was true of the body of Christ, it saw not the
least corruption in the grave. Or if you please, rather to unerstand it of
whole Christ, God will not give him his Holy one to see Corruption, to cease to
be in the state of death, what he was before to God and to his Church. This is
the genuine voice of the letter warranted by abundance of other Scriptures; but
for the other gloss rejected, it is not usual to the letter, nor possible to
stand with truth and right reason of interpretation. Number. 5.2.


To draw down all this good nearer toward our selves, and show that these
comforts are not shut up in Christ, but passeable from him to us, I will only
lay down this rule: Whatsoever good privilege or communicable excellency is
attributed to Christ in the flesh, it is with respect to his body, the Church
(for unto it the son was given) and what is eminently true of him in the
letter, is really and in measure verified upon every one of his united members:
So is this sweet dignation of God to him, Dub.
and them in the state of death.

There is yet one Rub in the way that must be removed, before we can carry this
heavenly privilege clearly for Christ and his members jointly, and it is
raised from a speech of the Apostles, which seems to contradict this of David:
here the Psalmist says, thou will not give me, thy holy one to see corruption:
then there must be a truth in this concerning himself, Acts. 13.36.
but Saint Paul urging this text to prove Christ's resurrection, says
expressly, Sol.
David saw corruption, and therefore infers the truth of this text only to
concern Christ.

To solve which doubt and to clear obscurities, I shall premise some
distinctions, first of David the Subject, he is to be considered two ways,
first, as a Type of Christ, Secondly, as a member of Christ. Secondly, of
Corruption the state that is affirmed and denied of him, which is two fold,
first supernatural and divine, such as respects man's being or relation to God,
which is a ceasing to be to Godward, what formerly and before death one was;
Secondly natural, which is only in respect of man's being in nature, a
cessation of that, or a change of it to no being, which in a graduall
consideration may be also two fold, first, Tot all, secondly partial: these
premised I answer.

1. Consider David as the Type of Christ, and resolved into Christ, as is the
true use of all figures, to turn them into the substance represented, so he
may be said to see no Corruption at all, as the Type usually in Scripture
bears the name of the best privileges and greatest effects of the truth it
self the Antitype; Exodus.12.11, 1 Cor. 5.7. Hos. 3.5. Psalm. 2.2.
so the Lamb is called the passe-over as well as Christ himself: so Christ
bears David's name, and David Christ's.

2. Consider David as a member of Christ, and Corruption as a cessation of
being Gods, so David and Christ and the Saints neither have seen nor shall see
Corruption at all, for they are all Gods, Exodus 3.6. Matthew. 22.32.
Holy ones, in the state of death, as much as in the state of life; He is the
God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, though they be in their graves.

3. Consider David as Christ's member, and Corruption for a cessation of
natural being, and rottenness and Mouldring of the flesh to dust in the
grave, so David saw Corruption, which is all the Apostle contends for: And this
corruption Christ did not see in the lest degree of alteration upon his flesh;
wherefore, great reason had the spirit of God, to show that this Scripture was
eminently fulfilled in Christ above any other creature: yet further in this the
same spirit denies not, that the Saints in measure, and by participation,
enjoy the same gracious privilege, though not in that transcendent way made
good unto them: Their flesh though crumbled into dust is Christ's, which he will
purify and make up again, to be conformed to his glorious body, so that it
neither come simply not to be, nor to be miserable, which properly may be
styled Corruption:

These doubts cleared now I shall proceed to weigh this Scripture more exactly:
The text by it self considered is a notable bold proposition of faith
maintained against the sensible encroachments of the souls dereliction, and
the bodies corruption in the grave, to keep up hope in the darkest, saddest
times, even under the shadow of death. It is the faith of Christ eminently, but
of every Saint or Holy member really and truly; wherein are very observable,

1. The matter concluded and averred by faith in these two propositions.

1. Of the effect, which is expressed two ways, first the holy soul shall not
be left in Hell, Secondly nor the holy one, or the body given to see corruption.

2. Of the efficient or author, God will not leave the soul in hell, nor give
his holy one to see corruption.

2. The manner of propounding these, not doubtfully, or fearfully, but
peremptorily, certainly and confidently as becomes faith, thou will not
leave, etc.

Not to stand upon any further curious Mincing of the Scripture; there arise
from all this, these three maine points of truth, which I shall desire further
to prosecute, and jointly to apply.

1. Doct. 1.
The proposition of the confection of Embalme it self together with its force
or virtue, Holiness keeps the soul from dereliction in the state of death,
and the body from Corruption in the grave.

2. Doct. 2.
The proposition of the confectionary, the only author and efficient of this
Embalme, and its prevalency: God will not leave his holy one in hell, nor give
him to see Corruption in the Grave.

3. Doct. 3.
From the divine assurance, peremptorinesse, and confidence, wherewith faith
speaks, this the last proposition of the security of both the former comes
forth, Faith secures the holy one, from dereliction in the State of death, and
from Corruption in the grave. Of these I shall desire to treat for your profit:
1. Holiness the excellent preserving Embalme, 2. God the efficient of it. 3.
Faith the security of all: and then bring home the fruit unto your hearts, if
it may be, that by the influence of Gods spirit, I might fulfill the desire of
my deceased Brother in this work, even for his sake, to leave something with
his flock, that may stand them in stead in the day of darkness.

1. I shall begin to hold out that Aphorism or distinct position, which
contains the confection of Embalme it self, and other appendent circumstances
considerable with it, Doct. 1.
Holiness preserves the soul from dereliction, in the state of death, and the
body of the Saint, from Corruption in the grave.

If it be desired by any that doubt of it, to see the clear issue of this from
the text, I shall guide them to read this text with a great accent upon that
term, Thy Holy one, that they may take special notice of it, even the quality
of that man exempted from these evils: In this the spirit of God puts an
emphasis upon Holiness, as counter-working and prevailing over death, and the
grave: it is this, and nothing but this, that thus keeps the man dead, and
buried from desertion in death, and corruption in the grave. To look a little
more narrowly, into the worth of this little wedge cut out of David's Michtam or
his golden hymme, I shall propose and answer about it these three Queries, 1.
Quid sit, what means this golden truth? 2. Quomodo, how Holiness does effect
all this? 3. Cur sit, why it is so effectual?

To the first, the true value of this precious truth will appear in the
explication of these particulars, Quid sit?
1. The preservative Holiness, 2. the virtue or force it keeps from or it
forbids or denies. 3. The evil over which it prevails, Dereliction and
Corruption in state of death, 4. the subject on whom it works so powerfully,
the Man, the Saint, My soul, thy Holy one, What Holiness?
1. What is this Holiness? all the help we have to find this out in the text,
is only in that expression thy holy one, which is diversely rendered; by some
thy Merciful one, by others thy gracious Saint; and by others, him whom thou
favourest, or whom thou followest with mercy and goodness, (...) At. M^^t.
Ainsw. Vatabl. Iunius. Bez in Act. 2.27.
or in short, Sanctus hoc loco, Hasid, est, qui gratia spiritus sanctisicatus
est. Luth. in text. (...) Acts 2.27. Acts. 13.35.
thy favorite. The word indeed carries the voice of mercy and goodness, but
then they have done best, that translate it passively, and note by it, the
soul that has received mercy and goodness from the Lord to be sanctified,
and become a Saint. The seaventy render it plainly thy holy one, which the
spirit in the new Testament, twice warranteth to be a sound translation, and
our translators do well to keep that expression: which notes a man, pure from
iniquity, and a Divine worshipper, as Etymologists observe, but to leave bare
words and to search for the thing intended, even Holiness, I shall labor to
open it, first, in its nature, secondly, In its Rise, thirdly, In its relation.

1. Touching the nature of this Holiness, that we may reach it, Nature 1.
need will require that we should distinguish to select that, whose nature we
would know. Now the Holiness carried in the text is two fold, 1. primitive,
which is in the head, Christ the chief Subject here intended, for above all
eminently is he called the Holy one of God; and his holiness again, is two
fold. 1. Essential to him, as God equal with the Father, so is he the subject
of that the Seraphims proclamation, Esaias 6.3.
Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord of Hosts; even the Holy God.

2. Additionall, such as by the Fathers pleasure was poured out fully on him in
the flesh, and did concern him as Mediator: for as he had the fullness of the
Godhead, and that essential Holiness, Col. 2.9.
which is incommunicable being one with the Father, so no less did he think
it meet being in the flesh to become one with his Church, to receive such a
fullness of the spirit, that might be communicable to his body, Col. 1.19. Joh.
3.34.
and from whence every true member might have grace for grace; Joh. 1.16.
which fullness, how ever it was created to be fit for us, yet in Christ it
received such an influence from that God-holinesse; by reason of the personal
union, that it was most glorious, and not without this advantage, does he give
it cut to believers: In this respect, he is called by way of eminency, the
Christus proprie passim inscripturis aspellatur Sanctus Dei, sicut Chris^us
Domini Luth. in text. Mark. 1.14. Luke 1.35: Acts. 3.14.
Holy one of God.

2. Derivative, namely, that which by participation every true member receives
from the Holy Head* or fountain, and this is also two fold, according to the
various ways of Communication.

1. 1 Cor. 1.30.
Holiness imputed, which is Christ's indeed in propriety and right, but the
Saints only by his deed of gift, and Gods gracious account. 2. 1 Per. 2.9.
Holiness infused, which has a proper being in the Saints, wrought by the
spirit of Christ, and left effected in them, whence they are likewise called by
God an holy people: and that both these ways they may be truly sanctified,
Joh. 17.19.
Christ is said to sanctify himself.
Now then if we restrain this privilege to Christ, that Holiness, which he
received not abstracted from, but joined with, and glorified by that
God-Holinesse, did keep him from dereliction, and Corruption in the state of
death. But if we extend this benefit to every Member of his body Mystical, as
is intended by him, then the Holiness created in them is their preservative
also, being of the same nature, with that in their head, yet neither this
separated, but accompanied with Christ's own Holiness imputed, and that not
stripped of the abundant glory cast upon it of God, so that though the (...), the
matter whereof we desire knowledge be creature-Holinesse, and that infused into
every Saint, yet by reason of its connection with, and dependence upon that in
Christ and God-Holinesse it self, whereunto it must bear conformity, we
cannot understand one without the other, let us touch therefore upon the
discovery of both.

1. That Holiness which is God, (...)
may well be conceived from the notation of his name: Now this the Prophet
publishes, Esaias 57.15.
his name is Holy, which ld proprie apud Hebraeos Kados dicitur, quod a vulgari
usu and consuetudine, propter singularem aliquam vel virtutis, vel vitii
notationem semotum and sejunctum est. Ar. Mon^ in lib. Ios. c. 2. Levit. 10.3.
word with the Hebrews sets forth that thing, which for some singular note of
goodness or of evil, was set apart for common use: but in this place, it must
be taken in the better part, having respect to God, so that when God is called
Holy; it notes him to be a Being, wholly separate from all spots and
imperfections, most pure, perfect, good, great, and most incomparably excelling
all other Beings, in so much, that he will not be touched, nor spoken of, nor
served by any low or polluted creature, but will be sanctified by all that
draw nigh unto him, and for those that have dealt too commonly with him, his
Holiness has been as fire to consume them. It is a Title therefore worthy of
God, which Moses does give him, Glorious in Holiness, as noting that to be the
Top of glory; Exodus 15.11.
and if we would have a fuller description of this Holiness, it is the very
excellency, redundant out of the confluence of all Gods Attributes; whereby he
is set in the height of purity, above the reach either of the services, or
words, or thoughts of the most excellent creatures to be admired, not
comprehended:

2. The Creature Holiness, which we are now to find is called the Image of
God; Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24. 2 Cor. 3.18.
by which expression we are guided to think, that the nature of it should
stand in the likeness and conformity to the Holiness of God; whence this
discovery may be of it, Holiness is the excellency of the new creature, framed
by the spirit of Christ after God: whereby the soul, is set apart from Common
men for special Service to, and communion with the Lord; where the same is
called a new man, Ephesians. 4.24.
it is said to be created after God^; which phrase gives us to conceive God
under a double Notion 1. Of a Creator, for that can be none else but he, 2. Of
a pattern or Copy, after which the new Creature is drawn, for to that purpose
in the text, it seems especially to be urged; so that the great Jehova in
creating this new thing, whereof Holiness is the glory, does lay himself, and
all his Attributes, as it were the original pattern, conform to which he is
resolved to make it; and as his Holiness, is the sum of all his Attributes,
that sets him to the highest; so the Holiness of this creature the sum of
all the graces that concur to its perfection, and the glory resulting from
them all.

To this state of Holiness, four things must concur, 1. Reality, and truth
of graces, 2. Integrity and fullness of them, 3. Adue and fit disposition of
them, between themselves, as of members in a proportionable body. 4. A sweet
and clear perspicuity of them, in a sincere profession, which is like a fresh
and amiable color upon a well proportioned person: These so conspiring make up
the beauties of Holiness, wherein the people of Christ appear, Ps. 110.3.
suppose the glory of all the stars put into one, or the glistring sparks of
all the Diamonds in the world gathered in one, or seven days sunshine,
joined in one to make a surpassing glory, resolve these into the confluence of
all graces to make one transcendent and glorious one, and this is Holiness.
This Holiness as an ancient calls it, (...) Chrysostom. in Ephesians. 4.24.
is the pure, the full due, answering to the mind and will of God, in the
Archetype; for that it seems, was the use of the word rendered, Holy, to note a
man not obnoxtious for defect, one that owed nothing; And not a whit improper
is it here to set out true Holiness, which answers to God his due. In the
Innovatus spiritu mentis, novum bominom dicitur indutus qui est Christus. Ambr.
in Ephesians. 4.24. Ephesians. 6.24. 1 Pet. 1.23. In novissimo, no vis2ima. 2 Rise.
new man Christ, as one styles him, this Holiness is exact and full, and in
every believing member, that is a new creature, it is truly and indeed, though
as yet but in measure, not so heightened, as in the head: from this discovery
made in the nature of Holiness, thus much may we gather, that it is in genere
incorruptibilium of and incorruptible being: grace therefore is not unusually
paraphrased by incorruption; yea and such a new creature is it, that at the
oldest it is newest; some advantage, then may we see in its nature against
those evils, which are natures terrors.

2. The Rise of this Holiness, that we may look a little further into it, is
from heaven; which specifieth, and separates it from equivocall, and
false-named Holiness; And if it be a sprout of Heaven, no Marvel, that it
keeps so sweet to God, and secures the Saint from putrefaction in the earth,
Its descent is not darkly showed unto us in these intimations of it by the Holy
spirit, A birth from above heavenly things, a divine nature; Ioh. 3.3.12. 2
Pet. 1.4.
which do but paraphrase Holiness in respect of its original: I shall mainly
touch but upon one testimony, which at once will give us both its rise and
virtue, 1 Cor. 15.47.48.49.
and be no slender proof of the whole truth: The first man is of the earth
earthy, the second man is the Lord from heaven; As is the earthy, such are they
that are earthy; and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly;
and as we have borne the Image of the earthy, we shall also bear the Image of
the Heavenly. In which allegation I shall only note, first the scope, to be the
proof of the resurrection, 2. The burden of the Scripture, what it carries,
to evince the former truth intended. There is evident at first sight in the
words, a parallel between the two Adams; their seed, and their events or last
issue; upon the first part three propositions are laid down, 1. Of his
original, the first man for his substance, qualities, and perfections was of
the earth; and therefore is it averred, that he with the Rectitude, and Image
of God which he had, according to his principles, was earthy; all out of the
dust, brickle enough in his own nature, and likely to be broken, however by
obedience he might have been preserved, Ez (...) Chrysostom. in text.
Yet cleaving too much to the earth, he became sinfully earthy, sensual, and
so obnoxious to death, as the event declared: 2. Of his seed; As he, so every
living soul, that comes from him is earthy, corruptible and perishing. 3. Of
their end, he is returned to dust, from whence he came, (...) Ibid.
and his seed do bear his Image, and must see corruption also; upon the
second part, the same things are asserted. 1. The Rise of Christ, the second
Adam, He is the Lord from Heaven (not man, or body from heaven, as if he
brought it from thence, to avoid that Heretical gloss) He was as it is said
a quickening spirit, 1 Cor. 15.45.
having power to give lise, and the Lord having Sovereignty to dispose it to
his seed, and be comes himself, and brings this from heaven; it is not a
nature arising from corruptible principles, but heavenly, and lasting, and
communicable; of this he himself is full, and therefore termed the quickening
spirit, as being enriched with it, to give out Holiness with its powerful
virtue over death, as he does to his peculiar seed, in their regeneration. 2.
The conformity of his seed; even as he, such are they that are heavenly, that
is, like in nature, spiritual, Holy, as he is said to be a spirit; like also
in descent; he and his excellencies from heaven, so they and theirs from heaven
also. Heaven and Heavenly, bear a great Emphasis here, and add much virtue to
the spirit of Holiness, which is eminently in Christ, as in the head, and
answerably by measure, derived to the Saints. This is Gods heavenly Image, and
therefore incorruptible, as the first was earthy, and thence subject to
corruption: like also in the sovereignty given to this nature; he came not only
as the quickening spirit, but as the Lord from Heaven: Lordship is joined with
his spirit, which gives power and sovereignty to it, over the grave: and no
less is the virtue of this addition annexed to his spirit of Holiness in the
Saints, which gives it command and Lordship over corruption, it is a Lordly
Holiness. 3. The issue of this Lord Adam with his seed, he came from Heaven,
was manifested in the flesh, grapled with death, and for a moment yielded, and
took his lodging in the grave; but all this while, saw no corruption, for that
soveraigne-spirit preserved him in, and raised him out of the pit in his set
time: so says the Apostle, we shall bear the Image of the Heavenly: why did
they not bear his Image in his spirit already? yea sure in the true spiritual
nature of it, they were borne from above, as he was from above; they Holy, as
he holy; and they heavenly minded, as he heavenly: but yet they had not the
Image or likeness, of the power, and soveraignety of this spirit, in
experience of its preserving virtue in the grave. Now this they make sure of,
having the same heavenly and Lordly spirit from their head. This Sovereign
Holiness (...) Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 15.48.
they received in the first, and for its prevailing virtue over death, and the
grave, as it has been proved in their head, so no less do they wai^e for
it, 1 Cor. 15.48.
and shall surely find it in the second resurrection: To sum up all from the
several branches, It is certain that Holiness for its original is from
heaven, whence it must have connaturall to it incorruption and Dominion, and
that not only over death, and the grave, but over Hell also; precious and
powerful must such an heavenly Embalme be to preserve its owner from
Corrupting evils.

3. The Relation of this Holiness is a consideration of that consequence, 3
Relation.
and so expressly pointed at in the text, Thy holy one, that it may not be
omitted, in the treaty of this Holy unction; the Saint seems to Echo and
sing out that with a loud note, Thy, Thy holy one, two shares in himself he
conceives, flesh and spirit, nature and grace, Humanity and Holiness, and as
well two owners of these he confesses, Himself and God; It is my soul, my
flesh, in their weakness, such poor matters as they be; but thy Holiness,
thy grace, thy spirit. As I am weak, and perishing, I am my own; but as I am
holy and incorruptible, I am thine: weakness, death, corruption with the
worms, the attendants of my flesh are mine; but grace, and life, and
incorruption are thine, however graciously cast upon me. Holiness is the
Lords, and that in these respects.

1. Of being; Ephesians. 2.10.
it is immediately from God, the breath of his Mouth and the work of his
hands; even the holiness, both of head and members. It is not in the world
until God create it, nor appears it in any soul before God begets it; If the
Prince of Holiness would obtain it for his subjects, he goes to the father
for it, Sanctify them through thy truth, and however he sanctify himself
and them, it is, Ioh. 17.17. Gal. 2.20.
as God; hear the confession of another Saint, I live; yet not I, but Christ
lives in me: He corrects himself, as if he had said amiss J live, and
ascribes that to Christ, who did more properly own that life than he: yet he
did live as the subject of life; but Christ only, as the author or Root of it;
so may the Saint say in the present case, I am Holy made so by grace; Holiness
is my crown and dignity, But thy creature, and the fruit of thine own Bowels
And I am thy Holy one of thy making if I be Holy. 2. O special interest in
Gods affection, Thy Holy one, that is thy favorite, whom thou have loved so as
to sanctify; 2. M(...)a ^7.
and in whom thou delightest, after thou have made me holy. O how beloved was
that Holy Child, John 17.23.
whom God sent into the flesh? and no less beloved those united members
sanctified in him: strength of love makes nearest relations among creatures;
how much more may the infinite love of God enclose his holy ones: and make them
peculiar to himself? Hear the experience of a gracious Saint, The Lord has
set apart him that is Godly for himself. Psalm. 4.3.
It is Gods choyce-peece the holy man, that no less holds out grace in his
life for God, than he receives it from him, And see how the same makes use of
his interest in God; preserve my soul for I am holy; as if Gods heart and arm
were bound to Holiness, Ps. 86. (...) The same word in both forenamed places
as in the text.
and so it is. The head Saint, and member-Saints confess, we are thy Holy ones,
thine by Love as by creation.

3. 3.
Of covenant, Thy holiness, or thy holy one, by nature thine, by affection
thine, and by covenant thine; such a three fold cord of interest, which keeps
God to the Saint and the Saint to God, is not easily broken. God has given
himself by Covenant to his Saints, he delivered it to Abraham their father his
saint-friend, I will be a God to thee and to thy seed after thee. Genesis 17.7.
And no less have his Saints by Covenant given themselves to God; Ps. 5.5.
The Lord ownes them for his thereupon, gather my Saints to me, those that have
made a Covenant with me by sacrifice, Head and Branch-Saints are firmly thus
the Lords: Now then return and look back upon this Holiness, such an
heavenly confection, that has such a Father, such a favourer, such a
confederate; God wholly for it, as it for God; death startles at it, the grave
becomes weak, corruption cannot approach to oppress that soul, where
holiness dwells. This, this, dear Christians, is that Sovereign Embalme,
which I would have you prepare against your burialls.

2 2 What the virtue of it?
What then is the virtue of this holy ointment? In this place I shall touch of
it, no more than it concerns the present case: The expression of it in the
text is merely negative, and that infolded in the main Acts concerning God:
His Arm is chief in the work, Thou will not leave, thou will not give, the
preeminence whereof I will not conceal in its place; yet under God, Holiness
forbids dereliction and corruption to its Tabernacle; no desertion in the state
of death, no corruption to the holy one in the grave, yet though here be none
but Negatives expressed, a double force of this holiness is intimated. 1.
Negative, which is an absolute denial of Gods desertion, and of corruption to
befall the Saint in the state of death: holiness prevents all this evil; 2.
Positive, and that evident in three effects. 1. It Honos is (sc. unguentorum)
ad defunctos pertinere capit. Plin. Not. hist. l. 13. cap. 1.
Honors the Saints with God, as Odours, and ointments, and precious Embalmes
did kings in the fight of people at their burnings, or funerals. It is a
standing rule, precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints.
2. It draws and invites God to them, no less than the Name of Christ, 2 Chronicles. 16 14 Ps. 116.15. Cant. 1.2.
that fragrant sweet smelling ointment, provokes the hearts of Virgin Saints to
come out to him, and love him: He abhors not therefore to be in the Sepulchers
of the great Saint and of all his fellows. Commendatio unguentorum etc est ut
invitet aliud agentes Plin. not. hist. l. 13. c. 3.
It is the praise of vain ointments, that they draw them that do neglect
them, how much more must this holy odor invite God to it, that does respect
it. 3. It pleases and delights the Lord, to be always smelling on the Saints
Carkases; so sweet is the savor of holiness unto him: Alive or dead, they are
his holy ones, therefore in either condition, sweet in his Nostrills. Genesis
27.27.
As Isaac expresses his delight in Jacobs savor, The smell of my son, is as
of a field which the Lord has blessed, More sweet with God, must be the smell
of his Holy ones, even the savor of Holiness his own blessing, and if Gods
hand be on it to make it, 3 What the evil? (...)
and to bless it, his delight can never depart from it: This is the virtue of
the Holy Embalme.

3. The evil over which the Sovereignty of this Holiness prevails is
discovered in the text, by a double expression, desertion and Corruption in the
state of death; which two may have a double consideration.

1. As they concern the subject entirely, even the whole man, and so they set
forth one and the same thing; the latter being the fuller interpretation of the
former, Thou will not leave me in the state of death that is to be Corrupted;
that death should feed on me, prey upon me, or vanquish and domineere over me,
as it does upon the wicked; death is Lord over them: Secondly, as they do each
of them severally respect the two parts of man; Psa. 49.14.
so dereliction may be styled the souls evil, and corruption the bodies
misery in the state of death; either way is safe enough to take them: if
jointly, as they respect the whole, we must divide them for a due prosecution;
if distinctly, as appertaining to several parts, we shall join them again as
concerning the whole man. I choose rather the latter way.

1. Desertion then as the souls evil in the state of death is rightly to be
weighed, whereabout two terms would be a little opened, 1. Scheol rendered
hell, or the state of death; 2. The leaving or dereliction in this condition.

1. As for this Scheol, if it be more narrowly inquired what it is; It has
been clearly showed, that hell the place of the damned cannot be here meant
by it, the souls that go thither, are always left there, no return thence
is granted to any; It must then note the state of the first death, and the
evil of it, with special respect unto the soul of man. A full paraphrase of
this the spirit gives us, calling it the pains of death, from which Christ
was loosed in his resurrection; an expression importing a great deal of
bitterness in the state of death, as pains in a woman's travel, Acts. 2.24:
(...)
from which it seems Christ was not free, therefore neither can the Saints be
exempted: Now these pains are not of sense, but some kind of loss for
present, which this deadly head brings upon the soul such as these:

1. Separation from the body, for which it was first made, in which it has
lived and exercised its faculties, and unto which it must be reunited. This is
no small pain of death; whence it is called the King of terrors. Job 18.14.


2. 2.
Imperfection in respect of the glory to be cast upon the reuinted parts; for
howsoever the soul has fullness of joy, being in the bosom of him that made
it; yet there is a want of that glory, which shall be revealed, when the flesh
shall be raised up, and both together be honored: This is a pain also,
symbolized, if not proved, by the cry of those separate souls under that
Christ-Altar. How long How-longs? Revel. 6.10. (...) Acts 2.24.


3. Retention for a time under the power of death: for a moment this tyranny
fastened upon the head Saint: but it was not possible that he should be held by
it, longer than himself pleased, and that was accounted to him a pain: much
more then to the member Saints, over whom death's violence does more prevail,
and keeps them longer in the house of darkness: And this is an evil not to
be endured. All this the Scheol or state of death does not only bring, but
would keep upon the Saints.

2. 2.
The other member must come in to make it a full evil; and that is the leaving
or desertion of the soul in this state of deadly-head: which dereliction is
considered, either as an act of Judgment from God, whereby he resolves to
leave souls to scheol, or that state death to rule over them (whereof I shall
speak hereafter;) or as an effect of Judgment upon men, when such a sentence
shall be executed and souls actually left to endure for ever the pains, and
be held under the bands of death; these make it perfect misery, and desperate
evil: Against this first part of deaths Malignity will Holiness secure.

2. 2 (...)
Corruption the bodies plague feared in the grave must have a little light to
reveal it. It may be two fold, as it respects a double object, expressed in
the text: 1. As it concerns the man, so it is natural or bodily, a change of
the body to putrefaction and Rottenness, and this may also be, either
partial, and joined with mercy, or total and with a curse not to be
repaired, but for a worse corruption in hell: 2. As it concerns the holy man
so it is divine and spiritual and that is a ceasing to be in the state of
death Gods gracious and accepted Saint; from all the Prince Saint was eminently
exempted not the least change was upon his body in the grave: and from this
last with that total cursed corruption is every subject Saint privileged by
Holiness: only in mercy do they for a time lie under the natural change of
their flesh, while they are sown in the earth, that they may spring out again
to a glorious incorruption: It is a remarkable discovery of the Saints
condition in the grave, This corruptible must put on Incorruption: wherein do
but view. 1. The subject, 1 Cor. 15.53. (...)
the body of the Saint in nature as perishing as any other, a corruptible, or a
corrupted thing: 2. The end whereunto this is intended and carried, not of
corruption but perfection: Incorruption is the worst, (...)
that this corruptible of the Saints puts on, and rests in.

3. The necessity of this, it must be so, (...)
and there is no contingency in the event: and one necessitating cause though
not the highest, is the Holiness stamped upon that corruptible thing:
Infidelity may quarrel at the Saints, that they do see corruption, as the
Jews did at Christ, denying this Scripture to be meant of him, because the
word rendered corruption, signifies the Pit or grave, into which say they, he
was given, therefore he did see the pit; But know they to be given to the pit,
is to be under the power of it, that is to be corrupted, as Christ in the
least degree was not: so to be given to see corruption, is to be subdued and
overcome by it, and thus the Saints are not but after all their changes put on
Incorruption.

4. The Subject both of the evil and remedy is man the Holy Man, in the text
expressed My soul thy holy one; The Subject. 4. (...)
whither we take these two expressions, as noting the two essential parts of
man, the soul and body, or else if we take the former figuratively for the
whole man, or for the body, as by foregoing instances appears it may be taken;
and the later as noting the condition or quality of the whole man. These things
are considerable about it:

1. The aptitude of this subject in it self, to be forsaken of God and
corrupted; the principles of it at the best, are but corruptible, and the man
himself mortal.

2. The necessity by reason of sin, which is spread over all men, Genesis 2.17.
Genesis 3.19.
that this subject should be left to death and corrupted: when God himself had
given sentence, Thou shall dye the death, and, As dust thou art, so to dust
shall thou return again; otherwise it were no wonder to be preserved from
these evils; But now when man may and must perish in himself, that Holiness
should step in and save, that he shall not be left to death, nor be corrupted
in the grave: This still exalts the excellency of this Embalme. Such is the
subject, and such it is danger; such is Holiness and such it is virtue. In all
the weight of this piece of golden truth may be guessed.

2. Quomodo 2.
But how does Holiness effect and secure all this unto the man? I shall answer
shortly, by these two ways sweetly and comfortably. 1. By way of evidence
signifying and testifying this gracious privilege in the state of death to a
poor soul, as a pledge or token, which God has given for securing the same:
The Bow of God in the cloud is not a surer sign to men; Genesis 9.13.
that the world shall not be drowned again, than Holiness is to the Saint,
that his soul shall not be left in the state of death, nor his body see
corruption in the grave: The Lord himself, when he had made the covenant of
everlasting union and Communion in life and death, Esaias. 54.9.11.
with his accepted and sanctified ones, Looks upon it as the waters of Noah,
that is, as unalterable, for as much as he may not drown all flesh any more.
But how shall the Saints be secured in themselves? God will deck them with all
precious stones, Saphirs, Agats, and Carbuncles, which spirituallized are his
glorious graces, and by these shall they be secured of Gods never departing
goodness; This is Holiness:

2. By way of influence, though not meritorious from man, yet efficacious
against these evils by grace from God: This as it is carried in those usual
titles of Holiness, life and Incorruption, which have in them virtue opposite
to corruption and death, and are invincible by them, so its it most sweetly
paraphrased, when it is styled an unction from the holy one: for as the Legal
and inferior anointing of men to be Kings, Priests, or Prophets, 1. Joh. 2.20.
put a sacred stamp upon them, and a securing law, Psa. 106.15.
touch not mine Anointed; so that none durst lay hand on them to hurt them,
without incurring Gods deepest displeasure; And therefore David upon the
Amalikites false-selfe-accusation, about Saules death, startles him with this
question, 2 Samuel 1.14.
How wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thine hand to destroy the Lords
anointed? So much more, Psalm. 45.7.
that Supreme and Evangelicall unction powered out upon Christ, with and above
his fellows, must set him and them above all the injuries that death or the
grave can do unto them. God speaks to them, as David to the Amalekite, how
are ye not afraid to lay hand upon the Lords anointed? Nay, death and the
pit, shall be more afraid to corrupt the holy anointed dust, and more
faithful to Gods law, not to touch the Saints bodies to Corruption.

The last thing required to finis the doctrinall part of this truth; is the
(...) or demonstration of it, 3 Cur. sit
Why Holiness should be so powerful against deaths malignity, and the graves
corruption; whereunto may be full satisfaction, from the due consideration of
these three grounds,

1 The Saints union with Christ their head, Reas. 1.
which is fully according to our Lords Dominus patrem or at, ut qui in se
credituri sunt, unum sint, sicut ipse in patre est, and pater in eo est, it a
omnes in his unum sint. Quid hic aequanimitatem, quid pervoluntatis assensum
animae and cordiis unit atemiioducis? Locutus plane ille est vera and sincera
fidei Evangelicae Sacramenta; neque sohim locutus est ad significationem, sed
ctiam ad fidem docuit, ita dicens, ut omnes unum sint. Hilar. l. 8, de Trin. p.
100. Edit. Basil.
supplication to his father; the Saints are one with him and the father, as
they are one. It is not the same union as betwixt the father and the son,
essential, for this is impossible, but as like it as may be, mystical, the
holy Ghost himself being the spirit of union, the very Ligament and bond that
coupleth them: so that it is a real union, as that of the father and the
Son, and eternal as theirs is also; whence I thus demonstrate, that if the
union essential between the father and the son, and the union personal of
the son with our flesh were never dissolved in the state of death, but gave
him a preserving power in the time of deadlyhead, and raising power in his
appointed season; then in likeness and proportion, the mystical union between
Christ and his Saints cannot be broken in the grave, and if not, the divine
power of the head must needs preserve against the prevailing of deaths Tyranny
his holy members, and raise them from the belly of the grave in his own time:
See God in Christ acknowledging, Esaias 26.19.
and accounting the carcasses or dead bodies of the Saints his own: Thy dead
men shall live (and as we read it) together with my dead body shall they arise.
but more near the letter and emphatically thus, They my dead body shall arise,
so that they are Christ's united when they are dead, Christ's flesh, Christ's
bones, Christ's dust, and if he be with them, no fear can there be of the
souls dereliction in the state of death, or of the bodies Corruption in the
house of darkness.

2. Reas. 2.
The necessary and inseparable connection, between Imputed and infused grace; I
mean, the undivided fellowship of Christ's Holiness, which is his properly,
and by inhabitation, yet the Saints also by gracious imputation, and the
Holiness created and abiding in the soul: This always carries that with it,
as its glory and perfection; where this is, that is, where this works, that
works also to carry out to victory; if this be upon the dust of Gods gracious
one's in the grave, there will that be also to perfume it and preserve it, and
at last make it victorious over death and the pit: there can be no fear of the
deadly enemies prevailing over the Saints; for as much as this Head-holinesse
is a known conquerror, and has already made the grave to tremble, and
vanquished the power of it. This is the ground of that victorious song, which
the Saints take up from Christ: Death is swallowed up in victory; O death where
is thy Sting, O grave where is thy victory? 1 Cor. 15.54.55.57.
what is the matter I pray, that poor buried men should so insult over their
oppressors? It follows this victory is through our Lord Jesus Christ, He had
said before, Hos. 13.14.
O death I will be thy plagues, O grave I will be thy destruction: And now what
he by his excellent holiness has done, redounds upon his believing members,
that though in themselves, they be weakly holy, and therefore may be assaulted
by these proud enemies, yet in him having perfect holiness, they must be
victorious; and set up above the graves Corruption.

3 The undoubted relation of the Saint to God and true interest in him: how God
and all his Attributes stand engaged to Holiness, is already in some measure
discovered. Reas. 3.
What he will certainly do for his holy ones, will be more fully declared
in the next point: for present know we, The Lord is the God and King of Saints:
The Lord does go before them, and the God of Israel is their rereward, Revel.
15.3.
therefore cannot death look them in the face to hurt them, Esaias 52.12.
nor the grave pursue after to make a prey of them, their own God stands
before them, and behind he gathers them up: blessed is the holy one, for in his
God he shall never see corruption.

But why then does the head saint cry out as a man forsaken, Dub.
before he fell into the pit, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Matthew.
27.46.
if the chief of Saints find a dereliction before death, the inferior may
fear to be left and corrupted when they are dead.

The answer in short may be, Sol.
this desertion may be considered,

1. In the truth of the thing, 2. In the sense of the patient, Now it is
certain, that in deed and truth God had not left him, for the union was then
continued, and by his inabling and assisting presence was with him, kept him in
the grave, and raised him to glory; but in the feeling of this holy one God
seemed to be with-drawne, and that only in respect of his comforting presence,
that the redeemer might feel the burden of his peoples sins upon him, while he
suffered an Ecclyse of the light of his fathers countenance; and that having
felt he might pity and help such as at any time might fall under that
temptation, otherwise Christ was not left, for thus he says, thou will not
leave etc.

2. Having thus far stated the virtue of this Holy Embalm it is in order
requisite next to consider it is Author and maker God, upon whose Arm only
depends the being and force of it, Doct. 2:
The second proposition sets him out and his work: God will not leave his Holy
one in Hell, nor give him to see corruption in the grave. In this point God
bears the Emphasis and his efficiency in the Saints privilege. Thou, thou
Jehovah wilt not leave etc.

In the consideration of which truth, I shall only inquire, 1. Quid sit, The
meaning of some terms, 2. Cur sit? the grounds necessitating this truth.

1. The terms I shall touch in explication are only two. 1. The efficient, 2.
His work: As touching the first, 1 Efficient.
that we may see the saint trusts not to the vanities of the Gentiles, but
lays the work upon good strong hands indeed, even his, who is the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; of him I shall shortly note these proper
Characters.

1. He is God life; he that says I live, that is, truly eminently and of
himself, and so can none else say besides him; Deuteronomy. 32.40. Esaias 40.17.
As the creature is not in comparison of his being, so it lives not in
comparison of his life; nothing is, or lives, or can be, but by dignation from
him, and participation of him; O how is he like to match death and the grave?

2. He is God love; The great Saint and his companions, scarcely remember him
by any other name; neither he styles them any thing, 1 Ioh. 4.8. Matthew. 17.5.
but his beloved. What will he not then do for them?

3. He is God power; so he speaks of himself, I am God Almighty, Genesis 17.5.
and by reason of this power he has sovereignty over all creatures, actions
and events in the world; Alas poor Gods that can do no good neither can they
do evil. Esaias 41.23.24. Esaias 45.7. Deuteronomy. 32.39.
I form light and create darkness. I make peace and create evil, I the Lord
do all these things: This is God indeed: He kills and he makes alive, death
and the grave are his slaves: and should he let them domineere over his holy
ones?

4. He is God eternal, the first and the last: none was before him, to prevent
his purpose, Deuteronomy. 33.27. Esaias 44.6.
and good will toward his chosen Saints; neither can any come after him to
supplant them: death was not before he commanded, neither shall it be after he
gives forth the word, 1 Cor. 15.26.54.
Let it be swallowed up and destroyed: If this God will then preserve his holy
ones, in spite of death and the grave, who are they, that they should resist
him? And thus God will do as his work will testify:

2. The work of this God is set down in two Negatives, concerning his holy
one in the stated of death. 2 The work
1. Thou will not leave, 2. Thou will not give. They are both referred to the
same object, the Saint in the state of death, and so must be considered, with
this rule, that we apply to each part the privilege herein peculiar to it, to
the soul her property, and to the body its peculiar, freedom from desertion
may concern both, but from corruption as here intended, seems only to respect
the Holy flesh, sown in the dust. Now to weigh these Acts of God.

1. Thou will not leave etc. His meaning plainly is, God will not forsake him
in the house of darkness, nor cease to be to him either in body or soul, (...)
what formerly he had been in the state of life: The affirmative then is this,
that God will be to Christ and his holy members in the state of death, to their
souls, to their bodies, what ever he had been; more punctually God will not
fail them in these 4. respects:

1. Of union; God was one essentially with his son before death, and God the
son one personally with our flesh in life, Ioh. 10.30.
and in neither does God fail him now under the bonds of death: He and the
Father are one now as much as ever; So God and man as much one Christ now, as
ever. Though soul and body be for a while parted, yet God is not gone from
either.

This is transcendent for the Prince Saint; yet every meaner saint may claim
his privilege in measure: God in Christ is mystically one with these, Joh.
17.23.
having by his spirit knit them to Christ their head, and thorough him to
himself: once one, and ever one is God, when he does reunite to man in
Christ: though spirit and flesh part and fail them, yet God fails them in
soul and body never; rottenness and stench in the grave cannot drive him
away, nor separate him from his dust: Bodies and souls are parts united to
Christ, so that they are of his flesh and of his bone, therefore never by death
to be divided from him: They are Gods own, what ever they be.

2. Of Relation: The Lord was Christ's, God and Father, while he was alive, his
voice from heaven proclaims it, This is my beloved son; Luke 9.35.
and as tender hearted a Father was he to him, Ioh. 20.17.
when he was dead, he did not cease to be what he was: neither does he to the
Holy seed arising from him, He is Christ's Father, and their Father, Christ's
God, and their God, while they are in the Land of the living; and though man
dye, God dies not, nor his relation, wherein he has been known to his, he
his the father of the Saints dust in the pit, and of their souls in his hand,
as well as he was of both united: He gloryeth to be known at this day, Matthew.
22.32.
The God of Abraham, The God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, God of their
souls, God of their dust; yet not the God of the dead, but of the living, as
our Lord teaches, for as much as they are related to the fountain of life,
and shall by him be revived and raised; They and the Saints are his, therefore
not truly dead; if so then were they left.

3. Of affection: what love the Father bare to the Son in his life time, John
1.18.
is fully expressed in that one passage, he was in the bosom of the Father,
and no whit was it abated, when he dies, nay for that cause rather more love is
now discovered; it is his own word, John 10.17.
therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life; and when it was
gone, he could not be loved less, God could not leave now to affect him: It is
no otherwise with his brethren-saints, John 17.23.
if God love them even as he has loved him, yielding to Christ's own request;
whom he loves he loves to the end; and death is no end of being unto them;
conform therefore herein are they to their head also; God cannot leave to love
them in the grave, Romans 8.38.
nor can death separate from Gods love in Christ.

4. Of Operation: God wrought in Christ and for Christ admirably in his life;
Isay 55.5.
God glorified him in his combat with Satan, in his conflicts with the world,
John 11.41.43.
in healing sick, and raising dead, in curing bodies, and saving souls, John
5.17.
he confesses the Father works and he works in all. And will he now leave
working with him and for him in the grave? Nay his glory is there also, to keep
him, to command and drive away corruption from him to make him laugh at death,
and scorn the frowns and terrors of the grave, yea to raise him again out of
the pit, and exalt him up to his victorious throne: But was this for him only?
Is it not for his confederates also? Yea the poorest Saint has a portion here,
God will not leave to work for them in death: Has he rescued them from the
power of Satan and from the hand of hell by his quickening and converting grace?
and shall he now leave them to be a prey to death? Nay sure, he that has begun
is faithful, and will not leave working, until he carry them through the
shadow of death, and house of darkness, and perfect salvation for them in the
heavens: you see the first work.

2. Thou will not give, etc. or thou will not suffer, etc. Yet the former is
more near the letter, (...)
and a word of action more consoant in reason for the present purpose then of
pernaission; for an efficacious permission seems too little for God about
this matter, for as much as God does not only permit these evils to be done
upon his enemies, but his own hand does them, as a Judge dividing right: So
that in this confidence of Gods gracious will to him, the Saint acknowledges
these things concerning the Lord.

1. His sovereignty over the graves malignity, as if he had said, thou
might give me into the power of the grave, but thou will not, thou art the
Lord of it and me, and it cannot budge one jot beyond thy leave.

2. His sentence, so that to give to see corruption is to give sentence upon a
soul, and to adjudge it to the cruelty of the grave, thus God does to some.

3. His execution also of this, it is the Lord not only that has power over
these evils and gives sentence, but whose arm does execute, even corrupt and
destroy the condemned, and this makes it intolerable evil, when the hand of
God inflicts it upon sinners: Now from all these the Saint confides to be
exempted (and he is not deceived) God will be faithful. He therefore speaks
very boldly, Thou will not give thine holy one to see corruption. That is, thou will not use thy sovereignty over death to the disadvantage of thy Saint, thou
art Lord of all, not against, but for me, not to destroy, but save me in my
bed. Nor will thou command death to feed upon me, nor the grave to rot me away
from thee, but rather will thou give sentence for me to preserve thy darling in
the house of death, and require it back safely and with advantage from the
place of my Hinc and Apostolus concepit, seminari eam dicere, cum redhibetur in
terram, quia and seminibus sequest^atorium terra est, illic deponendis, and
inde repetendis. Tertul. lib. de car. resur. c. 25.
sequestration: neither will thou stretch out thine hand thy self to corrupt
thine holy one, (which none can do without thee) but rather spread it over thy
favorite and carry me in the hollow of thy hand, that a perpetual desolation
may not come near me. This is the work of God for his Saints in the state of
death, a sure defense is against desertion and corruption.

2. 2. Cur sit.
But why will God do this for his holy ones? I shall in short reply. 1 The
eternal purpose of God. 2 His promise and covenant with the Redeemer. And to
says in him are the causes of it, I will but touch these.

1 God will thus stand by his Saints in the state of death, Reason. 1.
because from eternity, he has purposed and decreed, to make them, to call
them, and through tribulations, Ephesians. 1.4.11. (...) Ephesians. 1.11.
sufferings, death and the pit to bring them to glory. Concerning which purpose
I shall but note. 1 The freeness or independency of it on any thing in the
creature; it is of himself, and for himself only, that thus he purposes,
therefore he must be most willing to his own work. Romans 11.29. A (...)
2 The steadfastness and immutability of it, he wavers not in his counsels, nor
repents of what he has resolved or done, therefore the least no willingness
cannot come in to decline him from his purposed grace to his chosen ones.

2 God will not leave them, nor give them to corruption, because his covenant
with the Redeemer and his seed is to set them above all and this God gives to
Faith to keep as a sure evidence against the day of darkness, and thereby to
secure the soul of its welfare. Psalm. 110.1.
It is Gods word to Christ, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine
enemies thy foot-stook, and among them death is not the least. John 11.26.
And it is Christ word to us, whosoever believes in me shall never die, not
dye indeed and thoroughly, that death should rule over him or plague him: And
again yet further, Matthew. 16.18.
The Portae inferi peccatum est, and peccati regnum, ex quo aditus est ad
inferos. Ar. Mont. lib. Ios. p. 108.
gates of hell shall not prevail against his holy body: And if not all the
power of Hell the terriblest enemy, then not the gates of sin, nor of death,
nor of the grave, can corrupt the Saints, for these are strong confederates,
and either prevail or are vanquished together; these words are faithful and
true, and are given to Faith to lay up and keep safely for the
Saints-advantage; if ye desire to know what use faith makes of them, the last
point will declare it whereunto I now proceed.

3. Faith secures the Saint of Gods gracious presence and of his immunities
from the evils of death and the grave. Doct. 3.
It is the voice of faith every word of it. Thou will not leave, etc. see how
boldly and peremptorily it speaks, My flesh shall rest in hope though it now be
laid in the dust, (...)
or more nearly to the letter, My flesh shall dwell confidently, or in
confidence and security; Not once fearing deaths terrors, or the graves spite.
And why so daring thou holy one? Faith brings in evidences, and secures the
soul of life, in the midst of death, and of salvation in the very pit of
corruption; so that not only the holy child Jesus, but all Gods holy children
are thus bold with God as to say, Thou will not leave our souls in hell, etc.

But how comes faith to give this security to the Saints?

I shall answer this, Q. A.
and it shall suffice at this time, for the doctrinall part of this truth.
There are two notable acts or effects of faith, that must needs work invincible
confidence against the mighty powers of darkness, where ever they appear, and
by them the Saints are so well established.

1. 1.
A realizing and evidencing effect of faith there is, which gives subsistence
to things which we yet but hope for, (...) Heb. 11.1.
and evidence to that glory which flesh and blood cannot see: thus the Apostle
commends faith, It is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of
things not seen. Now to consider duly this work of faith, two things must be
noted.

1. The object expressed in two terms. First, things hoped for, such as are
not actually subsisting, nor present to sens. Secondly, things not seen, which
though they have an actual present being, yet are not open to sight.

2. The work of faith about these, which is double. First, those things which
yet have no actual subsistence, it makes really to subsist unto the soul,
therefore is it called the subsistence of them, because it gives them being to
the heart, when yet they are not in themselves. Secondly, those things which
actually are, but are not seen by men, faith makes them so evident and
apparent unto the Saint, as if he looked on them with his eyes. I will give
instance of somethings touching the present case, and apply the work of faith
to them, and then let any judge whether the Saint have not cause enough to be
confident against deaths ghastly terrors.

1. Things hoped for, and not actually subsisting are such as these. First,
Incorruption to be put upon our corruptible. Secondly, resurrection from the
grave. Thirdly, vision of God in his heavenly glory. Now the excellent work of
faith is to make these really to be to the soul in present, that how ever to
sight they are not, yet to faith they are: and what coward would not be
confident against death, if he had the resurrection really present with him
before hand? Indeed without this death may swallow up a man: It is David's word,
Except I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the
Living, Psalm. 27.13.
alas what would have become of me? I might have fainted and perished for ever.

2. Things not seen, yet actually being, are such as these. 1. Gods being the
cause of all. 2. Gods union with, relation to, and love of his Son the
head-saint and all his believing members. 3. Gods absolute dominion over death
and hell, etc. All which though they be in present, yet are not seen with men,
and therefore are neglected, but faith gives as clear a convincing
demonstration of them to the saint as if he did look upon them; that however
before with Elishas servant he tremble, as a man, 2 King. 6.15.17.
yet when faith has opened his eyes and made him see God, and Christ
inseparably united to him, he is then secure and bold as a believer. He now
perceives there are more with him, than are against him, and therefore foolish
were it, to fear death or the grave.

2. 2.
An appropriating and a closing work of faith there is, whereby what ever a
man sees, it is given to him and made his own: Faith does but touch and take
with God. To believe Christ and to have him is all one in the language of Gods
Spirit: so to believe God, his power, 1 John 5: 12.
wisdom, and goodness, is but to have them, to believe his union with us,
love to us, zeal for us, protection over us, even in death, against death, is
but to enjoy all this, and possess the sweetnsse of it. It is registered of
those holy worthies among many other great exploits, Hebr. 11.33.
that by Faith they obtained promises; whether they were promises peculiar to
themselves, or in common with other Saints, it matters not here; this is
certain, faith only gives possession of them. And is not this a notable ground
of confidence and insultation over the grave, to have God and to have his
Attributes, and to have his Son all ours, pressed to do us good? To see Mines of
gold, and no more but to see them, may maze the eye, but leave the man poor;
to see and have all is that which makes rich, and sets above contempt: for a
close to this, were it only to see God, and to lose him, a man might be
notwithstanding a scorn to death: But where real subsistence, evidence, and
propriety of an Almighty gracious arm concurres, that soul may laugh at the
frowns of death, and terrors of the pit: All this does faith secure to the
Saint, well then may he be bold and say, in the grave shall my flesh dwell
confidently, for thou will not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thine holy
one to see corruption: we have seen the weight of these golden truths, The use
of them is next considerable, I shall add from all but three words in general
for use, to convince, to counsel, and to comfort, and these as the former
rules direct me.

1. Use 1.
Grant holiness in the nature of it a conformity to the holy God, and in the
virtue of it, the only preserving embalme from dereliction in death, and
corruption in the grave; who and in what case art thou, unholy soul? look on,
and be convinced of thy sin, and of thy misery.

1. Of thy sin and be ashamed: Is holiness the image of the glorious God, are
the beauties of it the splendour arising from the confluence of all graces? It
is sin then to want it, ugliness and baseness to be a graceless man; the
Blackmore is not more unlike to, nor more despised of the fairest creature,
Amos 9.7.
than thou art of God; Are ye not as the children of the Ethiopians unto me,
said the Lord to an ungodly seed. O that I could let thee see thy self in Gods
glass, how would thou hide thy face? Whose image and superscription bear
thou, ungodly sinner? No other reply can be made but the Devils, nothing
appears upon thee but sin, and sin is nothing else but the Devil in
perspective, or in his natural image; children of the devil is the proper
name that our Lord stamps upon ungodly men; and rightly his seed are they
termed both for their birth, and likeness, if the confluence of sin make up
the Devils image, vile wretch beat this upon thy heart, if it be Gods command
to be holy, it is thy cursed sin to be unholy, and if holiness arise from the
concurrence of all grace, hellish sinner, thou whose nature is inconsistent
with any one grace, or the relish of it, see thy sin, thy self.

2. Of thy misery be convinced, and be confounded; if holiness only be the
preservative against doleful desertions in deadlihead, and corruption in the
pit, what will become of thee, unholy wretch? Have thou other enbalmes prepared
against that day? take what thou can: fill thy soul with vain hopes, and
whorish perfumes of mercy, get for thy carkase the Regale unguentum appellatum,
quoniam Parthorum Regibus temperatur. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 13. c. 2.
royal ointment, that beseemes Kings, after that wrap thy self in
Sear-clothes, and then be wound up in a sheet of Lead, and hew a Sepulcher out
of the rock to lie safely in: And shall these commend thy soul to God? or
preserve thy body from putresaction? Sin will spoil these ointments and eat
through all these fences; The soul, the body, Prove. 10.7. Jer. 22.15.
yea the name of the wicked shall rot. Shall thou reign, says God to Coniah,
because thou closest thy self in Cedar? Alas sin will spoil Cedar pales, one
simple pale of holiness were better then all, but that thou hate; thou shall
therefore stink alive, and stink dead: Thy soul is a forsaken thing, left of
God to the spoil of Devils, and thy body shall rot in the prison whither thou
go, until both be clapped together into hell, A^curse shall thou be and an
abomination for ever, for thou art unholy.

2. As thou art an enemy to holiness, so no less art thou to God himself:
say then that the holy one is Gods favorite, that God will never leave him to
be a prey to death, nor give him up a spoil unto corruption; what is this to
an unholy soul, hating God, and hated of him? It is sin more grievous to
neglect and slight the Lord that is so gracious and faithful to his people, as
not to give them to the least disadvantage under death; And judgment shall be
aggravated to the weight of sin, God will certainly relinquish the ungodly
wretch in all those deadly evils whereinto his sin has led him; he shall not
have a smile of his countenance, nor the least work of grace from his hand, nor
hope of recovering out of the dungeon, but he that is soveraigue of death and
hell shall give him up to the tormentors, Mat. 25.41.
he shall pass the deadly sentence, depart thou cursed, the tempest of his
wrath shall drive him, he shall smite him, not only into the place of Dragons
and of death, but into the place of Devils, where the everlasting arm of
vengeance does for ever torment the unholy crew that are descended thither.

3 Unholy sinner, know this, thou art as contrary to faith, as to God and
holiness, and thy unbelief makes thee a perfect sinner and perfectly
miserable: thou can want no sin that want faith, unbelief is the root of
all, and binds on all in guilt, in power, and defilement, neither can faith
more secure the gracious presence of God, and sweet privileges in death unto
the Saint, then unbelief does make sure the wrath and curse of God, the plagues
of death and hell to the ungodly man: They are deadly words, John 3.18.36.
He that believes not is condemned already, He that believes not shall never
see life, but the wrath of God abides on him, Rev. 21.8.
The unbelieving shall have their part in the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone: These dreadful things thy unbelief secures to thine unholy soul.
What inscription leavest thou upon thy Tombe-stone when thou go down into
the pit? Unholiness, ungodliness, unbelief, there must be also death,
rottenness, and everlasting perdition. What is thy Epitaph, Here lies an
unholy and unbelieving man? There also will God write, A Child of death, of
corruption, and of hell. I speak not these things as a Judge unto you, O ye
unholy souls, (The Lord awaken you and keep you from this bitter portion) but
as a messenger from God to warn you, that ye may yet consider the things that
concern your peace: but if not, as a friend to monrne over oou, because you
are going into everlasting captivity, and to destruction never to be repaired:
but I would rather counsel than reprove or terrisie. And thereunto I now
descend.

Saving counsel will not hurt but help, given rightly, Use 2.
and well taken from the truths precedent: Brethren I exhort you in the name of
the Lord, O that ye would obey, be wise for your selves, and provide for souls
and bodies against the day of parting, that in the day of darkness ye may have
light, and neither sting of death, nor stench or Rottenness of the grave may
fester your souls, or make your bodies an abomination unto God: Earthy
provisions of Embalme, winding sheet, and Coffin will not profit, Q.
but heavenly will fence against all corruption: what then in to be done?

The advice which the text directs to give Sovereign against the Malignity of
death I shall dispatch in three words: obey them, and ye are above the grave. A.


1. Make sure of being in Christ, the Head-Saint, Romans 13.14.
or in another phrase, put ye on the Lord Jesus, clad your selves with him
before ye lie down in the dust, he is ornament, and Muniment, for comeliness
that ye be not naked, and for desence that nothing can hurt you, the grave
cannot corrupt the body, that he clothes: Believe in him truly and ye have him
for life, and food, and raiment, and wealth, and strong ^^^ity against the
attempts of your most dreadful enemies: see a little more narrowly, what a
fence he has about him that abides in Christ: The Father, and the comforter,
are always with the Son, so that have him, and have all: The spirit the
Comforter close at the heart, the son thy Head, and God the Father thy Rock;
thy strength, thy glory round about thee. (...) Joh. 14.26. Ephesians. 1.22. Psalm.
18.1.
Can death terrify, or the grave Rot these, and drive them away? then May
thou fear too; but hell and death tremble before the Lord: It is enough,
Christian, it is enough to see thy self in Christ, he has tried the arm of
death, and power of the grave, and has subdued them to himself, and laid them
under the feet of his believing members. If thou be yet without him, poor
soul, thou art naked, and exposed to the fury of death and the pit, be advised
therefore, and give no sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids
until thou can say, Christ is mine, and I am his: An humbled, selfe-judging,
selfe-abasing, and selfe-denying soul cannot come to him and be cast out; and
if received secured for ever; Ioh. 6.37.
As soon may that holy son be deserted of God, and made a prey to the powers
of darkness, as thy soul left in hell, or thy body given to see corruption in
the pit: Only be sure to immure thy self in Christ, and thou art set about
with walls of Salvation.

2. Next to this state of incorruption in the head provided, care must be taken
to be incorruptible in thy self, then art thou safe against deaths
destructions: As in the last resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.53.
our corruptible must put on incorruption eminently, that there shall not be a
possibility of dying again, so to make a way to that, in our first
resurrection to the life of God, there is an Incorruption by way of inchoation
that must be attained unto, which makes us safe against the destructive power
of the grave, though we do now dye: This is that holiness so much commended,
concerning which, This is my counsel, take care mightily, for the Being, and
perfection of Holiness in thee.

1. That it be in thee indeed: not form or show of Holiness will do good in
this matter; Holiness in truth is the only sacred preserving thing, the
reallity where of must appear in the rice, nature, and fruits of it. 1. For
its Rice, 1 Ioh. 2.20.
see it be truly from the Holy one, from that Holy-son the head of the Church,
from the holy Father the head of Christ, and from the holy spirit the ^^me of
both, all is but the thrice holy God, no Holiness real but from him.

2. For its nature that it bear conformity with his Holiness, that God may
appear to be in thee of a truth in his Image and peculiar work: be as like
as may be to the Holy one, Ephesians. 4.24.
heart to his heart, pure and heavenly:

3. For its fruits, that in thoughts, word, and ways the power of holiness
may give out it self, to bias, and turn them all to the holy one; This
destroys finne, and brings forth fruits to none but to God: O that this golden
oil might run in all thy veins, and seake thy bones, and fill thy bowels,
and clad thy flesh about, death durst not hurt thee, nor Rottenness spoil
thee:

2. Let it not content only to be holy, but perfect holiness in the fear of
God, to the most excellent beauties of it: see to the real concurrence of all
graces in thy soul, 2 Cor. 7.1.
as to the sweet order and disposition of them; Harmony is among graces, let
not sin put them out of Rank: Be it thy daily study and exercise to hold
out the splendour of all, Shine in Imitation of thy God, strive to reach his
glory in thy ways, Be holy as he is holy, even to sins utter destruction,
corruptibility dies with that: Aim at this mark and follow after it, let
ambition run to the highest to be like to God; the more holy the more
incorruptible by fin, and the more secure from the Malignity of death: when the
Apostle would demonstrate firmly the incorruptibility of Christ in the grave,
he urges this authority, God said on this wise, I will give you the sure
Mereies of David. In the prophet it is the Amen mercies, Esaias. 55.3. (...) Act.
13.34. (...)
in the rendering of the Apostle the sacred or holy things of David: nothing is
mistaken in the matter; The holy favors, which God by Covenant gave to David
the Type, to Christ the true head of his confederates, were a sure guard to him
against corruption, the same are the Saints indowments carried all in
holiness, and will be their fence impenitrable by the curse of the grave. O
then be Holy, be holy, brethren, be glorious in holiness, let it be your
garment now, your winding sheet when you lie down, it will be glory in your
life and victory in death it salse:

3. Let says also have its perfect work; if you provide well for your selves
against the evils of the dark habitation, and shadow of death. Ca^e in this
matter I would commend mainely about two things: 1. To pitch upon the true
object, the proper remedies and preservatives against these deadlyevills: 2.
That the Act of faith upon these be genuine and naturally to it, such as may
show it to be Gods noble plant in the soul; these are the realizing,
evidencing, and appropriating these saving receipts unto the soul. 1. There be
great and precious promises for salvation, in the midst of the furious assaults
of death and the pit, which have admirable virtue, if well applied, such are
these, Esaias 26.19. Hos. 13 14. Ioh. 11.26.
Dead men shall live, death shall be plagued for killing, and the grave
destroyed for devouring, and whosoever lives and believes in me shall
neverdye: These perhaps confidered in the letter may seem either not to be, or
not to be evident, or not to be a man's own, but thing remote or far of. Now
let savign faith come and work upon these, it will make all the sweethesse of
these to be in present, which seems either not to be, or to be long
hereafter, to come, it will make them evident which otherwise cannot be seen,
and it will give possession to a soul of all the goodness of them, unto which
otherwise it is but a stranger: what a sweet security is this to a poor soul,
to live in death, to vex and were out the grave, and never truly dye or be
corrupted? this safeguard will faith give out of Gods promises, neither can
law or curse prejudice or disannuall it: believe, O then believe the promises.

2. God infinite, invisible, immortal, all-powerfull and only wise, Pro. 18.10.
is the Rock, the fortress, the Sanctuary of his Saints; Esaias 8.14.
all his attributes shelter them in every storm fence them against fiery
darts, and hide them from the bloody pursuit of that merciless one that has
the power of death: let faith work mightily on him also, to compass the
Almighty, Heb. 11.27.
to make him seen that is invisible, to give propriety and interest in him
that is immortal, wrap thy self by faith in God, put on his attributes, as
garments of salvation while thou live, and keep them about thee for
grave-clothes when thou dyest; God will not disdain to by they safety in the
pit: and then death must destroy his glory and corruption eat thorough it,
before they can come to de mischief unto thee: Stagger not then; but be strong
in faith giving glory unto God.

3. The son of God manifest in the flesh the Prince-Saint, given to be the
head of his Church, is deaths king and the Graves commander, they are his
conquered captive slaves, he keeps them shut up under lock and key; Revel.
1.18.
he has they keys of hell and of death, were wethen but his confederats and
member-Saints, how might we laugh at the from nes and spite of death, and
slight the venom of the grave? Ioh 14.1.
Faith will accomplish this for you, unite you to him, cause you to see him,
make you his, and him yours: ye therefore that believe in God, believe also in
him; He carries God with him, where he is, God is: He makes good all
promises, in him they are yea and Amen, granted and performed. Make sure of him
and have all: Faith has, by gracious dignation, as it were a command over him,
he will no where fail it: Faith called him to his three companions in the
fiery furnace, and he brought them out in safety, Dan. 3.25.
not so much as the smell of fire was upon them; and no less will it draw him
to accompany his saints in the deadly habitations, where he will keep them,
and whence, he will never leave until he raise them out and no smell of the
grave shall be upon them. obey these counsels, exerise faith in these, and
live above death, ye shall never see corruption: but overcome death when ye
dye, and triumph over the grave, while ye live in it, and sing that triumphant
son when ye awake, O death, where is thy Sting, O grave where is thy victory?
etc.

Lastly, the sweet comfort of these golden truths may not be concealed from
the Saints; Use 3.
the Lord has given special charge, O comfort, comfort them, especially his
afflicted ones, that are oppressed either with the sad thoughts of his absence,
or fears of the fury of these last enemies: I dare not withold the Cordialls
provided for these sick souls; 1. To you is comfort sent that are sick of
Love, that lie commplaining of Gods absence from you, or desertion of you, that
long for, Cry for, wait for his return, and presence, saving, O when will he
come and appear to us? why does he leave and forsake our souls? Refrain
from these complaints ye holy ones, God has not left you, Then is a soul
left indeed when it has no desires after God; but here is no fear of Gods
forsaking you, while your souls are restless in longing after him; wipe away
your tears and look up, God is it nearer to you, than ye think: It was
M^^^es ca^e once, she weeps for Christ, and all the while, he stands by her,
and so is not unusual with the Saints, Joh. 20.15.16.
that are selfe-susoicious, to think upon every uneven step of theirs, God to
be gone; It may be sometimes his comforting presence may be hid, and yet his
sanctifiing presence continues to enlarge your souls in desires after him,
this is then better for you than that; Grace more needrull for you than
Comfort: know this, dear souls, God cannot, God will not leave you, when you
are dead, Heb. 13.5.
and will he forsake you while you are alive? He desires to have more trust
from you upon his promise, I will never leave you nor forsake you; and you
shall certainly receive more manifestations of love from him; quicken faith,
where sense fails, and be assured as soon may he forsake Christ the
Head-Saint (which is impossible) as you the member-Saints, whose souls delight
in him: These good and comfortable words God speaks to your hearts, O receive
them and be cheared, for they are true and faithful.

2. For you that are sick with fear, is fom fort here prepared; ye that are of
a trembling heart, God faith unto you, be strong; ye that are fearful
andshake at the terrors of the enemies of your salvation, be ye comforted; ye
that often express your fears, one time or other we shall perish by the hand
of sin, and be given up to death and hell: O how terrible are the thoughts of
death? how ghastly the visage of the grave? woe unto us when we must descend
into the pit: And why so fearful poor Saints? O that ye would make use of
faith now, and take in the consolations of God. Can promises cheer the heart
more then wine? can they secure invincibly against the power of sin, of death
of hell? All these are yours. Has Christ vanquished death and the grave? has he
made the gates of hell to break asunder, and conquered all the power of
darkness? Does he now laugh at death, and shake terribly the grave? He is
yours, his holiness yours, his conquest yours, his triumph yours, and his
dominion yours: Death and hell lie at his feet, and at your feet also: O lift
up your heads, and rejoice ye holy ones in this lot and behold yet more: Can
the Almighty forgive sin? can he blot out transgression? can he undee the
pains and chains of death? can he stop the grave from devouring? and bring
the prey out of its Mouth out of its Bowels? can he chain the devil, and
make hell not to be his? This God is yours, ye that have obtained that holy
and precious faith, ye are his holy ones, and can he leave your souls in hell,
or sufler his holy ones to see corruption? ye will take up better thoughts of
God, and be comforted against your fears, if yelet faith work thoroughly on
him: Be hold and speak confidently, Esaias 50.7.8.9.
challeng the King of terrors as the Saints have done their terrible enemies
before you. The Lord God will help me, therefore I shall not be confounded,
I have see my face like a flint, I know I shall not be ashamed, He is near
that justifies me, who will cont end with me? will sin, will death will the
grave? let us stand together. Behold the Lord God shall help me, who will
condemn me? shall these adversaries lead me in triumph? Lo they all shall
wax old as a garment, the moth shall eat them up: poor death, poor grave, the
moth shall fight with you and consume you: should the saints then fear to
encounter with you? God will deliver you into their hands, and like old
moth-eaten garments shall they tear you and come out. Live then above fears
ye Saints, in the shadow of death, fear no evil, for God is with you, Leap
for joy, and be glad at the remembrance of his Holiness.

3. To close all, but a word to the congregation of saints both sick and well,
consider your calling and be comforted over all the cross blasts that may meet
you in the world, ye are Gods anointed, his holy ones, holiness is your
Cognizance, which as it has the nearest likeness and is the Image of God, so
it has the highest place of dignity next to God. Holiness sets up Iehova
above all, that is his glory wherein he is exalted above all creatures. None
can abase the holy one of Israel, next to him is his holy child, Jesus,
Holinsse advances him unto his Fathers throane; and in this head are all the
Saints, Holiness makes them fit upon his throane. Be glad then and rejoice in
what God has done for you He has created you Holiness to the Lord; Mighty
Princes has God made you, over sin, death, the grave and hell; The powers of
darkness may puff at you, but ye shall trample them under foot. Sit down then
every of you, glory in your portion; and in the thoughts of ensuing graplings
with death and the grave, sing with David with Christ, My heart is glad, my
glory rejoices, my slesh also shall dwell confidently: For thou will not leave
my soul in hell, neither will thou give thy Holy one to see corruption: This
joy, This Honor have all his Saints. Praise we the Lord: Amen.

Thus of the Text.
Useful observations upon the life and death of Mr. William Crompton, the
Reverend and faithful Pastor of the Church of Lanceston Cornwall.
I Have another text, and another Sermon for you, before I dismiss you, the
one is our dear and Reveredn Brother now interred, the other will be fruitful
Collections from his life and death imitable by us all: I confess my judgment
is, that these Pulpit-speeches of the dead as generally used, do very much
hurt in the hearts of many, yet I dare not be injurious to the Holy, to
conceal that honor which God himself has cast upon them: In the present what
I speak, I shallayme it more to your instruction, than the deads commendation:
though it cannot but make his name a sweet savor. I omit the usual preface of
place, birth, and parentage: I begin with him, where I find him beginning with
himself, even from the first evidence which he conceived he had of his
interest in Christ. And all that I shall note of him will be under these two
conside rations. 1. As a member of Christ. 2. As minister of Christ.

1. Touching him as a Christian, that ye may see I speak not by rote, I may
let the world know, that not many hours before his death being under some
conflicts, and not able much to speak, he delivered unto me his
Bosome-day-booke, wherein he said he had ripped up his heart(and so he had
indeed) desiring me to return after some consideration my judgment of him and
it; I did so, as I could; As for him I am persuaded such thorough dealing with
a man's own heart as was there discovered, cannot be expected but from a soul
in Christ. It pleased the Lord to speak peace to him in the Answer: And for
the Book, being as his conscience the book of secrets, ^ thought it fit, it
should have its funeral with himself, wherewith he trusted me, and I did see
it consumed before I saw him buried.

Now though many things therein are to be concealed under a sacred tie, I know
it will be faithfulness to commend some things thence of public use, that
they may do good to others: No other shall I touch, and those I shall divide
it to two branches, 1. Such notable things as concerned himself in the way of
Christianity. 2. Such as note his carriage and respect to others.

I. Concerning himself, I find these things remarkable under his own hand,
which may testify the life of Christ, and the power of godliness.

1. A care to look for the beginning of his life to God, or at least the first
evidence of it which satisfied his self-suspecting-heart: and this be notes to
be in a sickness which God laid on him September 1631. at which time it
seems sin appeared more ghastly to him, and Christ more desirable, in that he
begins his reckoning of returning from that term. I mentioned this, nor that I
think he was not converted till then (as has been misreported) for he gave
good proof of God in him long before that time, but I aimed only at this use
in it for our selves, to make us wary how we trust our conceited conversions; A
storm may shake us out of all our selfe-confidences, nay make us mistrust
whither any thing be true in us at all, it is good therefore to look carefully
to the laying of our first foundation in Christ.

2. Upon this shaking an exact scrutiny and search of his heart and ways, from
the first time that he could remember unto his present sickness: The birth of
the body of sin with him, lively deciphered, his education at home, his life
at the Universitie, and his whole course in several places where since he
lived.

3. A strict and severe marking of every sin, whereof he found himself
guilty by nature, or by Act from his Childhood to his very entrance into the
grave described, as they were committed against every Commandment.

4. A very deep aggravation of all these sins upon his own soul, from
knowledge, from mercies, from rods that God had used as bars in the way to
sin, and yet he had leapt over them, and that with the bitterest expressions
that sin can be styled by, he spared not sin in himself.

5. A bitter contestation against hatred of and sorrow for sin, in the
discovery whereof, me thinks he wrote as if his pen had bin dipped in tears of
blood. O those impartial selfe-judgements, dismal tremblings of heart, and
grievous burdens of soul, under which he groaned to the last!

6. An unsatisfiable hunger and thirst after Christ, and the manifestation of
God in him to his poor soul; His written pantings and breathings after God,
did imitate David's, the panting Heart did not more bray for waters, nor the
thirsty ground more gape for moisture, than his soul did, to receive some
drops of mercy in Christ.

7. A most gracious bent of heart in most earnest desires to be as much purged,
as pardoned, and that sin might be as much subdued, as for given, peace any
way did not content him but peace with grace, and that God would so speak
peace, that he might not turn again to folly.

8. Constant use of means ordinary, and extraordinary, for the mortification
of sin and growth in grace, and amongst the rest monthly fasting and
humiliation, wherein he found no small advantage.

9. An Holy indignation at himself, and revenge upon himself for time
unfruitfully spent, wherein he conceived he neither did, nor received good:
Godly sorrow wrought much of this in him, and he lost not by it, growing more
watchful, and more skillful to improve all seasons of Good, and to redeem
time that was lost.

10. Unwearied perseverance in this godly thriving course, even to a few days
before his death, until weakness laid him in his bed, the forerunner of his
grave. See the man and judge severely, are not these the Characters of a
Christian? Thus he continued a self abasing, and a Christ exalting soul. Thus
he conversed within.

2. Touching his Christian deportment to others, I shall in short declare it in
this threefold respect which he had to others.

1. To the Churches of Christ, both at home and in foreign parts, an exact
observation of all memorable occurrences both good and evil in them, that he
might be sutably affected with them, either praying or praising God for them.
Deep thoughts of sorrow he expressed upon Germanies desolations and great
fears of the pouring out of Gods indignation upon our own Land, strong Cries
and Tears to turn away judgments, joy and thankesgivings upon hopes of
refreshing to the Churches of Christ among us, and one thing among the rest I
may not pass, when he enters upon the Register of this years mercies, he
begins it with this title in Capital letters, ANNVS MIRABILIS. 1641. and so it
is, A wonderful year of Gods mercies to England.

2. To his fellow Christians that were of his flock or otherwise, a strict
notice of their weaknesses, troubles in mind, temptations, or other afflictions
in diverse kinds, that he might have a fellow-seeling as a Christian, and
pastoral bowels as a Minister to them, to be weak with them that were weak,
and tempted with them that were tempted, that he might help to bear their
burdens with them, and so fulfill the law of Christ.

3. To his enemies it was his reach to be like minded to Christ, to do them
good for all their evil, and to seek it for them with his whole heart. O sweet
petitions, and strong cries have been registered for them, that have despised
his Ministry, and reviled his person. I hope God will remember them, if they
belong unto him, if not their storming at his goodness, and the relation of
it, will argue but the greater malignity of their sin, and leave them in a more
inexcusable condition. If this be the Christians Cognizance to love them that
hate him, and pray for them that despitefully use him, let him be well
accounted among the assembly of the Holy.

2. If we consider him as a Minister of Christ, these things I have observed
that may not be unfruitful to us, and were no blots in him.

1. His humble and heart-afflicting confession, that at his first entrance into
the Ministry, his aim was more to seek himself and his own, than to serve
Christ, and seek his glory. It may be no needless or unusefull Item to his
brethren in the Ministry, we that live may do well to take an hint from
hence, for a search of our ends in undertaking this sacred function; It is rare
if we be not deep in this transgression; and if so, it is no shame to be
plain in our confessions, and deep in our Humiliations for it: our gain it
will be if we awake, and in sincerity now begin to serve the Lord Christ.

2. His selfe-condemning for the best of his performances in the work of his
Ministry, looking upon himself as an unprofitable servant in all: Such
passages were usual in his own day-booke. This day I preached weakly,
carnally, with much corruption, etc. O how good is it to be a self denying
Man, a selfe-denying Master? But Lord, how hard is it to have any thing and
deny himself in all, yet must we strive.

3. The good proof which he made of his Ministry in the time allotted him; I
shall but touch the evidence of this in these particulars: 1. In his abilities
humane and divine; His works have shown this; and among others his worth
approved by that famously learned King James, who being called before his
Majesty as a delinquent, in delivering a false view of some of S. Augustines
works, was yet dismissed for his sufficiency with a Scholars reward: This may
silence detractors in that respect, but his proficiency in the knowledge of the
mystery of Christ, was eminent, (...). Greg. Nys. in Orat. in laud, Fra. Basil.
however he judged himself nothing in all, and in the sound judgment of truth
a Mountain not a reed to be shaken, as one said of Basil. 2. In his diligent
and indefatigable study to do Christ's work carefully and faithfully, as
becomes the Work of such a Master, he feared the curse of doing Gods work
negligently, it is good thus to fear. 3. In his tender bowels and affection to
those souls over whom God had set him: How did he watch for them, pray for
them, and carry them in his heart daily with desire to save them? poor souls
ye know not your less. 4. In his constant labors and travailes to form
Christ in the hearts of his people, by unwearied, faithful, powerful
preaching of the Gospel: In this way as he was laborious, so he was skillful
too; (...), Chrysostom. 10.5. in orat in Barl. Mart.
As he said of one Barlaam a Martyr, he was a good Archer, he shot his arrows
in the air, mighty words, and broke the Devils ^ankes. No less has he
wounded, spoiled, and scattered the devils forces, by the effectual preaching
of Christ in the place where God has set him. 5. In his fervent desire for a
good provision for his people after his departure; that a Pastor after Gods
heart might be sent to feed them.


In these ways was his life, since he began to live, wherein he approved
himself an holy Man, and an holy Minister, laboring to perfect Holiness in
himself and others; He was no less a saint dying than living: See his descent
to the grave.

Perseverance crowns a Christian, it was his glory to be perfected in the
spirit as to begin in it. I shall but note these things toward his end.

1. His patient submission unto, and welcomming of Gods rod unto him. It was
his choice, Love and chasten me, afflict and purge me my gracious God.

2. Holy care to make good use of Gods corrections, to consider his ways, to
hear the rod, and him that had appointed it, and to learn obedience by the
things he suffered.

3. Great struglings under bitter temptations, made something heavier by his
disease, yet Grace was sufficient in the midst of all, and by says he obtained
victory in Christ, glorying over his Tormentors.

4. Constant profession of faith, at his death sealing the saving truths of
Christ which he had preached, living and dying in the love of them: and whilst
sweet counsels and hearty prayers to, and for them that were conversant about
him: as for the Church of God, he spent his short breathing time, until his
spirit returned to God that gave it. Cast all up, and the sum in Charity must
be, in life and death he was Gods holy one, therefore will not God leave his
soul in hell, nor suffer him to see corruption in the pit. Let me but touch
our duties toward him, in three words and I have done.

1. Let us lament him, there is cause if we know our loss; Psalm. 12, 1.
It is David's cry, Help Lord, for the godly man cease: So many gaps are made
for wrath to break in, as there are holy men taken from us. Here is dead an
holy man, and an holy Minister. It was Jerusalems trembling, when good Prophets
were cut off; It should not be our rejoicing, The burial of a Nurse with Jacob
has a sad Monument, her Sepulcher is called Allon Bachuth, the oak of weeping,
Genesis 35.8.19, 20.
she dyed not unlamented; A Pillar of sorrow is raised for Rachel his wife upon
her grave. Nay, Jacob himself an old Saint dying among strangers wants no
mourners, at the floor of Arad the Egyptians made such a bitter lamentation
that the place bears the name Abel Mitsraim, Genesis 50.11.
the mourning of the Egyptians. Natural affections become men, gracious
affections should be in Christians (though not to mourn as without hope) yet
to mourn greatly at the fall of such a Saint, such a Minister, such a Pillar
in the house of God.

2. Let us Imbalme him, Eccles. 7.1.
at least spread his own confection on him, his good name is a precious
ointment, Holiness has made it so. Give him his due then, as David to that
Worthy, Dyed Abner as a fool dies? So say we, 2 Samuel 3.33.
dyed this Holy one, as a sinner, as a sot? no but as a Saint, giving up his
spirit in Faith into the hands of a faithful Redeemer. We may set it on his
grave here lies an Holy one.

3. Let us imitate and follow him, as he followed Christ: as he said in his
speech upon a dead martyr, (...). Chrysostom. ibid.
we come not so much to commend him, as to be bettered by him, in the
imitation of his right ways. Hear Christians and Ministers, there is a Copy
for you both in this deceased Saint: ye his flock and hearers, write after him
in selfe-examination, search, judgment and aggravation of sins, no less in
try all of Graces, and of your conversion: Walk after him in godly Sorrow,
Repentance, Faith, Holiness, and Times redemption: Good fruit will then
appear in your lives, and sweet comfort in perseverance to death; Keep ye a
day-booke also for your souls, that your accounts may be in readiness, when
your Lord shall come.

And we his Brethren in the Ministry may not disdain to be followers, where we
have not been leaders: let us now bethink our selves, that we are called to
seek Christ's and not our own; Dig we by study into the Mystery of Christ,
preach we the Gospel painfully, faithfully, constantly: Love we the souls for
which Christ has dyed, and account it our glory to be sacrificed upon the
service of their faith: so shall we dye peaceably in conscience of our
innocence from the blood of souls; 1 (...) 5 4
And when the chief shepherd shall appear, we shall receive a crown of
glory that fades not away. To all and for a close; Be ye holy, shall I say, as
he was holy? Nay, I set you an higher Copy, even as God is holy, strive to
reach it, though ye come short in the truth, in the beauties of holiness; Ye
hear your honor, Death and the Grave shall be your slaves, and ye Lords over
them, while ye seem to lie under their power. There is no fear of
dereliction by God, nor corruption to betide you; Nothing can separate between
you and Christ, nor between Christ and God. After his sufferings he is entered
into glory, and now is in the holiest of all, appearing for you as your
forerunner, ye also his Member-Saints shall follow him in this path of life,
and when this dark vale shall be drawn aside, then shall ye enter into the
high and Holiest place, to be perfected in the vision of the Thrice Holy God,
in whose presence you shall have fullness of joy, and at whose right hand you
shall have pleasures forevermore: All which the good Lord grant unto us,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

