HALIFAX LAW TRANSLATED TO OXON: OR, The New Visitors Justice, Displayed in a
Letter to a Friend, concerning the late Reformation begun there by the E. of
Pembroke.

More particularly in Brasen-Nose College, and S. John's.

Printed in the Year 1648.

YOur last Letters, (Gentle Sir) show me that you keep close to your old wont,
and are still as eager after News as other Men are after Meat. You show me that
you would be satisfied how it fares with your Mother the University in this
newfound Visitation: How with your Nurse the College of Brazen Nose, where
you were trained: How with the President of S. John's, unto whom you profess
your self obliged for some special Favor afforded unto you in the renewing of
your Lease from the Church of Sarum, by his means as Dean. I see your desire,
and the Method how you would be satisfied, and I shall endeavor for the
staying of your stomach (until some one of more leisure may cook you out a
full Meal) to give you a Taste of each of those Dishes, which you have named
unto me.

On Tuesday, April 11. My Lord of Pembroke came to Oxon, in the common
expectation, attended with Gentlemen of the Country, and Men of special Rank
and Quality; but in very deed accompanied with a very lanke and mean Retinue:
before him came five Beadles, that would be, and the Clergy Visitours, with
some of their Seekers, who were in hope to rake something out of the Rubbish,
when their Masters had ruined the Colleges: there followed his Honor some
Gentlemen of his own Household, and thence unto Merton College, an Herd of
Townsmen and ragged Gowns, who were entertained (as they conceive) all alike
with an Oration from M. Cheynel, he telling them, that Englishmen were to be
entertained in the English Tongue, and so after some few Words answerable to
this latter part of his Auditory, he shut his Mouth, and the Roat came back
with open Mouth, that they had often seen Sir Cranion or the Fly at Whitsuntide
fetched in by the Cooks of Oxon, with much more grace and solemnity.

On Wednesday, his Lordship was brought to the Convocation-house, his five
Staffe-less Beadles preceding with empty hands, and his five Visitours with
empty heads, pursuing his Honor, it is agreed these later were empty heads but
it was discovered by a secret Spy, that Langley a broken Tailour who first led
the Beadles without Staves had a Needle in his hand, which he bore (they say)
as Ensign that the Visitours were now come, who meant to botch up the
University, or otherwise as the only prosse, that these Men were the Fellows
indeed, who were like to make good the Latin Proverb, Rem acu targe, and to
put out the Eye of the University with their Needle.

On Thursday his Lordship went to diverse Colleges with these Nothings before
and behind him; who to make themselves pass for something, had joined unto
them a Torne-breech'd Smith with a Cyclopian Sledge or Hammer: and that was the
thing which made the terrible noise, and proclaimed those Visitors what they
are, the Enemies to all Doors which might keep in Sober men and Students. This
Magdalen College, Alsoules, and Trinity College were made sensible of; whose
doors being broken down to the ground, were made the only things pertaining to
Learning which sell down and worshipped these, those, those, etc.

On Friday his Lordship went out of the Town, not one Beggar retarding his
passage with a breath to beg for an Alms; Some unhappy Iacks have collected,
that either the poor were very glad to be rid of their new Chancellor, or other
wise, that they had resolved to take Alms at no hand, but from whence they
might likewise hope for a blessing, But that I may not surfeit you while I am
giving you the Taste I promised, you shall now hear the last of this Pageantry,
or ante-dated May Game.

The Chancellor being departed, the younger Frye spend their Mouths and
judgments upon him, That he came into the Town like a Botcher, proceeded to
knock down Learning like a Butcher, and went out like a Pinch-penny. But these
were the extravagancies of younger and wilder Fancies: The more Authentic and
Sober men were very sparing of their words, but sure they paid it with
thinking. Yet some of them were heard to say at a close meeting, that it was a
mavelous condescension for a Gentleman of so Noble Birth, and so much Honor
to be led up and down a City in the execution of a Petty-Constables Office,
for the breaking open of Gates and Doors according as a company of Cockbraind
men, a Medlye or Composition of Fools, Knaves, and Madmen should direct him.
How say you? Is not your Mother the University in a ready way to become a
famous and glorious. University, just after the same manner as her
Foster-Father has been made a most famous and glorious King.

Your Nurse has been long sick in her head, but little looked for such
Physicians, who cure not but by killing. The plain and breife English is this.
Upon Thursday night last the Visitors came unto Brasen-nose College, went into
the Hall, caused the Order from the Committee above to be read, wherein it was
declared, that Dr. Ratcliffe was thought guilty by the Commons of high Contempt
of Parliament, and thereupon resolved that he should be removed from being
Principal, and Mr. Greenwood should be made Principal in his place. The
Visitors without more ado (D. Ratcliffe the Principall-remaining in full
possession, and his place being never declared actually void) put Mr. Greenwood
into possession. But you must not call this an Error among them, with whom it
has ever passed current, that the house which they have a mind unto, admits
not of the distinction of Plena and Vacua, Voidable and Voyded. But is as
pervious to these holy men, as is the air to a celestial body, or the light.
Well Sir, the Earl of Pembroke tells Mr. Greenwood out of the Vn-eccing
Chair, which rules at the high Mess at Brasen-nose that he was Principal.
And Mr. Cheynell immediately tells my Lord, that he must now rise out of the
Chair, and give Mr. Greenwood the place. The first President that any called
Chancellor gave way to any of the University in any place of the University.
But the headie Cheynell would have it so, and the good dutiful Lord obeyed,
and came out of the Chair, and set Mr. Greenwood in it; and then Mr. Greenwood
came out, and both of them together went out of the Colleges; so they were in
and out, and out and in, and out throughout.

Doctor Baylie at St. John's had some fair play for his Presidentship: But
little better success. He met the blow which was to smite him beside his
Head-ship in the Quadrangle; and so was taken by the Earl of Pembroke and the
Visitors into the College. Hall, and admitted to hear his Doom, the Fatal
and irrespective Decree of the Committee, which condemns and executes before
men have done any Evil; and cannot be prevented though you should do never so
much Good.

Mutatis mutandu, Names and the like, what was read at other Colleges was
repeated at St. John's, and the Doctor required by the Earl of Pembrooke to put
in his Answer: Which was as soon done as demanded: The Doctor instantly
replying, That he conceived the Honorable Houses of Parliament had never
either seen or heard the Answer which he had formerly in writing given up unto
the prentending Visitors of Oxford. His reason this; For that he had humbly
presented in that Paper 8. several Clauses of Statute, which bound him by a
Corporal Oath, and the rest of the Fellows of that College, to admit of no
other Visitors under pain of Perjury and Expulsion from the College for ever,
then the Visitor precisely named in the Statute. The words running all along,
Nulli alij nec aliis sub pena perjurij and amotionis perpetuae, ne admittant,
with exception against Quemcunque and Quoscunque. Alium vel alsos, intra vel
extra Collegium, tacit vel express, sed eis resistam express etc. And more
as my Curiosity has since been witness of: I prevailing with a Fellow of
that House to show me the Answer which the Doctor put in to the Visitors,
whereof he had a Copy. Whereto the Doctor further added, That in the Answer
returned by him to the Visitors, he had humbly besought them so far to mediate
with the Parliament, in the behalf of himself and his College, as that he
and they might be referred for strict examination upon any accusation commenced
against them, unto any Court of Justice in the Kingdom, or be any other ways
most strictly Sifted and Adjudged, save only by this Course in present
propounded: Which, upon their entertainment of it, manifestly involved them in
Perjury; and for this one very Act of Submission rendered them so obnoxious,
that if no other Argument of Offense could be possibly made good against them,
yet these Visitors might have recourse to this act of their Submission; and for
this justly accuse, convince and condemn them of Perjury, and accordingly
statutably amove and expel them for ever our of their Colleges. The Statutes
of our particular Colleges are all I believe like unto these: Ours (I am sure)
are, and so I presume our several Pleas do, and must respectively accord with
this of the Doctors. This first reply of the Doctors was received by the Earl
with this Answer, that the Commissioners above had interpreted him guilty of
high Contempt, and for an adjunct, avoiding of this first reply of the Doctors,
it was avouched by Mr. Wilkinson, that the Commit above had seen or heard his
Answer; which made some of us who stood by ome what to wonder at the acuteness
of the Committee, who out of a man's tenderness not to be Perjured, and his
voluntary Provocation to be tried by any Public course of Law in the Kingdom,
should extract the guilt of high Contempt against the authority of Parliament.
But the Doctor easily waved this first Plea, and upon the Earls Allegation of
the Committees judgment, being by the Earl urged to further Answer, then
openly called to his Lordship and the whole company of some hundreds present to
witness, that however the Committee were pleased to interpret him, and his
past or words or deeds, that he took God to witness that he was most ready
to submit to all authority, and in the present and heretofore he is and had
been ready to submit unto the Orders of this Parliament in all things which
consisted with the safety of his Conscience and Livelihood; For the
Rationality whereof, he first referred to the law of God and his Son Christ; and
for the other to the law of Nature and this Kingdom.

And here he took the Liberty to enlarge himself, that the things he craved
were, First, the liberty of a Christian; to wit, that he might not be forced to
do any thing contrary to the Law of God and his Son Christ. In particular that
he might not be forced to Forswear himself. Secondly, the Liberty of a
Freeborn Subject granted in Magna Charta by H. 3. received by Ed. 3. continued
by all Parliaments from H. 3. more precisely renewed in the 3. of K. Charles,
where his Lordship thought it ht to crave the same by himself from the King,
and to grant it to other Subjects as a Peer and Member of that Parliament.

The Doctor to bring himself and his Discourse home to the business in
agitation, observed that there were punctually two things required of him in
the present Visitation. First, that he should submit to these Visitors. The
second, that he should for non-submitting divest himself of all Emoluments,
and remove himself out of the College: to each of which he regested in order.
First, that by the first he must be enforced to involve himself in Perjury:
and for that he plainly professed that no Authority under the Sun should
prevail with him so to do, and thereby to lose the Liberty of a Christian, and
incur the main hazard of his soul For the other he appealed to his Lordship and
all the bystanders, whether it could be adjudged reasonable that he should
lend, or arm, or knife to the cutting of his own throat? Diverse other things
were alleged by the Doctor, which though they had no present answer, yet they
obtained promise of answer from some Lawyer present, when they should come
again to visit: that is, when the Doctor shall be absolutely turned out, and
not there to reply. His Lordship for conclusion vouched a saying of the old
Lord Burleight, that A Parliament could do any thing but turn a man into a
woman, and a woman to a man. Whereat the Westminster Lads who know Hide Park
and the Spaing Garden, and that my Lord had in his younger daye^ made that
easy enough, laughed in their sheves: and the company were now to wait on his
Lordship unto the Presidents Lodging, where he meant formally to dispossess
the Doctor and induct M Cheynel, in the Hall was the Doctors wife and children,
on whom Sir Nath. Brent was pleased to cast a favorable eye, and drawing
toward Mrs Baily while the Doctor was talking with my Lord, moved her to
accept of a fortnight for removal of her sick children and goods; she replied,
less than a month would not suffice, the Lord over-hearing the discourse,
interponed, and after some words used by his Lordship to Mis Baily, professed
to the Doctor that he was willing to yield him any favor, and would consider
with the Visitors, what might be done for him. The Doctor civilly acknowledged
his Lordships pronenesse to favor him; but in this particular he renounced
favor, and professed that he only expected justice. The Lord replied, he must
turn the Doctor out, and give M. Cheynel possession. The Doctor replied he
might use his pleasure, but he hoped his Lordship did not expect that he or
could or would contribute to his own prejudice. Much p^ate these was, but in
fine they left the Doctor without a formal Voydance, and with some show that a
month should be indulged for the removal of his goods, and we conceived it
might be so.

Yet smee we hear, that the Visitors have agreed, and will print the same, that
Doctor Barley upon condition of compliance with M. Cheynell, and the like, shall
enjoy part of his Lodging for a Month, being deprived of all other Emoluments.
How the Doctor will bear this (whom we know to be of a natural stoutnesse, and
well settled upon his Principles) we know not: but we think him very much
mistaken by the Visitors, who put him to stoop to one so much below him, and
to derive his Water from a stinking Channel, as yet he is in the College, but
providing (I must tell you) suddenly to remove his Goods. And truly I must
further add, that my self, though yet unquestioned, am not like to hold long
the Place I obtained when I left Brazen Nose. I will not have any Fellowship
with and among these Wretches, into whose hearts the Devil I fear has
entered, and filled them full of all iniquity, that he may bring them to
destruction both of body and soul. The God of Heaven purge their hearts from
this Gall of bitterness, and lose them from this bond and Covenant of
iniquity: otherwise, God preserve your and my soul that they enter not at any
time into their Counsels.

So I am yours.
Oxen, April 17. 1648.
POSCRIPT. One pretty odd Passage there was betwixt Sir Will. Cob and the
Doctor, and you shall have it for Marmalade to close up your stomach. The
Doctor strongly assevering something, said, as I think In good Faith; Sir Will.
harving ruminated a good space on the business, at length as in aneztasie
cries out, Blasplemy, horrid blasphemy, Is there never a Justice of Peace here?
This made a general silence, until the Doctor spoke to Sir William, and
desired to know, what it was that caused him thus to amuse the Company, Sir
Will. replied The Doctor had blasphemed. The Doctor asks, In what? The Knight
replied, In swearing by your Faith. The Doctor said, He did not remember that
he (...) used those words, but admit he had, he desired to know where the
blasphemy (...). In this, said the Knight, for that you have sworn by that
which is none of your own, that is your Faith. How, said the Doctor? By your
good leave Sir Will. my Faith ^^mine own, and if you mean to be saved, you must
get you a Faith of your own, it will be a hard matter for you to live by the
Faith of another. Yea, find the Knight, Your Faith is none of your own, it is
the Gift of God. Then reh^^ed the Doctor, It is so much the more mine own, for
what freer than gift? In^^d, Sir Will: you are here quite beside the Cushion. I
confess, replied Sir Will. that I Am no Doctor. True, said the Doctor, nor
Phisician. And so the Tongue ^bat ended, and the Foyles were laid down on both
sider,

FINIS.

