A LETTER From NEW CASTLE, To the Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor
of Scotland, and the rest of the Scottish Commissioners at London.

Containing a RELATION of the taking of the Town of NEW CASTLE By Storm.

Dated the 19 of October, 1644.

Published by Authority.

London, Printed for Robert Bostock and Samuel Gellibrand, October. 26. 1644.

Right Honorable,
I Should have gone into Newcastle at the time when the Packet went from hence,
on Thursday, but was put off till Friday by these obstinat mischreants,
especially the Mayor of that Town. Sir David Hume, John Ratherford of Jedburgh,
and I, went in on Friday at nine in the morning; we had Commission from the
General and Committee (if we found real dealing) to yield to all honorable
Conditions, for preventing the effusion of blood, notwithstanding all the
Provocations we had from them. The Mayor, Sir Nicholas Cole, and Sir George
Baker were treating with us: they gave us big words: do what we could, they
would not so much as come to speak of Conditions of rendering up the Town: And,
after three or four hours Debate, all they would condescend unto, was, To think
upon their Propositions, and send them to the General within three days; one
of which Propositions to be as they affirmed, and Mordicus adhered unto: That
when all Conditions were agreed upon, they should give Hostages for delivery up
of the Town after twenty days, if Relief came not to them. And because we who
were commissionated from the Army, were limited to Friday at night, to conclude
or give over Treaty, we desired them to write to the General, to know his
mind concerning those delays, and we should either stay till his Excellencies
Answer did come, or would carry it, and return, if we had further Commission.
They would not grant this favor to us; but told us, They would let us go, and
they should write to the General to morrow. I went thus far on with them,
which was more then in Policy I should have done: yet so fain would I have
effusion of blood shunnd, that I told them in plain terms, That if they did
write any thing, it should be that night. They sent out a Letter that night,
about eight of the clock, wherein they averred many untruths, and told, They
would send their Propositions on Monday next. It was late before many of us
could be got together, to give Answer: Those who met, thought it fittest to
return an Answer, and to send such Conditions as we would grant; and to
certify them, That if they did not accept them, and send out Hostages for
performance, the General would no more treat. The substance of the Conditions
were: 1 That all Officers and Soldiers who are desirous to go out of Town,
should have liberty to go with Arms, Bag and Baggage, to any Garrison not
beleaguered, within sixty miles; and should have a Convoy, Wagons, and meat on
the way. 2 That all Strangers, Sojourners, or Inhabitants, who desired to go
with the Soldiers, should have the like Liberty and Accommodation. 3 The Town
shall enjoy their Privileges and Jurisdiction, conform to their ancient
Charters. 4 The Persons, Houses, Families and Goods of the Citizens and
Inhabitants should be free and protected from violence. 5 They should have
their free Trade and Commerce, as other Towns reduced to the Obedience of the
King and Parliament. 6 That any of them who desired to go into the Country,
and live in their Countrey-houses, should have safeguard for their Persons,
Families, Goods and Houses. 7 That no free Billetting shall be imposed on them,
without their own consent. 8 The Army should not enter the Town, but only a
Competent Garrison.


I have not the perfect copy of the other Instructions sent to them, which was
signed by the General, with that caveat, That they should send out Hostages
this day, at eight in the morning, for the surrender of the Town upon these
Conditions, betwixt this and Monday the one and twentieth, before two in the
afternoon, otherwise the Conditions to be void. In stead of sending out
Hostages, or desiring a new Treaty, this morning they sent a bitter
Invective-Letter, standing to their former Resolutions. We had been so long
expecting that these men within the Town should have pitied themselves, all our
Batteries were ready; so many of our Mines as they had not found out or
drowned, were in danger of their hourly finding out; the Winter was drawing on,
and our Soldiers were earnest to have some end of the business; which made
the General (after so many slightings) to begin this morning to make Breaches:
(whereof we had three, and four Mines) the Breaches were made reasonable low
before three of the clock at night. All our Mines played very well: They within
the Town continued still obstinate: My Lord Chancellors Regiment, and
Backleughs, entered at a Breach at Close-gate: The General of the Artillery his
Regiment, and that of Edinburgh, entered at a Mine at the White-Tower Colonel
Stewart and Gasks Regiment, entered at a Mine, after not dispute, beside
West-Gate: this was one Quarter: Lieutenant-Generall Baylie had another Quarter
at Newgate, with five Regiments, viz. his own (which was formerly Dudhops)
Waughtons, Cowpers, Dumferlings, and (...)who entered by a Breach: Great dispute
was made here, and some of our Officers killed, whereof one Major Robert
Hepburn cannot be enough lamented. Cassilis, Kelhead, Wedderburne, Marshall,
and the Master of Yesters, had a third Quarter, who entered by a Breach, not
without dispute. Lord Sinclare, Aytoun, Niddery, the Master of Cranstoun, and
the Lord Levingston, had the fourth Quarter, who entered at two Mines. They
would have had more hot work, but the Resolutions of the Officers and Soldiers
made a quick dispatch. They within the Town made all the Opposition they could,
on the Walls, and in the Streets. Some houses are burnt. The Mayor and some
others fled to the Castle, and did presently beat a Parley, which the General
would not hear, at that time, in respect they had been the instruments of so
much bloodshed. The Lord Rae, and some others of our contrymen, are
prisoners with us. You shall hear more particularly, within a day or two, by an
Express.

October. 19. 1644. Your Lordships humble servant, A. HUMBIE.

FINIS.

