HORAE VACIVAE, OR, ESSAYS. SOME OCCASIONAL Considerations

BY JOHN HALL.

-- Vitiis nemo caret, optimus ille
Qui minimis urgetur --
LONDON, Printed by E.G. for J. Rothwell, at the Sun and Fountain in Paul's
Churchyard, 1646.

olim Majora Aetatis Suae 19. 1646

W. Marshall sculpsit.



TO The Reverend Mr. John Arrowsmith Master of St. John's College in Cambridge.
BUt that ( Worthy Sir) you know as well how to pardon as judge, I might justly
suspect your entertainment of these pieces. Faint breathings of a mind
burdened with other Literary employments, neither brought forth with Care, nor
ripened with Age, yet such as if they be not now blasted may be the first
Fruits of a larger Harvest; Let them Sir, Receive the honor and shelter of
your Name, since borne under your Government, and cherisht by your Candor; That
if they chance to survive their Father, they may testify he was Sir

Your most humble Servant, J. HALL.

To the Reader.
WHen thou shall peruse these ESSAYS, and compare them with the Authors years,
J suppose thou will wonder to see one whose Pulse beats short of nineteen,
take such long Strides in matters of this nature; and be ready to suspect,
whether he walks upon his own Legs, or be stilted up by what he has
borrowed from others; the truth is, he might be indebted to many, and yet few
discover it, in regard of his acquaintance with the French, Spanish and
Italian: but yet I dare assure thee what this Gentleman presents thee with, is
as free from any such engagement as his Fathers lands are from morgage. For the
language, it is continued everywhere so like it self that any may perceive he
has nowhere stretched his own meaning to make way for another fancy: and for
the matter, know this, they who are well acquainted in the closest shops where
wares of this Kind lie, say that he is a true man and has not robbed any
Author; the whole web (such as it is) is his own, if thou will believe him (who
alone and only) saw it woven; it is but a little one; it is in thy power to make
it bigger; for He has more of it upon the loome, and only stays to know of
thee whether he shall go forward in the work. Most of these Subjects were not
of his own chusiing, but (after discovery of his Genius this way imposed upon
him as taskes, though he was pleased then to call, and after make them,
Recreations; His Recreations they were; and if thou please to make them thine,
it may encourage Him to begin, complete, and publish, what he has either
designed, begun, or perfected. Be entreated to accept of these, and He is
resolved (being already provided) to acknowledge thy Candor by some POEMS. As I
hope thou will find Him not altogether Left Handed in prose, so I dare promise
thee He will be far more dextrous in Verse.

John Pawson.
John's in Camb. June 12. 1646.
To my dear friend Mr. I. Hall on his Essays.
WIts, that matur'd by time
have courted praise,
Shall see their WORKS
outdone in these ESSAYS;
And blush to know thy early
years display
A dawning clearer then their
brightest day.
Tho. Stanley.

To his worthy friend the Author, on his Essays.
THy youth these Lessons
learned has, and more
Then were set out to any
of three score.
Thus thou out-strippest Life,
and do beguile
The fatal Sisters of a
longer file;
And like the youthful Planet
of the light,
Art ever climbing and yet still
at hight.
W. Hammond.

To the deserving Author upon his Essays.
It Is common to commend;
but to deserve
Is for some few, that
march in a reserve
With Thee. Thy Essays
rich in native worth,
Need not our Trimming
praise to set them forth;
But while judicious men
the Readers be,
Are monuments of judgment,
Wit, and Thee.
Ja. Shirley.

To the Author.
I Nor intend with some
ambitious verse
To court applause; nor yet
thy praise rehearse;
J hence no fame affect;
thou none do want
That we can give, whose
larger worth our scant
And narrow thoughts scarce
comprehend; thy praise
Thine own works best relate;
thy first Essays
Shame others master-
pieces; Thy Nineteen
Makes five and forty blush,
that scarce has scene
What thou have read, digested,
and can teach;
What we in other singly
praise, thy reach
Together graspes; thou
studies can direct;
Make choice of friends,
opinions false detect;
Thou'st read both men and
Books, thou have a key
To each man's breast which
is thy Library.
In short, no single knowledge
can confine
Thy larger Soul; but as
the Sun does shine
On the whole globe of earth,
and banish night
From its usurpt dominion,
yiedling light
To eyes without it useless;
Thou like him
Shinst everywhere, enlightnest
every dim
And heavy eye; dark matters
clearst, turnst night
To brightest day. J know of
whom I write;
Light wits by every breath
of vulgar praise,
As empty Ships when the
wind kindly plays,
With their large sayls do
proudely ride, as past
All thought, all fear of
wrack; till some cross blast
Oreturne and sink them;
but thy nobler soul
Whose balast's judgment,
is beyond control
Of popular censure; thou
thine own worth,
Parts, skill, have better
weighed, and sent them forth
Of doors to seek a Censor,
who at home
Have one severe as he so
by old Rome
Sirnamd; Go on then
happy youth; and be
Thy fruits as great as we
can hope to see.
A. Holden Col. St. Ioh. Soc.

To my worthy Friend the Author, concerning his Essays.
ARe these the bloomings
of thy greener Age?
Sure, they some monstrous
Summer-fruits presage.
Nature does seem to Antidate
thy years,
And ere thy Seed-time's
past, Harvest appears.
Well have thou writ Essays;
And well He may
Whom nature has set forth
as Her Essay.
If for thy mornings drawght
Thou drank'st thus deep,
Poor Helicon will grudge
Thee long to keep.
And if each moale Thou do
thus heart'ly feed,
Nine Muses must go
supperlesse to bed.
Yet take Thy fill: long
may Thou live, and be
Their Patron; They Retainers
unto Thee.
T. Goodwin. Fellow of John's Col. Camb.

(...) Essay 3.31.
(...).

HORAE VACIVAE, OR ESSAYS.
Of Opinions. I.
WE Consider Opinions here as well Errors sent abroad under the vizards of
Truth, yet by some Wart or Moale distingwishable, as Truths themselves walking
under the notions of Paradoxes.

Some broach them to serve the glory of their own Names, and this is
ambitious; some to poison and infect others, and this is diabolical; others to
occasion further search and satisfaction, and this is discreet. To stick to
ones own after sufficient conviction; argues self-love to reject another at
the first blush, peevishness; to follow antiquity hoodwinked, is but Jmplicite
Ignorance; utterly to reject it, and wholly lean on Novelty, a heady lightness.

Those Opinions are not like to get much footing which meet not with the
disposition of true and place to entertain them, as that of Vigilius of the
Antipodes; but on the contrary, they easily spread, as that Project of the holy
War, meeting with a stout and superstitious Age; they take best root when
they are sowed by degrees, for that insensibly qualifyes men's Humors, and
adapts them for molding; as Columbus design of a discovery after he had been
stav'd off by several Christian Princes, yet by his own confidence (which
questionless was strengthened by a higher power) He gained the assistance of
the King and Queen of Castile.

Where they are to meet with a people groaping in gross ignorance, The
weakest and those that suit best with such conceptions, do with the greatest
facility possess themselves; for eyes coming out of darkness are unable to
endure light, whereas they can with small or no pain suffer twilight; but
those of more rectified Reasons, can sustain bright and glistring discoveries
to beat in upon them.

Disputing of an evinced certainty teaches again to doubt of it; cashering of
a probability, not thoroughly sifted, may cut off means of further knowing,
since though errror be blind, she sometimes brings forth seeing Daughters.
The Alchymists have benefited the World more by their occasional experiments,
then ever they will do with their Gold; and the prodigious Tenants of some of
the old Philosophers, have given hints for some more accurate discussions,
truth having this advantage over her enemy that she makes her turn many times
her weapons upon her own self.

He takes the best course to keep his judgment from biasing, that narrowly
heeds upon what principles both parties build, whether both stand fast to their
own grounds (as sometimes in Philosophy utraque Pars est vera) and whether
ground is surer to build upon.

So long as no man can challenge an unerrancy, nay, the greatest minds have
been soyled with the foulest stains: to captivate ones reason to a private
brain, is to betray it to another error; but the (...).
Retention of assent to settle it in the best surety, and rejecting what is
disallowed without protervity, is the safest means of sure and solid knowledge.

Multiplication of Opinions in Religion, argues that men's minds are unsettled,
and the Tapour of Devotion burns but dimly; they generally usher in uproares
in the State, seldom end in verbal contestation; nay One Sect subdivided,
pursues her own differences with the most rancour; as is seen amongst the
Jews, Turks and Persians, some swarms of Friars etc. whether it be that they
think errors that approach nearest the Truth to be most pernicious, or that
they can the worse tolerate them where they least expected to find them.

Some Tenants are more easily maintained then opposed, some better to confute
then assert; some that are detestable, carry in them shows of applause;
othersome seem more ugly then they are really; it is a poor flattery of a
man's self to propose his adversaries arguments with their edge blunted; nor
can it proceed from any thing else then a Spirit of malice, to set them out in
more horrid visages then they truly carry. The multitude is susceptible of any
opinions, being ever unconstant, suspicious, credulous, violently hurried away
with them for the time, which is never long; ever greedy of liberty, though
neither knowing to obtain nor possess it; easy to be wrought on in matter of
Religion, and that rather out of a reverentiall confidence of their Priests,
then reliance of their own Judgments, either adoring or detesting their
Governors, and consequently sometime struck out of a tumult by the presence of
one, whose age and virtues have placed him beyond their envy: Sometimes boiling
into a commotion at the appearance of another, whose Pride, Oppression or
Greatness has caused their malice, Idolizing their own darlings for the
present, and suddenly crushing them; Implacable where they have the upper hand,
merely Asinine where they know an overruling power, suspecting the designs
of great ones, and ever taking their practices to be darker then they appear.
Wise men are timorous in the disfranchising of their judgment before they
suffer their considerations to be regulated with reason, and matur'd by time;
once settled, it is one of the greatest taskes to remove them; doubts cause them
to suspend their Assents; satisfaction of doubts Confirms them, and renders
them inflexible, that many times they will write a Confirmation of their Theses
with their own Blood.

Since we all see here but per transennam, or as men in mists, one may see
somewhat further then another: yet none can take a full and clear Prospect: it
is but Charity to pardon that in another (Errorr) from which no man can exempt
himself.

Of Time. II.
THe most precious thing we can enjoy is time; yet neither is it, nor do we
enjoy it; we cannot reinforce a passed minute, nor rely upon a future moment;
all we have is that Punctum fluens, Now: which is no part at all of it. Thus
are we like flowers nursed by the wind, and if we escape a violent hand in our
bloome, we after wither and droope into the Bosom of our mother Earth: So that
he seemed to carry Reason along with him, who called Nature Stepmother, in
that she gives us so small a portion of Time, that we commonly rot before we
ripen; But he considered not that brave Actions are the best Chronologies, and
that we only live so long as we live under the Colors of virtue; in other
actions we are no more then Irrationals; nay, they were far more happy then
we (many of them) to climb to so many Centuries of years, whereas the greater
part of us can hardly reach half one. It Is a comfort Thetis gives her brave
Son in Homer, that though he should be ( (...)
) short lived, yet he should continue himself in the Admiration of Posterity:
Many snacht out of the world in their youth, though they might have been more
beneficial, yet are beneficial by their example, of drawing out the short
thread of life, by interweaving it with choice Actions, and making it though
small, yet well wrought. Thus indeed we wrest the Sithe out of the hand of
Time, and pull the wings from his heels; But idleness is too delicate to do
either, and it only content to anticipate death, by suffering her self to be
Rackt with Passions, and entombed in Pleasures; Thus our Silken Gallants are so
sick of Time, that they embrace any means to shake it off; but high Souls
like the Heavens they come from, move continually, and are incapable of rest,
until they rest there; They look at the gliding of every Sand in the
Houreglasse of their life, and are so insensible of labors and withal so
unwearied, that as in Natural motions, they move with greatest force in the
latter end. God sends us not unto the Theater of this World to be (...).
mute persons, but actors; and though he grants many Exits, yet it is but that
we may re-enter with the greater Activity; and it is an arcanum of his Empire
to conceal from us the date of our days, that we may the better number them,
and keep us perpetually awake, because we know not how soon he may come upon
us; for He will come like a Theife in the night.

Thrift in the Expense of our time is an excellent virtue, wisdom to manage
it to our best improvement, the Base whereon the Superstructures of all other
wisdom lies; it is an honest injury to Nature, to steal from her some hours
of repose; unsufferable to the soul to let the Golden hours of the morning
pass without advantage, seeing she is then more capable of Culture, and
seems to be renewed as well as the day; It were an excellent posture to paint
Caesar in, as he swome with a Book in the one hand, and a Sword in the other,
since he made his Tent an Academy, and was at leisure to read the Phystognomy
of the Heavens in Military Tumults. This shows he knew how to prize time, and
hated Idleness as much as a Superior, and indeed to speak to Christians, we
ought to look how we spend our hours here, knowing they are but the
praeludium of that which shall be no time but Eternity.

Of Felicity. III.
IT was an unsuccesfull stratagem of satan to tempt his Lord and Maker with the
Kingdoms of the earth, and the glories thereof; yet how has he ever gained
by it? most being contented to look upon it through his Optic instruments, and
then indeed it seems only glorious; but who consider it as it is in it self,
see, that it is the basest Element, spurned (as it were) out from among the
Rest, as though Nature disdeigned it a Room, but what it crowded for; besides
compared with the Heavens, it is puncti instar, or as the Arabians say, minimum
de minimo, and can produce nothing without the Influence of them; and those
circles by which her measures do so magnificently cantonize her, are only
Imaginary, and but borrowed from the Sphere.

Now the Soul by the almost unanimous consent of the Heathen, being a Divine
substance, and only mued up in this cloister of flesh, cannot but entertain
so strong desires of liberty, that although courted by all the blandishments
the World can offer Aestuat Infoelix angusto limite mundi.

So that those who walked in the midnight of Nature, both wished and sought for
a day of happiness, but they like men in the dark did only wander, or like
Pilgrims in the Wilderness still engage on new errors; yet what sweet did this
disquisition cost? all confessing, most searching, none finding.

We have it brought brought home to our own doors, nay, are woed to accept it;
and yet how many are content to cheat themselves of it for a Toy? These are
like Noah's Crow sent out an Espiall of the weather, which being entertained
with carrion was content to live in Exile. But those happy souls that claspe
hold of it, are like the Dove that could find no resting place, till she
returned to the Arc; these though they enjoy the greatest felicity can be
enjoyed on Earth, an Earnest of Heaven, yet are they unsatisfyed till they
enjoy Heaven it self; They can set a true estimation of those sublunarie
things, that others are contented so to overbuy, more Sottish then the
Barbarous Indians to exchange Gold for Glass: more greedy then Atalanta, loose
themselves to stoop for a golden Apple; or to take it a Note higher, more
wicked then Judas to sell their Master for a thing of nothing, and yet like
Plato's people in the Cave wander they in their pleasing darkness, offended if
you show them light, nor marvel if Oules cannot endure the Sun, when it is
the best discoverer of a true Eaglet.

They both go on contrary principles and are led by contrary guides, these by
Fancy, the other by judgment, the one by a purblind Reason, the other by a
quick faith; the one builds on the Sand, the other on the Rock; the one is the
Golden Image whose feet is of clay, the other the Tree whose Root was in
Earth, and branches in Heaven. There is more in that Elysium of the Poets then
a mere flowrish; truly if the Original of it were exactly traced, it would
be found in Egypt, and yet the Egyptians not the first Authors, and from
them devolved among other knowledge into the Schools, which gave the best
fuel to the choycest inventions, neither is there any great cause to wonder at
the corruption of it, since being not fordable by Humane reason, humane Reason
brought it down to that lowness it could wade over it, and fitted it to her
own capacity, since she was not wide enough to Receive it as it was in it
self.

I have not that I remember observed of any Nation though near so barbarous,
but it had some glimmering Notion or other of another Life; for that whimsey of
Pythagoras of the transmigration of Souls, it has been hissed out long since
as Heterodox.

So that if these may to Reason evinee a second Life, we can turn our eyes no
way but we have examples of the shortness of this; It were madness to set our
hearts on what we cannot long enjoy, although there were somewhat here worth
our liking.

Of Preaching. IIII.
PReaching is the Crystal aquaeduct that conveighs the water of Life to us,
the Pillar of fire in the Night, the Manna in the Wilderness; but that it falls
most plentifully on the Sabbath; they gather the best that are all ear, and
grow the bes^ by it that are all Heart; This is Gods solemn Ambassie to the
Soul. and we must hear him, although as to Baalam, he speak to us by the
mouth of an Ass, and yet he must either boar our ears, or we cannot hear
what the Spirit speaks unto the Churches, for his messages are high and
mysterious, such as can find no entrance in at the ear of a man of flesh, who
is too fast asleep to take any Alarm at the Silver Trumpet of the Gospel;
Nay often when God is desirous he should shake off such a Spiritual lethargy,
calls upon him; he like young Samuel mistakes the voice, and returns again
unto his slumbers; but such is Gods passionate love to mankind, that he
irresistibly forces himself in; And such his is infinite wisdom that he
always selects the fittest means; as Hearts of Adamant he softens with Goats
milk, Hearts of Iron with fire; some like Paul he brings in with light from
Heaven, others like Timothy he lets understand the Scriptures from their
Childhoods; to some Souls he comes as he did to Elisha, first in an earthquake
of guilt of Sin, then in a whirlewinde of sorrow for sin; then in a fire, a
tyrall of righteousness: then in a still voice, a calm and composed
Conscience; others he builds up as was Solomon's Temple without the noise of a
hammer; nay such an Admirable method has he to insinuate himself, that though
he come in a Conqueror, he suffers the Soul to be victorious, and though he
force her, leaves her a pure virgin, and both compels her to be willing and
makes her willing to be compelled. It Is an admirable thing to see two mere
Carnalists at a Sermon, the one bring away himself discomposed, and the other
hardened; such a wonderful Nature has the word, that it freezes as well as
thawes, and it is as well a sea-ring Iron, as a two-edged sword; The Law
speaks wounds, the Gospel oil; the one Threats, and the other Blandishments;
the one of the wilderness, the other of the land of Canaan. The one begins
with our fall, the other with our restitution; The one shows us we lean on
the bulrush of our own merits, the other how we may find acceptance through
Christ our Lord; The one was delivered with fire and lightening; the other with
a Quire of Angels and a Star, the vehemence of the one, and the delicacy of
the other, are the best rhetorike to win a Soul; the one inforces Arguments,
the other confirms them; yet what poor Orators does God (to convince reason
it self of his Glory) often make use off, that they may not speak in excellency
of man's wisdom, but demonstrations of the Spirit? but abstract them into a
voice, and what differs the meanest Minister, from the greatest Rabbi, humane
learning being a good Hand-maide and an ill companion to divinity, who though
she carry away the Jewels and Earerings of the Egyptians, she desires to use
them and not wanton with them. Embossed Language tickles the ears, nervous
twitches the Heart: the one is better for an Oration, the other for a Sermon,
in which there would be Ethicall Truth as well as Logical.

Of Fame. V.
DEsire of Fame is an Epidemicall passion, that possesses low as well as high
minds, but is only predominant in the latter, the other it may force up a
little from their own center, but can hardly advance them to any great
designements; from this Root sprung all the virtues of the Heathens; this very
wind blew the pens of the Poets, and first made them cast ink so clearly,
and taught Princes to feed them, seeing it was a cheaper way to outbrave
Oblivion, then by emptying their Treasures on heaps of stones; and it has
proved the surer way too, since many of them have through age forgot the Names
of their Founders, others have quite shrunk away; othersome with their ghastly
Ruins can only present us sad considerations of what they have been; whereas
we have Ajax fighting as stoutly this day in Homer, as when he made the Trojans
turn their backs of the Navy; and the wildfire of Lust burning as hot in
Helens cheeks, as when it set Troy on fire: the clouds of the Times
intercepted the sight of other Paths, nay hardly suffered them to tread these
aright; they would adopt one person to a great performance, and in the same act
by stumbling either at time or place, basterdize him; so that it would be a
Thirteenth Labor of Hercules to make us believe any of his twelve. But more
refined Ages threw of their disguises and vizards of fables, and chus'd rather
to appear unmasked in Histories. But yet how often did they paint, how often
did Historians like flattering Limners draw too favorably, or shadow ore a
wrinkle; and stily forge in some secret grace; How often anger so jog'd their
hands that they could only dash and blot, so that vice many times Cog'd virtue
out of the Chariot, and rode in her stead in Triumph, and she is as well
content to steal her honor as her upper garments; yet envy has done as much
hurt as Malice, in cankering virtues by looking on them, and those not the
meanest, but the most fair and goodly; wings become this Harpye very well,
since she still mounts aloft and disdaines to stoop to inferior Preyes;
Questionless, Pens made of her quils are ever blunt in the end; Libels are her
spawns, but as other Monsters short lived if they be not honored with an
encounter, for so they will continue more long and but die honorably; it
argues a great Spirit to fight with them by flying, as did Augustus and other
great Personages, who left examples that there may good use be made of them, in
that they may give occasion to casheire some lurking vice, which fled, ones
own observation, and had not been hinted by the two much modesty of friends. A
good name is better then precious ointment, nay rather to be chosen then great
Riches, said he that had as great a share of Riches and Glory as any man
living; It Is an unexpressible comfort to any; to have their Actions smell sweet
in the nostrils of good men; as that Natural perfume about Alexanders body,
argued an excellent Crasis; so does the sweet relish of ones carriage a good
composure in the Soul; Tacitus says, contemptu famae contemni virtutes; and
Tully, Negligere quid de se quisque sentiat, non solum arrogantis sed etiam
dissoluti; yea these people that care not for being well spoken of, are a feared
of being ill; as was apparent in Tiberius, who so long as he could shadow his
manners ad pompam and ornatum continued at Rome, although he refused honor so
stiffly, that it was interpreted Modestia degeneris animi; but, when Age begun
to perfect his corruptions, he retired to Capreae, that he might with the
better vacancy, and secrecy attend his lusts.

Writing of Lives is very profitable both to the memory of the party, and to
Posterity; they do better Lance into secret humors, and present men in their
Nightgowns, when they are truly themselves. A General may be more perfectly
discovered on his Pallet, then when he appears in the head of an Army; They
leave us withal good Copies, that beginners in the World may write by; men of
most raised thoughts have not disdained patterns; as Germanicus took
Affricanus: Julius Caesar, Alexander: Mahomet the great, both: others, others.
A diligent comparing of those that resembled one another in their manners or
fortunes, were more worth then the Pains. Plutarch (to whom Rome stands
indebted for the virtues of her Trajan) has done somewhat, yet some very
steady judgments have found his Matches are unequal, and hardly jump, so that
they may truly be called Paralells, for they will never meet.

The description of ones own Life might be thought ambitious, were it not it
has been done by some persons, either already sated with glory, or not
regarding it, as among the Ancients, Josephus, Nazianzen, etc. moderns;
Thuanus, Fr. Junius, etc. for fidelity, they going out of the World, can have
no great desire to juggle, and they have the most Liberty in relation, for
Truth they are best able to be acomptants of their own Actions; for authority,
they can best command attentions; since their past life, has been but the
Exordium to what they speak, and every word is raised from a mass of
experience, so that it were to be wished, that Modesty did not withdraw many
men from this Task, and that there were not so great a paucity of those that
have labored in the other.

As there is an Exorbitant desire of Fame, so is there a too nice Refusal of
it; nay sometime it is more ambitious then the Acceptance, as in that of Cato,
he had rather men should ask why his statua was not there, then why it was;
or perhaps it may be with intent to draw on more, as in Caesar's refusing the
Crown, Non Rex sum sed Caesar: but it is seldom, or never Cordial and real,
there being an innate desire in every man, to transmise himself unto
posterity: For as Hanniball gallantly frets it out in Silius, "Heu quantum
distant a morte silentia vitae.

There may be gleaned out of Histories (but it will require a whole task)
several ways and Ginnes used for Glory; they are most observable in those
Mushrums that rise ex minimis initiis, because, having their fortunes to mold
out themselves, they are forced to look more narrowly into exquisite means:
as first to possess themselves of the People; who are most soon won, and
most hardly held; for it is ever, that they rather desire to make men great,
then they can endure them when they are great, and are better to erect then
conserve a Favorite; and this is done by insinuating into them of most
authority among them, they being like the Bells in the Grove of Jupiter, touch
one and they all sound; this was commonly practiced in Rome, in any Tumult to
possess themselves first of the Tribunes; or by Liberality, which was Caesar's
course, That we may say he made himself by undoing himself, or else by
putting on a disguise of Religion; and what else was Scipio's staying in the
Capitol? withal a good stock of parts is required to begin on, but these are
Cause-wayes of ambition as well as fame.

Inserting a Name into a History, is somewhat more flat, commending it to after
Ages by writings, comes far nearer the Life; the Image of a man is conveyed
both ways, the first as in a draught of Colors, Dimensions but no Motions;
for Histories for the most part pick but at the Rind of business, and few are
writ with such exactness, that we can perfectly see the concurrence of
Instruments, carriage of counsels and Influence of Superiors. The other as in
a Crystal, there is a perfect Repercussion of a Man's visage, and he is hardly
a judicious Reader that cannot in any work (except it be absolutely Dramatick)
g^esse at the Genius and Inclination of an Author. Hasty glory frequently
extinguisheth in Snuff, for it arises from Expectation, for the most part;
which if not secunded by a double performance, turns to undervaluing; And men's
judgments have more time to grow dispassionate and disintangled, so that there
would be required a singular cunning in poysing a Man's self, and staying too
hasty Augmentations, for they give but occasion of more narrow inquiry, and
raise up more store of enemies.

Fame upon no deserts may be a silent invitation to deserving; but where there
is opposite vices, it is merely sarcasticall, and Ironicall, nor ought to be
entertained without a Sting and Blush.

Of Studies. VI.
MAny have Chalked us out Methods for study, out of which it were more easy to
draw one good one, then to find one among them. Some give slight directions
for the attaining of Sciences, as though they were merely to Relieve the
memory, and withdraw some fading Notions: or else as if they supposed us to
have either so short Lives, or small Industries, that we could only cast some
small glances on Learning. Others are so Elaborate that the Lives of the old
Patriarchs would be too short to take those voyages they direct. Some parcel
out Studies into Time, very unfitly, since some wits can digest before others
can Chew, and some hot Stomachs turn all to good Nourishment, whereas others
are so weak, that they cannot away with any thing that is not a Chylus before
they Receive it; besides some engage upon Literature toward Maturity, when
their judgment is stayed, and fastened; others are brought into it in their
Childhood, while their parts do but fluctuate, and there cannot but be a great
disproportion betwixt these two; for assiduity best manures the one, whereas
the other would only be sprinkled with some dew; for overmuch watering does
but loosen them in the Root, and so destroys them. Some wits are of a finer
temper, and would have learning instilled into them by way of Recreation;
others it must either be forced and hammered into, or else they will never
Receive Impressions to any purpose.

The Prescription of various Methods has arisen from this; some by the
pureness of their Naturalls have reached to good perfection in learning more
compendiously, and suppose others may do the like, others having gone about,
think at their jornyes end they can prescribe nearer paths; Others having
stumbled on some Method, and finding it succesfull in two or three more
pregnant wits, endeavor to obtrude the use of it upon the World; but indeed
some General directions can only be given, Men's means and ends being so
various, some abounding in leisure, others in means; some happening on an
Excellent Tutor, others being forced to hew out all themselves; some desiring
to know much, others to know well, so that we may truly say in this case, a
Lesbian Rule were the most certain.

Studying at set hours is much advised and practiced, but cannot but be a
slavery to a free wit, who when she is stinted begins to dislike Her
enforcement to horary taskes, which carry in them a show of Labor, but would
quilt her employments so with Recreations that she might seem to play in her
severest business; Neither can we so long as we carry these four Elements
about us, attend at all times with the same alacrity, so that it is injustice
to fetter a man's spirit to any fixed Labors, but ever to seize on an advantage
of her cherfulness, and to make use of it; but finding a Reluctance to be
weighed down; for such idleness is not only harmless, but profitable, like
the taking of the Plumets of a clock to make it go in the better Order;
neither will a great spirit be content to Rest long, but reinforce her self
with disdain to be buckled with so base a companion which devances her from
her own Sphere.

A Man may have many fine devices to cheat himself into a new Industry,
whether by thinking of the exellency of that he goes about, or placing his
admiration upon the Eminency of some person exqeisite in it, or hearing it
commended by others, or commending it himself, thrusting himself into such
company, where he knows it is respected, and he shall have occasion to make
use of as much of it as he knows; teaching it to some others. There are a many
other neat Incentives, and such as might well deserve a catalogue; But in some
cases a Man had need know which way to disintangle himself, as if he find
his Fancy too Luxuriant, to restrain it with matters of judgment: if he
find himself inclinable to a study neither so profitable, nor advantageous,
dexterously to conveigh himself into another, and weane himself from the
former; as to dishearten himself by looking at some pieces which are above his
Reach, for then it will abate the edge of his desires, when he sees his hopes
seconded with no fruits; or looking upon some Author, who has but feebly
handled such a Subject, or Reading some bitter invectives against it, or
foolish controversies of it, these will set a Man's thoughts straight, as in
rectifying a Bough, we weigh it down the contrary way.

One had need take the hight of his own parts, and see whether they lie
adaequately to all Sciences, or strongly bend to any-particular one, and to
follow his own inclination with the most wariness; for they do but injure a
man's parts that drive besides their own bed, which is many times the cause
that they run in so poor and muddy Channels.

No man ought to graspe more then he can well fathom, for so he shall have his
labor answered by but small profit; The Jtalian says Che Abbracchia troppo
stringhe puoco, and that very truly.

There is a ororium vinculum (as they call it) amongst the Sciences, and indeed
none can tell a perfect tale but referres somewhat to the relation of her
Sister; so that he that would not make a Polygamie of them all, but is content
with one, had need admit the rest as Attendants.

The tongues are the fittest to be soonest learned, for they most depend upon
the memory, which is strongest in children; who remember that best which they
learn first; their tongues are more flexible to personate any pronunciation,
which cannot so easily be essaid by one of riper age; withal, their judgments
are not at any setlednesse, so that they cannot without prejudice follow more
serious studies: Now continued meditation, does strengthen and confirm old
judgments, and does only put young ones on the Rack; so that these praecocia
ingenia, as they shoot out before the Spring, so they commonly wither before
Winter.

Tongues are our Interpreters in the World of knowledge; and what advantage
has he in a Nation, that understands the language by him that speaks with
another mouth, and hears by another tongue? It Is well known what gross
errors in some of the Fathers this has produced.

The choice pearl in Divinity, lies in the Hebrew; the best of moral
knowledge amongst the Greeks, Political amongst the Romans, Rich Gems of the
Mathmatiques amongst the rubbish of the Arabians; and who can perfectly
understand these, unless he converse with them in their own dialects? The
effeminate French, the luscious Italian, the grave Spanish (three (...).
daughters of the Roman) add both luster and furtherance to other knowledge.
Unless an inclination be very discoverable, it cannot be perceived till after
Twelve; and from that time fancy begins to sprout and wantonize for some
years, till it have arrived at the just height.

Judgment is long ere it be settled, experience being the best nurse of it; and
we see seldom Learning and Wisdom concur, because the former is got sub
umbra, but business does winnow observations, and the better acquaint us with
breathing volumes of men, it teaches us both better to read them, and to apply
what we have read.

Memory is the Treasure of the mind, but trust her with overmuch, and she will
at the best fall short in her accounts; a man should only commit choice things
to her, which should sooner concoct into good judgment; meaner notions take up
as much room as the more precious, and consequently insensibly weaken her. For
they give a reason why blind men remember so strongly, because they are not
taken off with so many external Objects: There are many Auxiliaries; as for
the natural memory meditation, ruminations at night, discourse, diaeticall and
medicinal helps, etc.

For Artificial memory, one wittily compares it to the tricks of a Pike,
though ostentation be one great fruit of it, yet in these two things, I have
ever thought it useful; first, it is a fit depositum of knowledge till it can
be disposed into notes and natural memory, which questionless is a mighty
help; another is the continuing and placing of Idaeas, which does greatly
quicken and vegetate the Invention.

For notes, whether it be Analyzing of an Author, or clositing up observables
in several Cells, they would be but very short, (otherwise they will draw away
too much time and labor) or be dispatched only by references; some would have
common places renewed at a certain time, which whether advantageous or no, as
long use can best discover; so it may be easily granted, that unless they be
ranked in good order, they will prove more hurtful then they could have been
subsidiary to the memory.

Health ought to be nicely respected by a Student; for the labors of the mind
are as far beyond them of the body, as the diseases of the one are above the
other; and how can a Spirit actuate when she is caged in a lump of fainting
flesh? unseasonable times of study are very obnoxious, as after meals, when
Nature is wholly retired to concoction; or at night times, when she begins to
droope for want of rest; hence so many Rhewmes, defluxions, Catarrhs, etc. that
I have heard it spoken of one of the greatest Ambulatory Pieces of learning at
this day, That he would redeem (if possible) his health with the loss of
half his Learning. C S.


For sleep, seven hours comes the nearest a fit proportion in general, of
any number can be assigned: but Phlegmatique Complexions may require more, and
Sanguine may be content with less; yet ought it to be piacular for one of
indifferent industry, to sleep after four in the morn, as to be up after
nine at night; turning day to night, and night to day, and observing meal
times with them of the other Hemisphere, is being most proper to the Luxury and
wantonness of Courtiers.

Some studies would be hugged as employments, others only dandled as sports;
the one ought not to trespass on the other; for to be Employed in needelesse
things is half to be idle.

Of Company VII.
MAn is a Creature made by nature for commerce; some he sorts with in a
general manner, and these we call acquaintance: others in a more particular,
and these friends; accordingly we will shape our discourse; for the first, some
you shall meet with, whom vices have so disguized, that they retain only the
shape of men; of these you must by all means prohibit your self; and if your
occasions push you upon them, do it with all fear; remembering that vice is
diffusive, and gains more easily upon our depraved natures then Virtue:
besides the truth spoke it; Touch not pitch least you be defiled; Let the
civility of your carriage make such silent invectives against those that
cherish vices, as that they may be discouraged to attempt your friendship,
neither will they when they see contrary virtues; a Carbuncle shines though
covered with many clothes, Virtue will send forth a luster through a many of
imperfections; but Vice is bleer-ey'd and cannot endure to look upon them, but
desires to recede; as Antonies Genius did from that of Augustus.

Such as are of a different Religion, may be kept company for Traffic, hope
of conversion, etc. But if beyond these limitations, you may be Lyme-twig'd
with their errors and loose the Truth for a friend, which is a hard exchange.

The society of Ladies and Gentlewomen, is like the shade of a Tile-tree, very
pleasant, though, the tree be unfruitful, and the leaves tasted poison.

Other companies are hardly so dangerous, yet since men's humors are so various
as their faces, there is required a supplenesse in behavior (for men of morose
natures, do but in a manner stifle the vital parts of humane society) and
this was excellent in Alcibiades, who could conform to the constitutions of
all those several people his variety of fortune made him converse with; as
also a quick sagacity in discovering complexions whether sound or
unhealthfull, or disagreeing with your own; if they hit not right, to withdraw
so unperceived, that if you gain not a friend, you may not get a enemy; for if
he be not worthy to be the one, he may be able to be the other; but if you
find endowments, from whence you may suck experience, be as winning as you
can, and endeavor to draw most from thence where you find the parley most
furnished, and there commonly will he be most free; yet do it in such a manner
as he may not discover you; pose him, but dispatch it by such facetious turns
in discourse, that he may hardly suppose you to be serious; for so he might
begin to have an eye on you, and be more reserved; when a man is in earnest, he
stands upon his guard; in mirth he lies open unfenc't: This is an honest and
beneficial subtilty, and by this means you may sometime jest your self into
that in an hour, that you could not have labored out in a month; if you
meeet with more reserved natures, you will commonly find them also
vainglorious; Let these know you value their endowments as highly as they do
themselves, and they can wish no more; yet not parasitically, but as if it
proceeded from judgment and serious observation, and it will very seldom
prove unsuccessefull.

But, in case it do, Arrows tipped with silver will pierce the best Armor of
proof, and for the most part covetousness intrudes into the Attendance of
learning, and many times need will make you find acceptance.

In general have an eye on profit in what company soever you come; sometime
you may glean high notions from mean persons, and find matter of speculation
from the mouth of a Zany, for a good and strong stomach will convert course
viands into good nourishment; keep your secrets fast locked up, and be not
inquisitive after another, but what is committed to you keep as a sacred
depositum; The wisest of men among many other excellent ones says Boccha
chinsa occhi aperto [a shut mouth and open eye] and as Nature has set a double
guard on the tongue, do not you enlarge her; for you hardly have another
member so potent to your mischief. Trample not on the imperfections of any,
but modestly dissemble them, and be sure they be never the Subjects of your
scurrility, for they will wound deeper then the party himself; mention any
man's virtues at large and freely, his vices not at all or very sparingly; or
if, to himself with all candor and modesty; you will find this as subtle a
trap for Fame as any you can devise; be ever jealous over them you deal with,
and commit to them no more then you care if they disclose; if otherwise, you
put a weapon into their hands in case they prove your enemies.

Make account such as you converse with shall you be accounted; for it is easy
to sound a Man's conditions by his company, and company by his conditions; thus
knew Augustus his two daughters constitutions: The one sorting in the Theater
with Senators, the other with Gallants; Man is of an Apish nature, and content
to take up his manners many times on trust, yea, and at the worse hand;
Customs insensibly Naturalize themselves, and we draw them from those we
live with; It is best to call and select the choycest whersoever we mete them.
Change of Society, as it makes the carriage pliant and various, so it prevents
sucking too much of any ones humor. They which use much old People, grow
rigid, and harsh; youth light and active; bringing up Princes in cells has made
them more fit for to hold a cross then a Scepter; breeding the Persian Kings
among so many Women made them fitter for a Nursery then for a Throne.

Of Friends. VIII.
FRiends are a Man's self in Fractions; he that admits every one into the
Number of them, prostitutes his Soul to all comers; he who none, denies her
one of the best comforts she can here enjoy. Friendship of great men has much
honor, and small Security; of meaner men, less credit, but more sweetness.
That of equals is ever best soldered, since their thoughts running parallel,
are not like to Clash; he who chuseeth in haste, shall have leisure enough to
repent; He who at leisure and with direction, time enough to enjoy the fruits
of his Wisdom. He who discovers all his secrets, lays open his own
Nakedness; He who none, may well faint under his Burden.

He who climbes up into the favor of Princes, steps a Ladder whose Rungs
break as he passes up, that whenever he must return, he must
necessarily fall. The most doggish Princes of all have had some choice
Privados, and these generally men of comely features and low births, whether it
be they may the more absolutely command creatures of their own immediate
Creation, or that they may the more easily reduce them in Materiam primam;
These seldom stand as constellations, but are only Comets, which blaze as
long as their piceous substance remains, and then vanish.

Great Men are like Summer suns; we delight to eat the fruits of their
bringing forth, but care not for lying under them, without the Jnterposition of
a shade; yet in Winter when they are Low, and feeble, we are content to admire
the beauty of their Rays; they nourish those of meaner quality, most part
only to set the Trayns they lay, on fire, and when they fall, do but like
great Oaks break their own branches and Neighboring underwoods; Aequality
best glewes minds since there is neither occasion of Envy nor Contempt; it
better Ballasts humors, whereas if any one grow praedominant, it causes the
dissolution of so sweet a frame. The Fable of the Lion and Fox, (says Julian
the Apostate teaches meaner Friendships are not altogether unusefull; no more
they are; but yet he that is Superior ought so to behave himself, that the
Inferior may keep himself level, by seeing the other still remember the
distance between them, in such a manner as he may rather observe it then his
Friend show it. Popularity sinkes greatness down too low; the Medium between
this and too much stateliness is very hard to hit upon. Antonius the
Philosopher, would give any man his hand he met; Constance would sit without
either hem or spit; but where is there an example of any that equally avoided
these two Rocks? of the two, the latter comes nearer Majesty; It Is excellently
observed by Livie of Camillus his Soldiers, eandem virtutem oderant, and
mirabantur.

But for private friendship, had it not only allowance, but also praise, the
Holy Spirit would not so often have been flosculent, when He touched here; nay,
Christ have loved one Disciple. It is the greatest pleasure because it Receives
Augmentation from Continuance: and the surest Treasure, because it need fear
no violent hand but Death.

Communication of Secrets is one of the best fruits of it; yet would they not
be forced into one another bosom, but drop of themselves; paps too straightly
pressed, give only ulcerous matter in stead of Milk.

Admonition is another maine advantage; but it would be done rather with Tears
then Gall; and if possible, out of past discourses and private Maxims; and what
is this but to grind a Diamond with his own dust?

He was too cautelous that bid sic ama tanquam osurus. These two can never see
one another perfectly, where Distruct and Iealousy put a mist between; The
Graces were painted naked; And the wisest Men will be content to lay aside
themselves to an Intimate friend; the other half was very Christian, odi
tanquam amaturus; yet he that bid have no Gall, allowed a sting for defense;
And he who advised us not to let the Sun set on our Anger, did not advise to
trust a deceiving enemy the next morning.

Friendship would creep to an hight, and not Rush to it, for so it will soon
Run it self out of breath. Entertain no sinister and by-ends, for these will
be but so many Moths, and Canker-Wormes that will eat out the heart and marrow
of it, and turn it to a more biter enmity; As to love is an eminency of man
beyond beasts, so to love constantly argues a fixed high spirit, and such a one
as scorns to stoop to change; it best agrees with the Levity of children to
be both friends and enemies in the beating of a Pulse; wise men are the most
cautelous in the Reception of an Intimate; Mecaenas's Chariness to Horace, was
exemplary,

Nono revocas me denique mense; but when they once join league, it is
indissoluble. History affords us many pompous examples of strict amities, but
it may be justly feared that some have in them too much of the Fable; for souls
may indeed mingle, but doubtless can never grow one. Lubrick is the estate of
Favorites, few do not stand sometime in umbrage or set in a Cloud, if not in a
storm. It Is as rare for one to stand in an eminent degree of favor two Kings
Reigns as a son to inherit the good affection of a Prince to his Father. Kings
of composed tempers, best preserve their darlings, when they have arrived to
just growths; they of hotter spirits change them with as little passion as they
do their Robes. That favorite is the likest to continue that suffers the rays
of favor not to fall perpendicularly, but Obliquely upon him.

Of Dissimulation. IX.
DIssimulation quickens Policy, and mortifyes Divinity; in the former the
Tongue is the sole actor, in the latter the heart is also an agent; The first
may sometimes be connived at, the latter always detested: we shall according
to our cursory and imperfect manner (for he that expects exactness and method
in an ESSAY, wrongs both the Author and his own expectation) look upon a part
and jointly.

Sleights in civil carriages are now become so frequent, that they are almost
necessary, both sides in their performance rather supposing they act in the
dark to others, then that it is so; which may be one reason, why there is now
a days so little gained by Treaties; It was the observation of an excellent
man, that in Modern counsels, there is rather a shuffling of approaching
dangers, then preventing them from afar; if so, it argues men are not very
cunning in laying trains, and there is a decay in present policy; As he
plays not well at draughts, that only can avoid snapping when it comes to a
pinch, so does it not argue any excellent wisdom in them that suffer dangers
to meet them at their own doors; We have many times wondered at the
greatness and prudence of the Roman State; and no doubt before the luxation of
the Commonweal, the latter was more eminent; but especially in preventing of
growing Evils, notwithstanding hardly discoverable by the most Eaglesighted:
yet did that State more then any other at above board, whether merely out of
generosity or ambition, is not much material; It Is great art in dissimulation
to dissemble the art of dissimulation; greater to perform that Magnale in
Serspective, to appropinquate things remote, and Remove things approximate;
thus applied it may prove advantageous; but if it once leap over those bounds
prefixed to it by Religion and Honesty, (as they say) step beyond the altar,
what a man gains by it in his affairs, he looses in the serenity of his
conscience; for we understand not at all Macchiavilian Machinations, wrought
by perjury and Inhumanity, but an honest and columbine kind of cunning, which
shakes at perjury as that which infringes the Majesty of the deity, nor can
allow of equivocations which rather strengthen then elude oaths.

In some cases natural desire of ones own conservation, will force him to
dissemble, as the retaining of secrets among Potentates, which unless strictly
observed, brings assured ruin upon the discoverer; A lamentable example hereof
is there in Guicciardin of the Bishop of Setta, who too precipitantly revealing
a Breife to the King of France, was not by Caesar Borgia suffered many days to
survive.

Personal dissimulation, (that I mean by which one individual does either
meliorate, or conserve himself) is either in concealing defects, or purposes;
For the former, that Governor deserves to have his Robe cut in pieces, that
though he be crookbackt, will not have it so made, that he may appear
straight. Men may out of a brave security suffer their vices to be eyed or
spoken of, confidently assured that their better merits do far outstrip
them; but no doubt this path is too open, since one small blemish does
sometimes stain many excellent virtues, and though so small that it cannot
stand in competition with other eminencies, yet does it by degrees weaken a
man's repute; this granted, it will Porismatically follow, that Magistrates
ought what they may possibly to cover those slips that attend humanity, as well
for example, as their own Repute; it is (they say) dangerous to act any
naughtiness before children.

Maxima debetur puero Reverentia si quid Turpe paras. It Is so with the people;
those vices which they wish in great men and also hate, they most times follow;
for obnubilating a man's designs, he that lays his ultimate end open, teaches
but another to prevent him; subordinate aims, as they are ever among States,
so are they among private men; besides when it is known what a man goes about,
it is commonly forestalled by attending expectancies; there is best means of
preventing this, where there is one secondary end worth the repute and visage
of a primary, on which while a man looks asquint, he may with the better
security fix his eye on the other.

The Spaniard says, Amores, dolores, y dineros no pueden estar secretas;
(Love, Joy, Money, cannot be kept secret) such sovereignty has love over the
affections, that it is the highest difficulty to dissemble it accurately, nay
after all, it will be laid open by some Erotique symptoms, but they fall not
under this consideration; for grief, it is every whit as arduous; a while it may
be suppressed, but if vehement, it breaks out with the greater force; nay though
it may cozen the Public, yet will it write it self in Characters of pallor,
in the visage; and for money, the alterations of men's dispositions with their
estates; does sufficiently argue; methinks the moderation of Pomponius Atticus
was herein excellent, in that he in so many changes of estate kept the same
constancy in his expenses, that they were the same in the ebb as high tide of
his fortunes.

It Is hard to keep these two equally ballanc't, especially those that devance.
The intempestive lavishnesse of our Richard the first in his return from
Palestine, was the means of his discovery, and wretched captivity. Vice makes
especial use of disguizes.

Nemo repent fuitturpissimus. Should she at the first view discover her self,
she would prove so ugly, that she would be hissed of the stage of the World,
and we should not know that virtue had an opposite; but we have staid longer on
this then we at first determined.

For dissimulation of Religion, it cannot be to him who tries the heart and
reins, who sees the most inward recesse of our Souls, and knows our
thoughts before we think them; men we may indeed deceive, either in the
appearance of our manners, or opinions; some to avoid the name of supercilious,
cast themselves to a lighter garb then beseemes them; it is a kind of pity
these should have any thing commendable, since goodness is so valuable even in
the sight of her enemies, that very Hypocrites would claim kindred to her
though mere aliens; another sort strive to set out themselves with the fairest
gloss; these before discovery may be imitable, but prove after odious; good
sentences in their in their mouths, are like pearls set in Iron, debast by
being there; and carry but contradictions in their own bowels; now of the two
surely these are the better, in that they give some countenance to, and in a
manner bear up the train of virtue; whereas the other kick her, while she
reposes, from form their own bosoms.

There is much spitting against those that declaime against vices whereunto
they sometimes slip. If this proceed from a sincere detestation, and when by
the shooting at others, to make it dart more deeply at ones own bosom, if
there appear some amends, with endeavors and hopes of further progress, it
deserves somewhat more then mere toleration.

For Tenants of Religion a negative dissimulation (that is the fittest name I
can give that) which soberly conceales them, where there is not a place fit to
endure their venting, and no probability of dispersing them; it will surely be
approved by any moderate judgment. But a positive confession (though not
cordial) is merely damnable; so dear ought truth to be to us that we ought
to post-habite our lives to the smallest principle of it; yet some time winding
up to high may make it fall asunder; as he is a madman that will suffer
preposterous zeal to carry him to an unseasonable profession; so is he a weak
man that when he is called will not avouch it.

Though God does not ordain and strengthen every man to Martyrdom, yet ought
every man to propose to himself to be a Martyr.

Illusory deceits may not be done though to a good end; for this is evil that
good may come of it; me thinks, an aright conscience may tremble even at a
jesting lie; Mendacium jocosum.
he bid not make a show of any thing that is unlawful to do, that bid shun
not only evil but the appearance.

Of Recreations. X.
THe most artificial running descant continued too long, will at length wax
tedious even to the vulgar; it is so with Pleasures, the most various and
exquisite after some continuance grow nauseous to them that most greedily
desired them; They being altogether like civet, smell at the lump unsavory and
fulsome, by drams sweet and pleasant; we should use them as Physic with
praescription, or (being on our Journey) as Travelers bait only at Them, and
like Dogs at Nilus touch and be gone for fear of Crocodiles, remembering they
are but Gourds, and carry a Worm in the Root. So used, they sweetly Checquer
our employments and steal from us all thoughts of Irksomenesse, and may be in
their use as commodable as labor it self; for the mind having stood long
centinell upon serious Thoughts, becomes at length sluggish, like a Bow
continued bent; if she be not slackned with some pleasant Relaxation.
Painters take a good course with their eyes, draw them off the Table to let
them recreate and recollect themselves a while on some delightsome Green;
otherwise they would grow dim and weak; the like would be done with the
spirits, which still engaged on hard employments, grow listlesse and flag, and
can only flutter not fly; hence Bookewormes, whose heads being the Tombs of
so many brave Writers, might well be supposed animate libraries, while they
converse with the dead, become in a manner dead themselves, and like dreaming
Dogs they retain only some confused notions, which by Heterogeneous mixtures
beget armies of Chimera's that like Cadmus soldiers fall a quarrelling among
themselves; and truly how should they not be opplete with gross humors, when
they want evacuation? well might they be compared to unpolisht Statues, at the
first graving rough-hewn, and formelesse, which levigated by the file may
become pieces of perfection. This casts an aspersion upon learning that it
enervates men for high employments, when indeed it is the best Thread to be
directed by in such labyrinths; the best compass to sail by in such
Aegaeum's; what else was the meaning of Plato's Philosophante Rege, Regnante
Philosopho; disjoined, the one may do he knows not what: the other know what
to do, but unpowerfull to act, united make up a personage fit to move in the
highest Sphee^; but recreations carry in their tayls some cautions; else they
recede from themselves and are precipitated into crimes; let them not be such
as come within the cognizance, of the Law and drag danger along; harmless,
not Amphitheater sports, not jests empoysoned with bitterness, and
needle-pointed, that will draw blood as well out of, as into the cheeks;
Seasonable, otherwise they will make vast Ruptures in time, and become
employments: frugall, otherwise you may die by a laughing disease; moderate,
for that were to add drunkenness to thirst; generous, such as may reinforce a
vivacity in the Spirits, instill some repast of profit into the mind; civil,
that they may not commit a rape upon the Soul; easy, for if puzling, they
become burdens, and this would cause me to dislike Chesse, because those
abstractions of the senses bestowed on a game of it, might be far more
usefully employed: I might add selection of company by it self. This caution
would also be laid down, you be not bewitched with any pleasure; for so it
will ingrosse you wholly, and hardly suffer you to disingage. Thus may you touch
without harm, handle the Serpent Pleasure, and bereave her of her sting; but I
verily believe History can show us as few examples of this kind as of any
moral virtue; Of those I have met with these two most deserve an Asteriske,
the two Africani, Major, and Minor; the Grandfather, and Nephew who though he
were an Aemilian was ingrafted on the stock of the Carnelians; The first by
that memorable speeeh of his Nunquam minus solus quam cum solus, nunquam minus
otiosus quam cum otiosus, Shows he knew to to set a value on his minutes; and
a Law on his thoughts, and one thus parsimonious cannot but be very rich in
masculine virtues: The Other by that Elogy of Vellejus Paterculus, Nemo
elegantius negotiorum intervallo otia dispunxit, tells he was adopted to the
manners of the Scipio's, as well as Name, and that he was an excellent man as
well as a Captain; And trod up the stairs of virtue to the Capitol of honor,
so that his laurel might well grow out of the ruins of two so great and
famous Cities as Carthage and Numantia. Since I am thus far I care not much
to speak my conceptions of some of these sports most common in use.

Hunting is very magnificent, and a sport for Princes (and it may be noted that
more of them have bestowed themselves on this then any other, nay some of them
even to excess, as our two Williams, Pope Leo, etc.) It inures the body to
travel, being as Oppian calls it a (...).
counterfeit of War, and by it does Xenophon discover the genius of his Cyrus.
The fable might seem to have from hence his Original, Adonis a delicate
youth, Venus own darling slain by a Boar; 'twas anciently practiced on the
most fierce Savages, as well by the Kings of Persia (who took singular delight
therein) as in the Spectiles and sports at Rome; but now it is reduced almost
only to timorous creatures, for whom nature has provided no other defense but
flight, yet as it is, there is nothing less in it then Idleness.

Hawking, which is but Aeriall hunting, cannot challenge the antiquity of the
former; it is not for mean persons, yet a generous exercise, as well for
variety of depraedators as preys. Fishing is a melancholy exercise, yet is
there more stirring with the fly then bait; there might be many pretty
inventions of baits, every river commonly entertaining one more peculiar Fish,
which would require a particular bait.

Tennis is a violent sport, there is much activity required in it; it is somewhat
strange that this age brings forth so many fine wits; none has honored it
in the like manner as Vida has done Chesse, Thuanus Hawking, and Natales Comes
Hunting.

Shittle-cock requires a nimble arm, with a quick and waking eye; 'twere fit
for Students, and not so vehement as that waving of a stool so commended by
Lessius.

Wrestling seems to grow out of use; it is of ancient standing, as may be seen
in Homer and Virgill; Prizes there were for it in the Olympicks, neither was it
unpractised by the Roman Soldiery; verily it conduces both ad robur and
sanitatem, and will admit of the advantage of slight, and might more commend
it self by more frequent practice.

Bowling exercises proportionably all the parts, and that mildely; he is like
to be most exquisite in it, that can make his hand obey the judgment of his
eye.

Shooting with the Arrow of a private exercise, may be very advantageous to the
public; many Nations have hardly known any other weapons, or at least not
bin skilled in them, as the Paleares, the Parthians whose arrows sheilded them
against the Roman greatness; yea the nerves of this Nation have sometimes been
in her bowstrings; What raised the Turk to such a height, but his excellent
Archers? it is an injury they are jusled out by Guns so wholly; whether upon good
grounds has been hotly disputed; we consider them only as an exercise, and so
they are every deal as pleasant as healthful.

The traverses at Chesse are exceeding laborious, yet they may be recompensed
with the pleasure of so many furious encounters, plots, and justlings which
come nearest the broils of waspish men.

It Is not proper here to speak of the Lawfulness of sortelegious Games; Dice
have been used by many great men as Claudius the Emperor, who writ a Book of
it, Domitian, Theodorick King of the Goths too liberally; yet cannot that
justify private practice. The Inconstancy of Irish, fitly represents the
changeableness of humane occurrences, since it ever stands so fickle, that one
malignant throw can quite ruin a never so well built Game; Art has here a
great sway, by reason if one cannot well stand the first assault, he may
safely retire back to an after game.

Tick-Tack sets a man's intentions on their guard; errors in this and war can be
but once amended.

For Cards, the philologie of them is not for an ESSAY; a man's fancy would be
sum'd up in cribbidge; Gleeke requires a vigilant memory; Maw a pregnant
agility; Pichet a various invention; Primero a dexterous kind of rashness,
etc. sed manum de Tabula, I make an employment of a Recreation.

Of War. XI.
War is the Phlebotomy of the Body Politic, which sometimes in taking away
superfluous humors brings it into a consumption; It Is Gods scourge of a
people, whether he whip them by themselves or a foreign enemy.

Civil wars are ever most cruel, Parties being most incensed, and fighting
either out of despair or revenge, there is in them the best room to exercise
private malice. The conqueror, though pride and petulancy are inseparable
companions of victory) more insulting and scarce putting up the Sword when
there is not an enemy for to draw it against, as being most insecure; these
that have assisted, if displeased, being as powerful to his hurt, (in that
backed with followers and alliances) and with difficulty retaind, when they see
not their expectation in the reformation of a State, (as domestique jarres have
ever such pretenses, not meanings) and hopes of rewards fully satisfied, nay,
over-estimating their merits, they are apt to fall off at the least indignity;
as was evident in Richard Earl of Warwick, who distasting Edward the fourths
marriage, because himself had bin employed in France about another match,
revolted, unking'd him, though he was the prime instrument to set him in the
Throne; and suffered his malice never to period till he had made his life a
sacrifice to it; neither is any war so long spun out, although they have
breathing intervals: oppressed factions when they seem utterly extinct,
gleaning themselves into a head (being assisted what with pity of their
present lowness, what with envy that attends the prevailing party) growing to
overtop the other, and perhaps they themselves after breaking into two; as
Augustus and Antonius, when they had destroyed the murderers of Caesar, fell
out between themselves; neither could any mediation so soder them but it ended
with one of their ruins. War of neighboring States, whether begun out of
jealousy (as there is both reason and precedent for preventive wars)
harboring one another fugitives, or any other politic cause, are after two
or three fields easily suspended with short truces; especially if the one party
have not gained of the other, but if there be some inequality, matters are
hushed a while in a necessitated peace.

Those who have little or nothing of their own, gain by discords, the loss
falling on their side who are most full and best able; to prosecute a victory
too far on a broken enemy, is to teach him to be desperate, and make him
obtain what he could not have hoped for, a bettering of his condition; a
notable example of this, was Charles Duke of Burgundy, who by pressing too hard
upon the broken Swysses, lost first a field to them, and after his life.

Those States whom providence designs for burdens of the World, and devourers
of confining Countries, (such as that old Roman State and the modern Ottomons)
though they may be resisted with much courage, resolution and pertinacy, yet at
the last do overweigh, as did the Romans over us here in England, and them in
Spain; for overpelling with renewed forces and succors, they leave the
Conquered no other solace in their ruins, then the glory of the continuance of
their resistance. That money is the sinnewes, nay the vital spirits of war,
is acknowledged by all, it being impossible to preserve discipline in an
unpaide Army; but when the Soldier grows full, he grows withal wanton;
learnes to discontinue military hardness; is ready to forsake his colors; so
that Gold which many times makes a Soldier, again marrs him. A General is
the heart, as well as the head of an Army; and has need of a working brain,
as a strong arm; secret should he be in his designs, Saturnine in consulting,
and Mercuriall in acting, coming on his enemy like the hammer on an anvill,
touch it before we see it strike, not like the discharging of a Cannon, to
send forth a flame before the eruption of the bullet; severe to punish even
prosperous disorders, and succesfull disobediences, as but mere connivances of
fortune; strict in exacting the duties of the Soldiery, as Creatures better
commanded with fear then love; industrious, and rather leading in labors then
dangers, (the person of a General being different from that of a Soldier)
valuing his Countries glory above his own, and his own above his life, neither
stealing honor nor forceing it, not refusing a triumph because of a sharer,
nor fainting under the weight of business, when there are no other shoulders
but his own; carrying always a fixed spirit, which will neither shrink under
the suddenness nor weight of any danger, gratefully acknowlegding him that
conducts him through all difficulties, and wishing rather to perish then to
attribute any thing whatsoever to himself. The modern Militia differs much
from the ancient, there being in it more room for stratagems then personal
valor; yet are not pitched battles so bloody as before, whether it be that
smoke gives better assistance to flight, or that they do not close as before,
or that order is not so entirely preserved, and Battalias are sooner broken;
this is certain that conflicts are not protracted to that length as before,
but Victory does sooner cast the Balance.

Of all Nations whose remembrance time has preserved to us, those two States
of Greece and Rome did most excel in the art of War, whether the Tactick or
the Stratagematick part; both which may be said to be in a manner lost, yet do
they somewhat reflourish in the practice of the Low Countries, which may be
assigned as one serecondary cause of their long resistance of the Spaniard.

Of Religion. XII.
IF men could have been without Religion, Superstition had never bin molded
into so many monstrous shapes; could casuality have performed it, it is strange
if among such variety none had hit; could succession of time have refined any
into a good one, it had been done in so long continuance; but succeeding Ages,
rended them still more faeculent: could nature have lent any light; The most
elevate Heathens had seen somewhat, but it was all they could do to get a
sight of the dim principles of Reason; but without God who was the Author of
Religion, it was impossible, the widest soul being too narrow to Receive him,
unless he were pleased to shoot in a few beams of himself at some crevices,
and were pleased to teach what he was (though Man could never perfectly
learn) and how he would be worshipped, though Man could never do him
complete homage.

To prove Religion by reason, is like those tricks, which before performance
seem impossible, after, contemptible; one of them was that of Columbus, 8
Lips. Praelante Critic.
in setting an Egg upright: when our hearts are once possessed of the truth of
it, it seems nothing, but a sublimated and refined Reason; but did Reason ever
persuade it to any heart, or Antidote it, against Apostasy? We must profess
our ignorance of any; Those pretty natural Discourses and Arguments, with many
both old and new Luminaries of Learning found out, show, that they could rather
fight with their enemies, then ore-come them.

For the Ancients that encountered with heathenisme at push of Pikes, they
could better lay open, the vanity of the other, then assert the truth of their
own; The best service they did was to unteach the people their Idolatry, that
they might be the better capable of true devotion, and bring them from a
by-path; but they could only set their faces toward (and point at) the true.

For the Moderns, they have had to do either with Jews, Turks, or
Barbarians; The first (were they not so obstinate) are the best to deal with,
by reason they grant us one side of our two edged Sword; The maine is in
applying the Prophesies, and manifestation of the Messiah, in which GOD himself
must either interpose, or they will never see him whom they have peirced; that
being now Chafe which the wind drives to and fro from the face of the Earth,
they may not be burnt in unquenchable fire.

For the second, the ground where it thrives must be Plowd with Cymiters, Sowd
with Carcasses, and watered with Blood, so that it is not likely that verbal
instruments will be able to eradicate this pestilent darnell.

For the last, they are of so many climes, and praepossessions, that little can
be said in general; only this, that the savagenes of the Spaniards in
America showed that they are sooner flattered then threatened into better
notions, and the Innocence of those that have not much mingled with others,
seems to promise some Faciliation; But whether the sedulity of the Jesuits in
those parts has been a means of preparing or obstructing them to
Protestantisme, is only known to him whose incomprehensible wisdom it was to
reserve their discovery to these last Times.

It Is handsomely observed, that the maine of other Religions never gained by
Christianity, since she carried before her the light of the World; they,
fuliginous Torches of error: since her God came like a Shepherd, theirs like
Roarers: she required the more difficult part of worship, internal; the other
only corporeal; that no wonder if the Roman Senate did not admit Christ into
the Pantheon -- but they were more aware then they thought of: since His
Presence might have caused the rest to fall, his crying formerly struck them
dumb. Were it not there is a great hand and eye, and a conscience, that can
sting and whisper, Religion would do a great deal of hurt in Policy, because
she pinions Men, whereas Atheists have their arms loose, and need never be
opposed with that empty name of Equity, which ought much to regulate him who
remembers that he stands accomptable: whereas it is easy for him to be an
excellent Politician that can brawne his Conscience, that it be not peirceable
by any pricks: or so ore-master it, that it cannot cry when it is pricked, and
so still it that it cannot continue when it shall cry.

For Atheists, (as he spoke of the Scepticks) it is better to tell what they
think not, then what they think; They are milder opposers then the blind
superstitious, as thinking Religion an enemy only worth the jeering; It Is
questioned, whether there be any such really or no; divines say it is extra, non
intra; aliis, non sibi; miserable are they (if any) whose hearts tell them the
contrary.

The Ascension of causes to one supreme, for Reason; and the Energy of nature,
for sense, best confutes them; the one calls home their wandering senses, the
other composes them.

False Religions gain most by violence, the true by opposition; gaudy best
please the simple, decent the wise; loose ones best please Natural Men; strict
ones, goodmen.

Of Rewards. XII.
GReat Persons stand for Imitation, lesser for Observation: Man is led by
nothing better then Example; and Examples of Great ones, are most effectual;
they have both a great influence on manners; and Men suppose there easiliest to
find a Reward, where there is a conformity of carriage. Rewards ever beget
proportionable endeavors; passing by deserts does but extinguish them; feed a
Lamp with competent Oil, it will yield a sufficient light; deny it
nourishment and it dies; every one is not sufficiently satisfied with the
applause of his own Conscience in doing well, but would look for some
external advantage. What more honorable then to dye for ones Country? yet I
dare say the Decii themselves had thoughts of glory. What moral man did ever
so extenuate wealth, and spoke so goodly sentences in commendatio^ of poverty
as Seneca? yet his Admirer Lipsius can make Report, what an estate he scrapt
together under his Scholar Nero: so powerful are encouragements over the
endeavors of Men. Munificency conduces much to the glory and greatness of
Princes but should hold proportion with their Treasuries, and the parties whom
it falls upon; heaping too much upon one, (perhaps of meaner merits) while
another that has performed more singular services is passed by, is a way to
banish virtue out of the World, and introduce envy and factions into the Court.

There is no better means to discover the abilities of a Prince, then by his
Ministers of State; it both shows whether he know how to pick them out, and
whether he know how to make use of them, when he has chosen them. Jews the
eleventh of France was excellent in this, and would spare for no Reward (though
he were coveteous below the decorum of a King) to one whom he thought would
prove a convenient instrument for his purpose.

Some wisest Monarchs have sedulously noted the deserts of their servants; no
doubt a wise course, and such a one as may keep their hands steady in
dispencing of their bounty.

Those who have many attendants, must not think to feed them by pecuniary
largesses, which will be soon out of mind, and make the other still gaping
after renewed liberty; but should be rather free of their countenance then
purse, which as it cannot be inexhaustible; so if immoderatly drained must be
supplied by some unlawful means. In a word, Rewards ought not to exceed the
merits of him they are conferred on, nor the ability of him that confers them.

Of Fables. XIII.
AS Parrhasius limnd a Veil with such happiness, that his Corrivall would
have drawn it aside to see what it covered; such are the Fables of Poets; we
suppose they shadow somewhat, but find Nothing. To shape every one of them to
a Moral were all one as to force every Picture to an Emblem-and with Pictures
they hold a great Analogy; Some are rough drawn and show best at distance,
some are smooth and admit a nearer survay; Some Tougher Inventions best please
at a careless perusal; Others more finely wrought after a curious enquiry,
best comply with the Fancy; small pieces best commend themselves through a
Magnifying Glass; greater, in a Shadow; short Fables become Amplifications,
longer would be somewhat wound up; Antic work pleases with its absurdity,
Historical by its Jmitation; some stories delight more by their further
receding from, some by their nearer approaching to the truth; So Picture is
nothing but Poesy in Colors, and Poesy only Picture in black and white;
both of them, skrue and wind up the imagination, and give most life to
Passions and Receive the best Ornament from them; but it is hight of Art in
both; which, who so has attained, can withal command another Eye, or
Countenance. Landskapps and fine Descriptions do dilate and enlarge the Eye,
but the dexterous Characterizing of a thought in the face attracts and fixes it.

Where many Relations are to be knit up in one series, it shows excellent
cunning to join them without a Seame. Ovids Metamorphoses speak him extreme
happy in this, in that he has so quaintly knit so many various relations,
that they are indeed but one entire body, whereas Ariosto will interruptly
shake hands with the Reader, at half a Tales end and wrest his Attention to a
new business.

That Fabling is no lying, may easily be granted, since Divines will
acknowledge it is but truth apparelled like a fiction; things by this means
do more slily drop into the minds of Men, especially the vulgar, who will be
best led by things that come nearest the Sense; This made Morality assume the
shapes of Rational beasts, speaking woods, Articulate Birds; this I conceive
has made the Aeygptians, wanting the use of Letters, fly to Hieroglyphics;
or to speak out, what has caused so many Anthropopathies, and Allegories in
the holy Scripture?

As they are useful this way, so are they dangerous if they be profane, and
indiscreetly tampering with Dieties; it is a blemish of the Prince of Poets in
assigning so unfitting parts to his deathlesse and bloodlesse (that is all he
can make of them) Men, making Counterscuffles in Olympus, bringing his Jove one
time rambling, another time cheated with a sleepy drink, other while bound;
Juno jealous, Venus wounded, and such kind of Ribaldry, that young wits may
easily draw in Atheism, or Polytheisme like Poison in a perfume; And why may
not dealing in such Wares make Poetasters so chill in their Religion, nay
render them so profane? why may not their Poverty and Contempt be a just
Reward of Heaven, that though singing clear their Chests, it can never fill
their bellies, or warm their Backs; Canta larana (says the Spaniard) y no
tein peil nilana.

The Frogge still sings,
yet never gains
A Fleece nor hair
for all her pains.
But this is digressive; That foolery (to name it best) of Homer procured his
banishment out of Plato's Commonwealth, though Plato by his practice showed
the high estimation he had of Poetry; yet though Homer be most guilty, few
there are of the other Poets that can stand clear; but it is observable these
Inventions are most quick, fine, and full of life, wherein there do not
intervene any other persons but mortal.

Nor would Stories be lascivious, no drug so powerful to provoke Lust, they
being speculative filth, and contemplative wantonness, which wound the soul
deeper, because they do surprise her unguarded; how unclean have the Heathens
been in that they shamed Heaven it self, with such pollution, In Caelo est
meretrix, in Caelo est turpis adu^^^;

And honored such high Crimes with no worse Monuments then Asterismes? how ill
have many Moderns, as well as Ancients deserved in making Poetry their Baude
and Limners to make their Tables the Interpreters, nay the Promoters of
lewdenesse? One example may be Chaerea in Terence, beholding Jove turning
himself into a bribe, to gain Danae. Egomet quoque id spectare caepi, and
quia con similem luserat jam olim ille ludum -- Ego Homuncio hoc non facerem?

There has been a great deal of Rich Fancy lost in frothy Love-Stories, and
fantastical Chimera's, which had it been bestowed on some rare Idaeas, might
have been altogether as profitable and delightsome as they are now hurtful;
what rare Commonwealths have been molded, by Sir Thomas Moore, Campanella,
etc. What a stupendous Fabric of a College for Nature, has great Saint
Albanes reard; how has Barclay laid open the distempers of a surfeting State
Xenephon the Virtues of an excellent Captain?

It Is a delicate Invention, that of Master Howell, wherein he turns Europe
into a Grove, and among the Thickets Satyrizes an exact History; it is wholly new;
nor can Antiquity show the like; and might be much promoted, if some refined
wits would perform the like on other Pieces of Nature, since Beasts, or Birds
might as well act such parts as Trees.

We will take a short view of Poetry, since it has such Relation to Fables,
that it may be a Question whether Poetry beget Fables, or Fables Poetry; it is
a sweet kind of madness, which yet argues an Harmonious soul, Doctriuae
tanquam Somnium, (says that Prodigy of Literature) Res dulcis and varia, and
volens in se aliquid habere Divini quod etiam Somnia vendicant; it is too high
for a Recreation, and too slight for an employment; where it meets with a
pronesse of Nature, very bewitching, and not easily avoided, but it will make
Inrodes into serious and great employments, as in King, James, Pius the second
who was a Poer Laureat, Urban the Eight, the Cardinals Bembo and Peron, and Sir
Philip Sydney, his companion the Lord Brook, The Earl of Striveling and
others; this excellency it has, that it both makes and forms its own matter,
and is as boundless as the imagination of Man.

Epick Strains lift the Soul into high conceptions of virtue, and Glory;
Lyrick lull it asleep with pleasure; Elegaick melt it with Sorrow and pity;
Satyrick stir up hate against Vice, and sometimes teach it, which makes their
writings of an Ambiguous Nature; Lubin protests there is more Morality in one
Satyr of Iuvenal, then in the ten Books of Aristotle to Nichomachus; Scaliger
cries out of him as not fit for Christian ears.

Every one that can make words dance in Numbers (there may be a Poem too in
Prose) is not a Poet, but only These that raise themselves to such a pitch
that they are inaccessible by future imitation; and in this sense he spoke
truly that said, Every Age has scarce produced a Poet.

FINIS.
Imprimatur Charles Herle.

The Judicious Reader may be pleased to pass the literal slips, they being
easily corrigible.


