Heaven Ravished: OR A Glorious Prize, achieved by an Heroical Enterprise: As
it was lately Presented In A SERMON TO THE Honorable House of Commons, at
their solemn Fast, May 29. 1644. By HENRY HALL, B. D. late Fellow of Trin.
Coll. in Cambridge.

Printed by Order of the said House.

1 COR. 9.24. Know ye not that they which run in a race, run all, but one
receives the prize. So run that ye may obtain. Printed by J. Raworth, for
Samuel Gellibrand, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of the
Brasen-Serpent in Pauls-Churchyard. 1644.

TO The Honorable House of Commons, now assembled in PARLIAMENT.
I Have offered violence to my self to satisfy your desires, in Preaching
first, and next in publishing, these weak and course-spun meditations; fitter
indeed for a popular auditory then such an awful and judicious assembly
concerning which I may fitly say what Zeba and Zalmunna sometimes did of
Gideons brethren, each one resembled the children of a King, Jud. 8.18. or as
Cyneas the Ambassador of Pyrrhus being asked after his return from Rome, what
he thought of the City and State, made answer (...), the same may I, with
better reason, say of your Honorable Senate, It seemed unto me to look like a
little Commonwealth of Kings. When first I understood you had designed me (the
unfittest in many respects you could have thought upon) unto this solemn
service: I resented it truly no otherwise than Jonah did his message to
Nineveh, with much trouble and emotion of spirit, not to say discontent: and as
forward should I have been as he (had not a strong band of reason and
conscience held me back) to fly to Tarsus or any whither else, rather then
undertake the Province you had called me to: Not out of any disaffection to the
work, or the Authority that summoned me to it, which I shall always honor,
and next to that of Gods, esteem sacred; but being sensible of nothing more in
all this world, then mine own defects: and knowing well how hard a matter I
find it to satisfy my self, I held it impossible for me to bring forth ought
that might satisfy others (especially such a grave Court of great Statesmen)
either in the Pulpit or the Press. However since you are pleased out of your
ingenuity and candor, not only to own this worthless piece, but to over
value it so far, as to call it forth into the public light, having nothing
else to sway with me, besides the obedience I owe to your commands, I do
therefore in all humility present it unto your honorable acceptance, such as
it is it glories to be yours, and were all the body of this simple discourse,
like Solomon's Lineae aureae cum punctis argenteis, Cant. 1.11. wrought with
lines of gold and enameled with pearls, I should not hold it too rich a
present, for such unparalleld Worthies, which have honored God so much, and
are so much honored by him. Your exemplary zeal and piety, your Noble and
heroical atchieuments, for the honor of our God, and the advancement of his
kingdom, has already stamped for you such an Impression of respect and
reverence, in the estimations and thoughts of all the godly, that you seem to
be as the stones of a crown lifted up, and as an Ensign upon our Land, Zech.
9.16. Go on and prosper, most worthy Senators, in the great work which you
have so happily begun, till you shall have fully crowned our hopes, and
perfected your own most glorious undertakings. Never had any Parliament either
so glorious a prize as you have to contend for, or so many potent adversaries,
oppositions, and difficulties, to encounter with: but this may serve as a more
then sufficient encouragement to hearten you on, that you have a good God, a
Noble Cause, an Honorable Reward, and what could you wish more? See what you
have done already, and let your former, many and precious experiences of divine
favor and assistance, animate you to wait upon God, with an unwearied
patience, till he shall make all your enemies of the Synagogue of Satan, to
come and worship before your feet, and to know that he has loved you.
Consider how many great and stupendous works God has already made you
instruments to bring about. How many mighty Nimrods have you cut down? how many
yoakes of oppression and tyranny have you broken? how many dying Saints have
you revived? The Lord has made darkness light before you, and crooked things
straight, he has levelled mountains, and raised valleys; what enterprise have
you taken in hand, which has not in the Issue prospered beyond your
expectations? You have sprung a mine under the walls of Babylon, unsettled the
Throu of the Beast. Behold how the Antichristian faction languisheth, the
Pontifical chair reeles, the Miters wither, the triple Crown shakes: that
which the Lord threatened sometimes against one of the worst of the Kings of
Judah, the same he seems to do now against the great Monarch of Babylon,
Remove the Diadem, take away the Crown, I will overturn, overturn, overturn it,
until he come whose right it is, and I will give it him, Ezekiel 22.26, 27. Me
thinks I see the proud turrets, and battlements of Rome falling, and Sion
rising up fair as the morning, clear as the moon, terrible as an Army with
Banners. Howsoever this is certain, God has promised, and he will no doubt in
due time make it good, which we have in the Prophet. Esaias 24.23. The moon
shall be confounded, and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall reign
in Mount Sion, and before all his ancients gloriously. I hope the happy time is
at hand, which God has appointed for the full working out of his Glory and our
deliverance, and that this dawning of our hopes may break forth into a perfect
day of joy and triumph, It is and shall be the earnest and constant prayer of

Your most unworthy Servant in the work of Christ, HEN: HALL.

MATTHEW. 11.12. And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the Kingdom
of the heavens suffers violence, and the violent take it by force.
THis Text is not entire of it self, but linked in necessary connection with
that which went before, for clearing whereof we may borrow light at the next
door: If we please to go back a little and take the advantage of a run, the
coherence will show that our Savior having in the former chapt^r chosen the
12. Apostles, and sent them out to Preach in the Cities of Jury, here in the
beginning of this he goes himself about the same errand, to preach the Gospel
in the Cities of Galilee, for so the current of Interpretors carries the sense
of those words, Paraeus in loc. Cor. a lapide in loc. and a^i Complares.
verse. 1. He departed thence to Teach and to Preach in their Cities, referring
it to the Apostles who were all or most of them of Galilee. The promulgation of
the glad tidings of the Kingdom of heaven, now ready to be revealed, it was a
matter of that grand importance and general concernment unto all, that our
Savior thought fit to disperse himself and his Apostles several ways, that
all the Cities and parts of the land might with more convenience be summoned to
take notice of it.

John the Baptist, he had indeed awakened the people as with the sound of a
Trumpet, and stirred them up to a general expectation of the Messiah his
coming, but yet many of them remained in suspense, and were not so well
satisfied about the person of the Messiah, whether John himself or Jesus was
He, as appears Luke 3.15. This scruple was necessary to be cleared, and
therefore John being cast into prison, and now near unto his Martyrdom, he
dispatcheth out two of his Disciples in an Embassy unto Christ, to know of him
whether he was (...) that grand Redeemer of I^rael, so much desired and so long
expected, or whether they should look for some other, verse. 2.3.

J^st^n Man (...)

(...) c. 12.


It was not out of any doubt that John himself had (as some Ancients have
thought) that he sent unto Christ this message, for the Oracle from heaven had
satisfied him in this, and He others, John 1.32, 33. etc. But it was out of a
pious desire to imform and settle his Disciples who were not yet so well
resolved in that matter, as Chrysostom and other Interpreters Ancient and
Modern have observed. Luk ^ 22.
Our Savior therefore having at that time, as appears by another parallel
place, wrought sundry miracles in healing the sick, clensing the Lepers,
raising the dead, he returns this answer, verse. 4, 5, 6. Go and show unto John
what things you have heard and seen, implying fairly, that such divine words
and works, carried light and conviction enough along with them, to bewray the
Author of them, and that he were little other than a miracle of unbeleef, whom
such great wonders and miracles could not move.

Hereupon the Disciples of John being sent away with their answer, he turns
his speech to the multitude, and gives out a large and ample testimony unto
John, commending him greatly for his personal virtues, and his High Office,
and the singular effect and fruit thereof, verse. 7, 8, 9, 10 11, 12.

First, for his personal virtues he was a man of a grave spirit, of a constant
and wel-setled Judgment, not wavering and reeling to and fro, like a reed
shaken with the wind in which is no steadfastness; for howsoever the people
might happily think by occasion of this message, John 1.19. and ^.34. and cap.
3.28.
that John after his imprisonment might change his mind and not retain the
same opinion of Christ which he had before, yet our Savior cleares him from
any umbrage of such a suspicion by that quaere which he puts forth to the
multitude, verse. 7. What went ye out into the wilderness to see? intimating
that they could not in reason suppose that Camell-hayred Prophet, haunting the
Wilderness, to be such a fickle, humorous, and desultory temporizer as those
smooth silken Chaplains are wont to be, that are in the Courts and Palaces of
Princes.

2. He extolls his Office and Function, he being not only a Prophet but much
more then a Prophet, v. 9. The ancient Prophets they saw Christ a far off but
John saw him face to face; they fore-shewed his coming, but John was his
harbinger and immediate forerunner, that pointed him out with his singer,
saying, this is he, in which respect our Savior ranks him above the chief of
Prophets, and makes him the greatest mere man that ever was born of a woman,
and yet withal gives a prerogative of excellency to the meanest Officer in
the Kingdom of heaven above him, verse. 11. which must not be understood of
inherent holiness or personal grace (for in that respect the ordinary
ministers of the Gospel are much inferior unto John) but it is to be
interpreted of their more honorable Office and Function, in which they go
beyond John, and excel him as far as he did the former Prophets, it being a
received maxim, Minimus maximi est major maximo min^mi.
that he that is least in a greater Order, is greater than the greatest of a
lesser Order; as in the Schools, he that has proceeded a master in the Arts,
though but an Inceptor and of the latest Edition, is above the highest
Batchelours; and the meanest Knight above the greatest Esquire.

3. But the principal commendation of John and the fairest flower in all his
garland is taken from the singular effect and force of his ministry, it being
not dull and sluggish, but lively and powerful in operation upon the
consciences of men, and crowned with a more then ordinary success and fruit,
and that is presented unto us in the Text now in hand; From the days of John
the Baptist until now, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers viol^nce, etc.

The words then hold out unto us a glorious Spectacle, a goodly sight well
worth the beholding, and that is the Kingdom of heaven ravished; or if you will
here is a Noble prize achieved by an honorable and heroical enterprise,
together with the condition and success of the enterprizers, and the period
and date of all this.

1. The Noble prize to be achieved is the Kingdom of Heaven. 2. The honorable
and heroical enterprise is to invade and seize upon this Kingdom. 3. The
condition and quality of the enterprizers, they are not remiss and slack, but
eager and violent. 4. The Issue and success of the enterprizers, they prevail
in their design and take the Kingdom by force. 5. The period or date from which
this violence begins, and how long it continues, from the days of John the
Baptist until now. John's ministry was but of a few days and of a short
continuance, but he kindled in that short time such a light of knowledge, and
such a flame of affection in the hearts of men, as no opposition could put out,
but it continued like the morning star, still blazing and glowing more and more
till Christ came the Sun of righteousness, and he with his Apostles was so far
from quenching the smoking flax, that taking the Lamp out of John's hands, he
blew it up to a greater height, and made it burn more clear and bright.

And from Christ's time to the end of the world, wheresoever the Gospel is
preached, which is the ministry of the Spirit, discovering glorious things in
the Kingdom of heaven, and working mighty impressions upon the consciences of
men by means of such discoveries, there will be violence offered and resolute
attempts and enterprises taken in hand, for the atchieving and compassing of
those glorious things.

These are the parts of this Text, all fraught with precious and choice
materials; I shall endeavor first (...) to top these sheaves and to beat out
the meaning of the several parts, and then we shall the better come to reap
from them such fruits of Instruction as they will afford.

I begin with the first particular propounded, The glorious prize here held
out, which is the Kingdom of heaven; and to omit the various use of the notion
(if yet it be taken at all in a various use) for I rather hold with the
Judicious Cameron, that it imports always one and the same thing, Came.
praelect. in Mat. c. 18. v. 1. Regnum Caelovum unum and idem significat in
scriptura nempe regnum Christi, quod and regnum Dei dicitur sive Statum and
conditionem Ecclesiae quae proprie Christiana dicitur.
even the Kingdom of Christ the mediator over the Church and people of the New
Testament, with the preaching of the Gospel and the other Ordinances of
Evangelicall and Christian worship which properly belong thereunto.

There is first a Kingdom of power and providence which Christ has, as God
over all the world; Angels, and men, and devils, being put in subjection under
him, and of this the Prophet speaks, Psalm. 102. v. 19. The Lord has prepared
his Throne in heaven, and his Kingdom rules over all, this is not meant here.

2. There is a Kingdom of Grace, which Christ as Mediator exercised in a more
especial and peculiar manner, over the Church and Commonwealth of the Jews,
before the time of his Incarnation and coming into the world; for even the
Jews as well as we, vid. Iud. 8.23. 1 Samuel 1.7. etc. ^1 Samuel 12.12.
were unto God a Kingdom of Priests and an holy Nation, Exodus 19.5. and the
Lord was their King, Judge, and Lawgiver, Esaias 33.22. and Solomon, after David
his Father, is said to reign over Israel sitting upon the thron of Jah, 1 Chronicles. 29 23. and hence as one of the Ancients Eusebius praep. Evan. lib. 8.
(...) -- (...).
well observes out of Josephus, The Politic State and form of Government among
the Jews, It was neither a Monarchy, nor an Aristocracy, nor a Democracy, but
a Theocracy or Divine Government, the Son of God being in that Commonwealth
Commander in Chief, and ordering all things therein according to his own will.

Christ therefore reigned over the Jews as mediator many hundreds of years
before he was born of the Virgin Mother, the Kingdom and government even then
was upon his shoulders, yet you shall never find throughout all the whole
Scripture, that State and manner of Christ's Reign over the Church of the Old
Testament called The Kingdom of Heaven, and the principal reason seems to be
this, because the whole policy and form of it, was Typical and Ceremonial, all
things being carried then in clouds and shadows and mystical prefigurations of
good things to come, the truth and substance whereof was not yet exhibited and
revealed.

Hence the Apostle shuns not to call the Jewish Tabernacle, a worldly
Sanctuary, Heb. 9.1. and their Ordinances and rites of Worship, carnal
Ordinances, imposed only until the time of reformation, verse. 10. the like
censure he is bold to pass upon their sacrifices and offerings, They were only
patterns and (...).
figures of things in the heavens, and not the heavenly things themselves,
verse. 23. the people also were in comparison of the Christian Church, a carnal
people, and the whole economy and frame of their Religion, worship, and
government, was to be shaken and removed, as with an earthquake, at Christ's
coming, Heb. 2.27. Vid. Estium and Cor. a lapide in loc.
therefore that policy and ceremonial form of Church administration, was not
fit to be called by so high and glorious a Title, The Kingdom of heaven.

But now in the days and by the ministry of John the Baptist the Leviticall
Paedagogie, with all the carnal rudiments and umbrages of it, began to wax
old, and to wear out of date; another manner of Church State much more
spiritual, entering then upon the Stage and coming in by degrees in the room
of it, which therefore in the New Testament is commonly called, The Kingdom of
heaven.*

The mother place in Scripture from which this notion was derived is Dan. 2.44.
In the days of those Kings the God of heaven shall set up a Kingdom which
shall never be destroyed, etc. this passage Aben-Ezra and the Jewish Rabbis do
generally interpret, as Cameron observes, of the Messiah his Kingdom, which
they were wont to call (...) the Kingdom of heaven. Drusius praet. in Luc.
15.18. peccavi in caelum i.e. in deum nam (...) unum esse ex nominibus dei
sciunt omnes qui illam lingnam callent.

Lucae 20.4. Baptismus Joh. dicitur esse e caelo. i. a Deo. sive divini tus.

Scitum est illud apud Hebraeos sit Reverentia prae ceptoris tui sicut
reverentia caeli: and illud qui venit ut se mundet, adiuvant cum de caelo.

Sic apud Latinos caelo gratissimus omnis.


The denomination is not taken as is commonly thought, from the subject or
place of residence, but from the efficient rather, for with them in their
Dialect, the Kingdom of the Messiah, or Son of God, and the Kingdom of the
heavens are terms of promiscuous use as they are also in Scripture, compare
Mat. 70.7. with Luke 10.9. and you shall find that which in the former place
is called the Kingdom of heaven, in the latter is the Kingdom of God, the
difference in the thing it self being none at all, but only in the sound of
words.

But now this Evangelicall state of the Christian Church, called the Kingdom of
heaven, it is either Militant or Triumphant, the State of Grace or the State of
Glory, which for kind and nature are both one, and differ but only in
degrees; for the State of grace what is it else but glory begun: the way to the
Kingdom is not without some first fruits of the Kingdom, says Non est via ad
regnum sine primitiis regni.
Bernard. And the State of glory on the other side, what is it else but grace
fully perfect and consummate. It is the former of these which is here
principally meant, to wit, the Militant Estate of the Christian Church, in
which men are brought to live under the gracious and mild government of
Christ; their minds being enlightened, guided, and powerfully moved and
overruled. 1. To repent of all their sins, and then, 2. To accept of the
pardon and remission of them in such sort as it is offered in the tenor of the
New Covenant. 3. To render back as a Tribute of thankfulness a free,
cheerful, universal and constant obedience to all the revealed Will of God.

The next thing to be cleared is how this Kingdom may be said to suffer
violence? And here Interpretors vary, I shall give a touch of their several
descantings. It may be the very discords will help to make the Music better
and the harmony more pleasing; the sum of all or most of the tendries I have
met with, is reducible to these three heads. The violence here spoken of may be
taken either as it is opposed, 1. To Natures, 2. To Just and right, or 3. As it
is opposed to temper and moderation.

First it may be taken as opposed to that which is according to Nature: the
Philosophers are wont to distinguish of motion thus, 1. Grandis est violentia
in terra nos esse genitos and caelorum sedem quaerere Hieron. inloc.

Qui homo natus est angelus esse desiderat and terr^num animal cael ste
quaerit habitaculum Hier. ad Algasiam, Epist. 151.


That it is either natural or violent; natural motion springs from natural
principles, and tends to natural objects and ends, but the motion, says
Hierome of these enterprizers was not such, but violent and strained in respect
of its principles, object, and end. It was in all these beyond the sphere and
compass of nature: those that were by nature born men of an elementary
constitution, being upon the matter little other then mushromes sprung out of
the earth, were transported with a more then generous affectation to become
Angels, and their ambition was so transcendent and supernatural that nothing
could satisfy them under heaven, and this seemed to be such an extreme
violence against the common course and strain of nature; as if fishes should
affect to leave their watery Element to live in the earth, or as if Camels, and
Elephants should strive to leave the earth, and go live and swim in the Sea.

2. But this Interpretation it self is judged by some to be too much forced and
violent, and therefore Ambrose and Hillary take violence here, as opposed to
just and right. Id dicitur violentum quod est contra fas and jus. Glossa sic
exponit Regnum Dei Christi merito justitiaque ex pugna tum pecatoribus in
praedam datur, adeo ut illi id occupent qui eo Indignissimi sunt sicut raptores
alieno labor parta per libitum occupant. etc.
We are wont you know to call them violent who invade and seize upon that by
force, which they have no good right nor title unto, as thieves and robters do
by the high way In like manner the Gentiles, say these Authors, who had no
right unto the Kingdom of Heaven (for they were strangers from the
Commonwealth of Israel, aliens from the Covenants of promise, without God and
without hope in the world) yet they came thronging and crowding in howsoever:
whether they had any good tenure or no quo jure quaque Injuria, they came
according to our Saviors prediction, from the East and from the West, and from
the North, and from the South, and seated themselves in the Kingdom of God,
whiles the Jews which were the children of the Kingdom were cast out of
doors, Luke 13.28.29. Rapuit Ecclesia regnum, a Synagogue says Ambrose, the
Jews being Abraham's children thought this kingdom to be an inheritance due
unto them only, in respect of their lineall descent and propagation from their
Ancestors, but the Gentiles came by force and shouldered them out, and took all
their Ancient rights and Privileges from them. This exposition carries
smoothness and concinnity enough with it, and might well be admitted were it
not that it antedates a little too soon the conversion of the Gentiles who
sprung not in with such violence nor in such numbers and multitudes* till after
the days of John the Baptist in whose time yet this violence began.

Hi sunt qui per vim irrumpunt ac veluti Januam fracturi urgent. Adeo avidi
sunt ut nulla vi ab strahi possunt sed potius moriuntur quam abstrahu^tur ab
Evangelio. Luth. in loc. sic plerique alu.
3. Therefore the more received, and as I think the more judicious
interpretation of this violence here takes it as opposed to temper and
moderation, for so in moralls we account them violent who are not dull and
sluggish, but earnest and serious in their work, warm and zealous in their
pursuit, impetuous and resolute in their undertakings, and such was the
disposition of many people in John's days, they were so bent and set upon the
Kingdom of heaven, that no difficulties or discouragements could take them off,
they would have a share whatsoever it cost them. As Soldiers when they lie
before a besieged City, they set to their long ladders and Scale the walls, and
when they are got in they fly upon the spoil, and seize upon what ever comes
next to hand; so was the course of these violent ones. The Kingdom of heaven
was no sooner opened, but they sprung in and took hold of this glorious prize,
and carried all away before them with maine force.

But there is yet another Interpretation of this place given by Melancton,
which though it lie a little out of the common rode, and is not much, nor so
far as I can find, at all taken notice of by others, yet it seems to me very
considerable and worthy of due regard, as well as any of the former: the sum of
his notion, to give you an account of it in a word, Regnum caelorum vi
irrumpit, venit vi non quod Christus vi occupetimperia sicut Alexander sed
potentia divina erumpit contra surores diabolorum and tyrannorum, etc. Melanc.
in loc.
it is grounded upon the proper signification and common use of the word (...)
which in all sorts of Authors is for the most part taken in the active, and but
seldom and very sparingly in the passive, and if you please thus to take it
here, the sense will run clear and smooth to this effect, from the days of
John the Baptist until now, regnum caelorum vi ingruit vi irrumpit, the
kingdom of heaven breaks in by force. As the sun though it may be over-cast
with a dark cloud, yet the beams of it will at last break out, or as a mighty
violent flood or winter torrent, though it meet with many obstructions to dam
up its course, yet it will burst through and flow over them; so the kingdom of
heaven howsoever there were oppositions raised to obstruct the passages and
proceedings of it, yet it violently rushed in bearing down all resistance,
removing all rubs, and reigning over all impediments that lay in the way of it.

This Exposition has nothing forced nor strained in it, it agrees well with
that native force and common use of the word, and there is another parallel
place Luke 16.16. which much favors this sense, From the days of John the
Baptist until now, the Kingdom of heaven is preached, and every one presses
into it: the word is the same there and here, and I know no reason of any force
why the Active signification of it may not be admitted here as well as there,
the places being parallel, its probable enough that one and the same line of
Interpretation may serve them both.

Besides the current use of the word in this sense among other Authors, the
Septuagint as far as I can find, takes it always thus; Vid Septuagint in Genesis
19 3. and cap. 33.11. and Judicum cap 19.7.

Sic Tert. vocat Johannem Limitem constitutum inter vetera and nova ad quem
defineret Judaismus and a quo inciperet Christanismus. lib. 4 cont. Mar. vid.
Ireneus lib. 4. c. 8.


to wave other places for the present, that in Exodus 19.24 is full and
punctual for this, (...). Let not the Priests and people break through to come
up unto God; and the next clause to the Text (for the Law and the Prophets were
until John) fairly admits, if not requires this construction; his Ministry
being the common bound-stone betwixt the Jewish and the Christian Church, the
limits from which the Law and the Prophets took their conclusion, and the
Gospel and Kingdom of Christ its commencement and inauguration.

However because I delight not to to recede from the beaten tract, unless it
be upon urgent necessity, therefore choose whether sense you please, the
difference will not be material in respect of the observations arising hence,
which before I enter upon, there is yet one thing more to be explained in a
word or two, and that is, Why from the days of John the Baptist this Kingdom
of the heavens does thus violently come in, or if you relish the former notion
better, Why it suffered such violence in his days more then in former times.

The Reasons are 1. Because the Law and the Prophets were in force until those
days, and then upon the expiring of that dispensation, John's ministry, with
the Gospel and Kingdom of Christ, like time and the motion of the heavens
took beginning together at one and the same instant; therefore the Evangelist
has coupled them both together, Mar. 1.1, 2, 3. and S. Peter has done the
like, Act. 10.37. The Word you know which was published through all Judea,
beginning at Galilee, after the Baptism which John Preached. John's Ministry
it was you see preparatory and introductive unto Christ, the whole design of
his Preaching and Baptism was to discover Christ, and to make him manifest
unto Israel, John 1.31. His preaching being in the Spirit and power of Elias
tended unto this, to make ready a people prepared for the Lord, Luke 1.17. and
his Baptism being a summons to repentance for the remission of sins, Mar. 1.4.
did manifestly pre-ingage the people to believe in him that should come after
him, that is, on Christ Jesus, Acts 19.4. Now the gospel being preached, which
is the word of the Kingdom, it never returns back without success, but like a
draw-net when it is let down, some or other are caught and converted unto
Christ by it.

Omnia prius f^^geban^ sub ministerto Scritarum and pharisae orum Musc. in loc.
2. John's ministry was mighty and powerful, above the proportion of former
times: the people lived under shadows and dark clouds before, which cast forth
but little light and yielded less heat, their hearts were as cold and frozen
as ye, under the Ministry of the Pharisees and Scribes, but John was a
burning and shining light, Ioh. 5.35. His Doctrine and conversation kindled a
light of knowledge and an heat of zeal in the hearts and consciences of men,
which drew them to Christ with much violence.

3. When John had once begun this course, soon after, our Savior with his
twelve Apostles and 70. Disciples came after him advancing and carrying on the
work to a greater height and progress, and look how far John's ministry
excelled all that went before, so far did the ministry of our Savior and his
followers excel and go beyond him, both in respect of a more clear
manifestation of glorious truths, and also in respect of a more forcible
operation upon the consciences of men.

And now having rubbed out these ears of Corn, come we in the next place to
reap from them such fruits of instruction as they will afford; the points
arising hence are four. 1. That the Church and people of the New Testament, is
the Kingdom of heaven. 2. Where it pleases God to raise up choice and pr^^ious
Instruments to Pre^ch the Gospel (as he did here) there the Kingdom of Christ
will forcibly come in, and numbers will as forcibly press and throng into it,
though there be never so much opposition against it. 3. Those that would have a
share in this Kingdom, they must not be dull and remiss, but earnest and
violent in their pursuit. 4. All those, and only those, which are thus earnest
and violent, shall prevail in their design, and carry the prize which they are
so eager for.

For the first of these, That the Church and people of the New Testament, is
the Kingdom of heaven; This is coucht in the Text and employed only as a
ground, and therefore to insist upon it at large would be a little impertinent.
I shall therefore hint you to some reasons for this manner of denomination and
so pass it over.

First, therefore the Church of the New Testament is called The Kingdom of
heaven, because in the Church, and in it only the Scitum est qoud Judaei
na^rant de R. Simeon F. Jo^hai, cum ille vid^ret occ^^em aviculis insidias
struente naudivit vocem caelitus delapsam i^ haec verba. Sine Caelis (i. e.
sine deo) ne una quidem avis capta est aucupio quanto minus tot and tot animae
filiarum hominum. Lud. Capell. Spei leg ex Bear shith. Rabba. Sect. 7^.
Heavens govern and that not only in a general way of power and providence,
for so is all the world under that government: Nebuchadn^zz^r when he had been
schooled by grazing 7. years among the bruits, he came to see this clearly,
that the heavens do rule, Dan. 4.26. But the Church is under the rule and
government of the heavens in another manner then the world is. God reigns over
the world only in a Providenciall way, ordering and disposing all things
according to his secret Council; but he reigns over the Church according to
his own hearts desire, by the Scepter of his Word and Spirit: look upon which
you will, of all the States and Governments in the world, even those that are
most exactly ordered according to the rules of Civil Policy, Justice and
prudence, and you shall find that they are but men at the best, and often
worse then men, beasts and sometimes worse than beasts, devils that bear all
the rule and carry all the stroke.

The four great Monarchies which have been so glorious in the world, would you
know what Emblem the Holy Scripture sets them forth by Dan. 7.17. They are
four great beasts which arise out of the Earth, and to the last beast of this
litter, the worst of all the former, though in outward respects the most
glorious, the Dragon resigned his power, and his Throne and great authority,
Rev. 13.2. S. Augustine is in the right for this Magna Regna, Magna l^tro^ima,
the great Kingdoms of the world, what are they else in plain English but
Tabernacles of Robbers, dens of Lions, and mountains of Leopars, Job 12.6.
Cant. 4.8. Copernicus his conceit is here no paradox, the earth mooves and the
heavens are at a stand, the Wisdom, the Council, the Policy, and Interests of
the Earth, turn all the spheres, move all the Engines, and do all in all; but
the Wisdom, the Council, the Policy and Interests of heaven stand still, and
strike never a stroke, carries no sway at all. But in the Church its otherwise,
there the Lord alone reigns in a peculiar manner, and his Will is done in
earth as it is in heaven, etc. that is the princiall reason, others are of
inferior remark which I shall briefly glyde over.

2. The Church is the kingdom of heaven, because the Prince that commands
there, is the Lord from heaven, Dan. 2.45. 1 C^r. 15.47.
The stone cut out of the mountain without hands; heavenly, in respect of his
extraction and original, as being sprung from the bosom of his Father, by an
eternal and ineffable generation; and from the womb of his Mother by a Divine
and miraculous conception, without any concurrence or help of man; and heavenly
to, in respect of his Inauguration and entrance into his Kingdom, which was
neither by popular Election, which course he declined John 6.15. nor by
succession, for his Kingdom rests solely in his own hands, and never did nor
can pass from predecessor to successor; nor yet by conquest or force of Arms
as other Princes enter. Christ waved all these ways, and came into his Throne
by an Ordinance from heaven, Dan. 7.13.14. When Peter drew his sword he
commanded him to put it up, For my Kingdom (says he) is not of this world,
its in this world, but not of this world, the prime source and original of it
is not from hence, John 18.36.

3. The first planting, establishing, and the continual advancement and
propagation of this Kingdom, proceeds not from any council, policy, or
strength of the world, but from the Wisdom and Power of God. It is God alone,
and no other, That plants the heavens, and lays the foundation of the Earth,
and says unto Sion, Thou art my people, Esaias 5.16. As they say of Thebes, That
it was built by the sound of Amphious harp, so its true much more of the
Church and Kingdom of God, it was built by the Fishermen of Galilee, and not
any other way, but only by the preaching of the Gospel, Micah 7.11. In the
day that thy walls shall be built the D^cree shall be far removed, P^sc. in
locum.
which Piscator Interprets thus, long latique propagalitur Evangelium; the
Gospel shall be propaged far and wide all the world over.

4. In respect of the Subjects who are not of this world, but severed and
separated from it. 1. By an heavenly Election, They are the Congregation of the
first born, whose names are enrolled in heaven, Heb. 12 23. And 2. They are
taken and bought from the earth, by a special work of Redemption, out of every
Country, and Kindred, and People, and Nation, Revel. 59. and cap. 14.3, 4.3.
They are singled out from others by a powerful conversion, upon which ground
they are saluted, Holy brethren partakers of the heavenly calling, Heb. 3.1.
And 4. Their trading and traffic is not for the things of this world, but
their conversation is in heaven, Phil. 3 20.5. Their inheritance and portion is
not in the earth, for here they are but strangers and pilgrims out of their own
Country, but they have an inheritance immortal, Dan. 8.10.
undefiled reserved in the heavens for them, 1 Pet. 1.4. In these and diverse
other respects the Saints which are members of the Church, though they live in
the earth, yet they are accounted in Scripture, the Citizens and Inhabitants of
heaven.

5. The Laws and Ordinances which the Church is governed by, are all extracts
taken from an heavenly original, 1 Chronicles. 28.12.19. Heb. 8.5. Vmbra in lege
Jmago in Evangelio, vtritatus in caelo Ambros.
copies and draughts derived from the Pattern in the Mount, as Moses
Tabernacle, and Solomon's Temple, were (...). The Church of God, says
Nazianzen, which is the inferior Tabernacle and House of God here below, it is
in all its institutions, rites, and Ord^nances, commensurable to its pattern
and prototipe for the heavenly Tabernacle which is above.

6. The Acts and administrations of the Church, if they be such as they should
be, divine and Spiritual, they sent not of the earth, breathe not of the
world, but the whole savor and relish of them is heavenly; when the Word is
Preached, it is not the Wisdom and Spirit of man, but the Lord from heaven
that speaks, Heb. 12.25. Mat. 10.20. And the Apostle tells us likewise, that
when men Prophecy, there is such a demonstration of divine power, that
unbeleevers coming in are convinced by it, saying, God is in you of a truth, 1
Cor. 14.25. The like may be said of prayer, its the Spirit that must frame
every request, and indite every Petition, if it be according to Gods Will, Romans
8 27. So the execution of Church censures, and generally all Church
administrations they are not such as they should be, if they carry not with
them a certain perfume as it were, or odor of heaven.

This may suffice for the first point, I defer the Use of it till I have done
with the next; which is this, Where the Lord raises up choice Instruments to
Preach the Gospel, as he did here in the days of John and of our Savior,
there the Kingdom of heaven comes in amaire, and multitudes take hold of it.
For the proof of this, see the truth of it in clear predictions and prophecies,
foretelling that it should be so, Esaias 2.1, 2, 3. It shall come to pass in the
latter days, that the Mountain of the Lords house shall be lifted up (not
only on the Mount Marlah at Jerusalem) but on the top of the Mountains, and
all nations (not the Jews only shall flow unto it; but how shall this be
brought about) the Law of the Lord shall go out of Sion, and the Word of the
Lord out of Jerusalem, and then he shall rule among the Nations. If the Gospel
be preached, the Kingdom of God will advance and get ground among all the
Nations of the world.

The like Prophecy we have Psalm. 110.2.3. When Christ sends out his Gospel,
which is that rod of his power, out of Sion, he will then be ruler in the midst
of his enemies, Populus sum voluntarius fi^ Pisc. inloc
In the day when he sends out his Armies (to wit of Apostles and Prophets) His
people shall be a willing people, or as some Interpretors turn it, they shall
be all volunteers in the beauty of his holiness, and the dew of his youth
(that is, the multitudes of children that shall be born unto him) shall be as
numerous as drops of dew in a spring or summers morning.

2. See the real performances and accomplishment of these Prophecies. In the
first dawning of the Gospel, when the state of the Jewish Church was exceeding
corrupt, even then by the preaching of John great numbers of people came over
unto Christ, and by Solemn Baptism took the oath of allegiance unto him, Mat.
3.5, 6. And the Ministry of Christ and his Apostles was yet more effectual,
their diligence was such, that they went through every City and Village
preaching and showing the glad tidings of the Kingdom of God, Luk 8.1. And the
people flocked after them in such multitudes that they trod one upon another;
Luke 12.1. And they were so eager and violent for the Kingdom of God, that they
came by break of day to seek Christ in the desert and they laid hold of him
that he should not depart from them, Luke 4.42. And the success of those
endeavors was such, that Satan fell from heaven like lightning, Luke 10.18.

All this came to pass whiles the Gospel and Kingdom of Christ was yet pen^
^o as it were in a corner, and confined only to the Jews; but after that Christ
was once by his Ascension lifted up unto heaven, Mark. 9.1. Sic interpritantur
illum locum Call. Beza Buzer. Toss. (...).
then he drew all men after him, John 12.32. then was fulfilled, and not before
as some learned conceive, that prediction of our Savior Mat. 16.28, Verily I
say unto you, there be some standing here, that shall not taste of death till
they have seen the Kingdom of God come with power. The Kingdom of God came
with power when the Holy Ghost came down like a mighty rushing wind, and shook
the place where the Apostles were on the day of Pentecost gathered together,
Act. 2.2. This violent rushing wind, was an Emblem of the great power of the
Gospel which shook the foundations of Satan's Kingdom, and overthrew all his
strong holds, demolished Idols, Romans 16.26.
subdued all the learning, policy, and power of the world, and captivated all
Nations to the obedience of faith. The Jews had most of them a strong
prejudice against Christ, yet S. Peter with his Fish^rs net came over them and
caught 3000. of them at one draught, Act. 2.41. The Samaritans had for a long
time been held under the power of Satan by the Enchantments and Sorceries of
Simon the Conjurer, but the Gospel coming among them, those Magic Spells
lost their force, and were un-witched by a more pot^nt and effectual charm,
Act. 8.12. Its recorded there, That when they believed the things that were
spoken by Philip concerning the kingdom of God, and the Name of Jesus Christ,
they were Baptized both men and women: When the Word is Preached, its as
possible to keep down the Sun from rising, as to hinder Christ from getting up
into his Kingdom.

But how comes the empty breath of a few weak and despised men to be so
effectual and prevalent?

The Reasons are, 1. This is the Institution and Ordinance of God, which
therefore must needs be mighty and powerful, Non vi no^ armis nec carceribus
sed solo gladio Spiritus quod est verbum dei tot victorius tot triumphos
paravit Ecclesiae Christi Possidon. de August. in vitaejus.
to bring about the end it was appointed for: this was the sole Apostolic
Weapon whereby they subdued all the world to the Scepter of Christ, 2 Cor. 10
4.5. It is not the bare sound of the Word, but the concurrence of God with his
own Ordinance that did give it such life and success every where, Mark 16.
ult. As the woman of Tekoah was subtle, because the hand of Ioab was with her,
so the Preaching of the Apostles was powerful because the hand of the Lord was
with them, Act. 11.21 Zabarell gives this account why heat being but a mere
accident is yet the cause of all nutrition; It is not as it is a bare quality,
Zabar. phys. non ut so^us sed ut instrumentum animae.
but as the Instrument of the Soul. And if any ask, How the Preaching of the
Gospel works such rare effects, it being so weak and contemptible a thing,
the answer is, Non ut sonus sed ut instrumentum dei, not as it is a sound, but
as the Instrument of God; there was never any man more excellently
accomplished, or more diligent in this great work, then the Apostle S. Paul, he
carried the Word of the Kingdom and set up the Scepter of Christ, well near to
the third part of the know world, Yet I dare not speak, says he, of any thing
which Christ has not wrought by me, to make the Gentiles obedient by word and
deed, through the mighty power of the Spirit of God, Romans 15.19, 20.

2. In the Gospel there is a discovery of great and glorious things, which
objectively and morally work upon the apprehensions of men. All objects make
impressions upon the hearts of men according as the worth and excellency, the
use and necessity of them is more or less apprehended, every man is drawn by
that which appears best for him in his own judgment: As a sheep may be led
along with a green bow, so may an Epicure with pleasures, an ambitious man with
a bait of honor, and covetous men with a bribe, (...). Homer. de A. hill.
a martial man with feats of Arms, and every man with that which carries the
greatest stroke with him, and which he has the greatest apprehention of. In
like manner does it fall out here; the great things propounded in the Gospel,
when they are seen and understood according to their own worth, they attract
the heart and ravish the affections; the Arminians say, That the Word preached,
Vid. Came^. in Ep^st. ad viram Doctum.
works upon the understanding irresistibly; in the Elect no doubt it does so,
when the hour is come which God has appointed, and when there is an
impression of light set on irresistably upon the mind, the will and affections
are always in a due proportion, equally moved and stirred as the hinder
wheels in a coach are with the former, and when both the understanding is
conquered, and the will caught, and the affections ravished, what then can
hinder men from coming into the Kingdom of Christ. If the Pharisees by taking
away the key of knowledge, debarred men of entrance into the Kingdom of God,
Mat. 23.13. Luke 11.52. Surely then the preaching of the Gospel, and the
dispensation of the mysteries of it, being the right use of the Keys of
knowledge, must needs be a means to give people admission and entrance into
that Kingdom.

3. In the Preaching of the Gospel there is not only a bare Proposition and
discovery of glorious things to whet up and provoke the affections of men, but
there is an offer and tendry of them upon the easiest and freest terms; as if
the Lord were weary of his Kingdom, and would gladly make it over unto men, he
offers it for nothing, requires nothing but acceptance and thanks; more than
this, he entreats and woo's and sollicites men, yea he importunes and urges,
and in a manner offers violence unto them, to make them plyant and tractable to
their own happiness. As Lot urged the Angels and offered violence to them to
come and lodge with him, In his locis 70. Interpretes utuntur hoc verbo (...)
and aliis passim.
Genesis 19.3. and Jacob in like manner was urgent with his brother to accept his
present, Genesis 33.11. and the Levites father-in-law would needs with much
importunity heap kindness upon him; so the Lord he seems with a loving
violence to obtrude, as it were, his Kingdom upon men, Nolite cogitare invilum
trahi trahitur animus and amore, Aug. tract. 26. in Joh.
and to press it upon them with such eagerness of affection, as if he knew
not how to be happy without them. When the guests that were invited to the
marriage Supper of the Kings Son, refused the offer, Go, says he, into the
high ways and hedges and Market places, and bring in the blind, and the lame,
and the halt, (...), Luke 14.23. compel them to enter in, that is, use all
your uttermost endeavors to allure and draw them, try all conclusions by
persuasions, promises, threats, to work upon them. Genesis 19.26. Nemose ab invito
coeli vellet ne homo quidem Tert.
As Lot when he lingered in Sodom, and was loath to depart; the Angels laid hold
on him and plucked him out: so the Lord would have his servants to enforce as it
were, and hale men into his Kingdom, that they might be saved; not that he does
in proper speech constrain or enforce the will; for that agrees not with its
nature, it being a rational faculty which cannot be compelled, but the Lord
draws it with a sweet and liberal (...) a loving and gentle violence, a
pleasing and powerful necessity, which in effect is all one with those cords
of a man and bands of love which the Prophet speaks of, Hosea 11.4. and when
men are thus drawn its no marvel if they come and offer violence to the
Kingdom of heaven, when it has first offered such violence to them.

4. The Gospel and Kingdom of Christ is of an increasing and growing nature,
it spreads like a leaven, Mat. 13.33. grows like a grain of mustard seed,
ver. 31. It got first into families, then it crept next into Cities, afterward
it advanced into whole Provinces, Countries, Commonwealths, that little stone
that was cut out of the mountain without hands, figured the Kingdom of Christ
which will break in pieces all other Kingdoms, and grow into a great mountain
filling the whole earth, Deuteronomy. 2.34, 35.

5. And that which is yet more observable, this Kingdom of Christ it grows by
its losses, thrives by its decays, prospers by its oppositions: it is in this
like unto a bed of Cammomill, the more its trodden down the more it gets up,
and rises; the old rule here if ever holds true, Punitis ingeniis gliscit it
authoritas, opposition makes the Gospel it self, Manifesta setum ^^i virtus
contra odia humana porrex it cum tanto magis Christus praedicaretur quanto
magis praedicari inhiberetur, Hilar. cont. Auxent.
and those that bring it, gather strength and win the more Authority: when the
Apostle was cast into prison, the Word of the Lord was not bound, howsoever the
Adversaries thought to stop the proceedings of the Gospel by that course, yet
it tended rather to the enlarging and propagation thereof, Phil. 1.11, 12. Lo
here how bonds and fetters helped forward the happy spreading and progress of
Christ's Kingdom; opposition at Jerusalem, made it get footing in Rome the
Imperial City; and not only so, but even grow famous too in Caesar's Palace,
the Apostle took notice elsewhere, of a great door and effectual, which was
opened unto him, when yet there were many adversaries, 1 Cor. 16.9. which
plainly imports great success in despite of great resistance; when the Dragon
lay in wait to devour the Churches man-child as soon as it was borne, he
was frustrate of his hopes, notwithstanding all his rage, the child was caught
up to the Throne of God, Revel. 12.5. So in Dioclesians time, when there was
set up an Edict in the Market place for the utter extirpation of Christianity,
the whole world soon after turned Christian.

^. Use for Instruction.
See then how great and singular a blessing it is which God affords unto any
people, when he raises up store of precious and choice Instruments to Preach
the Gospel among them. Howsoever we may happily despise the day of small things,
and make but slight account of such a mercy, yet it is a favor certainly of
as much worth in the intendment and consequence of it, as the kingdom of
heaven amounts unto. Its a sign that God is coming to Keep his Court of
residence, where he sends out harbingers to take up rooms and to prepare
lodging and entertainment for him. When Saviors come upon mount Sion, the next
news is this, That the Kingdom is the Lords, Spirituallter significati sos
Apostulos and ministros verbi qui servare dicuntur cos quibus Evangelium
annuntiant. Dras. in loc. confer. 1 Timothy 4.16.
Obad. v. 21. God abates nothing to a people of the height of his favors when
he vouchsafes unto them this mercy, Jer. 3.14, 15. Its promised as a special
token and pledge of Gods matrimonial love, Return unto me ye backsliding
children, for I am married unto you; how does that appear? I will give you
Pastors according to my own heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and
understanding; and would you know of what consequence that is, verse. 17. At
that time they shall call Jerusalem the Throne of the Lord: the Lord Reigns to
be sure, and has a Throne where he is pleased to plant a faithful and
powerful ministry; and where the Lord Reigns, there is,

1. The greatest Honor and advancement that can befall a Nation. Its that
which makes a Country to be the land of Immannel, Esaias 8.8. A glorious high
Throne, Jer. 17.12. A Crown of glory and a Royal Diadem in the Lords hand,
Esaias, 62.3. In a word, (...). Hero. dian.
this is it which lifts up a people as high as heaven, Mat. 11.23. Let Italy
glory in this, That it is, for pleasure, the garden of the world; we shall
never need to envy them, whilst it may be truly said of great Britain, That
it is the Court and presence Chamber of the great King; this is the Churches
peculiar honor, The name of it shall be called from henceforth, The Lord is
There, Ezech. 48 35.

2. As the greatest honor, so the greatest safety and protection attends where
the Lord Reigns. The Church, it is the Kingdom of heaven upon Earth, and it is
a strong City, having Salvation for its walls and Bulwarks, Esaias 26.1. It may
indeed before assaulted and battered, but cannot be overcome; it may be
endangered, Mat. 26.18.
but not destroyed; Christ must be plucked out of heaven, and the Scepter
wrested out of his hands, before the Church can miscarry.

3. The Kingdom of heaven is a storehouse of all blessings, temporal,
Spiritual, and Eternal; the blessings of the heaven above, Deuteronomy. 33.13.
and of the deep that coucheth beneath, Irriguum superius and irriguum
inferius the upper springs and the nether springs, yea all Gods fresh springs
have their course here, Psalm. 87.7. Qui possidet possidentem omnia nunquam
pauper erit. Ber.
Christ has unsearchable riches of grace and glory, and he makes them all
over, together with himself, to those that receive him. That State can never be
bankrupt, that possesses him who is the possessour of all things; look over
all the world and consider what good thing we would have in reference to our
private or public welfare, whether it be riches, honor, wealth, peace,
liberty, policy, plenty, prosperity, or whatsoever else, which heaven can
afford, they come in as additions with the Kingdom of God, Mat. 6.33. We value
our Magna Charta much, our civil rights and liberties we count them precious,
and yet they are but for this life, but the grand Patent and Charter of heaven
Feoffes us in the promises of the life that now is, and of that also which is
to come, 1 Timothy 4.8.

To wind up therefore this clew, Wheresoever the Lord is pleased by the
Ministry of his Servants to establish himself a Kingdom among men, there is a
Throne of honor, a mine of wealth, a storehouse of blessings, an Ocean of
comforts; In a word, there is the springhead where all happiness flourishes
and all misery withers.

2. Use for Consolation.
2. Here Is matter of comfort and encouragement, That wheresoever the Gospel is
preached, there the Kingdom of heaven comes in, and no opposition can keep it
out. The Prophets are wont to make this as a ground of greatest comfort, even
in the midst of sad times. How beautiful are the feet? how welcome the
access of those which bring this good tidings unto Sion, Thy God reigns, Esaias
52.7. Esaias 40.9. Romans 10.15.
We may feed upon this cordial, even on our solemn Fast, in our greatest
mourning, in the midst of all our tears, this may excite us to some
expressions of thankfulness and strains of gratulation. The Lord reigns,
says the man after Gods own heart, and what then, let the earth rejoice, let
the multitudes of the Isles be glad thereof, Psalm. 97.1. If any other people in
the world, surely we of this Island have great cause to rejoice and be glad in
this regard, howsoever it be with us in other respects, yet blessed be God it
may not, Brittanorum in accessa Romany loca Christo tam^n sunt subdita Tert.
it cannot be denied, but that the Lord reigns and has had his Throne among
us for a long time. Tertullian observed long since, that Christ set up his
colors, and came in as a conqueror before the Roman Eagles could spread their
wings here; and S. Hierom: has an expression to this purpose, De Brittanniis
aeque ac Hierosol, mis aequaliter patet Aula caeleftis. Hier.
That the Court and Kingdom of heaven is as open at great Britain as at
Jerusalem; and although in the general Apostasy of Antichrist the Kingdom of
heaven was here fast locked and barred up for many hundreds of years, yet it
was afterward by the happy reformation in the days of our Fathers, here also,
as well as in other Churches set open again according to that prediction,
Revel. 15.5. After this I looked and behold the Temple of the Tabernacle of the
Testimony in heaven was opened; I need not tell you what store of excellent
and glorious Instruments the Lord then raised up, Nostram doctrinam a prima
ejus praedicatione prohibent reges duces and magistratus cum universes
satellitibus illa tam^n non flaccescit ut doctrina humana sed magis f^oret.
Clem. Alex. strom 7.
both of Magistrates and Ministers, nor how mightily they carried on the work,
though against a world of opposition. It suffices that we all know that the
foundation of the Temple and Tabernacle of God was laid, and the street and
walls of the heavenly Jerusalem built, though in troublous times; and from that
day forward to this, the Lord that has the key of the house of David, that
opens and none shuts, and shuts and none opens, he has set before us an open
door, as he did for Philadelphia; Rev. 3.7.8. and although there has been, and
still is, much opposition, and great endeavors to have this door shut and fast
bolted, yet still its kept open in despite of Rome and hell, and is not this
just matter of comfort, that God has by his Word opened us a passage into his
Kingdom which no Art or power of the Enemies can block up? Does it not revive
and cheer up our Spirits in our saddest droopings; that although the Lord
suffers our treasures to waste, our estates to be drayned, our provisions and
supplies brought low; though he feed us with the bread of adversity, and water
of affliction, as it is in the Prophet, Esaias 30.20, 21. Yet he suffers not our
teachers to be scattered into corners; notwithstanding all opposition, he still
continues a fresh Spring of the Gospel, and with it the cloud of his presence
among us. Nil sentit erus in nervo cum animus est in caelo, Tert.
Surely we are injurious to the bounty and goodness of our God in this kind,
and value it not aright. If it bear not such weight in our estimations and
thoughts, as to counter-vaile, and more then countervaile, to outballance all
our afflictions.

And though there be some that would make us believe, That we are still in the
midst of Babylon, and that it is not Christ but Antichrist that has his Throne
among us, yet that is not a more malicious then an ignorant slander, and tends
not a little, were it true, to the honor of that man of sin: For how almost
can you honor him more, as a reverend and grave Author says well, Mr. Ball
Mod. Trial of the grounds tending to sep:
then by holding him to be such an one under whose reign a faithful and
effectual ministry takes place, the Word of the Kingdom being purely
preached, the Sacraments rightly administered for substance, thousands of people
converted, and the way to Salvation and life eternal as open as in any other
place in the world, Surely we should be worse scared then hurt with those
expressions of horror and atrocity, which the Scripture brands the kingdom of
Antichrist with, if this were the condition of his reign and government. Sed
non sic notus Ulysses, I hope we are taught of God to know the manners of that
man of sin otherwise then so.

But to pass over this, let us descend into a more particular survey and
discovery of our present condition, 3. Use for Humiliation.
and then I doubt me we shall find but too much ground of just mourning and
humiliation, for although it is true, that there is a Kingdom of heaven among
us, which prospers and flourishes in a considerable degree; yet it has not
spread and got ground in such a large manner as might have been expected and
desired. Hos. 9.3.
A man would think that we who have been tenants in the Lords land, and have
had a Patent and Charter of the Gospel leased out unto us, for the term of
more than fourscore years, with many other great advantages, above other
parts of the world; a man would think I say, we should have been long since a
people so refined in Religion, so ripe in knowledge, so eminent for the life
and power of godliness, so exemplary for purity of Ordinances, Ministry,
Doctrine, Worship and Government, as might have rendered us a praise in all the
Reformed Churches, and a singular pattern and myrrour to the other parts of the
world. But alas how far short are we of such a condition, and what great cause
have we of mourning and humiliation in sundry respects?

1. Its matter of mourning, That although there be some, yet we have not
workmen enough rightly fitted and furnished with ability and fidelity for the
Kingdom of God; if we had as many laborers as Solomon had for the building of
the Temple, and he had many hundreds of thousands, 1 Kings 5.15.16, yet all
this would be no more then sufficient, in respect or the great Work of God now
in hand and upon the wheels among us. But alas, we have scarce the tithe of
that number, the harvest is great, and the laborers but few, as our Savior
complained in a like case, Luke 10.2. The Apostle having mentioned some 4. or
5. men of principal note, who assisted him in the great work of Preaching the
Gospel, he does as it were fetch a sigh and breath out his soul in an
expression of some grief, for that there were no more such, Col. 4.11. These
only says he, are my fellow workers unto the Kingdom of God, which have been
a comfort unto me: you know how our Savior mourned, and how his bowels yearned
with compassion over the multitudes, when he observed them to be destitute in
this kind, and scattered abroad like sheep without a shepherd. Mat. 9.36.

2. Its yet more to be lamented, that we are clogged and cumbred with others,
who in stead of promoting and carrying on, do indeed retard and set back the
proceedings of the Gospel and Kingdom of Christ (...), as the saying of Byas
was, their very help is a disadvantage and an hinderance, rather, there be no
small numbers employed in the Service of the house of God, whom a man would
disdain to set with the dogs of his flock, as Job has it, Chap. 30.1. of this
sort are,

1. Those troops of blind guides, ignorant sots, priests of Jeroboams order,
the scum and froth of the people. Indeed the silliest creatures in the world,
if they were but men, were good enough as one fayes to make priests for
Jeroboams gods, Dr. Stoughton.
which were but calves, but what has the Gospel and Kingdom of Christ
deserved, that it should be put into the hands of such hucksters.

2. Little better upon the matter, though some of them are more learned, are
those Loiterers, rather than laborers in Gods Vineyard, who feed themselves
and famish their flocks, Non-residents I mean, who through covetousness make
Merchandise of the Church of God, and care not what becomes of the souls of
the people, bought with Christ's blood, so they may wallow in their pomp and
jollity. Master Greenham wished that this Inscription or Motto might be written
on their doors and posts, on their beds and tables, on their study, books,
plate, and all their furniture, precium sanguinis, pretium sanguinis, The price
of blood, The price of blood.

3. Worse then both the former, are those sons of Eli, or sons of Belial
rather, who by their corrupt Doctrine, or scandalous conversation, poison those
who are committed to their charge, pulling down the Church and Kingdom of God
with both hands, but building it up with neither; if the people call for bread,
they give them a stone, and when they ask a fish, reach them a Serpent; are
not Christ's flock, trow ye, well provided for, when they are set over to the
feeding of such Wolves?

4. That small sprinkling of faithful Ministers and people that are in the
Land, have they not been discouraged, oppressed, and persecuted with all
extremity of rigor, only for that power of godliness which they held out, as
if they that are themselves and would gladly draw others to be subjects in the
Kingdom of heaven, were for that reason not worthy to live upon the earth. That
which we read of the Jews, Ezekiel. 11.15. It was me thinks an exact image and
portraiture of the late face of our times; The great ones that bare the sway,
cast out all the Ministers and people of God, saying, Get ye far hence from the
Lord, to us is this Land given in possession: oprression was in power,
superstition in credit, Luxury Idleness in favor, Ignorance cherished,
prophannesse countenanced, negligence harbored, all Impiety fostered and
maintained, Nil pet^avit agnus tantum lupus esuriit.
only the faithful servants of Christ were and eyesore and a burden which
the land could not bear; and what was the quarrel? Why they could not
reconcile their Consciences to the piety of those times, the new revived Popery
would not relish antiquated superstitions then obtruded were not pleasing,
they could not concoct Idolatry with witty distinctions, In a Word, they could
not swallow the doctrine of Balaam, which some great Prelates and their
adherents set abroach, teaching men to bow to a piece of wood or stone, the
work of the hands of the Mason or Carpenter, no doubt a right worshipful
block, therefore the enemies either drove them out and persecuted them into
strange Cities, as Jeroboam did the conscientious Levites, 2 King. 17.21. Or if
they tarried still in the Land, they were appointed out as sheep to the
slaughter, Zach. 11.45. consult the place and it will seem a Prophecy
calculated for our Meridian.

5. To affect our hearts with just grief, yet more, see if there be not a
mighty Reign of all manner of Iniquity almost every where in the Land. Is
there not an overflowing Deluge of Popery, Atheism, Heresies, Sects, Schisms,
Idolatry, Tyranny, Simony, Bribery, Merito quis ^irari possit quomodo in tam
dissolluta consu^tudine omniumque rerum excepta prasulatus sug^illatione
doctrina tum diu incorrupta perstitit Brightman in 3. cap. Apoc.
Sacrilege, Oppression, Rapine, Whordom, Drunkenness, Adultery, Murder, with
all other abominations, that can be named? are not all these as you heard
worthily from the reverend Doctor in the morning, broken in like a torrent or
winter landflood upon us? It was a sad complaint of a learned and worthy Divine
of ours diverse years since, That there was such a general corruption of
manners here, that all things seemed to be lawful, and might be acted freely
and with impunity enough, except meddling with the Prelates Myters, which only
were so sacred that they might not be touched: the Jews have a saying, That
when all the creatures were destroyed by the flood, Noah had a copy of them in
the Arc, which was after reprinted to the world; and sure I think, were all
the corrupt Religions, and all the notorious sins of the world lost, a new
Edition might be soon supplied and sent out by the Copies and Paternes of them
that are among us. Where these things are, and abound, it may be questioned
whether the Lord raigns; but it is out of all doubt that so far forth at least
Satan has a Throne there, as in the Church of Pergamus, Revel. 3.13.

6. That which may heighten our grief as it does our misery yet further, since
the beginning of the Reformation none of all out former Princes or Parliaments
have ever yet so laid these mischiefs to heart, as to make any effectual
provision against them. Daut animum ad libere loquendum ultimae miseriae.
Extreme miseries will force a man to speak out more freely then otherwise were
perhaps fitting, Let me therefore entreat you, most honored Senators, to lay
your hands on your breasts, and tell me whether this be not true. What law has
ever yet been enacted to enforce diligence and painfulnesse in preaching, or to
establish a learned and faithful ministry? Nay has not the door unto the
Ministry been set wide open, and Sacred Orders prostituted to all sorts of
persons though never so apparently unfit or unworthy? And has there ever yet
been any sollid well-grounded course, either to prevent the entrance of such at
the first, or to eject and remove them afterward? The like may be said of the
unsuppressed growth of scandalous sins, dangerous errors, destructive
opinions and heresies, besides the prodigious ignorance next to Barbarism,
which has been suffered to overflow the Dominion of Wales, and the
neighboring Kingdom of Ireland; to say nothing of the blind corners in our
own Land, in all which there is so little knowledge of Christ and the Gospel,
that a man could hardly take it upon his conscience, that the most of the
people are not Infidels; surely very few would suspect them to be Christians;
Who would think that such a Kingdom as this, professing the Gospel and faith
of Christ, Pudet haec appr^brianobis and dispotuisse and non potuiste refelli.
should suffer such abuses and prophanations, and take no effectual course for
the redress and reformation of them. It may be a just grief and shame unto us
that such things may be laid to our charge and that we cannot answer for them.

7. But this is yet worse then all the rest, and more to be lamented, That the
Public State of the Kingdom has heretofore by Parliamentary Acts and
Decrees Legitimated some of the former and sundry other mischiefs: Vid.
Mollerum in Psalm. 94.2^.
and is it not a strong conviction of sin reigning in a land, where the throne
of Iniquity establishes mischief by a Law? Psalm. 94.20. Qui non impedit
peccatum quum potest Jubet.
Other sins may be charged upon private persons, but the public state must
bear the guilt of those evils which it might have hindered and did not, much
more of those which it did command; and how can that State be excused from
commanding of sin, which enacteth laws against Gods Laws? what should I need
to tell you of the errors and oversights of former times, in which the civil
Authority and sanction of Parliaments has confirmed and ratified, not only
Non-residency, Pluralities, Impropriations, and a dumb Ministry, with other
like corruptions, but that which has given growth, and spreadth to all these,
and many other horrible abuses, a pompous high towering and most unprofitable
Hierarchy, with a multitude of Chauncellours, Commissaries, Surrogates, and
other inferior Officers depending thereupon; the most of which have been ever
found by constant experience, very bitter enemies to the Kingdom of God; and
now the whole faction of them, with all its dependants, is risen up in Arms to
oppose Religion and Liberty, Nunquam (...) religio ni^i inter reverend^ssi^os,
(...)
and to sacrifice to their unbounded ambition, the prosperity, honor, and
happiness of three Kingdoms. It was a harsh expression, but too true,
Religion is never in danger but among the Right Reverend.

8. Once more, look upon all these great evils, not as sins only, but as
Judgments also, especially that Church-destroying, soul-damning curse of a
corrupt Ministry, which is one of the forest plagues that God is wont to
punish a wicked people with. Its undeniable this, upon the former grounds, for
if Pastors after Gods own heart be such undoubted pledges of special favor
and grace, sure then the contrary must needs be interpreted as symptoms of
wrath and infallible arguments of much displeasure: God is angry with a people
to purpose when he inflicteth upon them such a Judgment, Hos. 9.7. Israel
might well know (and so may England now by the same token) that the days of
visitation and recompense were come, when the Prophet it a fool, the
spiritual man mad, Ideo muitum est odium Dei videlicet in te^ Drus. in^.
an heavy condition God wot, but hark what follows; For the multitude of
their Iniquity and the great hatred: we are for the most part slight and
shallow in searching out the true root and ground of such a Judgment when the
Prophets are fools, and spiritual men mad, we shift off the blame from our
selves, and derive it upon others; oh we may thank the Prelates for this, or we
may thank corrupt and Simoniacall Patrons; these commonly be our thoughts, but
truly we may thank our selves most of all, who by our manifold great sins
have provoked our God to scourge us with such a dreadful visitation, Let us
therefore sit in the dust and accept of our punishment, acknowledging and
owning our demerit. If there be multitudes of Prophets fools, and multitudes
of Spiritual men, that are no better then mad or distracted, take the Prophets
word for it, and write it down as an Oracle, That it is for The multitude of
our Iniquity, and for Gods great, but just, Hatred, conceived against us.

It was Hirams complement to Solomon, Because the Lord loved his people,
therefore he made thee to be King over them, 2 Chronicles. 2.11. And let me say in
the same manner, Jer. 5.6.
because the Lord was angry with his people, therefore in Church and State he
made such and such Lions, Wolves, and Leopards, to rule over them; when a
Religious man in an expostulatory strain, complained to God of Phocas that
Paracide, who paved his way to the Throne by the murder of Mauritius his
predecessor, saying, Lord, wherefore have thou made this man Emperor: The
story records, Bishop Usher in his Tract De Christianarum Ecclesi^^um
saccessione and statut relates this out of Cedrenus.
that the Lord returned this unto him in answer, enimvero quomodum non inveni
pejorem, Verily, because I have not found a worse: It seems the sins of the
Roman State were then grown to such an height, that if God could have culled
out a worse Instrument then Phocas was, they should have had him to sit at the
Helm, and Steer their Commonwealth with a vengeance. And if any should
expostulate now, and complain in like manner unto God and ask, Why he has
set over the Church such multitudes of blind Seers, mongr^ll temporizers,
superstitious Chemarims, desperate malignants, Incendiaries and furies, May he
not return the same answer, Because he has not found any worse; Verily, the
sins and provocations of our Land are risen to such an height and swollen to such
a Number, that if the Lord could have raked together a worse generation of
pernicious and destructive instruments, from any corner of the world on this
side of hell; Its not to be doubted but that sundry of our Parishes and
Congregations should have been thought worthy to be plagued with them.

I know this will seem a sad, and perhaps too grievous a charge, but will ye
please to consider how the Lord lightens and thunders, and with how tragical
an accent he ushers in such a Judgment, Esaias 29.9, 10, 11, etc. Stay your
selves and wonder, and cry y^e out, Wherefore is all this noise? What means
such unusual fulgurations? Sure the matter must needs be great, more then
ordinary, when the expressions are so full of horror; Indeed so it is, for the
Lord was now preparing a Judgment for his people, (...) i. e. Spiritum
prosundissini soporis.
little short of the damnation of Hell, at the 10. verse. He powers out upon
them a Spirit of slumber, rocks them fast asleep in a profound security, and
that they might never be awaked, Their eyes were closed (as dying men use to
be) their Prophets, Rulers, and Seers, were covered; a black and palpable mist
of Egyptian darkness, enclosed and over-clouded them all, learned and
unlearned, The visions of heaven were unto them a Sealed book, verse. 11.12.
Utterly inexplicable and unintelligible: and if we would know what means the
heat of this fierce wrath, see the ground and meritorius cause of it, verse.
13, 14 It is for the Iniquity of an hypocritical and superstitious, people,
Propter p^etata populi principes and prelati excacantar. A Lapide in loc.
which draw near unto God with their mouth, and with their lips do honor him,
but their hearts recede far from him, and their worship of him is taught by the
precepts of men. Therefore does the Lord proceed to do this mavelous work
and wonder in their days: when he would seal up a people unto destruction, he
strikes them with a spirit of giddiness, Quos perdere ^^lt Jupiter dementat.
and makes their wisemen that should be, as blind as beetles, so as they can
see nothing.

Let me with you patience add one place more, of many others, to close up
this, Zach. 12.16. 1 Kings 22.20. Revel 9.1, 2, 3.
Mich. 2.6, 11. They straightned the Spirit of the Lord and silenced his
Prophets, they liked not their Prophecies which never boded unto them any good,
but still, as they thought, put them to shame; therefore to fit their humor,
that there might be like Priest like people; (...)
If any man, says the Lord, verse. 11. walking in the spirit and falsehood do
lie, saying, I will Prophecy unto you of wine and strong drink he shall even be
the Prophet of this people. The visions and inspirations of faithful Prophets,
which like golden showers came dropping from heaven, these were loathed,
therefore the Lord lets them have such as they best relished, drunken sots
setting all their doctrines abroach from their wine cellar. Do but turn the
key of the speech and alter the Scene, and it will suite our condition to an
hair. If any man walking in the Spirit, and falsehood, will Preach against
Preaching, and cry up the divine right of Episcopacy with Altar and Image
worship, and the only lawful devotion of May games and Morris dances, for the
Sanctification of the Lords day, he shall even be the Prophet of this people.

4.This may reach out a word of exhortation, First to all in general, and next
in a more special address to ministers, and lastly to our honorable Senators.

1. To all sorts.
1. It generally concerns us all of what degree or condition soever we be, to
help forward as much as lies in us, the powerful preaching and receiving of
the Gospel, which is the only means by which the Kingdom of heaven comes in
and gets possession: Indeed we cannot all be Christ's Scepter bearers that is,
an Office peculiar to some few that are designed to it by special appointment;
we cannot all promote the affairs of the Kingdom of heaven by Preaching, but
there is somewhat which we may all do,

1. We may prepare and make way for the erecting and setting up of Christ's
Throne in our own hearts and in our families and dependants; we may do much,
if we put our strength to it to do our utmost. If Christ reign in our own
consciences by the Scepter of his Word and Spirit, and the Kingdom of God be
within us, (...). Homer.
as the expression is, Luke 17.21. We shall then strain our endeavors with
all violence, to make our houses Bethels little Temples, and Sanctuaries, and
courts for Christ to keep residence in, there shall be room for no swearers,
drunkards, scorners of Religion or any other children of Belial, that turn the
broad side against Christ, and will not have him reign over them.

2. We may hold fast what we have got already, not suffering any enemy to take
our crown and Kingdom from us; there is a holy art of violence if we could hit
on it, by which the King may be detained and held in our galleries by the
chains of an acceptable and well pleasing captivity, Cant. 7.5. If he see us
earnest and zealous, with all our most serious desires and affections, winding
about him, and passionately enamored and sick of love for him, and steadfastly
resolved to retain him with us in despite of all oppositions, it will not
then be in the power of any enemies to drive him out or pluck him away from us.

It may be we cannot prevail to advance the Kingdom of heaven to a further
extent and progress, and to the achieving of new acquisitions; but we may, if
we be zealous and resolute, make good the ground, which it has already won,
maintain and defend all the Forts and strong Holds, which it has already
taken in and conquered. We cannot be all Soldiers to fight the Lords battles
in the field, but there is an holy war which we all may and must wage against
Christ's and our enemies, which would if they knew how, plunder him out of his
Imperial Soveraignety, and us out of our Salvation. S. Jude would have all
Christians (...), Dicant nos praefractos dures pervicaces dum in eo sunt ut
Christum enobis ripiant hic supervissum sumus and esse volumus, Luth.
earnestly to contend and wrestle for the faith which was once delivered to the
Saints. Here it behooves us all to be stout and invincible Champions to take up
the Arms of our Christian warfare, against Satan and Antichrist, and all
their Ensigne-bearers: whosoever go about to encroach upon our consciences, and
to reign over us in matters of faith and Religion besides Christ, we must hold
our own against them to the last gasp.

3. If we can do nothing else, yet we may help forward the propagation of the
Gospel by our prayers, S. Paul often moves the people to pray that a door
might be opened unto him, Col. 4.3, 4.
and that the Word of the Lord might run and be glorified. Habebat ille verbi
tonitruum sed dari ei viam querebat, says Gregory, He had the thunder of the
Word, and yet he desired the peoples prayers that it might get the easier
entrance, Nos in tanta rabie host^^a undique p^rsequentuum nihil al^ud ^^^amus
ni^i ed^re gemitus c^^suspiria sed (...) sunt bombardae nostrae and instrumenta
bellica quibus di^^ pavimus tot innotreanum Antichristi. Luth. Acts. 12.6, 7,
8, etc.
and make the swifter progress through all the difficulties and rubbs which he
knew it would meet with. There are great mountains of opposition that lie in
the way of Christ's Kingdom, but prayer, if it be earnest and faithful, will
remove them, Mat. 7.20. This was the Engine which the Prophet plied when he
would with his breath blow down the great Monarchy of Babylon, which so long
hindered the Churches restitution, Esaias 64 12. Oh that thou would rend the
heavens and come down, that the mountains might flow down at thy presence;
when the spirit of prayer grows hot and violent, it melts mighty mountains,
and makes them flow down as snow before the sun, or wax before the fire.

There be many faithful Ministers which now lie in chains, and suffer
Imprisonment as Peter did, when Herod set a strong guard of Soldiers to keep
him: the enlargement of them were a great advantage to the Kingdom of God, a
strong Gale of prayer would turn the lock of the Prison doors, shake off all
their fetters, and fetch them out with safety; there be many blind corners in
the Land, where the people sit in darkness, and the shadow of death, having
scarce any more knowledge of Christ and the Kingdom of heaven, then those that
live in the wild deserts of America, how miserable is the condition of such
poor souls, which are besieged with hell fire, and yet know not their own
danger: The key of knowledge not being with them, the kingdom of heaven is fast
locked and shut up upon them with Iron gates and bars. If we can do nothing
else, yet we may at least pity such poor souls and weep over them, and pray
for them, that the Lord would thrust some faithful laborers into his harvest
among them, Mat. 9.38.

4. We may and must with our prayers join our endeavors, employ our
Interests, friends, purses, withal the contributions, talents, and advantages
that we have to help forward the propagation of Christ's Gospel and Kingdom,
that it may prevail and prosper every where, especially in our own Land. We
all pray that his Kingdom may come, we are not in good earnest, but do in
effect mock God, when we use not all possible means to accomplish what we pray
for. If we be desirous to have a Kingdom of heaven upon earth, we must spare
for no cost, but like the wise Merchant man, venture all we have for this
pearl; Wherefore were our estates given us, but to honor God, advantage our
selves and help our neighbors? which we can no way procure more effectually
then by laying them out to purchase a sound Ministry, we can never put out our
wealth to a nobler use; riches are then Goods, when they are thus employed: if
there be any other, this is the best way to make our selves friends of the
unrighteous Mammon, Luke 16.9. We may at once engage God and man to be our
friends by this course. For what can be more to the honor of God, Tyrii ad
Christum conversi divitias suas conserunt ad usus Sanctos, i. e. ad Cultum dei
and sustentionem ministerii Evangelici, Pisc.
or benefit of man What more acceptable to both then to do with our Estates as
(...) did after its conversion, write upon them Holiness to the Lord, L^in
23.18. Happy are those stones, says the Philosopher, of which Temples are
made; and happy is that Sacred Revenue, say I, which is employed (...), to make
a bridge for men to go to heaven by. Oh that some common stock might be raised
for this purpose. There was an honorable design on foot some few years since,
for the buying out of Impropriations, and the redeeming of the Churches
patrimony; it was a work of as eminent piety and charity as ever any this Age
has produced, and the stopping of it by some execrable instruments, was an act
of as pure Sathanicall malice against, the glory of Christ, and the Souls of
men, as ever issued out of Hell; and were there no other exception against some
great Incendiaries but this, it were enough to render their persons hateful,
and their memory infamous to all generations.

But howsoever all are interessed in this, yet the Ministers of the Gospel it
belongs to them in a more special manner, 2. To Ministers.
to endeavor the prosperity, honor, and enlargement of Christ's Kingdom;
their very office and calling, bespeaks this at their hands, wherefore else
are they appointed of God and separated from others, Oration ejus Tonitraum vita
sulgar. Nazian. de Basil.
but to be both by their preaching and conversation builders of his house,
Stewards in his family, Watchmen in his City, Laborers in his Vineyard,
burning Lamps in his Temple: the success and fortune of Christ's Kingdom
depends next unto God upon the Issue of their endeavors. If they whose office
it is to attend the Sanctuary, had but the fire of the Sanctuary burning on the
Altar of their own hearts; If they were like John the Baptist, Burning and
shining lights, oh what a goodly light of knowledge, and flame of zeal, would
be kindled in the hearts of the people; How would multitudes come flowing in,
to borrow fire from their hearth, and light their candles at their Lamps? What
a singular honor would this be to have it recorded as ('it is here of John) That
from the days of such and such a Minister, since the time of his arivall and
continuance, in such and such a Congregation, with the parts adjacent, there
has bin great contention, much wrestling and violence for the Kingdom of
heaven, great trading and trafficking for remission of sins, the Graces of
the Spirit, which before were scarce at all looked after.

How much better were this, then to have it left upon record, That since the
entrance of such and such a Dumb Minister or lazy Drone, there has been a
great decay of Religion and piety, a great famine of the Word, with a Mighty
Inundation of Popery, Atheism, and all Prophannesse, since the entrance of
such Idol Sheepheards, and Priests of Baalam; all vices have grown, all
virtues withered: What a woeful account will such men have at the day of
judgment, when it shall be charged upon them, as upon the Pharisees, That they
neither entered themselves into the Kingdom of God, and that they hindered
others that were desirous to enter; molesting, discouraging, and doing what
they could, to cast them out with a rage, that reached as high as heaven; with
such a violence as this, they will find that God was not, nor ever will be
well pleased.

3. To the Parliament.
I descend to that part of this Exhortation which concerns our honorable
Senators: If powerful and plentiful preaching of the Gospel, be the next way
to bring down the Kingdom of heaven among us; you see then Worthy Patriots,
what it is which the Lord and his people expect and call for at your hands. The
general complaint is from every corner of the Land, That the people have been
for a long time almost quite without the true God, and without a teaching
Priest, and without the Law, as the Israelites were, 2 Chronicles. 15 3. No
Ministry, no Worship, no Ordinances, or that which is little better then none;
and the general request and desire is like to that motion of the man of
Macedonia, That you would send some over to help them. If therefore the glory
of Jesus Christ and the Salvation of his people, bought with his own blood, be
dear and precious unto you, as we know they are. If ever you desire to have
the honor of being the chiefest Instruments to plant a new heaven and a new
earth in this Land, Help every Congregation to faithful Pastors, and pure
Ordinances; you are as Joshuah and Zerubbabel, the two Olive-branches, or the
two anointed ones, which stand before the Lord of the whole earth; Oh let the
golden Oil still stream out in abundance from you to feed the Lamps of the
golden Candlestick, Zach. 4.12, 14. Hi sunt duo silli magnatum qui stant coram
Domino totius terrae. Chal. Paraphrastes.
God has made you nursing fathers, and nursing mothers to his Church, blessed
be God we have found you such: Go on still with your honor, and make yet more
full and liberal provisions for all the children of his family; by this means
Religion and the Church shall flourish more than ever, and thousand, thousands,
shall bless God for you.

If you would strain your selves to do a work of the richest merit, and
grandest importance for the Churches of Christ, I do not know any other that
may be of superior, or but of equal consideration with this, which among many
things useful is without all doubt, That one thing mainely necessary, Luke
10.42. The Kingdom of God cannot be held up without this, The key of knowledge
(you know the custody of it, in the Priests lips) it is the key of heaven; take
away this, and suppose the whole land were paved with gold, and walled with
rocks of Adamant; suppose we were crowned like the fortunate Islands, with the
richest confluence of all worldly prosperity, honor and happiness: Satius
erat solemn non lucere quam Johannem non docere sic populus de Chrysostom. in vita
ejus.
what would all this avail whiles the heavens are shut up and fast locked
against us. Take away a right Ministry and what is the most flourishing
Commonwealth? but as a Paradise without the tree of life, as the firmament
without the Sun, or as a goodly Palace richly furnished and hung about with
stately ornaments, but without any windows to let in the light of heaven.

Among all the Religious and worthy Acts of Jehoshaphat, this is recorded as
one of the chief, 2 Chronicles. 17.7, 8 9. That he sent his Princes, and with them
the Levites, to teach the People in the Cities of Judah, and I need not tell
you, for its well known how prosperous and successful that design prooved. I
doubt not but this practice of that incomparable Prince, will be set up unto
you, as a pattern for imitation. Blessed be God ye have begun well, I shall
need to say nothing, but as that Greek Commander said unto Teucer, (...), go
on and prosper, Gather out of the Kingdom of our God, (...), all things and
persons, that are offensive and that do Iniquity, Mat. 13.41. Ye have displaced
sundry unworthy and scandalous ones, which like drones cumbred the hive and
preyed upon the honey, which should have served for the laborious Bees; take
the same course with the rest, Remove the stumbling blocks, Esaias 62.10.
prepare the way of the people, lift up a standard that they may flock to it,
as doves to their windows, this is the way to leave the Church a Palace of
Marble, which you found as a cottage of brick. I have insisted but too long
upon this, wherefore I pass it over, and come to the next. Those that would
put in for a share in this Kingdom, they must not be dull and sluggish, but
earnest and violent in pursuance of it.

There is indeed a violence, nothing praiseworthy, held out in Scripture,
which is either, 1. In general, when men put forth themselves to the
uttermost, and draw out their strength in any sinful way, be it what it will,
As the Priests and people when Ahab-like they sold themselves over to Idols,
and the full bent and sway of their spirits was unto sin, here was a violence,
such as it was, (...) Sept.
Jer. 23.10. Their course was evil and their force not right. Or 2. There is a
violence taken in a more special and restrained fence, which is all one with
oppression and rapine pillaging, spoiling, plundering, and other such practices
which Jehoiakim that wicked Prince is branded for Jer. 22.17. John the Baptist
reads a Lecture to the Soldiers that came to his Baptism, Luk 3.14.
to beware of this violence, it being such a character as least of all suits
with those that pretend toward the Kingdom of heaven, S. Paul is peremptory,
that none such shall ever come there, 1 Cor. 6.10.

It is a violence quite of another nature and strain, which is here hinted
unto and commended. An honest and just violence, an holy Rapine, a lawful and
heavenly Robbery, a divine Sacrilege, which to give you in a word a rude and
cursory description of it, is nothing else, But a vehement bent of desires,
affections, endeavors, intensively aspiring, and reaching after the Kingdom
of God, and greedily laying hold of all helps, means, and advantages which
may conduce and tend thereunto.

We have sundry instances in Scripture of such a violence as this. The woman of
Canaan, Mark 7.27. she was so obstinate in driving on her design, that she
could not be beaten off, no not with repulses, the more Discouragements she
had, so much the more resolute and violent she grew, taking a strong hold-fast
of Christ, and cleaving to him like a bur, and never giving him over till she
had got what she came for. So the blind man which sat begging by the
high-way-side, you may enter him into same List, When he heard that Jesus
passed by, he cried after him with a loud voice, and when the Disciples
discouraged him, he cried yet out the more a great deal, and clamored after
him, Jesus thou son of David have mercy on me, Luke 18.35. And were not those
Auditors of Christ exceeding violent who thronged after him in such crowdes
that they trod upon one another, Luke 12.1. and those also no less, who
forced their access unto Christ by digging through stone walls, and uncovering
the roof of the house where he was? Mark. 2.4. What should I need to stand
upon particular Instances, the Scripture is full of them every where. The
Soldiers, Publicans, and Harlots, Surgunt Indocti and caelum rapiunt and nos
cum doctrinis nostris sinc cord ecce ubi volutamur in carne ac sanguine, Aug.
in those days, they rose up in great numbers and took the Kingdom of heaven
by force; whiles the Pharisees and Scribes and those profound Scholars were
left behind. Those that seemed first were the last, and they that were last
proved first. This violent Disposition and strain of Spirit, I shall endeavor
to show wherein it consists, how it works and wherefore it is so requisite and
necessary.

1. Therefore this violence consists in earnest and vehement desires. 2. In
steadfast purposes and Resolutions. 3. In stirring and impetuous endeavors. To
begin with the first of these. Earnest and vehement desires; They are the next
and most immediate issues, and outgoings of the soul, the feet on which it
runs, the wings on which it mounts and flies toward the object desired and
longed for; and these desires are either good or evil, carnal or spiritual,
thereafter as the object is, on which they fix, and the order and manner in
which they move. A man may know what the constitution and temper of his spirit
is in relation to the Kingdom of God, if he can but discern how the pulses of
his desire beat, and what the chief and principal thing is, which the most
quick and violent motions and ebullitions of his heart works after. If a man
be (...) as the Philosopher spoke, a Citizen and inhabitant of this world, his
desires grovell on the earth, he pants after riches, honors, pleasures,
relisheth nothing else; but now on the other side, if a man be (...), a Citizen
and inhabitant of another world, then the current and full stream of his
desires is still rising and working up toward heaven, He will pant after God,
as the chased Heart does for the water brooks, Psalm. 42. And thirst for him as
the dry and parched ground does for showers of rain, Psalm 63 1. He will long
(like a woman with child) for his Salvation, Psalm 119.174. and if it be
deferred he will faint and fall into a swoune, Psalm. 119.81, 82. And be sick of
love, Cant. 5.8. Such desires as these are violent, and they are of such force
and prevalence that nothing can withstand them. Tae^am quisque pot^st in
negotio religionis quantu ^ optime vehementissim^que vult, Came.
A man may do what he will and carry what he will in matters of Religion if he
have but earnest and vehement desires, Matthew. 7. Ask and it shall be given
you, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you, This
asking, seeking, knocking, is nothing else but prayer; and prayer is nothing
else but the ejaculation or darting out of earnest and impetuous desires, which
pierce the clouds and strike up unto God, get into his bosom, charm his
wrath, opens or shuts his hands, extorts mercies, removes Judgments, and never
will away without its errand.

This is that golden Key, as one fitly calls it, which can open all locks,
Vehementissimum a siderium est elavis aurea totius prosectus in regno Dei
Harph. Theol. m^st.
remove all bars, reign over all Impediments in heaven and earth. Its a
kind of omnipotent thing that can prevail with God and man above all
expressions and thoughts. As they write of Proteus, that when any came to
consult with him, and to receive Oracles from him, he would at the first turn
himself into a thousand varieties of colors and shapes, but if they pressed
on him with importunity, and held him hard and close to it, he would then give
them at last satisfactory oracles; So the Lord, though he seem for a while to
neglect and take little or no knowledge of the desires of his people, and
seems to put them off, and wind from them, yet when their desires grow
violent, and when they knock at his gates with importunity, then he lets them
be their own carvers, and is content that they should ravish from him
whatsoever they will. By this you may see how strong and forcible desires be,
though they seem but of a soft and gentle strain, they ravish the objects
they are set on; As if a man look upon an object of beauty, and lust after it,
you know what interpretation our Savior makes of that; so if a man look upon
the Kingdom of heaven, and lust after it, he has already ravished it in his
heart.

2. This violent disposition and strain of spirit discovers it self in
steadfast purposes and resolutions, Resolution it is the spring of Action. Its
that which poyseth and steeres a man's course, such as our purposes and
resolutions are, such be our actions and enterprises, the hand of the dyall
goes without, as the weights and wheels of the clock turn it within; so the
head plots, the hand acts, according to the sway of a well or ill settled
Resolution. The heart says (if it be set right for heaven) I must and will
have the Kingdom of God; let honors and wealth go which way they will, to set
up Christ upon his Throne, that he may reign in heaven and earth, and in the
hearts of men: Though it be a difficult, a painful, and chargeable design;
yet this I must and will drive to the worlds end; let other things sink or
swim, prosper or wither, it skills not, the Gospel of Christ shall prevail
with me universally; let the world lie at six and seven, this course I must and
will follow, though all the dust of the earth, sands on the shore, and tyles of
houses were devils, this I will set in hand with, come what will come; such a
resolution as this is violent, and it will overcome all resistance, and make a
man with a full purpose of heart cleave unto God, Act. 11.29.

We may see a lively portraict of such a spirit, in the Apostle S. Paul, Act.
20.22. He went bound in the spirit, as in a chain, to Jerusalem, and though he
knew himself, and others told him too, by the inspiration and instinct of the
spirit, That nothing but bonds and imprisonments waited for him in every City,
yet all this could not move him, he had such a magnanimous and adamantine
resolution to go through with his work, and fulfill his ministry; that his
life was not at all dear unto him, neither did he set any value on it in
comparison of the service which he was now upon. So true is that of the Spouse,
Cant. 8.6, 7. Love is as strong as death, zeal as hard ( i.e. inexorable) as
the grave, much water cannot quench it, neither can the floods drown it, no
difficulties or oppositions can allay or abate, much less extinguish the heat
of it, If a man would give all the substance of his house for it, it would be
utterly contemned.

The whole world, though vayled with the most glorious and glistering
temptations, would be scorned, as too mean and poor a bribe, to draw off the
heart of a man from the kingdom of God, when it is once well fixed and steeled
with a firm and adamantine resolution; no diswasions, sloth, fear, policy,
covetousness, fickleness, nor any other thing, can either divert, or stop, or
interrupt him in his enterprise. Esto obsirmatus ad morem pardi ad faciendum
voluntatem patris t^i qu^ est in caelo, Drus. praer. ex libro Abeth.
When a man is thus obstinately and courageously bent unto his work, this is
violence well pleasing unto God. The Jews have a saying, That a man should set
his face as a flint, and that his countenance should be like a Leopard, stout
and stearn and obstinate to do the will of his father in heaven.

3. This consists in strong and serious endeavors; A man is not violent in
matters of the Kingdom of God, if he do not put forth himself into action,
trying every conclusion, rolling every stone, and leaving nothing unattempted
that may conduce to the atchieving of his end. (...) Arist.
Every man says the Philosopher, works as he is, and his acts, and operations
are such as his principles. If the inward principles of his desires beat
faintly, if his purposes faulter and reele and be not steady and constant, then
his Actings in like manner, will either be none at all, or feeble, and
unspirited, and consequently fruitless and bootlesse; as an arrow weakly shot
off will not carry home, but fall short of the mark; and short shooting, we
say, loses many a game; it does so in religion also: but now, when the
desires are as hot as a flame, and the purposes as strong as steel, then to be
sure vigorous and Spirited endeavors will follow unavoydably. The Church in
Solomon's Song may serve for an instance to clear this; for a long time she lay
languishing, and as I may say wind-bound; no excitations, wooings, or
entreaties of her lover could prevail, to get her up out of her warm bed, her
secure and slumbring condition; some velleities and imperfect wishings and
wouldings she had, but still the door was locked against Christ; her will was
not bowed, there lay the inward impediment, the will was but half stirred, and
therefore no arising, no motion, till Christ comes and puts in his hand to the
hole of the door, and takes away the bar, shoots the bolt, removes the
Impediments, and then her bowels were affected and moved toward him, Then she
arose and sought him with a curious diligence every where, her hands bestirred
themselves till they sweat, till they dropped again, O^nis animae motus radix
est amor. Paris. quodlibet agens propter amorem agit qoud cunque agit. Aqui.
1.2. q. 28. art. 6.
her feet trudges up and down the streets to find him whom her soul loved,
and a world now for them that could tell her of any tidings of him, Cant. 5.2,
3, 4, 5, etc.

Its a true saying, That love is the root and principle of all the motions of
the soul; for though there be other affections, and those active, yet all are
reducible to love; and in the strength thereof they Act, and put all the
wheels of the soul in motion, as David when his heart was caught with a
violent passion of love toward God, how does he extend and spread out his
arms, and put forth all oars and sails in a strong pursuance after him.
Psalm. 63.8. My soul follows hard after thee: there was never a more
difficult and in humane view, a more unfeasible design then that of the Jews
in Nehemiahs time, when they were to build the house of God, they had a potent
faction at Court, and malignant Councillors at home, to retard and stop the
proceedings of the work, they were feign to build with a trowell in one hand,
and a sword in the other, yet they prevailed against all difficulties, and this
is given in account at the reason of it, The people had a mind to work, Neh.
4.6.

You see now what this violence is, and wherein it consists, see in the next
place how it works, either in relation to the good which it reaches after,
and would obtain; or else in relation to the evil which it would remove, and
be rid of.

In the relation to the good which it desires to obtain. 1. It stirs up a
generous and mighty ambition to excel in the inward gifts and graces of the
Spirit, which are necessary qualifications for all them that would have a share
in the Kingdom of God. A man that is in a violent strain, he cannot rest in
any mediocrities, never thinks he has virtue and grace enough, still he is
aspiring and reaching after more, He gives all diligence to add unto his
faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance, brotherly kindness, godliness; all the
rest of that chain of pearls which the Apostle stringeth up, 2 Peter 1.5, 6,
7, as well knowing, that if these be in him, and abound, they will make that he
shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of Christ, and then to
be sure, (...), Arist.
an entrance shall be ministered unto him abundantly into the everlasting
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, v. 11. As a scholar thinks he
can never have learning enough, and a covetous man thinks that he can never
have wealth and riches enough; so is it with a Christian of a violent Spirit,
he never rests contented with his present pitch* but labors still to abound
more and more; strives, if possible, (...), Arist.
to get up a note above Elah, sets himself no bounds, counts all that he has
attained, as nothing, like the Apostle S. Paul, whose zeal and covetousness,
and ambition, in this kind was so beyond all measure super superlative, that
although he had already gotten the greatest measure of grace that ever any
mortal man attained on this side of heaven, yet he forgot it all, and scarce
thought it any competencie, still pressing forward to an higher mark, as if he
would pre-occupate the state of glory, and attain even in this world, unto the
resurrection of the dead, Phil. 3.11.

2. In the worship and Service of God, and in the use of all the Ordinances,
public and private, the violence of a man's spirit works much in this:
Eccles. 9.10.
the Jews have a rule, That whatsoever a man does in the solemn Worship of
God, he should stretch and strain his inventions to do it with all his might,
else it is not current nor allowable with God; (...).
and the Apostle requires the like, Romans 12.11. He would not have a man slight
and formal, but fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord; and the word notes an
ebullition or boiling up of our spirits to the height. The odds is not great,
if any at all, between the omission of duties altogether, and the remiss
performance of them, seeing a man is a looser both ways. Acts of worship and
devotion when they are livelesse and superficial, are like a bow slack bent,
which will not carry the arrow home to the mark. S. Basil observes further,
That such slighting over duties, (...), Basil.
is not only unprofitable, but hurtful and prejudicial to the State of the
soul, as tending only to nourish an hypocritical and barren formality. There
is nothing in the world more unbecomming the worship of God, then such a slight
wanton superficial strain of spirit, when a man plays with Religion and
serves God as if he served him not. It was David's just praise, that the Zeal
of Gods House did eat him up, Psalm. 69.9. And he daunced before the Arc with
all his might, and when Michael scoffed at him for it, I will, says he, be yet
more vile then thus, for God, 2 Samuel 6.14, 22. Nor was Hezekiah behind him in
this, of whom to his everlasting honor it is recorded that 2 Chronicles. 31.27, In
every work which he began in the service of the house of his God, and in the
Law, and in the Commandments to seek his God, he did it with all his heart
and prospered. The ancient and primative Christians when they met, Coimus in
Caetum and congregationem ut deum quasi manufacta precationibus ambianus
orantes haec vis deo grata est, Tert. Apol. 39.
and crowded together with one shoulder, at their devotions, were so earnest
that they seemed to besiege the Throne of Grace, and to raise a common strength
to invade, and make a riot upon God in their prayers, and this, says
Tertullian, was a violence right welcome unto God: Jacob was honored and
called Israel for this, because he wrestled in prayer, and by main strength
prevailed like a Prince with God, Hos. 12.3, 4, 5. Genesis 32.28.

3. Nor is the violence either less acceptable or less necessary which we are
to use for the Word and worship of God, either to maintain and hold it up when
we have it, or to restore and recover it, if lost or endangered: S. Jude held
it necessary to write unto believers to stir them up (...), Earnestly to
contend for the faith, which was once delivered unto the Saints, v. 3. and the
angel of Pergamos is much commended for holding fast Christ's Name, and not
denying his faith in a time of persecution, Revel. 2.13. If wicked men would
rob us of the Gospel, take from us the Worship and Ordinances of God, plunder
us of our glory, our crown, our Salvation, here we must hold fast what we have,
Revel, 2.25. (...).
Not giving place by subjection, no not for an hour, Gal. 2.5. nor yield to
betray one syllable unto them, as Basils worthy resolution was; we value not
the truth of God, nor set a right estimate upon his worship and Ordinances, if
we be not violently bent to maintain and defend them to the last drop of our
blood.

And if there be a famine of the Word, a want or loss of any part or piece of
worship, it must be violently striven and contended for. Solomon would have us
buy the truth and not sell it, Prove. 23.23. at any rate to purchase it, at no
rate to part with it: a man that is rightly principled for heaven, will venture
through an Army of Philistims for water of life, as David's worthies did, unto
the well of Bethlehem; the people would part with their very Jewels, the most
precious things they had, for the erecting the setting up of Gods Tabernacle,
David would not take an hours rest till he had prepared an habitation for the
Arc, Psalm. 132.3, 4, 5. and because he set his affection upon the house of
God, he prepared for the building of it with all his might, 1 Chronicles. 2, 3, 4 He
thought it a thing unbecomming him, to dwell himself in a house of Cedar, when
the Ark of God dwelt under curtains: Joseph. de Bell. Jud.
and the Jews in the sore famine and siege of Jerusalem, brought ever the
fairest and fattest Cattle for sacrifices, though they were constrained
themselves to feed upon Rats and Mice and other worse vermin; they chose
rather to pine and famish their own bodies, that the Altars of God should be
altogether unfurnished, or take up with the worst: and when the Tribunes
complained for want of gold in the Treasury, Livy Hist.
to offer to Apollo, the Roman Matrons plucked off their chains, bracelets,
and rings, freely offering them to the Priests to supply that defect in the
service of their gods; This certainly was a high strain of devotion in those
Jews and Heathens, And what do you think of the Primitive Christians, were not
they also thus violent when they sold their estates, and laid down the price of
them at the Apostles feet, to purchase the means of Salvation for themselves
and others? If the people of this land would bid so high for the rich pearl of
the Gospel, The Kingdom of heaven were ours.

2 In remo^ing of evils.
2. And as in procuring of helps, means, and advantages for the attainement or
advancement of the kingdom of God, so in removing the lets and impediments,
this heaven-sprung-violence will work and bestir it self to the uttermost. If
the Gospel of Christ, the Word of the Kingdom, chance to be brewed with humane
traditions, or the Worship and Ordinances of God adulterated with spurious
institutions and impure mixtures, Quid non audet amor, what will not a man of
violence do or suffer? What labor or cost will he spare? What adventures will
he not make? What hazards not run, rather them suffer (if he can help it) such
pollutions? He will set his shoulders, with Sampson, to the pillars of Dagons
house, and pull them down, though himself be oppressed in the ruins; he will
cut down the grove of Baal, and overthrow his Altars, though the men of the
City cry out of him, and threaten to have his life for it. He will do his
uttermost to remove scandalls and stumbling blocks as Hezekiah did the brazen
Serpent when Idolized; to scourge out of the Temple corrupt Churchmen, which
make merchandise of holy things, as our Savior did the money changers; to
reform abuses and prophanations of Gods Name, his Sabbath, and Sanctuary, as
Ezra and Nehemiah did; He will not connive at his nearest friends, but eject
and cashiere them, if Idolatrous or superstitious, as Asa did Maacha his Queen
Mother, 2 Chronicles. 15.16. Hezekiah made it his first work when he came to the
Kingdom to set open the doors of the Lords house, which for a long time had
been shut up; he was scarce warm in his Throne when he was fiery hot, for a
full and through reformation, 2 Chronicles. 29.3. And Josiah his grandchild, when
he was yet but young was nothing less, if not more eminent in this violent
zeal than he. All the Altars, Groves, Images, and whatsoever other trinkets,
relics, and monuments of superstition were found in the land, he offered them
up for a hecatomb, made a bone-fire of them, as you may see at large, 2 Chronicles.
34.3, 4, 5, etc.

You see now the chief Ingredients of this heroical Disposition, and strain
of Spirit, and some few (for I cannot name all) of the principal operations of
it, see now the Grounds and Reasons of it.

1. In respect of God (...), Its meet and our bounden duty, that we should use
all our violence, and if 'twere possible more then all, in matters of this
nature; Its good council that of the wise man, Eccles. 9.10. Whatsoever thine
heart finds to do, do it with all thy might, slightness of heart in carrying
on any business is naught, but worst of all in Religion, God likes it well
when we put on to purpose, muster all our Forces, (...) Ex omni valde tue.
and stir up our strength to lay hold of him, Esaias 64.7. He looks for what we
can, Deuteronomy. 6.5. And if we offer him less than all, we might as well offer
nothing. When our intentions in his Worship, are not screwed up to this height,
its a sign that our hearts are divided and cloven, and therefore hypocritical:
when the Jews were careless and perfunctory in their devotions, and put God
off with any sacrifices which came next to hand, he accounted this as a
dishonor to him, and as a derogation to his Majesty and greatness, and
therefore he thundered out a dreadful curse against them, Mal. 1.14. If ye
offer the blind and the lame for sacrifice, is it not evil; offer it now unto
thy governor, will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person, says the
Lord of Hosts, verse. 8. This carriage of theirs bewrayed plainly how little
respect their hearts bare him. It was a clear evidence against them, that they
made him not their chief; therefore he lets them know how sensible he was of
this disrespect, verse. 14. Cursed be he that having a male in his flock,
offers unto the Lord a corrupt thing, for I am a great King, says the Lord
of Hosts. If there be not a stamp and impression of zealous violence in all our
religious addresses unto God, our deportment is not such as becomes the Majesty
and greatness of such a King.

2 And as this violence is just and necessary in respect of God, who requires
and calls for it at our hands, so is it also in respect of the prize it self,
which is here contended and striven for, it being the Kingdom of heaven, and
therefore well worthy of all the violence which we can use for it: to be eager
and earnest in other things of an inferior allay (...) it will not quit the
cost, violence for the most part is above the proportion and value of them; but
the Kingdom of God is a matter of the greatest importance and consequence of
any other in the world. It is worthy of all the courage, zeal, and resolution
that we have; where can we lay them out better, or so well, as for the
achievement of a kingdom. The heathen man could say, Imperia pretio quolibet
constant been: A kingdom cannot be over bought, the crown Imperial of a
mortal Prince, it is a radiant and sparkling object; whatsoever a man pays
for it, Occidat, modo imperet, Suet. in vita Ner.
it is held a rich purchase notwithstanding. Agrippina thought the Roman
Empire a good penni-worth, though she bought it for her son Nero, a very
wretch, with the loss of her own life. What violent running, wrestling and
striving was there of old in the Olympique games? what combats and
contentions? yet all was but for a corruptible crown, as the Apostle speaks, 1
Cor. 9.24, 25. The greatest reward they could look for, was but a crown of
Laurel, a chaplet of flowers; and besides, they all ran in those masteries,
and yet it was but one only that could receive the prize: but we strive for an
Incorruptible crown, and if we strive violently, as we ought, we shall all
obtain the prize we strive for; and when it is obtained, it will be more worth
then all the crowns and diadems in the world.

The Crowns of the greatest earthly Monarchs, though the pearls in them be
never so glistering, yet they are stuffed, for the most part, with such
thorns, attended with so many piercing cares and sorrows and discontents,
that a wise man, if he should meet with one of them lying before him in the
way, he would scarce think it worth the taking up; but the crown of this
Kingdom which we strive for, if by all the violence we can use in doing or
suffering we may win it at the last, it will super-abundantly make amends for
all.

Its possible that we may, nay its certain that we must endure much, if we
will set our selves with obstinacy and violence to run this course; it is a Law
enacted in heaven, That we must all through many tribulations, enter into the
Kingdom of God, Act. 14.22. But this needs not discourage. If our suffering be
great, our Reward is Hyperbolicall, 2 Cor. 4.17. Our light afflictions which
are but for a moment, 2 King. 11.14.
what comparison betwixt them and the reward which they work out for us, which
is, a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Its possible, in these
plundring times, we may lose our estates, it skills not much; if we part with
that which we cannot keep, to gain that treasure which we cannot lose: The
Primitive Christians, suffered the spoiling of their goods with joy, knowing
they had in heaven a better and more enduring substance, Heb. 10.34. It may be,
whiles we are zealous for the honor of God, we shall be in danger to lose all
our own respect, and reputation among men; the black mouth of Calumny may
asperse the loyalty of our intentions, and sully our Names with horrid
imputations of treason and Rebellion; Jehoiada did but endeavor to put down
unjust usurpation, and to set up the right heir in this throne, and to draw
the people into a Covenant with God, and yet Athalia cried Treason, treason.
Oh, but says Saint Peter, if ye suffer reproach for Christ's sake, hapyy are
ye, for the spirit of glory and of God rests upon you, 1 Pet. 4 14. A Christian
is never so glorious as when he suffers most reproach and ignominy for Christ's
sake. There is nothing in the world, says Chrysostom, nothing at all
comparable to that glory. (...), Chrysostom. in Mat. Homil. 8.
When men revile and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you
falsely for my sake, rejoice and be exceeding glad, says our Savior, for great
is your reward in heaven, Math. 5.11. A dram of credit well lost, in a good
cause, and for a good conscience, will amount to as much in the return of it,
as an eternal Crown of glory is worth: but we may happily yet further endanger
our liberties, forfeit our dearest contentments, incur the displeasure of our
friends, lose our interests, yea our lives and all we have in this world: we
could never bring them to a better market, we shall gain an hundred for one,
take his Word for it who cannot lie, you cannot desire better assurance, it
being all which heaven and earth have to show for their continuance, Luke
18.29. Verily I say unto you, there is no man that has left house, or Parents,
or brethren, or wife, or children, for the Kingdom of Gods sake, who shall not
receive manifold more in this present time, and in the world to come, life
everlasting.

Its a thriving trade indeed, thus to part with transitory things, Si aliqua
amisistis vitae gaudia, negotiatio est aliquid amitteris ut majora lacreris,
Ter. in lib. ad Mart.

Si homo mill annis Deo serviret quam ferventissime, non mereretur dimidium
diei in calo. Ansel.


and gain eternal, to exchange dross for gold, peebles for pearls,
withering flowers for an inaccessible crown: Who would not traffic in such a
merchandise? Anselme has a saying, That if a man could serve God, with all
fervency of zeal and devotion, for a thousand years, yet all this were as
nothing in comparison of the happiness to be for one half of a day in heaven;
I will say yet more, If a man could perform all the virtuous exploytes, and
suffer all the most exquisite tortures which all the Saints and Martyrs have
suffered from the beginning of the world, yet all this would not bear up the
scales, nor hold any proportion of weight, so as in any sort to be judged
worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed, Romans 8.18. We can
never therefore be over violent for this prize.

3. And as in respect of God and his Kingdom, this is necessary, so in respect
of the enterprisers themselves; who, except they strain hard, press on with
much violence, might as well sit down, and set their hearts at rest, giving
over the Kingdom of heaven and eternal Salvation, as a lost prize: cast your
eyes about which way you will, whether on God, or your selves, or the world,
enemies or friends, nothing can set before us the least door of hope that ever
we shall come to heaven, Except we strive to enter in at the straight gate,
Mat. 7.13.1. Look upon God and you shall find that he has fixed it as an
irreversible order, that such as strive for mastery, shall not be crowned,
except they strive lawfully, 2 Timothy 2 5. We must conquer before we triumph; win
the Garland before we wear it: we are too well conceited of our selves, and
presume too much upon Gods love, without any just ground: if we expect that he
should bring us by a nearer way, and shorter cut, unto eternal glory, than he
did his only begotten son, who came not easily by his crown, his conquest
over death and hell, and the spoils taken from them, were not Salmacida spolia
sine sanguine and sudore, spoils got without sweat or bloodshed, for he did
both sweat and bleed in his striving and struggling for them; and I do not find
where entrance into heaven is proposed unto us but upon such like terms in
quality, I mean not in equality which is impossible. Revel. 2.3. To him that
overcommeth will I give to sit with me on my Throne, even as I also overcame
and am set down with my Father in his Throne: Lo here God has held out his
Kingdom as a (...), an honorable prize, for brave spirits to contend and
scuffle for: this is the just price which he has pitched, He that overcomes,
the Crown is his, upon other terms it cannot be expected. The old rule was
(...); The Gods sell all for sweat, and it is indeed true, that there is
nothing of worth in all this world which can be got better cheap: a Scholar
cannot compass any competency of skill in the Arts and Sciences without much
study and travel; Multa tulit fecitque puer sudavit and alsit, it will cost
much sweat and much toil to excel in learning. A mechanical artificer cannot
thrive nor grow rich in his ordinary trade, without more then ordinary
diligence; and shall we think the Kingdom of heaven will come dropping in our
laps, whilst we sit still and fold our hands, and will do nothing, or that
which is to as little purpose as nothing, for it.

I confess that of Tertullian in proper speech is most true, Pretio res nulla
Dei constat. Tert.
That nothing of or belonging unto God can be either bought or sold; God is a
most liberal Benefactor and gives us all things, even his Kingdom too,
freely; we have nothing that good is, in relation to time or eternity, but it
comes in upon us as a gratuity; and we for our parts (...), we have no price in
our hands to give in exchange for such blessings, especially the Kingdom of
heaven, which his more worth then all the world, though turned into a Globe of
gold or mountain of Diamonds, yet it is as true in another sense, That all the
blessings of God, yea even the Kingdom of heaven too, must be traded and
trafficked for; Solomon calls in customers to the shop of truth, and he
requires them to buy it; and our Savior commends this practice in two
parables, Esaias 55.1. Revel. 3.18.
The one of a rich Treasure, the other of a precious pearl, Mat. 13.44, etc.
Many such like expressions we meet with every where in the Scripture, all
which import a kind of trading and trafficking with God, for the great things
of his Kingdom, which must be bought and purchased by laying out whatsoever we
are or have, Sapiens nummularius est Deus, nummum falsum, nec fractum recipiet,
Bern.
for them. When we offer him the flower of our desires, the highest pitch of
our affections, and the marrow of our best endeavors, this is pretium
legitimum, God will accept of it, as of a just and current price; and if any
bid short of it, and will not be at such cost for heaven; I can give him no
other comfort but this, He may go to hell, if he please, good cheap.

2. Look we toward our selves, or the world about us, and we shall find all
the contention and violence we can use, In respect of opposition* from our
selves.
no less then necessary: The Kingdom of heaven is unto us as Canaan was unto
the Israelites, a Land of promise indeed, but yet a land of conquest too; there
is a multitude of Giants, the sons of Anak that we must encounter with, and
prevail over, ere we can take possession of it; there be Gyant-like
corruptions in our own hearts, which will find us work enough to resist, and
much more to overcome them; sometimes our unbeleefe will dash our hopes, melt
our courage, emasculate our resolution as it was with the Israelites, and the
ten low-spirited Spies, which gave over Canaan as desperate, because of its
fenced Cities, and high battlements, and the sons of Anak the great
Zanzummims that lay in the way, we had need of a mighty violent operation of
faith, to over-looke and over-master such difficulties: sometimes Ambition will
solicit us with a bait of honor, and other-whiles covetousness will tempt
us with a bribe, to stop our course; and either, altogether to let our design
fall, Qui diliberant, desciverunt, Tacit.
or else to be more remiss and moderate in the pursuance of it; here if we be
not violent, we lie open to much danger. Its no hard matter for temptations to
break in and prevail, when our desires linger after such things, when our
affections are but lukewarm, and our resolutions not steady, now we are upon
the point of being betrayed; a faint deny all begets new suites, and a door
left unbarred gives easy entrance, When we cleave not unto God with full
purpose of heart, Act. 11.23. Other things will get in betwixt him and us. Its
only a Spirit steeled with Christian resolution, that can make a man in such
assaults steady and unmovable like to the Roman Fabritius, of whom it was
said, That one might as well offer to stay the motion of the sun in the
firmament, as to put him out of his way; sometimes carnal policy will
endeavor to take us off, and sometimes ease and sloth will retard us; and
sometimes carnal fear will hold out a Gorgons head of dangers and
discouragements, telling us there is a Lion in the way, and that it is better
to sit still then to bestir our selves, and be active, when there is so small
probability of success. These, and a world of such other oppositions and
encumbrances, we shall be sure to meet with from our selves; Ecce adversarius
in pectoretuo Christum conatur occidere, Hier. Epist. ad Heliod.
we have a traitor that lies in our own bosom, an adversary in our breast,
which will ever and anon endeavor to kill Christ in us, as Hierome speaks,
and to smother all desires, motions, and affections, which proceed from him,
or breath after him.

2. From Friends.
3. Nor is there less opposition to be expected from the world, both friends
and enemies will interpose hindrances and blocks sometimes, which we may have
much ado to leap over, The world is never more prevalent then when it comes
alluring and wooing us in a way of love, with sweet promises and pleasing
blandishments. When that Noble Italian Marquess Galeatius Caracciolus was
solicited with great offers of preferment from the Emperor and Pope to draw
him off from his Religion, it was a shrewd temptation, and would no doubt have
taken with him, if he had been of a flexible Spirit, but he returned this
peremptory answer, I esteem one days communion with Jesus Christ, in the
Gospel, above all the honors and riches in the world; If carnal friends and
counselors assault us, with bewitching entreaties, to work us to a
complyancy, we shall be hard put to it, to turn them off; except we violently
stop our ears, against their pleasing charms, as Ulysses did against the
Sirens Songs. It may happen sometimes, that our nearest kindred and
acquaintance, our dearest parents, or the wives of our bosom, may with weeping
eyes, and moving words, wind about us, and offer to mis-perswade us, Etiam si
parunlus ex collo pendeat nepos, si flens passis crinibus ubera quib^^^ te
nutrieral mamater ostentet, per calcalum perge patrem -- socum pretatis
genutest hic esse crudelem: Hierom.
as Dalilah did Sampson; and to draw us from God, as Peter would have done our
Savior with, Master, Pity thy self; and it will be a great degree of
violence, to shake them off as Christ did him, with, Get thee behind me
Satan: or as Saint Hierome exhorts in this case, to trample upon the gray
beard of our Father, to tread upon the womb of our Mother that bare us; to
shake off children and Nephews, as S. Paul shook off the Viper from off his
hands. It must be a fixed and all-conquering resolution, that can, like
Sampson, snap a sunder such cords, and not be bound with them.

4. And if it be no easy matter, to make good our resolutions, 3. From Enemies.
against the batteries, which we our selves, and our friends too often raise
against them; surely then we had need of Robur and as triples circa pectus, a
breast plate of Adamant, an helmet of steel, to make us impenetrable against
the hail-shot of opposition, which we must expect from our enemies; the more
close we cleave to God, and the more we separate in our ways and courses, from
the world; so much greater will be the rage of the devil, and his agents
against us, to vex us with all harsh trials. If we be so violently bent, that
nothing will serve our turn, but a full and through Reformation of Doctrine,
Worship, and Government; we shall meet with as fierce opposition as the Jews
in Ezra and Nehemiahs time did: a mighty Court-faction, and a Potent Army will
be raised against us, so as we shall be forced to build the Temple, as they
did; with a sword in one hand, and a trowell in the other.

If the three children, would have been content to conform themselves to the
Court Religion, and to resign their consciences to the Kings pleasure, all had
been well enough; but when they declared a contrary resolution, and were as
stiff as oaks, and would not yield, Infantiam Christi studiose persequantur
and antequam sormetur Ch^istus in nobis in ipso viae conversationis iaitio ut
extinguatur spiritus and sussocetur vita justitiae penisus elaborant, Cypr.
Ser. de stella and magi^.
then there was but one way with them; an artificial hell was prepared, and
they must be cast into the burning fiery furnace, Dan. 3.15. It is, and ever
has been the elaborate and great design of the world, says S. Cyprian, to
strangle Christ in his cradle, as soon as ever he begins to be shaped, and
formed, and brought forth in the manners and conversation of a Christian, now
to kill him in his Infancy.

The Church met with no persecution, that we read of, whiles she lay slumbring
in her drowzie bed, and opened not the door to her beloved that knocked, but
when she arose and went about the City, and left no corner unsearched, and made
all the town know who she was in love with; now she falls into the
Inquisition; the Prelaticall Faction met with her; the watchmen and keepers of
the walls wound d her, and took away her veil, with other course usage, Cant.
5.7. When the blind man had the eyes of his mind, as well as of his body, so
far enlightened, that he declared himself in the face of the Court, to stand
for Christ; now there was no remedy but he must be excommunicated; for the
Pontifical tribe had made a Canon, That whosoever confessed Christ, should be
put out of the Synagogue, John 9.22, 34. If once we begin to advance in good
earnest, and set forward toward heaven, it will not be long to be sure, ^st
opinio quaedam and persuasio exitialis quae primum mundum and Jud. remp.
perdidit quae Noviquoque Testamenti caetu^ vastat and sebolas destruit Novum
dicitur Evangelium, dogma, vidz. de miseri cordia Dei patris vimis. peccatorum
and salute ^^rnat er exter^um dei cultum consequentda, Sixth. Amam. in Praef. ad
Anti^^^^.
ere some furious storm of persecution be raised, to drive us back again (if
possible) to the gates of hell. In all these, and sundry other respects, there
must be much fervency in our desires, affectionate obstinacy in our resolutions
and endeavors, much wrestling and conflicting with God and our selves,
friends, and enemies; or else admission, and entrance into the Kingdom of
heaven is a thing to be despaired of.

I come now to inferences of use and practice, and to omit others which offer
themselves in variety: I pitch upon three only. 1. For Instruction. 2. For
Reproof. 3. For Exhortation. For Instruction in two Branches.

1. This may inform us, That Salvation is a prize, not so easily won, as its
commonly Imagined. There is an opinion in the world; * Paulus Tarnovius calls
it, Novum Evangelium, A new Gospel; that if so be a man profess the true
Religion, and be Orthodox in his Judgment, and not grossly notorious for any
enormious crimes, in his conversation; if he come to Church, and hear the
Word, and receive the Sacraments, and have form of Godliness, though not the
power and life of it; why then such a man shall certainly be saved. This new
Gospel, as that Reverend and worthy Divine calls it, is an old Delusion and
fallacy of Satan, which has prevailed in the world from the beginning; and in
all ages, jugled thousands out of their Salvation; and wheresoever it is
received, and entertained, it will be the destruction, not of particular
persons alone, but of whole States and Kingdoms, as it was of the old world,
and the Jewish Commonwealth, and of Germany too, now of late; if the judgment
of that learned man mistook not its mark. Oh this (...) as Nazianzen speaks;
this new Gospel without charges, this cheap Religion, which would open us such
an easy way, with a few good words, with a little wholesome breath, to purchase
the Kingdom of heaven, we could relish it well; its mavelous pleasing and
delightful to our lazy and sluggish dispositions. As Marcus Lepidus when he
stretched himself, and lay along on the grass; Tull. de Orat. lib^o 2.
O utimam hoe ess^t laborare: Oh, says he, that this were to labor, and to
get the Mastery: so many of us, when we stretch ourselves, on our beds, like
them in Amos, and live at ease in Sion, denying nothing to our carnal
affections and appetites, which we have a mind to; Oh, say we, that this were
to be violent for the Kingdom of heaven, for then we would list our Names, and
be as forward as who most: but let us not be deceived, The Kingdom of God
consists not in Words, but in power, I Cor. 4.20. If Christianity were a soft
and delicate profession, were the way to heaven over green meddowes, and floury
plains, strewed with Roses and Violet; and not beset with tryers and thorns,
with difficulties, encumbrances, and oppositions; every Agrippa would then be
not only almost, but altogether persuaded to be a Christian, every profane
Esau would come in for a share, none would sit out: Non est ad astra mollis a
terris oi^ Sen.
but heaven is not got with a wish, nor Paradise with a song. Remission of
sins, and the Graces of Regeneration, they are not obtained with a sigh,
victory over all oppositions from earth and hell, is not achieved with a
breath: its not dull and faint wishes, cold and languishing velleities, feeble
and heardlesse endeavors, that can hope to win the crown of Glory, there must
be passionate longings and breakings of the heart, with continual desires
after God: the operation of Gods Word upon us, must be as a burning fire shut
up in our bones, Jer. 20.9. Our zeal for God must eat us up, Psalm. 69.9. We
must be valiant for the truth, Jer. 9.3. Resist oppositions and temptations
unto blood, Heb. 12.4. Else were there as many heavens as there be days in the
year, we are never like to arrive in any of them.

2. This may let us see what we are to judge of temper and moderation in
matters of Religion. In other things it is a virtue and worthy of much praise,
and it is not to be denied, That even in Religion too, there are some things,
in which it may have place. When there was too much heat in the Church of
Rome, about some matters of indifferency, not much importing any way, the
Apostle to calm both parties, and to compose them unto moderation, and mutual
bearing with one another; The Kingdom of God, says he, is not meat and
drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14.17.
All truth carries Gods stamp, and is precious, but not alike; there be some
truths of such moment and consequence, as that they cannot be over violently
striven for; but there be others of an inferior alloy which need not be held,
much less pressed upon others, with so hard a hand, such are not a few
speculative opinions and rituall practices, in matters of external Worship; in
contending about which, if the excesses of zeal, were corrected and allayed,
with a little cooling of moderation, no doubt it would be much better then now
it is with the Church of God. Bonum est mel rum favo Sapor Scilicet devotionis
cum modera mine discretionis, Gerson.
Its a good rule to this purpose, that of the famous Chancellor of Paris:
Honey is good with the honey comb, and so is the Savor of Devotion, when it is
seasoned with a discreet mixture of moderation.

But although it be true, that in these punctilioes, as it were, in Religion,
moderation is a Jewel, yet in the profession and practice of those maine
fundamentalls of Faith, and Worship, with other superstructions, nearly
bordering and coasting thereupon, it is far otherwise. In these things its
easy to be too moderate, but impossible to be over violent. Non legimus
reprehensos qui nimium de sonte aquae vitae hauserint, Call. praef. ad Institut.
If we seem to be transported into an ecstasy, so as the world judges us to
be besides our selves, it matters not much; If we be besides our selves, it is
unto God, 2 Cor. 5.13. Religion is a tender business, and of great
concernment; the glory of God, and our Salvation, depends on it; and as Calvin
said, of drawing too much water out of the well of life; so may I, of drawing
out our Spirits in too much violence for the honor of God. I do not know where
any man is blamed in all the Scripture for such a fault. If it were possile
that in hearing the Word, a man were all ear, if in prayer he could be rapt up
into an ecstasy in mourning for sin, if he could melt out his soul at his
eyes; in all the other parts of worship and practices of piety, could he be all
devotion, and pure, pute zeal, it would become him well, and there should be
no danger of excess; How is it possible, that we should have too much of that
whereof we can never have enough?

The world is generally of another mind, a little violence in matters of
Religion, a very little upon the knives point will suffice, a dram or two is
enough of all conscience; but for moderation, as much of that as you will, the
more the better; This is the opinion of Politicians, Court-Divines, and all the
rest of that stamp, they cry up that bosome-Idoll of discretion, as the only
fit temper, for a wise and well-composed Christian; and if sparklings of zeal,
break out, and discover themselves, If any violence appear, this they cry
down as faction, folly, frenzy. It has indeed been ever so with this wise
world in all ages.

When our Savior was so wholly taken up with the great affairs of the
Kingdom of God, rising up early to Preach, and continuing often whole nights
in prayer, so as he had no leisure, no not to eat; his friends out of mere
pity, good folks, sent to lay hold on him; for they said, he was gone besides
himself, Mark. 3.21. The like censure past upon Saint Paul, because he was
earnest and zealous in the cause of God, it was thought he was gone mad, the
man sure had lost his discretion. Act. 26.24. And Saint Basil when he was
passionately eager against the Arrian faction, then prevalent at Court, this
was interpreted a symptom of dotage. If men will not be baffled out of their
Religion, the wise world counts them fools, and furious zealots, and complains
sore of them, for want of moderation. The less wonder it is that our
Honorable Senate, which has showed so much zeal for God, should meet with
the same measure, from Malignant and ill-affected spirits. Among other virulent
invectives, this is clamored against your Religious proceedings, with the
greatest noise, That you are and have been over violent; Quoditiana sornax
nostra Maledicentium lingua, Aust.
Oh you have undon the Kingdom with an high and Imperious reformation, you have
let it blood in the Basiliks vein: In sum, the Physic has been worse then
the disease, such cavils and calumnies, are rife against you, in the mouths of
your enemies, who in this, like Lapwings, cry aloof from their nests, the
truth is, they have a bitter, and most enraged despite against you, for
preventing, and counter-myning their execrable and Acheronticall designs: they
hate you most of all because you will not suffer them to destroy three
Kingdoms, and to pull up Religion and property by the roots. This is the
ground of their malevolent aspersions; ferrit their complaints to the bottom,
and you shall find that this is it, That you have with all your force and
strength resisted them who would destroy us all, ruin Religion, introduce
Popery and Tyranny, and purchase the means of damnation to us and our
posterity. Hinc ille lachrymae, Hence are these vollies of slanders,
reproaches, and imputations discharged against you, in which the enemies deal
alike with you, for all the world, as Fimbria a mad fellow of Rome, dealt with
Scaevola, against whom having a quarrel, and endeavoring to murder him, with
a sudden stab; because he braided aside a little, and warded the blow, so as it
proved not mortal, therefore he commenced an Action of trespass against him,
and sued him at the Law; and wot you what was the Indictment, Quod telum toto
corpore non excepisset, For that he would not open his body, and suffer him to
run up his dagger unto the hilts.

Or as Caligula when he practiced to poison a man, in a slye underhand way, and
the man suspecting the worst, took a counter-poyson to prevent the mischief:
the gentle, kind-natured Emperor, thought it was foul play, and complained
much of the Iniquity of the times; that men would be taking Antidotes against
Caesar. No doubt a very heinous crime, a just and rational complaint and sibbe
to this against us, that we will not all lie down and quietly suffer our
throats to be cut, our Cities fired, countries wasted, and all we have, taken
from us.

But to return to the matter, whence I have a little strayed, just indignation
transporting me: Honored worthies, you will, I know like the Moon in the
heavens, hold on your course, though dogs and bawling curres, bark never so
much, you shall never have cause to repent of your zeal and piety toward God;
the next morning after you are arrived in heaven, you will think all your
labor and cost well bestowed, and repent (were it possible) that you have not
done, and suffered more; and for the present, the less respect and thanks you
find from wicked men, the more esteem and honor you shall have with God, and
all that are virtuously disposed; yea that zeal and piety of yours, for which
you are so much maligned, and traduced it shall make your memory precious unto
the present age, and to all posterity; and when the names of your enemies shall
rot above ground (as they do already) and they themselves shall be rung down
with a peale of Satyrs to their graves, your names shall be as sweet as
perfume, the generations to come shall embalme them with honor, the children
yet unborn shall rise up, and call you blessed, and every one that reads your
Chronicles, or hears of your worthy acts, shall say, This was the Reforming
Parliament, which did, and suffered more for God, then ever any that was before
it; many Parliaments have done worthily, but this has excelled them all.

2 This Text and Doctrine may serve like the knuckles of a man's hand, appearing
on the wall to Balshazzor, 2. For Reproof.
to write unto many their sad doom, to read them their destiny, they are
never like to come near to the Kingdom of heaven. Of this sort are not a few:

1. Such as are enemies to the progress and proceedings of the Gospel,
whether close and secret, or open and notorious; there be many glozing
Malignants, that can bite in their malice, calm their looks, smooth their
foreheads; but their hearts swell like the Sea in a storm: If they could raise
any tempests, cause any commotion, and the occasions and junctures of affairs
would permit them to do it with advantage, we should taste as much of their
Malignity, as of the most desperate opposers, Gebal, Ammon, and Amaleck they
are now knotted together in a confederacy, and up in Arms; pillaging,
spoiling, plundering, and laying all waste before them, With a rage that
reaches up unto heaven, 2 Chronicles. 28.9. Tobiah and Sanballet were not in a more
pelting chafe, when the Temple and City of Jerusalem were like to be reedified.
Herod and Jerusalem were not more troubled when they heard that sad and damping
news, That Christ was borne, then these malignants and Incendiaries are
startled at the noise of a Reformation. The powerful coming in of Christ into
his Kingdom, the Majesty and luster of pure Worship and Ordinances is unto
them (night-birds as they are) formidable as the sunshine to the Owl, or as
the light of heaven to Cerberus the dog of hell; they abhor it as the
darkness and shadow of death. Oh the bright star of Jacob ^ the rising and
Orient luster of it, to such as love darkness better then light, it is of an
Ominous and dismal presage, it portends their kingdom will come down, their
mis-giving hearts are afraid of the scorching Influence of it, as the devils
were of Christ's coming, lest it should torment them before the time, Mat.
8.29. And now, is it possible, trow ye, that such sons of Belial, to whom the
presence of Christ in his Ordinances and Worship, is the greatest burden and
torment, and as it were an hell upon earth; Is it possible that such should
ever expect or conceive the least hope of reigning with him for ever in heaven?
Oh, yes, they pretend for heaven as much, and as loud as any others, and they
are for Religion too, even for the true Reformed Protestant Profession, and
they are zealous, yea violent for it, and that is the reason (you must believe
them) why they have drawn their swords, and taken up Arms; Its for no other
end doubtless, but to defend the true Protestant profession, with his
Majesty's just Prerogative and Crown-rights, which the Parliament with the
faction of Brownists, and Anabaptists that adhere to it endeavor to destroy.
Its a true saying that of the Roman Orator, Nihil tam incultum tam horridum
quod non splendeseat Oratione and tanquam excolatur, Cic.

Majore formidine Caesarem observatis quam Jonem. Tert.


There is nothing so horrid, no cause so desperate, which may not be palliated
and covered over with glorious and glittering pretenses; As Herod would have
the wisemen bring him word, when they had found Christ, for he meant to come
and worship the babe, when his intent was to slay it. But as Tertullian wittily
told the Gentiles, when they contended so fiercely for the worship of Jupiter,
That whatsoever they pretended, Caesar was their chief God, and that they
worshipped him with more devotion, then Jupiter; The like may I say of these
Herodians, or Court-zealots, call them what you will, and let them pretend what
they list for God, they are Caesar's by wholesale in Religion, affection,
conscience, soul, and body, and all Caesar's; they measure Religion by the
length of the Scepter, being resolved to believe the worst of Popery, and to
practice the worst of Tyranny, even to the destruction of the three Kingdoms,
Quid si faces in far jussisset in capitolium nunquid paruisses? Respondit
nunquam jussisset id quidem sed si jussisset utique paruissem Cic. de Amic.
if Caesar do but please to declare the one to be the True Reformed Protestant
Profession, and the other, The due Rights and Privileges of Parliament; much
like the Boutefew that Tully speaks of, C. Blos: Cumanus I think it was, that
would, to show his affection to his friend, do whatsoever he should bid him,
though it were to set fire on the Capitol.

2 Not all out so desperate, though bad enough, is another sort of neutralizing
temporizers, that are just of Gallios temper, for matter of Religion, not
caring a jot whether the Arc or Dagon be set up, whether Christ or Antichrist
prevail, the true Religion or Popery, both, or neither, to them is a matter of
indifferency, and not so much as the turning of an hand; they pass not at all
for such things; only, they have the discretion to set their sails as the
wind blows, and to wheel about as they see occasion, that they may be of the
prevayling side; much like the man in Macrobius, who during the times of civil
war betwixt Antony and Augustus Caesar, had with much Art and diligence taught
his two crows their several notes, the one to say Ave Imperator Antoni, the
other, Ave Imperator August^; that so when the wars should be over, and the
controversy determined, whether party soever prevayled, he might be sure to
have a bird for the Conqueror. Bishop Andrew in Tort. Torti. Neque enim est
ullus ulli locus mendius ut sit nisi cum diabolo qui non est cum Christo, Aug.
If there chance to be any such within these walls, I wish they would sadly and
ripely consider that speech of our Savior, He that is not with me is against
me, Mat. 12.30. and that grave expression of a great Prelate, This cause of God
is of that Nature, that if a man do not appear in it, and gather with Christ,
he scatters from him, there being no middle condition possible in which a man
can close or side with any other than the devil, who joins not with Christ.

3. Such as value their wealth, ease, credit, reputation, above Christ and his
Kingdom; to come to Church now and then, to hear the Word, perform some
cheap outward duties which may look like a form of godliness, none will,
blame them for this. It were disgraceful to be Atheists; unprofitable to be
Papists, or recusants, thus far they go and its fair too, but to be at any
expense for Christ, to purchase his kingdom with any prejudice to themselves in
their credit or estates, he must pardon them for that: they love a Religion
(contrary to David's disposition) which will cost them nothing; these have taken
the Covenant, many of them only to save charges, for they spare not to
profess that they will trust God with their souls (though they perjure)
rather then the Parliament with their Estates. They will lash out more in
furnishing a banquet, or some unnecessary entertainment, spend more in one cast
at Bowls or Dice, then ever they can be gotten to part with all their life
long, for the glory of God, the upholding of his cause, and Gospel, and the
preservation of an 100000. Christians, in the three Kingdoms: the men of this
world, they are violent for their Mammon: Give them the fatness of the earth,
Take the dew of heaven who will: A right brood of old Gadarens, who can be
content to have a whole Legion of Devils roost in the Kingdom, and nestle in
their own hearts, as in strong holds, rather than they will be at so much cost,
as the loss of their hoggs, to purchase the dispossession of them.

4. There be others that seem violent in matters of Religion, none more
forward in appearance then they, but they are not sincere and cordial. As it
is with them that are sick of a Fever, while the face and outward parts burn,
the heart quakes and shivereth with cold, so it is with these pretenders; their
countenance, Jehu like, is full of flushing heat; in their face and outward
carriage you may see their zeal for the Lord, Pone in pectore d^xtram, nil
calet. Pers.
but if you could put but your hands within their breasts, you should find
their hearts Nabal-like, as cold as a stone. Its no new devise, but an old
trick of hypocritical spirits, (...). Ign.
to seem devout only for their own ends, to drive their own designs under a
color of being zealous for God. Ignatius observed, there were some of this
stamp in his time, who made a trade and an occupation of Christ, to get wealth
by him, shuffling in Religon, to deal themselves a thriving game in the world.

I know not whether it be true, but the Vox Populi, the Common opinion and
voice of the people is, That in Country, City, Armies, I hope not in the
Parliament, there are and have been too many, who in public places of
Employment, at the public charge, drive their private designs; enjoying both
at once, and improving the miseries of the times by dilatory proceedings, dead
pay, false musters, betraying of advantages, and letting opportunities of
action slip, with other stratagems and feats of policy, very depths of
Satan, profound as hell, which I have not wit enough to reach. If there be any
such Judas's, masked devils, here, let me inform them; If their bosom
intelligencer, their Consciences I mean, be asleep, perhaps it may arouse
them a little, that thunderbolt, Esaias 29.15. Woe unto them that dig deep, and
seek to hide their Counsel from the Lord, and their works are in the dark,
and they say, who seeeth, and who knows us: and let them take that along with
them too, Esaias 30.33. There is a Tophet prepared of old, its deep and large,
the pile thereof is fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord like a stream
of brimstone kindles it; and let me tell them yet further, If this fiery gulf
be not for such, I do not know whether it can challenge any guests.

5. There be others, zealous in Religion, but not enough; they have like the
Laodiccan Angel and Church, some heat which makes them lukewarm, but they
are not violent, their dram of zeal is tempered with so many ounces of
discretion, that the operation of it can scarce be discerned; they are Orthodox
in opinion, not much exorbitant in conversation, own the great cause of the
Kingdom, set their faces toward heaven, are not against Reformation: but then
they must not be over-driven, you must not put them out of their own pace,
they like not a Jehu's March. Its good to be zealous, but not too much, say any
what they will, do what they can, Ille igitur nunquam dir^xit brachia contra
Torrentem, nec civis erat qui libera posset verba animi profeire vitamque
impendere vero. Juven. sat. 3.
their affected moderation will never suffer them to exceed the middle temper
of that wise Statesman in Tiberius his Court, who to be sure would not strike a
stroke against the stream, nor engage himself so far in any cause, as might
tend to his prejudice; how-ever the world went, he would be sure to save one.
Such is the politician and wordly wiseman, he will move no stone, though never
so needful to be removed, if he suspect that there lies a Scorpion under it,
or if he apprehend the least fear, that any part of the wall will fall upon
himself; well fare yet the Roman Consul, that incomparable patriot, Tempus
omne post consulatum obiecimus iis fluctibus, qui penos a communi peste depidsi
in nosmetipsos redundarunt, Cic. de orat. lib. 1.
who in his private and retired condition, when he was removed from the Helm
of the Commonwealth, employed all his force and strength to keep off those
waves from the great vessel of the State, which had well-nigh drowned the
cock-boat of his own private Fortunes.

6. There be others zealous and violent for a while, but they hold not out to
the end: The Philosopher says, No violent thing lasts long, Its true in
Divinity, as well as in Nature: If the violent motion proceed from some
external artificial cause, and not from a rooted stirring principle within,
when that which is the cause is removed, the motion arising from it cease. If
our violent stirrings and heates of zeal, be not from the right fountain of
heat, the heart; tract of time and other occurrances will be calm them by
degrees, and wear them out: the stony ground set forward, and put on with great
animosity at the first, but when difficulties and unlooked for dangers, when a
storm of persecution arose, then they plucked in the tender horn, their zeal
cooled, their courage abated, their resolutions fell like leaves in Autumn. In
the beginning of this Parliament, when the Lord tolled us on with fresh
mercies, and allured us into the wilderness as the Prophet speaks, that there
he might give us the valley of Achor for a door of hope; when every day we
were pasti miraculis as Cyprian speaks, feasted with miracles in ordinary, the
Lord setting himself on purpose to engage us firmly in his work, by diverse
rare and astonishing providence, that all bridges might be cut off, and that
we might never think to retire back again; At that time, many that were not
sound at the heart-roote, joined with us, and who more resolute then they, but
when the wheel of Providence seemed to turn, and many sad clouds began to
gather and threaten a storm, now they tacked about, and set their sails
back; they were willing to follow us out of Egypt when they had seen the
wonders and miracles of God at our departure thence; but when they came into
the wilderness, and met with Scorpions and fiery Serpents, and great
afflictions, then their hearts fainted, and they fell on murmuring as the
unbeleeving Jews, and that mixed multitude did, Numb. 11.4. A man might as
well never own the cause of God, as afterward desert it; whatsoever a man has
done and suffered for Religion, (and there be many that have done and suffered
much,) Its al lost and forgotten, when once he begins to look back, Ezekiel.
18.24. Judas, and Demas, and Hymaeneus, and Alexander the Copper-smith, with
other such flinchers; what were they the better for all their hopeful
beginnings, when afterward they declined, their zeale-being all spent, their
violence tired, and all their alacrity lost. Its not good beginnings, but
perseverance in Religion, that takes this glorious prize, and wins the garland.
Be faithful unto the death and I will give thee a Crown of life. Revel. 2.10.

7. I may not pass over another sort without a gentle touch, such I mean as
are unfeinedly cordial in the cause of God, and zealous for it, yet do not a
little hurt to themselves and others, and the Cause it self too, through their
indescreete and unwary managing of it: they desire nothing more then this, That
Christ might reign, and weild the Scepter of his Kingdom, according to his own
hearts content, in all the parts of the Land; they are active in endeavors for
Reformation, and this deserves just praise, but they step out of their bounds
sometimes, exceed the limits of their special calling in which the Will of
God is, they should contain themselves.

How happy were it for us, if all would keep within their proper sphere, and
wherein so ever they are called therein, to abide with God, 1 Cor. 7.24. But
there be some that do (...) overstretch themselves beyond their line and
Compass, 2 Cor. 10.14. They reach and strain after a perfect Reformation of
the Church, and that is well, but they run before the Parliament, and do
anticipate the work, taking it out of those able and faithful hands, unto
which God has committed it, and that deserves just censure. Romans 10.2.
That have a great zeal of God, Oh that it were a little more according to
knowledge! We have all entered into the bonds of a Religious Conant with God, in
which among other things we have vowed our utmost endeavors to reform
Religion, Worship, Government, according to the Word of God, and the example of
the best Reformed Churches; and withal, to draw the Churches of God in the
three Kingdoms, to the nearest uniformity; and to labor the extirpation of
heresies, sects, and schisms, which how we can make good, if every one take
liberty to rear up a model and platform, according to his own principles,
without respect unto public, Authority I cannot see. How can it be avoided,
but there will be divisions in the work, when those that should carry it on,
act several ways without any regard to one another. I wish such would
consider, that zeal in Religion, though it be exceeding good and necessary,
yet it needs a sober guide: much wisdom is requisite to prescribe when and
where, and how far, and in what manner and order to proceed in carrying on a
work of so great consequence, as a public Church-Reformation is. Zeal,
except it be ordered aright, in conflicting with corruptions and abuses,
whether real or pretended, uses the razor sometimes with such eagerness,
that Religion it self is thereby endangered, and through hatred of tares, the
good corn in the field of God is plucked up. That which Isocrates said of
strength, is as true of zeal, that if it be tempered with sound wisdom, and
a right Judgment, (...), Isoc. ad Them.
it does much good, but without such a mixture it does much mischief to our
selves and others, like Grenades and other fire Works, which if they be not
well looked to, and discreetly ordered, when they break, do more hurt to those
that cast them, then to the enemy: no man can be ignorant of the ill effects of
an indiscreet and ill governed zeal, which like unto a fire, when it burns
out of compass, sets all the house and town in a combustion: It may perhaps,
justly be doubted, whether a too slack moderation, or an over-violent zeal,
Fervor discretionem erigat, and discretio fervorem regat. Ber. Ser. in Cant.
be worse; seeing the one does no good, and the other does much hurt;
discretion, without zeal, is slow paced; and zeal without discretion, heady;
take therefore St. Bernards counsel, let zeal spur on discretion, and
discretion reine zeal, join them both together, and the conjunction will be
lovely.

3 Use of Exhortation.
I would not willingly drop one word to quench one spark of any true
Heaven-bred zeal, my errand is as our Saviors was, rather to kindle this
fire, Luke 12.49. which every Sacrifice must be salted with, Mark 9.4. Let us
all labor to blow up and to keep alive this Sacred fire, upon the Altar of
our hearts, that it may inflame our devotion toward God, kindle our love
toward men, and burn out all our own corruptions; let it never cool with
age, nor abate with opposition, nor be quenched with any floods of persecution
whatsoever.

1. Its necessary.
1. As the Apostle said of patience, so may I of zeal, we have all need of it,
especially Reformers. 1. Because of the glory of God, which we ought to have a
tender resentment of, more then of our own lives, or whatsoever is dear or
precious unto us in this world. Our Savior resented the injuries and
reproaches offered unto God, as done unto himself, Romans 15.2 Because of the
honor and happiness of the Church, which we ought to prefer before all our
own Interests, Psalm. 137.6. I have read of Ambrose, that he was so zealous for
the Church, that he wished any storm might light upon himself, rather then
the State of it should be endangered: Ne december quidem maria transcurrere
pigeret. Call. ad Prot. Ang.
Reverend Calvin would be content, to sail over ten Seas for an uniforme
draught of Religion, amongst the Evangelicall Churches. Moses and Paul were so
transcendent in this kind of zeal, that they would have redeemed the Churches
losses with their own damnation. 3 Because of the great difficulties and
obstructions which we must make account to encounter with. If you set your
faces toward Sion, the Jebusites hold it, which you must remove, with an Host
of Idols to boot, even the blind and the lame, the abhorring of David's soul,
or else you shall never take the Fort, 2 Samuel 5, 6, 7. If you will endeavor
with Elias to put down the Priests of Baal, Jezabel will send you a message of
defiance, threatening to make the Land too hot for us: There are many Lions that
lie in our way; its only a zealous violence that can Sampson-like get victory
over them, and honey out of them. If we declare our for heaven, all the faction
and power of hell will be up in Arms against us. Therefore we have need of
much violence.

2. This will stand us in much stead. 2. Its Useful.
1. It will make us bold and daring, it will put us upon the uttermost
adventures. Amorem erubescitad nomen difficultatis.
Love and zeal will, if need be, run upon the Cannons mouth, dare through
deaths gauntlet, Cant. 8.7. Esther knew not whether she should prevail, yet
she would venture, though to the apparent hazarding of her Crown and life,
Est. 4.16. Zeal and love blush at the Name of difficulty. 2. It will quicken
you up to mighty endeavors; (...), Clem. (...).
a bow full bent will violently deliver the Arrow, and carry it home to the
mark with full strength; a piece full charged will go off with great force. A
zealous Christian is like a ship, says Clemens, Stella cadem non e^t stella
cometa fuit.
carried on with full sails toward heaven. 3. It will make you constant and
steady; That Is no heaven-borne violence, which tract of time or opposition
wears out. True zeal is like the Philosophers (...), a sparkling fiery stone,
no floods can quench it. 4. It will make us prevalent and successful in our
endeavors, if any thing in the world can. Love is a pleasing Tyrant, says
Chrysostom, the power of it is above all power, (...), Chrysostom.
it reigns over all impediments in heaven and earth, prevailing both with God
and man as Jacob did.

This zeal then being so necessary and useful, labor we to get our hearts
stored with it, and see that it be of the right stamp, sincere and upright,
aiming only at the right end, Gods glory and the Churches good. Let there be
no sons of Zebedee among us, to project for themselves places of honor at
the right hand or the left, when Christ comes into his Kingdom; away with all
private designs, preserve we our intentions single and sincere, and we shall
prosper the better. 2. Let our zeal flame out upon all occasions, let nothing
smother the operation of it: Aristotle writes of the bathes in the Pythecusian
Islands, that they are fiery hot, Balnea in Pythacusiis Insulis ferrent supra
mod^um calore and ui ignea, nec tamen flammas emittunt. Arist. de mirab. oscu.
yet send out no flame; I cannot commend such a zeal, which is smothered and
pent up in the heart, and gets no vent, has no external operation; a treasure
concealed, and an hidden virtue are both alike. When that profane King had
burnt the Roll, the Prophet wrote it over again with an addition of many other
like words, Jer. 36.32. The more Gods Worship, Ordinances, Servants, are
opposed, the more will true-hearted Zealots appear for them, to assist and
vindicate them. They write of a fish that has a sword, but no heart, but I
hope better things of you. 3. Let your zeal be guided by the right Rule, (...)
which is the Word of God. In all your consultations and resolutions, let the
Law and the Testimony be your Oracle. Its a Kingdom of heaven that you are
bound for, and therefore your course must be like that of the Mariners, guided
by the heavens. If you steer your course by any other line, sure you will
never arive where you would be, at the fair havens. The Heathens themselves
never undertook any great work about the affairs of state, Priusquam de
caelo s^r^atum ess^t. Cic. de Arasp. Resp.
till they had consulted the face of the Heavens: what they did out of blind
superstition, do you from a principle of true Religion. 4. When you have taken
your aims right, and made choice of fit means to compass them, Dummodo
clavum rectum teneam.
let God alone with the success, he will make good the issue, and turn all to
the best. As Quintillian said of a Pilot, Sapientis est nil praestare praeter
culpam.
so may I of you, whiles you hold the stearne and guide the compass right, you
cannot be blamed, although the great vessel of the State should be cast away,
and wracked in the storm, which yet I hope it never will be.

Signanter dici. tu^ in oratione Dominica adueniat Regnum tuum i. e. ad nos
veniat quia virtute nostra ad ipsum pervenire non possumus, Gerson.
Furthermore it concerns us all in common, but you more especially, most worthy
Patriots; not only to labor for our own particulars, to take hold on this
Kingdom with all violence, but also to prepare way for others, that they may
come up to it, or rather indeed that it may come down to them. As David
therefore in a violent ravishment of desire, that the Temple might be built,
cried, Psalm. 24.9 10. Lift up your heads oh ye gates, and be ye lift up ye
everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in; So let me address the
like desire to you, that are the Heads of our Tribes, and have the keys of the
Kingdom of Great Britain, hanging at the doors of your Honorable Senate
House. Oh, let all the gates and doors of the Kingdom, and of all the
Counties; Cities, Parishes in it, be set wide open, That the King of Glory may
come in. The eyes of many thousands in the Land, and a great part of
Christendom too, are now upon you; you are in the hearts of all the Saints in
all the Churches, especially those at home, who are ready to live and dye with
you, and what is their expectation and desire other then this, That Christ may
reign as an All-Commanding King, over his own house; That Doctrine, Worship,
Government, may be all exact, according to the Pattern in the Mount. Help on
this much-desired Work.

1: By setting a faithful, pious, and learned Ministry. Be not offended that I
touch upon this string once more. How mean apprehensions soever any may have
of this great Ordinance of God, Preaching of the Gospel, yet it is no other
thing then the Scepter of Christ's Kingdom, the Royal Mace that is lifted up
and born before him, his triumphing chariot, in which he rides conquering and
to conquer, Revel. 6.2. God is wont to hang the greatest weights upon the
smallest wires, Maxima ex minimis suspendit.
The Salvation of the world depends upon this foolishness of preaching, 1 Cor.
1.21. Blessed be God, he has given us his Word, and if we could but add what
is next in the Psalm. 68.11. Great is the multitude of them that publish it,
Satan would soon fall down like lightning, and we should have an heaven upon
earth. We are zealous against Babylon, and its well that we are so: I will show
you a way how to storm down the proud walls and battlements of it without any
Petards or Cannon shot or Engines of war, not so much need of these; The
sound of Rams horns will serve the turn. Revel. 14.6. When the Angel flies
in the midst of heaven, with an everlasting Gospel to Preach: the next News
is, verse. 8. Babylon is fallen. This preaching, it will be the ruin of the man
of sin: it will spring a Mine under his Thron, and beat down all his power and
glory into the dust.

2. If you would have a learned conscientious ministry, do as Hezekiah, Command
the people to give the Priests and Levites their portion, that they may be
encouraged in the Law of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 31.4. Let there be due provision of
oil, for all the Lamps of the Sanctuary, and let there be worthy
encouragements for all the several professions of learning, especially the
sacred. If learning should decay, as some (I hope without ground) fear it
will, what can we look for but an Inundation of Popery, Atheism,
profaneness, sects, heresies, with all manner of Barbarity. In the memory of
our Fathers, when it pleased the Lord to raise up Luther, Melancton, Calvin,
and many other choice spirits; it was unto the Churches, even like unto a
resurrection from the dead: the Resurrection of learning brought with it a
resurrection of Religion, and a fresh spring of the Gospel, which, blessed be
God, continues still, and flourishes to this day.

3 But now that I have made mention of learning, I may not without piacular
neglect pass over the two Seminaries and seed-plots of it, without a word or
two. It was a sad complaint of Luther, against most of the Universities of
Europe, that they were become chaires of Pestilence, and the very stews and
brothels of Antichrist. Pleraeque omnes Christiani orbis academia sunt
cathedrae pestilentiae and lupanaria Antichristi, Luth.
God forbid that any should harbor any such apprehension of ours. Blessed be
God they have been worthy Nurseries and schools of the Prophets, both of
them; and I hope they will continue so still: Howsoever, it were good to cast a
little more salt into these Springs, that the waters of life issuing from them
may be more sweet and wholesome, and that there may be no death nor
barrenness, nor any thing causing miscarriage in them, 2 King. 29.10. The
common complaint is, That the two breasts, though they be not quite dried up,
yet they yield neither so much milk, nor so wholesome now of late, as in
former times; that it is now adulterated, and brewed with mixtures, its easy
to know whence; The way to heal all, were to plant more wholesome, heavenly,
and powerful preaching there: St. Basil tells, That when men were desirous, in
his days, to store themselves with Doves in their houses, they took some of a
milk white color, and perfumed them with odours and sweet ointments, and
they flying abroad, allured home, with their sent, all they met withal: oh
that we had a brood of such Doves richly perfumed with Myrrh, Aloes, and
Cassia, men anointed, I mean with the spirit and graces of Jesus Christ, which
are more sweet and odoriferous then all the unctions else in the world. If
there were some of these sent abroad into Country, City, Court, and University,
how would multitudes flock after them, like Doves into their windows? Esaias
60.8.

4. If you would have Christ reign fully, freely, universally, all the
Kingdom over, let the Reformation then which is intended, advance freely and
fully, and let it be, first, through and exact; that no Rome be left for a
throne of Satan in any corner: we would be loath that God should put us off
with half a deliverance, why should we put him off with half a reformation.
2. Let it be swift and speedy, let it not always thus stick in the birth, but
give it quick expedition and dispatch; our Saviors rule is, primum quaerite,
Minus soluit qui tardius soluit, Elem. Jurisp.
Mat. 6.33. Seek first the Kingdom of God, before and above, all other
things; God takes it ill, and shows himself angry with the Jews, and chides
them sore for neglect of this, Hag. 1.4. Is it time for you to dwell in your
cieled houses, whiles this house lies waste? God gives us as, he did them,
leave to have a due regard of our own houses, but his work should always in
order preceede ours, as it does in worth and dignity. Other causes may, and
must wait, till that which is of greatest Importance be dispatched: Si
praeterlit tempus, praeteriit sacrisicium. Drus. in prove.

Non litat qui su^ tempore non saecrificat.


it was a worthy resolution that of Nehemiah, when the enemies sent a
Trumpeter, as it were to beat for a parlee; I am, says he, about a great
work, so that I cannot come down, why should the work cease whiles I leave
it, and come down to you? Nehem. 6.3. A word to the wise is enough, I press
it no further.

5. Remove all the lets, Impediments, and stumbling blocks which hinder the
propagation and spreading of Christ's Kingdom among us, whether things or
persons, whatsoever cannot show its pedigree from heaven, out with it, what
should it do amongst us; That which never came from heaven, can never be a
means to carry us thither: the Temple of God may not be built with the
materials of Babylon, we should not take a stone from thence for a corner, nor
for a foundation, Jer. 51.16. And those persons too that pretend so high for
their divine original, and cannot yet show the Genealogy of it from the
Scriptures, They should be as polluted, put from the Priesthood, Neh. 6.64. But
above all the other Impediments, that which gives sourse and life unto them,
and is it self the greatest, the faction I mean of Rome, and Antichrist, let
that be removed. If you be on the Lords side, cast down Jezebel out at the
windows; when that mother of whoredom and all her merchants, factors, and
retainers, with all their Babilonish trash and trumpery, the wares which they
traffic in, is sent packing away, and cast like a mil-stone into the bottom
of the Sea; then, and not before, begins that victorious and triumphant Song of
the Elders, Revel. 19.6. Hallelujah, the Lord God Omnipotent reigns.

This is your work, oh ye worthies, and to quicken you to it, consider, 1. How
necessary it is, if we let slip this opportunity, in which the Kingdom of
heaven seems to come near unto us, and to knock at our doors for admission,
we are an undone people, the Lord, if not admitted now, is like never to make
us such another offer, he will take his Kingdom from us, and give it to some
other Nation, that will bring forth the fruits thereof, Math. 21.43.

The unclean spirit, which is in a good measure cast out, will return again,
and bring along seven other worse ones with it, to take possession of the whole
Kingdom, and so our condition will be worse then ever it was.

2. Its a glorious prize that we are called to be violent for, It is a
Kingdom, and who would not strain hard for such a booty, which once obtained,
will more then countervaile all our care and cost, (...), ^u^ip.
our zeal and violence for it. The heathen man thought it great reason to
offer violence even to Justice and Conscience, if it were for a Kingdom. In
other things he would have respect to just and right, but if a kingdom lay at
the stake, and might be won, he held it no discretion to be over conscientious,
I commend not his resolution in this, our Rule is, Fiat Justitia and ruat
caelum, let Justice be done, though the heavens fall; we must be violent to
keep faith and a good conscience, not to put them from us, and this is the way
to make us all Kings and Priests unto our God; they are of the family of
heaven, and of the blood Royal, that are thus affected, Revel. 19.26. Christ
at his last coming to destroy Antichrist, is said, to have his Name written,
not only upon his vesture, but upon his thigh too, King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords: What Is this (...) a name Written upon his thigh: somewhat an unproper
s^ituation; what should a man do with a name written upon his thigh? But it is
the place of generation; Jacobs 70. souls are said to come out of his thigh,
and those choice violent spirits, that follow Christ, Vid. Riberam. Jesuitam in
Com. ad hunc tocum.
in his wars against Antichrist, as those Armies of heaven did, spoken of
before verse. 14. They all came out of his thigh, were descended and propagated
from him, by a divine work of Regeneration, the Spirit of Jesus Christ refines
the blood of the meanest persons, and creates them a Regal pedigree.

(...), Arist.
3 Its an honorable thing to be violent for the honor of our God and the good
of a whole Kingdom; to do good to one is honorable, said the Philosopher, but
to do good to a City or Nation, this is heroical, how much more, when the
honor of God and the happiness of three Kingdoms, that I may not say of
Christendom too, is infolded in one another.

Saint Paul says, Its good to be always zealously affected in a good thing,
Gal. 4.16. Always good, It was intended no doubt as a mark of honor, that
Name which our Savior for this cause imposed upon one of the Apostles, when he
called him Simon Zelotes, Luke 6.15. Het. do^um pro^^ume ^eo um quireg^abunt
etem. Christo, Aug.
The more zeal we have, the more honorable we are at all times, but to be
zealous for God, as Elias was in evil times, to own his cause in an
adulterous and sinful generation, this is honorable indeed; yea, and I had
almost said meritorious, but howsever it is thank-worthy to be sure, in an
eminent degree, Luke 22.28, 29 Ye are they that have continued with me, in my
temptations, and what then, I appoint unto you a Kingdom that ye may eat and
drink at my Table, and sit on thrones; etc. Martyrs sunt Clariores and
honoratiores in Ecclesia cives. Aug. de Civ. Dei. lib. 10.
You see how well our Savior takes it, when his servants cleave close to him,
and will stand for him in his temptations. If the right hand place in his
Kingdom be reserved for any more then others, it shall be kept for such.

5 The contrary disposition is of it self base and unworthy, yea and of all
other the most loathsome and abominable, Revel. 3.15, 16. Better key cold then
only lukewarm, Its an argument we neither value God nor his Kingdom, when we
are so dull and heartlesse in our desires and endeavors, as if the purchase we
are about would not quit the cost, nor be worth the pains that is required for
it. When Callidius a Roman Orator, pleaded a cause very faintly, Tu M.
Callidinisi fingeres sic ageres, Cic.
and made no show of affection, Tully told him that sure he was not in earnest,
otherwise the tide of passion would have been up: In like manner when men are
so lazy and languishing, so cold and slack in dealing for a Kingdom, Its a
shrewd argument against them, that sure they are not in earnest, they do but
play with Religion; the precious treasures of heaven are set before them, and
they resent them not at all, or but a very little, make no great haste, are not
a whit sollicitous, take no pains about the matter, as if the things were of
no great importance; they are very moderate and delicate in making toward
them, neither that high hand that holds th for t h, nor that blood that bought
them, nor that worth that is in them, works much; but all is slighted: God
comes waiting upon them with calls, and calls, and with gracious offers, and is
not regarded; hence no doubt is this black cloud risen, which darkens the
heavens over us. The glory of God and the Salvation of our souls, we do
nothing many of us but jest and dally with them. I have read of Anastatius the
Emperor, that he was, Magdeburg. Cent. 5.
by the hand of God, shot to death with a hot thunderbolt, because he was
lukewarm in the Catholic cause, and not zealous against the Arrian faction.

6. In other things where the least overture of gain, honor, pleasure,
appears, how eager are we panting after the dust of the earth, as the Prophet
speaks, and ready to run our selves out of breath for it: if a rich purchase
may be made, a profitable bargain driven, an honorable and wealthy match
gotten, or any such other secular Commodity which we are affected with; oh then
we are all upon the spur, upon the wing, no haste, no alacrity, no labor, or
diligence is thought too much, or but enough; now there is violence upon
violence, all oars and sails, must now be plied, and shall we be thus
earnest, for frivolous, unconcerning, low things, which we may have, and be
never the better; want, and be never the worse; and yet carry our selves in
matters of eternity, as if we were all Stoics, and had no passions about us?
Ferventissimi in terrenis, frigidissimi in caelestibus, shall we be red hot as
fire for earth, and key cold as any Ice for heaven?

7. If all this will not move, look upon wicked men, how violent a bent have
they to sin, Their hearts are fully set to do mischief, Eccles. 9.3. They
inflame themselves, with Idols, Esaias 57.5. They are as swift Dromedaries
traversing their ways, Jer. 2.23. Their whole force is evil, Ad
^^ggillationem nostram haec dicta sint, se non praestet fides quod praestitit
iafidelitas, Hier.
and their course not right, Jer. 23.10. How violent were the Israelites for
their Idolatry, when they offered their sons and daughters unto Devils,
Deuteronomy. 32.17. Had they so much devotion for Idols, and have we so little for the
true God? what care did they not take? what cost did they not cast away, when
they made haste, as David has it, to pour out meat and drink offerings, to
another God? Psalm. 16.4. and shall we esteem our true God and Religion at such
a low underhand rate, as if gold and silver were too dear and precious then
to be offered up upon the sacrifice and service of them? as if hell and lies
were pearls never over-bought, but truth and heaven mere trash and nothing
worth; since they would do any thing, for the one, and we nothing for the
other.

8. Look upon your enemies, how more then Hyperbolically violent they are, in
carrying on their design of Rome and Hell; how furious is their march? how
resolute are their spirits? how quick their endeavors? how do they compass
sea and land, to Spain, France, Holland, Denmark, whither do they not
dispatch their Emissarie? what vaste treasures do they not lay out, what
expense of blood do they stick at, what stones do they not roll? what
conclusions do they not try? what project have they not hammered? what corner
of the earth have they not searched, even till hell from beneath was moved to
meet them; and all to drive their desperate and pernicious design, to cast
down, if it were possible, Jesus Christ out of his Throne, and to set up
Beelzebub in his room; hedging, fencing, planting, watering, what could they
have done more for that wild vine, that false Antichristian Religion and
Church, which is the vine of the earth, and not of heaven, it having no
rooting, growth, nor blessing thence? Rev. 14.11. If there be any to whom the
Sirens voice sounds sweet: Hark what Father Campian professes of himself
and his fellow Jesuits, Quamdiu vel vnus quispiam e nobis supererit, qui
Tiburno vestro fruatur, fruatur, that is his word, whiles there was any of them
left to enjoy a Tyburn tippet, as old Bishop Latimer was wont to speak, whiles
any of them remained for the gallows, torment, and imprisonment, they vowed
never to desist nor let fall their weather-beaten cause: and what shall we be
cool and moderate, when they are so extreme violent? Acrius illi ad perniciem
quam nos ad salutem, Shall they be more zealous to procure their own and
others destruction, temporal and eternal, then we for our own and others
Salvation?

9 If we be resolute, we shall prevail and carry away the prize which we are
contending for: This should have been a doctrine entire of it felfe: I only
touch it, and but lightly too, as a motive to quicken us up. What will not men
do upon uncertain, and often, most unlikely hopes, to advantage themselves;
but we have this hope as an Anchor, sure and steadfast, That if we be violent
for it, this Kingdom is ours; none can hinder us of it, such as sell all,
shall have the pearl, Mat. 13.44. Those that shrink not from Christ in his
temptations for fear of the Cross, when he comes in his glory, they shall sit
upon thrones, and reign with him, Luke 22.28. and for the public cause, now
depending, whiles we continue faithful with, and stout for God, fear not the
issue; let the oppositions be what they will, all those great Mountains before
Zerubbabel, shall become a plain, Zach. 4.8. The Lord reigns, though the
earth be never so unquiet, he will bring about his design, when men and
devils have done their worst. What though the pillars of the Land tremble, and
all the foundations of it shake, as in an earth quake; Videte nedum caelum
destudimus, terram amittamus, Them. ^. ad Athan.
what though we be in danger whiles we are so violent for heaven, to lose all
we have on earth, as the Orator sometimes told the Athenians, yet we shall not
have an hairs harm, If we serve our God with reverence and godly fear, we
shall receive a Kingdom, that cannot be shaken, Heb. 12.28. Unto the which God
of his infinite mercy bring us, through the Merits of Christ Jesus, who has
purchased it for us, To whom, etc.

FINIS.
Die Mercurii 29. Maii. 1644.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That Mr Harman
do from this House give thanks unto Master Hall, for the great pains he took
in the Sermon he preached this day, at the entreaty of this House, at St
Margarets Westminster, (it being the day of public Humiliation) and to desire
him to Print his Sermon. And it is Ordered that none shall presume to Print his
Sermon, not being licenced under his hand writing.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I appoint Samuel Gellibrand to Print my Sermon.

HEN. HALL.




