THE HUMBLE Acknowledgement AND Congratulation of many thousands young men and
Apprentices in and about the City of London, to his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax.

With his Excellencies Answer to the same. Dated at Ringston August 19. 1647.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax.

Signed, John Rushworth. Secr.



Aug: 20 LONDON, Printed for Laurence Chapman. 1647.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Captain General of all the
Forces in ENGLAND and WALES.
The humble acknowledgement and Congratulation of thousands of young men and
Apprentices, in and about the City of London.
Most worthy General,
THe extremities of this Nation growing great (the Enemies thereof being
strong, and confident of success) and the visible means of our deliverance
broken, and almost totally consumed, then it pleased the good hand of heaven to
call forth your Excellency, and those worthies with you (your faithful
Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers,) to save this poor and distressed
Kingdom, and although at first your strength was small, your encouragements
few, and your enemies many and powerful, yet with all thankfulness we
acknowledge, you were not deterred thereby; but over looking all, (eying that
Almighty power, by whose providence you were set a part for so great a work)
you marched out in his might, and became prosperous; your enemies fell before
you, their armies were vanquished, their strong holds surrendered to you, and
the joyful day of Englands peace, and longed for deliverance not only dawned,
but shown forth upon us; these clouds of fears, of ruin, of slavery, and
oppression (which had till then beset us) began to scatter, and in our hopes
and expectations were vanishing quite away.

And when, again, our restless enemies (seeing their open force could not
prevail) betook themselves to hellish policy, and under the face of friends
and actions for common good, had laid surer (as they hoped) the foundations of
their own boundless power and greatness, the restoration of their former
tyranny, and the final ruin of our Laws and Liberties; and for that purpose
had contrived the disbanding (and that with disgrace) of your Excellencies
Army, as the only obstacle in the way of their Designs; then it pleased our
good God again to appear, and your Excellency, with your faithful
Commanders, Officers, and victorious Army, with their industrious Adjutators,
became (we gratefully acknowledge) happy instruments in his hand, to discover
and oppose those wicked Designs; whereby the dying hopes of this distressed
Nation again revived, ere long to see a happy settlement of its peace and
freedom.

And when again, our malicious enemies had scattered their poison in this
great City, expecting the venom thereof would diffuse it self, not only
here, but from hence (as from the heart) into all the parts of this Kingdom,
and had thereby so far prevailed, as to force the Parliament into a compliance
with them, to engage many of the Grandees, and some of the Youngmen of this
City to prepare and act for a new war, and in opposition of your Excellency, to
join themselves in a dangerous Bond and engagement, and (having forcibly
gotten the power and Militia of this City into their hands) listed and armed
many vile and dissolute persons, Reformadoes and renegado soldiers, and by
their hands had begun the tragedy of War and bloodshed in this City, at the
Guildhall thereof upon peaceable and unarmed men, and threatened the speedy
ruin of the wellaffected therein, who would not join with them in their
barbarous and destructive practices. Then again we do with all thankfulness
acknowledge) that your Excellency with your renowned Army, became a blessing
unto this City and Kingdom, and with incredible speed (drawing together from
parts greatly remote each from other) came seasonably to the help and
deliverance of this City, (then with all its might acting toward its own
ruin) and settling the Parliament of England, who by the tumults raised, and
encouraged from that City, was dispersed, and forced to quit the Houses, and
depart thence, to your Excellency for protection.

All which your most worthy services for your native country, as we cannot but
with all joy and thankfulness acknowledge, so we doubt not, but the memorial
of them will be a crown of glory and honor upon your head, and upon the heads
of your faithful commanders and soldiers to all posterity.

And although we could not (as we would manifest our hearts in a visible acting
for you in this late time of need, yet let your Excellency be pleased to accept
of our refusals to join or comply with any thing bearing a face of opposition
to you, (notwithstanding the threats of death for so doing) as an undoubted
testimony of our resolution, to live and die with your Excellency and your
army, in settling his Majesty's rights, the Parliaments privileges, and the
peace and freedom of this Nation, the which we do still retain, and shall
further manifest, as God shall give an oppertunity, and your Excellency require
it at our hands.

Gentlemen,
I Have received your congratulation of the late endeavors of this Army, and
great successes with which God has blessed us against the open and secret
Enemies to the interest of this Kingdom, manifesting with many cordial
expressions your good resentment of our late proceedings in prosecution of
those public ends, for the accomplishment whereof you have not only declined
and refused compliance with the Kingdoms Enemies, but have freely tendered a
joint adventure of your selves with us when occasion shall require: All which I
cannot but gladly receive with a thankful acceptance, returning the like
acknoweldgement of your good and honest offer, as you did of our endeavors,
and do desire that you will continue still in your several places the
promotion and pursuance of those public ends aforementioned, and I doubt not
but the same Divine providence that has been our guide hitherto will still
direct us and all honest men going hand in hand with us toward an happy
conclusion of our present troubles and distractions, and settling of the King,
Parliament, and Kingdom in safe^^, peace, and freedom.

Kingston, August 19. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellenc^^ Sir Thomas
Fairfax. Signed John Rushworth, Sec.

For the young men and the Apprentic^s in and about the City of London, who
subscribed a Paper, entitled, The humble Acknowledgement and Congratulation,
etc.
FINIS.

