THE HUMBLE PETITION OF DIVERSE Well-affected Persons, DELIVERED The 6th day of
July, 1659. TO THE SUPREME AUTHORITY, THE PARLIAMENT OF THE Commonwealth OF
ENGLAND. With the Parliaments Answer thereunto, and Sense thereupon.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Brewcter, at the three Bibles in Paul's Churchyard,
at the West end, 1659.

To the Supreme Authority, THE Parliament of the Commonwealth of England. The
Humble Petition of diverse well-affected Persons.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners have for many years observed the breathings and longings
of this Nation after Rest and Settlement, and that upon mistaken grounds they
have been ready even to sacrifice and yield up part of their own undoubted
right, to follow after an appearance of it.

And your Petitioners do daily see the bad effects of long continued
distractions, in the ruins and decays of Trade Foreign and Domestique; And
in the advantages that are taken to make Confederacies to involve the Nation in
Blood and Confusion, under pretense of procuring a Settlement.

That it has been the practice of all Nations upon the subversion of any form
of Government, to provide immediately a new constitution, suitable to their
condition; with certain successions and descents, that so both their Lawgivers
and Magistrates, might use their several Trusts, according to the established
constitution; and the Peoples minds be settled secure, and free from attempts
of intraducing several forms of Governments, according to the variety of their
fancies, or corrupt interests.

That God has preserved this Nation wonderfully without example many years,
since the dissolution of the old form of Government, by King, Lords, and
Commons, there having been no fundamental Constitutions of any kind duly
settled, nor any certain succession provided for the Legislative power; but even
at this instant, if by any sudden sickness, design or force, any considerable
numbers of your persons should be rendered incapable of meeting in Parliament,
The Commonwealth were without form of successive Legislature or Magistracy, and
left to the mercy of the strongest faction. Yet we have reason to remember in
these years of unsettlement, the expressible sufferings of this Nation, in
their strength, wealth, honor, liberty, and all things conducing to their
well-being; And we have like reason now, sadly to apprehend the unpending
ruin; And we cannot discern a possibility of your Honors unanimous, and
expeditious proceedings toward our Countries preservation, and relief from its
heavy pressures, whilst your minds are not settled in any known Constitution
of Government or fundamental Orders: according to which, all Laws should be
made; but diverse or contrary interests may be prosecuted upon different
apprehensions of the Justice and Prudence of different forms of Government,
though all with good intentions.

Your Petitioners therefore conceiving no remedy so effectual against the
present dangers, as the settlement of the peoples minds, and putting them into
actual security of their properties and liberties, by a due establishment of
the Constitution under which they may evidently apprehend their certain
enjoyment of them; and thereupon, a return of their Trade and free Commerce,
without those continual fears, that makes such frequent stops in Trade, to
the ruin of thousands.

And your Petitioners also observing, that the Interest of the late Kings
Son, is cried up, and promoted daily, upon pretense, that there will be
nothing but confusion and Tyranny, until he come to govern; and that such as
declare for a Commonwealth, are for Annarchy and confusion, and can never agree
amongst themselves, what they would have.

Upon serious thoughts of the premises, your Petitioners do presume with all
humility, and submission to your Wisdom to offer to your Honors, their
Principalls and Proposalls concerning the Government of this Nation: Whereupon,
they humbly conceive, a just and prudent Government ought to be established,
viz.

I. That the Constitution of the Civil Government of England by King, Lords,
and Commons, being dissolved, whatever new Constitution or Government can be
made or settled according to any Rule of righteousness, It can be no other then
a wise Order or Method, into which the free Peoples Deputies shall be formed
for the making of their Laws; and taking Care for their Common safety and
welfare in the execution of them: For, the exercise of all just authority over
a free People, ought (under God) to arise from their own Consent.

II. That the Government of a free People ought to be so settled, that the
Governors and Governed may have the same Interest in preserving the
Government, and each others Proprieties and Liberties respectively; That being
the only sure foundation of a Commonwealth's Unity, Peace, Strength, and
Prosperity.

III. That there cannot be an Union of the Interests of a whole Nation in the
Government, where those who shall sometimes Govern, be not also sometimes in
the Condition of the Governed; otherwise the Governors will not be in a
capacity to feel the weight of the Government, nor the Governed to enjoy the
advantages of it: And then it will be the interest of the Major part to destroy
the Government; as much as it will be the interest of the Minor part to
preserve it.

IV. That there is no security that the Supreme Authority shall not fall into
factions, and be led by their private Interest to keep themselves always in
power, and direct the Government to their private advantages; If that Supreme
Authority be settled in any Single Assembly whatsoever, That shall have the
entire power of Propounding, Debating, and resolving Laws.

V. That the Sovereign Authority in every Government of what kind soever, ought
to be certain in its perpetual Successions, Revolutions or Descents: and
without possibility (by the Judgment of humane prudence) of a death or failer
of its being, because the whole form of the Government is dissolved, if that
should happen, and the people in the utmost imminent danger of an absolute
Tyranny, or a War amongst themselves; or Rapine and confusion. And therefore
where the Government is Popular, the Assemblies in whom reside the Supreme
Authority, ought never to die or dissolve: though the persons be annually
Changing: neither ought they to trust the Sovereign care of the strength and
safety of the people our of their own hands, by allowing a Vacation to
themselves, lest those that should be trusted be in love with such Great
Authority, and aspire to be their Masters, or else fear an Account, and seek
the dissolution of the Commonwealth to avoid it.

VI. That it ought to be declared as a Fundamental Order in the Constitution of
this Commonwealth, that the Parliament being the Supreme Legislative Power, is
intended only for the exercise of all those Acts of Authority that are proper
and peculiar unto the Legislative Power; and to provide for a Magistracy, unto
whom should appertain the whole Executive Power of the Laws: and no Case
either Civil or Criminal to be Judged in Parliament, saving that the last
Appeals in all Cases, where Appeals shall be thought fit to be admitted, be
only unto the Popular Assembly; and also that unto them be referred the
Judgment of all Magistrates in Cases of Male Administrations in their Offices.

And in prosecution of these Principles, Your Petitioners Humbly propose for
the Settlement of this Commonwealth, that it be Ordained,

1. That the Parliament or the Supreme Authority of England, be chosen by the
free People, to represent them with as much equality as may be.

2. That a Parliament of England shall consist of two Assemblies, the lesser of
about three hundred, in whom shall reside the entire power of consulting,
debating, and propounding Laws: the other, to consist of a far greater
number, in whom shall rest the sole power of resolving all Laws so propounded.

3. That the free People of England, in their respective divisions at certain
days and places appointed, shall for ever annually choose one third part to
each Assembly, to enter into their Authority, at certain days appointed: the
same days, the Authority of a third of each of the said Assemblies to cease,
only in the laying the first Foundation in this Commonwealths Constitution:
the whole number of both the Assemblies to be chosen by the People
respectively, (viz.) One third of each Assembly to be chosen for one year, One
third for two years, and one third for three years.

4. That such as shall be chosen, having served their appointed time in either
of the said Assemblies of Parliament shall not be capeable to serve in the same
assembly during some convenient intervall or vacation.

5. That the Legislative power do wholly refer the execution of the Laws unto
the Magistracy, according to the sixth principle herein mentioned.

6. That in respect to Religion and Christian liberty, It be ordained that the
Christian Religion by the appointment of all succeeding Parliaments, be taught,
and promulgated to the Nation, and public Preachers thereof maintained; and
that all that shall profess the said Religion, though of different persuasions
in parts of the Doctrine, or Discipline thereof, be equally protected in the
peaceable profession, and public exercise of the same; and be equally
capeable of all elections, Magistracies, preferments in the commonwealth,
according to the order of the same. Provided always, that the public
exercise of no Religion contrary to Christianity be tollorated: nor the
public exercise of any Religion, though professedly Christian, grounded upon,
or incorporated into the interest of any Foreign State or Prince.

These your Petitioners humbly conceive, to be the Essentials of the form of a
free Commonwealth, which if they were made fit for practice by your Honers
appointing the numbers, times, places, and all other necessary circumstances,
and settled as the fundamental Orders of the Commonwealth, would naturally
dispose those that should hereafter be chosen into the Parliaments, from the
love of their own interest to seek the common good being obliged by the
constitutions here humbly offered to partake with the whole body of the people,
of the good or evil that shall happen to the Commonwealth, having no probable
temptations or means left, to compass any private or factious ends in matters
Religious or Civil, And your Petitioners cannot imagine a greater security for
the cause and interest contended for with such effusion of blood, Then by
disposing the free people into this kind of order, whereby the same cause would
become their common interest. Yet if your Honors should think it necessary or
convenient for securing the minds of such as are doubtful, and jealous, that
the people may betray their own liberties; There may be inserted into the
fundamental orders of the Commonwealth, these following Expedients, Viz.

I That for securing the government of this Commonwealth, and of the Religious
and Civil freedom of the good people thereof, it may be for ever esteemed and
judged Treason against the Commonwealth, for any member of either Assembly of
Parliament, or any other person whatsoever to move or propose in either of the
said Assemblies, the restitution of Kingly Government, or the introduction of
any single Person to be chief Magistrate of England, or the alteration of that
part of the fundamental order herein contained that concerns the equal freedom
and protection of Religious persons of different persuasions.

II That about the number of twelve persons of the most undoubted fidelity and
integrity, may be authorized and empowered for some certain number of years next
ensuing to seize, apprehend, and in safe custody to detain any person or
persons whatsoever till he or they be in due form of law, delivered as is
hereafter specified; That shall move or propose in either of the said
Assemblies of Parliament the restitution of Kingly Government, or the
Introduction of any single person to be chief Magistrate of this Commonwealth,
or the alteration of that part of the fundamental order herein contained, that
concerns the equal freedom, and protection of Religious persons, of different
persuasions. But for no other matter or cause whatsoever; And when it shall
happen that any person or persons shall be arested or seized for any of the
causes aforesaid, in manner aforesaid; a Commission of Oyer and Terminer may
issue forth in due form of Law, unto the said Twelve or any Six of them to
proceed in due form of law, within one month after the apprehension of any
such person or persons: to the arraignment and public trial of every such
person or persons, and upon the legal conviction of him or them by the
testimony of two sufficient witnesses of any of the Treasons herein declared,
to condemn to the pains of death; and to cause the same Judgment to be duly
executed, and the keeper or keepers of the great seal of England that shall be
for the time being may be authorized and required from time to time during the
Term of years to issue out Commissions unto the said twelve or any six of them
authorizing them to proceed as aforesaid.

And if your Honors shall further judge it convenient, the fundamental orders
of the Government may be consented unto or subscribed, by the people
themselves, if their express pact shall be esteemed any additional security;
other Nations upon the like occasions of expulsion of their Kings, having taken
the peoples oaths against their returning, And the same may be proclaimed as
often as our Ancestors provided for the proclaiming of Magna Charta and any
further security also added, if any can be found amongst men, that has a
foundation in justice.

Now your Petitioners having with humble submission to your grave wisdoms,
thus declared their apprehensions of the present condition of this distracted
Nation, and the only effectual means under God to prevent the impending
mischiefs; They do most humbly pray,

That such speedy Considerations may be had of the premises as the Condition of
this Nation requires, and that such a method may be settled for the debating,
and consulting about the Government, that your wise Results may be seasonable
for the healing all the breaches of the Commonwealth and establishing sure
foundations of Freedom, Justice, Peace, and Unity.

And your Petitioners shall always pray, etc.

Wednesday, July the 6. 1659.
The house being informed that diverse Gentlemen were at the door with a
Petition, they were called in, and one of the Petitioners in the Behalf of
himself and the rest said, we humbly present you a petition, to which we might
have had many thousand hands, but the matter rather deserves your serious
consideration then any public attestation, and therefore we do humbly present
it to this honorable House: which after the petitioners were withdrawn was
read and was entitled, The humble Petition of diverse well affected persons.

Resolved.

That the Petitioners have the thanks of the House.

The Petitioners were again called in and Mr. Speaker gave them this answer.

Gentlemen,

The House has read over your Petition, and find it without any private end,
and only for public interest, And I am commanded to let you know that it
lies much upon them to make such a settlement, as may be most for the good of
posterity. And they are about that work, and intend to go forward with it
with as much expedition as may be, And for your parts they have commanded me to
give you thanks: and in their names I do give you the thanks of this House
accordingly.

Tho. St. Nicholas Clerk of the Parliament.


