THE HVMBLE ADDRESS. of the AGITATORS of the ARMY To His Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax. Presented the 14. of AUGUST. On behalf of the Kingdom and the Army,
etc.
May it please your Excellency,
THe continued destructive designs and dangerous Combinations of perfidious
men, formerly Members of Parliament, which constantly blast the fairest hopes
and expectations of Peace and Freedom, rendering all our endeavors and hazards
of our lives fruitless, and at present threatening the ruin and desolation of
this poor distracted Kingdom, constrains us once more to address our selves to
Your Excellency, to improve the present opportunity that Providence has put
into your hands, of making them incapable of prosecuting their mischievous
purposes; being fully confident that though their former treacheries were more
obscure and intricate; yet their late unparalleld proceedings in violating the
free legal Parliament, and USURPING A PARLIAMENTARY POWER, on purpose to have
embroiled this miserable (and almost, still, bleeding) Nation, again in blood,
cries aloud to Justice to remove them from their USURPED, DESTRUCTIVE POWER.

Seeing therefore those Honorable Members of Parliament that discharged their
trust, have been forced to fly to this Army for refuge; that they might
endeavor to secure them to sit as a free and legal Parliament, and your
Excellency with this Army have engaged themselves to improve the utmost of your
possibilities to that intent; and seeing those worthy Members are now again
dis-inabled for discharging their Trust, through the UNEXPECTED INTRUSION OF
THOSE USURPERS, and their assuming to themselves a Power of voting amongst
them, whereby those desperate enemies to the Kingdoms peace and welfare, do
again obscure and pervert the true Parliamentary power, and imprint the Image
of that highest Authority upon their own designs, protecting themselves and
their Accomplices from justice.

We cannot but humbly and earnesty implore your Excellency, That those Usurpers
of that supreme Authority might not be permitted (even contrary to the Law of
nature) to sit judges of their own prodigious Treacheries. But that all and
every person, that have sat in that pretended Parliament, or adhered to them
or their Votes, when the free legal Parliament was by violence suspended, might
immediately be declared against, as persons incapable of sitting or voting in
this Parliament; That so according to our last Declaration, and our former
Proposals tendered to your Excellency for that end, we might secure that free
and legal Parliament, til the differences of the Kingdom be composed, and the
Peace and Liberties of the people firmly established.

THE PROPOSALS of the AGITATORS To His Excellency at Hammersmith, the 5. of
AUGUST, 1647.
Before the free Parliaments return to WESTMINSTER.
FOrasmuch, as your Excellency with the Council of War, by their
Representations and Declarations have referred the Composure of differences;
And the Establishment of the Peace and happiness of the whole nation to a free
Parliament. We being very sensible, that the ends of all our labors, and
manifold hazards of our lives are now depending thereupon; And of how dangerous
a Concernment it may prove, if persons disaffected to the peace and welfare of
the Kingdom, should retain places therein; do humbly offer to your Excellencies
Consideration, To be by you presented to the Members of Parliament, now
Resident in the Army.

FIrst, That all those who have sat at Westminster usurping a Parliamentary
Authority, since the Tumultuous and forcible expulsion of the Parliament of
England, and choice of new pretended Speakers (thereby giving encouragement and
assistance to the City of London to raise a new War in this Kingdom) may
immediately be excluded the Houses.

Secondly, that all which formerly have been Members of Parliament, and have
adhered to the pretended Parliament, may be also Excluded the Houses; And a
Penalty agreed upon, to be imposed upon such person, or persons, appearing
guilty, that shall presume to fit after the said Exclusion.

Lastly, that all former Votes against Members disaffected may be duly
Executed.

Daniel Hincksman. John Blackmore. Geo. Tracey. Will. Young. Timothy
Thornberry. Will. Hall. Ed. Vaughan. John Wells. John Wilson. Io. Radman. Nich.
Lockier. Geo. Stevenson. Sam. Whitmore. Richard Clerk. Edmond Gurne.
Consolation Fox. Tho. Butterroy. John Willoughby. Ed. Twigge. Will. Pryor. J.
Reynolts. Joseph Wallington. Hen. Cannon. Rich. Hodden. John Perke. Fran.
Allen. Tho. Robinson. John Clerk. Tho. Johnson. Geo. Joyce. Ed. Sexby. Will.
Allen. Rich. Johnson. Joseph Adams. Rich. Flower. Edmond Chillington. Rich.
Colbrand. Tim^. Whiting. Tho. Butler. Stephen Shipden. Will. Knolles. Will.
Wilkinson. Edw. Tomlint. Rich. Salter. Robert Stedman. Harbert Field. Robert
Baldwin. Tho Ellis. John Felpes. Will. Symond. John Wood. Tho. Sheppard. Tobias
Box.



