An Humble ADDRESS To the truly Loyal Citizens of London, By a True Lover of
his KING and COUNTRY; With a Candid Reprehension to the Intelligencer at the
Stationers Arms in the Piazza under the Royal Exchange in Cornhil.
He that speaks Evil of Kings, Princes, and Magistrates, will be as Simple as
he is Wicked, to be offended and not amend, when he is justly and moderately
corrected.
Gentlemen and Fellow Citizens,
I Am not ignorant that whatever comes forth in Print, if it be, cum or sine
Privilegio, although it assert Allegiance to the King and Obedience to the
Magistrates, yet now adays it is A la mode to Libel it, and for every pitiful
Mechanic Fellow to become a Censurer, Tempora mutantur; At the Beginning it
was not so. It is now a great fashion for such scurrilous Persons, to be the
Common Mouth in Defaming the best of our Governors; by villifying the
Government, disliking every thing which is contrary to the foolish Idea of
their own minds; but from Men of such factious and turbulent Spirits; Libera
nos domine: Certainly it is worthy our most serious Consideration, the shameful
Actions done by some of our Fellow Citizens, whose Courage and Deportment to
our Loyal Lord Mayor, and some of our truly Loyal Governors, then sitting upon
the Bench: What is the reason that our brave Sir Joseph Sheldon, or Loyal
Turner, must be despised at the great Solemnity of our last Election of
Burgesses? We have too great cause to conceive that those hissing Persons that
were there present, are the very Encouragers and Promoters of Faction and
Sedition; and that when opportunity serves we must feel the poisonous Sting
that is in their Tails: But we live not, thanks be to Almighty God, and our
most gracious King, in so miserable an Age, that we need fear to utter Truth
without a disguise. Surely many then present, were not Compos mentis; that is
the most charitable Excuse that can be made: otherwise they would not have
reproached and branded their Magistrates with false and opprobrious Language. I
may I hope, without offense in this circumstance, use the saying of the ever
renowned Lord Chancellor; Publish it not in Gath, nor let it be declared in the
Streets of Askelon. Can we ever expect Gods Benediction, whilst we contemn the
Magistrates he has set over us. It is a true saying, Herba crescit satis, quae
nil habet utilitalis. Such Persons would have the mark of the Beast set on
them, that Good and Loyal Subjects may shun them with an, Oh procul este
profani --

What ails the Fates, what moves the wandering Stars,
That cause these Earthly Tumults and these Jars?
Are Men grown with Passion now so proud,
That their fond Humors must be heard so loud.
Shall not these worthy Persons named be,
And must we Cavil at their Loyalty?
Happy are those Men that have the Kings Regard,
And Crowned is he that has the Kings Reward.
Pardon this small Digression from my intended purpose, I shall now come ad
rem. It is to you Fellow Citizens that I shall now address my self: I shall not
Apologize for my self upon the account of my ensuing Discourse; for Veritas non
quaerit Angulos. I fear not the Frowns nor the Threats, nor the Censures of any
self-conceited Cox-comb, nor Humorist whatsoever; my humble request is to you,
my dear Fellow Citizens, that you would now in this juncture of time, continue
to make evident Demonstrations to the whole Universe of your Heroic and
Magnanimous Resolutions to fear God and honor the King, and join not with any
turbulent Spirits, who are given to change. How many are there now adays that
make it their whole Business and Design to sow Discords and Divisions amongst
us, by the many scurrilous Pamphlets that daily appear in Print; you may
perceive that Greatness it self cannot, Omnibus horis, securely pass, but
sometimes it is the Butt of Envy and Detraction, and meets with unhappy
Vituperation, Ah dolor and sit pro dolor, mirum videtur. It must needs be
strange, that in so well-governed and regulated a City as ours is, and in the
face of so many of our Loyal Magistrates, so many base and scurrilous Pamphlets
are permitted, without any punishment. Were but the Advice of our Loyal and
Learned Recorder put in practice, which he gave upon the Election of our late
Lord Mayor, Faction would then be buried in Oblivion; then we might hope to see
a Resurrection of the Golden Age again: then we might expect Peace and Plenty
and Prosperity, to co-habit amongst us. I must declare it, and without any
Ostentation or Flattery, it deserves to be written in Letters of Gold,
notwithstanding the ill Resentment some Turbulent Spirits were pleased to pass
upon it; but it is evident that many ill-minded men are so wedded to their
Rebellious Principles, which they have formerly imbibed, that nothing will
prevail with them to be metamorphosed; but that Ancient Proverbial Saying must
be verified, Immedicabileulnus euse rescindendum est ne pars sincera trahaiur,
a few Scabby Sheep spoil the whole Flock. I am sorry to see the Governors of
our Church vilified, witness the Weekly Packet October 3. 1679. And as for our
Intelligencer, it is a great Scandal to our Renowned City, that such an
Impudent Saucy Fellow should so audaciously assume to himself, in conspectu
totius Mundi, to abuse Persons of Worth, as he has frequently done in several
of his Intelligences, and then to say Erravi, that he accounts Compensation
enough (witness his abusing Sir Gervis Elways and his Friend, in saying, That
giving Money and Drink, caused them to be Elected. What an high Aspersion has
he cast upon those Worthy Gentlemen, and upon the Electors likewise that chose
them? And what a base Aspersion did he cast likewise upon Samuel Pepys Esquire,
and then cried Peccavi, and thinks that satisfaction enough. It is likewise
said, That our Lord Mayor, out of his great Circumspection, Care, and Loyalty,
gave this Intelligencer an Order to seize all Factious Pamphlets, and he being
Factious himself, perverts his Lordships Design, and winks at the Factious ones
and stifles the other; and has the Audacity to think he shall now go on
uncontrouled; bragging he has a License till the 26th of January next. I would
not be accounted arrogant, neither will I be so saucy, to undertake to
prescribe Methods to our Governors; but if our present Laws, or the Power of
our Magistrates, cannot put a stop to these Seditious Pamphlets, I hope at the
Convention of our Sage and Prudent Senators, they will take it into their
speedy Consideration.

How often has the Gazettes taken notice of his Lying News, and yet he goes on
with as great Impudence as ever, as if it were Cum Privilegio; but I hope he
will be made to recant openly, where the World may see him.

It is well known to all Sober and Ingenious Citizens, who are not Jenkismed,
that our Clergy have a Constellation of Theological and Heroical Virtues, not
only in their Doctrine, but Unity in their Lives, and Conversation: And they
are Armor Proof against all Gainsayers; and I fear our Intelligencer will
have need of an Amnesty or an Act of Oblivion for his many Scandala magnata, by
him published: but Praemonitus praemunitus. Let the renowned Speech of that
Illustrious Knight Sir Robert Clayton, be remembered in Memoria secuiorum
omnium; and let the Counsel therein be heartily embraced by all Loyal Citizens:
then we may expect Halcion Days within our City, which God of his Mercy grant:
then that excellent saying will be verified, Concordia parvae res crescunt,
discordia maxima dilabuntur. If that Persian Monarch Artaxerxes, with a willing
Gratitude and a graceful Will, embraced so mean a present as a Dish of Cold
Water from so unworthy a Vassal as Cyneta; I doubt not but you my Fellow
Citizens will kindly accept of my Address, and follow the good Advice of being
True and Loyal to our King, and Obedient to Governors, and to live in Unity
one with another.

VALE.

POSTSCRIPT.
READER be kind, and when thou see these Lines,
Thou Wilt surely censure Poetry declines.
Be impartial in thy Judgment and consider
How ere usurpt, the Laurel does not wither.
Neither impute that Science is decayed,
Which unripe Wits endeavor to invade.
Rather blame the Impudence of him that tries
To act against what Nature him denies.
But since it is frequent to direct her Laws,
I Will crave Indulgence for another Cause.
It Is strange to me to see revenging Sheets,
Lamb's Conduit Paper that in Duels meets.
Nor dare I now presume to make presage,
How present Influences threat this Age.
The New World's Old, since Noah's Flood,
And most too Old therein for to be good.
Methinks I see most in that Evil Mood,
Though having Manna, yet crave Quails for Food.
Some new fond Sight, or some rare fine Show,
This gazing World expects below.
Now give me leave, kind Reader, to entreat
Thy good Construction makes my Lines complete.
Hoping that such the Union be reserved,
Which has so long so careful been preserved
From being broke; as Knaves hope and Fools fear it,
Conclude with me, Quis medio tutus erit?
Amator Patriae.

The Character of a Factious Libeller.
HE is one that has nothing to do with his Business, and yet no Man busier than
he, and his Business is most in his Face: He is one that forces himself into
all Company and Affairs, without being sent for or feed; his part is only an
eager bustling, that rather keeps a-do than does any thing. His Discourse
stuffed up with Faction, speaks ill of His Majesty and his best Subjects;
has a dislike of all Government and Magistrates: Commends much his own
Chimaera's, by which you may track him; at the end makes himself, with a great
deal of endeavor ridiculous. The Worm in his Brain has put him quite beside
his Nature: He cannot be what he would, and has forgot what he was. He is one
that must be principal Actor in every Trifle. A Man very Contemplative, or
rather very Active in his Bed, where he can do more by his Contrivances, than
six men at Work; where we will leave him, till he has spun Thread enough to
make him fast as long as he shall live.

FINIS.

