The Humble PETITION AND PROTESTATION of the County of KENT: Presented the 30th
of August, 1642. to the Honorable Houses of PARLIAMENT By Sir JOHN SIDLEY
Knight, with many thousands of hands thereunto.

Wherein they disclaim that late, bold, and unexampled Petition sent to His
Majesty, contrived by a few malevolent, ambitious and loose persons, and their
real affections to KING and PARLIAMENT.

Together with Sir John Sidleys Speech upon the presenting of the said Petition.

Also, the Answer of the House of Commons to the said Petition delivered by
their SPEAKER.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That these Petitions be forthwith
Printed and published:

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed by LUKE NORTON and JOHN FIELD for E. Husband and J. Franck,
and are to be sold at their shops in the Middle Temple, and next door to the
King's Head in Fleetstreet. September 1. 1642.

Die Martis 30 Augusti, 1642.
THe House being informed that diverse well-affected Gentlemen of Kent were at
the door to present to this House an humble Petition, they were called in; And
Sir John Sidley in the name of the rest, spoke to this effect following:
Mr. SPEAKER,
1. I Am entrusted by the well-affected Gentry, and Commons of Kent, to present
their humble desires, and faithful Resolutions, in a Petition to this
Honorable House.

2. This Petition comes guided hither with as many hearts as hands; It is like
a coat without seame; it has no subtle disguised Preamble to it; it is all of
a piece, speaking plain language, yet full of loyalty, and obedience to His
Majesty and the Parliament.

3. This Petition is more considerable then any that has been presented from
this County, coming not only from that part of the Gentry who are exceedingly
well-affected to the true Religion, and their Country, but embraced with such a
unanimous consent of the entire body of the Commonalty, as that each man
contested for the first subscription to it.

4. The Commons of Kent are very deeply sensible of the many injuries done them
by several Petitions, especially by that late unexampled bold one to His
Majesty, falsely assuming to it the Votes of the whole County; whereas indeed,
it was contrived by a few malevolent and ambitious spirits only, and wholly
disclaimed of the Commons, and was subscribed by diverse loose and dissolute
persons. This was growing to a dangerous Imposthume (having gathered the most
of its corruption about the Town of Maydstone) had not the Parliament timely
observed it, and applied that seasonable remedy, sending down the late Troops
of Horse to launch the sore, thereby preventing all further or future
ulceration: For which vigilant care of theirs thus to preserve the whole body,
the Commons have desired me to return their most humble and grateful
acknowledgement to this Honorable House.

To the Honorable, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses now assembled in the
high Court of Parliament: The humble Petition and Protestation of the Knights,
Gentlemen, and Commons of the County of Kent;
SHOWS,
THat the fear of misapprehensions and misunderstandings of our duties and
respects to this House, is that which emboldens us humbly to present our
affections and protestations.

And first, with all possible thanks for your great care and Resolution in the
well discharge of your public trust, which (with so much opposition to you,
never read or heard of in former times) you have hitherto undertaken and
encountered, with the hazard of some of your Lives and Fortunes.

And we do all most confidently believe, and much joy in the thought of it
(notwithstanding the misrepresentation of your Actions by some ill-affected to
public good for private ends) that all your Actions and endeavors have aimed
at the maintenance of the Protestant Religion, the preservation of the Kings
Person, the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberties of the
Subject, according to the late Protestation commended to us.

And that there may not appear of any fayler in our duties and respects to you,
We the Knights, Gentlemen, and Commons of the County aforesaid, Do humbly
present this Protestation; That to our utmost powers and endeavors, and with
the hazard of all that is near and deer unto us in our lives and estates, we
shall and will maintain, preserve, and defend, the Rights and Privileges of
Parliament, and the full authority thereof, the Kings Person, the Protestant
Religion, and the Liberties of the Subject.

And we humbly desire that all ill-affected persons opposite hereunto, by the
power and justice of this House, may receive such a degree of punishment, as
those that are professed enemies to the true Religion, the peace and prosperity
of this Kingdom.

And we humbly pray God (whom we infinitely praise and thank for his blessings
hitherto, your endeavors manifested in the happy settlement of peace betwixt
us and our Neighbor Nation, and in the preservation of some of your Members
from apparent dangers) that those mists of misunderstandings fomented by
persons ill-affected to our public peace and religion, and now interposing
betwixt His Majesty's grace and goodness to you, and your duties to Him
(hindering those sweet influences, which otherwise in a great measure by all
probability would have a free passage betwixt His Majesty and you) by your
great wisdoms may be so dispel'd and taken away, that a clear and right
understanding might be had of your Actions and Intentions to His Majesty and
this Kingdom: And this (God working in his Majesty's heart an inclination
thereunto) we are confident will speedily render a great proportion of
happiness to His Majesty, your selves and the rest of this Kingdom.

Which shall be the prayers of, etc.
To the Right Honorable, the Commons House of Parliament: The humble Petition
of the Knights, Gentlemen, and Commons, of the County of Kent.
WE your humble and faithful Petitioners inhabiting the County of Kent, being
deeply sensible of the many miseries which these calamitous times
(notwithstanding your great care and vigilance to prevent the same) are likely
to produce, wherein His gracious Majesty, seduced by the malevolent Council
of an ill-affected party of Malignants and Cavaliers, the Protestant Religion,
His Royal Person and Honor, the Privilege of Parliament, and the Subjects
Liberty are threatened with too too apparent hazard and ruin, toward the
support of which, your Petitioners according to the duty of loyal subjects and
good Christians, are not only willing to contribute their best wishes and
Votes, but even the utmost of their endeavors, both with their lives and
fortunes, for the redeeming of His Majesty from such hands, and our Religion
and Liberty from such peril and danger; But may it please this honorable House
to consider, that the Petitioners apprehend themselves in a condition and
posture nothing suitable to this their Resolution, being deprived and left naked
by the taking our Arms from us in the late expedition for Scotland; We
therefore beseech your provident care to empower us with such a proportion of
Ammunition and Arms to be magazin'd in these parts, whereby we may be enabled
to manifest our affections and obedience to the Command of King and Parliament,
both for the pursuance of the aforesaid intentions, and opposition of all
illegal infringements of our Laws and Liberties, such as the Commission of
Array, wherewith we are at this time threatened, and what other of the like
nature and condition soever, shall be hereafter obtruded upon us.

And your Petitioners shall be bound, etc.

The Answer of the House of Commons, to the Petitions of the Knights,
Gentlemen, and Commons of the County of Kent, presented the 30 of August, 1642.
delivered by their Speaker.
GENTLEMEN,
I Am commanded by the House to let you know, That it is no small satisfaction
and contentment to this House, to find the affections and resolutions of your
County, expressed to them so seasonably and so worthy of your selves, as they
now receive them in these Petitions; especially observing the many subtle
practices that have bin set on foot under the name of that County, to work in
this House a contrary opinion of you; from which you have now so well and fully
vindicated your selves and them.

Nor can we but observe, that at this time, when contrary to the Fundamental
Constitution of this Government, both Houses of Parliament, and the whole
Kingdom in them represented, are by the seducement of wicked Council,
proclaimed Traitors, (a thing until this time unheard of) you do with so much
zeal and resolution, offer your selves, your lives and fortunes, to support
your Religion and Liberty, your Country, King and Parliament, all now in
imminent danger of utter ruin. For which, the House has commanded me to
return you their most hearty thanks. And touching those Malignant and
ill-affected persons, whereof you have in your Petition given a general
character, and in particular presented a List of some of them; This House does
assure you, That they will, according to your desires, proceed against them
with all expedition and severity.

And concerning your desires for a supply of Ammunition and Arms for the
defense of your County, such has been the care of both Houses in that
particular, and for the general security and peace hereof, That they have
already granted full power and Instructions to a Committee, and the Deputy
Lieutenants appointed by them for your County, to take a course therein, which
they doubt not will give you ample satisfaction.

FINIS.

