GODS APPEARING For the TRIBE of LEVI: IMPROVED In a Sermon Preached at St.
Paul's, Nov. 8. To the Sons of Ministers, then solemnly ASSEMBLED.

By GEO: HALL, Minister at St. Botolph Aldersgate.

Romans 8.31. (...);

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Roycroft, for Philemon Stephens, at the gilded Lion in
Paul's Church Yard, 1655.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Can hardly satisfy my self, and thee much less, who do wonder to find
me in Print, My coming forth into this open light, who have rejoiced in my
close retyrednesse; is, as if the Batt should stare the Sun in the face, at
noon day. I desire thee to know, that, as the service fell unexpectedly upon me
by Lot, so the performance no less unexpectedly ingageth me, to be thus
public: I was not a little tempted, to decline the employment, and even ready
to say in some discouraging Considerations, O my Lord, send I pray thee, by the
hand of him, whom thou will send: And see, how my Experience justifies my
Fears; the Report is come to me, of one (an unknown Hearer) who hardly
refrained himself in the Congregation, from clamouring against me, as a
Preacher of false Doctrine: Serpents will bite the heels; I am in this somewhat
concerned, to submit to common censure what was delivered; let the false
Doctrine be pointed at, I desire no mercy, and shall justify every syllable:
The adventure was (in my own apprehension) great, while (as St. Paul in that
time of his greatest peril, when the Ship was fallen into a place, where two
Seas met) so was I engaged, between opposite Parties, which I was to speak
unto; the rigid Punctilio-men, both of the right hand, and of the left; unto
whom, to speak of any thing tending to Moderation, is the same thing, as to
bring several swelling mountains together, to grow into one even ground: But,
as they do not find me so for Communion with dissenting Brethren, as to buy it
upon the unfit terms of yielding up my own sure Principles; so I wish them to
sit down, and calmely consider, whether (as Christians) we are not bound to
make all fair offers for it we may, and to lay down all our Animosities, of
which the Mischief is so sadly visible.

Now, that I may be sure not to disappoint thee, I promise little i^ this
Sermon, but the Subject, the extraordinary occasion, the Orthodoxy, the plain,
open Honesty, and Zeal, without intemperate heat: If thou find something,
which may be of good use, and (for the temper) proper and seasonable (as some
would persuade me) I repent not my well meant few days labor, most gladly
would I bestow, and be bestowed, If in the least I may be profitable.

I never cared (as all who have known me, can witness) to wrap up, and hood my
self, as shy of discovering what I am, and now it will appear, I am no
Changeling, though one, who would sacrifice himself for the Unity or Gods
Church.

I would give thee a little further advertisement; For that Generation of men,
who are haters of Ministers Toto genere, who are for a (...), nothing less
then utter extirpation of us; and who, if they were Basilisks (as they are
Serpents) would look us dead; These I do either roughly treat, or slightingly
pass by: Disingenuity, is the (...) Vis plastica; And what can Ingenuity, or
reasoning prevail upon such? As for the other sort, who face us, and with the
mustered Forces of their pretended Gifts, do invade our Pulpits, and pull away
the Cushion from us: We stand and admire not them, but the infinite patience of
God, who plucketh not his right hand out of his bosom, to consume, such
uncommissioned undertakers; He judge between them, and us (whom he has been
pleased to separate, and call near unto himself) Whether their taking our
Censers, and holding forth, be upon any warrant, or no; I am sure it will be
hard for them to plead, what We can. I am vvilling to suppose thee a sober
Well-wisher to a fixed Ministry, and I hope, one who do solicit God, in thy
Prayers, for us who are beset with so many, and those unreasonable Adversaries;
In lieu of those Prayers, take our blessing with thee, that God would give thee
such Wisdom, as is most needful to guide, and direct thee, in the worst, and
most perilous times, that thou may steer an even, safe course, without
danger of making Shipwreck of thy Faith and good Conscience, till thou arrive
in thy wished Haven, In sinu Abrahae, out of all the still new threatening
Storms, of this tempestuous evil World.

Gods appearing for the Tribe of LEVI.
NUMB. 17.8. And it came to pass, that on the Morrow Moses went into the
Tabernacle of witness, And behold the Rod of Aaron for the house of Levi was
budded, and brought forth Budds, and bloomed Blossoms, and yielded Almonds.


A Good day, and happy design of our solemn Meeting, a Meeting not of Vanity
but Piety, not (...), to make a show of our selves, to number our Tribe, that
it may be spoken how many of the Lords people, are Sons of the Prophets; but in
singleness of heart, to present and dedicate our selves unto the God of our
Fathers: We are come up hither, Psalm. 122.4.
as the Tribes to the Temple at Jerusalem, Even the tribes of the Lord, unto
the Testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the Name of the Lord: And blessed
be his Name, who takes pleasure in the prosperity of his Servants, and has
given us this occasion of a free and solemn Convention.

Micha 3.11.
People in this Age, love to talk of Gods appearings for them, Fondly leaning
upon him, and saying, Is not the Lord amongst us? But let the House of Levi now
say, The Lord has appeared for us of a truth; and, Ps. 62.24.
It is well seen O God, how thou go, how thou our God, and King, go in
the Sanctuary: He has appeared, I say, both for his Priesthood, under the Law,
and for his Ministers under the Gospel; and this have I prepared to entertain
you with (which the Lord has brought suddenly to me) and I hope it will prove
savoury meat, that a blessing may follow it; How God did manifest his especial
favor to the House of Levi, in the Signal Election of Aaron, the Head, and
Prince of the Tribe.

The Text points us to look back to what had passed before, Romans 8.7.
and there we find, that as Sin took occasion by the Law to work evil in the
Apostle, so here Mercy took occasion by wickedness and rebellion to work good,
to magnify and exalt it self. A Mutiny was kindled, by some hot headed men,
levelling Spirits, and Pretenders to Giftednesse, against their Governors,
Moses and Aaron; they put themselves forward in a pretended zeal, to give a
check to the incroachment of the Priest upon them, in an assumed peculiarity of
Office, in setting up a Pale, where all (as they thought) should be Common:
Corah the Ringleader, gets many Accomplices to second him, no less then two
hundred and fifty Captains of Israel, they together, take stomach, roundly to
tell their Leaders, that they took too much upon them, that they acknowledged
no such difference to be made between them and others: If they were anointed,
yet the people also had an Unction of Holiness, and would allow no such
discrimination, as their arrogance made: Thus early did the humor of striving
with the Priest begin, that we may not wonder at it now; no small
discouragement was this to Aaron, especially, when he considered who they were
that maligned him, even of his own Tribe, of Levi, for so I find them to have
been, associated with some Reubenites, indeed the Levites did rise against
Aaron, and the Reubenites against Moses. The Quarrel grew hot, and the Issue
was easily foreseen to be the worst confusion, and reasoning the matter with
unreasonable men, would not compose and end it, some extraordinary Expedient
was necessary to stop the Train, before it went far: It was time for Moses to
consult God, yea, for God also, to lay to his hand, to arise and show himself,
when thus his Priesthood was invaded; and such an Issue is devised, to which
the matter should be put, as the Mutiniers could not but confess just and
reasonable, and should find most convictive of their Insolency, Censers to be
taken by both, and so the Controversy to be decided from Heaven, by a Glory
resting upon that part, which God should own, so it was. But the conviction of
such Wretches, was not enough, Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right?
It was fit, that the Honor of God which now suffered, should be magnified in
their exemplary punishment, and that by his immediate hand, a discrimination
should be made, between those whom he had called near unto himself, and others,
who would not own any: And behold, that the World might take notice, they were
judged un worthy to tread upon Gods earth, who had no more regard to his Sacred
Institution, the earth cleaves under them, becomes an open Sepulcher, and
swallows them up alive, with no intention to cover their Fault, when it
covered their persons.

Their personal punishment was not enough neither, aftertimes might forget
any such judgment, or mis-report it. Corahs Spirit might rise again in others,
and raise new disturbances; to prevent that danger, God would give the people a
visible, and lasting sign, in what particular Tribe, the Priesthood should
rest, a Rod must be brought for every Tribe, and the name of the chief of every
Tribe written upon it: and that Rod of the twelve (all being laid up together
in the Tabernacle) which should be found to blossom, and flourish, that should
give a clear evidence, and put it out of all dispute, for succeeding times, out
of which Tribe, and what particular man was designed, and pitched upon by God,
for his Priest: It was done accordingly, and then the Text comes in, And it
came to pass, etc. Now that this Text may be to us, according to the subject
of it, a Rod budding and bringing forth, not Blossoms only, but Fruit also, let
us make the best improvement of it we may, and let your thoughts be exercised
upon the History the Mystery
of it.

The History, what more remarkable passages are in that?

The Mystery, how useful, pertinent, and applicable with us?

What then are the more remarkable things of the Story?

1. Aarons Rod budds, consider the several Rods, when laid up, they were all
alike, one as little promising as another, the Characters as fairly written, of
the names of the rest, as of Aarons, and yet behold, as visible a difference
appears between them, as between a living, growing, Fruitful Branch, and a
bundle of dry sear sticks: Do we look into nature for a reason of this, that
was quite non-plust: It could not work beyond the Sphere of its activity, and
did as much forbid one Rod to flourish, as another. Can a Rush grow without
Mire? Job 11. John 5.
A Branch that is cut off grow, except it abide in the Vine? In the natural
imposibility of this, lies the strength of our Saviors Argument, and
Application.

But we easily overlook nature in this, that God, who at first made all things
to have a being out of nothing, could well make this Rod to budd, without
earth, Or moisture, or other helps, and advantages: It is not now so ingenious
to ask, How could this thing be? As why? and that is as easily answered; All
Israel were representatively in these twelve Rods, and it was necessary, a
difference should be made, the other twelve Princes standing in competition,
and thinking themselves as well qualified for the Priesthood, as he who was
invested with it; Now surely those Princes believed the Priesthood to be the
greatest honor, who made this the height of their emulous ambition, and were
in good hopes they should have carried it, they would not else have had their
names put into this Divine Lottery, written in several Rods. And necessary it
was in that juncture of time, that some one Rod should keep life in it self,
and how vainly should they be Competitors any longer, against whom God did thus
manifestly appear.

2. Aarons Rod does not only bud, but blossom, putting forth it self, and
giving proof of its germination; Nature is slow, and leasurely in its
productions, the most lively branches which continue in the Tree, cannot make
Buds and Blossoms at once, how much less a twig cut off from the sap that
nourished it; We must therefore conclude, the finger of God was here, there was
something more then ordinary in Aarons Blossoming Rod: It was of an Almond
Tree, according to that in the Prophet Jeremies Vision, I see the Rod of an
Almond Tree; Ier. 1.11.
The Original word comes from (...) Vigilare and Festinare, to a wake, and to
make have, because the Almond Tree is the first in the Spring, that awakes and
hastens to put forth it self: And most elegantly does the Royal Preacher set
forth the gray hairs of venerable old Age, by the Blossoms of the Almond
Tree, Eccl. 5.12.
The Almond Tree shall flourish, the Blossoms of that being white, and coming
out soonest: But the Story here shows us a production too quick for the Almond
Tree also, though the quickest of all, justly marvelous in our eyes, Buds and
Blossoms in one night, what a quick Spring was this? Here I would give a hint
to our suddenly gifted and illuminated Brethren, if they would be pleased to
take it; Though Aarons Rod did bud and blossom in a night, his Qualifications
for his Office did not come so suddenly, both his inward acquired and not
infused Abilities, Exodus 29.35.
and his outward Calling and solemn Anointing and Consecration for seven days
together, do all show, too much have may be made into the Priesthood: And what
can I say to those Novices, against whose admittance the Apostle entered his
Caveat, who will needs be in Aarons Office before their Buds be come forth.

3. Aarons Rod, did not only bloom Blossoms, but also yielded Almonds, not
only gave hopes, and promises, and Earnest of Fruit, but the fruit expected,
and that not overhastned, but kindly, and come to due maturation: This was the
height of the wonder, Buds, Blossoms, ripe Fruits, and all within so little a
time, as a night; who sees not in these several productions, both satisfaction
given, to that present age, in the Fruit, a sure proof of Aarons Calling to
the Priesthood, and security given to Posterity, for constant succession, in
the Buds and Blossoms, which did tell what fruit should come in after times,
from the same Stock. Of these Almonds much good use may be made, many ways; we
content our selves now with this; There is no such good, and sure proof, of
the calling of God, as Fruitfulness.

Some more weak and scrupulous sheep of Christ's Flock, do stand looking upon
their Pastor, and question his Calling, to take the care of them when they
should be feeding; they scruple whether their Ministers be lawfully called to
the oversight of them, though never so duly ordained, when they might find it
by their own Improvement; let that scruple cease: If with right Ordination
(and the continued practice of the Church determines what that is) there be
fruitfulness in their Ministry, if there be on their part laboriousnesse,
watchfulness, desire to approve themselves to the consciences of men,
endeavor to gain souls unto God; if they be Doctrinall men (as Doctor Donns
word was) (...), Living Laws, their lives, sound Commentaries upon their
Doctrine, these be evidences enough, here be Almonds upon Aarons Rod.

And in this will we make our free appeals to God, to judge between us, the
legally ordained Ministers of the Church of England, and whosoever our
opposers; If we have not fruit to show of our Callings, which Gifted pretenders
shall vainly boast of, if there be not, in all places where we have been
settled, some seals of our Ministry, Epistles, and Letters of Commendation of it
to be produced; if men have not thrived happily, under our labors, and been
fitted for Heaven, if Christ's Kingdom be not more advanced by us, then it can
be by any of those Invaders of our Ministry, then let Heaven and Earth be
witnesses against us, let us be razed out of the land of the living; yea, we
may boldly make the imprecation, Let the earth do by us, as it did by Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, even swallow us up quick.

But stay, Fruits so extempore, so soon ripe, as these Almonds on Aarons Rod,
might perhaps as soon wither; not so, they were kindly, and lasting, by this
good token, That for perpetual memory, both the Rod and Fruit, were kept in
the Ark of God: And in this (if it be fit to make comparisons between them)
says a Reverend Auther; This Rod of Aaron, had the pre-eminence above that of
Moses, though that did very great Miracles, yet the wonders which it did,
passed away: But this carried still the Miracle in it self, and so was a most
precious Relic: And that the Fruit should continue upon it, and that be
continued in the Ark, was also most necessary, for a sign of the perpetually
succession of the Priesthood.

By the way, If we had then lived, and should have seen the Ark rifled, the
Buds, Blossoms, and Almonds (all the good Ornaments of the Rod) plucked off, and
the Rod it self broken, would we not have shaked our heads at it? If any of
Levi especially should have been accessory to the mischief, would we not have
cried shame upon them? It is well considered by a Master of Contemplation, who
spends good thoughts upon this Subject, what comfort Aaron must needs take, to
see his Rod among all the rest, thus flourishing, and fruitful, what a good
Assurance he saw in this, of Gods gracious Election, and Approbation of him;
And what a satisfaction is it, to us also, whom God has called nearer to
himself, to knows, what ample Testimony he has given to our sacred Calling.
And who shall make my Glorying vain. If I now take a fit occasion, (...), Romans
11.13.
(as the Apostle) to magnify and speak big words of our holy Office: After so
much Dirt, and Contempt, as has been cast upon our Coat, let none call, what I
shall bring for the honor of it, swelling words of vanity, but a just
vindication, and Apology.

To the stopping of the mouths of all our Vilifiers and Contemners; We will
plead the high dignity of our Office, and to the Conviction of all such, as do
suggest our uselesnesse, the high necessity and importance of it.

1. For the Dignity of it first, who can deny, that in the beginning of the
World, for many hundreds of years, the Kingdom and Priesthood did concur in
the same person, and when they were severed, were divided between two brethren,
Moses and Aaron. To Minister before the Lord, was the Prerogative of the
Firstborn: And how observable is it, that the Spirit of God supposes Royalty
annexed unto the Priesthood, Exodus 19.6.
Ye are a Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9. ((...) and so the Sept. renders that,
Exodus 19.6. Ye shall be unto me, a Kingdom of Priests: As if to be Royal
without the Priesthood, were not Dignity enough, (...), etc. To Reign as a
Monarch, and to Officiate as a Priest, these are properly inherent in the same
person, Arist. pol. 10.
says Aristotle.

And that even among Heathens, the Priests were in the highest Esteem, and
Veneration, is a State Truth.

Among the Egyptians, (...) Grace with tne precious Crown of Priesthood, Isid.
petufiot. 2. lib. ep. 291.
Is Isid. pelusiots of them; And that they were (...), Next to the Prince, in
dignity, and Authority, Di. Siculus assures us, Diod. siculus.
That they were so among the Greeks known, by the several names, of (...),
their Authors give us full account.

In what high strains the Greek Fathers speak of this Function, is obvious to
all that read them, (...) the excelling Priesthood, is St. Chrysostomes
language of it, (...), the greatest of all Ornaments, Nazianzen calls it,
(...), is S Cyrills, a thing honorable and great in Gods esteem; And those,
who are in this Office, Council sardic. Can. 20.
to be (...) venerable, and to be looked upon with most respect; nay, a Counsel
gives it this Elogy, (...), The name of Priesthood to be Divine, and in the
first place, to be reverenced. Has our Profession been set so high, and have
we lived to see it, in a Christian reformed Nation, scorned, and laid as low as
the dust? The name of Priest, cast as a reproach? this is not more the
Atheism, then the Folly, and weakness of men, to make that a term of scorn,
which we have reason to bind as a Crown to us. I would feign know, how, or
when, the name of Priest (though we do not affect it under the Gospel, with
judicious Hooker, Christus sacerdos quoad (...), in Terris quoad (...) in
Celis, Attingius,
we acknowledge it antiquated, and improper now) when (I say) this name of
Priest, fell so low, as to become most vile and contemptible? What? was it,
when our Lord and Savior himself was pleased to own it? A Priest for ever;
They are deceived, that think to put us out of Countenance, with giving us a
name of greatest honor; we will bear this after Christ, not as out Cross,
our Burdens, our shame, but our best Eusigne of Honor: We all will join with
the Apostle, (...), (...), Romans 1.16.
I am not ashamed of my Office; And in that word of his, Minus dicitur, plus
intelligitur, the Apostle meant more, then he expressed, I am not ashamed, was,
not only, I blush not for the Gospel, I account not my employment in it, no
disparagement, but, Vehementer glorior, Romans 15.20.
I exceedingly glory in it, according to that in another place, (...), In which
is employed, this was his Ambition, this he would contend for, as for a
Preferment, as an honor from God; When God commanded his people to be numbered
in every Tribe, he appointed all the other Tribes, to be numbered from twenty
years upwards as you find. Number. 1.3.
But of the Tribe of Levi, the numeration to be from a month upwards, When they
were in Fasciis, Oleaster.
and lay in their Cradles. One asks the reason of this, and answers, Agnosce
Sacerdos, quanti te Deus fecerit, See, O thou, who out of that Tribe art called
to the Priests Office, how much thou art beholding to God, above others. I must
change the Note Agnosce Sacerdos, quantilli te vulgus fecerit. What esteem God
has of us (of our office at least) I wish, people would consider from hence,
how he takes the Allitude of men's wickedness from their Offenses against us;
This is reckoned as the great aggravation against his people, and brought as a
sign of their imminent ruin: This people are as they that strive with the
Priest, Hos. 4.4.
Or rebuke the Priests; Nay not reverencing their persons was guilt enough,
They reverenced not the person of the Priests, slandering them, is made to be a
kind of blasphemy ((...)) Is the Apostles word: Lam. 4.16. Romans 3.8.
And he that despises you, despises me, says our Lord and Master; And how
ill the Affronts, and Indignities offered to Priests and Prophets have sped,
and prospered, On John.
The Observation is offered to us, by Reverend Mr. Hildersham, and exemplyfied
in four Kings of Judah, not far one from another, who in the beginning of
their Raigns were excellent Princ^s, and prosperous: 2 Chronicles. 16. 12. 24. 21.
25. 27. 26. 19.
But after the violences, and dishonours they did unto such, they never
prospered, but came to ill ends; The instances are, Asa, Joash. Amaziah, Vzzia.
I must refer you to their Story, and I take my self off, from insisting any
longer upon the Dignity of our Office, in which I may quite lose my self.

2. The second thing was the Importance of it, how high that is, of what use we
are, let the Apostle be our Speaker, Let a man so account of us, 1 Cor. 4.1.
as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God. ((...))
as Stewards, without which, such a Family as Gods is, cannot be well
administered; Occomonos sociosque Dei. 2 Cor. 5.20.
And so Ignatius calls us (...), Elsewhere, We are Ambassadors for Christ. That
is an employment, not of more honor, then use, In reference to which it was
said, that we do Causam agere generis humani, We are Agents with God, for men.

Our blessed Savior gives us the name of (...), Matthew. 5.14.
The light of the World, and so S. Chrysostom, (...), like the light of
Heaven, enlightening the Universe: What do they then, that quench this light,
that put us under Eushels? In the Verse before, he called us the Saelt of the
Earth; That, V. 13.
which seasons all, What have they done, who have cast so many of us out upon
the Dunghill? He says, that we are, as a City on a Hill, in open view; sure
then we are not so obscure, and inconsiderable, as we are made: yea, indeed, as
Beacons on a Hill; so we are still where we stand weather-beaten, the Winds from
every quarter blowing hard upon us; Nazianzen gives us the names of (...), Heb.
1.14.
Ministering persons, as the Angels are Ministering Spirits, sent forth to
minister for them, who shall be Heirs of Salvation: Another Greek Father, that
we are (...), Gods Interpreters, and (...), Procuratores magni Regis, so Valens
and Valentinian did call Ministers. Theodoret.


Now in which of these names is it, that we are supposed to be useless
supernumerary Creatures? that may well be spared, and men have no need of us?
let people consider us in all changes of times.

1. In times of peace, when all things are quiet, we are (...), Shepherds, To
lead Gods Flock into the green Pastures, and by the still waters: And can the
Sheep well want their Shepherds?

2. In times of danger, we are Watchmen, to stand upon the Watchtower of the
Lord, to give warning of evils coming, Isa. 62.6.
To tell what of the night. I heve set Watchmen upon thy Walls O Jerusalem:
And is there any safety and true security, where no Watch is kept?

3. In times of War, of the greatest use, Charriots and Horsemen: Indeed, some
of us have been but too serviceable this way, God forgive their activenesse.

4. In times of Seduction, Guides, Reducers of them, who are too easily
whistled away, Hunters of the little Foxes, Jesuits, Sectaries: And I appeal
to every ones experience, did they dare to look abroad, to forage and play
about, as they do, while our Ministry was in its due power?

And here to all Antiministeriall Spirits (perhaps some may be within hearing)
unto whom we are such eye-sores, and who would insinuate us, to be such
Ciphers, I offer this to be chewed upon:

Whereas they would carry the face, and name of men of Godliness, whether they
can show us, any truly godly persons, that ever appeared against a fixed
Ministry? Whereas they would seem to be men of Prudence, and Reason, whether
they can show us, any rational sober persons that have opposed it? I am sure
the Apostle sets forth the Opposers of it, by such Characters, as they have no
reason to be proud of:

1 To be (...), And let them take their choice of the signification of that,
either, wicked, and vicious, or troublesome: 2. To be (...), Absurd men, of no
Topics; And 3. (...), men of no Logic, not to be reasoned, or disputed with
(and who ever gained any thing, by entering into the Lists with them) and from
such, the Apostle begs the prayers of his Thessalonians, to be delivered, and
so do we; Nay, 2 These. 3.2.
he has another term for them, if they like it, (...), Men of sick brains,
as well as of corrupt minds. 2 Timothy 3.8.


And that We, or our Fathers, should be opposed or set against, made (...), as
a sign to be spoken against; We have no reason either to wonder, or complain,
when we consider,

1. How much our betters have the same lot with us; when I read that sad place,
He pours contempt upon Princes, My hand is upon my mouth, Psalm. 107.40.
it may well be so with us: Nay, when we look higher to the Prince of peace,
that Divine Preacher (who spoke as never man spoke) and consider, Heb. 12.3.
what contradictions of sinners he endured against himself.

2. When we consider what our enemies are, such as we heartily pity, wishing
unto them, Sanam nemtem.

3. When we consider, what our work and Office is, Predicare nihil aliudest,
quam derivaere in se furorem mundi, says Luther: To Preach, is nothing else,
but to chafe, and bait the World; and we may expect no other, but it will turn
against us: Our work is, (...), as Nazianzen excellently; To snatch away as
much as we can from the World, and to give it to God.

And because I see, there are (...), many Adversaries, our Ministry is hard
beset, by Papists on one hand, and Sectaries on the other, I cannot but borrow
a few Sands of my hour, to Apologize.

The Romanist first, clamours upon our Ministry, as polluted, because married,
and they look upon us, a Solecisme, an absurdity in nature, Sons of Ministers,
are as so many Injussa gramina, unbidden, illegitimate births, even as bad as
Pope Joanes issue: We are therefore most nearly concerned, to take off this
blot from our Fathers, and our selves; Indeed, it we could not till now,
justify our Births to be lawful, it would be somewhat too late to plead it;
if we be Weeds, We are overgrown weeds in his Garden of Gods Church: But if
(after such able Advocates, as we have, had to plead our Case) we have not
enough to justify a married Clergy, let us be used as Bastards, cast out, and
denied entrance into the Congregation of the LORD. Deuteronomy. 23 2.


That under the Law, the Fathers were married, no question is made, they were
only too much proofs, in their Poligamy; under the Gospel also, there was a
universal, unrestrained lawfulness of marriage, else the Apostle would never
have called the interdiction of this common liberty, 1 Timothy 4.1.
A doctrine of Devils, as he does, That place does not only warrant our
liberty, but sticks a black Brand of Diabolicalnesse upon them, who will not
allow it, let them claw it off as well as they can.

The Apostle was also (...) indeed, Acts. 17.18.
(as the Epicureans and Stoics called him) a Trifler, a Sower of words to
little purpose, when he gave that Caution, That a Bishop should be the Husband
of one Wife; If he was not allowed any, 1 Timothy 3.
That he should have his Children in due subjection: If their Marriages were
Trespasses, and their Children -- spuria vitulamina.

Strangely, and most unadvisedly, Heb. 13.4.
did he proclaim Marriage to be honorable in all, without any Restrictions; If
to Ministers it were unclean, what would he bring them into a snare?

Will holy precedents add any more authority, and license of marrying to us?
The Apostles were most of them (if not all) married men, Peter, Phillip, yea,
Paul also; If besides hints to this purpose in Scripture, which makes it not
improbable: 1 Cor. 9.5. ad Phillad.
Clemens Alex and Ignatius be of credit.

Will the course of Antiquity from the Apostles carry it? We provoke our
Adversaries to disprove us, that till the Counsel of Nice, the liberty of
Marriage did continue, inviolable: By this Token, that when some of the Fathers
there, proposed, to have a binding decree of Continency, Socrates, lib. 1.
ocap. 80.
Socrates calls it a new Law, which they would bring into the Church; And
Paphnutius, eminent for his Piety (one who suffered the pulling out of one of
his eyes in persecution, and was so honored by Constantine, that he kissed the
empty place, where his eye had been) who was no married man neither, and
therefore the fitter to be heard in this case, cried out with vehemence, that
they ought not, to lay that heavy yoke upon men of the Church; And his zealous
denying the Proposition, prevailed to stop it.

An. 860.
Yea, this liberty (though shaken) continued in suspense, under Nicholas 1.
witness that famous Epistle of Huldericus, Bishop of Auspurg, to him,
reasoning the case strongly with him, unto which the Adversaries are referred,
by the Irrefragable Apologist for our married Clergy.

An. 1080. Huntingdon Hist. edit salit, p. 378. Caietan Opusc. Tom. 1.
And that Anselme was the first, who in a Synod here in London, forbad
marriages in England, to Ecclesiastical persons, we refer to clear account of
Story. But we content not our selves with this neither, we have the ingenious
acknowledgments of their own best Champions against them, Noc ratione, nec
authoritate probatur? quod absolute loquendo, Saecerdos peccet contrahendo
matrimonium.

Panormit. de clero conjug. cap. cum Olim.
But Panormitan their Lawyer, and a Cardinal also, speaks more fully and
honestly, Credo pro b ono, and salute animarum esset, ut volentes possint
matrimonium contrahere: And the shuffling of them among themselves, they being
no way agreed upon their Verdict; Some saying, that the marriage of Clergy men
is forbidden, Jure divino, Bellermine thinks that too high: Others, Apostolico:
Gratean, sees not that neither; Others, Positivo, and mero humano: This
division makes their report less valued, by any indifferent Judge. And what
need we any further prescription to bear out our Clergy Marriages, when we
have so many Famous holy Bishops both in the Eastern and Western Churches, that
were married, I shall seem vain in naming them, I only take notice of
Nazianzen, Naz in carminibus de ciia sua.
who witnesses, that he was born of a Bishop: Nay, Eonifacius, a Bishop of
Rome, Patrem habut presbyterum, says Platina, I could easily forgive the zeal
of these good men, in their declarations against marriage, if I did not find
them more loose, Citat. a Rev. Ep. Davenantio in Determ.
and favorable to Fornication, if it had not been said by Pighius and
Costerus, Toleravilius est in Saceradote, si fornicationem admittat, quam si
ducat Vxorem: In their Court of Conscience, Fornication is a venial sin, but
marriage a mortal; Indeed not so deadly, but his holiness may dispense with
it: And here is the mystery of iniquity, the Popes assumed this power of
forbidding Clergy Marriages, Ibid. ex Aquinate.
Vt dispensare possent de voto Celibatus.

But why do we look so far abroad as Rome, for Adversaries, when we have so
many at home, and even in the midst of us: our Ministry may say With David,
They came about me like Bees, Ps. 118.12. Exodus 11.7.
O that we could add, And are extinct: Against any of the Children of Israel
shall not a Dog move hit tongue, or bark; Against us in our whole
Ecclesiastical Order, there has been continual barking, Martin Mar-prelate,
and Mar-Priest also, is still alive; let me familiarly express our Condition,
Since the time of our not peevish, and voluntary, but enforced drawing off from
Rome, in our Reformation, much like Hagars departure from Sarah, driven away by
her impeciousnesse: The Seperatists, and Papists, have been playing at Tennis,
and our Hierarchy, and Ministry, are the Balls they toss; The Seperatist aims
to strike us into the Popes Hazard, calling us Antichristian; and look, how
many Bishops we have had, so many Popes; (It is well Pope Cranmer, Pope
Latimer, Pope Ridley come in to the number.) The Papist, with vehemence
Rackets us back again, as Schismatic, and Heretical, and ill is it with
us, which soever vvins the Game: Our Brother Anabaptist (St. Francis was so
mannerly, that he used to call every Beast Brother, as our Quakers now, are
pleased to call us Fellow Creatures) And we pity both the one and the other,
saying, Lord have mercy on him for he is Lunatic: the Anabaptist (I say)
shoots out his forked Arrows against us (those are his Arguments) bitter words:
but shall I Apologize? Nay, let him alone, let him empty his Quiver, without
our harm; And let not this day be clouded, with any complaints, or passionate
reflections, though I might turn about, and say, Is then not a cause? A better
improvement will be made, of the little remainder of Time, in some safe, and
seasonable words of Counsel; and six words will comprise what I would
commend to you, as I do to my self.

Be Thankful. Be Regular. Be Circumspect. Be Steadfast. Be Moderate. Be
Charitable.
1. Be thankful, Seems it a small matter, said Moses to those Mutenous
Levites in the Context, Numb. 16.9.
That God has separated you from the congregation of Israel, to bring you near
to himself? So, is it a small matter, that, God has made us Apostolici seminis
Frutices, in Tertullians Language, Branches of and Apostolical holy Stock?
That we have had the Advantages both of stricter Education and better Example?

2. Is it a small matter, that in us, Genesis 27.27.
(whose smell is as the smell of a Field which the Lord has blessed) not a
little of that reproach, is this day taken off, which has lain upon the Issue,
and Posterity of Ministers, as forlorn, unblest, and destitute, exposed, and
left like the Ostriches Eggs in the earth, Job 39.14.
for the dust to warm them, and to pass all hard adventures, that the foot may
crush them, or that the wild Beast may break them: We shall be most ungrateful,
and unworthy, if we acknowledge not a particular providence over us, yea, if we
deny, that our Parents leave us rich Heirs, when they leave us Heirs of Gods
Blessing: The Blessing of the Lord, it is that which makes rich: Pro. 10.12.
Who accounts not Jacob the richer, and more blessed, Genesis 32. 10.
because he began with so little: With my Staff, came I over this Jordan, and
now I am become two Bands.

How many now present may say so? and (I am confident) they do with hearts
lifted up unto God, with such a small stock, yea, with nothing did I begin, and
now am I become Wealthy. Those, who cannot go so high, have a competency
proportionable to the way of Trade they are in, and may say, I have enough my
Brother, and he who has enough is rich: Let both sorts give God his due Glory.
Thus the rich man's Wealth will be kept from melting, and thus the meaner Estate
will grow, and multiply.

My second words is, Be regular, answerable to the Extraction.

Thucydid. lib. 4.
(...), walk worthy of this honorable City, whereof you are Members, and
worthy of the Parents from whom you descended: Think it not enough to say, We
have Abraham to our Father: Our Fathers were good men, faithful in all Gods
House, of Worth and Reputation, shining in their Orbs, as Stars of a fair
Magnitude; (...), having their bright Lamps of good practice burning, and their
silver Trumpets of good Doctrine sounding: What is this to us? What, to be the
Issue of them who are the light of our Israel, if we walk not as Children of
light? What for Hophni and Phineas, to be the Sons good Eli the high Priest, if
they be lewd, and graceless, and scandalous, making men not only to loath the
Offering of the Lord, but even all then who offer also, Malo sacerdotatem virum
Syd. A. pollin.
supposed to be as bad as themselves: We know the change laid upon our Parents,
To rule their own house well, to have their Children in subjection with all
gravity. Does it not then lie upon us, to approve our selves so, should we not
all be, Viri sacerdotales; Clerical men, having the Graces of our Fathers, to
shine in us, as those precious Stones did on Aarons Breastplate: Next to a
debaucht scandalous Minister, which I acknowledge to be the greatest eye-soare
in the World; The light which he holds forth, being like a burning Taper in the
hand of a Ghost, of a Devil, making him look but so much the more ghastly, and
affrighting: His filthy Conversation is like the steam of a Dunghill, so much
more noisome, and offensive, by how much it is more gilded with the beams of
the Sun upon it: Next to this I say, is the scandalous Son of a good Minister,
he throws dirt in his Fathers Face, if he be alive, and abuses his Ashes if he
be dead; To be the Son of a Religious Minister, and of Belial too, 2 Calab.
this is -- (...), I hope I need not press this any further, J would much
rather say with the Apostle, I joy in beholding your Order: And -- (...), May
no irregular dissolute persons, be reckoned of our Tribe.

3. Be wise and circumspect, Brethren, 2 Timothy 3. ^. 1.
we are cast to live in the dregs of time, (...), In the last days; Not
perhaps, so at the very bottom, That J should undertake to tell you, the end
of the World is falling upon us, this next year J cannot see that in the
Stars, nor by any Apocalypticall Calculations, though some (who are more
sagacious) think they do: But in times so near the last, that they are visibly
worse, and more Apostaticall then the former worse? J mean, more perilous, and
more wicked. Both do enforce our circumspect walkings; If not to make the
days better (which we should aim to do) yet, that they may not make us worse;
Evil times do call for double Prudence, that we may neither be taken in to the
Whirpools of danger, nor carried down the stream of ungodliness; certainly
never was there such need of the Serpents wisdom and the Doves Innocence, to
keep Integrity and Indemnity together, To resolve -- (...), I will be honest
and righteous, and discharge a good conscience, Eccles. 7.16.
and yet not righteous overmuch neither, so hotly and indiscreetly, and
peevishly, as to be doing mischief, to tempt, trouble, Why should I destroy my
self? (...), live close, and retired, so as to keep nearest Communion with God,
and to have least to do with the World: This I do magnify, and account, the
Apex, the top of wisdom.

4. Be steadfast, not Giddy, and Virtiginous, This Age has been taken with an
unhappy Vertigo, which has made men not keep the ground they first stood upon;
shall I add inoffensively (while I speak inter nos, and only of our selves)
There has been a wanton delight, to be meddling, trying experiments, and
ringing of Changes -- Quieta movere merces magna videbat, Salust.
yea, so distemperd have some been, that like the intoxicated man, who (the
liquor being busy in his brain) fancyed himself at Sea, Athenaeus.
in a great Storm, in present danger of Shipwreck, and thought there was a
necessity of lightning the Ship, and throwing some of the lading over board,
and so threw the Goods of the House out at the Windows; So, I say, have some
fancyed a present necessity, of abolishing, and throwing away, what they would
have done better to have kept; But the worst sicklenesse, and novelty has
been, Growing weary of old Truths (as well as old Establishments) and espousing
new fond opinions, Forsaking the ancient paths, Ier. 18.15.
wherein the Prophet advises us to walk, and choosing to go in paths not cast
up, yea, good God! how many ways have many been lost? Some proving Apostates
to God, and Religion, rellishing the Cup of Romes enchantment, and making
themselves drunk with it, so that that Scarlet Whore, can openly brag of the
numerous List of her new Proselites, and Servants, though they are such indeed,
for the most part, that we could well spare them, and care not to Lure them
back again. Others crumbling away into Conventicles, Jer. 12.9.
ready to join with every frantic Sect, and so making Gods Israel to become a
speckled Bird of several Colors, of all varieties of Religions: O what Rivers
can wash off that deep scandal, which sticks upon this late glorious, and most
Uniform, but now miserably deformed, and even Antic Church, for which we may
thank the Giddiness of men; well, but while others have gone away after
strange delusions: Believe you, J beseech you, that you hear Christ calling to
us especially who are the Sons of his Teachers in Israel, Will ye also go
away?

Of all, it will be most to our shame, and to the shame of our Fathers house,
if while they were strong Pillars in the house of God, we prove our selves
Weather-cocks, turned about with every wind.

If we who are Branches of the firm Cedars, shall show our selves, as the
soft bending Willowes, of no strength, or Consistency; O let us remember, the
best Inheritance our Fathers could leave us, were their Principles, and let us
not (upon any terms) part with our Inheritance.

2 Timothy 1.5.
The Apostle well insinuates with his young Timothy, telling him, he was
persuaded that the same Faith which dwelt in his Grandmother Lois, and his
Mother Eunice, was in him also, I do not press this that we should all be of
the same Religion, that our Grandmothers were of, because, it was their
Religion; but our inheritance of sound Faith from our Fathers, is the same that
his was, from his Mother and Grandmother, whosoever then be fickle and warping,
let us hold our own, and let our word be, (...), Ephesians. 3.17.
rooted and grounded in Faith.

5. Be Moderate, and Peaceable; after those unhappy divisions, for which there
has been and yet is such thought, such bleeding of heart, so many prayers and
tears poured out by good men, and which have cost so much precious blood, what
can be more seasonable and needful, then cementing Counsel? Ier. 32.
That all Gods Building (O when we shall see it) may be raised up, as of one
stone; By having Cor unum, and viam unam, one heart, and one way:

It is true, Christ's Coat has been miserably rent, in the whole cloth, as
well as in the fringe: Do not so much as ask, who made the Rent? let the world
judge of that. Do not suppose it hard to be drawn up, and made entire again:
Down with whatsoever Animosities, and study of parties, and pertinacy to keep
up, what has been set up, which have already given to growing Sectaries such
advantage, and to the Devil such occasion, to laugh and triumph: Let those ill
invented differential Terms, whereby we have been distinguished from each
other, be buried and swallowed up, in that name which will lead us all hand
in hand to Heaven, the name of Christians, J know, here are many of different
persuasion from me: But is there any here, whom J would not gladly accompany,
and zealously further toward Heaven? Why then should we not be friends in the
way? If my stomach, or any of yours, do rise against the name of Brotherly
Communion, which may consist with our several principles retained, not
differing in Substantials; God take down that Stomach, and make us to see how
much we are concerned, to keep the unity of the Spirit in bond of Peace, Phil.
4.5.
to make our moderation known unto all men, because the Lord is at hand.

Moderation, in what we may: And let me ask in one particular; Why should some
in the height of their zeal, for Liturgy, supposes there can be no Service of
God, but where that is entirely used?

Why should others again, think their piety concerned, and trespassed, if I do
prefer, and in some considerations, think sit to use a set form? There must be
Abatements and allowances of each other, a coming down from our Punctilio's, or
we shall never give up a good account unto God.

My last word is, Be Charitable; And a good close shall I make, if I maybe
heard effectually in this, which is indeed the grand motive and inducement of
our summoning one another this day; Not to feast our selves, who are full, but
to feed others, who are hungry and empty; We would this day pay our Vows of
thanksgiving in the great Congregation, for Gods visible blessing upon us, for
his goodness in letting our Lot fall in so fair ground, and so increasing our
Store. But if we would appear thankful, Exodus 23.15.
where is our thank-offering? No man should appear before the Lord empty: What
Present do we bring to show our readiness, of honoring the Lord with our
Substance? How can we but be damped in our enjoyment of the good things we
have? To see before our eyes, so many sad, and only too fit Objects of our
Commiseration? Venerable Wanderers, who ill become their condition; And the
Relicts of worthy Servants of God (sufferers for a good conscience) Eating
Ashes as bread, and mingling their drink, (if they have any) with weeping;
Their very Blessings, adding now to the burden of their unhappiness, their
Children in worse case then the young Ravens, which God feeds when they call
upon him: Psalm. 147.9.
And were they the Apostles, or are they not described Ministers, their
mournful Widows, and unprovided Children, that say to you, the wealthier
Citizens, here, 1 Cor. 4.8.
Now ye are full, now you are rich, we are weak, but ye are strong, ye are
honorable, but we are despised, even to this hour, we both hunger and thirst,
and are naked, and have no certain dwelling place.

As for me (and I think others are no less affected) It is my greatest
heart-aking, in the midst of all encouragements, which I desire to bless God
for, and it turns my Bowels within me, to have my Ears daily pierced, with
the cries and complaints of the poor and oppressed, the Widows and Orphans:
Those cries do pierce the Heavens, and if they cannot move us, what are we made
of? My Exhortation is, That those who have yet had none, would from this day
put on Bowels of Mercies: And those, Col. 3.12.
who find their Bowels troubled within them, would give case unto themselves,
by giving relief unto those, whose affliction, sympathy has made their own;
And may the rich blessing God follow them, and theirs, who have had it in their
heart and design, to make this a good day unto the Distressed, now if there
were need, I should provoke Charity; I would tell you,

1. While so many are in extreme Indigency, your Purses are not your own, you
are but Stewards and Almoners, not proprietors: And next unto drinking up the
Tears of Widows and Orphans, is, not drying them up, when it is in your power
to do it.

2. I would urge, it is the Infamy of this age, to have been all in the
Ablative case, good at taking away and making Beggars: It is high time we
should turn it into the Dative.

3. J would tell you, in moving for others, J do but exhort you to be good unto
yourselves, and yours, that you would increase your store, by this most
beneficial way of holy Usury; Indeed, when accounts shall be cast up, it
will be found that the poor are Benefactors unto the rich; You know how the
poor Widows little Meal and Oil increased in the spending, because spent (in
a way of charity) upon a Prophet. We shall do well to try the Experiment,
whether our giving out, not unto one Prophet, but many, Faithful,
Conscionable, Exemplary, unto the Widows of such, or their unprovided Children
(for these are the intended Objects of our compassion) and strict care will be
taken of the choice of these, and of the clean disposal of your charity, that
nothing may stick by the way in corcorrupt fingers) We shall do well, J say,
to make the experiment, whether our giving out unto such, will not bring more
in? It is J confess, a casting our Bread upon the waters, Eccl. 11.1.
where we would think it quite carried away, and lost; But we need not
mistrust, After many days we shall find it, with the greatest advantage: And
some of you (J am confident) do already find comfort of your Charity, privately
exercised; For, as other duties, so this especially, carries meat in its mouth,
as we say, the very work is a reward: J see in your Countenances, a cheerful
forwardness to the good motion, such as becomes you; yea, J am vvilling to
believe, that our zeal has provoked some others also, who are not strictly of
our Fraternity; If so, as their free will Offerings, will, J doubt not, come
up as a Memorial before God, so they shall not want the help and advantage
which our Prayers can give, that they may ascend and be accepted, and return
to their happy account.

I now vvind up all, as you desire the Rod of Aaron should flourish and bear
Fruit, that God should appear for his own Tribe, for a fixed Ministry; Appear
you (in your several capacities) for God: And let your thankfulness, your
Regular and Exemplary strictness of Conversation, your wise circumspection,
your grounded steadfastness, your free Charity, have their perfect work; And as
many, as thus resolve to do, Peace be on them and Mercy, and upon the Israel of
GOD.

FINIS.

