The Humble PETITION OF Many Officers lately drawn from the Army for the
service of IRELAND, In the behalf of themselves, and their Soldiers, TO HIS
EXCELLENCY Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Captain General of the Army raised by
Authority of both Houses of PARLIAMENT.

Showing the Reasons why, and how they were drawn off. With a Vindication of
themselves against the scandals raised by some of his Excellencies Army since
their drawing off.

Also, a Letter annexed from the General to the several Regiments inducing
them to engage in that Honorable and just war.

July 8th LONDON, Printed by E. Griffin. 1647.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, General of the Army raised by
the Authority of both Houses of PARLIAMENT, The humble Petition of the Officers
of the several Regiments lately drawn off Your Excellencies Army for the
service of Ireland: in the behalf of themselves and their Soldiers.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners formerly members of your Army, by your Excellencies
countenance and encouragement did draw off and engage our selves and soldiers
for the service of Ireland; and since that contrary to our expectation, and as
we humbly conceive, your Excellencies knowledge, there has been very high
affronts offered unto us by some of your Excellencies Army that came into our
quarters, and by a pretended authority from your Excellency, and a special
order from some of the chief Commanders in your Excellencies Army, as they
alleged, did ^t that time draw away many of our Soldiers, and have by false
and scandalous suggestions and misinformation endeavored to seduce, corrupt,
and draw away many more, as does appear by the late loss of five Companies,
and the great discouragement of all the rest from that service, which your
Excellency endeavored so much to promote, manifested by that never to be
forgotten expression which then fell from your Excellency; That rather then the
service of Ireland should be neglected or retarded, you would willingly traile
a Pike your self: And whereas it is by some persons or pamphlets spread
abroad, declaring that we deserted the Army merely on purpose to make a party
to stand in opposition to the Army, and so to involve and engage this Kingdom
in another bloody war: which our consciences tell us to the contrary; and to
give your Excellency and the world satisfaction, we call God the sear^^er of
^^l hearts to witness for us, that such a (...) never entered in, or came
near ou^ ^^^ug^^ neither do we know of any such incli^^^^^n (...) have had
such intimation from any of our superiors, or from any others in the whole
world.

We therefore make it our humble suite to your Excellency, That as we have all
along served your Excellency in your just undertakings for the welfare of this
Kingdom, with all integrity and fidelity, we may not now be looked upon as
enemies, but as well wishers to the peace of this Kingdom; and now ready, if
not obstructed, with our lives and fortunes to endeavor the relief of
bleeding Ireland. And to that purpose we further beseech your Excellency to
give command that no interception be made, or interruption given to any person
or persons employed to London or to the Parliament upon our affairs, by any of
your Excellencies Army, but that at all times free passage may be allowed to
your Petitioners,

And as in duty bound we shall pray for your Excellencies happiness, etc.
William Harbert, Colonel. John Melvin, Lieut-col. Richard Lundy, Major.
Captains.
Nathaniel Short Barthol. Helbye John Dunklin Charles Awbery Thomas Morgan
VVil. Mathews, Cap. Lieut. Lieut.
Thomas Vahan Walter Brough VVil. Hodskins Peter Winchester Richard Onyon
Edward Lo
Ensigns.
James Short William East William Hall Thomas Robins John Stamp John
Williams Math. Maderson Thomas Hodskins
Nich. Kempson, Col. Christ. Packham, Lieut. col. Fran. Dormer, Major. Capt.
Robert Fish Alexand. Frye Geo. Masters Abrah. Clerk Francis Wels Lindsey
Sbarples Stephen Coin John Bissill
Lieut.
Robert Dormer Thomas Moon Jarvis Marrey George Hope Timothy Clare
Ensigns.
Robert Chafe Andrew Fine^ Robert Batts Bryan Elton John Mackellan David
Hollan Robert Cloak



SIR,
WHereas at the last meeting of the Officers of this Army at Saffron Walden I
declared in the presence of the Lords and Commons Commissioners of Parliament
to all the Officers then present; as also to such Officers as have since that
time come to the Headquarters, that they should make known to their several
Regiments the intention of the Parliament to send a considerable force of such
of their Army that are willing to go into Ireland for the reducing of that
Kingdom, desiring them also to make known my desire to advance that service,
and to prevent any hinderance thereof; and that if any Officers stand not
disposed to engage in person in that employment, yet that they should promote
it, in making known my desire and the Votes of both Houses, for the
encouragement of such as should engage in that service: I do therefore desire
you to publish this Letter, together with the said Votes, by reading the same
unto your Regiment. In expectation whereof I remain

Walden, April 18. 1648. Your assured friend, FAIRFAX.

FINIS.

