THE HVMBLE PETITION OF THE BROVVNISTS.

Printed in the year. 1641.

THE HVMBLE PETITION OF THE AFFLICTED BRETHREN.
Humbly showing,
THat whereas there are so many different Religions now professed in England;
as your Honors well know, and that with grief no doubt, casting your eyes
upon the great confusion that thereby arises in the common wealth; every one
hoping and expecting that theirs alone shall be received and established by
this present and powerful high Court of Parliament and all others to be cast
forth abolished and prosecuted, which certainly would cause (if it be once
Decreed) a far greater confusion and coffeehouse.

For the timely prevention of which danger many hold it necessary, and humbly
desire, that you would take it into your deep considerations and profound
Judgments, whether it were not more convenient for this State, and more
grateful to the subjects to tolerate all professions whatsoever, every one
being left to use his own conscience, none to be punished or pesecuted for it.

There is no man that professes a Religion, but is in conscience persuaded
that to be the best wherein to save his soul, and can give no doubt some
reason, yea, and allege some authority out of the word of God for it, which is
an argument that not his will, but his Judgment is convinced, and therefore
holds it unreasonable, to be forced to follow other men's Judgments and not his
own in a matter of so great importance as that of his salvation is, which is
the only mark his tender soul aims at in his Religion, and for which he
reads the word daily, and hourly sucking from thence sweet and holy Doctrines
as Bees do honey from sweet flowers in the Spring time.

It may be objected that this Tolleration would breed a greater confusion, but
we which know we have the Spirit, believe the contrary; for the establishing
of only one, and suppressing all others, will breed in all a general
discontent, jarring, railing, libelling, and consequently must needs follow a
mighty confusion, where contrary-wise, if all were permitted, all would be
pleased all in peace, and their obligation and love would be far greater to
the King and State for so great a benefit as the freedom of conscience, which
to all men is the most grateful thing in the world, more for the better
maintaining of peace with each other, differring in Religion, how easy a
matter it were considering the good natures and sweet dispositions of our
English nation, who willingly would embrace a law enacted to that effect that
were upon some penalty to be imposed, should affront or upbraid the other for
his Religion. This in diverse well governed Countries is permitted, as Holland,
Germany, France, and Polonia, etc. where though their Religion be as opposite
as Heaven to Hell, yet their concord is so great, that they say with the
Prophet David, behold how good and pleasant a thing it is for Brethren to dwell
together, Psalm. 132.

If therefore the Brownists upon scruple of their tender conscience, and
grounded upon the word, will separate themselves, and not go to the Church with
Protestants, let them alone, give them free leave to exercise their Religion
where they please without disturbance, the place where does not import, they
not daring to add or diminish any thing in the written word.

If the Puritants will not use the Service Book, Corner Cap, Surplesse, or
Altar, nor bow at the name of Jesus, their pure hearts esteeming it Idolatry,
let them alone, they are great readers of Gods book, and if they be in
error, they will sooner find it, having liberty of conscience, then being
oppressed with the Tyranny of the High Commission Court or other kinds of
persecutions which disquiet their consciences and troubles their patience.

If the Socinians will not subscribe to the 39. Articles nor credit more then
by Natural force of their best wits they can reach unto, let them alone, they
profess that if any man can give them a better reason, or confute them by the
word, they are ready every hour to change their opinions, of such soft and
pliable natures they are.

If the Arminians will have Bishops, Altars, Lights, Organs, hold Free Will,
merit of good works, and diverse other points with Papists, though as yet no
sacrifice with them, upon their Altars, let them alone, let them use their
ceremonies without sacrifice, let every spirit praise the Lord, Psalm. 150.

If the Papists will have Altars, Priests, Sacrifice and ceremonies, and the
Pope for their supreme head in Spiritual affairs, seeing they affirm so
confidently they have had these Sixteen hundred and odd years, let them
alone with their pretended prescription, and let every Religion take what
Spiritual head they please, for so they will, whether we will or no, but the
matter imports nor, to they obey the King as temporal head, and humbly submit
to the State and civil Laws, and live quietly together.

Let the Adamits Preach in vaults and caves as naked as their nails, and
starve themselves with cold, they think themselves as innocent as Adam and Eve
were in their nakedness before their fall, let them therefore alone till some
innocent Eve be so curious as to eat forbidden fruit, and then they will all
make themselves aprons of fig leaves perceiving their nakedness.

Let the Family of Love meet together in their sweet perfumed Chambers, giving
each other the sweet kiss of peace; great pity it were it were to hinder
their mutual charity; let them alone: Lastly the same we desire for all
professors of the Gospel, Let every one abound in his own sense, Romans 14.

Now were this freedom permitted, there would not be so many idle scandalous
pamphlets daily cast abroad to the great vexation of each other, and trouble to
the whole Realm, every one laboring to prefer his own Religion.

A Tolleration therefore would hinder all this strife and coffeehouse, but
if oppressed with persecution they will cry out of the word of God, We will
render to Caesar, the things that are due to Caesar, and to God that which is
due to God, Mark 12. If Tolerated, more promptly will they obey the King and
State, if troubled or molested, they will cry, We must obey God rather then
men, Acts 5. and so remain discontented and afflicted in spirit.

Neither does a Tolleration seem dissonant, but rather concordant with the
Doctrine of the most learned Protestants: First the Primate of Jreland Doctor
Usher, in a Sermon before King James at Wansted 1624. admittes all Christians
into the Church of what Religion soever, good soul! he will have none
persecuted, his tender heart draws all to Heaven. Muscovites, Grecians,
Ethiopians, all reformed Churches even from Constantinople, to the East Indies,
none* none by him are excluded from Paradise, as you may read in the 10. and
11. page of his aforecited sermon, his pitiful heart cannot pass such a
bloody sentence upon so many poor souls; nay he will pull in the Jews and
Papists, for the Ethiopians though they baptize with us, yet they circumcise
also both male and female, and in all other things join hands with the Pope,
as in the confession of their faith sent to Gregory the 13. is manifest, this
learned Doctor being so gracious and mercifully pitiful, how can we Imagine
that your clemencies will persecute those in earth which are esteemed worthy of
Heaven. Master Hooker in his five books of Ecclesiastical policy, page 138.
affirms the Church of Rome to be part of the house of God, a limb of the
visible Church of Christ, and page 130. he says, we gladly acknowledge them to
be of the family of Jesus Christ: now if the family of the Roman Church be of
the family of Jesus Christ, then I hope you will not deny other professors of
the Gospel to be of the family of Christ, if they be of the family of God,
others are not of the family of the Devil, no, all servants of Christ,
brethren of Christ, all according to Doctor Vshers doctrine shall be saved:
why then should any be persecuted, shall the servants of the same family
persecute their fellow servants, this must needs be greatly displeasing to
the Master of the family, let therefore none of the servants of the family be
persecuted for the love and honor you bear to the Lord and Master.

Seeing therefore in the opinions of these and diverse other learned Protestant
Doctors which you know well, the Papists may be saved, and as Doctor Some
says, in his defense against Master Penrie. Page 164. 182. and 176. that it is
absurd to think the contrary ye will without question think it more absurd
to hold either professors damned, then it follows that it is most absurd to
persecute any whose names are written in the book of life, never to be blotted
out, if they persevere and live the life of the righteous.

Let every one therefore follow his own Religion so he be obedient to the
State and temporal laws certainly, that which is erroneous will in time
appear, and the professors of it will be ashamed, it will perish and wither
as a flower, vanish as smoke, and pass as a shadow.

The Apostles of Christ preaching ( Acts. the 5.) the Jews hearing these
things it cut them to the heart, and they consulted to kill them, but as the
same Chapter relates verse 34. one of the counsel rising up, a Pharisee called
Gammaliell, a Doctor of the Law honorable to the people commanded the men to
be put forth a while, and then he said to them, you men of Israel what mean
you to your selves for before these days there rose Theodus, saying he was
some body, to whom consented a number of men, above 400. who was slain, and
all that believed him were dispersed, and brought to nothing. After this fellow
there rose Judas of Galilee, and drew away the people after him who were
dispersed.

And therefore I say to you, depart from these men, and let them alone, for if
this council or work be of men, it will be dissolved, but if it be of God,
you are not able to dissolve them, least perhaps you be found to resist God
also. And they consented to him, here is a president, here is an example even
from the Scripture it self, follow it we beseech you, give your consents,
agree, vote it, that every man may have freedom of conscience, let them alone;
you desire nothing but the truth by this freedom and connivency truth will at
last appear, that which is of men will be dissolved, that which is of God will
continue and remain for ever, now many men are wavering what to follow, what
to embrace, neither will they be contented with any thing that shall be
established by Act of Parliament, were it never so good, only freedom will in
time cause the truth to shine upon them.

The matter therefore of so great importance and consequence, we prostrate;
leaving to your honors profound and deep Judgments, humbly requesting and
imploring again and again, that for the quiet of the state, for the comfort
of the subject, and for the love of truth, you cause and proclaim a
tolleration, that for Religion none shall be persecuted, but every one shall
freely enjoy his conscience.

This is every man's case, this would bring Joy to all, discontent to none; this
would breed the hartiest love, loyalty and affection to our dread Sovereign,
our gracious King, this would cause all dutiful and loving respects to you,
right honorable and noble Peers of the upper House of Parliament, and no less
to the most noble Kights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Honorable House of
Commons, the careful watchful, and painful laborus, and endeavourers in
this, behalf for the good of the Common wealth, and the comfort of afflicted
souls and concscieces, grant therefore this Petition, and for ever you will
eternize your names.

And so praying to the Lord that he wiould endue your hearts with the spirit
of true wisdom and clemency toward your poor servants and brethren in the
Lord, and grant their humble petition, we ceaes.

FINIS.

