THE HVMBLE PETITION of the Inhabitants of the County OF BVCKINGHAM, Presented
to the KINGS most Excellent Majesty at WINDSOR the thirteenth of this instant
January. 1642.
In the behalf of Mr. Hampden Knight for the said County, and of the rest of
the members of Parliament, accused by his Majesty of Treason. With his
Majesty's gracious answer thereunto.
Shows,
THat your petitioners having by virtue of your highness writ chosen John
Hampden Esquire Knight for our Shire in whose loyalty and wisdom, we his
Contrymen, and Neighbors have ever had good cause to confide: how ever of
late, to our no less amazement then grief, we find him with other members of
Parliament accused of Treason, and having taken to our serious consideration,
the manner of their impeachments we cannot but (under your Majesty's favor)
conceive, that it does so oppugn the rights of Parliaments, to the maintenance
whereof our Protestation bind us: That we believe it is the malice (which their
zeal to your Majesty's service, and the State, has contracted) in the enemies
to your Majesty, the Church, and common wealth has occasioned this foul
accusation rather then any desert of theirs; who do likewise through their
sides wound the judgment and care of us your Petitioners, and others, by whose
choice they were presented to the House.

Your petitioners most humbly pray that Master Hampden, and the rest that lie
under the burden of that accusation may enjoy the Just privileges of
Parliament. And your Petitioners will ever pray etc.
His Majesty's answer.
At the Court at Windsor the 13th. of January. 1642.
HIs Majesty being graciously pleased to let all his subjects understand his
care not (knowingly) to violate in the least degree, any of the Privileges of
Parliament, has therefore lately by a Message sent by the Lord Keeper
signified; That he is pleased (because of the doubt that has been raised of
the manner) to waive his former proceedings against the said Master Hampden and
the rest mentioned in this Petition, concerning whom his Majesty intends to
proceed in an unquestionable way. And then his Majesty says it will appear
that he had so sufficient grounds to question them, as he might not in
Justice to the Kingdom, and Honor to himself have forborne; and yet his
Majesty had much rather that the said persons should prove innocent, then be
found guilty, however, he cannot conceive that their crimes can in any sort
reflect upon those his good Subjects, who elected them to serve in Parliament.

London Printed for John Burroughes 1641.


