The humble desires of the Knights, Gentlemen, Ministers, Freeholders and
Inhabitants of the County and Borough of LEICESTER.
Delivered to His EXCELLENCY, The Lord General MONCK, At St ALBANS the
Thirtieth day of January, 1659. by George Fawnt Esquire, High Sheriff of the
said County, William Boothby, Richard Orton, and Richard Halford Esquires,
entrusted for that purpose by the Body of the whole County.
WE the Knights, Gentlemen, Ministers, Freeholders, and Inhabitants, of the
County of Leicester, humbly conceiving, that the first Force put upon the
Parliament, has been an encouragement and occasion to all the rest: And
finding that your Excellency (under God) has been the principal means, for
repairing the last interruption; are the more encouraged to desire your
assistance, in the promoting of these our just desires, as a visible means of
an happy Peace and Settlement of these Nations. And whereas every freeborn
person of England is supposed to be present in Parliament, by the Knights and
Burgesses of the place where he lives, and thereby is presumed to give his
consent in all things that ass in Parliament. There is not (as we are credibly
informed) one Knight for all the Counties in Wales, nor for diverse Counties in
England, and some of them the greatest in England, as that of Yorksire. We
therefore desire, that all vacant places be supplied, whether they became
vacant by death, judgment of Parliament: And that those that were secluded by
force in the year 1648, may sit again. And that no previous Oath or Engagement
be put upon any, that is chosen by his Country to sit and vote freely in
Parliament.

That the fundamental Laws of England, the Privileges of Parliament, the
Liberties of the People, and the Property of Goods, may be asserted and
defended, according to the first Declaration of Parliament, when they undertook
the War; and no Taxes or Free Quarter imposed upon any, without Authority of
Parliament.

That the true Protestant Religion may be professed and defended, all Heresies,
Sects, and Schisms, is countenanced and suppressed; a lawful Succession of
godly and able Ministers continued and encouraged; and the two Universities,
and all Colleges in both of them, preserved and countenanced.

That a fitting and speedy course be taken, for paying and discharging the
Arrears of such Officers and Soldiers, as submit to Authority of Parliament,
and that they may be speedily reduced to a lesser number, for easing of the
great Taxes and Burdens of these Nations.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Chase, in Chancery Lane. 1659.


