The humble Desires of the Loyal hearted, well-affected FREEMEN of the City of
London in their several Parishes, unto their several Common-Councell-men by
them entrusted for the Peace and welfare of the City.
Gentlemen,
WE have Elected you as Members of the Common Council of this City for our
several precincts, to preserve our Liberties, not inthrall them; to advance
the Public, not your private Interests: and therefore may justly challenge
from you an Account what (as our Proxies) you have done to these Ends.

We find the whole Kingdom groaning under the burden of an oppressing Army,
presenting their grievances to the Parliament, whilst our selves (as if the
Interest of this City were dis-joyned from the public Concernment) is ready
to be engaged against them; or (at least) to stand Neutrall: and after so late
a threatening of Fire and Plunder, to satisfy our selves with a shadow of
security, by a pretended putting the Militia in the hands of the City, which is
indeed, into such hands as we, the Commoners of the City, cannot confide in:
The Commander in chief being a Member of that Army, which so lately threatened
us. And many others so particularly interessed, that we have much reason to
doubt, they intend their own, rather then the public profit and Security.

We therefore require you, in the Names of us, the Freemen of this City, by
whom you are entrusted; forthwith to present to the Lord Major, Aldermen, and
rest of the Common Council, these our desires, and to endeavor to effect them:

1. That they make a speedy humble address by Petition to the two Honorable
Houses of Parliament, that all further effusion of blood, and Engagement in a
New war be prevented, by a timely concession to the cries and humble desires of
the whole Kingdom for Peace.

2. That His Majesty may speedily be brought to Westminster with Honor,
Freedom, and Safety, to Treat Personally with His two Houses for a safe,
wel-grounded Peace, and setlement of Religion, according to His Majesty's
presentation made by the Hollands Ambassadors to both Houses, 24 February.
1644. which we conceive to be agreeable to our Covenant, viz. That a National
Synod shall be Called, and all other Christian Churches admitted to send their
Deputies; and what in our Religion shall be found disconsonant to the Word of
God in part, or whole, to be reformed according to the Word of God, and best
Reformed Churches.

3. That the Army under the Lord Fairfax may be forthwith Dis-banded, their
Arrears Audited, all just satisfaction given, and a general Act of Oblivion be
sought from HIS MAJESTY.

4. That the Country may be eased of Taxes, Assesments, and Free Quarter.

5. That the Excise and Assesments of this City be either eased, or for the
present, employed only for the security of the City.

6. That the Militia of this City be put into such hands as this City shall
confide in for their security.

7. That the Colonels and Captains of the Trained Bands, and Auxiliaries, be
Chosen by the Freemen of the City that are to serve under them.

8. That none of the Trained Bands or Auxiliaries, of this City, be forced, or
suffered to march out of this City, to engage in any New war, but to remain
within the City for the defense of it.

9. That no more Engagements may be brought upon us, either to Combinations,
War, or other Supplies thereon depending, others then according to the Laws
and Statutes of the Land, and ancient Customs of this City; and that such
transactions as have been contrary to the same in these late times of
distractions may be Cancelled out of the Register, and an Act passed, That they
shall never more serve for a Principle to posterity.

10. That there may be no more Listing of our Children and Servants: for as we
detest that late hypocritical fiction of their private Listing, so we utterly
dislike the public Listing of them, in regard we conceive thereby our Rights,
and present subsistence interessed, and the peace and Safety both of City and
County endangered.

Of these our Desires, we expect a speedy Account from you, or otherwise shall
declare, That you have broke the trust reposed in you by us. And therefore we
may, and ought to revoke our Election, and protest against whatsoever you shall
do or Act by virtue thereof, and conceive the same contrary to our peace and
safety, who do find our selves bound by Christian duty to provide for our
Families by the peaceable following of our several vocations, which by
lamentable experience we have found woefully obstructed by the late Wars, which
a Rebellious generation do now again endeavor to foment amongst us; from whose
wicked practices, we hope under God, by your wisdom and provident endeavors
to be preserved.

All honest Freemen, into whose hands this Paper shall come, are required to
underwrite and send it forwards to their Common-Councell-men, with effect. June
3d 1648
FINIS.

