Digitus Testium, OR A DREADFUL ALARM TO THE WHOLE KINGDOM, ESPECIALLY The
Lord Major, the Aldermen, and the Common Counsel of the City of LONDON. OR A
SHORT Discourse of the excellency of Englands LAWS and RELIGION.

TOGETHER, With the antiquity of both, and the famous Kings that England has
had to defend both the Religion and the Laws against the Heathen Romish
Emperors, and against the Romish Power, under Popes.

WITH The several Plots the Popes of Rome have used against the Kings of
England, to throw them down, and how of late he has prevailed against the
Magistracy and Ministry of England, his new designs, and manner of Progress:

TOGETHER, With a serious view of the new Oath or Engagement, with 22. Queries
upon the same. And also Objections made against the non-subscribers thereof
answered.

Let the ingenuous Reader take so much pains, as to read that incomparable
piece of vindication of a Treatise of Monarchy by way of discovery of three
main points thereof.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCL.

To the Right Honorable, the Lord Mayor of the City of London.
My LORD,
YOur eminency for the Profession of Religion, and the lawfulness of your
Office, only invites us to dedicate these our papers to you, not that they so
much expect your protection, as intend your instruction, they only beg your
serious perusal, which may prove a happy corasive, or otherwise leave you
excuseless: your Lordship certainly knows, that this day Michael and his
Angels, and the Devil and his Angels are in fight, and the Dragon seems to
have got the better. Now at such a time as it is a sin accursed with a bitter
curse, to stand a newter; for it is a seavenfold more accursed sin to fall from
Michael, and fight on the Dragons side: if he that loves not the Lord Jesus
shall be cursed with a bitter curse; what shall befall that Professer who
hates the Lord Jesus, and persecutes him in his Members? Certainly, that man's
sin comes near to the unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost: The World may
read his name written in Hell in great Characters, the sin against the Holy
Ghost may be committed in one Act; it is a sin frequently committed in this age
in England, by Professors, as there are certain straits in the narrow way to
Heaven, (as repentance and self denial) the which if a man pass, he shall
never fall away; so there are certain precipices in the broad way to Hell, the
which if a man pass, he shall never be able to return again, though he
heartily desire it. Cain passed this precipice, and Judas in betraying his
Master, and Esau in selling his Birthright for pottage; we are far from
charging your Lordship (as we are free from acquitting the men of these times)
of these damnable sins, let God and your Conscience condemn or acquit you,
before whom ere long you must appear; our design is only to unbowel that little
bigbellied Viper (of the Romish Conclaves hatching) the Engagement, which like
the Trojan Horse has concealed in the belly of it, the ruin of lawful
Magistracy, lawful Ministry, and the lawful reformed Religion; your Lordship
knows full well, that these are three precious Jewels, and your Lordship
cannot but know as well, if you please, that this Engagement is the designed
ruin of them all.

How sad a progress it has made already the sincere Protestants of the three
Kingdoms to their sorrow know: long since it has been the design and endeavor
of our inveterate enemy the Pope, to extirpate Protestant Magistracy and
Ministry; but they never could effect it until this day, and that principally
by this Engagement: is not the Protestant race of Kings utterly banished this
Kingdom by this Engagement? and are not all the Protestant Ministers, now about
to be turned with their Wives and Children out of their Estates and
dwelling-Houses, and banished at the pleasure of their tormenters, and all by
this Engagement.

My Lord, We beseech you to consider what Ministers they are that are
persecuted; for what, and by whom they are persecuted? your Conscience tells
you my Lord, that they are the Orthodox, grave, learned, sincere, zealous
Ministry of England, that by this Engagement are persecuted, and for what? but
only because they will not forsake a good Conscience, and a just cause, that
Covenant Cause which they engaged in, which they must do in taking the
Engagement, and that the contrivers of the Engagement knew full well, and for
that end contrived it. And who are they that put this in execution, but they
that entered into the same Covenant with us? that pretended the same cause,
those whom we have with the hazard of our lives, Estates, and all we have,
preserved from ruin, and been the cause of their promotion; even those who
make Laws for our ruin: these men outlaw us, these men sequestrate and
imprison us, these take away our Birthrights from us, and which is worst of
all, these are now about to banish our Ministry, who have always been our
comfort and encouragement in times of affliction. Woe unto us, were ever poor
Protestants so miserably deluded? or were there ever such notorious gross
Hypocrites, Apostate Pasters in the world? are these the Saints that cried out
against persecution of tender Consciences? is this the year of our liberty so
much boasted of by many? is this the removing of the yoke of oppression and
Tyranny? is this the year of throwing down Antichrist, and propagating the
Gospel of Jesus Christ? when our chief Protestants, both of the Parliament and
City, are enforced to look through prison Gates, and the archest incendiaries
of the Romish party are embraced and consulted with; and when our constant,
real, zealous Covenant-keeping Ministry, are they that must be banished, with
their Wives and Children (as in the Irish Rebellion) and Malignants and
Sectarians.

Jesuits and profane Fellows suffered to enjoy their liberties, we appeal to
your Conscience ( my Lord) whether this year be the year of Jubilee with the
Protestants or Papists: are not all Oaths, penalties, Laws and Statutes, taken
clearly off from the Papists? and is not the Engagement only designed as a
snare to catch the sincere Protestant, and to bring him under sequestration,
banishment, out-lawry, and what not?

The righteous Lord look upon our afflictions, our unheard of afflictions; that
our Brethren are risen up against us, and hate us, and persecute us with a far
more hatred then our open enemies, and that without a cause.

The Lord judge betwixt us and our enemies this day; if we have dealt
deceitfully in the Covenant of our God, then let God search it out, and bring
us to ruin; but if we are persecuted for holding fast to our Covenant, the
Lord plead our cause: we can with comfort and boldness say this in the midst of
our afflictions, Lord thou know our integrity, this appeal our enemies
cannot make.

Come forth (my Lord) from amongst the tents of these ungodly men, lest you
perish with them, for their folly is made known to all the World, and their
damnation sleeps not: be not found amongst the number of Hypocrites,
Apostates, Atheists and Papists, persecuting the poor Church: the sword is put
into your hand for the preservation, not for the persecution of a godly,
zealous Ministry: The God of all wisdom direct you for the Churches good and
his glory; for which ends we dedicate these our Papers to you.

A short Discourse of the excellency of Englands Laws and Religion, etc.
IT is not unknown to us the Freeborn Protestants of England, that our Nation
claims the priority of all other Nations in the World for ancient and famous
Laws, and Peace and Religion.

The Laws and Customs of England, Fortes.
(says Learned Fortescus,) are ancienter then the Laws of the Romans, Com.
yea of the Venetians, Leg.
which are esteemed the ancientest in the World; they are more famous then
others, Cap. 17.
because better then the Laws of other Nations, and that in a threefold
respect, in the subject matter, in the form, and 3. in the disposing of them.

The ras substrata of the statute Laws of England, is reason, which indeed is
the totum compositum of the common Law. Common Law, is a vast mine of right
reason, out of which all other Laws are dug, and fitly squared to the good
of the Kingdom: he therefore is esteemed the best Lawyer that spoke the best
reason, and herein the People of England excel all other Nations, in that they
are only subjected (by the Law,) to reason, and the purest reason, which to be,
is doubtless perfect freedom; yea it may truly be affirmed, that by the Law
they are subjects only to divine reason; for we have such a standing Law upon
record, that whatsoever Custom, maxim, or Statute, shall be faind directly
contrary to the Law of God; that Custom, Maxim, Statute, or Case, shall be ipso
facto void, and so adjudged.

And as for the matter for the form, the Laws of England are the absolute, and
undoubted best in the World; for as there is universal obedience required and
enjoined to every Law inacted, for there is a general assent in the acting and
constitution of that Law.

There are 3. estates which concur, (as joint causes of the same effect) in
making of a Law. These 3. Conjunctions do make the supreme Authority of the
Nation, the Apax, or Culmen potestatis, being set upon the Kings head, all
Writs and procession issuing out in his name; with him are joined the House of
Lords, and the House of Commons: these 3. divisions are limited by Law; but
compunction they have power to repeal, or make a Law; and none can say unto
them, why do you so? but either of these apart, are limited by Law.

Limitations of royal power have been made and acknowledged by Magna Charta,
and several other acts, and no obedience, acknowledged any otherwise then
according to Law; and King Charles acknowledged, that the measure of his power
was the Law, and he desired no more then what he was invested with by Law.

And so of the other two estates of Lords and Commons, these three have
negative voices alike, have freedom (in their several places,) a like freedom
to make motions, and freedom to reject what they dislike.

This is the absolutest best Government in the World, as is clear from God and
Nature. God himself who is the Almighty Monark of all Spirits, has pleased to
reveal himself to Man in a Trinity of persons, and governs the universe by
himself, Angels and Men Celestical Bodies, by Sun, Moon, and Stars: the little
World Man by understanding, will and affections; and the Kingdom of England, by
King, Lords, and Commons.

The King of himself cannot make a Law of himself, if he do, it is tyranny, nor
the Lords in a part by themselves, nor the Commons by themselves against the
other two, if they do, it is usurpation, exceeding presumption, perjury and
Treason, for they are sworn to the contrary by their Oaths of allegiance and
supremacy, to act nothing against the Crown and Dignity of their Sovereign Lord
the King; besides, they are sworn to maintain the Privileges of Parliament.

The King makes the first of these three Estates, by a right, which is not by
election, nor by Conquest simply, but by inheritance; for the Saxon Kings
laying the platform of good Government, here in England continued it
succesfully, until the Danes drove them into Corners, subduing them for a time,
the which they soon recovered again, and so recovered their ancient Customs and
Laws again, and continued them, Edward the Confessor, who was of the Saxon
line, having no Heir, descending of his body, intended to make Edgar Ethling,
Gran-child to Ironside his successor; but Edward the Confessor dying,
Harrold-Earl, Godwins Son, being popular for his Victories, usurped the
Crown, and dispossessed the right Heir, deluding William of Normandy, to whom
he had promised by Oath the Government of the Kingdom, after the death of
Edward.

William Duke of Normandy hereupon pleads a right to the Crown of England, by
promise (as he said) from Edward the Confessor, and hereupon brought an Army
with him from Normandy, and gave battle to Harold the Usurper, at Hastings in
Sussex, where he overthrow'd him, by whose overthrow, there was way made for a
Treaty betwixt Duke William, and the Nobles and Citizens then at London, Duke
William pleaded his right by promise, as having a grant of the Kingdom made to
him by Edward the Confessor, and confirmed by Harrold, who forswore himself,
and usurped the Crown: hereupon Duke William was received and acknowledged King
by the Nobles and City of London, after this Edgar Ethling, who indeed was the
right Heyr, compounded with Duke William, and for a royal allowance, which Duke
William granted him, he reconciled himself to him, and thus William came in as
Successor to Edward the Saxon King; and so it succeeded from the Normans to
the Plantagenets, Henry the 2. being the Son of Maud, Henry the 1. his
Daughter whom he married to Jeffery Plantagenet, who begat Henry the 2. and so
it passed from the Normans to the Plantaginets, in whose unquestionable time,
eight Kings succeeded each other: afterward they divided Henry the 4 of the
younger house, and usurped the Crown, being of the house of Lancaster; but
Edward the 4. of the house of York, coming in upon a better Title then those of
Lancaster, overthrew those that opposed his Title: this Division continued and
lived until Richard the 3. died, who breathed the last of the Plantagenets: The
Tudors next succeeded the Plantagenets.

Henry the 7. matching with Elizabeth, the eldest Daughter to Edward the 4. of
the house of York, united both houses of York and Lancaster, laying the white
Rose and the red together, in the royal person of Henry the 7. the Scepter fell
back into the Current of the old british blood: together with the German,
Norman, Burgandian, Castalian, and French achievements, with the
intermarriages, which 800 years had acquired, incorporated, and brought back
into the old royal time. Nauntons, fegmenta Regalia, p. 2. Sec. 1. So that the
Stuarts, have an unquestionable Title to the Crown of England, from the old
Christian british Kings, whose antiquity is beyond all the Kings in the World.

The Tudors expiring in Queen Elizabeth, the mighty Family of the Stuarts,
succeeded by an unquestionable Title, as lineally descended from Margaret the
eldest Daughter of Henry the 7. of whom descended James the 1. of England, and
sixth of Scotland, he reigning 22. years, died and left the possession of
England, Scotland and Ireland to Charles the 1. who after he had reigned 24.
years, was cut off by a violent death, Jan. 30. 1648. at his own door.

So that by this it may appear, by what right the Kings of England have for
above these 100. years made the first and chief estate in Parliament, it is by a
right of succession and inheritance, always acknowledged and granted by the
King.

The House of Lords make the second Estate, because the Nobility of a Kingdom
are the main pillars of those political Thea^ors where they live, and as they
are Clarior et illustri^r pars populi, they do claim that privilege jure
geutium, in this Kingdom they claim it as their Birthright, never in any age
denied them; their house being far more ancient then the House of Commons; for
Henry the 1. was the first that established the House of Commons, and the House
of Commons make the third estate who are called by the Kings Writ, and chosen
by the people to be their Trustees in Parl: these being chosen, and come up to
Westminster, or the place where the King appoints, they are called over in the
Kings presence, and there they answer for what Shire or Town they are, which
done, Smith.
by the Kings Commandment, they choose them a Speaker, who makes requests to
the King, C. W.
that he would be content that they may enjoy their liberties, p. 19.
to speak their minds freely, that they may punish any of their House
offending, that they may in doubts have the liberty to consult with His Majesty
and the House of Lords, promising in the Commons names, not to abuse, but to
improve their privileges, as faithful, true, and loving subjects ought to do
for their Princes Honor and advantage.

The House of Commons have power to impeach any person of Treason, except the
King; for the King is one of their Estates and the Head: now neither of these
3. Estates can impeach an other, the King and Lords cannot impeach the House of
Commons, because it is the third estate; and the King and Commons cannot
impeach the House of Lords, because it makes the second Estate, hereby the
community must necessarily dissolve it self, if either of the Estates could
impeach each other: therefore the Lords and Commons be they never so entire and
full, have no power de jure to impeach the King, because he makes the first
estate in Parl: indeed they have power to curb the exorbitances of each other;
and for this end, their two Estates of Lords and Commons, were devised, to curb
the excess of Monarchs; but in no wise to dethrone them.

The House of Commons never was a Court of Judicature, it had a regative voice
in the making of new Laws, and the chiefest hand in granting subsidies,
levying Taxes, and imposing Customs on this Kingdom, without whom, the King and
Lords could not proceed.

The original of the Subjects liberty came first out of Germany, where says
Tacitus, nec Regibus libera aut infinita potestas erat. Kings had not
unlimitted power, but the weighty matters of the Realm were dispatched by
general meetings of all Estates; but it can never be found that the House of
Commons was a Court of Judicature they are but the Peoples Trustees, and this
power they have, that they have a negative voice in the making of a Law, or
imposing of any Taxes; and herein is the great and vast liberty of the English
Subject included, that there can be no Law imposed on them, but what their
Representatives or Trustees in Parl: shall agree unto, and if after they have
agreed unto a Law which proves inconvenient, or not so effectual as was
intended for the good of the People. Fortes.
The next Session (says Fortescue) Cancito reformari potest. C. 18.
And thus the Laws of England in their framing are the best Laws in the World.

3. Commend.
And as the best in their frame and constitution, so they are the best Laws in
distribution; Legum.
for as all Estates have a hand in framing a Law, so no Estate is exempted from
observing of those Laws; so that English Laws may truly be called Justice in
the abstract; for they do suum cuique tribu^re. They give the King his due, the
Nobles their due, and the Commons their due; to each man, from him that welds
the Scepter, to him that holds the Plough, it gives him his right.

The Law sets the King above imprisonment, or attainture by his Subjects; by
this Rule in Law, nemo imprisonetur aut disvisietur nisi per judicium Legale
parium. Now all other men in the Kingdom may be tried, because there are to be
found his Fellow Subjects, equal in all the privileges of a Subject with him;
but a King, take him either in his personal capacity, or public capacity, he
is no Subject of the Law: indeed, he is sworn to maintain and defend the Law.
The King is bound to maintain the Law by his Oath, the form of which Oath runs
thus. You shall keep the Church of God, the Clergy and People entirely in peace
and concord in God, according to your power. The King answers, I will keep
them: you shall cause equal and right justice in all your judgments, and
discretion in mercy and truth, according to your power. The King answers, I
will do it, you shall grant just Laws and Customs to be kept, and you shall
promise that those shall be protected by you, and to the lover of God to be
strengthened, which the common People shall choose according to their power. To
which the King answers, I give and promise it. This Oath the King takes at his
Coronation, viz. Parl. Roll. 1. Hen. 4. but in case he does not so fully execute
the Laws as is meet, there can be no Judge legal of the King, because he is a
Monark, and there cannot be Judges of the access of Monarchy; for none can be
found his equals, and to judge him otherwise, were to deny the Monarch: what is
granted to the meaner Subject, which is to be judged by his equals.

But though the Monark cannot be judged, yet the instruments of that Monark
may; for a Commission from the King cannot bear out a Subject beyond Law, the
exorbitant Commands of such a Monak, as our English Monark being politically
powerless; and if Authority fail in the supreme Power, the instrument can have
none from thence derived to him, but must necessarily fall under the censure of
the Law; so that though the King is head of the three Estates, cannot be
molested; yet the instruments that he implies against Law may be tried. This
Law is most agreeable to the Law of God, and the Law of nature; to the Law of
God, for Kings are the Representatives of God on earth, and none can touch
them, we see this clear in two famous instances, in Saul, who (could crimes
have brought him under the censure of men) had enough to dethrone him; for he
was a Tyrant, a murderer, and a public enemy to the Church and State, yet
David when he could have done justice upon him, said, God forbid, for he is the
Lords anointed, the declared King of Israel. And David that was guilty of
murder and adultery, both of them deserving death by the Law, yet was not
questioned by his Subjects, because God only has the power of punishing Kings,
and not man.

This is most agreeable to the Law of nature; for if Kings should be subject to
their Subjects, then the order must needs be confounded, and the Law of nature
utterly rooted up, which orders approves no further then the supreme Authority,
which if judged by any, is not the supreme, and so produces confusion and
infinition: Therefore we conclude, that the Laws of England are the best Laws
in the World in every respect, both for matter, form, and distribution. And as
for Laws, so for pure Religion, it is beyond all other Nations, it received the
Apostolic faith almost, if not all out as soon as Rome that brags of its
antiquity. Origin*
Gindas tells us, that England received the Gospel in the Apostles days,
Joseph at Armathea bringing it into the Kingdom, Hom. 4.
and Origin and Turtullian tell us, Ezekel.
that it received the Gospel as soon as any Natian in Europe. This we are sure
that it has retained it in its purity, the longest of any Nation, it had a
great share in the Presevitians under the Heathen Emperors of Rome; after that
under the Arrian and Entichion Heresies, and after that under Popus, the
bloudiest and cruellest enemy to the Church; so that from the Apostles time
till this day, Christian Religion (though sometimes obscured) never was
obliterate nor extinct in the Kingdom. And as this Kingdom has been famous for
Laws and Religion above others, so it has been the famousest in the World for
Religious and valiant Kings to protect it, and eminent Ministers to divulge it.

Lucious the Son of Coilus, who was King of England, was the first Christian
King, Jesus Christ smiling upon this Nation above all others, in blessing it
with a righteous King, which was a miracle in the World: at that time
Constantine the 8. King of England, after Lucius, who was the Son of beautiful
Helea, King Coil his Daughter of England, whom she brought forth at York, he
becam Emperor of Rome, conquering the Heathen Emperors with a British Army,
and so converted Rome Heathen into Rome, Christian the famousest Reformation
that ever was wrought in the World, so that England is famous for being the
first Christian Kingdom, and setting up Christian Empire, English Kings having
been the only great friends to true Religion, in the time of Paganism. And as
they were the greatest friends to Christ's Church against Rome Pagan, so they
have been the greatest friends to the true Chucrch against Rome Antixfian; for
about the year 1070. when the Pope was in his full height of soverainty, the
Normons line succeeding the Saxons in England, were the first Kings that
contemned the Popes Authority. William the Conqueror spit at him, and Wilt
Rufus who succeeded him, openly spoke against the Popes usurped power of
binding and loosing withstanding and rejecting his intrapped fopperies,
declaring (against the Pope) the folly of invocating Saints, he plucked proud
Arch Bishop Anselmes nose under his Girdle, in despite of the Pope, and so did
the royal Family of the Plantagenets. The Tudors and the Stuarts got their
several parts in greater degrees against the Pope, as they succeeded each
other. So that the Normans may be said to resist the Pope, the Plantagenets to
grapple with the Pope, the Tudors to unhorse the Pope, and the Stuarts to stob
the Pope; King James being the first King that writ against him, and proved him
to be Antichrist. Against the Kings of England the Popes have born an old
grudge, and endeavored to destroy those Kings or Queens, which resisted their
Authority, at least 12. Treasons against Q. Elizabeth were discovered, and
prevented; which so frustrated Pope Pius Quintus projects, that it broke his
heart for malice, that he could not with his Bulls (which with his own hands he
sealed) depose and dethrone the Protestant Queen; for she took occasion from
the Popes wickedness, and the Papists treachery, to extirpate Priests and
Jesuits out of the Kingdom; whereupon Pope Gregory 13. erected a College on
purpose for English Priests and Jesuits that fled from England to Rome, and
another at Doway, which was much nearer England, that they might there both
frame their grenades of Treason against the English Court and receive such
persons as were succesless in their Treason, and made escapes out of England.

Against King James, besides that Treason of Warson and Clarke, the prodigious
Gunpowder-plot was contrived by the Papists to destroy the King the Prince, the
House of Lords, and the House of Commons, in the twinkling of an eye; upon this
ground, because Pope Clement 8. by a Bull, Commanded that the King should not
be crowned without a toleration of Popery; but God prevented that prodigious
blow. Hereupon the King and the Parl: framed the Oath of allegiance to be
taken by every subject in the Kingdom, it is thus. I. A. B do truly and
sincerely acknowle^ge, profess, testify and declare in my Conscience, before
God and the World, that our Sovereign Lord K. James, is lawful and rightful
King of this Realm, and of all other His Maj. Dominions and Countries; and that
the Pope neither of himself, nor by any Authority of the Church, or See of
Rome, or by any other means with any other, has any power of Authority to
depose the King, or dispose any of his Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to
authorize any foreign Prince to invade or anoy him or his Countries, or to
discharge any of his subjects of the allegiance and obedience to His Majesty,
or to give license to any of them to bear Arms, or offer any violence or hurt
to His Maj. person, State or Government, or to any of His Maj. Subjects. I do
swear from my hear^, that no withstanding any Declaration or excom. against the
King, his Heirs and Successors, or any absolution of the said Subjects from
their obedience; I will bear faith and true Religion to His Maj. His Heirs and
Successors, and him and them will defend to the utmost of my power, against all
conspiracies and attempts whatsoever; and I do detest and abhor as impious
and heretical, the damnable Doctrine of the Pope, that Princes may be
excommunicated and deprived of their Kingdoms, deposed and murdered by their
Subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I do believe that neither the Pope nor
any other can absolve me from this Oath, and all these things I do plainly
swear according to the plain and common sense, and understanding of the same
words, without any equivocation or mental evation, or secret reservation. This
Oath (with the Oath of supremacy) the supreme Authority of the Nation thought
fit to impose upon all the Protestants and other subjects in the Kings
Dominions. The Protestants rejoiced that there were such Oaths whereby they
might manifest their loyalty to their Sovereign Lord the King, only the Papists
refused it, having and using no other plea but tenderness of Conscience, and
fear to offend the Church of Rome: these Oaths distinguished Protestants from
Papists a long time in England; during which time, the Kingdom endured much
peace and prosperity; but after the death of K. James, K Charles succeeding him
in the Throne, and matching with one of the Popish Religion, a gap was opened
for Priests and Jesuits to enter into the Kingdom, and Romish designs were set
on foot, for the settling of Jesuits in the Kingdom under the name of
protestants; the Pope granting dispensations, and Jesuits writing books, (as
Ortwinus and several others of the Church of Rome) that it was lawful for a
Roman-Catholique to make profession of the ^rotestant Religion, to go to their
Churches, and outwardly comply with Protestants, and yet be a sacred
Catholic; and that it was lawful vulpirare cum vulpibus, to play the knave
with a knave, (they are their own words.) Hereupon subtle Jesuits under the
name of Protestants seated themselves in England undiscovered, held
correspondence with the Conclave of Rome, and carried on the Popes design,
professing all obedience to the King; but keeping their poisonous treason
against him in their breasts, ready to spit in the Kings and his Posterities
face, when they had fit opportunity; for they had learned their lesson within
book, that it is lawful to spoil an Heretic King of his Goods, melius tamen
est quod Authoritate judicis fiat; but it is better to do it by a Court of
Justice, this is not a new opinion of the Popes, (...) ^aus. 15. (...) 4. ^^oss.
nor of the Jesuits though newly acted. And this is another opinion of theirs,
that uxor Catholica viro haeretico been volentiam reddere non tenetur, that a
Papists wife may refuse to submit to her Husband, she may plot and conspire his
death by the Popes Law, and this is another Cardinals opinion, (whose Books are
licensed) Pater qui filium habet haereticum, exh^reditare talem filium tenetur,
that the Father may disinherit his Son being a Protestant, and Simancha
episcopus says* propter tonne haeresin patris filii non sunt sui juris, (...).
l. 5. Romans (...). ca. ^7.
by reason of the Fathers Heresy the same freed from his allegiance Nay they
hold that Subjects may lawfully refuse to obey Protestant Princes, says
Beliarmine; Non licet Christianis tolerare regem haereticum, That Christian
Subjects ought not to tolerate a Protestant King to live; for in the Papists
sense they are the Heretics. With these poisonous opinions, did many subtle
Jesuits and Priests lie about the Court, get into Universities and other
places in the Kingdom, under the name of Protestants many of them.

These with the Popes Nuncio, having won the Archbishop of Canterbury to their
party, as Statesmen conceived, drove on a subtle design to overthrow the
Government of the Kingdom by a Parl: and so to pull down the Protestant
Magistracy, and all their wholesome Laws, and by insinuating Altars, Crucifixes,
Images, and Image Worship, with several other popish Ceremonies, and imposing
them on the Ministry of England, thereby they intended at once to root out the
Protestant Ministry, and Protestant Religion. This took effect according to
the Popes desires so fully, and raised the hopes of the Popish party so high,
that they resolved (like Haman) to destroy the Church in every of the Kings
Dominions. Scotland they intended to new-mould to the Popes model, which
Nation, though poor and weak intemporals, proved to the world, that they were
rich and strong in spirituals; for they discovered the Popes designs, and the
English Jesuits, and the plots of the Spanish faction; insomuch, that the
Protestant Nobility of England, petitioned the King for a ^arl: which was
granted, and the etcaetera Oath, a Popish new Engagement, on purpose devised to
supplant the Protestant Ministry, was utterly broken. The Parl: was by the
gracious consent of the King established to sit until by their own Act they
dissolved themselves. This as it was great joy to the Protestants: so it was
exceeding terror to the Papists and Popish faction, many of which fled beyond
the Seas to Rome, and other places. Several others like subtle Foxes got on
Sheeps-Cloathing, and walked amongst the Separatists, who during the Prelates
tyranny, were counted the most religious and zealous Protestants, with these
did they join and quickly learned their language, fitting them in all things to
a hair, crying out against. Antichrist the Pope of Rome, and Common Prayer, or
Antichrists Bible, and Bishops as Antichrists brats: this pleased the
Separatists, and no whit displeased the most of Protestants, who too far lost
their discretion through the violence of their blind passions, who thought to
much could not be said against Episcopal Government, it had been so exceeding
tyrannical: hereby the subtle Jesuits under the name of zealous Protestants,
plucked the Protestant Ministry, and the Protestant Religion, and the
Protestant Magistracy, as much into danger on the other hand, as it had been
before by the Popish Prelatick party; for upon a true bottom did the Romish
Sophists build a false Argument thus. The Pope is Antichrist (that's true) the
Pope made Bishops (say they) and the Bishops made Ministers: therefore the
Ministers now were set down for Antichristian Ministers: here the Devils Cloven
foot appeared, and mark what progress and advantage they made of this: The next
consequence was: If Ministers be Antichristian, then the Ordinances they
administer are Antich. Baptism is Antich. singing Psalms, observing the Lords
day, meeting in Churches, all this was Antichristian: so that the Pope set up
two designs for the miscarriage of that of Scotland; for what with the Parl:
just and strict proceedings against the Popish party about the Court, and what
with their prevalency at Court with the Queen and the King; designs by the
Court factions were on foot, to bring the Northern Army against the Parl: to
overawe them; as appears in the preamble of their Protestation, made May 5.
1641. Thus, whereas the designs of Priests, Jesuits, and other adherents to
the Sea of Rome, have of late been more frequently and boldly put in practice
then formerly, to the undermining and danger of the ruin of the true reformed
Protestant Religion, and the subversion of the fundamental Laws of England and
Ireland, by wicked plots and conspiracies, and breach of Parliaments; whereby
the Kings Maj. person is endangered, and an Army intended to be brought up
against the Parl: to force them to condescend to the lusts of a Popish party:
Hereupon the first Protestation was framed, and sent throughout the Kingdom, no
body refusing to subscribe it except Jesuitish Separatists. J. A. B. do in the
presence of Almighty God, promise, vow and protest, to maintain and defend as
far as lawfully I may, etc. Soon after this, the breach between the King and
the Parl. fell out, the King giving too much ear to evil Council, and that
Popish faction which was the ground of all the former persecution and the civil
War: the King raised an Army to defend himself and the Protestant Religion, the
Parl: did the like upon the same grounds, which at that time was doubtless
real; their end propounded was to defend Religion, Law, the Kings Maj. Person,
the Parl. privileges, and the Peoples Liberties.

The Parl: cause seemed the best in most Protestants eyes at that time, in
regard the Courts designs were long before discovered to the Parl: The Queens
departure with the Crown-Jewels into Holland, and the numerous flocks of
Papists going to the King, with all the corrupt part and guilty persons of the
Kingdom, which made haste to the King after his departure, made the Protestants
afraid what would become of Religion, Parliament, and the Kings person, should
that party about him have prevailed: however they professed the Protestant
Religion, though many of them convicted Papists. Hereupon the Lords and Commons
made a second Vow and Covenant with this preamble, Whereas the Lords and
Commons now assembled in Parl: have declared that there has been and now is a
Popish and Traiterus plot, for the subversion of the true Protestant Reformed
Religion, and the liberty of the subject etc.

And after all this still perceiving the Popish party to increase, grow great,
victorious, bloody and blasphemous; the Lords and Commons professing to the
World, that they had nothing before their eyes but the glory of God, the
advancement of Christ's Kingdom, and the happiness of the King and his
Posterity, with the true public liberty, safety, and peace of the Kingdom
against the plots of the enemies, they entered into the solemn League and
Covenant, containing 6. Articles, which every Parl. man publicly and solemnly
at the Chapel of St, Margaret Westminster, (with his hand lifted up to Heaven,
in the sight of the Scots Commissioners, and the whole Congregation) did
subscribe.

1. That we will sincerely, really, and constantly through the grace of God,
endeavor in our several places and callings the preservation of the reformed
Religion of the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, against our common enemies; the reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland in Doctrine, etc. 2. That we will in like
manner without respect of persons, endeavor the extirpation of Popery,
Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, etc. 3. With the same
reality, sincerity and constancy in our several places and Callings, endeavor
with our Estates and Lives, mutually to preserve the Rights and Privileges of
Parl: and the liberties of the Kingdoms; and to preserve and defend the Kings
Majesty's Person and Authority, in the preservation and defense of the true
Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom; that the World may bear witness with our
Consciences of our loyalty, and that we have no thoughts or intentions, to
diminish his Majesty's just power and greatness. 4. We shall also with all
faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such as have been or shall be
incendiaries or Malignants, etc. 5. And whereas the happiness of a blessed
peace between the Kingdoms, formerly denyedt our progenitors, etc. 6. We shall
also according to our places, etc.

This solemn League and Covenant being entered into by both Nations of England
and Scotland, made the deepest and strongest Politicians of the Roman faction
to tremble, yea (as Mr. Hinderson, the Reverend and Learned Minister of
Scotland, then Commissioner, well foretold) the news of this Covenant, (which
was soon carried to Rome, with the names of all the Subscribers) made the Pope
and his Conclave of Cardinals amazed and tremble; insomuch, that they doubled
their diligence to work the destruction of the Covenanteers at this time. The
Duke of Lorane was solicited by Sir Kelem Digbies means, who was then the
Queens Agent for the English Affairs at Rome, to help the King of England with
an Army against the Covenanters in England. Sir Kelenem Digby was the Popes
right hand to promote and further all designs against the Covenanters party in
England. At the same time a Nuncio was forthwith sent from the Popes Court into
Ireland, there to make a Cessation with the Protestants, and to further by all
means possible the King of England against the Covenanters, which was concluded
with the Popes good liking, as has been confessed.

The old and sage Statesmen in Parl: perceiving the designs of the Pope to
drive furiously on toward the destruction of the Parl: and Covenanters, called
in the Scots to their aid against the Popes designs. The English A^my and
Scots Army admitting no Officers or Soldiers in their Armies, but such as took
the Covenant: the Covenanters (through Gods providence) beyond all expectation
prospered in the field against their enemies; and the Parl: and Assembly of
Divines prospered at Westminster, and went on successively, both of them being
unanimous in the pulling down of Popery and Tyranny, and establishing and
maintaining the liberties of the Kingdom, and Laws of the Realm, and true
Religion in Doctrine, Discipline and Government; for this purpose the Assembly
of Divines first went over the Articles of faith, drew them up after most
deliberate, serious, and learned debates upon each of them, and humbly
presented them to the Parl: under 33. heads. 1. of the Scripture, 2. of Gods
Covenant, and the holy Trinity, 3. of Gods decrees, 4. of Creation, 5. of
Providence, 6. of man's fall and sin, 7. of Gods Covenant with man, 8. of Christ
the Mediator, 9. of free will, 10. of effectual Calling, 11. of Justification,
12. Adoption, 13. Sanctific^tion, 14. saving faith, 15. Repentance, 16. good
works, 17. of perseverance, 18. of assurance of grace, 19. of the Law of God,
20. Christian liberty and liberty of Conscience, 21. of religious worship and
the Lords day, 22. of lawful Oaths, 23. of the civil Magistrate, 24. of
marriage and divorce, 25. of the Church, 26. of Communion of Saints, 27. of the
Sacraments, 28. of Baptism, 29. of the Lords Supper, 30. of Church Censures,
31. of Synods and Councels, 32. of the Resurrection, 33. of the last judgment.

Then they regularly proceeded to settle Church Government, first proving
Presbytery to be the Government which is most like to the primitive Government,
and coming nearest of all other Governments to Gods word; next they drew up a
Directory for Church Government, with an Orthodox, learned, and pious
Catechism; and thus the Covenanters Magistracy and Ministry went on and
prospered until they threw down their open enemies in the field, and were in
great hopes of settling the Protestant Religion in purity, and extirpating
Popery out of the 3. Kingdoms: at this time the Popes Politicians were got into
the Parl: Army, under the name of Independents, from which the King fled to the
Scots.

The King being fallen into the Covenanters hands, viz. the Scottish Army, the
Parl: made speedy and seasonable applications to him at Newcastle, offering to
him Articles of agreement, which news was forthwith carried to Rome; whereupon
the Pope and the Conclave of Rome were enforced to look about, and change their
designs, projecting new ways by contrary proceedings to effect one and the
same end; for whereas they had given order to the Catholics in Ireland before
to yield all assistance to the King against the Parl Seeing now the King was
under the Parl: power, least he and his Parl: should agree, and so England and
Ireland be lost, the Pope played aforehand game, sending his Army into Ireland,
commanding at this time all the Cathol quests renounce their allegiance to the
King of England, and from that day forward the Pope, and all the Romish
Politicians projected how to destroy both King and Parl: and destroy the
Reformation by the Covenanters, so far carried on both in England and Scotland.

The task was hard at first view; to destroy a Religious Parliament, a
victorious Army, and an able, pious, and zealous Clergy, was no small piece of
work. The Romish politicions therefore were enforced to fly to their last
refuge of Hypocrisy and lies, and like Euphrates Frog, to change both shape
and color, using the violent motion of Frogs from one extreme to another, from
the extreme of Tyranny, to the extreme of Anarchy; from the extreme of holy
Orders to the extreme of no ordination. In plain terms the Pope and his
Counsel perceiving there was no probable way to get a Toleration for Catholics
in the Kingdom of England, if the King, Lords and Commons agreed; consulted how
to throw down King, Lord and Commons, and Assembly of Divines, together with
the Protestant Ministry.

That the chief Engines to effect this might be placed here in England, and
have sure footing free from the power of the Magistrates corrective and
coercive power; Independency was set up which five valiant Champions of the
Popes had defended in the Assembly as long as they could; and being there able
to stand against truth no longer, like Serpents hissed for all the viperous
brood of Sectarious blasphemers, or any Sect to creep into their bellies.
Hereby Independencie that bottomless pit, and Independent congregations, (the
very plot designed to destroy Religion in the Nethetlands by the Pope, first
enacted there by Hugh Peter's the Popes hyerling) became as so many nurceries of
Jesuit: and Popish Priests, and so many dens of Thieves; where they framed all
their picklocks opinions and devilish destructive instruments to ruin the
Magistracy and the Ministry. For the propagating and facilitating of this
design, the chief of the Romish Politicians in Europe were sent to England,
where they all went under the name of dissenting brethren, Independents, tender
consciens-men, and great Enemies to Antichrist, crying, down with Antichrist,
calling the Pope Antichrist; not that they thought so but that they might
hereby carry an their design of throwing down the protestant Ministry
undiscovered for this to this day is their great and chief argument The Pope is
Antichrist (that's true Antichrist making Bishops, Bishops are Antichristian,
(that in some sortis true also)

Antichristian Bishops making and ordaining Ministers, Ministers of England,
are Antichristians. Ergo down with the Ministry of England, down with these
black-coats, down with Baals Priests, down with them, there is the design, and
there is the end of all. They only use the Argument to put in practice the
conclusion; they that press the Argument, and first framed it, were far from
thinking the Pope to be Antichrist, or Prelatical Bishop, eithe; only it was
framed to destroy the Covenanteeres Ministry, who abhor the Pope, and long
since renounced him and his adherents.

If it be well observed, Indepency was but the wooden horse with a thousand
Heresies in his belly, brought into the Kingdom of England by the Romish
Politicians, and let forth as so many furies to sly in the face of the reformed
Religion. For he that views the Heresies of late sprung up amongst us, cannot
but see that against every one of the Assemblies, 33. Articles they raised
contrary Heresies; and could the silly English Sectarians of their own heads
without the help of Jesuits and Romish Casuists do all this? it is solly to
think it. The late Heretical Arguments are taken out of Cas^sts; how subtly
did they devise liberty of conscience merely to get free from the Magistrate,
and how vehemently did they preach peace, for love, and meekness, and
admonishing on,e another in love, and being tender of giving offense to tender
cousciences; whereas we plainly see they had war and murder and malice in
their hearts, only thereby they Iull'd asleep secure and bleer-eyed
Protestants who suffered these cheates to pick their pockets, while they heard
them cry Gentlemen look to your purses; they cried out beware of Antichrist,
who brough him in, and be good to tender consciences while they carried under
their sheeps clothing the wolves teeth to wound tender consciences withal.

To tell how these subtly crept into the Army, who nourished and upheld them
there would be too tedious. Our end i^, to show that the setting up of
Indepency was the Popes design to throw down the Covenanting party in England,
and those that opposed the Popish Religion. Out of this bottomless pit came
all that party which first taught Rebellion against the higher powers, from the
dens of Independensie arose that party that lest off the Covenant, professed
open hatred to it and them that took it with an intent to keep it.

That party that raised those Heresies against the true Religion, having now
got power put them in practice against true Religion They that held the opinion
of being free from Magistracy under the Gospel, now made themselves free. They
that held Magistrates Tyran's, ^ow having got power used them as Tyrants; these
guifted brethren wete now high in the Army.

The chief men that were aimed, at were those that stood most stoutly to their
Covenant

The chief Protestants both in the House of Lords, the House of Common, and in
the C^^^ of London, were the men shot at, impeached, imprisoned, persecuted,
banished, and some ('it is to be feared) poisoned.

This party laid hold of the King, imprisoned him, and when the two Houses of
Lords and Commons sat freely, and voted a Treaty with the King, and when the
King had agreed to extirpate Popery, and establish the Protestant Religion in
his three Kingdoms, and to fettle Church Government according to the primitive
constitution; and when upon a free and serious debate the Lords and Commons
voted the concessions of the King to be a ground for them to proceed upon to
settle the peace of the Kingdom, then, even then, this party against the Votes
of the Supreme Authority of this Nation, and against their allegiance violently
rushed in upon the houses pulled out and restrained one hundred and fifty,
imprisoned the chief Protestants, and ablest Statesmen who were most violent
against the Papists.

and left only a party remaining in the lower House, such as themselves best
liked of; this party seized on the King, caused him to be publicly arraigned,
and at his own door at Noon in the view of all the people cut off his Head, who
was then the only Protestant King in the world, and only because he resolved to
root out Popery, and establish true Religion according to the Covenant.

Since which time the same party having rid their hands of the Protestant
Magistracy, have often printed Books against the Calling of the English Ministry,
which Books have been printed by Authority, licensed, and frequently taught and
scattered amongst the people.

And they have again and again petitioned that Power which they set up, if not
to pull down Ministry, States Preachers (as they call them) to take away their
Estates, their Tithes and Livings, by which they and their families subsist;
and how far they have proceeded in England and Wales to ruin the Covenanters
Ministry, all the world may see. But the chief Politicians amongst them
conceiving that Design to be too short to reach all the Protestant Ministry, as
the Heads of Colleges, and such men, and being well assured by taking away
Tithes they shall prejudice their own party equal with othets, have pitched
upon a more Politic Design for the extirpation of the Covenanters, which is by
framing a contrary Oath to the Covenant, and imposing it upon the Ministry;
hereby their own party escape the snare, and only the Godly, Faithful, Loyal
and Orthodox Ministers are taken; they have taken their Tithes from them,
silenced some, thrust out of their Livings many, banished others, imprisoned
others, outlawed all the Covenanters; and lastly, have resolved to turn them
this Winter out of all Cities, Towns and Corporations. Thus far have they
proceeded by this Popish Engine to destroy the Protestants.

This New Oath (so far as we can perceive) is a mere Design to destroy the
Parliament, to destroy the Army, to destroy the Ministry and the Kingdom.

1. Mr. Lilburn seems rationally to prove that this new oath or engagement
cannot be intended to uphold the present power that inforceth the taking of it,
but to maintain the Liberties of the Commonwealth, whose just Liberties and
Ancient customs they confound, and therefore by that engagement men (say that
party justly) are bound not to establish but to pull down any usurped power
over the people.

2, If Mr Lilburn who is a man very popular in the Kingdom, having always
been a public sufferer, should (as he conceives himself bound by that
Engagement) gather of Gentlemen Soldiers and other Commoners and freeborn
People of England, a considerable Party to remove those out of the way, whom he
and his party conceive are Tyrannical, and Opposers of the People, and in their
stead erect another Party, who are the true chosen Representatives of the
People; whether he may not justly tax all the Engagers that resist him, as
Covenant-breakers, and proceed against them accordingly; and so consequently
whether this does not open a gap, and a wide one, to set up whom the People
shall choose above the present House sitting and Engagement; to be Assistants
in such Parliament confounding Acts, as it is declared:

2. As it is destructive to the Parliament, so likewise to the Army; For says
one part of the Army, The present Government is by Representatives of the
peoples choosing. Says another part, The present Government is by that Party
in the House of Commons, who invited us to the City to pull down the King,
Lords, and the greatest part of the Commons, and by our Power enabled to make
Acts, and enforce the Kingdom to obey them. Says another part of the Army, The
present Government is the Council of State, and the Council of War, for that
party in the House were not of our setting up, only we suffured them to sit
there, and the Council of war commanded them to act what they did; therefore
the Council of War, with the Council of State, erected by us; are the present
Government. Whether all these several Parties (especially if there should be
clashing betwixt them) may not by this Engagement conceive themselves in
Conscience bound to maintain their several Parties as the present Government
without King or Lords? And thus it is likely to prove destructive to the Army.

3. It Is absolutely destructive to the Protestant Ministry, and the sound
Protestants of the Kingdom; For it makes them in the sight of all the people in
the world guilty of the horrible and Jesuitical Designs and Practices of the
cutting off of the King, the throwing down of the House of Lords, and excluding
of the Covenant keeping Protestants; for by subscribing that Engagement, they
testify to God and the world, that they approve of all that they have done,
(as they say.)

2. They make themselves guilty of horrible Perjury; for they did swear
Allegiance to the King, his Heirs and Successors, to defend them against all
Attemps and Conspiracies whatsoever; Now this is directly to conspire the
extirpation of the Kings Posterity. 2. The Protestation is against it. 3. Their
Covenant directly opposes the Engagement; For therein they engaged to maintain
the King, Lords and Commons; and in this Engagement they engage to they know
not what, without King and Lords: So that if they engage, they in their
Consciences pull the guilt of Murder, Treason, and other foul Facts upon their
head^, and forswear themselves; Or if they do not engage, they are it seems to
be stripe of their Estates, protection of the Law, and lies at the mercy of
every Villain. So that it is absolutely destructive to the Ministry, and the
like may be said of the Protestants of the Kingdom.

Oaths (say the Caseists, and all other Divines) ought to be plain and clear,
without equivocal terms or doubtful expression; For every Oath or Engagement is
given and taken, to oblige the party that takes it to the performance of what
he swore unto. Now every wise man in taking an Oath proposes first these two
things. 1. Who imposes it. 2. What it is that is imposed.

For that is certain, an unlawful or usurped Power cannot impose an Oath; it is
lawful Authority must impose it, otherwise the Oath (though good) may justly be
refused, As the Gunpowder Traitors, had their Design taken effect, they had
got into the Throne, and imposed an Oath (though lawful in it self) upon the
Barons, Knights, Citizens, Gentry, and Commons of England, yet it would
doubtless and ought to be rejected by them, because the Authority was imposed
which usurped it. This must needs be so, for otherwise a Master, if
overpowered by his servants, is bound to take and submit to such an Oath as
his servant shall impose, which would soon set Beggars on horseback, and make
all men of Honor and Wealth perpetual slaves; but greater confusion then this
there can not be in Hell, for it is Confusion bottomless and unfadomable.

2. What it is that is imposed? that must be inquired into, for no man of
conscience or honor, or the least degree of wit, but will inquire what it is
that he takes before he take it, he will not take it first and enquire
afterward what it means, that is forbidden by Solomon.

Now that men may understand what they engage or swear unto, the words ought to
be simple, clear, and plain, that men may understand them; For juramentum
obligat lecundum intentionem jurantis sine d^^^ alias secundum secundarium
intellectum ejus cui juratur, says Aquinas. Now if there be Amphibolas,
equivocal terms and obscurities in an Oath, how can it possibly be but there
must be errors either in him that gives it, or he that takes it, or both.

As for this Engagement indeed it is politiquely gilded like a poisoned Pill,
with as much subtilty and craft to induce people to take it as may be, for they
call it An Engagement, not an Oath, for then they supposed people would scruple
it, but it is only subscribing to two or three words, and there is an end; this
is no great matter with Atheists, Apostates, Schismatics, Lovers of the World,
and Haters of God and Goodness; but they that are wise, sober-minded, and
conscientious* As they two well know what Authority imposes it, so they cannot
possibly see what is inintended in it, nor what to make of it. He that
seriously views it, will positively conclude, there was never such a little
big-belly'd viporous Monster seen in the world before, to have so many Engines
within so small a compass, to teer in pieces all parties that engage in it.

We Will spread it to the eye of the world.

I. A. B. do promise and declare that I will be true and faithful to the
Commonwealth of England as it is now established, without a King and House of
Lords.

Within this little Circumference of words there are no less then two and
twenty Doubts to be resolved, and necessary Queries to be answered, before
this. Engagement can be taken by any man of Honor or Conscience, Viz.

1 Quere. What is the meaning of the word [Common-wealth?] Whether is it meant
in the primary proper sense, for the Body of the Nation, or for the common good
of that Body? Or whether in the secundary borrowed sense, for the Body of the
Representative?

2. Whether (if it be meant in the latter sense) by Commonwealth be meant a
Parliament, or a House of Commons, chosen as formerly? or by any other way, and
how? Or whether the thing be changed with the name?

3. Whether it be only an exclusive Engagement, as being against King and
Lords, without including any Government in their stead to which we engage?

4. Is the meaning, that we shall be true and faithful to the Commonwealth
whiles King and Lords are excluded? Or that we shall endeavor also to continue
their exclusion? And so whether he that endeavoreth their restoring, or he that
hinders it not, do break the Engagement, though he be faithful to the
Commonwealth while they are absent?

5. If the present Government should be overthrown, and King and Lords set up,
whether does he break this Engagement who shall be faithful to them, or that
shall swear or engage for them against the present Government?

6. If by Commonwealth be meant the present Government (as the words [Now
Established] would make us think it is) then what is it that is established?
whether an entire House of Commons, or not entire? whether only the present
House, or all future, or any future? Whether this House to be perpetuated? or
if not, whether to continue till they voluntarily dissolve, which we know not
whether it will be perpetuated or not, and consequently, whether we engage to
any succeeding Parliament or not? Or if they dissolve, whether the next must be
annual or triennial, or of duration of their own pleasure as this? or whether
chosen as formerly? or how?

7. Whether the meaning of the word ( As) be to engage us to endeavor that all
future Parliaments shall be established in the same course, and by the same
means as this has been?

8. Whether the word ( Now) have reference to the first Calling of this House
of Commons, or to any alteration since made? And if so, by whom? and when? and
by what Authority was that change made?

9. What Is meant by ( true and faithful,) whether only to do them no wrong, or
not to be perfidious? or else to obey them? or further to engage and hazard our
estates and lives on their behalf, or how far?

10. And so if King and Lords should raise an Army to recover their Authority,
whether he that refuses to fight against them do break his Engagement?

11. Seeing the people are judged the Supreme Power (as it is acknowledged by
the present House) do they hereby engage to their Representers, or to the
present Authority, as their Supreriors or Rulers? and so give away their
Supremacy? or is it so natural to them, that they cannot give it away? (which
else would have been done heretofore;) Or do they engage to them only as their
Trustees or Servants? viz. That they will defend them in the work that they set
them about?

12. Whether if an Army, or any powerful Company, should seize on the present
House of Commons, or the greater part, and should imprison, exclude, or hang
them up at Tybarn, are the people bound by this Engagement to rise for their
Defense, and make War against these Invaders?

13. If this Parliament or any hereafter should endeavor to perpetuate
themselves, and so prevent our having any more free Elections, whether do we
hereby engage to be true to them; or if we endeavor to dissolve them, do we
break this Engagement?

14. Does this Engagement take away the Power of the next Parliament? And if
they when they meet and sit restore King and Lords, which now are thrown down,
do they break this Engagement?

15. If this next Parliament shall so re-establish King and Lords, and will not
rule without them, must we resist all, and be without any Government? or must
we endeavor to choose a new Parliament? and if they do the like, what must we
do?

16. If the present House shall again change their Judgments, and set up King
and Lords, or require us to swear to them, must we obey or resist them?

17. If this Army by observing that there is no Government but Monarchy, or one
Insupremacy in all the Bible mentioned, or by reading that ( For the sins of
people many are thy Rulers,) or by the experience of new divisions and parties
in Parliament, breeding distempers in Government, or by being won over by the
prevalency or flattery of some one single person, whose deserts and worth they
conceive is such, as they resolve to make him sole Governor, and so set up
Monarchy again, whether we are bound by this Engagement to resist them?

18. Do we engage to the present Power absolutely or conditionally? If this or
any other Representative shall Tyrannize and invade the peoples Estates, or
take away propriety (which are things that cannot be authoritative acts,
because the people having no such power themselves, cannot give it to others,
seeing there is no power but what is derived from Gods, who has given none to
do evil,) are we in this case bound to continue our faithfulness?

19. If the people shall find that this present House, or any other hereafter,
has forfeited their Trust, or been guilty of the fore mentioned Crimes, may
they not recall that their Trust, and exclude them from Government?

20. Or if any of us be members of the Army, and the said Army shall hereafter
judge that this House has been so guilty, and shall exclude some, and banish
others, and behead others (for so the Powers as now established stand) and so
we understand [as now established,] do we break the Engagement if we join with
the Army in so doing, or should we resist them?

21. If this minor part of this present House, or any succeeding, shall judge
that the whole is in danger by a corrupt majority, and (having strength
thereunto) shall exclude them, do they break the Engagement or we, if we
further them in it?

22. If one part of the People or Army shall judge that this or any future
Representative has been this Trust, and the other part judge otherwise, which
must we adhere to according to this Engagement?

When the Authors of this Engagement shall clearly and fully resolve these
Doubts, and give national and satisfactory Answer to these Queries, they will
in great measure satisfy the Kingdom, at leastwise the more rational part of
them, and much more dispose them to engage for the good of the Kingdom; until
then, we could heartily wish that Mr Dury, and such vain Bablers (who most
grossly abuse and misapply Scripture, and other Moral Rules) might be refrained
from vometing up in the public view such indigested Crudities, to the scandal
of the English Nation, and reproach of the Protestants throughout the world.

We do profess, when the lawfulness of the Authority that imposes it shall be
made out clear to us, and our Doubts fully resolved, with the manifesting of
the Justice, Goodness and Necessity of this Engagement, we speak it seriously
and unfeignedly, there shall none more willingly nor readily then our selves
subscribe it, until then, we cannot but think the pressing of the Engagement,
and the punishing the Non-Subscribers with with such intolerable punishments,
as the exposing their Estates and persons to open violence, such on enslaving,
irrational and destructive Act against the Protestants of England, as since the
planting of the Gospel in this Kingdom until this day, the like destructive Act
can scarce be found, It enslaves the Souls as well as the bodies of men; for
what greater snare can there be to the Conscience, then to be enforced to
engage to they know not whom? 2. To they know not what? All the light that is
in it is, that it plainly tells a man that subscribes it, that he swears point
blank against his Oath of Allegiance, his Protestation and his Covenant, all
which engage him to maintain King and Lords* this engages him against King and
Lords in the bare words.

Object. It is said by the most learned of the Engagers, That the taking of
this Engagement is no breach of the Covenant, because the Covenant obliges no
longer then there is a possibility of keeping it; but King and Lords being
taken away, there is no possibility of maintaining that that is not.

Sol. But we humbly conceive (under favor) that this Argument is no way
satisfactory; For though it be granted, that it is impossible for a Covenanter
to maintain King and Lords when they are thrown down, yet it is not impossible
for him in his calling and place to maintain Kingly Government; As it is
impossible for the son to yield actual obedience to the father whom Thieves and
Robbers have murdered, yet it is possible for that son to express his fillial
affection that he bore to his father, and his real intentions of preserving his
father, by exclaiming against the Malefactors, and using all lawful means to
bring such men to condign punishment, and utterly shunning all compliance with
them.

Put the case a company of hired servants in a family should conspire to kill
the Master of the family, or imprison him, and seize on the wealth and estate
of their Master, divide it amongst them, proclaim themselves Lords and Masters
of the family, command the children to yield obedience to them; though the
children are not able to resist them, nor yield that obedidence for the present
which is due to their father, nor the wife express that conjugal love, by
reason of the violent restrant and separation; yet it is possible for the wife
to abhor the company, and disclaim the authority of those servants, not to own
them for her lord, nor submit unto them, nor be confederate with them, though
she cannot for the present enjoy her husband; and so for the children, though
they cannot possibly love as their father, yet they may disclaim the power that
abused their father, pray for his restoring, and abhor compliance with that
party, that so presumptuously and wickedly threw down their father; This they
may do, and are bound to do by the Law of Nature, as children to a father; and
to do the contrary, as to be confederate with those that destroyed their
father, were unnatural wickedness, and a mere Conspiracy, notwithstanding their
father were not then in being. Rex pater patriae.

2 We affirm, That the Kings Title is now on foot, and the Lords in being,
therefore there is a possibility of keeping the Covenant now.

Can any created (much less usurped) Power free us from our Oath, which we made
to maintain King, Lords and Commons, Religion, Liberty; and the Peace and Union
of the Kingdom? and never to be drawn directly or indirectly by any
Combination, Persuasion or Terror to be divided from this blessed Union and
Conjunction, whether to make defection to the conteary part, or give our selves
to a detestable nutrarity or indiffterency, but all the days of our lives
zealously and constantly continue therein against all opposition. This clause
of the Covenant seems to be made purposely against the Powers now in Command;
And do they imagine that men of Conscience or Honor will so foully blur their
Profession and Reputation, and endanger their Souls, by a contrary
Subscription? Ashcam tells us, That usurped Powers are so, notwithstanding
theyout and succeed another generation.

We would fain know, whether subscribing this Engagement be not an
acknowledging of the present Power sitting to be the Supreme Authority of the
Nation? and consequently in so doing whether we do not approve of their cutting
off the King, throwing down the House of Lords, and casting out all the
Covenant-keeping Commons, with the rest of the Covenant keeping Officers in the
Kingdom, hereby contracting the guilt of Blood, Treason, and other foul
Enormities to our selves, by being partaker in other men's sins, which David,
Psalm. 1. bids us neither to sit with, nor stand with, nor walk with, not to
have the least communion with?

Object. But is objected by the ablest of them from Romans 13. 1, 2. That that
the Powers that be are to be obeyed, let them be what they will be, if they are
in being they are to be obeyed, because they are the Ordinance of God.

Ans. The Apostle lays this Command upon Subjects, not to rebel against the
visible Supreme Authority, this the Engagers hold to be the sense of the
Apostle if so, then hence we draw this Argument, Whatsoever subjects shall Rebel
against a visible supreme Authority, they resist the Ordinance of God. But an
Army and other subjects in contradicting the Votes of the two Houses, cutting
off the King and pulling down the house of Lords Rebel against the Supreme
Authority, Ergo. Here is an Argument ad hominem, so that the Apostle seems to
tell us that usurping powers are not the Ordinance of God, but the resisters of
the Ordinance of God; and therefore by their own Arguments the present power is
rather to be dealt with as resisters of the visible Supreme Authority then
obeyed or acknowledged for Supreme.

As for that of Christ's acknowledging Caesar, it is well known the Case is far
different from ours, for the Roman Emperors had conquered Judea many years
before, and the whole Nation became Tributary to the Romans, the Supreme
Authority of the Jews acknowledged Caesar to be their King, We have no King but
Caesar, and they had for a certain Tribute compounded with Caesar, which
Tribute money Christ forbids them not, but commands them to pay* if the Jews
will Covenant with Caesar Christ bids them not break Covenant with Caesar, and
this is all, and how far is this from our Case? Jesus Christ is a great enemy
to usurpation and so much abhors that Christians should subject unto it,
especially under the Gospel, that he calls it Devil worship, Revel, 13. 4.
Subjecting to a Tyrannical Government is called the worshipping of the Devil;
Verse 1, 2. the beast arising out of the Sea, (i. e.) the Ecclesiastical State;
meaning the Pope, the great Independent or the world; (verse 2.) to whom the
Devil, the Dragon, gave his seat and power, and great authority, The Dragons
seat (before Constantine) was the Emperial Throne seated at Rome, this the
Devil gave the Pope; and why is it said the Devil gave him his power and seat,
but because he got it in the Devils way? by lying, Covenant Breaking, Rebellion
against their Liege Masters the Emperors, and his murdering and dethroning of
them, and usurping their authority. This usurped power of the Pope, verse 3,
the world wondered after, that is, yielded subjection unto, acknowledged his
sovereignty; and Verse 4. and they worshipped the Dragon; how so? the next words
tell you, he gave power to the Beast; The Romans did not, and the Roman
Catholics did never absolutely profess themselves worshipers of the Devil,
but in as much as they worshipped an usurped Power, a Power gotten by Treachery,
Rebellion, murder, and deceit, they worshipped the Devil. This Text holds out
two clear Truths. 1. That there are Powers which are not of Gods setting up,
out of the Devils setting up. 2. To subject to such usurped power, is
subjection to the Devil, and as odious in the sight of Christ as worshipping of
the Devil.

Object. Kings were ordained in wrath, and God was angry with Israel for
desiring a King; Ergo, Kings are not the government approved by God.

Sol. To this we answer in a word to the Engagers, who upon this ground reject
the government of Kings.

1. God did not give the office of a King, but the person of a King in wrath*
for when God took away the person, he continued the office. 2. He promised to
Abraham that Kings should come of him. 3. He that denies the office of a king,
denies Christ who is a King, and denies the established Government (in the form
of it) by God in the Church since Adam.

2. God was not angry with them simply for seeking a king, but, 1. for their
manner of seeking a king; they would seek one in the pride of their heart,
only to be like other Nations: 1 Samuel 8. 5. their hearts were hankering after
not only to be like other Nations government, but their Religion. ^. For that
they sought a king inordinately, they could not be content with a government
that was over them, but had an itching discontented humor against the present
visible government. They made a remonstrance that their Judges were unjust,
therefore they would be no longer subject to them: v. 5. this God is angry at.
For Subjects to reject, or endeavor to change the government of a kingdom, or
to overthrow the visible lawful Authority upon dislike of the Government, is a
God-provoking sin, let the Ingagers look to it. The supreme Powers are only
disposed of by God. Doubtless they might have prayed to God in his due time to
fulfill his promise, Genesis 16. of giving them a king, for Israel never came to
the high noon of Reformation and glory till kings were set over, and that was
in Solomon, at which time the Church and State of the Jews flourished beyond
all things before or since: so that in praying for a king in order to the glory
of God, the accomplishment of his promises, and the good of his Church, it had
been no sin: but for the people of their own heads mutinously, and in
opposition to a visible Authority, to desire a king, this was a great sin.

Ob. If Gods providence order such things, we must submit to providence, and
revealed decrees of God, lest we be found fighters against God.

Sol. To this we answer: there are the decrees of God, and the commands of God,
we speak of them now as contra-distinct things quo ad nos.

The precepts or revealed commands of God in his word, are the unquestionable
rules of Christians at all times, whereby to regulate all their actions,
against which no providence nor necessity can prevail: so as to dispense with
those Laws or precepts, we mean moral precepts, such as are naturally moral,
not moral barely by institution, for such a moral differs nothing from
ceremonial, except in duration; such moral precepts, in extrema necessitate,
may be dispensed withal, as to help an ox out of a pit on the Sabbath day,
which is a labor, and toil, and simply a breach of the Sabbath, yet in regard
of the necessity it gives a dispensation, or rather the Law dispenses with it.
But as for moral commands which are such by nature, they are indispensible
rules, except in the case of an immediate call to the contrary by revelation
from God. As Abraham was called to kill his son Isaac, which was against a
natural precept, yet having an immediate call from God, had not God stayed his
hand, he might have lawfully done it: because he that commanded Abraham so to
do was the Lord, and maker of the Law, which he can dispense with. But this
case cannot be ours under the Gospel, because God has given us his revealed
will in writing, since which immediate revelations have ceased in the Gospel
Churches, there being no need of them at all.

Now as for the Providentiall acts of God, or his revealed decrees, these are
no rules for us to walk by, nor follow any otherwise then they concur with the
revealed will of God in his precepts. We bring a case shall make good this
assertion, and stop the mouths of all rational antagonists.

In the 1 King. 11. 29. to v. 39. there was that decree revealed to Jeroboam by
the prophet Ahijah, who exactly revealed Gods intentions to give to him ten of
the twelve Tribes, and the house of David but two, Judah and sickly Benjamin,
scarce worth the mentioning as a Tribe it was so small. God reveals the reason
to him why he did it, viz: for idolatry, and forsaking the true God. This, v.
37. donation of Gods to Jereboam is repeated again to him, that God would
choose him, and give him a vast power over the people, to do, and reign as his
heart could desire. Here if ever a man might have pleaded Providence, and have
urged the revealed decree of God for attempting treason against Solomon,
certainly (if in any case or person) it had not been rebellion in him to
attempt that which Providence had decreed him. Nor rebellion in Israel to have
subjected to him whom God had declared to be their king.

But Jereboam in following the revealed decree of God* contrary to a moral
precept of God, viz: the fifth Commandment, which injoyneth Subjects and
inferiors to submit to their lawful superiors, for this very cause he is set
down in the word of God as a Rebel against Solomon: 1 King. 11. 26. there he
is put in the rear of the worst of the enemies of the Crown, and royal family
of Israel, and stigmatized with this infamous mark of a Rebel: for, v: 26.
Jereboam the son of Nebat an Ephrathite of Zereda, Saul's servant -- even he
lift up his hand against the King: and the cause of this his rebellion is set
forth in the rest of the following Chapter, because God had revealed his decree
concerning the punishing of the Royal Family for their sin in giving him ten
of the Tribes.

This revealed will of God was so far from justifying his acting against a
moral precept, that his actions are set forth hanging as it were on Hamans
gallows, expressed in the terms of the highest treason, twice together, He lift
up his hand against the King, he lift up his hand against the king.

Nor are the ten Tribes less excusable who subjected to Jereboam: for though
they might have pleaded self preservation, and if they had not revolted they
had all been undone, and the providence of God who would have it so, who had
decreed it so, and revealed those decrees to them by a Prophet, these might not
be resisted, yet these ten Tribes notwithstanding for their rejecting of the
visible and lawful Authority, and supremacy of the kingdom, are twice
branded in holy Chronicles for Rebels. 1 King. 12. 19. Israel rebelled against
the house of David. And 2 Chronicles. 10. 19. Israel rebelled against the house of
David.

So that it is manifest, that following of Providence is so far from being a
Christians duty, that many times it is a desperate sin: and therefore it was
that holy David when he might have cut off Saul's head, and when Providence had
cast him into his hands, he durst not walk by acts of Providence, but by divine
precepts, which commanded him to do no murder. He might have pleaded
self-preservation, and in killing him he had killed a public Enemy, and a
murderer. But David had a better guide then Providence to direct him.

Witty and true was that expression of a pious and learned Divine: If Joseph in
Egypt had followed Providence, he had without doubt committed folly with his
Mistress, and have said Providence put him upon it. We therefore conclude, that
acts of Providence are no rules for Christians to follow, and it is so far from
resisting of God, the not being governed by them, that many times it becomes a
great sin, as is evident by what has been declared: and the ten Tribes have
this sin written in bloody characters upon their back until this day: for from
Rebellion they turned to Idolatry; and from that day forward they sank deeper
and deeper into misery, until they lost their Religion, Laws, liberties, and
Nation: which judgment remains upon them until this day; God having hanged
them in Gibbets to teach Posterities after them to take heed of their sins,
viz: of following Providence against a Precept:

Ob. But how comes it to pass, that they that make a scruple of subscribing
this Engagement, yet make no scruple of paying taxes: Is not such a subjection
an acknowledgement of their Authority? and do they not condemn themselves in
doing one, and not the other?

A. We will not undertake to give the fullest Answer hereunto, yet we hope a
satisfactory Answer we shall be able to give.

1. We therefore say, that we that do pay taxes do make scruples of paying them,
and were we not inslaved should much more express our selves.

2. Paying of taxes does not imply a not scrupling of the authority that
demands and exacts them: A man may pay his money to a thief, yet not
acknowledge that authority to be just.

3. Taxes that are now imposed are extorted, and not voluntarily paid: and (as
to that) a power is usurped over men's estates, as if the Nation were completely
conquered Now in such a case we conceive our selves merely passive, and no way
active, at least free from any spontaneous act. Now this is far from
acknowledging the iustness and lawfulness of the supremacy of such a Power;
it is one thing to be enforced to a subjection in person and estate; and quite
another thing to acknowledge that power which usurps this authority to be
supreme and legal, which the Engagement absolutely inforceth upon the
Subscribers.

But let the world judge from this Objection, how cruel and tyrannical that
Government is, that when the poor Protestants shall be content to submit to
most grievous taxes for quietness sake; yet this is not sufficient, unless
they will subject their souls, and ensnare them also in unreasonable and cruel
bondage. Is it not sufficient for the paying of taxes, bearing of Free Quarter,
and suffering many afflictions to purchase (that which in no age was ever
denied) our freedom, but we must be cut-lawed, accounted the offscouring of
the world, and exposed to the cruelty of merciles men without remedy; must our
estates, our livelihoods be taken away, our wives ravished, our children
dis-inherited, our goods rifled and must we have no remedy, and all because we
will not ^ump with men in their opinion? Let all Europe judge between our
enemies and us this day, what have we done against them thus to provoke them,
who of us have lifted up our hands against them where are these of us that in
any taxes are behind? but we have paid it double, and yet a thousand of our
families are ruined by them; they have taken away our offices, and livelihoods,
they have suspended and imprisoned sundry of our Orthodox and Presbyterian
Ministers, and now have laid a snare to pluck them out of their Benefices, and
at last to drive them the kingdom, as men unworthy to be protected. Where is
that liberty of conscience they so much pleaded for before they got to be
supreme, is not that forgot now? Are not Mr. Edwards his words fulfilled, who
forewarned the kingdom of that party which pleaded for Liberty of Conscience,
saying, If ever they got power they would not grant liberty of conscience to
others, who now so much plead for it for themselves.

This is our comfort in our distress, that though on all hands we are hated,
and persecuted, and repreached by our enemies, yet for all this we have not
dealt falsely in our Covenant: and we can say more in our distress to uphold
our hearts then all our enemies, Lord thou know our integrity.

We will only add one thing (which indeed is no addition, but a vehement
reiteration, that this new Engagement may be explained according to our
Queries, or any other way to satisfy the rational and sober minded part of
the Kingdom, and if possible the drawer of it up, and first framer of it may be
known. This would give wonderful satisfaction not only to private men, but
Parliament men, who know the framer of it, and stop the mouths of such who
say, that Sir Kelenem Digby, and that patty that came with him from Rome into
England (about the time of the throwing down of the Lords, and cutting off of
the King, framed this Engagement against the Protestants, and Covenanteers
party; as also to ruin the Parliament, and Army. This by many rational men is
much credited upon this ground: because that the chief head-peeces of Rome,
were at the cutting off of the King here in England, freely in oying their
liberty; such as Sir Kelenem Digby, with his concealed Comrades, besides Sir
John Winter, Endimion Porter Esquire, Walter Montague Esquire, Sir Edw: Ford,
all professed Papists, and the most of them proclaimed Traitors, some of them
being of the blood of the gunpowder-traytors; these had all their liberties to
flant it in the City of London, and Westminster Hall, and were courted, and
gallantly entertained, whiles above 40. of the notorious Heretics in the Popes
black book, we mean stout Protestants (whose names many of them were at the
Covenant in Print) were enforced to look through the grates of Prisons, Sir
William Waller, Major General Brown, Coll: Coply, and others being to this day
detained and not the least cause shown for it, but only because they are
Protestants many were enforced to make escapes, and fly beyond Sea as Coll.
Hollis, Col: Massy, and several Citizens of London: so that all men that had
observed the Popes designs, since the Covenant was made against him in
England, concluded that now the design of the Popes had taken effect, and he
had taken full revenge upon the Parliament of England for all their Injuries
done unto him and his party. Since which there only remains of the Covenant
keeping Presby^erian Ministry, against which many Petitions have been made,
and put up to the House at Westminster, some to take them down, and some to
take their means from them. But now the last and grand design is to put upon
them the new Engagement, this has scattered the Assembly of Divines in the
first place, has shaken and cast out the Heads of Houses in both Universities,
and daily creeps more and more upon the Protestant Ministers both in the City
and Country, clipping their estates, and keeping them out of Livings, and
Benefices, whereby very many of the godly Ministers with their Families are
like to starve already, these things make many Protestants imagine, that the
design is to pluck up all the sound Protestants in the Kingdom, both of
Magistrates and Ministers, and so by degrees to eradicate the Protestant
Religion, and all to make way for Popery, which has already got stronger
footing in the Kingdom then the Protestant Religion: for all the oaths that
were against their consciences are taken away, and a new one set up well
pleasing to the Papists, only offensive to the Protestants: nay all Laws
against the Papists are repealed, and they restored to their ancient liberties
in Q. Mary's days, and worse Laws against the Protestants, then in her days.
Nor is this inconsistent with State policy, for if it be true as it is
believed, and reported to be true, that the design is to set up Monarchy in
another family, they cannot do it without the alteration of Religion, for the
Protestants they are resolved to keep their Covenant, and the Sectarians they
are in no wise to be leaned upon, by reason of their instability, they are like
Jackdaws that fly from Church to Church, sometimes here, sometimes there,
Heterogenious parts in an entire body, are fit to throw down a government: But
unfit to erect another. But the Jesuit he is both a Statesman, and a staid man
upon the Romish bottom, and that party, viz: the Romish party, are all allies
in the Catholic cause; so that he that will usurp a Monarchy, his only
pollitique way is to join with that party who can befriend him in every
Country. For all Catholic Princes are bound by an Oath, as much as in them
lies, to promote the Catholic cause, and what Prince that is a Papist dares
be assistant to a Protestant Prince against an usurper, that has promised the
Pope to set up the Catholic cause, and root out Protestants, that Prince that
should do so, should be sure to be cursed whith bell, book, and candle at Rome:
nay what King durst refuse (upon the Popes command,) to be assistant to the
usurper, against the true head being a Protestant; we will say no more: what
others say, either to tell of Sir Kenelem Digby his being sent to Rome, or of
Quartermaster General Watsons going after him, or of his instructions what to
agitate at the Popes Court, or of the Popes designs in Ireland against the
Protestants.

But we will desire the Author who ever he be, or the power that put it forth,
that they will tell us, what is the meaning of his new Engagement, and make it
clear to us that they can lawfully impose it: and when the justness thereof in
each particular shall be made out, that it is for the glory of God, the
advancement of Religion, the establishment of lawful Magistracy, and the
establishing and reforming of the State, as the tenor of the Covenant runs, we
do again profess that we will with all joyfulnesse submit, and subscribe
thereunto.

But if upon clear and manifest grounds it appear to be destrctive to the
Parliament, Religion, Laws, Liberty, Kingdom, and Army, and a mere design to
introduce Popery, they will be so far from promoting it (we hope) that they
will speedily remove it out of the way, as a burdensome stone upon Christians
consciences, and the Kingdoms Gangreen. We could wish them to take notice of
the hand of God against it since is came forth, the same night that the Act for
the taking the Engagement was printed, the same night a dreadful blow by
powder, which blew up 70. and odd persons, and slew them all in the twinkle of
an eye: Lieut: Coll: Smith, who was Sir Hardresse Wallers L: Coll: he that was
the busy man in pulling the Members of the Commons House out of the House, and
imprisoning the Members, he was blowed up in the midst of his cups, and slain:
and since that one of the promoters of the Engagement (we tremble to mention
it) on Jan: 30. through the terror of conscience, and temptation of the devil,
hanged himself. We cannot but take notice of Gods displeasure and wrath which
breaks out daily amongst us, in fires and murders since this Engagement came
forth.

We therefore resolve (as we hate perjury, rebellion and treason) not to touch
with this Engagement, until upon evident grounds of humane reason, or Divinity,
it be made clear, that it is for the good of Religion, Laws, Magistracy, and
Ministry: and this our resolution is so reasonable, and just, that we conceive
none but unreasonable men, and the enemies of Church and State, Parliament,
Army and people will speak against it, or oppose this our resolution.

Ob. There is one objection or false gloss which the Ingagers make, and that
is in the clause of the 3d. Article of the Covenant concerning the King, that
we covenanted with the Parliament to defend the King so far as he defended the
Protestant Religion: but if he act contrary, then to bring him to Justice
according to the Covenant, that injoyns us to bring Delinquents to condign
punishment. But, say they, the King was a great Delinquent, and an enemy to the
Protestant Religion.

A. To this we answer briefly: 1. The two former Articles of the Covenant speak
wholly of the preservation of the reformed Religion, the 3d. Article speaks
wholly of the preservation of the King, and Parliament, and kingdom, which
together with the preservation of Religion we covenanted to defend. To defend
his Majesty's person [in the preservation and defense of the true Religion, and
Liberties of the kingdom] is not inserted conditionally, as I will defend his
person no longer then he shall defend Religion, and the Laws. If so, then it was
taken with the like condition to be subject to the Parliament: and then it must
necessarily follow, that we the Subjects make our selves the Kings Judges and
that man or party may revolt from the King, and endeavor to pull him down,
because he maintains not his Religion; and therefore we renounce that
Interpretation of that Clause as Jesuiticall. We Protestants took it in this
sense, that we would, together with our Religion, preserve our King and
Parliament absolutely: And if they did act any thing contrary to Religion, or
Law, we were resolved to yield passive obedience, and in no wise to resist the
higher Powers But grant it (which we will not) that it had been meant
conditionally, so long as he preserves Religion: how comes it, that when the
King had fully determined, and yielded to root out Popery, and to establish the
Protestant Religion in the three Kingdoms, and to establish Church government,
and put the Militia in the Parliaments hands; and when the Parliament voted his
concessions a ground to proceed on to settle the Kingdom, then he was snatched
away, and both King and Parliament thrown down. This plea of theirs joined with
their practice, would make any man believe the Ingagers flat Papists. How can
they say they sincerely maintain the rights and privileges of Parliament, when
they contradict their Votes, and take the boldness to tell them they are all
treacherous, and lay violent hands on them, and exclude them from sitting in
the House, and imprison them? And how can they say they defended his Majesty's
person in the maintaining of true Religion, when they cut him off, even then,
when both the Houses of Parliament and He had even concluded the Treaty, to
root out Popery, and establish the Protestant Religion? What Subject,
especially hired servants, dare presume to contradict the Parliaments Votes
upon serious debate, shall any one party of Subjects surmises outweigh the
grave and serious debates of a Parliament? It Is true subjects duty to submit to
higher Powers, not resist them. But this was a resistance at that very time
when all things were concluded in a manner, for settling the kingdom in peace,
and true Religion. So that they that upon this ground plead for the necessity
of cutting off the King, must plead it, because he would no longer defend the
Popish Religion. And therefore from the Ingagers own Argument of cutting off the
King, we cannot subscribe to this Engagement; lest the world take us for most
rank hypocrites, vile Apostates, and absolute Papists.

Reader, the times are such that they will not admit such Papers to be perused,
and corrected to thy hand: therefore be pleased to amend with thy pen these
gross mistakes of the Printer.

P. 1. l. 4. for, and peace and religion, r: pure Religion and famous Princes
to defend both. l. 5. for, Fortescus, r. Fortescue. l. 10. for, disposing, r.
dispensing. l. 11 for, Ras, r. res l. 16. for, spoke, r. speaks. l. ult: for,
faind, r. found p. 2. l. 3. for, matter for, r. matter, so for. l. 6. for, for,
r: so. l: 7. for, constitution, r: constituting. l. 9. for, conjunctions, r:
conjunctim. l. 10. for apax, r. apex. l. 12. for, procession, r: processes, l.
13. for, divisions, r: divisim. l. 14. for compunction, r: conjunctim. l. 17.
for, limitations, r. as for limitations, for, power have, r: power they have.
l. 33. blot out, and the kingdom of England by King, Lords, and Commons, p. 4.
l. 3. for, time, r: line. l. 4. fer, divided Henry, r. divided. Henry, pvt out,
and l. 13. for, laying, t: uniting. l. 21. 22. put out, whose antiquity is
beyond all kings in the world. l. 32. for, ^00. r: 1000. l. 34. blot out,
always acknowledged and granted by the king. p. 5. l. 21. for, then, r. the
three, l. 35. for, vegative, r. Negative. l. 31. for, public, r. politic, p.
7. l. 2. for, lover, r: honor. l. 3. for, their, r: your. for, give, r: grant.
l. 5. for, 4. but. r: 4. N. 17. But. l. 7. for, access, r: excess. l. 10.
for, meaner, r: meanest. l. 7. for, is, r: as. l. 19. for, implies, r: imploys.
l. 34. for, approves, r: appeals. l. 35. for, and infinition, r: ad infinitum.
p. 8. l. 1. for, Giudas, r: Guildas. l. 2. for, at, r. of. l. 6. for,
ptesevitians, r: persecutions. l. 8. for Entichion Heresies, r: Eutichian
Heretics. for Popus, r: Popes, l: 15. for Lucious, r: Lucius l. 17. for,
righteous, r. religious. l. 19. for, Helea, r: Helena. l. 25 for, up,
Christian, r. up, the first Christian: l. 29. for, Antichrisian, r:
Antichristian. l. 35. for, intrapped, r: Religious. l. 38. for, got, r: Acted.

FINIS.

