A SHARP, BUT SHORT NOISE OF WAR, OR, The Ruin of Antichrist by the Sword of
Temporal War, Hinted.

Written, By FRANCIS LIN,

And I will punish the World for their evil, and the Wicked for their
Iniquity, and I will cause the arrogance of the proud to cease, and will lay
low the haughtiness of the terrible. Isa. 13.11. These shall make War with
the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them: For he is Lord of Lords, and King
of Kings, and they that are with him, are called, and chosen, and faithful,
Rev. 17.14. LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, next door to the Golden Lion
in Aldersgate-Streete. 1650.

A sharp but short noise of War, Or, the ruin of Antichrist by the Sword of
Temporal War, hinted.
THough War may be said to have more Fathers then one, yet as a punishment to
the Inhabitants of the Earth; it comes from God, who being displeased with, and
provoked by the wickedness of a People, does many times manifest his
displeasure, and execute his wrath upon them, by the exercise of War; now in
this respect, and in reference to War as a judgment coming from God, all
Wars upon Earth may be called occasional, because that by the wickedness of
people, God is provoked, and by their sins, the Lord is occasioned to bring
War upon them: and this the Lord God has done upon three sorts of People,
Viz. His one people, Heathens, and Papists.

God has inflicted War upon his own People: who among you shall hearken to
this, and take heed, and hear? for afterward, Who gave Jacob for a spoil,
and Israel to the Robbers. Did not the Lord against whom we have sinned, for
they would not walk in his ways, neither be obedient unto his Laws,
therefore he has powered upon him his fierce wrath, and the strength of
Battle. Isa. 42.23. Son of man when the Land sins against me by committing
a Trespass, then will I stretch out mine hand upon it. And so on to the 20.
and 21. Verses. Though Noah Daniel, and Job, were in it, as I live says the
Lord God, they shall deliver neither Son nor Daughter, they shall but deliver
their own souls by their righteousness, when I send my four soar Judgments,
of which the Sword is one, which shall kill them without, and in the Chambers
fear, both the young man, and the young Woman, the Suckling with the man of
Gray hairs: I said I would scatter them abroad, I would make their remembrance
to cease from among men, save that I feared the fury of the Enemy, least their
adversaries should wax proud, and least they should say, our high hand and not
the Lord has done all this, Deuteronomy. 32.25. Thus we see, that War is not only
threatened but has been in flicted upon Gods own People, when they have
sinned against the Lord: You only have I known of all the Families of the
Earth, therefore I will visit you for all your Iniquties, Amos. 3.2.

Now by this very means of inflicting War upon a People, has the Lord
brought them to Repentance. The Children of Ammon passed over Jordan to fight
against Judah, and Israel was sore distressed, and then they cried unto the
Lord, saying, We have sinned against thee. Jud. 10.9, 10. Awake awake, and
stand up O England and Ireland; O England and Ireland, who has drunk deep of
this cup of Gods wrath; for you have drunk the dreggs of the cup of trembling,
and wrung them out, according to that of Isa. 51. 17.

It follows, that the Lord God both has and will bring War upon Heathens.
But now before I come to instance in a way of proof, I desire to look upon
all these Scripture Instances, which I shall make use of, as recorded by the
holy Ghost, to remain through all ages in full force and authority, against,
and in Gods due time to be verified, upon a Succession of the heads and members
of Heathens, and upon a Succession of the heads and members of Papists. I shall
take notice of the metaphor, and of the sense of things, as I go along, and
shall apply my self to the present time, and things with which I have to do;
I shall show my thoughts, and refer it to others: this is the persuasion of my
mind and heart, that the Lord God will not only bring War, but by War will
utterly destroy the beauty and power of Mahomet, which has ruled among the
Turks and Heathens; the beauty and power of the Pope, which has ruled amongst
the Papists; the beauty and power of all such of the Inhabitants of the Earth,
who shall in spirit, Judgment, and practice, cleave and adhere to Heathens,
and Papists. Let all such consider what the Lord God is now a doing, and submit
to providence, least by War they be broken in pieces.

Now there is one thing more to be hinted before I proceed in a way of proof,
in the producing of Scripture precedents, consisting either of Persons or
Nations, who may be termed types of such, who shall in the latter days be by
temporal War ruined or destroyed; according to this Scripture, Behold the
Tempest of the Lord goes ^o^^ ^ith wrath, the whirlewind that hangs over
shall light upon the head of the wicked, the fierce wrath of the Lord shall not
return, until be have done, and until he have performed the intents of his
heart, in the latter days, be shall understand it. Jer. 22. and 23.

But that which I was to do, was this, I must make some distinction between
the Types of the heads of Heathens and Papists, in my producing and applying of
Scripture-Texts against them: the which I shall endeavor to perform, by
applying such Scriptures against them, as I shall apprehend to be most suitable
to them in a way of resemblance between them; in the first place, I shall
rank them both together, and in a general way apply such Scriptures against
them, as do seem to me to threaten the ruin of them; and then I shall apply
against them severally by themselves, in a particular way, I shall in an
indifferent respect sometimes take the one for the other, as there is in them
comprised all those which are indeed the professed enemies of God, his truth,
and people: to this purpose, and in reference to the whole Work, I shall make
use of the 25. of Jerem. In which Chapter the Lord God imployes this Prophet
against his own people, in the first place; but in the next more mainly
against the Nations, and the World, against his, and his peoples enemies; so
now, judgment is begun at the house of God, as in Germany, Ireland, and
England, but God will make an end with his, and their Enemies: but to return
to the thing in hand.

The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all Judah, in the fourth year,
which he delivered to the people, the Lord, says he, Has sent all his
Servants the Prophets, rising early and sending them, but you would not hear,
nor incline your ears to obey. They said turn again now every one from his
evil way, and so on, Nevertheless they would not hear me says the Lord, but
have provoked me to anger, to their own hurt: therefore says the Lord of
Hosts, because ye have not heard my words, I will do so and so, unto you. Here
in this text there are very sad and heavy judgments, and very great and
dolerous calamities threatened against and brought upon Judah, and Jerusalem,
Gods own people. But then mark what follows in the 15. Verse. For thus has
the Lord God of Israel spoken unto me, take the cup of wine, of mine
indignation, at mine hand, and cause all the Nations to whom I send thee, to
drink it; and they shall drink, and be moved, and be madd, because of the
Sword that I will send among them. It is true, it follows in the 18. Verse.
That Jerusalem must drink of the cup, and the Cities of Judah, and the Kings
and Princes thereof. But Pharaoh ^ing of Egypt, and his Servants, and Princes,
and all his people must pledge them. And all sorts of people, and all the Kings
of the Land of Uz, and all the Kings of the Land of the Philistims, and
Ashkelon, and Azzah, and Ekron, and the Remnant of Ashdod, Edom, and Moab, and
the Ammonites, and all the Kings of the North far and near, and all the
Kingdoms of the World which are upon the earth: Therefore say thou unto them,
thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, drink and be drunken, and
spew, and fall and rise no more, because of the Sword which I will send among
you. But if they refuse to take the cup at thine hand, to drink, then tell
them, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, you shall certainly drink, for lo I begun
to plague the City where my name is called up on, and should you go free? you
shall not go unpunished, for I will call for a Sword upon all the Inhabitants
of the Earth. Now let the wise judge, if the people of the Lord who are a City
of Citizens, who have and do call upon the Name of God through all ages, have
been wasted by War, and the temporal Sword, as both Scripture and other
Histories do affirm. And in particular, the Waldenses, and Albingenses, the
Germans, and Rochellians, the Irish and English, and many others, certainly
there is yet a world of Heathens and Papists, who shall have blood to drink.
Truly for my own part, I tremble to think of that, which I think the sword
of the Lord will do up and down in the World, now in a short time; and yet
in reference to some events which will certainly follow, I do desire to
rejoice.

But to go on with the Prophets work, Therefore Prophecy thou against them
all these words, and say unto them, the Lord shall roar from above, and thrust
our his voice from his holy habitation; he shall roar upon his habitation, and
cry abroad, as they that press the Grapes, against all the inhabitants of the
Earth, the sound shall come to the ends of the Earth, for the Lord has a
controversy with the Nations, and will enter into judgment with all Flesh, and
he will give them that are wicked to the Sword. Thus says the Lord of Hosts,
behold a plague shall go forth from Nation to Nation, and a great whirlewind
shall be raised up, from the Coasts of the Earth, and the slain of the Lord
shall be at that day, from one end of the Earth even unto the other. And it is
observable, that it is the wicked who are in special given up to perish by the
sword: let all the ungodly in the World, of what Religion soever they seem to
be of, think of this.

I will suggest but one Scripture more, to this purpose, and then apply in a
particular way; it is the 24. of Isa. Behold the Lord makes the Earth empty,
and he makes it wast, he turns it upsidowne, and scatters abroad the
Inhabitants thereof: the Earth lamenteth and fades away, the World is feebl'd
and decayed, the proud people of the Earth are weakened; fear, and the Pit, and
the snare are upon thee, O Inhabitant of the Earth, and he that flees from the
noise of the fear, shall fall into the Pit, and he that comes up out of the
pit, shall be taken in the snare, for the VVindowes from on high are open, and
the Foundations of the Earth do shake; the Earth is utterly broken down, the
Earth is clean dissolved, the Earth is moved exceedingly, the Earth shall
reele two and fro like a drunken man. it shall be removed like a Tent, and the
iniquity thereof shall be heavy upon it; so that it shall fall and rise no
more: The Earth shall never be in such a posture again, as it was in before;
and in that day shall the Lord visit the Host above, that is on high, even the
Kings of the World that are upon the Earth.

And now I should come to apply against Heathens and Papists in a particular
way, but that me thinks I hear some say, that all this is old Testament, and
is already veryfied and fullfilled upon the times and People which are past,
and therefore does not relate to these times.

I Answ. The Old Testament is the sacred word of the Eternal God, and it
indures for ever, is it not a Prophecy, and a Foundation of the New? And is not
the New Testament a veryfying and a fulfilling of the Old, were they not both
for substance brought forth together, as it were like two glorious twins,
flowing from the gracious Bowels and infinite wisdom of God, who is from
everlasting to everlasting, God over all, blessed for evermore, and whatsoever
things were written aforetime, were they not written for our learning? Surely
the everlasting God is now in these our times, a fullfilling many of his words
which are written in that Old Book of his, which is called, The Old Testament.

The Lord our God is now a performing much of his work upon Earth; Christians
should now be much at work in Heaven by Prayer, and upon Earth by Observation,
that so they might magnify God in his works, which are great, and sought out
of those which love them: unworthy are they which do'nt in such a time as this
is, plentifully eye God in the glorious goings of his holy Providence, who is
now risen like a Giant refreshed with Wine, to help the meek of the Earth,
and is now making it appear, that his Excellent Majesty judges in the Earth,
and that there is a reward to be given on Earth, to them which truly fear his
Holy Name. This is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us, O
England, England, what is the God of Heaven doing in thee, what is the Lord of
the Earth doing for thee, O England strive against thy heart, and
tongue-Divisions, lay asside thy carnal plea for self-interests; cease from
thy reproachings, bite not thy Children, neither slander thy Mothers Sons; it is
sad to think of this, that Christians do manifest a kind of delight, in
opposing and in disgraceing of one another, tell not this in Gath, publish it
not in the Streets of Ashkelon, least the Daughters of the Philistims rejoice,
least the Daughters of the Uncircumcised triumph; rather then do thus, labor
to stir up the Gift of God which is in thee, pray, repent, reform, believe,
wait, he that is thine helper will not forsake, nor fail thee, for he is a
present help in time of need, the Lord of Hosts is his name, the God of Jacob
is thy refuge; fight courageously if need require, the God of Victory is on thy
side, who is God, and will be exalted among the Heathen, and among the Papists,
and among all the Enemies of this Reformation, and they shall know that they
are but men. But I am gone a little two far from the thing in hand, I do not
deny this, but that there is much of the Scripture already fulfilled, in this,
and in other respects, yet I think they are not fully verified and fulfilled:
as for men, times, and Nations, they may be bound, they have been so, but the
word of God is not bound, as the Apostle in another case speaks; it is a truth,
that there shall not only be Wars, in the days and times of the Gospel, but
there shall be Wars and rumors of Wars, and Nation shall rise against
Nation, and Realm against Realm. I shall not long detain my self from what
I intend, I shall but consider, and compare a few Scriptures and presently come
to that I have promised; the Scriptures are these, Isa 21. and Isa. 47. Jer.
50. and 51. Chap. 17. and 18. Rev. Behold this man's Chariot comes with two
Horsemen, and he answered and said, Babell is fallen, it is fallen, and all the
Images of her Gods, has he broken unto the ground. I was wroth with my People,
I have polluted mine Inheritance, and given them into thine hand, thou did
show them no mercy, O Antichrist remember this, but thon did lay thy very
heavy yoke upon the ancient, and thou said I shall be a Lady for ever, so
that thou did not set thy mind to these things, neither did thou remember
the latter end thereof; therefore now hear thou that art given to pleasures,
and dwell careless, she says in her heart, I am and none else, I shall not
sit as a Widow, neither shall know the loss of Children, but these two things
shall come to thee suddenly, on one day, the loss of Children, and
Widdow-hood, they shall come upon thee in their perfection, and so on to the
end of the 17. of Isa. the 50.and 51. chapters of Jer. Almost through out, a
cry of Battle is in the Land, and of great destruction, how is the Hammer of
the whole World destroyed and broken, How is Babell become desolate among the
Nations, I have snared thee, and thou art taken O Babell, and thou wast not
aware, thou art found and also caught because thou have striven against the
Lord, the Lord has opened his treasures and has brought forth the Weapons of
his wrath, for this is the work of the Lord God of Hosts, come against her
from the uttermost border; open her storehouses, tread on her as on Sheaves,
and destroy her utterly, let nothing of her be left, destroy all her Bullocks,
let them go down to the slaughter: Woe unto them for their day is come, and
the time of their visitation. Agreeable to these Scriptures is that of the 18.
of the Revelation, which is New Testament. And he cried out mightily with a
loud voice, saying, it is fallen, Babylon the great City, and is become the
Habitation of Devils; her sins are come up to Heaven, and God remembered her
iniquities, in as much as she glorified her self, and lived in pleasures, so
much give ye to her torment and sorrow, for she says in her heart, I sit
being a Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see no moruning, therefore shall
plagues come in one day, death, and sorrow, and famine, and she shall be
utterly burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord God, which will condemn her.
'Twas Babylon in the Old Testament, it is Babylon in the New Testament, the one
called Eastern, the other called Western Babylon, the which is Rome, called
Babylon a Mystery, great Babylon the mother of Whoredoms. Rev. 17.5. The
Eastern Babylon is destroyed, God did destroy it by a temporal War, because
Babylon would show the People of God no mercy, the western Babylon which is
Rome, and those which it comprehends, is, and must be destroyed, because they
neither have, nor will show the People of God any mercy, they are in the
purpose of God, and must be in reference to an eternal and visible
accomplishment in the sight of men and times, it seems God will destroy under
this name or notion: see or read to this purpose.

Master Brightman upon the Revelation. Master Dent upon the Revelation. Master
Perkins in his Reformed Catholic. p. 3.
Doctor Tailor in his Book Dedicated to The Honorable House of Commons
Assembled in Parliament, in the Year 1624. In which Book there is this
passage, at the latter end of one of his Sermons, say they were warned and
called out, but now cannot be either pittyed or helped. As Lots Cosins though
they made a merriment of Lots admonition, yet they saw the Lord in earnest, and
then too late wished they had departed according to the voice of the Lord. But
now God will not, and Lot cannot help them, neither can they shift themselves
out of the fire when the dreadful shower falls, do thou sit out the summons
at thy peril, but one of the two thou must choose, either thou must go out of
Babylon, or go into her destruction.

And now I come to that which I call produceing and applying of Scripture, as
it does most evidently and certainly threaten ruin and destruction to the
generality of Heathens and Papists in this present World by the Sword and
temporal War; severally and in a particular respect I now proceed, and apply
against Antichristian Papists, though I named Heathens first: and in my
conceit the second Chapter of the Prophecy of Habukkuk, does speak clearly
and fully to that seat of iniquity, that cursing, and that cursed Antichrist,
that great than of sin the Pope, and Popes of Rome, and their professed
Adherents. I shall as I have begun cite this Scripture. Behold he that lifts
up himself his mind is not upright in him, yea indeed the proud man is as he
that transgreffeth by Wine, therefore shall he not endure because he has
enlarged his desire as the Hell, and is as death and cannot be satisfied, but
gathers unto him all Nations, and heapeth unto him all People. Now who but
the Pope and Popes of Rome has done thus especially in both respects I mean
spiritualy as well as temporally. See a place in the New Testament, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Let no man deceive you by any means, for that day shall not come except there
come a departing first, and that that man of sin be disclosed or revealed, even
the son of perdition, which is an adversary and exalts himself against all
that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he does sit as God in the
Temple of God, showing himself that he is God, and then shall the wicked man
be revealed, he shall have a visible being, in, and upon this Earth. Who is
this the Pope and Popes of Rome, which is that Antichrist whom the Lord shall
consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall abolish with the brightness of
his coming. I conceive this is meant of the faithful, sincere, powerful
preaching of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, King of Saints, who appears by his
spirit in the preaching of his word, and by this glorious mean es both has and
will consume and abolish the spiritual power of that mystery of iniquity, held
forth by that man of sin, the Popes of Rome, whose coming is by the working of
Satan, with all power and signs, and lying wonders: that this is so, see Luke
10.17.18. And the seventh returned again with joy, saying, Lord even the
Devils are subdued to us through thy name, and he said unto them I saw Satan
like lightning fall down from Heaven. See Isa. 14.12. How art thou fa^^en from
Heaven O Lucifer, son of the morning, and cut down to the ground, which
did cast lots upon the Nations, yet thou saydst in thine heart I will ascend
into Heaven, and exalt my Throne above, beside the Stars of God, I will fit
also upon the Mount of the Congregation, in the sides of the North. What should
this mean but the Church of God upon Earth, to this purpose see Rev. 18.20.
Yet further I will ascend above the height of the Clouds, and I will be like
the most high; alas poor Pope, but thou shall be brought down to the Grave, to
the sides of the pit, and they that see thee, shall look upon thee, and
consider thee, saying, is this the man that made the Earth to tremble, and that
did shake the Kingdoms, if this 14. of Isa. do, as happily it may, relate to
some particular King of the Nations, yet surely withal, it does relate to a
succession of Popes, concerning whom it may be said, the Lord has broken the
rod of the wicked, and the Scepter of the Rulers. Observe according to this
account* that a succession of Antichrists, are held forth sometimes in
Scripture under the notion or form of a man. Observe that this man is very
like to, and is compared with Satan, the Devil: observe that this
Devill-like-man, or manlike Devil Antichrist, the Popes of Rome who did not
only aspire, but did get into high places, and did attain so great preferment
in the Church of God upon Earth, and in the Church did take it upon him as if
he had been God, and in this respect had built his nest as high as Heaven, in
his own vain conceit, from whence the Lord God will fetch him down with a
Witness, his spiritual power by spiritual means, and his civil and
temporal power, by civil and temporal means, to this purpose, see Hab. 2.6.
Shall not all these take up a parable against him, and a tanting Proverb
against him, and say, Ho he that increases that which is not his, how long,
and he that ladeth himself with the thick Clay, shall they not rise up
suddenly that shall bite thee, and awake that shall stir thee, and thou shall
be their prey because thou have spoiled many Nations, all the remnant of the
people shall spoil thee, because of men's blood, and for the wrong done in the
Land, in the City, and unto all that dwell therein, woe unto the Popedom of
Rome, who has built Towns with blood, and erected a City by iniquity. Call
up the Archers against Babell, all ye that bend the bows, besiege it round
about, let none thereof escape, recompense her according to her work, and
according to all that she has done do unto her, for she has been proud
against the Lord, Jer. 50.29. Even against the holy one of Israel, here, and in
Rev. 17.6. Antichrist is set sorth under the notion of a Woman, And I saw the
Woman drunken with the blood of Saints and the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus
Christ, and when I saw her I wondered with great marvel, therefore shall her
young men fall in the Streets, and all her men of War shall be destroyed in
that day says the Lord. Now Antichrist is spoken unto as a man, Behold I come
unto thee O proud man, says the Lord God of Hosts, for thy day is come, even
the time that I will visit thee, now that we may take notice that the Lord God
does not confine his meaning to the person of any one particular man or woman;
it is thus recorded; and the proud shall stumble and fall, and none shall raise
him up, and I will kindle a fire in his Cities, and it shall devour all round
about him, it is Cities and Nations which God does threaten with dessolation,
but to the next Verse. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the Children of Israe, and
the Children of Judah were oppressed together, and all that took them Captives
held them, and would not let them go. Literally I believe they shall be let
go in a short time; spiritually there be Children of Ifrael now in England,
and in many other places and parts of the World; the People of God, true
Christians are the Israel of God in all ages, and to such as do truly fear,
and sincerely serve the true and the living God the maker of Heaven and Earth,
in this present time wherein we now live, it may be said to them, that their
Redeemer is strong, whose Name is the Lord of Hosts, he shall maintain their
cause, that he may give rest to the Land, and disquiet the Inhabitants of
Babell, the which are such, where ever they dwell, as do in spirit, judgment,
and practice, professedly declare themselves to be either Heathens, or Papists,
or notoriously wicked; let the generallity of such know, that now in this very
instant of time wherein we live, that the Sword of the Lord God of Hosts is now
upon such Chaldaeans as these, a Sword is upon the Chaldaeans says the Lord,
and upon the Inhabitants of Babel, and upon her Princes, and upon her wise men:
a Sword is upon the soothsayers, and they shall dote, Romenish and Malignant
Priests they shall prove fools, a Sword is upon her strong men and they shall
be afraid, a Sword is upon their Horses and upon their Charets, and upon all
the Multitude that are in the midst of her, and they shall be like Women; a
Sword is upon her treasures, and they shall be spoiled: Babell is suddenly
fallen and destroyed, howl for her bring Balm for her Soar, if she may be
healed; we would have cured Babell, may all the faith full Ministers of the
Gospel, of all Countries say, but Babell neither would nor could be healed,
forsake her, let us go every one to his own Country, for judgment is come
up unto Heaven, and is lifted up to the Clouds: it is high time for all every
where who mean to have their souls or bodies preserved, to draw home to Jesus
Christ the Savior of all them who by a right rule do trust in him for
Salvation.

Oh that men would hear and take notice in the behalf of themselves, as it
may be of concernement to them what the Counsel of the Lord is, which he has
devised against Babell, and his purpose which he has conceived against the
Land of wicked Romish Chaldeans, see, and compare Jer. 51.13. with Rev. 17.15.
O thou that dwell upon many Waters, abundant in treasures, thine end is
come, even the end of thy coveteousnesse. Now if it be asked, by whom will God
bring this great destruction upon his, and his peoples enemies? Answ. And
observe, when the Lord of Hosts shall have an Army of men in the Field, whose
hearts shall be set at liberty to worship Christ in the beauty of holiness,
and to praise his Holy Name with courage and constancy, then shall the enemies
help destroy one another. 2 Cron. 20.23. Again, Israel is the rod of his
Inheritance, the Lord of Hosts is his Name: mark what the Lord God says to
his People: Thou art mine Hammer, and Weapons of War, for with thee will I
break the Nations, and with thee will I destroy Kingdoms, and by thee will I
break Horse and Horsman, and by thee will I break the Chariot and him that
Rides therein. Jer. 51.19. To this purpose is that of Rev. 18.6. Reward her
even as she has rewarded you, and give her double according to her works, and
in the cup that she has filled to you fill her the double. But one note by
way of parity or likeness, and I have done with the Romish Antichrist for this
time it is clear to me, that the old Heathenish Babylon, was a manifest Type,
and visible figure of the Romish Babylon, which now is as yet in being, and
that as face answers to face, so in reference to their actions, they have very
clearly portraied out each others lineaments, for what was done against God,
his truth, and people by the one, has been practiced and acted by the Other,
and that to thelife, as we say, and against more light and knowledge, and with
greater strength of malice, has the Romish Antichrist persecuted the Church of
Christ beyond the Heathens, therefore certainly God will be avenged upon such a
People as this, for true and righteous are his judgments, for he has
condemned the great Whore of Rome, which did corrupt the Earth with her
fornication, and has avenged the blood of his Servants shed by her hands, and
has, which shows the certainty of the thing, now that the Kings of the
ancient Heathens, were in some respects Types of the Romish Popes, and they the
Antitypes of them, I refer to the reviewing of these Scriptures, Isa. 14. Jer.
50. and 51. Hab. 2. Rev. 17. and 18. To all which I shall add, Revel. 13. In
which I observe that the Popes of Rome are set forth in the form of a Beast,
and that this Beast has received his power from the Dragon, which is the
Devil, And they worshipped the Dragon which gave power unto the Beast, and
they worshipped the Beast, saying, who ^s like unthe beast, who is able to War
with him, and there was given unto him a Mouth that spoke great things, and
blasphemies, and power was given unto him to do forty two Months, and he
opened his mouth unto blasphemies against God, to blaspheme his name and his
Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven, and it was given to him to make
War with the Saints, he was permitted so to do. Observe, Antichrist makes
war with the Saints, or upon the Saints, I understand this meant of a
temporal War, and of Antichrist his putting the Saints upon a defensive
War, though to his own ruin. Observe, the Saints who are a People that do
not delight in War simply, as it is a destruction to the life and well being
of man, yet the Saints do and must manage a temporal War, when justly
occasioned and necessitated thereunto, in the behalf of truth and of
themselves. But to the words again, with the Saints, and to overcome them, and
power was given him over every kindred, and Tongues, and Nations, that is, to
Antichrist the Pope, and Popes of Romish Babylon, this is that Satan-like and
Beast-like man, which has made the Earth tremble, and the Nations shake. This
is the man who has led the Saints for some hundreds of years into Captivity,
it is he that has killed them with the Sword, therefore it is he and his
Adherents that must be led into Captivity, and that must be killed with Sword
of the Lord of Hosts, put into the hands of his People, I observe by the way,
that this Scripture, I mean Rev. 13.10. is not to be aleadg'd against those
noble minded Christians which do in these days and times, out of conscience
to God and in love to truth and their Country, hazzar^ their lives in the high
places against the enemies of God, with a desire and purpose if possible to
preserve truth, and peace, and true Religion in their persons, Families, and
Nation wherein they live; I rather conceive it a Prophecy which relates to the
temporal destruction of Antichrist by the Sword of War, who is aforehand with
the people of God; for he, and his Adherents have already led them into
Captivity, and has killed them with the Sword.

I shall mention a passage or two out of a Sermon which was preached in the
Arch Palatine Court, in the year 1617 that only in Belgia, containing the 17.
Provinces of the low Countries, whilst CHARLES the Fifth lived, were slain and
murdered fifty thousand Christians: and that the Duke of Alva cruelly boasted
that in the space of six years after he had been Governor of that Country,
there had been eighteen thousand persons killed by his Commandment, and also
from the year 1576 to the Agreement at Gaunt, there had perished by the
Tyranny of Papists, thirty thousand, yet says the same Author, there was a
greater vintage and harvest in France, for says he, it may be proved by
arguments worthy to be believed, that from the year 1564 to the year 1586,
that is, in the space of twenty two years, that one hundred and forty thousand
godly persons were put to death, besides those already mentioned, and besides
those that were put to death by the Papists in England, in Queen Mary's days,
and besides those slain In King Charlses time. I have likewise read in the
History of the Waldenses of one Panza one of the Popes Inquisitors, who did cut
the throats of four score Christians, and then quartered them, and caused
stakes to be set up for the space of thirty miles, and caused a quarter to be
fastened to each stake. Next to this there is mention made of threescore women
who were brought to the Rack by the Fathers of the Popes inquisition, who all
perished by their horrible cruelty.

In the History of the Albingenses there is mention made of one hundred and
forty men and women, who because they refused to submit to the Church of Rome,
were all of them thrown into a fire at one time, and burnt to death by the
Earl Simon, and the Popes Legate.

These few instances fell in by the way, there is enough upon record to prove
that Antichristian Papists have been the most bloudiest and the most
devouringst Woolves, that have had a being upon this Earth; therefore for my
part I believe the Lord God will punish this Romish Babylon, and will bring
forth out of his mouth that which he has swallowed up, and the Nations shall
not flow together any more unto him, yea the Wall of Babylon shall fall, and
the days are come in which God will do judgment upon the Graven Images of
Babylon, and her whole Land shall be confounded, and all her slain shall fall
in the midst of her.

I have now done with Papists, only I wish to as many of them as do belong to
the election of grace, a visible repentance from sin and Idolatry; an actual
faith in the true Scripture (...) Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of God, a holy
and a harmless life, and preservation to their bodies from that War and from
that destroying Sword which is already occasionally drawn and will be extended
to, and excercised upon the generallity of wilful, stubborn and obstinate
Papists all the world over. I call it an occationall Sword, in a twofold
respect.

First, the Papists by committing more sins then I am able to mention, and
greater sins then I know how to paint out, have justly occasioned God to bring
the Sword of war upon them; and they have occasioned, you, I may say enforced
the Saints, I do not say, to bring War upon them, but in their own just
defense, to maintain a War against them. They, the Antichristian Papists I
mean, have been many hundreds of years, raising, and acting of most cruel
and bloody Wars upon the people of God called Protestants of late years; they
have made long furrows upon their backs, in the parts of Germany, in France, in
Ireland, in England, for they have been the hatchers of all these Wars, and
they have been the maine actors of them too, and they will continue to raise
and to act war in Ireland, in France, and it may be in Scotland too, they will
never end their war, till war has ended them, or at least, their power; they
will continue their malicious endeavors to destroy the true Church of Christ
upon this Earth, by war, in that faggot and fire has now failed them, the
which God has made a defensive City, an Iron pillar, and Brazen wall against
them, and they shall fight against it, but they shall not prevail against in.
Jer. 1.18.19. for the Lord of Hosts is with his Church to deliver it from the
power of every destroying enemy as well temporal as spiritual ones, and the
Church of Christ shall be upon this Earth in the appointed time as a City,
sought out and not forsaken, for glorious things are spoken of thee o thou
City of God.

One word more and I have done, let all those Papists take notice of this,
which do harbor in them the same mind which has been in their Fathers, who
have not only by War for a long time destroyed the true Members of Christ,
but by most exquisit and incredible torments as well in prisons and Caves of
the Earth, as upon Scaffolds and at Stakes, have most barbarously and most
unhumanly murdered the Saints of Christ, see Master Wadsworths book to this
purpose. I say seeing that you the seed of those evil doers, have now called
us into the Field, who do profess our selves friends and Servants to Jesus
Christ; whom you have mocked and Brethren to those his Servants, whom you have
cruelly murdered; I say take notice of this, that you are like to find as much
gallantry as you have acted cruelty. (...) know will fight, but we profess to
fight fai^^, whether it be in Ireland, or elsewhere, therefore now you brave
English spirits, show your selves gallant still' for the Sword must do great
things, according to that which Master Brightman has said, that the time shall
come when disputing by the pen, should cease, and that the Sword should end the
controversy between the Papists and the Protestants. I believe this time is now
come, and be you assured of these things, that as these Antichristian Papists,
shall make War with the Lamb, so the Lamb shall over come them, for he is Lord
of Lords, and King of Kings, and they that are with him are called, and chosen,
and faithful, Rev. 17.14.

One word to those amongst them that truly fear God, thus says the Lord, My
people go out of the midst of her, and deliver ye every man his soul from
the fierce wrath of the Lord, least your heart even faint, and ye fear the
rumor that shall be heard in the Land, a rumor shall come one year, and
after that in another year shall come a rumor and violence in the Land, Ruler
against Ruler, Jer. 51. and 45.46. And I heard another voice from heaven say,
Go out of her my people that ye be not pertakers in her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues. Rev. 18.4.

I now come according to my promise to produce and apply Scripture against the
Heathens of these times, I desire what I said at my beginning may be remembered:
that is, that I have in some respect spoken to these already, and therefore now
I shall no^ (...) much to them, only I shall take notice that there is a very
great people now in being upon this Earth, who are professed enemies to the
Lord Jesus Christ, and that these are distinct from Papists, and that they have
been and still are great Oppressors of the people that profes Jesus Christ,
and his Gospel: and that the power and pride of these Heathens shall be
brought down, by the temporal Sword in these latter days, and that then they
shall become the Inheritance of Jesus Christ, to whom God the Father will give
the Heathens of these times unto, for an Inheritance, and the uttermost parts
of the Earth to him for his possession; by the way, I confess that I am little
or nothing seen in the knowledge of the Histories of times, neither am I so
much in consultation with them, as with the God of times; I know but very
little either of the past or present State of foreign Countries, nor of the
external causes, nor humane reasons of the several new framings and mouldings
of those Nations, in the remore parts of the Earth, nor of those several new
constitutions into which they have in several pieces of time been put into,
by the overruling and all-disposing hand of the great God of Heaven, who is the
Lord of the Earth, and does whatever he will both in Heaven and Earth, and will
do what he has promised to do, and likewise what he has threatened to do,
it is true the vision is for an appointed time, it shall speak, and not lie:
this time is certainly come, yea, the set time is come, and God is now
manifesting of himself by theexcercise of the temporal Sword, to Nations,
Families, and to particular persons. I confess, as I said even now, that from
a want of the knowledge of such things as I have made mention of, I remain
unable in some respects to steer a course suitable to the apprehensions which
I have of the present face and appearance of things, when I think of them
according to the glorious word and unfathomd workings of the great and mighty
God, who is in his judgments unsearchable, and in his ways past finding out,
it is true, the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, has acted his great works, and
made his almighty power to appear in all ages, in which he has been
wonderful in his doings toward the Sons and Daughters of men, and that in
reference to the setting up and casting down of Nations, and people, in, and
by the exercise of War, and the temporal Sword, but yet I verily think I
speak with submission, that the Lord is now a doing, and a bringing to pass
such a piece of work, by the exercise of temporal war, at this time, as
there has not in the world yet appeared the like, in reference to all events,
notwithstanding men's Opinions to the contrary; for my part if in this I erer,
it is for no bye end, this is the thing I observe. First, the blood of many
thousands in several ages who have truly feared God, has been shed by the
cruelty of the Nations; now it is very clear to me that the Lord will never
give up his people to such a dreadful cruelty that they should destroy people
in cold blood, as we say, as they have been even multitudes of them destroyed,
some have been burnt to death, others Racked, and so by diverse other exquisit
torments they have been murdered.

Secondly, it is as clear to me that the Lord will by the hand of his people
make inquisition for blood, and that by the same hand will avenge the blood of
his Saints, whose blood has been shed by the Nations, therefore Nations shall
be dealt withal, by the Sword of temporal war, the Nations have in a private
Murtherous way, made themselves drunk with the blood of Gods Saints, the Lord
will deal with the Nations in a public way, he will make his Arrows drunk
with the blood of his, and his Peoples enemies, and the sword of the Lord in
the hands of his people, shall eat the flesh of Kings, and the flesh of
Captains, and the flesh of mighty men, Rev. 19.18. Again, me thinks this is
something to be considered of, what are the Nations now a doing? truly they be
now a gathering themselves together; what to do? To destroy if they can all
the Inhabitants of Zion, I mean all such as do truly and sincerely seek and
serve the true God, according to the rules of his holy word the Scriptures.

But to the thing in hand, Now also many Nations are gathered against thee,
saying, Zion shall be condemned, and our eye shall look upon Zion, but they
know not the thoughts of the Lord, they understand not his Counsel, for he
shall gather them as the sheaves in the barn. Mica. 4.11.12. Observe, surely
that dark and dismal Cloud which now hovers upon the world is like for some
time to grow somewhat thicker, and the storm is like to be somewhat more
terrible then yet it is, before these present Wars now in exercise come to a
full end, the Nations are now gathering themselves together, What to do? to
destroy spiritual Zion, they say the Church and people of God shall be
condemned, and they will be the Executioners, but they know not the thoughts,
nor the purposes of the Lord, they little think what God will do by this
their gathering together; they gather and the Lord God gathers, but for
contrary ends, they intend one thing, and the Lord means another, they an
extermination of truth, and true Christians, God intends a preservation of
both, yea a great deliverence and a glorious enlargment too. I speak with
reverence to God, who will at this time do two works at once, even use the
Sword of temporal War, with the Sword of his word, and with the delivering of
his people, will perform the ruin of his, and his peoples Enemies. Behold in
that time when I shall br^^gagaine the Captivity of Judah and Jerusalem, I will
also gather all Nations, and will bring them down into the Valley of
Jehoshaphat, and will plead with them there, for my people, and for my heritage
Israel, whom they have scatrered among the Nations, Joel. 3. Assemble your
selves and come all ye Heathen, and gather your selves together round about,
there shall the Lord cast down the mighty man, let the Heathen be weakened.
Observe, those the enemies of God, which in Scripture are sometimes called
mighty, are here prophetically destynated to weakness. Let the Heathen be
weakened, and come up to the Valley of Jehoshaphat, for there will I set to
judge all the Heathen round about: put in your Sithes for the Harvest is ripe,
come get you down for the wine press is full, yea the winepresses run over,
for their wickedness is great, O multitude, O multitude, come into the Valley
of threshing, for the day of the Lord is near in the Valley of threshing, the
Sun and Moon shall be darkened, and the Stars shall withdraw their light.
That is, as I conceive, in this their day of Gods visitation, they shall find
no help in Creatures, neither in the Sun the Moon, nor the Stars, in, and by
which, the Heathens of all times have been so much led, as appears by the
words of Jer. 10.2. Thus says the Lord, learn not the way of the Heathen, and
be not dismayed at the signs of Heaven, for the Heathen are dismayed at them.
I have read some Authors which affirm that there are Heathens of these times,
who do worship the Sun and the Moon, to whom I may speak as the Prophet
speaks, thou art wearied in the multitude of thy Counsels, let now the
Astrologers the Star-gazers, the monthly Prognosticatours, stand up and save
thee from these things that shall come upon thee. Isa. 47.13.

Again, this may admit of a spiritual meaning, whence we may take notice,
that the light of the glorious Gospel, which both has and does shine in the
World, as the Moon, and as the Sun, shall stand them in no stead, in this time
of great distress, which have contemptuously banished it from them, or refused
to give it entertainment, when the Lord in mercy has made a tender of it unto
them, certainly both Papists and Heathens have done this, and now the Lord God
in his just judgment will shut up all light from them, and darkness shall be
upon them till they perish in the same. The Lord, says the Prophet, shall
roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem. Observe, in those days
and times in which the Lord God shall what his glittering Sword, and shall with
his hand take hold on judgment, and shall execute vengeance on his enemies,
and reward them that hate him, that then the Lord will roar from Zion then God
will appear terrible to his, and his peoples enemies, from, and by his
spiritual Zion, in the exercise of temporal means; God will thresh them
with the Sword. Agreeable to this is that of Mica. 4. last. Arise, thresh O
Daughter of Zion, for I will make thine horn Iron, and I will make thine
hoofes Brass, and thou shall break in piece many people, Jacob shall be a
fire, and Joseph a flame, and Edom shall be as stubble. Mal. 4.3. The Enemies
of God have been drunk with the blood of Gods Saints, and the Lord God will
make his Arrows drunk with the blood of his enemies, and his Sword in the
hand of his people shall eat flesh, yea, and that for the blood of the slain,
and of the Captives, when I begin to take vengeance of the enemies. Deuteronomy.
32.42. Now in this day and time, the Lord God will be the hope of his people,
and the strength of the Children of Israel, Joel. 3.16.

I will but suggest that of the Prophet Isa. 2. and I have done; certainly in
such a day and time as this is, it will be thus, The high look of man shall be
humbled, and the loftiness of men shall be abased, and the Lord only shall be
exalted in that day, for the day of the Lord of Hosts is upon all the proud and
hauty, and upon all that is exalted, and upon all the Cakes of Bashan, and all
the high Mountains, and upon all the hills that are lifted up, and upon every
high Tower, and upon every strong Wall, and upon all the Ships of Tarshish, and
all pleasant Pictures, and the haughtiness of men shall be brought low, and
the loftiness of men shall be abased, and the Lord shall only be exalted in
that day, and the Idols will he utterly destroy, then they shall go into the
holes of the Rocks, and into the Caves of the Earth, from before the face of
the Lord, and from the glory of his Majesty, when he shall arise to destroy or
to shake terribly the Earth.

FINIS.

