The Humble PETITION AND ADDRESS OF THE OFFICERS of the ARMY, TO THE
PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND, etc.

Thursday, May 12, 1659.

ORdered by the Officers of the Army, That this Petition and Address be
forthwith Printed and Published.

Thomas Sandford Secretary. LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, for him and Francis
Tyton, and are to be sold at the Three Daggers in Fleetstreet, 1659.

The humble PETITION AND ADDRESS Of the OFFICERS of the Army, To the
PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth of England, etc.
CAlling to mind the former Declarations of Parliament, and the grounds
therein inviting us to take up Arms, and those many signal Providence, wherein
the Lord has owned you and your Forces both by Sea and Land, in asserting that
Righteous Cause, wherein the civil and religious Liberties of the People of
these Nations were involved, so as all open opposition was beaten down before
you; And likewise weighing with our selves, how in the several late changes in
Government, that Public spirit which appeared in that work, has since that
time been discouraged, and another raised up, drawing back to the same things
you had contended against, even to the hazzarding the essentials of that Cause;
We did, upon serious thoughts of heart, think it our duty once more to appear
against those backsliding ways; and providence having brought the state of
affairs to the condition they were in some few days before your sitting, we
found it necessary to assert amongst our selves, some of the fundamentals of
our Good old Cause, with some other things conducing to the preservation
thereof, with a full and fixed resolution, through the assistance of God,
effectually, even to the hazard of our lives, to endeavor the recovery and
security of the same. And the same good Providence holding forth an opportunity
to us, to open unto you a way for the further discharge of your remaining trust
in Parliament, we did, by our Declaration of the 6th of this instant May,
humbly desire you would be pleased to return to the exercise and discharge
thereof, as before the 20th of April 1653.

And having, to our great rejoicing, seen your Declaration of the 7th instant,
showing, That you are resolved, through the gracious assistance of Almight God,
to apply your selves to the faithful discharge of the trust reposed in you, and
to endeavor the settlement of this Commonwealth upon such a foundation, as
may assert, establish and secure the Liberties of the people, in reference unto
all, both as men and Christians, and that without a single Person, King-ship,
or house of Peers, resolving vigorously to endeavor the carrying on the work
of Reformation, so much desired, and so often declared for, to the end there
may be a godly and faithful Magistracy and Ministry upheld and maintained in
these Nations; which so fully answers what our hearts were drawn forth to
desire, that we could not any longer forbear to express our thankfulness, for
this door of hope again opened toward the obtaining a consummation of those
things so much breathed after by the good people of this Commonwealth. And
however we find our selves in some measure prevented by the late Declaration
and resolves of this Parliament, yet nevertheless we have judged it our duty to
represent what was chiefly and unanimously upon our hearts, when we engaged in
that which made way for your return, which we humbly, as becomes us, lay before
you.

I. That the Liberty of the persons, and Property of the Estates of all the
Free people of these Nations be maintained, preserved, and kept inviolable,
according to Law, under the Government of a Free State and Commonwealth,
without a single Person, King-ship, or House of Peers.

II. That there may be such a just and due regulation of Law, and Courts of
Justice and Equity, as that they may be a protection, and not vexatious or
oppressive to the people of these Nations.

III. That by an Act of Oblivion, all and every person and persons, who have
since the Nineteenth of April, 1653, mediately or immediately Advised, Acted or
Done, or Commanded or Appointed to be Acted or Done, Or by Commmand or
Appointment, have Acted or Done any Matter or Thing whatsoever, in reference to
the several Changes or Alterations in the Government of these Nations, since
the said Nineteenth of April, 1653, or in order to the public Service, Peace,
or Safety of these Nations, be indempnified and saved harmless to all intents
and purposes whatsoever.

IV. That all Laws, Ordinances, Orders, Declarations, and Establishments made
in the several changes and alterations of Government that have been in these
Nations since the Nineteenth of April aforesaid, and not as yet particularly
Repealed, be deemed good in Law until particularly repealed.

V. That such Debts as have been contracted for the public Service and
Affairs of this Commonwealth, and for the Charges of the Government, since the
Twentieth of April, 1653, be carefully Paid and Satisfied.

VI. That all persons who profess Faith in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ
his Eternal Son, the true God, and in the Holy Spirit God coequal with the
Father and the Son, one God blessed for ever, and do acknowledge the Holy
Scriptures, of the Old and New Testament to be the revealed or written Word or
Will of God, shall not be restrained from their profession, but have due
encouragement, and equal protection in the profession of their Faith, and
exercise of Religion, whilst they abuse not this Liberty to the civil injury
of others, or disturbance of others in their way of Worship: so that this
Liberty be not extended to Popery or Prelacy; nor to such as shall practice or
hold forth Licentiousness or Profaneness, under the profession of Religion: And
that all Laws, Statutes, Ordinances and Clauses in any Laws, Statutes, or
Ordinances to the contrary, may be declared null and void.

VII. That a godly, faithful, and painful Gospel-preaching Ministry be every
where encouraged, countenanced and maintained.

VIII. That the Universities and Schools of Learning be so countenanced and
reformed, as that they may become the Nurseries of Piety and Learning.

IX. That such persons as have at any time since the Twentieth of May 1642,
aided, or assisted, or adhered to the late King Charles Stuart, his Son, or any
other person or persons whatsoever of that party, against the Parliament or
Commonwealth of England, and all other persons whatsoever, that have made use
of any Authority or Power, under pretense of Law or otherwise, to deprive or
abridge any of the good People of these Nations of their Christian liberty, or
have, or shall express themselves in any way Mockers, Scoffers, or Revilers of
Godliness, or of the Professors thereof, or are otherwise scandalous, or loose
in their Conversations, or have not given good satisfaction of their affection
and faithfulness to this Cause, may be speedily removed out of all places of
Power or Trusty in the Magistracy or other Management of the Public Affairs of
these Nations; and that no such persons may be admitted unto any such Place of
Power, or Trust, for the future.

X. And forasmuch as no godly or other good interest can be preserved or
maintained, unless the persons, who are chiefly entrusted with the mannagement
and exercise of the Government, be of suitable spirits to those interests, That
those who are or shall be entrusted therein be such Persons as shall be found
to be most eminent for Godliness, faithfulness and constancy, to the Good
Cause, and interests of these Nations.

XI. That to the end the Legislative Authority of this Commonwealth may not by
their long sitting become burdensome or inconvenient, there may be effectual
provision made for a due succession thereof.

XII. And for the better satisfaction and more firm union of the Forces of this
Commonwealth, in this juncture of affairs, for preserving and maintaining the
principles and other matters thereunto subservient, we do unanimously
acknowledge and own the Lord Charles Fleetwood, Lieutenant General of the Army,
to be Commander in chief of the Land Forces of this Commonwealth.

XIII. That, in order to the establishing and securing the Peace, welfare and
freedom of the People of these Nations, for the ends before expressed, the
Legislative Power thereof may be in a Representative of the People, Consisting
of a House successively chosen by the People, in such way and manner as this
Parliament shall judge meet; and of a select Senate, Coordinate in power, of
able and faithful Persons, eminent for godliness, and such as continue adhering
to this Cause.

XIV. That the administration of the Executive Power of Government may be in a
Council of State, consisting of a convenient number of persons qualified in all
respects as aforesaid.

XV. That all debts contracted by His late Highness, or his father, since the
15th of December 1653, may be satisfied; and that an honorable Revenue of Ten
thousand pounds per Annum, with a convenient house, may be settled upon him and
his heirs for ever; and Ten thousand pounds per Annum more upon him during
life; and upon his honorable Mother, Eight thousand pounds per Annum during
her life; To the end a mark of the high esteem this Nation has of the good
service done by his father, our ever renowned General, may remain to posterity.

These having been the thoughts and desires of our hearts, unanimously agreed
upon before your returning to si^, and finding the spirits of diverse of the
honest faithful People of this Commonwealth, led forth for the same things,
and your selves, by your late Declaration and Resolutions in a great measure
assisting them, we thought it our duty to the Nations, to You, and to the
honest People, humbly to present these; and beg the blessing and presence of
the Lord with you in the prosecution and bringing forth such a Settlement, as
may be for the honor of God, the union, joy, and rejoicing of all the
peaceable People of this Commonwealth.

And We shall pray, etc.

Signed in the name and by the appointment of the Council of Officers, the
Twelfth Day of May, 1659. Thomas Sandford Secretary.

Presented to the Parliament by,
The Lord Lambert. Lord Desbrow. Colonel Berry. Colonel Hewson. Colonel
Barkstead. Colonel Lilburne. Colonel Cooper. Colonel Hacker. Colonel Okey.
Colonel Sankey. Colonel Ashfield. Major General Kelsey. Colonel Prittie.
Colonel Salmon. Colonel Clerk. Colonel Fitch. Lieutenant Colonel Moss.
Lieutenant Colonel Mason.


FINIS.

