The humble Petition of diverse Citizens of the City of LONDON.
To the High and Honorable Court of Parliament assembled at Westminster.
WE setting before our eyes the glory of God* the advancement of Religion, and
Covenanted Reformation, the Power and Privilege of Parliament, the Liberty of
the Subject, the settlement and safety of the Kingdom, the Honor and
happiness of the Kings Majesty and his Posterity; which were the grounds of
our former engagements, and for the purchasing of which ends, so much blood
has been spilt, and the Treasure of the Kingdom so much exhausted: yet our
expectations are not answered, nor the Kingdoms Peace secured: but on the
contrary, fresh Dangers are threatened, our former Fears renewed, and the
Discontents of all sorts of people to such an height increased, that whilst
many endeavoring to avoid the present evils under which they groan, (through
their inadvertency) are ready impatiently to plunge themselves and the whole
Kingdom into inevitable misery; some by their irregular proceedings, mutinous
and tumultuous risings; (we would not be understood of the orderly Petitioning
of any County) others by making it their grand design, to alienate the
affections of the people from the Parliament, by their secret, but false
suggestions and insinuations, That you intend to dethrone his Majesty,
disinherit his Posterity; that you are enemies to Monarchy; that you intend to
destroy or alter our well approved Government and constitution, and intend no
settlement, but even to let loose the golden reins of Government; that you
only carry on your own interests, and mind not the redress of public or
private grievances. Against all which Aspersions you have many times manifested
your selves both by your former Declarations and Remonstrances, as well as by
your late Votes communicated by your Committee to the Common Council of this
City; And we being persuaded it is your real intentions and resolutions so to
do, and by so doing to make your enemies liars; which does encourage us to make
these humble Addresses to your Honors in these few ensuing particulars. 1.
That in pursuance of your late Votes, you would be pleased speedily and
vigorously to endeavor the establishing the Government of this Kingdom,
according to the ancient constitution of it by King, Lords and Commons,
together with all the ends of the Covenant. 2. That the Militia of the Kingdom
may be forthwith settled in such hands, that it may not be in the power of any
enemy to ruin us; and way may be made for the safe disbanding or reducing of
all Armies in such a convenient time and manner, as the safety of the Kingdom
may require. 3. That all those that have been very faithful to the Parliament*
and are deservedly approved of by their respective Counties, may be impartially
employed and entrusted for the safety of those places against the common enemy.
4. That particular grievances depending before several Committees of
Parliament, may be listed, and orderly heard and determined, that the people be
not delayed, grieved, wasted, and their affections cooled toward the
Parliament by unnecessary attendance; that to this purpose the Committees may
constantly attend their days of sitting. 5. That the Debts of the Kingdom may
be put in a methodicall and certain way of payment, which course not to be
diverted till the engagements of the State are dischagred. 6. That as in many
things you have already Voted, so in all other things all due satisfaction may
be given to the Kingdom of Scotland according to the Covenant, and the Articles
and Agreements of both Kingdoms; And that in particular their desires
concerning the members of both Houses of Parliament, that so the peace of both
Kingdoms may be preserved, and the mischiefs and miseries of a new war
prevented. 7. That the peace of the Kingdoms being provided for, by mutual
advice of both Kingdoms, and their respective safeties being settled upon
lasting basis and foundations; The King may be restored to his due rights, in
the preservation and defense of the true Religion and liberties of the Kingdoms
according to the Covenant.


Thus your real intentions, and indefatigable endeavors, being to advance the
glory of God, the power and purity of Religion, the honor and happiness of
the King and his Posterity, the freedom and safety of the people, the mutual
union of both Kingdoms; in one word, all the contents of our solemn League and
Covenant, you shall stop the mouths of your adversaries, lessen the number of
your enemies, frustrate the plots and designs that are against you, increase
your friends, engage the hearts, strengthen the hands, and revive the hopes of
the well-affected in both Kingdoms; regain your former honor and respect among
the people, so that yet you shall be called, The repairers of our breaches, the
builders of our waste places, and restorers of paths to dwell in. And as for
your Petitioners, Contrary to all those false calumniations cast upon us, we
are resolved (through the grace of God) maugre all opposition whatsoever,
firmly to adhere to our first Principles and Resolutions, in standing by you
and for you, it being in our very hearts to live and die with you, according to
the Covenant.


