The humble Petition and Resolution of the Deputy-Lievtenants, Captains,
Officers, Soldiers, and Volunteers of the Trained Bands of the County of
Warwick, to the Right honorable, Robert Lord Brook Lord Lieutenant of the
County aforesaid, and by his Lordship presented to the high Court of
Parliament, July 9. 1642.
With the Answer of the Lords thereunto annexed.
To the Right Honorable Robert Lord Brook, Lord Lieutenant for the County of
Warwick. The Petition of the Deputy Lievtenants, Captains, Officers, and
Soldiers of the Trained-Bands, and Volunteers of the County aforesaid.
Humbly Shows,
THat as it was no small comfort, and settling to the well affected of the whole
Kingdom, when they understood the most excellent, necessary, and seasonable
Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, concerning the Militia, so in special,
we of this County, who did most earnestly Petition for it, Do desire to come
short of none in the expression of our unfeigned thankfulness to them, for the
happy accomplishment thereof; As also, for their respects to us, in appointing
your Lordship our Lieutenant. Our request to your Lordship is, That you will
present our most humble and hearty thanks to the Parliament, signifying our
readiness to obey His Majesty's Royal Authority in this their happy Ordinance
of the Militia, and our Resolutions to adhere to His Majesty, and both Houses
of Parliament, to the loss of the last drop of our dearest blood in securing
His and their Persons, and advancing their designs; Which (though maliciously
traduced by some few malignant Persons) we rest most assured, ^ends only to the
establishment of truth and peace to us, and our posterities. For the better
securing whereof, we humbly and heartily pray this Ordinance may be continued,
till by some other effectual provision, the peace of this Kingdom, and the
security of our Laws be established, especially by putting the power and care
of their execution, in such hands as the Parliament, and Kingdom may confide
in; which by the late violation of the Petition of Right, we have cause to
recommend to the Parliament, as fearing the like miscarriages for the time to
come, of whatsoever good Laws you can provide, without some such way of
security.

And we further pray, That some speedy course may be taken, to remove from His
Majesty's most Sacred Person, all pestilent troublers of this Church and State;
and for such Members as leave that great Council, and lean to the malignant
party, Our most humble and earnest desires are, That they may receive such
condign and speedy punishment (the Kingdom groaning under so long delay) as
shall be thought fit by the Wisdom and Justice of this Parliament.

One request more that concerns this County, We humbly present your Lordship
with, That the Magazine thereof, which lies in the City and County of
Coventry, may be removed and laid up in your Lordships Castle at Warwick, as
the safest place of the County, with a sufficient Guard, provided by the
County for the securing of it.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.
The Lords Answer.
MY Lords have taken your Petition into Consideration, and receive much
contentment in the good affections you have expressed, thus seasonably and
necessarily, for the good of the King and Kingdom, and for their Lordships
Encouragement in the performance of their Duty; For which they give you hearty
thanks: And my Lords do assure you, That (God willing) they resolve to insist
in their former declared Resolutions for the upholding the true Religion, The
Kings Authority in the highest Court, which by sundry late Declarations and
Practices to abuse the people, they find so much vilified and invaded, The
Privileges of Parliament, The free course of Justice, The Laws and Peace of
this Kingdom, notwithstanding any dangers and hazards that for that Cause
befall them.

That for the manifestation of their good Affections, and their Lordships kind
acceptance thereof, they have commanded your Petition and this Answer, to be
forthwith printed and published.

Die Sabbathi, 9 Julii, 1642.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That this Petition and Answer be forth
with Printed and Published.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parl.

July 11.
London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott, and John Wright. 1642.


