Die Jovis, 12. Jan. 1642.
IT is this Day Ordered by the Commons in Parliament Assembled, that M. Sam.
Brown, a Member of the House of Commons, be desired to have a care of the
Printing of a Book Entitled, A Second Remonstrance, or Declaration of the
Lords and Commons, and that none presume to Print it, but such as the said Mr.
Sam. Brown shall appoint.

Hen. Elsing, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint John Wright to Print this Declaration.

Samuel Brown.

THE HUMBLE PETITION OF THE MAJOR, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London
to His MAJESTY,

WITH HIS MAJESTY'S Gracious answer thereunto.

Printed, by HIS MAJESTY'S Command, AT OXFORD, January 5. By LEONARD LICHFIELD
Printer to the University. 1642.

TO THE KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY, The humble Petition of the MAJOR,
ALDERMEN, and COMMONS of the City of LONDON.
SHOWS,
THat the Petitioners, Your Majestyes most humble and Loyal Subjects, being
much pierced with the long and great divisions between Your Majesty, and both
Your Houses of Parliament, and with the sad and bloody effects thereof, both
here and in Ireland, are yet more deeply wounded by the mis-apprehension which
Your Majesty seems to entertain of the Love and Loyalty of this Your City,
as if there were some Cause of fear of suspicion of danger to Your Royal
Person, if Your Majesty should return hither; and that this is made the
unhappy Bar to that blessed Reconciliation with Your great and most faithful
Council for preventing that desolation and destruction which is now most
apparently imminent to Your Majesty and all Your Kingdoms.

For satisfaction therefore of Your Majesty, and clearing of the Petitioners
Jnnocency, they most humbly declare, (as formerly they have done) That they are
no way conscious of any Disloyalty, but abhor all thoughts thereof; and that
they are resolved to make good their late solemn Protestation and sacred vow,
made to Almighty God, and with the last drop of their dearest Bloods, to defend
and maintain the true reformed Protestant Religion, and according to the duty
of their Allegiance, Your Majesty's Royal Person, Honor and Estate,
(whatsoever is maliciously and most falsely suggested to Your Majesty to the
Contrary) as well as the Power and Privileges of Parliament, and the Lawful
Rights and Liberties of the Subject; and do hereby engage themselves, their
Estates, and all they have to their uttermost Power, to defend and preserve
Your Majesty and both Houses of Parliament from all Tumults, Affronts and
Violence, with as much Loyalty, Love, and Duty as ever Citizens expresses
toward Your Majesty, or any of Your Royal Progenitors, in their greatest
Glory.

The Petitioners therefore, upon their bended Knees do most humbly beseech
Your Majesty to return to Your Parliament, (accompanied with Your Royal not
Your Martial attendance;) to the end, that Religion, Laws and Liberties may
be settled and secured, and whatsoever is amiss in Church and Commonwealth,
reformed by their Advice, according to the fundamental Constitutions of this
Kingdom: and that such a Peace may thereby be obtained, as shall be for the
glory of God, the Honor and Happiness of Your Majesty and Posterity, and the
safety and welfare of all Your Loyal Subjects, who (the Petitioners are fully
assured, whatsoever is given out to the Contrary,) do unanimously desire the
Peace herein expressed.

And the Petitioners shall ever pray etc. MICHELL.

His Majesty has graciously considered this PETITION, and returns this ANSWER.
THat His Majesty does not entertain any mis-apprehension of the Love and
Loyalty of His City of London. As He has always expressed a singular regard
and esteem of the Affections of that City, and is still desirous to make it
His chief place of Residence, and to continue and renew many marks of His
favor to it, so He believes much the better and greater part of that His City
is full of Love, Duty and Loyalty to His Majesty; and that the Tumults, which
heretofore forced His Majesty for His safety to leave that Place, though they
were contrived and encouraged by some principal members thereof, (who are
since well known, though they are above the Reach of Justice) consisted more of
desperate Persons of the Suburbs, and the neighboring Towns, (who were misled
too by the cunning and malice of their seducers,) then of the Inhabitants of
that City. He looks on His good Subjects there, as Persons groaning under the
same Burden which does oppress His Majesty, and awed by the same Persons who
begat those Tumults, and the same Army which gave Battle to His Majesty. And
therefore as no good Subject can more desire from His soul a Composure of the
general distractions, so no good Citizen can more desire the establishment of
the particular Peace and Prosperity of that place, by His Majesty's Access
thither, then His Majesty Himself does.

But His Majesty desires His good Subjects of London seriously to consider,
what confidence His Majesty can have of Security there, whilst the Laws of
the Land are so notoriously despised and trampled under foot, and the wholesome
Government of that City (heretofore so famous over all the World) is now
submitted to the Arbitrary Power of a few desperate persons of no Reputation,
but for malice and disloyalty to Him; Whilst Arms are taken up not only
without, but against His consent and express command, and Collections
publicly made, and Contributions avowed for the maintenance of the Army which
has given Him Battle, and therein used all possible means Treason and Malice
could suggest to them, to have taken His Life from Him, and to have destroyed
His Royal Issue; Whilst such of His Majesty's Subjects, who out of Duty and
affection to His Majesty, and Compassion of their bleeding Country, have
labored for Peace, are reviled, injured and murdered, even by the Magistrates
of that City, or by their directions; Lastly, what hope His Majesty can have
of safety there, whilst Alderman Pennington their pretended Lord Major, (the
principal Author of those Calamities, which so nearly threaten the Ruin of
that famous City,) Ven, Foulke, and Mainwaring (all Persons notoriously guilty
of Schism, and high Treason,) commit such outrages in oppressing, robbing and
imprisoning, according to their Discretion, all such His Majesty's loving
Subjects, whom they are pleased to suspect but for wishing well to His Majesty.
And His Majesty would know whether the Petitioners believe, that the reviling
and suppressing the Book of Common Prayer, (established in this Church ever
since the Reformation,) the discountenancing and imprisoning Godly, Learned,
and painful Preachers, and the cherishing and countenancing of Brownists,
Anabaptists, and all manner of Sectaries, be the way to defend, and maintain
the true, reformed, Protestant Religion? That to comply with and assist
persons, who have actually attempted to kill His Majesty, and to allow and
favor Libells, Pasquills, and seditious Sermons against His Majesty, be to
defend His Royal Person and Honor, according to the duty of their Allegiance?
Whether to imprison men's Persons, and to Plunder their Houses, because they
will not Rebel against His Majesty, nor assist those that do? Whether to
destroy their Property, by taking away the Twentieth part of their Estates from
them, and by the same Arbitrary Power to refer to four standers by of their
own faction, to judge what that Twentieth part is, be to defend the lawful
Rights and Liberties of the Subject? And if they think these Actions to be
instances of either; whether they do not know the persons before named to be
guilty of them all? Or whether they think it possible, that Almighty God can
bless that City, and preserve it from destruction, whilst persons of such
known Guilt and Wickedness, are defended and justified amongst them, against
the power of that Law, by which they can only subsist?

His Majesty is so far from suffering Himself to be incensed against the
whole City, by the actions of these ill men, though they have hitherto been so
prevalent as to make the Affections of the rest of little use to Him, and is so
willing to be with them, and to protect them, that the Trade, Wealth, and Glory
thereof (so decayed and Eclipsed by these public Distractions) may again be
the Envy of all foreign Nations, That He does once more graciously offer His
free and general Pardon to all the Inhabitants of that His City of London,
the Suburbs, and City of Westminster, (except the Persons formerly excepted by
His Majesty,) if they shall yet return to their Duty, Loyalty and Obedience.
And if His good Subjects of that His City of London, shall first solemnly
declare, That they will defend the known Laws of the Land, and will submit
to, and be governed by no other Rule; If they shall first manifest, by
defending themselves, and maintaining their own Rights, Liberties and
Interests, and suppressing any force and violence unlawfully raised against
those, and His Majesty, their Power to defend and preserve Him from all
Tumults, Affronts and Violence; Lastly, if they shall apprehend and commit to
safe Custody the Persons of those four men, who enrich themselves by the
spoil and oppression of His loving Subjects, and the ruin of the City, that
His Majesty may proceed against them by the course of Law, as guilty of high
Treason, His Majesty will speedily return to them with His Royal, and without
His Martial Attendance, and will use His utmost endeavor, that they may
hereafter enjoy all the Blessings of Peace and Plenty, and will no longer
expect Obedience from them, then he shall, with all the faculties of His Soul,
labor in the preserving and advancing the true, reformed, Protestant Religion,
the Laws of the Land, the Liberty and Propriety of the Subject, and the just
Privileges of Parliament.

If notwithstanding all this, the Art and Interest of these men can prevail so
far, that they involve more men in their guilt, and draw that His City to
sacrifice it is present Happiness and future Hopes to their Pride, Fury, and
Malice, His Majesty shall only give them this Warning, That whosoever shall
henceforward, take up Arms without His Consent, contribute any Money or Plate,
upon what pretense of Authority soever, for maintenance of the Army under the
Command of the Earl of Essex, or any other Army in Rebellion against Him, or
shall pay Tunnage and Poundage, till the same shall be settled by Act of
Parliament; Every such Person must expect the severest punishment the Law can
inflict; and in the mean time His Majesty shall seize upon any part of his
Estate within His Power, for the relief and support of Him and His Army, raised
and maintained for the Defense of His Person, the Laws, and this His Kingdom;
And since he denies to His Majesty the duty and benefit of his subjection, by
giving assistance to Rebels, which by the known Laws of the Land is high
Treason, His Majesty shall likewise deny him the benefit of his Protection, and
shall not only signify to all His Foreign Ministers, that such Person shall
receive no advantage by being His Subject, but shall by all other ways and
means proceed against him as a public Enemy to His Majesty, and this Kingdom.

But His Majesty hopes and doubts not, but His good Subjects of London will
call to mind the Acts of their Predecessors, their Duty, Affection, Loyalty and
merit toward their Princes, the Renown they have had with all posterity for,
and the Blessings of Heaven which always accompanied those virtues, and will
consider the perpetual scorn and infamy, which unavoydably will follow them
and their Children, if infinitely the meaner part in quality, and much the
lesser part in number, shall be able to alter the Government so admirably
established, destroy the Trade so excellently settled, and to waste the wealth
so industriously gotten, of that flourishing City; And then they will easily
gather up the Courage and Resolution to join with His Majesty in Defense of
that Religion, Law and Liberty, which hitherto has and only can make
themselves, His Majesty, and His Kingdom happy.

For concurring with the Advice of His Two Houses of Parliament, which with
Reference to the Commonwealth may be as well at this distance, as by being at
White Hall, His Majesty doubts not but His good Subjects of London, well know
how far (beyond the example of any of His Predecessors) His Majesty has
concurred with their advice, in passing of such Laws, by which He willingly
parted with many of His known Rights, for the benefit of His Subjects, which
the fundamental Constitutions of this Kingdom did not oblige Him to consent
unto, and has used all possible means to beget a right understanding between
them; And will therefore apply themselves to those, who, by making Just,
Peaceable and honorable Propositions to His Majesty, can only beget that
Concurrence.

FINIS.

