The Humble REMONSTRANCE AND DESIRES OF Diverse Officers and Soldiers in the
Army, under Command of Colon^l HEWSON; Presented to his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairf^x, upon Thursday last. November. 4. 1647. to be communicated to both Houses
if Parliament assembled at Westminster.

Wherein is declared, the Great and Dismal Cloud now arising, together with
their firm and constant Resolution to adhere to his Excellency, against all
Dividers and Opposers in the Common Cause of this Nations Peace and Safety, and
to suppress all Incendiaries, who do or shall endeavor to beget Divisions
within this Kingdom.

BY the Appointment of the said Officers and Soldiers, Whose Names are
hereunto subscribed.

November. 9. 1647. Imprima^ur, Gilb. Mabbot.



LONDON: Printed by J. C. for G. Horton, and are to be sold near this Royal
Exchange in Cornhill. 1647.

To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Captain General of all the Parliaments
Forces.
The humble Remonstrance and Desires of diverse Officers and Soldiers, under
Command of His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners do with all thankfulness acknowledge the Lords gracious
hand in making your Excellency a choice Instrument of his glory, and a public
good to this distressed Nation; In whose deliverance, you have abundantly
manifested very great integrity and faithfulness. Notwithstanding, the many
difficulties and discouragements, wherewith you have been necessitated to
encounter, not only from open Enemies, but also from pretended friends: And now
divine presence having scattered your and the Kingdoms open Enemies, we
joyfully expected the fruits of all, even peace and righteousness to flourish
in our Nation. But to our great Grief, we see a dismal Cloud again arising
over our heads from Divisions and Discontents: The dispelling whereof, we are
confident, is and still will be your Excellencies earnest desire, and utmost
endeavor.

In order whereunto (your Petitioners most thankfully acknowledge) your
Excellercies great care has not been wanting (as in other things so) to
provide Necessaries for your Army, and to procure them those long decayned
Arreares, which they have so dearly earned, although your endeavors herein
have been hitherto greatly frustrated.

From the consideration of all which, your Petitioners are fully resolved (the
Lord assifting) in the midst of all discouragements, to remain firm and
constant in our duty and obedience to your Excellency in the prosecution of all
your just Endeavors and Undertakings, for the good and safety of this Nation;
for which we shall not account our lives dear unto Us, to serve your
Excellency in opposing and suppressing all Incendiaries, who do, and shall
beget Divisions or Distempers in your Army, or to rend them from your
Excellencies command: The issue whereof, would doubtless be a second and more
miserable War, and sad effusion of English Blood, which God in mercy prevent.

May it therefore please your Excellency, to accept our cordial
acknowledgments, of your faithfulness and care for Us, the Army, and Kingdom;
And to be assured of our firm Resolutions to adhere unto you against all
Dividers and Opposers in the Common-Cause of this Nations Peace and Safety: So
shall your petitioners be further engaged to love and honor your Excellency.

And shall over pray for your Posterity. Field-Officers.
John Hewson John lubbes Daniel Axtell
Captains
Thomas Price John Carter Henry Davis samuel Grime Alexand. Brayfield Thomas
Atkinson Ralph Gale
Lieutenants.
George Jenkins George Smith Thomas Baker Jenkin Bevan Samuel Axtell John Webb
William Hill Rob: Mullings Martin Iubbes
Ensigns
Tho: Newnham John Davis Morgan Porhay Thomas Rawlins Henry Williams Joseph
Grimna Edmond Garney Daniel Hinksman Edward Hoar.
Agents
William Jones William Racie Roger Newberry John Barton Thomas Shepherd
Richard Nichson Edward Spencer Thomas Chapman Edward Rush William Darkey


Certain Proposals from the chief Agents of the Army, offered to the joint
considerations of all the free Commons of ENGLAND.
I. That the People of England being at this day very unequally distributed by
Counties, Cities, and Buroughs, for the election of their Deputies in
Parliament, ought to be more indifferently proportioned, according to the
number of the Inhabitants: the circumstances whereof, for number, place, and
manner, are to be set down before the end of this present Parliament.

II. That to prevent the many inconveniences apparently arising, from the long
continuance of the same persons in authority, this present Parliament be
dissolved upon the last day of September, which shall be in the year of our
Lord, 1648.

III. That the People do of course choose themselves a Parliament once in two
years, viz. upon the first Thursday in every 2d, March, after the manner as
shall be prescribed before the end of this Parliament, to begin to sit upon the
first Thursday in April following a Westminster, or such other place as shall
be appointed from time to time by the preceding Representatives; and to
con^inue till the last day of September, then next ensuing, and no longer.

IV. That the power of this, and all future Representatives of this Nation, is
inferior only to theirs who chule them, and does extend, without the consent
or concurrence of any other person or persons; to the enacting, altering, and
repealing of Laws; to the erecting and abolishing of Offices and Courts, to
the appointing, removing, and calling to account Magistrates, and Officers of
all degrees, to the making War and peace, to the treating with foreign States:
And generally, to whatsoever is not expressly, or implyedly reserved by the
Represented to themselves.

Signed by the several Agents of the Respective Regiments in the Army.

FINIS.

