THE (...), OR, (...) OR THE VISION OF ETERNITY Held forth, in Answer to some
ANTIQUAERIES, Which were given forth from EGYPT by one of Babels Builders, a
pretended Minister of Christ, living in Worcestershire at Beudly, that is
called Mr. Henry Osland.

But the Quaeries were given forth as the following Papers declare, out of
simplicity of heart, for satisfaction of the Truth: But instead of giving a
reasonable account to him that asks, he rails like a greedy Hangman, or bloody
Executioner that rages for blood that he might get gains by it, as in these
following papers will be manifested. So now the Antiquaeries are answered by
one who (as a firebrand out of the fire) is escaped out of Egypt from the
Magicians where the House of Bondage is, into the Southside of the wilderness,
[which being in the evening tide] he espieth the whole circumference of
Canaan's land, to which Faith or Christ is leading him; but in a way not
known but to the invisible life that gives a motion to every wheel, though the
alteration of the effects of the wheels, or variousness consists not in the
immediate motion, or mover, but in the form of the matter of the wheel. Whose
name is known to God by these three Jews Letters in the sequel, (...) but to
men by John Humphryes.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert at the black spread-Eagle near the West end
of Paul's, 1657.

TO THE GENTLE READER These present, Love and Favor.
Charissime Lector,
HAEc presentant tibi salutem, and omni semeni Iudeorum, in quocunque loco vel
conditioneque Religione statuunt: Quamvis sunt in AEgypto, indeserto vel ponto
ingredientes desertum: Elisiae umbrae mortis violavere nostras gentes Europiae
mors egressus fuit nostrae Jannae Civitatis: sed tametsi spem habemus filium
justitiae nostram illuminare terram trabibus splendoris ejus; Ergo vedamus in
valleculas, vel in vellem Acabi: Et abinde ad Jehosaphat, ubi (...) Curret in
omnes inimicos nostros: (...) contra vel in (...) Judico.
Et prosiquuntur sententia mortis, and nos Corronabimur Laudibus Jehovaeque
eternitate perpetuo: Jubilemus nos in visibilio nostro Cortice; usque reddemus
a forma nostra in terram unde venimus; and in materia quoque nostraram in
visarum Habitarum.

Juno 30 1657. Johannes Humphreyes.

Henry Osland,
HERE I return all that pack of filthy deceit back unto thy self again, that
thou have vented out in thy letter and answers against the innocent out of thy
old corrupt bottle, for its more fit for condemnation, for which it was of old
prepared, then for instruction: it shall appear by thy own words that thou art
in confusion, deceit, and respect of persons; in thy corrupt will, and the
murdering nature: how frequent has it been for our preceding generations to
christen others with their names and titles, Joh. 1.9. (...) 1 Cor 1.15.24.28.
(...). Omnem virtutem. Omnis virtus and sanctas gentium cujus cunque formae.
(...).
that so all might be as bad as themselves, and if they would not like children
let themselves be sprinkled with water offered to Idols, then presently they
must be Baptized in the fiery flames of their Malignant fury; and be accounted
as the off scouring of all things, and is not this the practice of our present
generation (The dark m^st of Presbytery) is not this your blasphemy ye painted
tombs to deny Christ the light of the world to be only sufficient to save. Not
the light of your Church only but of the whole world; then Papists as well as
you, then Heathens so called as well as you are enlightened, He is their light,
I am the ^ight of the World, and why not all saved as well as you, seeing they
all have the same male and female. bond and free he is all in all, yea he is
(...), all things in all men: And the time shall come when you shall know it,
Even when the kingdom shall be delivered up, and all principality and tower,
and all virtue evacuated: for he is coming, whose work is after the manner of
Antichrist, even in you to destroy Antichrist sitting in his Temple above all
called God, whose working there is after the manner and likeness of God,
confusion most destroy the Builders of Babel Tower, confusion is the work of
the Devil; and Christ in you his coming there is after his working, Or
according to his work, viz. Satan.

Thus you tell people that you are the men elected, and none else, when all
have the same Electon, viz. Christ, and if he be in you, you are not
consequently Reprobates; yet you blush not to call some so, though they have
the same Election as you: Thus you turn people by lies from light to darkness,
instead of turning them from darkness to light. Thou bitter Priest, who art one
of the builders of Babel, for so I must call thee, because I have tasted thy
fruit, and its bitter to my taste: Do not thou teach men to follow the
Scripture that was never given from God to thee nor them; certainly they must
then neglect that portion of the Spirit given to all, enlightening all; for no
man can serve too Masters, Joh. 1 9.
Matt. 4. That which kills is your Teacher, because you have chosen it; and the
substance of that which reviveth, you persecute under a color, by preaching the
Name of Truth in the Devils Cloak, the shadow; the shadow you have, and will
have, for the Son is on the south side you; yet certainly the shadows will
vanish in process of time, when you are driven through the Wilderness, even the
Vallyes also Achab, and Jehosaphat, and passed even under the AEquinoctial
Circle, where the substance will pursue you, (the shadows being under your
feet) and Satan's House desolated. Now thou call me deluded, viz. dark; but
let him be so whose Habitation is in the North-East-Pole, elevated an
innumberable number of Degrees from the suns orb, where the Mountains do
tenebrate and neluminate the comfortable illumination and luctrance of the Sun
from the Vegitables, that so the Vigitation of the Inhabitant is captivated,
until the resurrection of the Sun, when God will donate Eagles Wings to mount
up and elevate above all interponations, that so the eternal prospect may he
enjoyed; this attainable Prize is clouded by the various nubiations of them,
who act in the dark Chambers of their imaginations and unbelief. Ezekiel. 2 20.
So let him that dwells here take that title back unto himself again where
its proper habitation to rest and remain is. Thou tellest men Tithes are
lawful, and denyest their repeal, though the Scripture thy own rule proves it;
Heb. 7.
for the greater was typical, viz. the Priests; then I ask thee, whether the
lesser (according to thy own Rule) be not so also? If so, then the Priests
Maintinance was; for it was lesser then the Priests, viz. inferior to them,
Levit. 25.
and if all the Ceremonial typical, then that, for it was a Ceremony. It Is said
in Scripture, Heb. 7.5. and 18. that tithes are nulled; for in the 5. verse
it is said, That the Sons of Levi had a Commandment to take Tithes. In 18. it is
said, That, that Commandment is disannulled: Consider my Friend, have thou, or
you priests a Commandment; are you called as Aaron was, of God? for none had
right to it but such, read Heb. 14. Now Aaron was called immediately, read Genesis
you mediately, by a Degree at Oxford, or Cambridge; Aaron in Egypt by Gods
Mouth: Now there is no ground that you should do by virtue of the same
Commandment that he did; First, Because the Commandment was not to you, but
them; and such as were called as Aaron was; prove you were so called, or stop
your mouths from feeding on tithes. Secondly, God gave never any Commandment at
the second hand, for else they could not be called his Commandments, unless
that in a necessary case he bad any man go and call another, as Paul, Timothy:
but tell me, Did ever any man come with such a Commandment to you to take
Tythis? O but the Scripture commands it. Then thirdly, I tell you, That all
Commands given forth for taking Tithes is disannulled, Heb. 7.5 and 18. unless
you have a new command for it; if you have, produce it, if not, thank God you
are convinced. O! but we do it from civil Laws; I pray who first hrought in
them civil laws? your Adversary the devil by his Instruments the Popes of Rome,
as History declares? And I pray if you be so holy as to repeal and violate all
the Popes Ecclesiastical Laws among you, do also disannul his civil Laws or
else you will still, do what you can, be the Reliks of the Beast, and some of
his hairs shaven from his head, viz. the Pope; A! but we do it upon another
account, Heb. 7.6. What Is that I pray? It Is from Melchizedec, who was of
another descent, before the ceremonial Law, who was the Prince of peace:
truly too great a descent for you to be his heirs or predecessors in that thing
Heb. 7.9. clears it, Heb 7.9.
that Abraham's paying tithes to Melch^zedec was no more but a sign or figure
whose antitype was the Saints congratulating Christ as the leopers did or
Christ in them. Matt. 8. Heb. 7.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
2. Now Levi was in Abraham's loins then, and did it as ordered of God, to
show or similize how afterward them who were Abraham's seed in the flesh
should pay tithes to the succeeding Priesthood, but not to you Priests.

And thus carnally and falsely you deceive being deluded, holding up tithes to a
corrupt Priesthood; for so I call them that are not perfect, thou in thy
answers pretendest to maintain an imperfect perfection; but where in
Scripture is that proved, making distinctions where the Scripture makes none;
but says, he that confesses his sin, God is merciful to forgive, And the
blood of Christ cleanses from all sin, (mark) its not only forgiven as you
say, but Christ's blood cleanses them from all sin; 1 John 1, 2, 3, 4 chapters.
read
How then have they some? yea he that commits sin is of the Devil; but the
Saints have the annoynting in them and the Sea: otherwise they are not Saints;
for the saint [or holy one in flesh] sins not, but the unholy sins against
it: Now as the seed is brought to the Kingship in man, (...); ab a non and
(...) terra.
so it rules all in all, the other is of that svvallovved up, viz. death of
life. Paul put a question where it was, but you like petty-rogues that go to
the wars for gain, but not to the field to see the victory, therefore know
not how it is with either party; so you: but Paul was a Soldier, and fought,
(Christ in him did) for Paul taught not properly, but Christ, for Christ is the
life of the world, and the life it is that moves in the Organ, for Paul was but
the name of the Organ, Christ the life in it; And be ye perfect as your
heavenly Eather is perfect: Mat. 4, 48.
Would Christ command that which was not possible to be done; indeed because
you do all you think of your selves, therefore Christ will let you alone a
little till you own him Gods Fullness to be in you in all, who is deluded? he
that holds that which the Scripture denies, or the contrary? Isa. 60.17, 18,
19, 20. Isa. 5.3, 4.
because all that appears in you is sin, therefore you think that it must be so
still, or is in all so. Now indeed I must tell you, That when the Sun appears,
the Moon-shade will vanish.

Again thou say, That the Devil is not Gods servant: If I prove it, wilt not
thou be content to be a liar? Matthew. 4.48. says, That he shall serve him, and
worship him. I have heard thee say, that when you come together to preach and
pray, and worship God, that then you serve him; I pray you sirs allow the Devil
to be Gods servant as well as your selves, seeing he worships him as well as you;
nay I am almost persuaded he does more then you, for he believes, and so do
you; I, but he trembles, James 2.
and that you call blasphemy, and a poisoned Cup, 1 King. 22. God sent the
Devil to seduce Ahabs Prophets; 2 King 22.
Has not he been among you Prophets? The reason why I am almost capable of
receiving such a report, is because Ahabs Prophets smote Micajah for declaring
what he had received as well as they what they had received, and were presently
jealous that Micajah had got the spirit from them. Such is now your pride, that
if any declare besides them that are on your Regiment, you smite them; do not
thou smite me with bitter words for declaring freely my mind? thou certainly
art Ahabs Prophets Work; so if liars be deluded, thou art; even by that spirit
that deluded Ahabs Prophets; and it has obeyed Gods voice in being a lying
spirit in thy mouth; so that the same Salutation that thou did donate to me,
will I retor to thy self again; only for decency omitting the abstract, or
rather mutate and change it from soul to flesh, viz. deluded flesh; but
remember thou that thine was deluded soul. Christ and his Minsters traveled to
present every man perfect in Christ, and spotless, without wrinckle; yet that
Ministry took no tithes at all; What Is your Ministry worth, who rob the Nation
to teach them and save them from sin, and yet must go to Grave with sin upon
their backs? Are not you worse then the Papists, who allow of a Purgatory? O!
is not Christ's blood sent to purge? indeed you are not Christ's Ministers, for
they were never persecutors nor casual to it; but Christ bade them believe them
not, and let the Tares grow till harvest with the Wheat; but your Wisdom seems
to stretch its self beyond Christ's; but take heed you spoil not the Wheat, for
woe to thou that spoilest: I entreated thee to answer my Queries in love and
meekness, and not to tell me a confused Story of JAMES NAYLER the Quaker, as
thou call him out of thy old Bottle, to tell me that I know, is vanity, such
is thy vanity; to answer when thou art not asked, is to be more ready to speak
then to hear, a Busiebodies property indeed, then a discreet Ministers of the
Gospel; Was his sufferings good or bad, I mind no such thing can be good, 1
Cor. 13.1, 2, 3.7.4, 5, 6.
why then rejoicest thou in evil? Is the love of our God in thee? Thou tellest
me that I am deluded, and yet laughest at my Writing; is this Solomon's time of
laughing accomplished in thee, to laugh at me when I am going headlong to
hell, provide withal, that hell be as bad as thou make it; I rather am
forced to conceive, that the Devil has thought this time of his merriment too
long ere it come, and has produced thee to it before its season, or else thou
surely would a wept until I had escaped Hell Gates, and then a laughed: I
can scarce choose but believe, that if thou had been with Christ when he
wept over Jerusalem, Matthew. 23.36, 37, 38.
that when he wept thou would a laughed, for he wept at their delusion, but
thou laughest at mine, and tellest me thou could not choose; true love
rejoices not at evil; surely thy own Rule or Tutor has dealt so plainly with
thee as to give thee a true Character of thy condition: Thou say that I have
some love in me to thee; because I in my Letter to thee did present such soft
words, certainly a soft answer turns away Wrath; sometime the devil confesses
truth; but truly if I in Writing to thee so mild had love in me, and that a
character of it, then certainly thou have none in thee, and that is as true a
character of it, who tellest me of Whips, and Stock, and hot Irens, and Burch;
and certainly if there be any sparks of wrath in me, Solomon's proverb will be
verified; Reader, read 1. Epist. of John 2 chap. v. 9, 10, 11, 12.
but I hope the Water of life has squenched it, though I was never counted so
rare a Preacher as thou. 2. Have I love in me, and yet deluded, (God is love)
thou ignorantly confessest God is in me, and yet manifests confusion in
saying Satan is in me.

Out of obedience to the eternal Light do I write unto thee, yet not mine, but
he that dwells in me; for my Sabbath is come, and I work not; and has in
some measure captivated every thought that exalts its self above the knowledge
of Jesus Christ. O! what high thoughts have you of your Way and Sect, and
Oxford and Cambridge; all this while you are but building Babel, and the longer
you build, the nearer its fall is, (...) Undiscipled.
for you but build flesh that must dye, having been so long at Universities,
and yet unlearned (or undiscipled) as the Greek renders it, you act barely from
other men's Commissions, dreaming that it is yours, and that God intended you as
well as them when he spoke; Ah filthy Dreamers! stealing the Prophets words (to
make a sale on it) and from your Neighbors: O! I thank God that I am struck,
and raced out of your Muster-Roll of thieves; stay a little, Hos. 4.6.
your work is pleasant, yet at the end your Wages will come; God never sent
any, but with the command he gave Power; but God never sent you priests of
England, for he has not given you as much Power as to make his Church perfect;
but has (blessed be his Name) gave us a notable Character that he never sent
you, even in that he has sent the devil his obedient servant, to make you deny
perfection, or the perfecting of his Saints upon earth.

Thou say thou would freel, help my foot out of the snare; Is this to do
it; to laugh at me now I am in it, and tell me that I am in a spiritual Snare,
and the while do what thou can to help me into a pair of Stocks to augment my
misery: Surely thou art turned tyrant, and worse then AEsops Tormentors; David's
Enemies jeered at him in his calamity: but had thou been a Preacher in his
time, thou would have been better known to the world, and characterized to
the Nations then now thou art; thou will do it freely; for it is well thou
promisest so fair, for thou know I Will give thee no hire to do it but I think
thou had spoken more truly if thou had said thou had been willing to help
me into another snare, then thy mouth, pen, and heart I think would agreed
together; wherefore am I deluded and in a snare because I do the best I can to
wipe away a frothy Priesthood, and a hive of drones that eat the honey from the
laborers, Matthew. 5.
and am against them that run before they are sent? I hope you will give me
leave to do as I would be done by; and because I am a terror to your pride,
Matt. 23. read John the 5.
and vain honors, and Masterships; wherefore shall I call you Masters? because
you are servi Diobali and educati in Schola ejus; certainly then I were a
respecter of them whom I know not, or else I were one that had acquaintance
with the mystery of Iniquity; I would desire certainly rather to elevate my
self a little higher toward the condition of my first estate, even to know his
Master, viz. God, and be an Alien unto him; Matthew. 4.
Nam nullus homo duos Magistros scire potest. But because thou shall study a
little to prove thy practice, I will study, or rather have, to make it void
either of decency, order, civility, or good reason: What say thou to a
Scripture-Weapon, Call no man Master; Matthew. 23. Exodus 20.
and, Thou shall not worship the likeness of any thing in heaven, or the earth
beneath; but man is a likeness; Ergo, he that worships man breaks Gods
Command. By the way; the likeness of any thing in Heaven neither; but one
question, How do you escape the violating of this moral (as you call it)
command, when you pretend to worship Christ, and say he is in heaven with a
humane body? Certainly a humane body is a likeness: certainly you are worse
then the Papal-Church, who allow the picture of Christ, and maintain a
company of poor men to make them; for a poor Trade is held up by them. 2. What
is it in men that desire flesh, even dust, to bovv to it? Genesis 1.
I am perwaded it is naught but the devil clothed with dust thinks it some
honor to have his fellows bow to him; and certainly if I granted his desire, I
were not above him, but equal with him, and then I were no better then a devil
too as well as you. Thirdly, Rev. 22.
the Angel reproved John for the thing; and what do men by it but receive
honor one of another? no wonder so few of you are believers; what is it but a
tradition? Joh. 5.
even putting off Hats, and Congies; and a command against tradition broken it,
to null the Commands by Traditions, Christ's own words. If that be to honor the
Higher Powers, then Christ commanded the Disciples not to do it; Salute no man
by the way; and if ye salute none but your Brethren, what is that more then the
Scribes? but if thou read that Scripture in Greek, it will be found as a
charracter of thy idleness, Matthew. 5.47. compared with v. 46. (...) Salum, a
Metaphor from the Sea that ebbes and flows to supply our brothers need. Romans
12.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Heb. word is (...) Shalum, Salve, to bless one; a Metaphor
from the sea, whose ebbings and flowings comfort.
that in all this time of thy life and study, thou yet have not found or known
love in Greek from Salutation; for it is thus in Greek, [(...), Mat. 5.47.]
Again, are not these things the fashions of the world? And are not they that
are renewed in the light of their minds, past from the fashions, viz. vain
fashions, that maintain neither life nor credit? Ah but Jacob bowed to Esau,
and Abagal to David; nay but Isaac bowed not to Pharaoh, and Jacob to Esau out
of fear one to the other; but all this will not make a Paradox an Orthodox; for
since these times Christ gave an express command against it to the disciples;
and when the same command to me cease and is annihilated, then I Will do it
again.

Now who is in the Snare? he that desires to keep the commands, or he that
teaches men to violate them, and does break them himself?

Thou say thou writest to me because it may be the Lord may make me to
listen to thee, least through thy neglect I should be hardened in the way of
Quaking that poisoned Cup.

What, to an hireling Voice shall I hearken? Surely if if there be any thing of
the Lamb in me, it will know Christ's voice, and shun an Hirelings; if thou
had this of the Father, he would have taught thee to have exhorted me rather
to a heard Christ's voice, Col. 1.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 1 John 9.
Hear him who is in me and thee, and every man else: Or art thou Christ his
Son? nay, for thou denyest to be holy as God is; if no son, no heir; not
perfect, no son at all; for Christ was perfect, and we ought to be as he is;
read the Scriptures: must I hear thy voice who art not holy as God is, but of
the Devil; for he that commits sin is of the devil; I know thy voice, it is not
the voice of the true Shepherds, for thou enterest in by the Wall, and not the
Door, that is Christ in thee the spark of Innocence, Luke 17.
for then thou must a come in by revelation, and Gods voice, whose voice is in
his Kingdom, and his Kingdom within you, Prove. 1.23.
and his Temple within his Kingdom; this is he who cries in the corners of the
Gate to call the Passengers, Prove. 1.23.

And here thou have much ado with Quakers: Why, was not Paul one? 1 John 4.17.
1 Pet. 1.15. Acts 6. Ezik. 34. Mal. 2.1, 2, 3, 4 Amos 5.21, 21, 23. Mal. 2.9.
Read Mal. 3.4 chap.
and Moses one? and did not God say that he will roar out of Sion, and make the
Inhabitant, yea the earth its self to shake, and the Mountains; certainly he is
come to shake the Flesh, and terrify that fleshly Mountain, but thou art alone
escaped, whose life is given for a prey: [but mind] the Islands also shall
tremble, and remote corners of the earth; for he will plead, I say, with all
Flesh, etc. And who shall abide the day of his coming? Flesh must dye; and thus
when he comes he shall despise your F^ast-dayes, and assemblies.

Lastly; Seeing I have proved now that quaking is a condition the Saints pass
through into Canaan, Nah. i. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
or pure Love; and gave the reason, which was the presence of God or his Seed,
appearing as a terror unto the other seed or flesh that is weakness, Nahum 2.1, 2
it tremb'es and shakes til all is shaken in pieces that can be shaken, that,
that which never shall be shaken may be all. And this is the reason that men
fear hell, it is the Devil in them, who loves to dwell abroad, and is loath to go
home, for the proud man keeps not at home; Satanus magis est jucaelo quam in
inferno: etc.
now consequently if I am hardened in quaking, it is in that the power of God
(for good) produces; therefore thou should had kept this reproof for a^ more
anamocal or unlawfuller misdemeanor then quaking, etc.

And now I am brought by the Lords manuduction from answering thy Letter, even
to revocate these answers of thine tendaded forth as in reference to answers
unto my queries, My query was, Whether or no the Temple of God was not the
Saints bodies? Thou answerest affirmatively: Indeed the Scripture that I backed
my query with is so plain, i Cor. 3.16, 17. 1 Cor. 6.19.
that the cunningest devil among you cannot by any sophistical falacy educt it;
for the Devils foundation is the Letter; and if he should deny that, it would
be enough to plenative his members with a suspicious jealousy that he were
deculating that which for many years he has taught them by his education to
super-edificate, or build up. Now to prove the Letter his Maxim is easier for
me then for him in thee to prove another Temple besides the Saints bodies,
though presumption blusheth not at folly: The Apostles argument is not
particular, as to the Letter of the Law, for if so, why was he so
Logosevacuate, or empty of Expessions as not to express it particular, but
seeing he did not well take the Devils Liberty to keep close to the Letter
which is expressed in general terms, viz. The Letter kills: Now the Devils name
in Hebrew signifies a destroyer, and I hope betwixt them two there is little
difference, viz. killing and destroying.

Q. 1. Well, as to this query I shall be silent; for I have no need to clear or
dispute that which the Devil has done for me; it is sufficient, and I hope all
rational men who are legalized and legitimated in his Books will be
simulizmented, or like minded with me.

The second query was, Whether or no the Lord had any other Temple as to judge
or justify in? Thou answerest affirmatively, and asserts some Scriptures, as
Rev. 7.15. Rev. 11.19: 2 These. 2.4. Rev. 3:12. Acts 7.48. all which, as the
Reader may see, declares not one word of another Temple, but rather confirms
the former Scripture, that said the Saints bodies is his Temple, and declares
of a Temple, but not of another Temple; and declares that God has a Temple;
and the devil like a cunning Crittick adds another; but let me tell him this
that God will add plagues to him; Rev. 22.
and here thou art found a lier, and art like to be a lier to his Kingdom, viz.
The devil, who told the first lie to man; and here thou art of thy father,
whose works thou do: Now 2 Cor. 6.16. says, That God walks in them, and
dwells in them: Certainly if he dwells there, it is his only House; or else
has he two Temples, and one wherein he dwells not; certainly that is the devils
Temple, and not his wherein he dwells not; or where does he justify or condemn
any but within? if he does, produce. reason or experience: Luke 17. says, That
Gods Kingdom is within yea within Hypocrites where is his Temple pray? without
his Kingdom then? Thou assertest Acts 7.48. which declares merely in what
Temple God dwells, and not of another Temple; thou instancest Mic. 1.2. to
prove it; to which I say; the Prophet there bids the earth hearken, and all in
it, and let God bea witness against it from his holy Temple; where is the Word
another? good Master, let me now a little examine thee, since thou have
heretofore examined me much concerning things of less concernment; and all to
fit me for the holy Priesthood: I believe the devil is no Prophet, neither any
Predicator; for if he had, I hardly believe he would have spent so much time
in teaching his scholar to beat himself; the substance of that in Micah is
that God vvjl be vvitness against that place where he is not all, or rules by
the name of Christ, or dexte ial power.

The third query was, Whether the ho yest of all was the material invisible
Heavens? thou ansvverest, Heaven is the holiest, which I never yet queryed;
for if I had, I should have similized my self too much to thy spirit, who
ansvverest still when thou art not asked; which to prove, thou writest Heb.
9.24. which says not that Heaven that is the holiest of all, though true if
it had, though not in thy sense, for there is two senses in Scripture, the
Devils, and Christ's; but the Apostle says, He viz. Christ is entered into the
holiest of all; and Act. 1. says that he is gone into heaven; and thence thou
inferrest this falacie, seeing one Scripture says he is gone into the holiest;
and the other, that he is gone into heaven. Ergo, thou concludest, That Heaven
is the holiest of all; which is true in the Apostles sense, but a mere fallacy
in thine, and false Logic also; for who taught thee this Logic to prove a
particular by a particular? a particular affirmative proved by a general
affirmative is true according as I learned and heard when I was in the Magic
schools among the Witch crafts, sorcerers and Whoremongers, by which I so wound
thy error, that the best Physic the devil has shall never cure it. All
holiness of all belongs to one only Divine Power; but God is this one; Ergo, he
is the Holiest of all then consequently there is two holiests of all, or else
no Heaven but God, 1 Cor. 15.
but one power that fills all in all, hell and heaven is all filled with God,
and the Saints can be in either.

But to conclude this point, let me include it with this Maxim, In Hebrew Lux
(...) light, or God, or Heaven. Joh. 1.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Dan. 2.22. Joh. 16.10,
16, 17. Rev. 5.13. Matthew. 24. Isa. 60.19, 20. Isa 58 8, 9, 10. Isa. 16.1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7.
and the present of these Scriptures in the Margent, to the View of the gentle
Reader; my Maxim is, That Heaven is the holiest, and God Heaven-Light; for so
the word in He brew signifies Light properly; read and see else, and God is
Light, and Christ is entered into Heaven, yea, into the Father; I in the Father,
says Christ; now he is in the Father, and the Father is Light, that is Heaven;
in this sense it is true, else it is but a fallacy; for I ask thee, If the first
were a figure and visible, then whether the anti-^ype can be so also as the
type was? Now if the visible Heaevens be the holiest of all (he antitype) then
they should be invisible, or else cannot be the antitype, or sustance of the
visible. Truly thou multiplyest up so many Scriptures to hang thy errors in,
and yet they are so brittle in further and more abyss search, that they let
fall them to the ground, and will not hang together, they are of so contrary a
nature, no more then that sand would of whom the Devil went to make Ropes
(being sent by the Magicians) the while he sought a likelyer subject to make a
rope on to tie him up; so the Devil sets you to bumbast your errors upon the
scriptures to employ yeu (he knowing that they two will not stick together) the
mean time that he may get faster horst upon your carcases. But to conclude my
Maxim, The Heavens shall vanish and melt away; Ephesians. 2.
and if these visible heavens be his essential Temple; Genesis 1.
then your Opinion says that his essential Temple shall be destroyed; for you
say, at judgment it shall be burnt; These Scriptures are concerning light, in
which that word is but variously taken, sometime for Devil painted like God.
then God must no more be an essential power, but a lie Alas! that Heaven that
will shake, and tremble, and melt, is their heaven, is their Sky; as Isaiah
says; or light, a fa^se pretended thing, that pretends what it shall never be;
for the visible is but the Cage that the invisible is collected in to act its
parts in an invisible form, under two denominations. And further, that this
visible form in form perishes, but the matter still brings forth the invisible
in a particular body, or else it must be a Chaos, were it not collected, and
were it not a visible subject, there could be no collection; for I believe that
as in general the Visible is, and was as ancient as the Invisible in the matter
of it; Inqua^itate.
for God was ever, and God could never be but by a Visible, for he was ever a
Creator; but if never a Creation, then never a Creator; if there was a time
when there was nothing, then there was a time when there was no God (which
destroys Eternity) for God is something; take away the one, and the other; but
they shall never be separated in matter, quamvis in forma; For O Israel, when
the Sun cease to give Light, and the Creation to be so, then will I cease to
be thine, but God will not; Ergo, the Creation will not.

And here also in one of thy pages, thou say that I bind thee up; I desired
thee not to add thy meanings to the Scripture; I owe the Devil so much good
will, that I would not have the Plagues added to him; but sometime foolish
pity destroys a City: However then thou acknowledgest that God did not still
bind Satan up, but once Satan him, or rather the Angelical Image, who is
dressing its self with higher Robes, and finer by education, and its cursed
nature then ever pure Alphabe ical Nature put on us.

A again, in another page thou biddest me search the meaning my self, when I
had put forth the query to thee; on the Catechism of your Assemblies Agreement,
in that you say, Page 1. l. 13.14.
That the people should seek Knowledge at the Priests lips and now thou biddest
me seek the meaning my self O! is not this confusion? I leave it to manifest
its self openly and apparently. Or have thou left thy Priesthood, since that
thou have changed thy Resolutions so soon?

And that wherein you declared these preceding Expressions, you called your
Warrant; what have thou so quickly forsaken thy Warrant? and in the place thou
say the words are plain; viz. He is gone into heaven; why if they are plain,
what need I seek a meaning? Ah! confusion is at a cheap rate with thee in these
thy answers to me, as may appear by the Readers Integrity in apprehending.

2. What need I seek a meaning to that ^f it is not of any private
interpretation at all, 2 Pet 1.20, 21.
nor came by man's will? how then can it be opened by that by which it never
came?

3. The Apostles spoke in the Epistles to the Church and Saints and to
unbelievers, and weak Members; how came they to understand it at all without
exposition? and we now lay out so much to have the same now expounded which the
Apostles never expounded at all, or else the Apostles were much too blame, who
let that go out of their hands unexpounded to such a rotten Priesthood,
especially they knowing (2 These. 2. how soon after the myste^y of Ini^juity
should inhaurate, or produce such an Apostacy and Catalogue of Vi^erous
Deceivers, etc.

Hen. Osland, thou in thy second page in answer to my 16. query ventest out thy
Serpent-like Venom, and art found in the steps of the Scribes and Phariees,
crying out, Crucify him; they thought that they were good, and he evil, being
nursed up in the Educatory Schools of corruption. So thou and thy Ministry cry
out for warlike Weapons to kill and slay all that are with them in this
University of Conception; though the Devil be the Usher, I declare not who is
the Master; where is thy Scripture-Rule for this? What should thou do with
hot Irons, and Whips, and Stocks, but put the earth to action, the vegitive to
obstruction, the sensitive to torture, the reason to catacrination; a bloody
word proceeding from a Cain-like nature; for he that hates his Brother is a
murderer; Matthew. 5.
and Esau is the Brother of Jacob; yet Jacob hated not Esau, but Esau Jacob;
Obad. 3. i, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Obad. 21. read the last
verse but one.
therefore Jacobs Seed shall app ar as Saviors to judge the Mount of Esau.

Thou Enemy to Nature and good Education, does God require thee to take his
part with Whips and hot Irons? Thou Adetrolical Educator, who think that Gods
part is vindication by a Sword, and therefore smitest the ears of thy Enemies;
Vengeance belongs to God, and he only will pay it; what good would it do thee
to see me in the Stocks? then would thou answer my query as thou say, else
not; so that it seems thou shufflest off the difficult queries (that ought to
be answered by artificial Weapons) by handicraft punishments; and tellest me,
that if I do clear it thou will answer it, page 3. by which it seems the
Scripture-promises are not factabonitated unto thee; for if thou had the true
spirit, thou would understand my dark speech, as thou call it, without my
clearing it; for God is a spirit, and the God is the Comforter, and God knows
the Devils mind; for he pulls it, actienical urim; therefore if thou wast of
God, thou would know the mind of darkness, without darkness clearing it
self, as thou in page 3. requirest it; so that by thy own words thou art
numbered among them that call Light darkness, and darkness Light.

Thou say that Burraston and Baxter thy fellow Priests are more fitter to
whip me then dispute with me, the worst of them; His 2. page in answer to my
14. Query, l. 13, 14 and 12. 1 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3,
is this thy commendation of thy Brethren the Priest? Is their Calling fitter
to whip then dispute? why then tell them, that they may leave disputing, and go
to whipping. A bishop most must be no siricker; but a whipper is a stricker;
Ergo, they are more fit to be strikers then disputers; the truest word thou yet
say since thy Scriptural Discourse had its inc^pation or alphabetality.

Do not thou respect persons among thy Brethren, Viz. Mr. B. Joh. 2.13. These
pages, page 3. and 2.
who call one by his Name, another by the Devils Name, though thou think
to put the best Title upon him? the Apostle says they ought not know one
another after the flesh, nor Christ neither, but after the spirit; to know
Christ, and consequently so one another also: The Devil acts but a fools Play
upon the Stage in going by Contraries and immediocrity; for because we must not
know our Wives according to the flesh, therefore not at all; but honest
mediocrity says, that we must know them, and all according to the spirit or
life, viz. The visible by the invisible, 3 Cor. 5.16.
and use or act them according to the the flesh or outward form: Now concerning
thy human-bodyed-Christ, did not God make all things by Christ, and was not he
a perfect Christ from the beginning, or before (as to particulars) and was a
perfect Christ, and Lamb slain from the beginning of the world? then surely
that humane body was not him; for I believe that God made not the world in thy
sense by a humane Body, though in truth he does; but this is a mystery; but if
he made not the worlds by that body that dyed at Jerusalem, because the world
was made before the humane body came; Ergo, that humane body cannot be Christ.
2. Can a spirit be limited to locals? a humane body is. 3. Can a humane body
fill Heaven and Earth? Christ does; Erg, not a humane body. 4. Christ is in
God, and God is a spirit; then is a humane body in a spirit by this. A Paradox:
Indeed a spirit is in a humane body; an Orthodox.

Thou in answer to my 6. query say, that Christ is an othergess spirit then
the Saints, or not the same; My 6. Query.
but whetherther thou meanest not so in quality or quantity, or neither, I know
not; but this I know, That they are Kings and Priests on earth, and Christ is
no more. 2. I say, That there is no difference in, or of him that sanctifies,
Rev. 6. Heb. 2.11, 12.
or he that is sanctified; read Heb. 2.11, 12.

For they are all one says the Text, Gal. 3.20. Gal. 3.16.29.
which comprehends both quantity and quality. 3. The seed of Abraham is Christ
that s but one, and the Saints are the Seed of Abraham, and but one, Ezekiel.
36.23. Ezekiel. 37.26, 27. Ezekiel. 38.23.
viz. [(...)] that holy One that God will sanctify in the vail or form of
Elements, the Son being revealed in the flesh, or visible, reveals the Father;
but few know the Father who know not themselves to be the son; or their life,
though they may conceive a God in fancy, and so a Devil, and his garments a
form of Religion: And do not the Saints remain for ever, and Christ too; and
yet but one Eternity? Jer. 23.7, 8. Isa. 60.1, 2. Isa. 65.5.
Christ, or Saint? remains, viz. Now this is the Jews gathered from the North
Country, with your praying to come in from the South. Christ is the fullness of
God; but does Gods fullness dwell in a particular in a humane body? And the
Apostles prayers were, That the Saints might be filled with his fullness, and
the Saints with the fullness of God; Christ was no more then Gods fullness; the
Saints are his body; has he two bodies, or is his body humane or spiritual?
Thou art not ashamed to preach that which in truth thou persecutest others for
writing; did not thou preach that the Whitstones Name written upon the
Saints, Rev. 3.11.
was God? and yet if any should be called by the Name of God, thou will have
them killed, and bored with Irons, though they are called by no other Name then
that God has writ upon them; Ah! but after death they are so. Answ. Now God
writes it upon them when they are Saints, the New Jerusalems Name, Christ's Name
when they overcome; but they overcome, and are Saints here, therefore that Name
is proper and right to be inherited here. Thou make a distinction here in
Prove. 11.5. concerning perfection, the righteousness of the perefect shall
direct his way; what distinction is that to a gradual perfection? Christ shall
direct the way of the perfect; or God in flesh shall direct the way to the
perfect, as in Heb. for he directs all to perfection that is past the Creator,
viz. Soul, Reason, Vegebility, or Inaninamity. Thou say that they, viz. thy
Church, have the same anointing as Christ had: O! let shame cover thy lips, who
has the same Anointing as he had; and yet not as perfect as he? how is it, that
seeing you have the same mean, viz. anointing, as you confessed, and yet not the
same abilities? this proves you are idle in your School, therefore you have
assumed to your selves what you are not.

2. If so that ye have the same Anointing, How is it ye do not greater works
then Christ did? 1 John 2.27.20
for he that believes shall do greater works then I; How is it that ye are
taught then? for they need not teaching in whom this is; read. Thy page 1.
Thou say that God does fill heaven and earth; and yet in page 2. limitest
his Right-hand-power to a local heaven, and his left Hand to a local hell; so
that then by this, he has nothing to do in this medium, or mediacal Region;
then to whom do thou preach and pray? and for whom? not for the Devil, for he
is Gods Power in hell; not for God or Christ, for he is the power in heaven
above us; then it must needs follow, That thou preachest and prayest for thy
self; consentedst indeed that he fills all with joy and terror; and created
Principalities by one hand, and pulls it down by the same hand, viz. (...).
Annihilates Conceptions into no Conceptions; so that we shall live in our
Nature as Beasts, as mere sensuals in theirs; for all things visible and
invisible are God in a Lump, but otherwise properly called his Offspring, or
sons or idems. Are not all things of God? Is not there an evil thing, and a
Conceit called a Devil? Whence is it? Indeed Nature I must confess constrains
me to reveal, praelibate its primarecal Pettydegree; for Natures ipsiatical
Associate providentially conveyed its self into an opposite Position to act its
part invisibly; and that it might be so, first of all brought forth its self in
a Conception through a fall the incipiation of Conception of a good and evil.
Providence there was in both as was its will. And so to conclude, Amantium irae
amoris redintegratio est. Nature orders its motions so, as to previate its self
into its former Egrediention, or going forth in the visible, its incipation and
original being its self; God could not come forth in any thing but himself,
seeing himself was all things, Gal. 3.28, 29, 27.

Thou answerest to this query more subtly then Eve by the Devil; her
conceited fancy was answered; though it be not very proper, yet almost, to say
the Devil takes Degrees. Again thou confessest that every man is enlightened
with Christ. If man be enlightened with him, then is he in all, unless thou will
make him a mere visible Sun, to be as a visible substance in one supposed place
in essence, and his Light in all places, all as man. God is Light, and no such
substance as the Firmamental sun is. Thou call it a supernatural Light;
grant it be; quid tune? then it is above wrath, is it not? Christ is so, and
that is so, thou say; Ergo that is Christ; why then do not thou direct
people from Christ Gods Kingdom? Luke 17.
For if that Text in them, and Gods Kingdom in them, then for thee to direct
people to apply their minds on reading, studying, or hearing men preach, is to
direct them to without; for the Letter, and man's preaching in, Exterius, not
interius.
and hearing them, is all without; Ergo, it must needs follow that thou turnest
people from Christ, and so art wiped out from being any of the Apostles
succession in quality, though by conception thou art a Member of the
Apostolical Church, and all beside thee and that Church Devils; but it is but a
conception.

A Declaration of the Fall and Restoration, with their Causes.
O! How is the right ways of pure Nature perverted by the Malignant Education
of these generation, so that it is clouded and hid in the thickest of men's good
manners, by which Natures Manners is corrupted, or rather in men's fantastic
Conceits; thus good and evil, as in distinction, are but conceits, epilogued in
time in the first Adam; and when conceits have an end put to it, then will Adam
know no good nor evil at all; for as long as men know good, they will and must
necessarily know evil also; for evil proceeds, and has its Epilogue from the
cognoscity of good, not evil and good but good and evil; so then the knowledge
of good was the superial and primary effect of the fall, as well as evil; nay,
evil was but an effect in se undo graduo, in the se^ond degree: For although
Adam had received the Law of pure Nature or Innocence, of God, yet he knew no
good nor evil in any thing he did before he fell into the Serpentine-humour of
conceits in respect of action; yet for all this it was but action, for the fall
consisted not in any thing that he or she spoke, viz. words, though now the
devil is got up as God, and destroys men for words: And though he knew the
life of God in him, yet he knew no good, no not in the command that God gave
him, nor in hi^ life, (though it was Gods) for then consequently he must have
known evil too, when there was naught that he could call evil, unless he had
conceited some of Gods works to be so, which he could not in nature of conceit;
providencially transmitted into the Elementary part do, till he began to
conceive them to be so by a humor, and then something in his conceit was good
in oppositon to the evil; for without the one the other cannot be no more then
hatred without love, or love without hatred, or cold without heat; for if men
had never known hatred, they would never had known love; nor Christ without the
Devil; nor God without evil; so they are but educative distinctions, having
conceited something besides God, or else there had been no place found for the
Devil, and consequently then no place for Christ and his redemption* Nature is
as a tender plant growing up, loved in its self.

J. H.

(...) FINIS.

