THE KENTJSH PETJTJON, SET FORTH, By that Divine Spirit which God has given to
me JAMES HUNT, AND Dedicated unto all those which do love GOD and the TRUTH.
FOr Gods Word does tell you, plainly in the first Epistle to the Corinthians,
the 6. Chapter and the 17. verse. He that is joined to the Lord, is one spirit,
and there are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost, and these three are one, as you may read in the first Epistle of
John, the 5. Chapter and the 7. verse. And now I say again, there are four
which does bear record here on earth, and they are joined all in one; for the
Father is God, the Son is God, the Holy Ghost is God, and the true Church is
joined and made one with God; for it is plainly written in the second Chapt. to
the Ephesians. Christ was crucified on the Cross, for to make one-new man in
himself, and so making peace; but who is that new man. I, say all true
believers, although we shall be thousands in number; for Jesus Christ he does
tell you plainly in the 5. Chapter of John, and the 24. verse. Verily verily I
say unto you, he that hears my word and believes on him that sent me, he
has everlasting life, and he shall nos come into condemnation but he is passed
from death to life, and now I say again, the Father the Word, and the Holy
Ghost these three are one; the word does signify Christ, who is the second
person in Trinity; for it is plainly written in the first Chapter of John, In
the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, for Christ was one with
the Father before man was made, and the word was made flesh, Christ was made
flesh, and dwelt amongst us, verse. 14. And thus I have proved in brief, Christ
is the Word, and Christ is God, and know ye not that Christ is in you, excep ye
be reprobates; but how, and by what means is Christ in his people? I say by
the true light and glory of his word, and that spirit which does join us to
God the Son, the same does join us to God the Father, and to God the holy
Ghost; for it is plainly written in the 4. Chapter to the Ephesians, and the 6.
verse. There is one God and Father of all, who is above all, and in you all,
Again, in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, the 6. Chap. and the 19 verse.
What, know ye not that your body is the Temple of the holy Ghost which is in
you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own, for ye are all bought with
a great price, even with the precious blood of Christ, by his suffering on the
Cross, and therefore glorify God in your bodies and in your spirits which are
Gods, verse. 20. And thus by Gods help, I have made it plainly appear, by
plain and clear truths of Scripture, that for all those that will be
reconciled to Christ, and to the obedience of his word, which is made manifest
in the New Testament, your souls which is the inward man shall be joined and
made one with the Father, Son, and Holy Ghosts for as the glorious Trinity
cannot be divided from being one in Godhead and unity, neither can the spirits
of the true Church be divided from them three, which is the life and substance
of true peace and sound Religion, as I in brief have showed you, even as God
my Father has showed me, and by the spirit of Almighty God which proceeds
from above. I hope to draw my King and Parliament into the same true band of
peace and love.

And now all ye Committees, Captains, and Commanders, which have your authority
from the high Court of Parliament: from your persecuting power I pray in time
turn and repent; for by that glorious light which God has freely given to
me, you shall understand and plainly see, that if you will not be reconciled
to this blessed peace and unitee, and have your spirits joined to the holy and
glorious Trinitee, I say again, if you will not be reconciled, you shall be
sure damned to be; for Jesus Christ who is the powerful God of Heaven and
earth, he does tell you plainly in the 3. Chapter of John, and the 36. verse. He
that believes not the Son, he shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on him, and Saint Paul does tell you in the 2 Epistle to the
Thessalonians, the 1. Chapter and the 8. verse. God will take vengeance on them
that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord,
and from the glory of his power. And now I pray understand the Gospel in his
right place; for it is the New Testament which does proceed from the Throne of
grace, for Jesus Christ he is the Mediator of the New Testament, as you may
read in the 9. Chapter to the Hebrews, and Jesus Christ he did make his holy
Apostles able Ministers of the New Testament, and my task does tell you, he
that is joined to the Lord is one spirit, and mercy and sound judgment shall
be the true notes of my prose and my song; for by Gods mercy and sound
judgment, I shall no man wrong, for mercy and sound judgment does belong to
God, and to my Kings seat; whereunto I am ordained a preacher with power for to
pleat, and by the power of God you shall see clear: Gods Judgment day that
does draw near, for by the Divine power and glory of Gods grace, my royal
King shall have free leave to sit in Judgment in Knowle place, and have power
from God for to call a new Parliament, and thereby give Gods people good
content, and force the Devil for to lament; for by Gods power, he shall be
sure for to receive his pay; for to be plagued in Hell for ever, for Gods power
he shall obey, and so shall ye high Court in Westminstar, which are grown so
great in power, for if you will not be reconciled to God and the Truth, God
will bring you lower; for Gods word does tell you in the 5. chap. to the Ephe.
verse. 13. All things that are reproved they are made manifest by the light. And
now ye Committees and Excisers, I pray understand me well, and consider what I
say, for your taxing and your plunder, that is as hateful in Gods fight as
robbery on the high way; for I am sure you have no authority from my Royal
King for to be so bole, for to have the command of our money and goods, and yet
you say I must not you control; but plain truth if the world condemn thee
for a liar, I am sure I am no Weaver. And now ye Committees, I pray judge you,
who does deserve the halter, the thief or the receiver; but God my Father he
is full of mercy, and that must be your hope. And ye tormenting spirits I pray
forsake your hellish power, that you may all escape the rop^

And now all good people in City and Country round,
I pray mark and observe the Trumpets sound.
For I must tell you plainly, and boldly, I have received a commission from the
Divine power, and Spirit of Almighty God, for to require and entreat you all,
for the true love that is in Christ Jesus, and as you will answer at the
dreadful day of judgment, for to pay no more Tax money to the high Court of
Parliament, for to maintain cruel and bloody War against my Royal King, and
his true Subjects; for if ye do, I must tell you plainly, you will be found
for to be enemies against Jesus Christ, who is the true God of love and peace,
and false-hearted unto my Royal King.

For as the Bees they are all maintained with the honey; even so bloody War
you do maintain by feeding the Parliament with money; And now ye man of
War, Sir Thomas Fairfax, you are found to be more crafty then the Fox: For
you join in power with the Great and High Court, I plainly see, and so you
have the command of our money, for to mainetaine your great Army. But by the
Divine power and glory of Gods Word, you shall be forced for to l^y down your
bloody Sword; For God my Father, and Jesus Christ the Morning Sta^re, they have
made me a man of War, for to fight the Spiritual battle of the Lord; and
they have given me a powerful and fiery Sword, for to cut and burn down that
hellish power, which does the Saints of God devour.

And ye tormenting spirits, you shall be made to know God my Father as he
does require, and you shall be forced to confess, God has made me a Minister
and a flame of fire; For Gods Word does tell you plainly, in the first Chapter
to the Hebrews, and the 7. verse. God makes his Ministers a flame of fire. And
as a temporal fire will burn and consume straw or hay, even so Gods Word shall
shine so clear; Mark what I say: For to burn and consume false power quite
away.

Now here is a Tuchstone for you. Man of War, Colonel Blunt; for by your
blind justice you think to conquer prophet Hunt: For you have bound me to app
are at Maidstone next Quarter Session; but by the power of God, I shall command
you for to subseribe to my Petition. For I pray learn of me to be true to
God, and to the Royal Crown for if you will not, the sword of true Justice
shall cut you down. It is written in the 6 Chapter of the Revelation, and the 2
verse. Behold, a white Horse, and he that sat on him had a Boy, and a Crown
was given unto him, and forthwith he went co quering, and to conquer: and now
my kind and loving Friend, which by name is called M. Selke, I acknowledge,
once I was but a babe in Christ and was fed with heavenly mike, but now, God my
Father,

He has made me a spiritual Archer, strong and stour,
For to confound the Devil and all his rout:
For in my Quiver I have Arrows store,
I am fure a thousand, and many more;
And some are short, and some are long,
But my bow is stedfest and exceeding strong:
For my bow it has a double string,
Which I would gladly show my Royal King.
For God has made me able with my Verses and Prose,
For to conquer all our Foes,
And I am persuaded if my Royal King did but know my art,
He would give me leave to play my part.
For the divine power and glory of Gods Word,
That is my Bow, and Arrows, and my Sword,
For to wound those dark angels on the head,
Which all this misery have bread:
But if the dark angels you do not know,
In plain and brief I will you show,
For they are the Clergy I plainly see and understand,
Which have deceived the whole Land;
And that is the maine cause, as you all shall see,
Why our King and Parliament cannot agree.
But by the divine power of Jesus Christ, the glorious and precious stone,
The children of Almighty God, they shall be gathered all in one.
For Jesus Christ he does tell you in the 12 Chap. of John, and the 20. verse,
And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, I will draw all men unto me. But how,
and by what means will Christ draw all men unto himself, I say, by the
powerful preaching of his Word; for the true spirit of God he can draw but
one way, and that is to Christ, and to the New Testament, which is our glorious
Gospel of love and peace, that by the divine power thereof, bloody War may
end and cease: for Gods word does tell you plainly in the 1. Chapter to the
Colos. and the 19. verse. it pleased God our Father, that in Christ should all
fullness dwell, and having made peace through the blood of his Cross, for to
reconcile all things unto himself.

And now ye Lords, Knights, and Burgesses in Parliament, and all ye Committees,
Captains, and Commanders, and all ye Clergy Magistrates and Churchwardens, by
Gods help I have made it plainly appear, Jesus Christ was crucified on the
Cross, for to draw his people into the true band of love and peace; and now the
God of love and peace who has brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus that
great Shepherd of the sheep, make you all perfect to do his will, working in
you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through the Divine power of Jesus
Christ our Lord, Heb. 13.20. And now I say again, Jesus Christ he is the great
Shepherd of the Sheep, and there is but one true and perfect God, and there
must and shall be but one Religion, one Shepherd, and one Sheep sold, and
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, they have made me a powerful instrument for to
call and gather the Sheep into the true fould, that Gods love, power and glory
you may behold; and now my Royal King I do humbly beseech your Majesty for to
come to Knowle, and I will show you by what means all our enemies we may
control; for God has made me able to show you a plain and speedy way for the
establishing of true peace and sound Religion, and for the setting for^h of
Church Government in such a plain and powerful way, that the high Court of
Parliament, and all their Synod of Divines, Classes, Committees, and
Commanders, and those that are called by the name of Anabaptists, shall not be
able to convince it; for now by Gods help, I will boldly say, if I cannot
plainly prove and maintain what I spoke, why then let me be hanged or burned
at a stake. But ye Lords, Knights, and Burgesses, in Parliament; for the
Commandments you do say there are 10. and now I say true love and sound peace,
that is the greatest Commandment, and for that cause I hope you will all join
with me and say. Amen.

FINIS.

