The humble PETITION OF THE Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London, in Common Council Assembled.

TO THE Honorable the House of Commons assembled in High Court Of PARLIAMENT.
WITH The Answer of the House of Commons to the said Petition.

Printed by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honorable City of London, 1647.

TO THE Honorable the House of Commons assembled in High Court of PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London, in Common Council assembled.
Humbly shows,
THat as your Petitioners acknowledge the Parliament of England to be the
supreme Judecature of the Kingdom, from whom the Subjects of this Nation have
found shelter in danger, and releef in distress; So now your Petitioners
having (with the whole Kingdom) a great share and interest in these
privileges, do therefore at this time humbly, yet earnestly present these
their important desires to this Honorable House.

1 That all Honorable ways and means may be used to prevent the further
effusion and shedding of Christian blood, and to that end that all just
satisfaction may be given to the Army and all other Soldiers who have
adventured their lives for defense of this Parliament and Kingdom, that though
the condition of your affairs do not enable you to give full satisfaction at
present, yet that their Accounts may be justed, and put into a certain way of
payment to the quieting of many thousand discontented persons; which we humbly
conceive will be much to the glory of God, the honor of the Parliament, and
quiet of the Kingdom.

2 That according to our Allegiance, the Covenant and agreement of both
Nations, his Majesty's royal person may be preserved, and so disposed of,
that the Parliaments of both Kingdoms may have free access unto him, that
thereby a right understanding may be obtained between them; and this tottering
Church and Kingdom after all our fears, sorrows, and sufferings, may enjoy
the blessing of a wel-grounded and long desired Peace, whereby this Kingdom
may be the better enabled to send speedy relief and help to miserable,
bleeding Ireland.

3 That for the better defense and security of the Parliament, and City, in
these tumultuous and troublesome times, This Honorable House will be pleased to
renew so much of an Ordinance of Parliament of the 17. of January 1645. as
concerns the raising, maintaining, and ordering of Horses, and power of
making searches (a Copy whereof is hereunto annexed) whereby the Committee of
the Militia of London and Parishes mentioned in the Weekly Bills of Mortality,
may be the better enabled to suppress all tumultuous Assemblies, and to
prevent any dangers that may happen to the Parliament and City. And as this
City from the beginning of these troubles have faithfully adhered to the
Parliament, so we are resolved by the blessing of God never to desert the same,
but with the utmost of our lives and estates will stand and fall, live and die,
with the Parliament of England according to our Covenant.

And the Petitioners shall pray.

Die Martis Octavo Junii, 1647.
THE House being informed, that the Sheriffs of the City of London, diverse
Aldermen and other Citizens of London were at the door, they were called in,
and Sheriff Edmonds acquainted the House, That they were commanded by my Lord
Major, Court of Aldermen and Commons in Common Counsel Assembled, to deliver a
Petition to this House; the which the Petitioners being withdrawn was read, and
likewise a Printed Ordinance annexed, of the 17 of January, 1645. for the
raising of Horse for the defense of the City of London, and for searching and
apprehending of Papists and other ill affected persons.

Resolved, etc.

That an Ordinance be brought in o^ Thursday morning next, according to the
desires of the Petitioners; and it is referred (...) Mr. Recorder, Mr.
Grimston, Mr. Got, an Mr. Hill, or any two of them, to prepare an^ bring in
this Ordinance accordingly, and the care of this business is more particularly
referred to Mr. Got.

The Petitioners were again called in, an^ Mr. Speaker by the command of the
House expressed unto them the true sense this House has of their constant good
affections to this Parliament, and that no alterations whatsoever can work any
change in their duty and love, for which he is to give them the heartiest
Thanks from this House he can express.

He is further commanded to take notice of the Lord Majors, and Committee of
Militia's ready compliance with the Order of this House, in so seasonable
sending down a very good Guard, for which he is likewise to return Thanks to
the Lord Mayor, and the Committee of the Militia. Hereby the House understands
very well, that the Committee of the Militia is very sensible of the tumultuous
and distempered Humors that are now stirred, and therefore doubts not but of
themselves (to whom they do refer it) they will take care that such convenient
Guards may be appointed to attend the Houses as may preserve them from any
disturbance or interruptions in their Counsels: As to the request of the
Petitioners touching an^ Ordinance to the purposes therein mentioned, they have
done something in it and have put it into away for further consideration at
their next meeting.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


