The humble PETITION OF THE Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
LONDON in Common Council assembled. TO THE Right Honorable the Lords and
Commons assembled in High Court OF PARLIAMENT. With their Answer to the said
Petition.

Printed by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honorable City of London, 1647.

TO THE Right Honorable the Lords and Commons assembled in High Court OF
PARLIAMENT; The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the
City of London in Common Council assembled;
Humbly shows,
THat the Petitioners cannot but call to mind the deliverance, which they and
the whole Kingdom did justly expect from this Parliament, after so many years
suffering under the power of an arbitrary Government, both in their spiritual
and temporal concernments; and they do humbly acknowledge that this
Parliament has removed many obstacles, and are confident, would by this time,
with Gods blessing, have restored the Kingdom to its just liberties, and
settled a sure foundation for its future happiness, if they had not been
diverted by the great contrivers of the Kingdoms slavery, who, rather then
submit to the justice of this High Court, have raised, maintained, and
continued a bloody unnatural and long War against the Parliament of England.
In the suppression whereof, as much blood has been spilt, so a great Treasure
has been spent, and the Kingdom is still left involved in many engagements
and debts, both to their Brethren of Scotland (who like true Christian Brethren
came in to its aid against the common enemy) and also to a multitude of
Officers, Soldiers, and others the well affected people of this Land, who did
engage in the defense and support thereof. And although the Petitioners in the
obligation, which the cause of God, and the public safety did cast upon
them, have all this time both freely contributed, and cheerfully submitted to
many great and unusual Assessements, which also could not be leavied but in
an extraordinary way, yet they cannot be unsensible, how much arbitrary power
has been, during these distempers, exercised by Committees and others, by
whom the good Subject has been oftentimes more oppressed, then the Delinquent
suppressed, and who have managed the Receipts and Revenues which were designed
to maintain the public charge, so disorderly and ineffectually, that the
Kingdom cannot but be unsatisfied concerning the due employment thereof, and
doubt that much of the public Money has been employed to private ends, and
remain obscured in the hands of such as were entrusted with the Collection of
those Assessements, and the improvement of all Sequestrations to the public
and best advantage. And indeed the Petitioners have reason to attribute much of
the late discontent and disorders of diverse Officers and Soldiers, unto the
want of such Moneys, as if duly collected and faithfully managed, might have
in good part, If not fully, satisfied the Soldiery; And do humbly conceive,
that the Parliament has so much the more reason to enquire into the same,
because that from this defect, has risen those late Attempts of some of the
Soldiery, and there is such use made of the Vote passed by the Parliament for
their satisfaction, to invite and draw together very great numbers of Officers
and Soldiers from all parts of the Kingdom, under pretense of sharing the
money so obtained, that it may very much endanger the peace and safety of the
City.

The Petitioners therefore for remedy of the said Grievances and prevention of
those dangers which otherwise may be feared, and for settlement of this
miserable and distracted kingdom, do humbly pray,

I. That present command be given that no Officer of War or Soldier, other
then such as are already come in, do enter the Line of Communication, under
any pretense to share in the Moneys lately appointed by Parliament, toward the
satisfaction of any Arreares.

II. That such Officers and Soldiers who are already paid according to the
late several Ordinances of Parliament in this behalf made, if their usual
habitation and employment have been within the Line, be enjoined forthwith to
betake themselves to their calling, or some honest condition of living, and be
prohibited from their looser and tumultuous wandering and meeting within this
City, and other places adjacent, under penalty of losing their Arreares. And
that such Officers and Soldiers as have dwellings or other relations in the
Country, be required to depart the Line within two days after publication,
and to return to their homes or habitations, and there to apply themselves to
their several callings, upon the like forfeiture of their Arreares, except
such whose present and lawful occasions may require their continuance, to be
approved of by a Committee for that purpose to be appointed. And that the
Parliament would please to make some speedy and certain provision for the
satisfying of all Arrears unto the Soldiery, who have served the Parliament,
within some short and convenient time to be paid in the several Counties and
Places of their abode, according to the conditions of their entertainment.

III. That all Officers and Soldiers who have been in Arms against the
Parliament, or others who have assisted or contributed thereunto, be enjoined
upon pain of Imprisonment within 24. hours after publication to repair to
their several habitations, and fall to their lawful callings; And that such
Officers, Soldiers, and others as have no habitations nearer, be commanded
forthwith to withdraw themselves and to continue at least twenty miles from
London, for the space of forty days; Except such as by a Committee authorized
and appointed to that purpose shall have license, upon just cause, by them
allowed, to remain in or near London so long time, until they have
dispatched such businesses as they shall have in or near the City; which
ended, then presently to retire twenty miles from the City upon pain of
imprisonment as aforesaid.

IV. That such Commanders and Soldiers as, according to former orders of the
Parliament, have come in from the Army having received their Moneys, may be
otherwise disposed of as the Parliament shall think fit.

V. That all persons whatsoever that are possessed of any Moneys or Goods
belonging to the Public, may be enjoined to bring the same, within one month
after publication, into such public Treasury as is or shall be appointed for
that purpose, under penalty to forfeit treble the value, which shall be duly
proved to be so concealed, the half of the forfeiture to be given to such
persons as shall make proof of such concealment, and the other half to be
applied to the service of the State.

VI. That all Revenues as well such as are due by Sequestration as otherwise,
be managed under such Commissions, and by such Persons as notwithstanding any
Privilege of Parliament or otherwise, may be held to such Rules as are or
shall be prescribed therein, by Ordinance of Parliament, and be liable for
breach thereof, to answer the same in due course of Law; and that no arbitrary
power may be exercised to the contrary by any person whatsoever.

VII. That the Parliament would for present please to lay aside all businesses
of lesser consequence or private concernment, and improve their time and utmost
endeavor, that such Laws may be prepared for His Majesty's Royal
Concurrence, as may settle the Government of the Church, secure the People from
all unlawful and arbitrary power whatsoever in future, and restore his Majesty
to His just Rights and Authority, according to the Covenant, without all which
the Petitioners can never expect any lasting establishment. That so this long
divided and distracted Kingdom may attain to the Blessings of Peace and Unity
in Church and Commonwealth.

VIII. And that the People may be the better secured to enjoy the intended
effects of such Laws as shall be so made with the Royal assent, That
especial care be taken that all Officers of State, and other Ministers of
Justice, may be Persons of Honor, of considerable Interest and of known
Integrity to the Parliament and Kingdom.

IX. That the Parliament would please to provide for the carrying on of the
affairs in Ireland by speedy transporting the Forces which ly ready on the Sea
side, and such others as shall be willing to engage in that service, and by
such continual supplies as are requisite to reduce that Kingdom to the
obedience of the Crown of England, and rescue the good party left there, out
of the bloody hands of those barbarous rebels. And for the better
encouragement of the Subjects of this Kingdom to continue their supplies for
that Service, that with as much speed as conveniently may be, the Parliament
will please to take care that the People be eased of such extraordinary charges
and burdens as have long layne and still remain upon this Kingdom.

X. That by all just and good means the correspondence with our Brethren of
Scotland may, according to the National Covenant, be maintained and preserved.

XI. That this Honorable House would please to give order for a speedy
examination of all unlawful Elections and Returns of the Members thereof, and
purge the House of all such as have bin unduely chosen, or have bin in Arms or
in action against the Parliament, and provide for the supply of their rooms
according to the Laws of the Land.

XII. That some speedy course may be taken for the deciding of all causes
formerly determinable in the Court of Admiralty, the Trade and Navigation of
this Kingdom, and the correspondence with Foreign Nations, being very much
prejudiced, disturbed and endangered for want of due Provision herein, as has
formerly been at large represented unto this Honorable House.

XIII. And lastly, That satisfaction being made by Delinquents, according to
the wisdom of Parliament, an Act of Oblivion may be passed for an utter
abolition and final reconcilement of all Parties and Differences, and for the
quiet settling of Peace, Love, and Unity, among the Subjects of this Kingdom.

All which the Petitioners submit unto the wisdom of this Honorable House.

Die Veneris, 2. Julii, 1647.
THat their Lordships have had a long experience of the good affections of the
City of London to the Parliament and Kingdom, and they do return their
acknowledgement for the same. As to the particulars of the Petition, which are
many and long, they will take them into their speedy consideration.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Veneris, 2. Julii, 1647.
THe House being informed, That the Sheriffs, and diverse Citizens of the City
of London were at the Door, they were called in, and Sheriff Edmonds informed
the House, That he was commanded by the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons in
Common Council assembled, to deliver a Petition to this House; the which (the
Petitioners being withdrawn) was read.

Resolved etc.

That on Friday next, this Petition be read and considered of.

The Petitioners were again called in, and Mr. Speaker by the Command of the
House acquainted them, that the Petition consisted of many Heads of great and
public concernment, That most of them were under consideration with the House.

That their constant very good affections did still appear, for which he was
commanded to render them thanks; he further acquainted them, that the House has
appointed a day for the reading and considering of this Petition.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

