POEMS By JOHN HALL.

NAZIANZ. (...),
(...) --
CAMBRIDGE, Printed by Roger Daniel Printer to the Universitie, 1646. For J.
Rothwell at the Sun in Paul's Churchyard.

olim Majora Aetatis Suae 19 1646

W. Marshall sculpsit.


To his truly noble, and worthily honored friend THOMAS STANLEY Esquire.
My dearest friend,
SInce it is the hard fortune of these glowworms to see day, I wish they might
have passed your examination; for I know you to be a severe Critic in Poetry,
as well as in Philology, and the Sciences: But since others importunities, and
mine own pressing occasions, have denied it, I must present them laden with
their own blemishes, that being fitter Objects of Pardon, they may draw in
pardoning, more demonstrations of your Candor, and add to my Engagements,
could they receive Augmentation. I will not commit a Rape upon your modesty by
any praises, though Truth her self might be your Panegyrist, and yet continue
naked; give me only leave to tell you from mine own experience, that Love is
more then a mere Sympathy: for admiration did first attract my thoughts to you,
and after fix them; though it were only your innate sweetness that received
them with an undeserved entertainment. Sir What I was first endebted to you at
Durham I endeavor to acquit in part here at Cambridge: for the Total, though
it be rather above my ability, then desires, yet should I hate the thought of a
General discharge, let me only beg of you that these Cherrystones may draw
from you your own Pearls, which cannot but break themselves a day through that
darkness to which you now confine them. Let us once see Fancy triumph in the
spoils of the richest Learning, there will many (no doubt) press to follow the
Chariot, yet shall none be more forward then

Sir, Your most affectionately devoted servant J. HALL
St. JOHN'S Jan. 6. 1646.
The Preface.
JUstice it self cannot deny me liberty of speech before sentence, if Injustice
have not past it already, whether by declining the doom from me as the mere
Vizard and Hand of another, or censuring (more severely) all my life spent in
these Holy days, and my best flames on such Wild-fires.

I could never scrue my judgment up to that Rigor, as suppose those too
familiar with Poetry, that only courted her by some chaste Salutes; twere
injurous to that Nymph, which will only be woed by high spirits, and to high
spirits in stooping to so inferior an Object; thus much I have ever observed,
that those that slighted other Matrons, and made her their wife, had never the
Assistance of any Portion, and she seldom proved fruitful without cooperation
of good seed, and strong influences.

For mine own part since I am forced to shoot out these blooms, I might justly
fear chill winds abroad; but that I hope they will hasten the destruction of
such unripe fruit: neither am I solicitous how they savor, for I intend no
more, and these I give over as already distasted, let me only say thus much to
direct your Charity, that a Mushrome though but an excrescency, well dressed is
no poison, but a Salad; and dancing though censured as unbecoming, and perhaps
unlawful, is no other but the most Regular kind of walking, and that teaches
the body a most decent Carriage. But such sins as these are venial in youth;
especially if expiated with timely abjurement; for follies continued till old
age, do aggrandize and become horrid, whereas a seasonable intermission, puts
them among those pittiable lapses that attend mortality.

For the faults of the press, they may easily be passed over by your Candor,
some more notorious, which I casually observe in the perusal, be pleased to
take notice of.

J. H.

Corrigenda
Page 1 l. 8 for, Rhithmes r. reams p. 18 l. 12 for, tithes r. titles, p. 41 l.
9 for, this Ulysses, r. this young Ulysses, p. 45 l. 1 for, Antipathus r.
Antipathy. p. 48 l. 12 for, active r. ectype, ibid. l. 6. for, just r. vast,
ibid. l. 12. for, as could, as can.

To the young Author upon his incomparable vein in Satyr and Love-sonnets.
YOung Monster! born with teeth! that thus can bite
So deep, can wound all sorts at ten and eight.
Fierce Scythian Brat! young Tamerlan! the Gods
Great scourge, that kickst all men like skulls and clods!
Rough creature, born for terror! whose stern look
Few strings and muscles moved is a whole book
Of biting Satyrs! who did thee beget?
Or with what pictures was the curtains set?
John of the Wilderness? the bayry child?
The hispid This bite? or what Satyr wild
That thou thus satyrizest? Storm of wit
That fall'st on all thou meetst, and all do meet!
Singest like lightening the Reverend furre
Of ancient Sages. Make a fearful stir
With my young Master and his Paedagog,
And pull'st by the ears the Lads beloved Dog.
Then have thy finger in Potato pies
That make the dull Grammarian to rise.
Anon advancing thy Satyrick Flail
Sweepst down the Wine-glasses and cups of ale.
Nor yet art spent, Thy manly rage affords
New coil against young wenches and old words,
Against Jos. and Tycho that stings down the spheres,
Like Will with the wisp sitst on moist Asses ears.
And now stepped in, most quick and dexterous,
Boldly by the elbow jogst Maurolycus,
Causing him in his curious numbrings loose
Himself. Take Galilaeo by the nose.
Another stroke makes the dry bones, O sin!
Of lean Geometry rattle in her skin.
New rage transforms thee to a Pig, that roots
In Jury-land or crumps Arabic roots.
Or else made Corn cutter, Thou loutest low
And take old Madam Eva by the toe.
Anon thy officious fancy at vandon sent
Becomes a Chamberlain, waits on Wood of Kent.
Sr much good do 't you, then the table throws
Into his mouth his stomachs mouth to close.
Another while the well drenched smoaky Jew,
That stands in his own spaul above the shoe,
She twitcheth by the Cloak and thread bare plush,
Nor beats his moist black beard into a blush.
Mad soul! Tyrannick wit! that thus do scourge
All Mortals and with their own follies urge.
Thou 'rt young; therefore as Infant, Innocent,
Without regret of conscience all are rent
By thy rough knotted whip. But if such blows
Thy younger years can give; when Age bestows
Much firmer strength, sure thy Satyrick rods
May awe the Heavens and discipline the gods.
And now, I ween, we wisely well have shown
What Hatred, Wrath, and Indignation
Can do in thy great parts. How melting Love
That other youthful heat thou do improve
With phansies queint and gay expressions pat,
More florid then a Lanspresado's hat;
That province to some fresher pens we leave
Dear Lad! and kindly now we take our leave.
Only one word. Since we so highly raise
Thy wrathful wit; take this compendious praise.
Thy Love and Wrath seem equal good to me,
For both thy Wrath and Love right Satyrs be.
Thus may we twitch thee now, young Whelp! but when
Thy paw's be grown who will dare to touch thee then?
H. MORE Fell. of Chr. Coll.

To his friend Mr. J. H. upon his Poems.
MAy thine own verse (the envy, and the glory
Of gowned Gentry) still enrich thy story;
Flame out, bright spark, and let them clearly see
What Is not impossible for them to be;
Go on, and make the bankrupt World to know
How much to thy judicious pen they ow,
By whose Gigantick parts is clearly shown
That Natures womb is not yet feeble grown.
Thy lines pardon the Press for all the rhythmes,
That have committed bin in senseless times;
When Pegasus made hackney foundered grows,
Wishing himself turned loose to graze in prose.
Will. Dillingham Fell. Emman.

A Genethliacon to the Infant Muse of his dearest Friend.
DAme Nature long projecting, how
She might a New-years-gift bestow
Of greatest worth; at length did choose
To give the World an early Muse,
She felt Perfection in her womb
Struggling to get a larger room,
And could not choose but give it breath
Though by procuring her own death,
She would not her full time out tarry,
Left bringing forth she might miscarry;
Therefore she rather rips her womb,
Thence gives this rich Depositum.
Nor need we this Abortive fold
In a Lambskin, to keep't from cold:
We need not cry; Alas spare it yet;
It Is an untimely tender wit:
Let envy spatter what it can,
This Embryon will prove a man.
Thus thy luxuriant Laurel-sprout
As soon as 't has its bead put out,
Over tops old standers! Thus thy Bays
Vie greenness with thy tender days.
Will. Harington Fell. of G. and C. Coll.

To the honored Author Mr. Hall on his Poems.
Do mean to spoil thy self? do knotty arts
And pale faced study fit the silken parts
Of Gentlemen? or can thou stretch thy ears
To hear the holy accents of the spears
From their own volumes? will thou let thy hand
Tempt their strange measures in religious sand?
Summon thy lungs, and with an angry breath
Ravell the curious dust, and throw't beneath
Thy braver feet, it is too too low, go hence
And see the spears with blessed intelligence
Moving at tennis; Go and steep thy brain
In fluent Nectar: or go vie a strain
In goatish courtship; that (indeed) were good
Currently noble. Nothing taint's the blood
Like this (base) study; Hence ye arts, be gone
Ye brats, which serious superstition
Brings to the threadbare parent --
But thou, brave youth, with prudent skill have taught
Thy purged ear to hear, yet not be caught
With these fond Sirens. Thy green thoughts may vie
With hoary wisdom: thy clear soul can spy
The mines of knowledge, can as quickly store
It self, and dive to the retired Or,
Thou like that Eater (whom thy happy song
Shall cause to eat up time himself) with strong
And sprightly heat, thou can each art digest
In the vast stomach of thy knowing breast.
And when severer thoughts at length shall please
TO unbend themselves, then with such strains as these
Thou court'st each witty Goddess, and do tie
Thy purer ease in their festivity.
(...) Ja. Windet M. A. Reginal.

Vati faelix Auspicium.
SIcut multiplices varians Luscinia voces
Fit tandem mortis Praefica laeta suae,
Enthea sic tua sunt modulamina, Die Poeta,
At, quo funus avi flebile, vita tibi.
R. Marshall S. I. C.

To his honored friend Mr. J. H.
Fruits that arise in have, do soon,
Once nipt by piercing blasts, fall down;
Thy youth such sudden blooms did give
As may even Scythyan frosts survive,
And (manger Tempests) still be seen
Like youthful Ivy clad in Green.
T. Smithsby St. J. C. Gent.

To his admired friend Mr. Jo. Hall
VVElcome (bright Sun) into our Hemisphere
Now thou art risen we all disappear
As smallest sparks. Mount higher yet and make
All Arts and sciences thy Zodiake:
I should desire to be thy Mercury,
Could I (though but unseen) keep pace with thee.
Edw. Holland St. John's Coll. Gent.

To the no less knowing then ingenious, Mr. Hall on his ignorant Detractors.
THou need'st no nose-lesse monuments display
Or Ear-cropp'd Images: leave that by-way
To those who are contented to be known
By their forefathers Virtues, not their own:
Those who scarce other worth acknowledge will
Then what each Tailor puts into his hill,
Such plumed Estrages, it is hard to say
Whether the feathers or the Head outweigh:
Thou scorn'st these cheats, thy works purchase thee more
Then they can swappe there Heritages for,
A name (I mean) amongst those who do advance
Learning as much as they hug Ignorance.
Thou was a Nestor in thine Infancy,
Should they live Nestor's years they would Infants die.
When e're they learn, what thou could teach at Ten,
The world in Charity shall call them Men.
Thy Dwarf and Giant may fit emblems be
Of what proportion is 'twixt them and thee.
Could thou bedwarfe thy soul, thou might descend
Perhaps to please these Gallants, and so blend
Words with them now and then, and make a noise
'Bout some Gay-nothing, or themselves: such Toys
Could thou like, they would Thee; till then expect
Poems from them as soon as not-neglect.
If they commend one verse which thou have writ,
That Verse shall be amongst thy Errata's set.
Jo. Pawson Fell. of St. John's Coll.

POEMS. The first Book.
A Satyr.
PRay let m' alone, what do you think can I
Be still, while Pamphlets thus like hailstons fly
About mine ears? when every other day
Such huge Gigantick volumes does display,
As great Knockfergus self could hardly bear,
Though he can on his knee the ale standard rear,
To see such Paper-tyrants reign, who press
Whole harmless (...) to death, which nere the less
Are dogd by worser fates, Tobacco can
Calcine them soon to dust, the dripping-pan
^ack them to the dung hill, if they Groc'ry meet
They do the office of a winding sheet:
How better were it for you to remain
(Poor Quires) in ancient rags, then thus sustain
Such antic forms of tortures, then to lie
In sweating Tubs, and thus unpittyed fry,
Y' are Common-drudges of the world, if 't chance
A Pedant mend his shoes, you must advance
To Francforth Mart, and there demurely stand
Clothed in old sustian rags, and shake the hand
With every greasy Dutchman, who perhaps
Puts ye 'ith' selfsame pocket with his scraps;
Or if you into some blind Convent fly
Y' are inquisition'd straight for heresy,
Unless your dareing Frontispice can tell
News of a Relick, or brave Miracle;
Then are you entertaind, and deskt up by
Our Ladies Psalter and the Rosary;
There to remain, till that their wisdoms please
To let you loose among the Novices,
But if you light at Court, unless you can
Audaciously claw some young Nobleman,
Admire the choycest Beauties of the Court,
Abuse the country Parson, and make sport,
Chalk out set forms of Complements, and tell
Which Fashions on which bodies might do well,
No surer paints my Lady, then you shall
Into disgrace irrevocably fall,
But if you melt in oily lines, and swell
With amorous deep expressions, and can tell
Quaint tales of Lust, and make Antiquity
A patron of black Patches, and deny
That perrucks are unlawful, and be saint
Old Jesabel for showing how to paint,
Then the art my Golden book, then may thou lie
Adornd with plush or some embrodery
Upon her Ladyships own Couch, where never
A book that tastes Religion dare appear:
Thus must ye wretched shreds comply and bend
To every humor, or your constant friend
The Stationer will never give you room,
Y' are younger brothers welcomest from home,
Yet to speak truly it is your just deserts
To run such various hazards and such thwarts,
Suppose ye that the world is peopled now
With Cocknies or old women, that allow
Canon to every fable; that can soon
Persuade themselves the Ass drunk up the Moon,
That Fairies pinch the peccant maids, that pies
Do ever love to pick at witches eyes,
That mounsieur Tom-thumb on a pins-point lay,
That Pictrees feed the Devil nine times a day,
Yet such authentic stories do appear
In no worse Garb then folio, and still bear
No meaner badge then Aristotle's name,
Or else descent from reverend Pliny claim;
One in a humor gives great Homer the lie,
And pleases to annihilate poor Troy;
Another scourges Virgil, cause it is said
His fiction is not in due order laid:
This will create a monster, this will raise
A never found mountain, this will pour out seas,
This great Camillus to a reckoning calls
For giving so much money to the Gauls,
This counts how much the state of Egypt made
Of frogs that in the flime of Nilus laid,
We Will not digest these gudgeons, the world is now
At age, if 't do not toward dotage grow,
That starch't out beard that sits in the Porph'ry chair
And but for's crown's light headed, cannot err,
Barthius has read all books, Jos. Scaliger
Proportiond lately the Diameter
Unto the circle Galileo's found,
Though not drunk, thinking that the earth ran round;
Tycho has tumbled down the orbs, and now
Fine tenuous air does in there places grow;
Maurolycus at length has cast it even
How many pulses journey it is to heaven,
A world of such knacks know we, think ye then
Sooner to peep out then be kikt from men;
Whether ye gallop in light rithmes, or chose
Gently to amble in a yorkshire prose;
Whether ye bring some indigested news
From Spanish Surgeons, or Italian stews;
Whether ye fiercely raise some false Alarm,
And in a rage the Janissaries arm;
Whether ye reinforce old times, and con
What kind of stuff Adam's first suit was on;
Whether Ev's toes had corns; or whether he
Did cut his beard spadwise or like a T:
Such brokage as is this will never do 't
We must have matter and good words to boot,
And yet how seldom meet they? most our rithmes
Rally in tunes but speak no sense like chimes:
Grave deep discourses full as ragged be
As are their Authors doublets, you will not see
A word creep in, that cannot quickly show
A Genealogy to the ark of Noah,
Or at the least pleads not prescription
From that great Cradle of Confusion:
What Pamphlet is there, where some Arabic
Scour's not the coast? from whence you may not pick
Some Chinese Character or Mystic spell,
Whereon the Critics for an age may dwell,
Where there is some sentence to be understood
As hard to find as where old Athens stood:
Why do we live, why do our pulses beat?
To spend our bravest flames our noblest heat
On such poor triflles? to enlarge the day
By gloomy lamps, yet for no other prey
Then a Moatheaten Radix, or to know
The fashion of Deucalion's mothers shoe,
It will not quit the cost, that men should spend
Themselves, time, money to no other end;
That people should with such a deal of pains
Buy knowing nothing, and wisemens disdains:
But to prevent this, the more Politic sort
Of parents will to handycrafts resort,
If they observe their children do produce
Some flashings of a mounting genius,
Then must they with all diligence invade
Some rising calling or some gainful trade,
But if it chance they have one leaden soul
Born for to number eggs he must to school,
Especiall' if some patron will engage
The advowson of a neighboring vicarage;
Strange hedly Medly! who would make his swine
Turn Greyhounds, or hunt foxes with his kine?
Who would employ his Sadle-nagg to come
And hold a trencher in the Dining-roome?
Who would engage Sr James that knows not what
His Cassock's made of, in affairs of state?
Or pluck a Richeleiu from the Helm to try
Conclusions to still Children when they cry?
Who would employ a Countrey-schoolmaster
To Construe to his boys some new found star?
Poor leaden creatures yet shaped out to rule,
Perpetual Dictatours in a School,
Nor do you want your rods, though only fed
With scraps of Tully and course barley bread;
Great threadbare Princes, which like Chess-kings brave
No longer then your Masters give you leave,
Whose large dominions in some brew house lies,
Asses commands over you, you over boys;
Who still possess the Lodgings next the leads,
And cheat your Ladies of their waiting maids,
Who if some lowly carriage do befriend
May grace the table at the lower end,
Upon condition that ye fairly rise
At the first entrance of the Potato pies,
And while his Lordship for discourse does call
You do not let one dram of Latin fall;
But tell how bravely your young Master swears
Which dogs best like his fancy, and what ears;
How much he undervalues learning, and
sTakes pleasure in a Sparrow-hauk well mand;
How often he bears his footboy, and will dare
To gallop when no serving man is near;
How he black berries from the bushes caught
When antidoted with a mornings-draught;
How rather then he will construe Greek he will chose
To english Ovids Art into prose:
Such talk is for his Lordships palate, he
Takes much delight in such like trumpery,
But still remember ye forbear to press
Unseasonably some moral sentences,
Take head by all means how rough Seneca
Sally into your talk, that man they say
Rails against drinking healths, and merits hate
As sure as Ornis mocked a Graduate;
What a grand ornament our Gentry would
Soon loose, if every rug-gown might be bold
To rail at such Heroic feats? pray who
Could honor's Mistress health, if this did grow
Once out of fashion? alas fine Idols they
Ere since poor Cheapside Cross in rubbidge lay,
Ere since the Play Houses did want their prease,
And Players lay asleep like Dormouses,
Have suffered too too much, be not so sour
With tender beauties they had once some power,
Take that away what do you leave them? what?
To Marshall fancies in a youngsters hat.
And well so too, since feathers were cashiered
The Ribbands have been to some office reard,
It Is hard to meet a Lanspresado, where
Some else of favors do not straight appear
Plasterd and dawbed over and garnished
As feathers on a Southern-hacneys head,
Which if but tied together might at least
Trace Alexanders Conquests over the East,
Or stitch't into a web, supply anew
With annuary cloakes the wandering Jew,
So learnd an age we live in, all are now
Turned poets, since their heads with fancyes glow,
Alas Poets! yes! O beat me witness all
Short-winded ballads, or what ere may fall
Within the verge of three half quarters, say
Produce we not more poems in a day,
(By this account) then waves on waves do break
Or Country Justices false English speak;
Suppose dame Julia's Messet thinks it meet
To droop or hold up one of 'ts hinder feet,
What swarms of sonnets rise? how every wit
Capers on such an accident, to fit
Words to her faireships grief? but if by fate
Some long presumptuous s^^^ do boldly grate
Don Hugo's dublet there is a stir as though
Nile should his ancient limits overflow,
Or some cursed Treason would blow up the state
As sure as Gamesters use to lie too late:
But if some fortune cogge them into Love,
In what a fifteenth sphere then do they move?
Not the least tittle of a word is set
That is not flanck't with a stout Epithet,
What rocks of Diamonds presently arise
In the soft Quagmires of two squinting eyes?
How teeth Discolored and half rotten be
Transformed into Pearl or Ivory?
How every word's changd to a finest note?
And Jndian gummes are planted in her throat,
Speak in good earnest, are they not worse then boys
Of four year old, to dote on painted toys?
Yet O how frequent! most our Sages shake
Off there old furs, and needs will Laurels take,
That it will be no wonder to rehearse
The crabdest of Geometry in verse,
Or from the dust of knotty Suarez see
A strange production of some poetry:
But stay too lavish muse, where run you, stay,
Take head your tongue bite not your ears away:
Besides y' have other business, and you might
More fitly far with tears then gall endight.
Upon T. R. a very little man but excellently Learned.
MAkes Nature maps? since that in thee
Sh' has drawn an University,
Or strives she in so small a piece
To sum the Arts and Sciences?
Once she writ only Texthand, when
She scribled Giants and no men:
But now in her decrepit years
She dashes Dwarfs in Characters,
And makes one single farthing bear
The Creed, Commandments and Lords-prayer:
Would she turn Art and imitate
Monte-regio's flying gnat?
Would she the Golden Legend shut
Within the Cloister of a nut?
Or else a musket bullet rear
Into a vast and mighty sphere?
Or pen an Eagle in the Caul
Of a slender Nightingall?
Or show she Pigmies can create
Not too little but too great?
How comes it that she thus Converts
So small a totum and great parts?
Strives she now to turn awry
The quick scent of Philosophy?
How, so little matter can
So monstrous big a form contain,
What shall we call (it would be known)
This Giant and this Dwarf in one?
His age is blab'd by silver hairs,
His limbs still cry out want of years,
So small a body in a Cage
May choose a spacious Hermitage,
So great a Soul does fret and fume
At the narrow world for want of room,
Strange Conjunction! here is grown
A Molehill and the Alps in one,
In the self same action we may call
Nature both thrift and Prodigal.
A Sea Dialogue.
Palurus.
MY Antinetta though thou be
More white, then foam wherewith a wave
Broke in his wrath besmears the sea;
Yet art thou harder then this cave.
Antinetta.
Though thou be fairer then the light,
Which doubting Pilots only mind
That they may steer there course aright,
Yet art thou lighter then the wind:
Palurus.
And shall I not be changed? when thou
Have fraught Medorus with thy heart,
And as a-long the sands we go
To gather shells, does take his part?
Antinetta.
What shall not I congeal to see
Doris the Ballast of thine arms?
(Which have so often encompassed me)
Now pinioned by her faithless charms;
Palurus.
What if I henceforth shall disdain
The golden tressed Doris love?
And Antinetta serve again,
And in that service constant prove?
Antinetta.
Though mighty Neptune cannot stand
Before Medorus, and thou be
Restless as whirle-pool's, false as sand;
Yet will I live and die with thee,
Palurus.
Nay live, and lest one single death
Should wrack thee, take this life of mine,
Antinetta.
Thou but exchanged with that breath,
Thy Antinetta's soul for thine.
Chorus.
How powerful 's love! which like a flame
That severed, reunites more close!
Or like a broken limb in frame
That ever after firmer grows.
Upon the Kings Great Porter.
SIr, or great Grandsire, whose Vast bulk may be
A burying place for all your Pedigree:
Thou moving Colosse, for whose goodly face
The Rhyne can hardly make a Looking-glass;
What piles of victuals had thou need to chew,
Ten Woods or Marrets throats were not enew:
Dwarf was he whose wifes bracelet fit his thumb,
It would not on thy little finger came:
If Jove in getting Hercules spent three
Nights, he might spend fifteen in getting thee:
What name or title suits thy greatness, Thou,
Aldiboronifuscophonio?
When Giants warred with Jove had thou been one,
Where others oaks, thou would have mountains thrown;
Wer'st thou but sick what help could ere be wrought,
Unless Physicians posted down thy throat;
Were thou to die and Xerxes living, he
Would not pare Athos for to cover thee;
Were thou to embalme the Surgeons needs must scale
Thy body, as when Laborers dig a whale:
Great Sir, a people kneaded up in one,
We Will weigh thee by Ship-burdens not by the stone;
What tempests might thou raise, what whirle-winds, when
Thou breaths, thou great Leviathan of men:
Bend but thine eye, a Countreyman would swear
A Regiment of Spaniards quartered there:
Smooth but thy brow they 'l say there were a plain
TO act York and Lancaster once over again!
That pocket Pistol of the Queens might be
Thy pocket Pistol, sans Hyperbole;
Abstain from Garrisons, since thou may eat
The Turks or Mogulls tit^^^ at a bit:
Plant some new Land, which never will empty be
If she enjoy her Savages in thee:
Get from amongst us since we only can
Appear like skulls marched over by Tamberlane.
A Burning-glasse.
STrange Chimistry! can dust and sand produce
So pure a body and Diaphanous;
Strange kind of Courtship! that the amorous Sun
TO embrace a Min'rall twists his rays in one,
Talk of the heavens mocked by a sphere, alas
The Sun it self 's here in a piece of glass:
Let Magnets drag base iron, this alone
Can to her icie bosom win the Sun;
Witches may cheat us of his light a while,
But this can him even of himself beguile:
In Heaven he staggers to both Tropicks, here
He keeps fixed residence all times of the year,
Here 's a perpetual Solstice, here he lies
Not on a bed of water but of ice;
How well by this himself abridge, he might
Redeem the Scythians from their lingering night?
Well by this glassie proxey might he roll
Beyond the Ecliptic, and warm either pole;
Had but Prometheus bin so wise, h' had never
Scaled heaven to light his torch, but lighted here;
Had Archimedes once but known this use
H' had burnt Marcellus from proud Syracuse;
Had Vesta's maids of honor this but seen,
Their Ladys fire had never extinguished been;
Hells Engines might have finished their design
Of powder (but that heaven did Countermine)
Had they but thought of this; the Egyptians may
Well hatch their eggs without the midwife clay;
Why do not puling Lovers this devise
For a fit Emblem of their Mistres eyes?
They call them Diamonds, and say the have been
Reduced by them to ashes all within;
But they will assum't, and ever hence 'twill pass
A Mistress eye is but Loves Burning-glasse.
The Call.
Romira, stay,
And run not thus like a young Roe away,
No enemy
Pursues thee (foolish girl) it is only I,
I Will keep off harms,
If thou'l be pleased to garrison mine arms;
What do thou fear
I Will turn a Traitor? may these Roses here
To palenesse shred,
And Lilies stand disguised in new Red,
If that I lay
A snare, wherein thou would not gladly stay;
See fee the Sun
Does slowly to his azure Lodging run,
Come sit but here
And presently he will quit our Hempisphere,
So still among
Lovers, time is too short or else too long;
Here will we spin
Legends for them that have Love Martyrs been,
Here on this plain
We Will talk Narcissus to a flour again;
Come here, and chose
On which of these proud plats thou would repose,
Here may thou shame
The rusty Violets, with the Crimson flame
Of either cheek,
And Primroses white as thy fingers seek,
Nay, thou may prove
That man's most Noble Passion is to Love.
An Eunuch.
THou Newter Gender! whom a gown
Can make a woman, Breeches none:
Created one thing, made another,
Not a Sister, scarce a Brother:
Jack of both sides, that may bear
Or a distaff or a spear,
If thy fortunes thither call,
Be the Gran Signor's general,
Or if thou fancy not that trade,
Turn the Sultana's Chambermaid;
A Medall where grim Mars turned right
Proves a smiling Aphrodite;
How does Nature quible either
He, or she, Boy, Girl, or neither;
Thou may serve great Jove in stead
Of Hebe both and Ganymed,
A face both stern and mild, checkes bare
That still do only promise hair,
Old Cybele the first in all
This humane predicamentall Scale,
Why would she choose her Priests to be
Such Individuums as ye?
Such Insecta's, added on
To Creatures by substraction,
In whom Nature claims no part,
Ye only being words of Art.
The Lure.
1
FArewell, nay prithee turn again,
Rather then loose thee, I Will arraigne
My self before thee, thou (most fair) shall be
Thy self the Judge,
I Will never grudge
A law ordained by thee.
2
Pray do but see, how every Rose
A sanguine visage does disclose,
O see what Aromatic gusts they breath,
Come here, we will sit
And learn to knit
Them up into a wreath.
3
With that wreath Crowned shall thou be,
Not graced by it, but it by thee,
Then shall the fawning Zephirs wait to hear
What thou shall say,
And softly play,
While new's to me they bear.
4
See how they revelling appear
Within the windings of thy hair,
See how they steal the choycest odors from
The balmy spring,
That they may bring
Them to thee, when they come.
5
Look how the Daffidills arise
Cheered by the influence of thine eyes,
And others emulating them deny
They cannot strain
To bloom again,
Where such strong beams do fly.
6
Be not ungrateful, but lie down
Since for thy sake so brisk they are grown,
And such a Downy carpet have bespred,
That pure delight
Is freshly dight
And trickt in white and red.
7
Be Conquered by such charms there shall
Not always such enticements fall,
What know we whether that rich spring of light
Will stanch his streams
Of Golden beams,
Ere the approach of Night.
8
How know we whether't shall not be
The last to either thee or me,
He can at will his ancient brightness gain,
But thou and I
When we shall die
Shall still in dust remain,
9
Come prithee come we will now essay
To piece the scantnesse of the day,
We Will pluck the wheels from the Chariot of the sun
That he may give
Us time to live
Till that our scene be done;
10
W' are in the blossom of our age,
Let us dance over, not tread the stage,
Though fear and sorrow strive to pull us back,
And still present
Doubts of content,
They shall not make us slack:
11
We Will suffer viperous thoughts and cares
To follow after silver hairs,
Let Us not anticipate them long before,
When they begin
To enter in
Each Minute they will grow more,
12
No, no, Romira see this brook
How 't would its posting course revoke
Ere it shall in the Ocean mingled lie,
And what I pray
May cause this stay?
But to attest our joy;
13
Far be it from lust, such wildfire never
Shall dare to lurk or kindle here,
Diviner flames shall in our fanties ^oule,
Which not depresse
To earthlinesse,
But elevate the Soul.
14
Then shall aggrandia'd love confess
That souls can mingle substances,
That hearts can easily counter-changed be,
Or at the least
Can alter breasts,
When breasts themselves agree.
The Morning Star.
STill Herald of the morn, whose ray
Being Page, and Usher to the day,
Does mourn behind the Sun, before him play;
Who sets a golden Signal, e're
The bat retire, the lark appear,
The early Cocks cry comfort, Scrich Oules fear.
Who winkst while Lovers plight their troth,
Then falls asleep, while they are loath
To part without a more engaging Oath:
Steal in a Message to the eyes
Of Julia, tell her that she lies
Too long, thy Lord the Sun will quickly rise.
Yet is it midnight still with me,
Nay worse, unless that kinder she
^mile Day, and in my Zenith seated be.
But if she will Obliquely run,
I needs a Calenture must shun,
And like an Ethiopian hate my Sun.
Platonic love.
COme (Dearest Julia) thou and I
Will knit us in so strickt a tie,
As shall with greater power engage
Then feeble charms of marriage;
We will be friends, our thoughts shall go*
Without impeachment, too and fro,
The same desires shall elevate
Our mingled souls, the self-same hate
Shall cause Aversion, we will bear
One Sympathising hope and fear,
And for to move more close, we will frame
Our triumphs and our tears the same;
Yet will we never so grossly dare
As our ignobler selves shall share,
Let men desire, like those above
Unmatter'd forms, we will only love;
And teach the ruder world to shame
When heat increases to a flame:
Love's like a landskap which does stand
Smooth at a distance, rough at hand;
Or like a fire which from afar
Does gently warm, consumes when near.
To the Deformed X. R.
AS Scriveners sometime delight to see
Their basest writing, Nature has in thee
Essai'd how much she can transgress at once
Apelles draughts, Durers proportions;
And for to make a jest and try a wit
Has not (a woman) in thy forehead writ,
But scribl'd so, and gone so far about
Indagine would never smell the out,
But might exclaim, here only riddles be
And Heteroclites in Physiognomie;
But as the Mystic Hebrew backward lies,
And Algebra's gest by absurdities,
So must we spell thee, for who would suppose
That globous piece of wanescot were a nose,
That crockt etc's were wrinkles, and
Five Napers bones glued to a wrest, an hand;
Egyptian Antiquaries might survay
Here Hieroglyphics time has worn away,
And wonder at an English face more od
And antic, then was ere a Memphian God,
Eras'd with more strange letters then might scare
A raw and unexperienced Conjurer,
And tawny Africa blush to see her fry
Of Monsters in one skin so kenneled lie:
Thou may without a guard her deserts pass
When savages but look upon thy face.
Were but some Pict now living, he would soon
Deem thee a fragment of his Nation;
And wiser Ethiopians infer
From thee, that sable's not the only fair;
Thou Privative of Beauty, whose one eye
Does question Metaphysick verity;
Whose many cross aspects may prove anon
Foulness, more then a mere negation,
Blast one place still, and never dare t'escape
Abroad out of thy mother darkness lap,
Least that thou make the world afraid, and be
Even hated by thy nurse deformity.
Julia weeping.
I
FAirest, when thine eyes did pour
A Crystal shower,
I was persuaded that some stone
Had liquid grown;
And thus amazed, sure thought I
When stones are moist some rain is nigh.
2
Why weep'st thou? cause thou cannot be
More hard to me?
So Lionesses pity, so
Do Tygres too:
So does that Bird, which when she is fed
On all the man, pines over the Head.
3
Yet I Will make better Omens till
Event beguile,
Those pearly drops in time shall be
A precious sea;
And thou shall like thy Coral prove,
Soft under water, hard above.
To my honored Noble friend THOMAS STANLEY Esquire, on his Poems.
WHo would commend thee (friend!) and thinks 't may be
Performed by a faint Hyperbole
Might also call thee but a man, or dare
To praise thy Mistress with the term of Fair.
But I, the choicest of whose knowledge is
My knowing thee, cannot so grossly miss.
Since thou art set so high, no words can give
An equal character, but negative.
Substract the earth, and baseness of this age,
Admit no wildfire in Poetic rage,
Cast out of learning whatsoever 's vain,
Let Ignorance no more haunt Noblemen,
Nor humor Travelers, Let wits be free
From overweening, and the rest is Thee.
Thee noble soul! whose early flights are far
Sublimer then old Eagles soarings are,
Who light'st Love's dying Torch with purer fire,
And breathe new life into the Teian Lyre,
That Lov's best Secretaries that are past,
Lived they, might learn to love, and yet be chaste.
Nay, Vestalls might as well such sonnets hear,
As keep their Vows and thy Black Riband wear;
So chaste is all, that though in each line lie
More Amorettoe's then in Doris eye;
Yet so they are charmed, that looked upon they prove
Harmless as Chariessa's nightly love:
So powerful is that tongue, that hand, that can
Make soft Jonickes turn grave Lydian;
How often this heavy leaden Saturnine
And never elevated soul of mine,
Has been plucked up by thee? and forced away
Enlarged from her still adhering clay!
How every line still pleased, when that was over
I canceld it, and praised the other more!
That if thou writ'st but on, my thoughts shall be
Almost engulf'd in an infinity.
But dearest friend, what law's power ever gave
To make ones own free firstborn babe his slave,
Nay Manumise it, for what else wilt be
To strangle, but deny it liberty.
Once lend the World a day of thine, and fright
The trembling still-born children of the night.
That at the last, we undeceived may see
Theirs were but Fancies, thine is Poetrey.
Sweet Swan of silver Thames! but only she
Sings not till death, thou in thy Infancy.
To Mr. S. S.
AS he obtaines such an enchanted skin
That Bullets cast aright could never get in,
Even so thou Monsieur temperd have thy name
That to dispraise the most is yet no shame;
To curse is to befriend, who like a Jew
Art both a Vagabond and mony'd too;
Who feed'st on Hebrew roots, and like a tare
Unbid, unwelcome thrivest every where;
Who make all letters be thy Gutturall,
And brings the Conjugations to Kall;
Who though thou live by Grammer-rules, we see
Thou break'st all Canons of Morality;
And as far as that threadbare Cloak of thine
Is out of Fashion, do from man decline;
And come as near a wit, as does a Rat
Match in procerity Mount Ararat;
And art as fit to be a brewers Punck,
As Sumerburn is valiant when he is drunk.
The Crystal
THis Crystal here
That shines so clear,
And carri's in its womb a little day;
Once hammerd will appear
Impure as dust, as dark as clay.
Even such will prove
Thy face (my love!)
When age shall soil the luster of thine ey's,
And all that Red remove
That on thy spicy lip now ly's;
Nor can a hand
Again command,
By any art, these ruins into frame,
But they will severd stand
And never compose the former same:
Such is the case
(Love!) of thy face,
Both desperate, in this you disagree,
Thy beauty needs must pass,
It (of it self) will constant be.
A Rapture.
COme Julia, come! let us once disbody, what,
Strait matter ties to this and not to that,
We Will disingage, our bloodlesse form shall fly
Beyond the reach of Earth, where never an eye
That peeps through Spectacles of flesh, shall know
Where we intend, or what we mean to do;
From all Contagion of the flesh removed
We Will sit in Judgment, on those Paires that loved
In old and latter times, then will we tear
Their Chaplets that did act by slavish fear,
Who cherisht causeless griefs, and did deny
Cupids prerogative by doubt or sigh;
But they that moved by confidence, and closed
In one refining flame, and never los'd
Their thoughts on Earth, but bravely did aspire
Unto their proper Element of fire,
To these we will judge that happiness to be
The witnesses of our felicity.
Thus we will like Angels move, nor will we bind
In words the copious Language of our mind,
Such as we know not to conceive, much less
Without destroying in their birth, express:
Thus will we live and ('t may be) cast an eye
How far Elisium does beneath us lie,
What need we care though milkie Currents run
Among the silken meadows, though the Sun
Does still preserve by's ever waking ray
A never discontinued spring or day.
That Sun, though all his heat be to it brought
Cannot exhale the vapor of a thought.
No no my Goddess, yet will thou and I
Divested of all flesh so folded lie,
That never a body'd nothing shall perceive
How we unite, how we together cleave;
Nor think this while our featherd minutes may
Fall under measure, time it self can stay
TO attend on pleasures, for what else would be
But tedious Durance in Eternity.
To Mr. Stanley after his return from France.
BEwitched Senses do you lie
And cast some shadow over mine eye,
Or do I noble Stanley see,
What! may I trust you, is it he?
Confess and yet be graduall,
Lest sudden joy so heavy fall
Upon my soul, and sink unto
A deeper Agony of woe:
It Is he, it is he, we are no more
A barbarous Nation, he brought over
As much Humanity, as may
Well Civilize America;
More Learning then might Athens raise
To Glory in her proudest days.
With reason might the boiling main
Be calm, and hoary Neptune chain
Those winds that might disturbers be
Whiles our Apollo was at sea;
And made her for all knowledge stand
In competition with the land:
Had but the courteous Delphins heard
One note of his, they would have dared
To quit the waters, to enjoy
In banishment such melody;
And had the Mimick Proteus known
H' had left his ugly herd, and grown
A curious Siren, to betray
This Ulysses to some stay;
But juster fates denied, nor would
Another Land that Genius hold.
As could, beyond all wonder hurld,
Fathom the Intellectual world:
But whither run I, I intend
To welcome only, not commend;
But that thy virtues render it
No private, but a Public debt.
An Epicurean Ode
SInce that this thing we call the world
By chance on Atoms is begot,
Which though in daily motions hurld,
Yet weary not,
How does it prove
Thou art so fair and I in Love?
Since that the soul does only lie
Immersed in matter, chaind in sense,
How ran Romira thou and I
With both dispense?
And thus ascend
In higher flights then wings can lend.
Since man's but pasted up of Earth,
And never was cradled in the skies,
What Terra Lemnia gave thee birth?
What Diamond eyes?
Or thou alone
To tell what others were, came down?
On M. W. the great eater.
SIr much good do it ye; were your table but
Pie-crust or cheese, you might your stomach she
After your slice of beef, what dare you try
Your force on an Ell-square of pudding-pie?
Perhaps 't may be a taste, three such as you
Unbreakfasted might sterve Seraglio:
When Hanniball scaled the Alps, had thou been there
Thy beef had drunk up all his Vinegar:
Well might thou be of guard to Henry the eight,
Since thou can like a pigeon eat thy weight:
Full wise was nature that would not bestow
These Tusks of thine into a double row;
What womb could ere contain thee, thou can shut
A pond or Aviary in a Gut.
Had not thy mother born thee toothlesse, thou
Had eaten Viper-like a passage through;
Had he that wished the Cranes long neck to eat,
Put in thy stomach too 't had been complete.
Thou Noah's Ark, dead sea, thou Golgotha,
Monster, beyond all them of Africa!
Beasts prey on beasts, fisher to fishes fall,
Great birds feed on the lesser, thou on all:
Has there been no mistake, why may 't not be
When Curtius leap't the Gulf, 'twas into thee.
Now we will believe that man of Chica could
Make pills of arrows, and the Boy that would
Chew only stones, nor can we think it vain
That Boranetho eat up the neighboring plain.
Poor Erisicthon, that could only feast
On one poor Girl in several dishes dressed,
Thou have devoured as many sheep, as may
Cloth all the pasture in Arcadia.
Yet O how temperate, that never goes on
So far as to approach repletion!
Thou breathing Cauldron, whose digestive heat
Might boil the whole provision of the Fleet!
Say grace as long as meals, and if thou please,
Break fast with Islands and drink healths with seas.
The Antipathy A Pastoral
Tetricezza
SOoner the olive shall provoke
To amorous clasp's this sturdy oak,
And doves in league with eagles be,
Ere I will glance a smile on thee.
Amelius
Sooner, yond dustish mulberry
In her old white shall clothed be,
And lizards with fierce asps combine,
Ere I will twist my soul with thine.
Tetricezza
Yet art thou in my judgment far
Fairer then a rising star,
And might deserve even Dian's love
But shall not Tetricezza move.
Amelius
And thou art sweeter then the down
Of damast-roses yet unblown,
And Phoebus might thy bridegroom be,
Yet shall thou never conquer me,
Tetricezza
Why meet we then, when either's mind
Or com's compelled, or stay's behind?
Amelius
Just as two boughs together tied
Let loose again do stand more wide.
Song.
DIstill not poison in mine ears
Aereall Sirens! nor unty
These sable fetters, yonder spears
Dance to a silent Harmony.
Could I but follow where you lead
Dis-robed of Earth and plumed by Air,
Then I my Tenuous self might spread,
As quick as Fancy everywhere.
But I Will make sallies now and then,
Thus can my unconfined eye
Take journey and return again.
Yet on her Crystal couch still lie.
Home Travel.
What need I travel, since I may
More choiser wonders here survay?
What need I Tire for purple seek
When I may find it in a cheek?
Or sack the Eastern shores, there lies
More precious Diamonds in her eyes?
What need I dig Peru for Oar
When every hair of her yields more?
Or toil for Gummes in India
Since she can breath more rich then they?
Or ranfack Africa, there will be
On either hand more Ivory?
But look within, all Virtues that
Each nation would appropriate,
And with the glory of them rest,
Are in this map at large expressed;
That who would travel here might know
The little world in Folio.
Upon Samuel Ward D. D. the Lady Margarets Professor in Cambridge.
Were It not piacular to weep for thee
The world might put on mourning, and yet be
Below just grief, stupendous Man who told
By just endowments that she grew not old.
But thine own hands have raised a monument
Far greater then thy self, which shall be spent
When error conquers truth, and time shall be
No more, but swallowed by Eternity;
But when shall sullen darkness fly away,
And thine own ^ct^^e Brownrigge give it day.
Or when shall ravished Europe understand,
How much she lost by thee, and by it gaind;
How well thou guardedst truth, how swift to close
With whatsoever Champion durst oppose;
Bear witness Dort, when Error could produce
The strength of reason and Arminius.
How did he loose their knots, how break their snares,
How meet their minings, how pluck up their cares.
How did his calmer voice speak thunder? how
His soft affections holy fury grow?
That had but Hell and Tyrants any room,
There wanted nothing of a Martyrdom;
But Providence said no, and did consent
That oil of time should not be spilt, but spent,
Nay, as the greatest flame does ever fly
From failing Lamps, should in most glory die;
And as the Phoenix when she does prepare
To be her own both murderer and heir,
Makes richest spice her tomb and cradle be,
To quit and reassume mortality,
Even so thou (Seraph) spent thy minutes all,
In preparation for thy funeral,
And raised so great a pile, death could aspire
No greater honor hen to put to fire:
That thus the flame might lend us light below,
But the sweet breathing smoke still upward go.
To the precious Memory of Master William Fenner.
HOw brittle's wretched man? no sooner death
Scales up his eyes, and stops his panting breath,
But the hungry grave devours him, and he must
Return again unto his mother dust;
So frail a thing he is, so does he pass,
That nothing can Remain but that he was.
But thou (Triumphant Soul) art elevate
By thy vast merits 'bove the common fate;
Those sacred pearls thy self dig'd from among
Thy fiery thoughts, and polish't with thy tongue,
By thee a second life, that times to come
May say that Rochford had a Chrysostom,
Whose Life told out in Minutes, seemed to be
Nothing but one continued Homily,
So even was thy Conscience, such a flame
Raised thy affections, that thou soon became
Too good for Earth; so waking was thy breast,
That Night could never grant a truce to Rest,
But now thou Rests for ever drunk with joys
That never spend, yet ever new arise.
Yet let thy Name still breath new odors, and
Among those Angelik Spirits numbered stand,
While we below stand gazing up and see
Thou Have changed thy Room, but not thy Company.
On a Gentleman and his Wife, who dyed both within a very few days.
THrice happy Pair, who had and have
Living one Bed, now dead one Grave:
Whose love being equal, neither could
A life unequal wish to hold,
But left a Question whether one
Did follow 'cause her Mate was gone,
Or the other went before to stay
Till that his fellow came away,
So that one pious tear now must
Besprinkle either Parents dust,
And two great sorrows jointly Run
And close into a larger one,
Or rather turn to joy, to see
The Burial but the Wedding be.
Of Beauty.
WHat do I here, what is Beauty? less
How does it pass?
As flowers as soon as smelled at
Evaporate,
Even so this shadow, ere our eyes
Can view it, flies.
2
What Is color? 'lasse the sullen Night
Can it affright;
A Rose can more Vermilion speak,
Then any cheek;
A richer white on Lillies stands,
Then any hands.
3
Then what is that worth, when any Flower
Is worth far more?
How constant's that which needs must die
When day does fly?
Glow-wormes can lend some petty light,
To gloomy night.
4
And what is proportion? we descry
That in a fly;
And what is a lip? it is in the test,
Red clay at best.
And what is an Eye? an Eaglets are
More strong by far.
5
Who can that specious nothing heed,
Which flies exceed?
Who would his frequent kisses lay
On painted clay?
Wh'ould not if eyes affection move
Young Eaglets love?
6
Is Beauty thus? then who would lie
Love-sicke and die?
And's wretched self annihilate
For knows not what?
And with such sweat and care invade
A very shade?
7
Even he that knows not to possess
True Happiness,
But has some strong desires to try
What Is misery,
And longs for tears, oh He will prove
One fit for Love.
The Epitome.
As in a cave
Where darkness justies out the day,
But yet does give
Some small admission to one feeble ray,
Some of all species do distinctly play.
2
Just even thou
Whom wonder has not fully cleared,
Thy self do show,
That in thy little Chaos all is enspheard,
And though abridg'd, yet in full greatness reared.
Armilla nigra.
ATrati Proceres, quos ram divina coercet
Copula, caeruleo nunc exaequata Georg I
Garterio, atque olim long anteferenda, nec ulla
Interitura die, si quid praesagia vatum,
Si quid mollis amor valet, o dignissima Coelo
Pectora, sic vestris faelicia facta Ruinis,
Et flammis majora, novo succrescite honori,
Et durate diu, donec sese ultimus optet
Censeri numero Scytha, and ambitiosior Indus
Gestiat armilla vestra fulgere, relictis
Torquibus, and tenerae vultu constante puellae
Militiam subeant talem, cupiantque teneri
His manicis, and virgineas dediscere flammas,
Vestalique cadat Reverentia debita vittae.
At tu, Sol juvenum, soli cessure Maroni
Propter mill annos, vatum decus, ardue cunctae
Inscitiae Domitor, quem felix Anglia jactat
Et Galli stupuere, tuis en talia surgunt
Auspiciis, Tu tam grandis praeludia facti
Ordiris, tantasque jubes viviscere curas,
Hinc summus tibi surgit honos, hinc gloria quae non
Aut cadet, aut vult temporibus metirier ullis,
At cum se fragilis mundi ruitura resolvet
Machina, and armillis faelicia brachia deerunt,
Ipsa polo sese infinuet, candentibus astris
Accedens nova flamma, altae vicina Coronae.
To Mr. Stanley.
Stars in their rising little show,
And send forth trembling flames; but thou
At first appearance do display
A bright and unobscured day:
Such as shall fear no night, nor shall
Thy setting be Heliacall,
But grow up to a Sun and take
A Laurel for thy Zodiac;
That all which henceforth shall arise,
May only be thy Parely's.
On Doctor. Bambrigg, Mr. of Christ's.
WEre but this Marble vocal, there
Such an Elogium would appear
As might, though truth did dictate, move
Distrust in either Faith or Love;
As ample knowledge as could rest
Inshrined in a mortals breast,
Which ne'rethelesse did open lie,
Uncovered by humility,
A heart which piety had chose,
To be her Altar, whence arose
Such smoking Sacrifices, that
We here can only wonder at;
A honey tongue that could dispense,
Torrents of sacred eloquence,
And yet how far inferior stand
Unto a learned curious hand?
That it is no wonder if this stone
Because it cannot speak, does groan;
For could mortality assent,
These ashes might prove eloquent.
Upon Mr. Robert Wiseman, Son to Sir Richard Wiseman, Essex.
BUt that we weigh our happiness by thine
We could not (precious Soul) from tears decline,
Although the Muses Silver stream would be
Too poor by far to drop an Elegy;
But that's below thee, since thy virtues are
The spices that Embalme thee, thou art far
More Richly laid, and shall more long remain
Still mummifi'd within the hearts of men,
Then if to list thee in the Rolls of Fame
Each marble spoke thy shape, all brass thy name.
Sleep sacred ashes that did once contain
This Jewel, and shall once, and e're, again
Sleep undisturbed; envy can only raise
Her self at living, hate graspe lower preyes;
We Will not defioure you, let us only prye
What Treasures in ye did involved lie,
So young, so learned and so wise, O here is
Example, Wisdom's not the Child of years.
So rich and yet so pious! O it is well
Devotion is not coffined in a Cell,
Nor choked by wealth; wealth hated harmless proves,
And only knows to mischief him that loves.
So fair and yet so chaste! Lust is not ever
Youths constant Sorcresse, but does sometime sever
To look on moral virtues; there'le appear
The Courtier twisted with the Philosopher:
Nor were they on spruce Apothegmes spent
Begot twixt Idleness and Discontent,
But acted to the life and unconstrained,
The Sisters sweetly walking hand in hand,
And so entirely twisted that alone
None could be viewed, all were together one;
As twinkling Spangles that together lie,
Join forces and make up one Galaxie;
As various Gums dissolving in one fire
Together in one fragrant fume expire.
Sleep then triumphant Soul, thy funerals
For admiration and not mourning calls.
Johanni Arrowsmythio, Coll. Sti. Joh. Praefecto.
DIvina Siren, c^gne caelestis, tuba
Evangelizans, Nectaris flumen meri,
Jubar salutis, praeco faederis novi,
Jam sic redisti! teque in amplexus pios
Iterum dedisti! murmr ut vario fremit
Togata pubes, gaudia exprimens nova,
Quod patre tanto jam beatur, quod nutric
Sol tam refulgens, and coquit messes suas.
Sic saepe redeas, te licet retrahant tuae
Lac gestientes uberis mamillae oves,
Et te Senatus flagitet, cujus cluit
Pars magna; nostros sed fovere palmites
Desiste nunquam, vinitor dignissime,
Donec racemis pullulent usquam novis;
Duc hos tenellos in scientiae abdita,
Et esto morum dulcium felix faber.
To his Tutor, Master Pawson. An Ode.
1
Come come away,
And snatch me from these shades to purer day,
Though Nature lie
Reserved, she cannot escape thy peircing eye.
I Will in her bosom stand,
Led by thy cunning hand,
And plainly see
Her Treasury;
Though all my light be but a glimpse of thine,
Yet with that light, I will o'relooke
Her hardly opened Book,
Which to a read is easy, to understand divine.
2
Come let us run
And give the world a girdle with the Sun,
For so we shall
Take a full view of this enameled ball,
Both where it may be seen
Clad in a constant green,
And where it lies
Crusted with Ice,
Wher't swells with Mountains, and shrinkes down to Vales,
Where it permits the usurping Sea
To rove with liberty,
And where it pants with drouth, and of all liquor fails.
3
And as we go,
We Will mind these atoms that crawle too and fro,
There may we see
One both be Soldier and Artillery,
Another whose defense
Is only innocence,
One swift as wind
Or flying Hind,
Another slow as is a mounting stone;
Some that love Earth, some scorn to dwell
Upon It, but seem to tell
Those that deny there is a Heaven they know of one.
4
Nor all this while
Shall there escape us ere a braving pile,
Nor ruin that
Wastes what it has to tell its former state.
Yet shall we never discry
Where bounds of Kingdoms lie,
But see them gone
As flights new flowne,
And loose themselves in their own breadth, just as
Circlings upon the water, one
Grows great to be undone,
Or as lines in the sand which as they are drawn do pass.
5
But objects here
Cloy in the very taste. O let us tear
A passage through
That fleeting vault above; there may we know
Some rosy Brethren stray
To a set Battalia,
(...) And others scout
Still round about,
Fixed in their courses, and uncertain too;
But clammy matter does deny
A clear discovery,
Which those that are inhabitants may solely know.
6
Then let us away
And journey thither, what should cause our stay?
We Will not be hur'ld
Asleep by drowfie potions of the world.
Let not wealth tutor out
Our spirits with her gout,
Nor anger pull
With cramps the Soul;
But fairly disengaged we will upward fly,
Till that occurring joy affright
Even with it is very weight,
And point the haven where we may securely lie.
To an Old Wife talking to him.
PEace Beldam ugly, thou wilt not find
M' ears bottles for enchanted wind,
That breath of thine can only raise
New storms and discompose the Seas,
It may (assisted by thy clatter)
A Pigmaean army scatter,
Or move without the smallest stream,
Loretto's Chapel once again,
And blow St. Goodrick while he prays
And knows not what it is he says,
And helps false Latin with a hem
From Finckly to Jerusalem,
Or in the Pacifique Sea supply
The wind that Nature does deny.
What do thou think I can retain
All this and sprout it out again?
As a surcharged Whale does spew
Old Rivers to receive in new,
Thou art deceived, even Aeol's Cave
That can all other blasts receive,
Would be too small to let in thine:
How then the narrow ears of mine?
Defect of Organs may me cause
By chance to pillorize an Ass:
Yet should I shake his ears, they would be
Though long, too straight to hearken thee.
Yet if thou have a mind to hear
How high thy voices merits are,
Attend the Cham, and when h'as dined
Skreek Princes leave that have a mind,
Or serve the States, thou wilt useful come
And have the pay of every drum,
Or trudge to Vtreckt, there outrun
Dame Skurmans score of tongues, with one.
But pray be still, O now I fear
There may be Torments for the ear,
O let me when I chance to die
In Vulcans Anvile buried lie,
Rather then hear thy tongue once knell,
That Tom a Lincoln and Bow-bell.
The Recantation.
NOw sound I a retreat, now I Will no more
Run all those devious paths I ran before,
I will no more range sullen groves, to lie
Entombed in a shade, nor basely fly
The dear society of light, to give
My Thoughts their birth in darkness, I Will not live
Such deaths again, such dampy mists no more
Shall dare to draw an ugly skreen before
My clearer fancy: I Will not deifie
A failing beauty, Idolize an eye.
Farewell, farewell poor joys, let not my hearse
Bear witness I was ever mad in verse,
Or played the fool in wit; no, I Will not have
Such Theams increase the mourning at my graven.
Such thoughts I loath, and cannot now resent,
Who ever gloried in his excrement?
Now I will raze those Characters I wrote
So fairly from my self, now will I not
Suffer that Pyramid love raised within
My soul, to stand the witness of her sin.
Nor will I ravish nature to dispose
A violated and profaned Rose,
Upon a varnisht cheek, nor Lillies fear
Into a Iandise, to be set where nere
White was discovered; no, -- stay I Will no more
Add new guilt to the old repented for,
To name a sinn's to sin; nor dare to break
Jests of my vices on another back,
But with some searching humors festred lie
A Renegado to all Poetry.
And must we now shake hands dear madness, now
After so long acquaintance? did I vow
To sacrifice unto thee what was brought,
As surplusage of a severer thought,
And break my word? yes, from this very day
My fancy only shall on Marchpan play;
Now I Will turn Politician, and see
How useful Onions are in Drapery,
Feast dunces that miscall the Arts, and dance
With all the World a Galliard Ignorance.
FINIS.
THE SECOND BOOK OF Divine Poems. BY J. H.

Saepe quidem in galea nidos fecere Columbae. LONDON. Printed by E.G. for J.
Rothwell. 1647.

A Dirthyramb.
STill creeping, still degenerous soul
On Earth so wallowing still in mire?
Still to the Center do thou roll,
When up to Heaven thou should aspire?
Did not thy Jailour flesh deny
The freedom for to feed thine own insatiate eye;
How might thou let it surfeit here
On choicest glories, how it might
Thick flowing globes of splendour bear,
And triumph in its native light,
How it would hereafter sleep disdain!
The glorious Sun of righteousness uprise again,
O who so stupid that would not
Resolve to Atoms, for to play
Among the golden streamers he shall shut,
While he prolongs one endless day?
How small three evenings darkness be,
Compared once with measurelesse Eternity?
See how the joyous Clouds make way,
And put a ruddy brightness on,
How they their silken fleeces lay,
For him to mount to Heaven upon,
Where he may in full glory shine,
Whose presence made before a Heaven of Palestine.
That lovely brow that was before
Drowned in a flood of Crimson sweat,
Is now with brightness gilded ore,
And all with burnisht flames beset;
Him, whom his drowsy Sons did leave
Sleeplesse, Aeriall Legions triumph to receive;
This innocent Columbine, he,
That was the mark of rage before,
O cannot now admired be,
But still admired, still needs more;
Who would not stand amazed to see,
Frail flesh become the garment of Divinity?
Appear no more proud Olivet
In tawney olives, from this time
Be all with purple vines beset;
The sprig of Jesse from thee did climb
Up to the Skies, and spread those boughs,
Whereon life's grapes, those Paradisean clusters grows.
Why stare you curious gazers so,
No Eye can reach his Journeys end,
He Will pierce the rouling Concave through,
And that expanded Fabric rend,
Then he is at home, he was before
A Pilgrim, while he footed this round nothing ore.
If then his nimble feet could make,
A pavement of the quivering stream,
And cause those powerful Spirits quake,
That fear not any thing but him:
Now can and will he turn to joys
Your fears, and or disarme or turn your enemies.
He is not lost though wafted hence,
He Is with you (darlings of his love)
He Is the supreme Intelligence
That all the little Orbs will move,
He is the head, it cannot be
Members can perish, where there is such a head as he.
A head composed of Majesty,
Were not by mercy all possessed,
From which such charming glances fly,
As striking vengeance can arrest,
From which such powerful frowns arise,
As can strike palsies in the Earth, and headache in the Skies.
What did you think he could remain
Disguised in such an inch of land?
That unequal cannot him contain,
Though spun out by his own right hand.
What did you think that though he lay,
Enterr'd a while, the Earth might swallow such a prey?
That very dying did restore
Banished life to rotting men,
And fetched back breath that fled before,
Into their nostrils once again,
That very death gave life to all,
And to all mankind recovery of their Fathers fall.
Suppose ye that the fatal tree,
That happiest worst of punshiments,
Did punish such a sinlesse he,
Or shame him that was excellence?
No no, the crime does ever state
The punishment, and he sin could not act, but hate.
Thought ye that stream did flow in vain
That issued from his opend side?
Your souls were foul, yet every stain
By these pure drops were purified.
He was he freely prodigal
To spend all is blood for some, when some might have saved all.
Hark, hark, what melody, what choice
Of sweetest Aires, of charming sounds!
Heaven seems all turned into a voice;
Hear what loud shreeking joy rebounds,
The very Winds now whistle joy
And make Hosannas of the former crucify.
The Ermine.
THe Ermine rather chose to die
A Martyr of its purity,
Then that one uncouth soil should stain
It Is hitherto preserved skin,
And thus resolved she thinks it good
To write her whiteness in her blood.
But I had rather die, then e're
Continue from my foulness clear;
Nay I suppose by that I live
That only does destruction give;
Madman I am, I turn mine Eye
On every side, but what does lie
Within I can no better find,
Then if I ever had been blind.
Is this the reason thou do claim
Thy sole prerogative, to frame
Engines again thy self? O fly
Thy self as greatest enemy,
And think thou sometimes life wilt get
By a secure contemning it.
Jude. 14.15. The Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints to execute
judgment upon all.


I Hear and tremble! Lord, what shall I do
TO avoid thy anger, whether shall I go?
What, shall I scale the Mountains? alas they be
Far less then Atoms if compared with thee.
What, shall I strive to get my self a Tomb,
Within the greedy Oceans swelling Womb?
Shall I dive into Rocks? where shall I fly
The sure discovery of thy peircing Eye?
Alas I know not; though with many a tear
In Hell they moan thy absence, thou art there;
Thou art on Earth and well observest all
The actions acted on this massy Ball;
And when thou look on mine, what can I say?
I dare not stand, nor can I run away.
Thine eyes are pure and cannot look upon
(And what else Lord am I?) Corruption.
Thou hate sins, and if thou once begin
To cast me in the Scales, I all am sin;
Thou still continu'st one, O Lord; I range
In various forms of crimes and love my change.
Lord thou that made me, bid'st I should present
My Heart unto thee; O see how it is rent,
By various Monsters; see how fastly held,
How stubornely they do deny to yield.
How shall I stand, when that thou shall be hurled
On Clouds, in robes of fire to Judge the world,
Ushered with golden Legions, in thine Eye
Carrying an all-enraged Majesty;
That shall the Earth into a Palsy stroke,
And make the Clouds sigh out themselves in smoke,
How can I stand? yes Lord I may although
Thou be the Judge, thou art a party too;
Thou suffer for these faults, for which thou shall
Arraigne me Lord, thou suffer for them all,
They are not mine at all, these wounds of thine
That on thy glorious side so brightly shine,
Sealed me a pardon, in those wounds they are hid
And in that side of thine they are buried.
Lord smile again upon us; which what grace
Does mercy sit enthroniz'd on thy face!
How did that scarlet sweat become thee when
That sweat did wash away the filth of men?
How did those peevish thorns adorn thy brow?
Each thorn more richly then a Gem did glow?
Yet by those thorns (Lord how thy love abounds!)
Are we poor worms made capable of Crowns.
Come so to Judgment Lord; the Apostles shall
No more into their drowsy slumber fall,
But stand and hearken how the Judge shall say
Come come my Lambs to Joy, come come away.
Genesis 24. ver. 63. Quo egressus Isaac ad meditandum in agro, etc.


Juvenis beat, magne tot Regum parens,
Faecunde tot patrum pater,
Tot Nationum origo, tot vatum fides,
Tot Antesignane Heroum,
Sicne is in agros jam renidentes novis
Et aureis florum stolis?
Sic, sic recessum quaeris? and turbam fugis?
Sic totus in teipsum redis?
Ut nullus oculus sancta spectet otia,
Nulla auris insidias locet.
Dum tu (suave!) pectus effundis tuum
In caelici patris sinum,
Dum cor sacratis aestuans amoribus
Ebullit impletum Deo,
Dum Lachrymarum gemmeae scatebrae ruunt,
Per molle vernantes genas,
Dum misceatur dulce Planctuum melos
Ardentibus suspiriis,
Dum dum (invidenda solitudo!) men's suis
Jam libere e gyariis meat,
Linquensque terras, templa perrumpit poli,
Se luce perfundens nova;
Sic ipse vivam, sic mihi occulti dies
O effiuant, solus siem,
Sic me praehendat luce palpitans nova
Praeco diei Phosphorus,
Sic me praehendat luce candens ultima
Et noctis index Hesperus:
Non ipse curem vana vulgi murmura,
Non irritos rumusculos,
Sim mi' beatus! Nymphacae caelestis meum
Non abnuat Consortium.
Divinus illo flammat in vultu pudor,
Divina stat modestia;
Hinc hinc, pudica pallidas umbras amat
Et antra Musca vivida,
Ubi me loquelis melleis, suada mera,
Formosa mulceat dea,
Ubi in me inundans nectaris torrens fluat,
Ex ore prosiliens sacra,
Quantum haec voluptas! quanta! quanta gaudia!
Quis non? quis invideat mihi?
Dum sic edaces exulant curae, nigra
Fugiunt doloris agmina,
Dum mi voluptas, ipsa per se amabilis
Nullisque ficta officiis,
Mi mill Veneres mill mostret Gratias,
Mi mill dat Cupidines.
Sic mi juventae blanda marcescat rosa,
O sic senecta palleat.
Sic sic nivales vestiant cani caput,
Sic hora fugiat ultima;
Non ipse vanas horream mortis minas,
Sed tela sustineam libens;
Securus illuc evolare, quo mea
Semper perennem gaudia,
Redintegrare Paeanas possim novos
Inter triumphantium greges;
O mi appropinquet sic dies novissimus
Natalis adveniet mihi (...)
On an Houre-glasse.
MY Life is measured by this glass, this glass
By all those little Sands that thorough pass.
See how they press, see how they strive, which shall
With greatest speed and greatest quickness fall.
See how they raise a little Mount, and then
With their own weight do level it again.
But when the have all got thorough, they give over
Their nimble sliding down, and move no more.
Just such is man whose hours still forward run,
Being almost finished ere they are begun;
So perfect nothings, such light blasts are we,
That ere we are ought at all, we cease to be.
Do what we will, our hasty minutes fly,
And while we sleep, what do we else but die?
How transient are our Joys, how short their day!
They creep on toward us, but fly away.
How stinging are our sorrows! where they gain
But the least footing, there they will remain.
How groundless are our hopes, how they deceive
Our childish thoughts, and only sorrow leave!
How real are our fears! they blast us still,
Still rend us, still with gnawing passions fill;
How senseless are our wishes, yet how great!
With what toil we pursue them, with what sweat!
Yet most times for our hurts, so small we see,
Like Children crying for some Mercury.
This gapes for Marriage, yet his fickle head
Knows not what cares wait on a Marriage bed.
This vows Virginity, yet knows not what
Lonenesse, grief, discontent, attends that state.
Desires of wealth another wishes hold,
And yet how many have been choked with Gold?
This only hunts fot honor, yet who shall
Ascend the higher, shall more wretched fall.
This thirsts for knowledge, yet how is it bought
With many a sleeplesse night and racking thought?
This needs will travel, yet how dangers lay
Most secret Ambuscado's in the way?
These triumph in their Beauty, though it shall
Like a plucked Rose or fading Lilly fall.
Another boasts strong arms, alas Giants have
By silly Dwarfes been dragged d unto their grave.
These ruffle in rich filke, though never so gay,
A well plumed Peacock is more gay then they.
Poor man, what art! a Tennis ball of Error,
A Ship of Glass tossed in a Sea of terror,
Issuing in blood and sorrow from the womb,
Crauling in tears and mourning to the tomb,
How slippery are thy paths, how sure thy fall,
How art thou Nothing when thou art most of all!
An Ode.
1
DEscend O Lord
Into this gloomy heart of mine,
And once afford
A glimpse of that great Light of thine,
The Sun does never here
To shine on basest dunghills once forbear.
2
What though I be
Nothing but high corruption?
Let me have thee
And at thy presence 'twill be gone,
Darkness dare never stand
In competition while the Suns at hand.
3
And though my sins
Be an unnumbred number, yet
When thou begins
To look on Christ, do then forget
I helped to cause his grief.
If so, Lord from it grant me some relief.
4
All thou demands
Is that small piece of me, my heart;
Lo here it stands
Thine wholly, I Will reserve no part;
Let the three corners be
(Since naught else can) filled with one triple thee.
5
Set up a Throne,
Admit no rival of thy power,
Be thou alone
(I Will only fear thee) Emperor,
And though thy limits may
Seem small, Heaven only is as large as they.
6
And if by chance
The Old-oft-conquer'd Enemy
New stirrs advance,
Look but upon him and he will fly,
The smallest check of thine
Will do it, so cannot all the power that is mine.
7
Thy Kingdom is
More then ten thousand worlds, each heart
A Province is;
Keep residence in mine, it is part
Of those huge Realms; I Will be
Thy slave, and by this means gain liberty,
8
Such as all Earth
Never could so much as fancy yet,
Nor can give birth
To thoughts enough to fathom it,
No no, nor can blessed I
When I enjoy it, know what I enjoy.
9
Then give me this
I ask for, though I know not what
(O Lord) it is:
But what is of greatest price give that,
Or plainly bold to be
In begging, Lord, I pray thee give me thee.
Hymnus.
UT se perpetuo rotat
Ether, quam fluidis ruit
Semper pendulis orbibus,
Quam dulces variat vices!
Nunc serae tenebrae ruunt,
Nunc lucis jubar aureum,
Nunc flores Zephyri erigunt
Languentes Aquilonibus;
Jam jam vellera nubium
Quiddam caeruleum rubent,
Jam quid caeruleum albicant;
Jam flammam croceam evomit
Phoebus, sed modo debilem:
Jam molles abigit nives,
Flores parturiens novos,
Jam se proripit, and gelu
Sistit non rapidas aquas.
Tu cuncta haec peragis Deus,
Te clamant Deus, omnia
Fecisti ex nihilo, and modo
Servas ne in nihilum ruant.
Si^tu contineas manum,
Labescant simul omnia;
Tellus, non animalibus
Praebens hospitium suis,
Sordebit nimiis aquis;
Ipsum nec mare noverit
Fluctus sistere fervidos,
Turbabuntur and omnia
Ni tu cuncta manu poti,
Ta cuncta officio tenes.
Self.
1
TRaitor self, why do I try
Thee, my bitterst Enemy?
What can I bear
Alas more dear
Then is this Center of my self my heart?
Yet all those trains that blow me up lie there
Hid in so small a part.
2
How many back-bones nourisht have
Crawling Serpents in the grave?
I am alive,
Yet life do give
To Myriads of Adders in my breast,
Which do not there consume, but grow and thrive,
And undisturbed rest.
3
Still gnawing where they first were bred,
Consuming where they are nourished,
Endeavoring still
Even him to kill
That gives them life, and looses of his bliss
To entertain them: that tyrannicke Ill
So radicated is.
4
Most fatal men what can we have
To trust? our bosoms will deceive;
The cleerest thought
To witness brought,
Will speak against us and condemn us too,
Yea and they all are known. O how we ought
To sift them through!
5
Yet what is our diligence even all
Those sands to number that do fall
Chased by the wind?
Nay we may find
A mighty difference; who would suppose
This little thing so fruitful were and blind
As it is own ruin shows?
Anteros.
Frown on me shades, and let not day
Swell in a needle-pointed ray
To make discoveries; wrap me here
In folds of night, and do not fear
The Suns approach, so shall I find
A greater light possess my mind;
O do not (Children of the Spring)
Hither your charming Odours bring,
Nor with your painted smiles devise
To captivate my wandering eyes,
The have strayed too much, but now begin
Wholly to employ themselves within.
What do I now on Earth? O why
Do not these Members upward fly,
And force a room among the Stars,
And there my greatned self disperse
As wide as thought? what do I here
Spread on soft down of Roses? there
That spangled curtain which so wide
Dilates it is luster, shall me hide.
Mount up low thoughts and see what sweet
Reposance Heaven can beget;
Could ye the least compliance frame
How should I all become one flame,
And melt in purest fires? O how
My warmed Heart would sweetly glow,
And waste those dreggs of Earth that stay
Glew'd to it, then it might away,
And still ascend, till that it stood
Within the Center of all good;
There pressed, not overwhelmed with joys,
Under it is burden fresh arise;
There might it lose it self and then
With losing find it self again;
There might it triumph and yet be
Still in a blessed captivity.
There might it -- O why do I speak
Whose humble thoughts are far too weak,
To apprehend small notions? nay
Angels are non-plus'd, though the day
Breaks clearer on them, and they run
In Apogees more near the Sun.
But oh! what pulls me? how I shall
In the least moment headlong fall;
Now I Am on Earth again not dight,
As formerly in springing light,
The self same objects please, that I
Did even now, as base deny:
Now what a powerful influence
Has Beauty on my slavish sense,
How rob I Nature that I may
Her wealth upon my cheek display,
How does the Giant Honor seem
Well statur'd in my fond esteem;
And Gold that bane of men, I call
Not poisonous now but cordial:
Since that the Worlds great Eye the Sun
Has not disdained to mak't his own;
Now every passion swayes, and I
Tamely admit their Tyranny;
Only with numerous sighings say,
The basest thing is breathing clay.
But sure these vapors will not e're
Draw Curtains over my Hemisphere.
Let it clear up, and welcome day
It Is luster once again display.
Thou (O my Sun) a while may lie
As intercepted from mine eye,
But Love shall fright those clouds, and thou
Into my purged eyes shall flow,
Which (melted by my inward fires,
Which shall be blown by strong desires)
Consuming into tears, shall feel
Each tear into a Pearl congeale,
And every Pearl shall be a stem
In my Celestial Diadem.
A Hymn.
THou mighty Subject of my humble Song,
Whom every thing speaks, though it cannot speak;
Whom all things Echo, though without a tongue;
And int' expressions of thy glory break.
Who out of nothing this vast fabric brought;
And still preserv'st it least it fall again,
And be reduced into it is ancient naught,
But may its vigor primitive retain.
Who out of Atoms shaped thine Image, Man,
And all to Crown him with Supremacy
Over his Fellow Creatures, nay and than
Did in him raise a flame that cannot die.
Whose purer fire should animate that dross
That renders him but equal to the beast,
And make him, though materiate and gross,
Not less then those that in no bodies rest,
Nay Lord above them, they did first of all
Turn Renegadoes to thy Majesty,
And in their mine did involue his fall,
That caused him under thy displeasure lie.
There did he loose his snowy Innocence,
His undepraved will, then did he fall
Down from the Tower of knowledge, nay from thence
Dated the loss of his, Heaven, thee, and all.
So were thou pleased to let thy anger lay
Clouds of displeasure 'twixt poor man ^^d thee,
That Mercy might send forth a milky my,
To tell, that ne'rethelesse thou would agree.
Though man in sinning still new guilt should add,
It never could expugne thy patience;
Thine, who not ever any passion had,
But can forgive, as well as see offense.
Yet though our hearts petrificated were,
And all our blood curdled to ruddy Ice,
Yet caused'st thou thy Law be graven there,
And set a Guardian or't, that never dies.
But we eras'd that Sculpture, then thou wrote
In Tables, what thou had in stone before;
Yet were we not unto obedience brought,
But rather slackned our performance more:
Dead to all goodness and engulf'd in sin,
Benumbed by our own corruptions,
That we were only drowned, not rendered clean,
By the streams that covered all the Earth at once.
Wandering without the least ability
To tread, or Eyes to see our safest way,
While fiery vengeance at our heels did fly,
Ready to strike when thou the word should say.
Yet did thou disappoint her, thy Sons blood
Supplied our want of Oceans of tears.
The Author thought fit this should not perish, though other occasions suffer
him only to present it in the habit of a Fragment.



Ecclesiastes. 1.3. What profits a Man of all his labor which he takes
under the Sun?


1
EVen as the wandering Traveller does stray,
Led from his way
By a false fire, whose Flame to cheated sight
Does lead aright,
All paths are footed over, but that one
Which should be gone;
Even so my foolish wishes are in chase
Of every thing, but what they should embrace.
2
We laugh at children, that can when they please
A bubble raise,
And, when their fond ambition sated is,
Again dismiss
The fleeting toy into its former Air.
What do we here
But act such Tricks? yet thus we differ, they
Destroy, so do not we, we sweat, they play.
3
Ambitions towrings do some gallants keep
From calmer sleep,
Yet when their thoughts the most possessed are,
They grope but Air,
And when they are highest, in an instant fade
Into a shade,
Or like a stone, that more forced upwards, shall
With greater violence to'ts Center fall.
4
Another whose conceptions only dream
Monsters of fame,
The vain applause of other Madmen buys
With his own sighs,
Yet his enlarged name shall never craule
Over this Ball,
But soon consume; thus does a Trumpets sound
Rush bravely on a little, then is not found;
5
But we as soon may tell how often shapes
Are changed by Apes,
As know how often man's childish thoughts do vary
And still miscarry,
So a weak Eye in twilight thinks it sees
New species,
While it sees naught; so men in dreams conceive,
Of Sceptets, till that waking undeceive.
An Epitaph.
WHen that my days are spent, (nor do
I know
Whether the Sun will er'e immise
Light to mine eyes)
Me thinks a pious tear needs must
Offer some violence to my dust.
Dust, ravel'd in the Air will fly
Up high,
Mingled with water 'twill retire
Into the mire.
Why should my ashes not be free
When nature gave them liberty?
But when I go, I must them leave
In grave.
No Floods can make my marble so
As moist to grow.
Then spare your labor, since your dew
Cannot from ashes, Flowers renew.
A Pastoroll Hymn.
HAppy Choristers of Air,
who by your nimble flight draw near
His throne, whose wondrous story
And unconfined glory
Your notes still Caroll, whom your sound
And whom your plumy pipes rebound.
Yet do the lazy Snailes no less
The greatness of our Lord confess,
And those whom weight has chained
And to the Earth restrained,
Their ruder voices do as well,
Yea and the speechless Fishes tell.
Great Lord, from whom each Tree receaves,
Then paies again as rent, his leaves;
Thou do in purple set,
The Rose and Violet,
And give the sickly Lilly white,
Yet in them all, thy name do write.
An Ode.
1
LOrd send thine hand
Unto my rescue, or I shall
Into mine own ambushments fall,
Which ready stand
To d' execution, all
Laid by self-love, O what
Love of our selves is that
That breeds such uproares in our better state!
2
I think I pass
A Meadow guilt with crimson showr's,
Of the most rich and beauteous Flowers,
Yet thou alas!
Espi'st what under lowres;
Taste them, they are poison, lay
Thy self to rest, there stray
Whole knots of Snakes that solely wait for prey.
3
To dream of flight
Is more then madness; there will be
Either some strong necessity,
Or else delight
To chain us, would we flee.
Thus do I wandering go,
And cannot Poisons know
From wholesome Simples that beside them grow.
4
Blind that I am,
That do not see before mine eyes
These gazing dangers that arise
Ever the same,
Or in Varieties
Far worse, how shall I escape?
Or whether shall I leap?
Or with what comfort solace my hard hap?
5
Thou who alone
Can give assistance, send me aid,
Else shall I in those depths be laid
And quickly thrown,
Whereof I am afraid;
Thou who can stop the Sea
In her mid-rage, stop me;
Lest from my self my own selfe-ruine be.
FINIS.

