The humble Remonstrance of the Farmers and Adventurers in the VVine-farme of
forty shillings per Tun, to the honorable House of Commons assembled in
Parliament, Anno Dom. 1641.
Shows,
THat when Alderman Abell propounded to the retailing Vint^ers what Master
Richard Kilvert intimated to him, they desired him the said Alderman, and
others (whom they made a Commitee) to go to Counsel to be advised whether the
business might legally be untertaken.

That the said Alderman and Committee assured the Company that they had taken
as good counsel as gold could buy, and that the present Recorder of London and
Mr. Sergeant Stone (deceased) were of opinion that Wines being a foreign
commodity, his Majesty might impose what he pleased on it, and that the farm
of that Imposition might as freely be taken as any farm in England.

That this has been already by Mr. Alderman himself declared in the
honorable House of Commons in Parliament, and can still be fully proved if the
least doubt be made of it.

That the said advice brought by the Alderman and Committee, with the retayling
Vintners fear to be brought into the Starchamber on the illegal decree
against dressing of meat in their houses, was the absolute motive that made the
retayling Vintners to make the contract with his Majesty, and the Farmers and
Adventurers to undertake the Farm.

That Mr. William Dickens went to Mr. Anthony Low Counselor at Law, to advice
whether he might come in to be a Farmer or undertaker, he advised he might
freely do it, for it was no hazard or crime to be a Farmer of an illegal
Imposition before set on; thereupon the said Dickens came in as great an
Adventurer as any one Farmer whatsoever.

That the said Farmers and Adventurers (except Alderman Abell who was
Treasurer) never received penny of the forty shillings per Tun, and by the
account they are indebted at least 8000. pounds which they are sued for and
must pay out of their own purses, to the hazard of the undoing of some of them.

They humbly beseech this honorable Assembly seriously to weigh the premises,
and to commiserate their case, and as they never got one penny profit by it, so
they desire to surrender all up and to account from the beginning, and that
they may of have out of the Bonds owing by the retayling Vintners so much as
may free them out of debt, and thereby preserve themselves wives and children
from disgrace and ruin.

FINIS.
London printed, 1641.


