Christian Reader.
BY that glorious light, which God has given to me, all people by degrees
shall see, that true peace and sound Religion cannot be established without the
help of a true and sound preacher, whom God has made able by the divine power
of his spirit for to open and unfould the mysteries and parables in the new
Testament, to the true meaning and signification, to the setting forth of
Christ, and the true Church with that riches and honor and glory which does
belong to the Saints, and one the other side to the confounding of false power,
and false doctrines, which does belong to the devil, which God has promised
shall come to confusion; and I say plainly, and truly that God my glorious
Father, he has made me James Hunt a preacher for the same purpose, which I
have showed you here in brief.

For with my verses, and my prose,
The devil, and all his carnal ministers I shall disclose.
For my verses which have short and long feet,
That will teach those that are blind,
For to have more wit.
For it is written in the tenth Chapter of Saint Matthew 41. verse. Christ he
tells you plainly, he that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, he
shall receive a Prophet rewards; And that is the reward of of eternal glory;
but ye Protestants, and Papists, your faith is grown so cold, that you will not
believe that I am a true Prophet except I can show you a miracle, that you may
it behold, why then I will show you in brife of one strange thing, where at you
all may wonder, why the Protestants and Papist should devide themselves
asunder, for the Papists they do say, that they believe in the Catholic
Church, and so say the Protestants, but by the power of God, I will boldly say
that your clergy, they have deceive you upon both sides, for if there be any
Protestant, or Papist that can find any place of Scripture in the new
Testament, for to prove that the true Church of Christ is a Catholic Church,
then I will be content to be burned, but God he has made me a member of his
glorious and triumphing Church, for Christ says in John the 12. Chap. and the
28. Verse: Father glorify thy name, then came there a voice from heaven saying,
I have glorified it, and I will glorify it again, and in the 27. Chapter of
John, Christ ^aith pl^inly, the glory which thou have given me, I have given
unto them that they may be all one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee,
that they may be all one in us, that the world may believe that thou have sent
me again. In the second Epistle to the Corinthians the second chapter, and
fourteen verse. Now thanks be to God which always causes us, to triumph in
Christ Jesus, this word always does plainly signify, here in this world, and
in the world to come for ever, and I have proved in brief that Christ has a
glorious and triumphing Church here in this world, and God my glorious Father,
by the powerful preaching of his word, he will cause the glorious Church of
Jesus Christ for to flourish by degrees over the whole world, which will be to
the confounding of the devil, and the false Church; it is written in the
twenty chapter of the Revelations. I saw a great white throne, and him that
sat on it, from whose face the earth, and the heaven fled away, and there was
no place found for them. Now I understand, he that sits upon the white Throne,
does signify Christ and his preacher, for he that is joined to the Lord is one
spirit, as you may read in the first Epistle to the Corinthians the six
chapter, and the seventeen verse. But ye black coats, you do say, that you are
the heavenly ministers of God, and that you have the heavenly treasure of
Christ, in your earthen vessels, but I say that God he has made me able for to
show ye black coats, by what means you may have the heavenly treasures of
Jesus Christ in your earthen vessels; but you do fly, from me, as if I were
an Antichrist, and a deceiver even like unto your selves, but ye black coats I
must tell you, and your disciples that you shall find no true sound rest for
your soul, until you be reconciled to Jesus Christ, and to the Ministration of
the blood of the new Testament, which is the Throne of grace, but master black
coat you do say that the devil has puffed me up with pride, But I praise God
you arrows hit not me, for you shot far wide, for God he has given me that
knowledge for to be as humble as a Lamb, and that valor and courage for to be
as bold as a Lion, and now ye black birds which cry out so loud in your black
coats, I must tell you plainly you shall be all forced for to change your
notes, for you are not able for to make a clear destinction between God and
the devil, for to say, nor yet to sing, and yet will you be so bold for to
stir up War and strife between the Parliament and my King, but Mr. black coat
you are a man of War, and so am I and therefore pray let you and I the battle
try for by the power of God, I will boldly say as it is written in the cha. 8.
of the Romans and the 15. v. I have not received the spirit of bondage again to
fear, but I have received the spirit of adoption, and now by the help of God I
shall prove in brief, that the spirit of adoption does signify Christ and the
Gospel, but the spirit of bondage that does signify the Devil, and the old
law, my first proof is in the second chapter to the Hebrews and the fourteen
verse, for as the children were made partakers of flesh and blood, Christ
likewise took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that
had the power of death, and that is the Devil; and so deliver those who through
fear of death, were all there life time subject to bondage: This place of
Scripture does plainly prove and signify that all those people that were under
the old law, they were under a yoke of bondage, until Christ freed them by his
suffering on the cross again, in the seven chapter to the Romans and the six
verse. Now we are delivered from the Law, that being dead, wherein we were held,
as held under the chains and bondage of Satan, that we should serve in
newness of spirit, and not in the oldnesse of the letter, that in the newness
of the Gospel and not in the oldnesse of the Law, and thus I have proved in
brief, that the old Law is the spirit of bondage, and so is the Devil, but ye
black coats you do say that, Christ has redeemed us from the ceremonial Law,
and for the Iudiacall and Leviticall Law, and so by your cunning craft, you do
divide the old Law into many parts but if I ask any of you if there be any
more the two Testaments you will say no, why then my answer to you is, in the
ninth chapter to the Hebrews; and the fifteen verse. Christ he is the Mediator
of the new Testament, that by his suffering on the cross, for to Redeem them
that were under the first Testament, and now all ye black coats by the power of
God, you shall be forced for to confess, that the old Law and Testament, is
the first Testament which Christ has Redeemed his people from, but ye clergy
by your dark arts of Schollership you do clime so high that you are yet like
the Devil, for the plain truth of God he does deny, but the fullness of time
was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the Law for to
redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of
sons, Gal. 4. and now I say plainly that all those that be reconciled to Christ
and to the obedience of his word, be the adopted sons and daughters of Almighty
God, for to rain with Christ in his everlasting Kingdom of glory in heaven
above for ever.

For by the power of God all people by degrees shall see.
That the true light and glory of Jesus Christ,
Does not proceed from the Universitie.
But ye clergy you are very subtle and worldly wise,
For the old law upholds you in your tenthes and tithes.
And that is the maine cause whereat you need not wonder,
Whay the clergy will not allow that the old Law,
And Testament, and the new should part asunder.
But by the power of God for to
Speak the truth I will be bold,
For what will it profit you for to gain the world, and lose your soul.
For you shall be forced for to understand and see.
That the son of the bondwoman cannot be heir with the free,
As you may read in the fourth chapter to the Gallations and the thirty verse.

For ye black coats by the powerful Priesthood of Melchisedeck I shall
clear all your eyes which are grown so dull and thick, for if the High Court
of parliament will but suffer me for to spread my books about, by the power of
God I shall confound the Devil and all his route (now I pray God grant that
the High court of Parliament may sit in Judgment for that intent) and then I
am sure, mark what I say, you will not hinder me in my way, for it is written,
Heb. 7. concerning one Melchisedeck who is Priest of the most high God, and he
is King of peace which does signify Christ Jesus who is the Second Person in
Unity, again it is said that he is without Father and Mother and without
Descent and that does signify God the Father, who is the first parson in
unity, again, it is said that he has neither beginning of days nor end of
life, but he is made like unto the Son of God, and that does signify God the
holy Ghost who is the third Person in Unity, and thus by the help of God I
have showed you in brief that you may see, that the true interpretation of
Melchisedech does signify the Holy and Glorious Unity, Father, Son and holy
Ghost, for I say again, that there are three That bare record in Heaven: The
Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost and these three are one, 1 John 5.7. The
word does signify Christ, For in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
with God, John the first, for Christ was with God the Father in the beginning
before man was made, and the Word was made flesh, Christ was made flesh and
dwelt amongst us, verse. 14. and I have proved in breef that Christ is the Word
and the Word is God, and know you not that christ is in you except you be
reprobates, as you may read in 2 Cor. 5.5. Again, there is one God and father
of all, who is above all and in you all, as you may read, Ephesians. 4.5. Again, in
1 Cor. 19. What? know you not that your body is the Temple of the holy Ghost,
which is in you, and you are not your own, for you are all bought with a
price, and that is, with the precious blood of Jesus Christ, for it pleased the
Father that in Christ should all fullness dwell, and having made peace through
the blood of his Cross for to reconcile all things unto himself, as you may
read in 2 Col. 1.19. and thus by these plain and clear truths of Scripture,
which by Gods help I have showed you, here in breef I have painly and clearly
proved that all those people that will be reconciled to Christ and to the
ministration of the blood of the New Testament your spirits, they shall be
joined to the Glorious unity, Father, Son and holy Ghost, for as they three
cannot be divided from being one in the Godhead, and unity, neither can the
spirits of the true Chrtch be divided from them three which is the life and
substance of true peace and sound Religion, as I in brief have showed you, as
God my Father has showed me.

And by the Spirit of Almighty God which proceeds from above,
I hope to draw my King and Parliament into the bond of peace and love.
And now all ye carnal Ministers and false Powers, what so ever you be,
By the Power of God you shall be forced for to see:
That if you will not be reconciled to this blessed peace and unity:
I say again if you will not be reconciled, you shall be sure damned to be.
I or I must plainly tell you that God and his preacher you shall find true.
For what says the scripture, God will take vengeance on those that know not
God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of His power as you may read, 2 These. 1.8. But I pray understand the
Gospel in his right place. For it is the new Testement which proceeds from
the throne of grace for mercy and sound judgment, they are notes of my Prose
and my Song;

For by Gods mercy and sound judgment I no man wrong.
For mercy and sound judgment belongs to my powerful Godand to my Kings
seat.
Whereunto I am Ordained a preacher with power and courage strongly for to
pleat.
And now ye Roundheads which for true Religion do bear the name:
I hope that you will not fight against God and the Truth for very shame,
For if you will be persuaded by God and me:
You may live in peace and unitee.
And now the God of love and peace who has brought again from the dead our
Lord Jesus, that Great Sepheard of the sheep, through the blood of the
everlasting Covenat, make you all perfect to do his will, working in you that
which is pleasing in his sight, through the divine power of Jesus Christ our
Lord, Heb. 13.20. I say again, that Christ Jesus He is the great Shepherd of
the sheep, and I acknowledge that there is but one true and perfect God, and
there must be but one Religion, one Sepheard and one sheepfold, and I say
plainly and truly that God my Father He has made me a preacher for to gather
the sheep into the true found, that Gods love, and power, and Glory you may
behold.

For now my verses and my prose, which shall be plainly shown.
They will prove that God has lighted my candle within his glorious throne.
And now ye Magistrates and Churchwardens, I pray take not that in hand,
For to fight against the Power of God, which you are not able to withstand,
For God he has given me authority, as you shall know and find,
For to be a preacher in the Church for to declare his mind,
That by his power I may open the peoples eyes whom the Clergy do keep blind.
But there are some of you Magistrates and Churchwardens which do hold forth
such a false power,
That you fight against the power of God but you shall be all brought lower.
For if you will fight against the power of God, for to hinder him in his way,
If you do not repent you will be sure hell fire for to obey.
But I hope there is none of you that does desire for to hurn in Hell.
Why then I pray fight not against the power of God for he will have his Will,
But are not all those plain hypocrites as I shall show you by relation,
Which fight against that you pray for, which is abomination.
For in the Lords prayer you do pray that Gods will may be done,
Why then I pray fight not against that power which does proceed from the
Father and the Son.
For they have made me a powerful preacher of Their Word,
Which is the powerful and fiery sword:
That thereby I may cut and burn down that hellish power,
Which does the Saints of God devour.
For as a temporal fire will burn and consume Straw or Hay,
Even so Gods Word willl shine so clear, mark what I say,
For to burn and consume false power quite away.
And now all persecuting Angels, if you can be able to hinder the Sun in the
Firmament that he shall not shine at Noone day,
Then you may be able for to hinder my powerful God from going forward in his
way.
For all false power which is hateful in Gods sight,
That shall be reproved and quite overthrown, by the power and glory of the
true light.
And now by that glorious light which God has given to me,
Ye Protestants and Papists you may understand and see,
That your Clergy they have deceived you upon both sides by their craft and
policy.
But now ye protestants and Papists which are always at war and strife,
In this Book I have showed you how your spirits may be joined to my God of
Peace, and lead a quiet life.
But Greek and Latin, you that bear dominion over Gods house,
I must tell you plainly your deceitful craft is not worth a Lowse,
For ye Clergy by your Greek and Latin phrase,
You do blind the people many ways:
For you call the Church of Christ by the name Catholic, and Militant, and
Protestant, but alas you are more blind and cannot see,
For a true Christian he does bear the true toil of the Church of Christ, and I
in him, and he in me.
And all the members of the true Church of Christ, they are to be called by the
name of Christians, for Christ and his Church is compared in Scrippture to man
and wife, for Christ he is the Bridegroom and his Church is the Bride, although
the Members thereof shall be infinite in number: And therefore I say again that
the Church of Christ she must be called by the name of her Husband, for whether
things present or things to come all is one, and we are Christ's and Christ is
Gods: 1 Cor. 3.23.

But the Ravens are black and the Doves are gray,
But yet I pray will you mark well what I do say:
For I do not despise a black garment, but the clergy by their black garments
they do strengthen themselves in their false power for their black garments
does signify unto the people, that they have been all bred up in Universities,
and the people they are yet so far deluded by those dark Arts of Schollership
which proceed from the clergy, that you do think that no man can be a true and
a sound Preacher, but first he must be bred up in the Universitie.

But by that glorious light which God has given to me,
You may understand and plainly see,
That you have been mightily deceived in your judgment.
But there is one Mr. Kentish which is grown a crafty fox,
But God he has given me a key for to open all your locks,
For I hear that you have got a Mittimus from the Committee for to send me to
the Goal.
But by the power of God I shall set a fire the Foxes tail.
For you are a great enemy against the Cavalier,
But your false power shall be quite burnt up with fire:
For when I strike you home with Gods fiery dart,
Then you creep to the Committees, and entreat them to take your part.
But I hope the Committees will learn that wisdom for to give way and room,
That I may within your Pulpit come.
That so by the power of God I may show them and you the true way of peace
That by the power thereof your war and plunder may end and cease.
For these things I behold with my spirttuall eye,
For which I honor my King, and worship the holy and glorious unity:
And wish well to the Parliament that is so high.
For if you will be persuaded by God and me,
You may live in peace and unity;
For to triumph in true peace and glory,
Here for a time, and in the world to come world without end.
Amen.

