THE HUMBLE PETITION OF THE Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London in Common Council assembled: TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS and
COMMONS IN Parliament Assembled. Together with their ANSWERS to the said
Petition.

Printed by RICHARD COTES Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON, 1648.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS IN PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED
The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons in
Common Council assembled.
Humbly shows,
THat they had lately presented unto them an information from one John Everard,
a true Copy whereof is hereunto annexed, whereby he does give intimation of
some Speeches that passed from certain persons at Windsor, of an intention to
disarm the City, and then to Plunder the same: And that diverse reports to that
effect have been brought unto us by Letters and otherwise from diverse parts of
this Kingdom, and from Forain parts: Which Reports, together with the present
Drawing and Continuing of the Army so near the City; and the increase of the
number of Soldiers in the Tower, has been, now is, and will be occasion of
great fears, and a great decay of Trade, and an enhauncing of the Prizes of
Victuals within this City: The which fears are much increased by the taking and
keeping down of the Chains within the same. And the Petitioners do humbly
conceive, That their danger is increased, and their strength much abated by the
disuniting of the command of the Forces of the City, and the Parts within the
late Lines of Communication, and the weekly Bills of Mortality. For the
removing of which Fears, and obtaining of those things which may conduce to
the safety of the Parliament and of this City; The Petitioners do humbly pray,

That consideration may be taken of the information given by the said John
Everard; and that upon a further examination thereof, such course may be taken
therein as your Honors shall think fit.

That the Chains within the City of London, which were lately pulled down, may
forthwith be repaired and set up again: And that the Army may be speedily
removed to a further distance from the City.

That by an Ordinance of Parliament, Major General Skippon (who was long since
chosen, and still by Act of Common Council is continued Major General over
the Forces of the City) may be appointed to be Major General within the late
Lines of Communication, and the weekly Bills of Mortality; By which means he
may the better be enabled to reunite the Forces within the City, and the said
late Lines of Communication, and weekly Bills of Mortality, for the better
defense of the City, and the Places adjacent: And likewise for the preservation
of the Parliament, to whom the City do resolve to adhere according to their
Solemn League and Covenant.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.
The Information of John Everard, Concerning some Speeches that passed from
certain persons at Windsor, of an intention to Disarm the City of London, and
then to Plunder the same.
John Everard makes Oath, That he having some occasion of business at Windsor
upon Thursday the 20 of April, 1648. as he did lie in Bed, did hear some
Gentlemen discourse in the next Chamber, the number of whom he cannot tell, but
by their discourse they could not be less then three or four; And that he does
believe they were all Officers of the Army under the command of his Excellency
the Lord Fairfax; one of them was Quartermaster-generall Gravener as he
supposes; another, one Colonel Ewer, or some such name: And after some merry
discourse, they began to be serious, and propounded what they thought fit to
be done in reference to the present exigencies of the Kingdom, upon which
subject they discoursed an hour or more: They made no doubt of the coming in
of the Scots; and with the same confidence believed that the City of London
would join with the Scots; For the preventing of which, they could find no way
but to Disarm the City both Friend and Foe: And afterward, they said, they
would intimate that those who were the Friends of the Army, should come forth
into the Fields, and there they should be armed: And that they should have the
power of the City of London put into their hands, to keep the rest of the
Citizens in awe: And that they should be maintained at the Charge of the City,
so long as it should be thought fit to continue them. And because that Money
is the sinews of War, having which, they doubted not but to procure Men enough,
if there were occasion to use them: And therefore for the present advancement
of the same, if need were, (this City being Disarmed) they would make them
advance a Million of Money, or else plunder them: And the Party that spoke
this, said, He had acquainted Commissary-generall Ireton with it. All which,
or to the like effect, was spoken in this Deponents hearing.

John Everard.
Copia vera.

23. Aprilis, 1648. Jur. coram Jo. Warner Major.



Die Jovis, 27. April. 1648.
MAster Sheriffs, and Gentlemen of the Common Council of the City of London;
The Lords have commanded me to return Thanks to the Lord Major, Aldermen, and
Common Council of the City of London, for the good affections that they have
expressed in this their Petition, asserting the resolutions of the City to
adhere to the Parliament according to their solemn League and Covenant.

They likewise have commanded me to assure you, That it has ever been a
principal part of their care to prevent any danger or inconveniency that might
threaten the disturbance of the quiet of the city of London, or tend to the
decay of the Trade thereof, though to their great grief these late troubles
have much hindered the success of their endevors therein; which care they are
fully resolved still to continue to the utmost of their power. And they assure
you, That it never entered into their thoughts to have the City of London to be
disarmed: And they hope there can be no such intentions in any others who wish
well to the safety of the Parliament.

As to the report which has been brought unto you by one John Everard, they
will put it into a further examination, that they may be satisfied of the truth
or falsehood of it: and except there be further proof of it, they hope such a
report shall not render the Army to be suspected of any such design,
considering the many former and late experiences that the Parliament and City
have had of the fidelity and good services of the Army.

As to the particular of setting up the Chains within the City, they do fully
leave it to the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council, to do therein as
they shall think fit.

To the last particular concerning Major General Skippon, he being a member of
the House of Commons, the Lords can resolve nothing therein, without a joint
concurrence of that House; but they will take it further into their
consideration.

Joh. Brown,
Cler. Parliamentorum.
Die Jovis, 27 Aprilis, 1648.
THe House being informed that diverse Aldermen and Citizens were at the door,
they were called in, and Alderman Bide one of-the Sheriffs of the City of
London, after some short preamble, acquainted the House that he was commanded
by the Lord Major, Aldermen and Commons in Common Counsel assembled, the
representative Body of the City of London, to present a Petition to the House:
The Petitioners being withdrawn, the Petition was read, and an information
annexed of one John Everard taken upon oath before the Lord Major, 23. of
April, 1648. The Petition was entitled, The Humble Petition of the Lord
Major, Aldermen and Commons in Common Council assembled.

Ordered upon the question by the Commons in Parliament assembled, That this
House does approve of the desires of the City, concerning Major General
Skippon.

Resolved, etc.

That the desire of the Petitioners concerning the Chains be granted, and that
the Committee of the Militia do see it done.

Sir Harbottle Grimston Major General Skippon Mr. Knightley Sir John Evelyn
Mr. Bond Mr. Doddridge Sir Henry Mildmay Mr. John Corbet Colonel Harvey Sir
Robert Harley Mr. Prideaux Mr. Miles Corbet Mr. John Ash Colonel Ven Mr.
Swynfon Mr. Boyse Alderm. Pennington Mr. Blakiston Mr. Vassal Sir Tho. Soame
Alderm. Atkin Sir Greg. Norton Mr. Earl Mr. Reynalds Mr. Long. Sir Martin
Lumley Mr. Grove Mr. Scuwen Mr. Dove Sir Rob. Pie. Mr. Bulkley Major Genesis
Brown Commissary Ireton Colonel Purie Mr. Say.
This Committee or any five of them are appointed to examine the information
given in by Mr. John Everard, mentioned in this City Petition, The information
given in by Mr. Walker a Member of this House, and that he do name unto the
Committee the Reporter of it to him; and all other informations, Foreign or
other, that concern the same business; and have power to send for parties,
Witnesses, Papers, Records, and they are to meet upon it to morrow at two pt.
merid. in the Court of Wards, and the care of this business is more
particularly referred to Alderman Pennington and Mr. Doddridge.

Resolved, etc.

That the thanks of this House be returned to the Citizens for their good
affections expressed in their Petition.

Mr. Speaker is appointed to acquaint the Citizens, That the drawing of part of
the Army so near the City was occasioned by Orders given out in the time of
the late Tumult; That the House will take that business into serious
consideration, and do that therein which may be for the good and safety of the
Parliament and City so far as thereby they may receive satisfaction.

The Sheriffs, Aldermen and other Citizens were again called in, and Mr.
Speaker by the command of the House, acquainted them with the Resolutions and
Proceedings upon the Petition, and did give them the thanks of this House for
their very good affections expressed in the Petition to the Parliament.

H. Elsynge
Cler. Parl. D. Com.
FINIS.

