The humble PETITION OF THE Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London, in Common Council Assembled.

With an humble Representation of the pressing Grievances and important Desires
of the well-affected Freemen, and Covenantengaged Citizens of the City of
London, to the Lords and Commons assembled in high Court of PARLIAMENT.

Together with the several Answers of both Houses of Parliament to the said
Petitions and Representation.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honorable City of London.
1646.

Die Sabbathi 19. December. 1646.
IT is Ordered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, That the City Printer
shall print and publish the two Petitions presented to this House this day; the
one entitled, The humble Petition of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of
the City of London in Common Council Assembled: and the other entitled, An
humble Representation of the pressing grievances, and important desires of the
well-affected Freemen, and Covenant-engaged Citizens of the City of London, and
the Answer of the Lords in Parliament made this day unto them both.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

Die Sabbathi 19. December. 1646.
THe Lords are so fully satisfied with the constant and real expressions of
the fidelity and good affections of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Common Council,
and Citizens of the City of London, as they have commanded me to give hearty
thanks upon the whole matter of the Petitions presented by you from the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, Common Council, and Citizens of the City of London, and to
let you know that they will take the particulars of your Petitions into their
speedy consideration.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

Die Sabbathi 19. December. 1646.
THe House being informed, That diverse Aldermen and Citizens of the City of
London were at the Door, they were called in, and Master Alderman Bunce
presented to the House a Petition, entitled, The humble Petition of the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of the City of London, in Common Council
Assembled, Together with an humble Representation of the pressing grievances,
and important desires of the well-affected Freemen, and Covenant-engaged
Citizens of the City of London, thereunto annexed: The which (the Citizens
being withdrawn) were both of them read: And it is

Resolved upon the Question, by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That this
Petition, and the Representation annexed, be taken into consideration on
Tuesday morning next, notwithstanding any former Order.

Ordered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That Master Speaker do give
the Petitioners thanks for their constant good affections.

The Petitioners were again called in, and Master Speaker accordingly, by
Command and Order of the House did give them thanks for their constant good
affections, and did further acquaint them, That they had read their Petition,
and the Representation annexed, and that they have appointed a very short day
to take them into consideration.

H. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.


