THE HUMBLE PETITION OF The Knights, Esquires, Gentry Freeholders, and
inhabitants of the County of SOMMERSET
Presented to the Honorable Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses now Assembled in
Parliament, June 15. 1642. Humbly Pray,
THat the Liturgy, and the Church Government be continued until otherwise
some alterations may be for a free, and well chosen SINOD, and that in the
mean time the disturbers thereof may be discountenanced, and that you
endeavor to remove all Jealousies and misunderstandings between his MAJESTY
and PARLIAMENT, the discontents within being the greatest evils that can
happen unto us, and which We most fear; and to take into your consideration
his MAJESTY'S Message of 20. JANUARY, as the means proposed for an
accommodation, and that you will provide for his Majesty's security by
declaring against Tumults, and unlawful assemblyes, and that you will take
Order to suppress Seditious Sermons, and Pamphlets, which his Majesty declares
He expects, as the means to come near His PARLIAMENT.

2. That seeing his Majesty and Parliament do not agree in a new way, for
settling the MILITIA: it is humbly desired that the Trained Bands may be set
into such a Posture and Government as in the time of QUEEN ELIZABETH, until a
law be made, and that the dispute about the manner of doing it may not actuate
devision in the mean time.

3. That the Subject may have the benefit of the Petition of right both for his
Person and estate in all cases, and in all Courts, and that the laws of our
Kingdom may be the only rule of Government and obedience.

4. That whereas great sumes of Money have been levied by Act of Parliament, and
great are now required; we beseech you to take notice that the Country is much
impoverished, and will unwillingly bear any burden of this kind, but such as
shall be employed for the general service of this Kingdom, and Bleeding
Kingdom of JRELAND. And therefore we humbly pray that it may be made known
how those former Colections have been disposed, which will be a great
encouragement for the ready payment of the present.

5. Lastly, whereas and seeing his Majesty has often with sundry Protestations
declared to his Parliament and People, that he will ever maintain the true
Protestant Religion established, the Laws of the Kingdom and the Liberty of
the Subject; which we do confidently believe.

We further humbly beseech you, that the dispute about Prerogative and the
fear of the Malignant party or other Jealousies, may not imbroile you in the
greatest of evils, as are those of civil discention and engagement, and that
you do your utmost to alay distempers, and heedfully watch over the Peace and
safety of this Kingdom; In which we will join with you our earnest Prayers,
and willingly adventure our selves and fortunes.

London, Printed for W. D. 1642.


