AN Apologeticall LETTER TO A Person of QVALITY, Concerning a Scandalous and
Malicious Passage, in a Conference lately held betwixt an Inquisitor at
White Hall and Mr Anthony Sadler, Published in his Inquisitio Anglicana.

Written by JO. HALL Bishop of Norwich, in vindication of himself.

printer's device" Alma Matter
HINC LVCEM ET POCVLA SACRA



LONDON, Printed for N. B. and are to be sold at the Marigold in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1655

To the Right Reverend Father in God, Dr J. HALL, Bishop of Norwich.
R. R. Sir,
WIth my respective remembrance: I cannot blame you, if you were much moved
with that wrong which was so publicly done to your name, in that mentioned
Pamphlet; whereof we that are your friends are so sensible, as that I have been
advised by diverse of them to publish that Letter of Vindication, which you were
pleased to address privately to me: whereunto I have been easily induced to
consent. For though I had at the first receipt of it, purposed to conceal it,
as supposing it not needful to take notice of that aspersion, which was thus
cast upon you by a namelesse Author, well knowing that all wise men were
satisfied long ago, with that full Defense that you made for your self, and
which was so effectually seconded by those Reverend Bishops, and Learned
Doctors, who were in the height of reputation for their profound judgment,
and out of all danger of suspicion of any Popish inclination: Yet now,
perceiving that the less judicious, and common sort of people are apt to take
offense at this imputation, which is so confidently laid upon you by some
person that would seem to carry authority in his public employment; I have
thought it requisite to let this your short vindication to fly abroad
(although thus late) for the satisfaction of those, who either have not seen
the resolutions and Apologeticall answers of those Learned Bishops and
Doctors, or who are not able to judge of the state of this question, raised
(as you have truly said, and Bishop Davenant before you) out of a mere
misconstruction of words, and not any real difference in matter.

Sir, I hope I have done nothing herein that may be displeasing to you; since
what I have done has been out of a zealous respect to your dear reputation,
which herein suffers too much in the weak opinion of vulgar readers. Commending
all your studies and holy endeavors to the blessing of the Almighty, I take
leave, and am

Nov. 20. 1654. Your much obliged friend to serve you H. S.

A Brief LETTER OF APOLOGY sent by the R. Dr HALL B. N. to a private friend.
Worthy SIR,
IN that strange Pamphlet which I received from you yesterday, you cannot
marvel if I startled to meet so inexpectly with the name of Bishop Hall
disgracefully ranked with Priests and Jesuits, and the man that was executed
the other day. (for so it has pleased my unknown Accuser, in his great
charity, to range my unworthiness.) If my pale and wrinkled cheeks could be
any whit capable of the tincture of shame, you may well think what change of
countenance these words must needs have wrought in me. Lord, (thought I) what
so heinous crime is this, for which I am thus shamefully arraigned before all
the world, now on the brink of my grave! Forsooth, Bishop Hall (as the rest of
those meet accomplices) says, the Church of Rome is a true Church. [ Grave
crimen Caie Caesar.] What an impotent malice is this, to single out my name
thus ignominiously, from all the rest of my profession, for an odious Paradox;
when I say no more, no other herein, then all the Orthodox Divines of
Christendom? How must the reader now needs think, Sure this Bishop Hall is a
man of corrupt principles, singular for his dangerous misopinions, a greater
friend to Rome then all his fellows? whenas the world knows that I have
already, about 28 years ago, clearly vindicated my self from this gross
misconstruction, and showed that, in my sense, there is no knowing Protestant
Divine that agrees not fully with me. You remember that about the time
mentioned, when, upon some passages of the Old Religion, then published by me,
Mr Burton and some others boggled at that expression; namely, that the Church
of Rome is yet a true visible Church, though extremely corrupted; and that the
quarrel began to wax warm, and the Press to complain of being pestred with
opposite Tractates: in a due care to lay this ill-raised spirit, besides my own
full and satisfactorie Apology then set forth, I appealed to other
unquestionable Divines, the Oracles of our Church; writing my public letters
to two famously learned Bishops, Bishop Morton and Bishop Davenant; and to two
eminent and approvedly Orthodox Doctors, Doctor Prideaux, and Doctor Primrose
Pastor of the French Church; earnestly desiring them to declare their
judgments freely and fully concerning this point. All which have not only in
their published answers declared this to be an undoubted truth, in the sense
proposed, proving it by sound and convincing reasons, and asserting it, not as
their own private opinion, but as conceived by them to be the just and common
tenet of all Orthodox Divines and Churches: but withal affirming that those
men little know what prejudice they do to the Protestant cause, that hold the
contrary. The instances whereof it were easy for me to give, were it not that I
fear and hate to furnish the adversary with weapons to wound our selves. I wis,
those our enemies are quick-eyed enough to espy their own advantages, and our
exposednesse to the danger of self-wronging consequences, without our
intimation. The grave and solid determination of those godly and judicious
Divines is still extant in a thousand hands: upon the publication whereof, the
world then rested satisfied, my self acquitted, the adversary silenced, and the
controversy quieted, which is now thus uncharitably and unadvisedly raked up
from under the ashes of a wise and just silence.

The truth is, nothing but a gross and inconsiderate mistake is guilty of this
quarrel: The homonymy of this word True, (as master Blake in his answer to
master Tombs) besides the forenamed authors (has truly observed,) makes all
this seeming difference. If we take a True Church for a true believing Church;
so the Church of Rome is far from a True Church: If we take a True Church for a
Church truly existing in a visible profession of Christianity, so it cannot be
denied to be a True visible Church. A thief is no True man, yet he is truly a
man. So the Church of Rome, though false in too many of her Doctrines, yet has
a true visible being. Her Clients vainly flatter her with the title of
Catholic, or Universal: we expect no thanks from her to say she is
universally corrupted, yet a Church visible still. Those gross errors
wherewith she abounds, have marred her first purity, but do not forfeit her
outward Church-ship. It were a strange uncharitableness to say that a Romanist
is no Christian* though too many of their Tenets are justly branded for
Antichristian. And where there is a society of Christians, not directly and
obstinately destroying the Foundation, (though otherwise foul, and erroneous in
opinion,) there cannot be denied a visible appearance of a Church. Let the
Church of Rome then go for as erroneous, impure, false in matter of opinion and
practice, as she is: she cannot be denied the face of a Church, how ever rotten
at the heart. All which has been so judiciously, and amply declared by those
learned and worthy Contests, whom I formerly mentioned, in their public
discourses of this point, that I am confident, if Mr Sadler had had leisure to
have considered, he would rather have distinguished then denied, and the
Questionist (who ever he was) would, upon second thoughts, have thought good to
suffer my innocent name to rest in peace; whereas now, he has both wronged me,
and himself more, in drawing upon himself an opinion of either ignorance, or
uncharitableness, or both. God forgive him, I do.

Thus we too well see how apt nature is, even in those who profess an eminence
in holiness, to raise and maintain animosities against those whose calling, or
person they pretend to find cause to dislike; and perhaps also to brand with
the black note of unjust infamy, those who concenter not with them in some
lighter opinions, (although indivisibly theirs, in the brotherhood of the same
most holy faith, and meekly affecting to hold with them the unity of the
spirit, in the bonds of peace.)

Truly Sir, (to open my self freely to you) nothing has more wounded my soul,
nor drawn deeper sighs from me in secret, then to see that, whereas our dear
and blessed Savior has so vehemently encharged all his true disciples with
the duty of mutual Love; and his chosen vessel, with so zealous importunity,
cries down strife, and contention, as arguing mere carnality, and utterly
inconsistent with the truth of Christian disposition and practice: yet no Grace
is such a stranger to us (for the most part) as Charity; nor no employment so
universally rife amongst us, on all hands, as quarrels and brawlings, both
verbal and real, arising commonly from false surmises and misconstructions;
and proceeding (too often) not to the scratching of faces, but to the ripping
of bowels, and to the stabbing of hearts; to the infinite scandal of the
Gospel of peace, and to the sport and triumph of Gath and Ascalon. Now ^he God
of peace, whom we all profess to serve, be pleased for his great mercies sake,
to pull out of our bosoms all these roots of bitterness, and to compose our
mis-alienated hearts to perfect love and concord, to the glory of his great
Name, and to the comfort of all those that are faithful in his Sion.

Sir, you will pardon me, if I have thus passionately enough unloaded my self
(into the bosom of so faithful a friend) of my justly conceived grief, to be
thus scandalously and causelessly traduced. Your love will both put the best
construction upon these sudden lines; and where you meet with this blurre
undeservedly cast upon my name, wipe it off with a just and friendly
vindication: wherein you shall do an office worthy of the thankful
acknowledgement of

Higham Nov. 5. 1654. Your unfeignedly devoted in all Christian affection Jos.
Hall* B. N.


