The Humble REPRESENTATION AND PETITION Of diverse VVel-affected Gentlemen, Free
Holders, and others of the County of OXON.

Presented to the supreme Authority of the Nation, the Commons in Parliament
Assembled, April 6. 1649.

With the Speeh of Mr. Butler at the delivery of the said Petition, and the
Speakers Answer thereunto.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spred-Eagle at the West End of
Paul's,

Die Veneris April 6 1649.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, that the humble Representation
and Petition of diverse well-affected Gentlemen, Freeholders, and others of the
County of Oxon, be referred unto

Sir Arthur Haslerig. Sir James Harrington. Sir John Danvers. Mr. Whitlock. Mr.
Humphrey Edwards. Mr. Dove. Mr. Whitacre. Mr. Say. Mr. Hypsly. Mr. Smyth. Mr.
Lemmon. Mr. James Challenor. Mr. Thomas Challenor. Sir Thomas Wroth. Mr. Ash.
Mr. Allen. Mr. Salway. Sir G. Northon. Alderman Wilson. Mr. Millington. Mr.
Oldsworth. Colonel Ven. Colonel Moor Lord Gray. Mr. Fenwick. Mr. Scot. Mr.
Garland. Mr. Love. Mr. Masham. Mr. Boon. Mr. Bryssoil. Mr. Blachstone. Mr.
Pury. Mr. Weaver. Mr. Geardon.
Or any three of them, to hear what shall be further presented to them by the
Petitioners, and such as are authorized by them, and this Committee are to meet
this afternoon at two of the clock in the Duchy Chamber, and this Commit
have power to look on the former Votes, and to present some way to the House
for reception of Ministers to supply the places that are unsupplied, and to
have the same power with the Committee for Itinerary Ministers, Mr. and Garland
is to have special care hereof.

To the Supreme Authority of the Nation, the Commons in Parliament assembled.
The humble Representation and Petition of diverse well-affected Gentlemen,
Freehoulders, and others of the County of Oxon.
Humbly Shows,
THat our Spirits are much revived, and our hearts raised up in the sensible
apprehension of the good hand of God upon you, in your late and present
actings, in referrence to Common Right and freedom, and for as much as your
work tends to the wel-being of this Commonwealth, we as members thereof, from
our present sense of some grievances in the County, City, and University of
Oxford, Yet unremoved, do conceive our selves in duty obliged to acquaint you
therewith; As namely the obstruction and delay of Justice, through the
corruption, and disaffection of diverse now in Commission, the countenancing of,
and conniving at Delinquents by some of our Committee men, and their Officers,
the irregular proceedings of the visitors in the University, the violent
endeavors of the parochial Ministers, to imbitter and stir up the Spirits
of the people, in opposition to your present actings, and under pretense of
breach of Covenant; the great and intolerable burden of the Chancellors
Arbitrary Court, in the University; the manifest evil of keeping many of our
Laws in an unknown tongue, the great increase and necessity of the poor, the
great quantity of ground of Forests and Parks (now belonging to the State)
which lie wast, without benefit to the public the exemption of College lands
from Taxes, the want of faithful representatives for this County, to sit in
your house, and to represent these and other our grievances for our good; the
consideration of all which makes us to represent these our humble requests and
desires, as follows, viz.

1. That all our disaffected Justices may be forthwith removed, and such only
empowered as have and still do approve themselves faithful to the public
interest.

2. That all our disaffected Commissioners and Committee men, with their
officers, may also be removed, and such only be entrusted as are of known
fidelity, and honesty amongst us, and all called to an account.

3. That such of the visitors appointed by Parliament, as have not appeared,
and acted in the late visitation of the said University, according to the trust
reposed in them, may be disabled to sit or act as visitors for the future, and
that such others as are able and well-affected, may be added to the remaining
number, and that the persons so to be added; may have power to review and
rectify (if there be cause) the procedure of the said visitors, and from time
to time to act to all intents and purposes, as the other visitors may or might
have done.

4. That such Ministers, or others, that shall in Preaching, Praying, or
otherwise endeavor to discontent, and disaffect the people of the Nation, in
rendering your proceedings, (as to the Trial of the late King, nulling the house
of Lords, and others) to be a breach of Covenant, by their misrepresentation
thereof, thereby stirring up the people to new Engagements and Insurrections,
may by strict Order from you, be apprehended and punished as deceivers of the
people, and disturbers of the public peace; and also that a competent number
of Itinerary Ministers may be appointed in this County, and paid out of the
public Treasury.

5. That all Arbitrary and Tyrannical Courts in this University, or elsewhere,
may be wholly taken away and abolished.

6. That as many of our Laws as are in an unknown tongue, may be translated
into English: That what are corrupt may be corrected, the evil r^pealed, the
obscure explained, and the good revived.

7. That all the good Laws for relief of the poor, may be duly put in execution
by the several Justices, setting them to work, or otherwise providing for them,
that no common beggar be found amongst us.

8. That all those Forests, Lands, and Parkes that now lie wast, may be
speedily put to the best improvement for the use of the public.

9. That the well-affected of this County, who have been always faithful to your
proceedings (and none else) may have liberty to make choice of so many
representatives, as are wanting in this County to sit in the House, and none
but such capable of being chosen, that have faithfully adhered to you in all
your Engagements from first to last.

10. That all College Lands may be taxed, and pay equally with other Lands, in
all Charges and Contributions whatsoever.

11. Lastly, That you will be pleased to appoint some of your own Members to
receive information from those that shall present these our humble desires,
what persons we conceive fit to be employed and entrusted in the several
places and offices before mentioned.

All which we refer to the wisdom and Judgment of this Honorable House, not
doubting your speedy and serious consideration thereof, and answer thereunto,
being (as we conceive) of most necessary and present concernment, which will be
a further testimony to us, and others, of your real intentions and endeavors to
act in all things for our public good.

Die Veneris April. 6. 1649.
THe House being informed that diverse Gent. of the County of Oxford were at the
door they were called in, and after a short preamble made by Mr. Butler to this
effect, viz.

WE are desired from diverse Gent. and well-affected Persons of the County of
Oxon, to present both our grievances, and diverse Requests unto this Honorable
House; Truly they are not a little sensible of the great blessing of God on
them, in you and your unwearied labors, love and pains, and many good fruits of
your impartial Justice, by that remnant that God has pleased to reser(...) to
this day; And we may say, had not there been a remnant we had been as Sodom,
and we had been as Gomorah: And we hope, as God has preserved you, so he will
still preserve and continue you faithful, and we desire these grievances and
requests may be read, and such a speedy and effectual Answer thereto, as to
your wisdom shall seem meet.

He delivered a Petition, which after the Petitioners were withdrawn, was read,
and was entitled, The humble Representation, and Petition of diverse well
affected Gentlemen, Freeholders, and others of the County of Oxon.

Resolved etc. That Mr Speaker do return the Thanks of this House unto the
Petitioners.

The Petitioners being again called in, Master Speaker by Command of the house,
gave them this answer.

Gentlemen, you of the County of Oxford, the House has read your Petition, and
do likewise take notice of the discreet and moderate expressions of it, the
fair and modest delivery of it, which they conceive did proceed from a good
intention, and the matters themselves show it, and they have appointed a
Committee to meet this afternoon in the Duchy Chamber, to consider thereof,
and to hear what you shall farther present to them; many of the particulars of
your Petition are taken into consideration already, others will be taken into
consideration by this Committee, and the expressions and explanations you made
to me, the House has taken notice of, and have commanded me to return you
hearty thanks for your good affections, and I do return you the hearty thanks
of this House accordingly.

Hen: Scobel Cleric. Parliamenti.

FINIS.

