A plain and brief discovery of those two beasts that are written, Revel. 13.

AND To show what dishonor and disgrace the Clergy bring against Christ and
his glorious Church in reading some part of the Service Book.

Again I praise God I have showed in brief the true signification of Christ
and his glorious Church, with those holy Ordinances that do belong unto it.

Gathered and directed by that grace God has give to me James Hunt.

All glory be to God on high.

Printed for J.H. 1643.

IT is written, Ephesians. 5.13. All things that are reproved ^e ^^a^ ^^nifest by the
light. Now by that glorious light God has given to me, I will show you the
signification of those two beasts that are written, Rev. 13. The first beast
rises out of the sea, which signifies the Pope and all his Clergy, which have
gathered to themselves so many false doctrines, that the Spirit of God compares
it unto the deep and broad sea. But the second beast he comes up out of the
earth, which signifies the Bishops here in England and all their Clergy, which
have gathered to themselves so many false written books, that for their number
they may be compared unto the stars in the firmament, which false written
books do arise and proceed from the devil, who is called the god of the earth,
and by those false written books the Bishops and their Clergy have deceived all
those people that are as yet held under their power: but the people whom the
Clergy have blinded, they cry out against me saying, who has made thee a Judge
or a Preacher. My answer is, God my glorious Father, and Christ Jesus my
redeemer: they have raised me up by the virtue and divine power of their Word,
for to be a Judge and a Preacher, for to judge and divide betwixt truth and
error, light and darkness: for I hope all that shall read this book they may
understand from whence my judgment does arise and proceed. Again it is said,
the second beast he exercises all the power of the first beast before him. Now
I will prove, that the Pope and his Clergy, and the Bishops and their Clergy,
their power not long ago was both as one. First for the Pope, he has made the
people believe, that no man can be a true and sound Preacher, but he must be
brought up in the Universities, and so say, the Bishops and their Clergy: but
alas they are deceived upon both sides: for God has laid the Gospel in such a
complete way, that if there be a mystery or parable that speaks something dark
in one place, a man may find two or three places for to prove and justify what
that dark mystery signifies, and that is the true and perfect way to open and
unfold the mysteries of God to the true meaning and signification, and I praise
God I can prove these things may be done without the help of the Latin or Greek
tongue; for I can prove it by plain truth of Scripture. Again for the Pope, he
will not allow that any man shall be a Preacher for to declare his mind to the
people, but first he must be sworn for to observe those Canons and articles
that the Pope or some of his Assigns shall set forth. The very same power did
belong to the Bishops here in England.

Again for the Pope, all Magistrates and Churchwardens are sworn for to
uphold the Pope and his Clergy in their way, that if any man reprove them, for
to say, their power or their doctrine is false: then the Magistrates cast him
into prison, or else the Churchwardens will complain of him in the Spiritual
Court: and when he comes there, if he do not play the hypocrite, and say he is
sorry for that he said, and fee the Officers with money, he shall be cast into
prison; if not, put to death. The very same power not long ago did belong to
the Bishops and their Clergy here in England. Again for the Pope, he and all
his Clergy have deceived the people, in making the people believe that the old
law is a rule of obedience for the people to be led and guided by, and so say
the Bishops and all their Clergy. But they are deceived on both sides in their
judgment: for I can prove, the more they bring the people under the obedience
of the old Law, the more they bring them under the bondage of the devil. My
first proof is Heb. 2.14. Forasmuch then as the children were made partakers
of flesh and blood, Christ likewise took part of the same, that through death
he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil, and so
to deliver all those who through fear of death were all their life time
subject to bondage. This place of Scripture does plainly signify, that all
those people that were under the old Law, they were under a yoke of bondage
until Christ freed them by his suffering on the cross. Again, Romans 7.6. the
Apostle says plainly, and so say I, Now we are delivered from the Law, that
being dead, wherein we were held as under the chains and bondage of Satan,
that we should serve in newness of spirit, and not in the oldnesse of the
letter: that is, in newness of the Gospel, and not in the oldnesse of the
law. Thus I have proved in brief, that the old Law is the spirit of bondage,
and so is the devil. And hereby I have overthrown the Pope and his Clergy; and
the Bishops and their Clergy in their judgment, because they say, the old law
is a rule of obedience. Again, I will show you in brief, that S. Paul's false
zeal was to the old Law when he was a persecuter of Christ, for he says
plainly conserning his zeal persecuting the Church, Touching the righteousness
that is in the Law, blameless, Phil. 3. Thus I have proved in brief, that S.
Paul's false zeal was to the old Law when he was a persecutor of the Church of
Christ, and in so doing, let any man judge if he were not an enemy to God, and
a friend unto the Devil; and so will all those Divines be found and proved so
to be, that keep the people under the obedience of the old Law. Again, I say,
all those Magistrates and Churchwardens will be found to be Gods great
enemies, that shall strive to uphold the Clergy in their wickedness; and thus
I have proved in brief, and shall prove again at large, that those two beasts
signify the Pope and his Clergy, and the Bishops here in England, and their
Clergy, which by their false power as conserning Church government, and false
doctrine, they keep the people under the bondage and captivity of the devil;
and the plain truth is, many of the Magistrates and Churchwardens do yet
uphold them in their abominable wickedness, for they will not suffer the
Prophets of God to reprove them for their false power, and their false
doctrines, which is abominable in the sight of our glorious God. My text says,
All things that are reproved are made manifest by the light, wherefore I say
again, by that glorious light God has given to me, I will show you in brief
what dishonor and disgrace the Clergy bring against Christ and his glorious
Church, in reading of some part of the Service book, for the Clergy say we
are all miserable sinners, and there is no health in us; now if there be no
health in us, then we are all reprobates; for, Know ye not that Jesus Christ
is in ye except ye be reprobates, 2 Cor. 13.5. Hereby I understand, that if
Christ by the virtue of his word does shine in his people, then I am sure there
is some health in us, but the Clergy say, there is no health in us: therefore
let any man judge if they do not accuse the people to be in the state of
reprobation. Again, the Clergy say, that we are all miserable sinners: but if
I ask any of them if the body of Christ be a body of sin and misery, they will
answer no: Why then my answer to them again is in Ephesians. 1.22. God gave his son
Christ to be head over all things to the Church, which is his body, the
fullness of him that fills all in all. This place of Scripture does prove and
signify, that all those people that will be reconciled to Christ and to the
new Testament, their spirits shall be joined to the glorious and mystical body
of Christ, and thereby they shall be set free from the bondage of sin and
misery. Again, the Clergy by reading of some part of the Service Book, they
bring the people under the obedience of the old Law, which is the bondage of
death and corruption Again, the Clergy in reading of the Service Book they
teach the people to worship God in a false way, for they teach the people to
fall down on their knees, and pray for Christ's Church militant here on earth,
which is a vain and false worship; for they have no Scripture in the new
Testament to prove, that Christ has any such Church: but I can prove by plain
truth of Scripture, that Christ has a glorious and triumphing Church here on
earth: but that the Clergy teach the people to deny: for they say, that Christ's
Church is militant here on earth, but glorious and triumphing in the world to
come, but not here upon earth. But I say plainly, that is a doctrine of devils:
for the devil he strives by his carnal ministers for to teach the people to
worship and obey that which is false, and to deny that which is just and true:
for I will prove in brief, that Christ has a glorious and triumphing Church
here on earth: for Christ says, Joh. 12. Father glorify thy name, then came a
loud voice from heaven saying, I have glorified it, and will glorify it again:
and Joh. 17. Christ says plainly, The glory which thou gave me I have given
unto them, that they may be all one in us, that the world may believe that thou
have sent me. Again, 2. Cor. 2.14. the Apostle says expressly. Now thanks be
unto God, who always causes us to triumph in Christ Jesus: this word always
plainly signifies here in this world, and in the world to come forever. Thus I
praise God I have proved in brief, that Christ has a glorious and triumphing
Church here on earth, and Christ will have his glorious and triumphing Church
by degrees for to flourish over the face of the whole world, which will be to
the overthrow of the devil and the false Church: and I praise God I have
showed you what dishonor and disgrace the Clergy bring against Christ and his
Church in reading of the Service Book. My text says, All things that are
reproved are made manifest by the light: now by that light God has given unto
me, I understand the Pope and his Clergy in their Service Book they have but
the Lords Prayer and some of the holy Epistles of S. Paul, and other parts of
the Gospel, and thereby they have set a gloss and a glorious color upon
their Service Book, that so they may the more closely and craftily blind and
deceive the people, for it is said in the 13. Verse, that the beast makes fire
come down from heaven, and deceives them that dwell on the earth: I understand
the fire that comes out of heaven is those parts of the Gospel which the Pope
and the Bishops have caused to be put in their Service book: for the Word of
God which is revealed in the New Testament does signify the Holy Ghost and
fire. Again I say plainly, that the divine power of the World of God in the
Gospel of Christ will be as a flaming and consuming fire, for to burn up all
those errors and false traditions which the Pope and the Bishops have invented
in their Service book. Again I say, that the divine power of the Word of God
in the doctrine of the new Testament will be a flaming and a consuming fire for
to burn and consume all false power, as touching Church government and false
doctrines, which is contrary to the true worship and Word of God. Again, I
understand, that my glorious God has appointed and commanded, that for
preaching and Church Government that must be held forth for to gather the
people into the mystical body of Christ. But for those two beasts, the Pope
and his Clergy, and the Bishops here in England, and their Clergy by their
false doctrine and false power they keep the people out of Christ, as I shall
prove in brief: for the Apostle says expressly, 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in
Christ he is a new creature, and to be a new creature is to be reconciled to
Christ, and to the new Testament. Old things are past away, behold all things
are become new. I understand the old things that are past away is the old Law
and Testament. For as circumcision and the blood of bulls and goats did belong
to the old Law and Testament, which Christ has abolished. Now on the other
side, Baptism and the Bread and Wine, they are two holy Ordinances which do
belong to the body of Christ, and to the second covenant of grace. Now these
things which I have proved in brief will overthrow the Bishops and all their
clergy: for their order is to read a chapter in the old Testament, and then
another in the new, and when they are in their pulpits, they join in their
doctrine the old Law and Testament, and the new together, as if they were both
as one: and in so doing they have blinded and deceived all those people that
are as yet held under their power: for if there be any Divine or other man that
can find any one place of Scripture in the new Testament for to prove, as he
thinks, that the ministration of the old Law and Testament is to be joined to
the glorious body of Christ, if I cannot find five other plain truths to
prove that he is deceived in his judgment, I will desire no mercy, but I will
be content to be put to death under the judgment of a Jury of twelve honest
men: but what says the Scripture, Cast out the bondwoman and her son, for
the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the free woman,
Gal. 4. the son of the bondwoman plainly signifies the Devil and the old
Law: for the old Law is the spirit of bondage, and so is the devil, as I in
this book have plainly proved. Now I will show you in brief of Gods love and
mercy. For if the Pope and his Clergy, and the Bishops and their Clergy will
forsake the old Law, and their false power, and false doctrines and traditions,
which is contrary to the true worship and will of God, and then be reconciled
to Christ and the second covenant of grace, God is rich in mercy to forgive
them and receive them into his everlasting kingdom of glory. Wherefore I will
conclude with S. Paul, as it is written 1 Timothy 2.3. For this is good and
acceptable in the sight of God out Savior, who will have all men to be saved
and to come to the knowledge of the truth, for there is one God, and one
Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself ransom
for all to be testified in due time, whereunto I am ordained a Preacher, I say
again, whereunto God my glorious Father has ordained me to be a Preacher, I
speak the truth in Christ and lie not, for the spirit of God draws but one
way, that is to Christ, and to the obedience of the new Covenant, my text
says, All things that reproves are made manifest by the light, Now by that
light God has given to me I shall reprove the Anabaptist, which will not allow
young children to be baptized, but by the help of God I will prove in brief by
human reason, and spiritual signification of Scripture, that they are deceived
in their judgment, my first proof is Heb 10. For the Law having a shadow of
good things to come, which does signify that the old Law was a type and shadow
of the New, for the Apostle says plainly concerning the Jews which were under
the Old Law, he says they were baptized to Moses in the cloud, 1 Cor. 10.2.
the cloud signifies the Old Law, now I understand that Moses did not baptize
with water, but to signify that circumcision was a type of Baptism, and young
children were circumcised at eight days old. Again, I find it written Acts
16. concerning the Jailer and Lydia, which were converted by S. Paul, it is
said they and all their household were baptized.

Now what man is able to gainsay but those two persons might have young
children that were baptized by S. Paul: Again, Acts 2. when the Apostle told
the Jews that they had crucified the Lord of life, they were pricked in their
hearts, and said, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Peter answered, Repent
and be baptized, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost, for the
promise is to you and to your children; these places of Scripture does plainly
signify that all young children of faithful parents are to be baptized to the
mystical body of Christ. Again, Christ said, Suffer little children to come
to me, and forbid them not, for to such belongs the kingdom of God: Mark
this point I beseech you, for Christ says plainly, that the kingdom of God
does belong to young children, and Christ and his Gospel signify Christ and
his Kingdom. Now if I ask the Anabaptists if they do believe the Baptism
with water to be an holy Ordinance, which does belong to the body of Christ and
to the second Covenant of grace, they will answer, yea; why then my answer to
them is in brief, that all those that will not suffer young children to be
baptized, they do exclude them from the mystical body of Christ, and from the
second Covenant of grace; I pray God give all such people grace to forsake that
wicked practice, or else they will draw down the fiery wrath of God upon their
own souls, and thus I praise God I have proved in brief by humane reason,
and by plain signification of Scripture, that young children must be baptized.
Again, I have showed you, that those two beasts does signify the Pope and his
clergy, and the Bishops and their Clergy, that their false power are both as
one.

It is written John 16.13, 14. Christ says plainly, When he the Spirit of
truth is come he will guide you into all truth, he shall glorify me, for he
shall receive of mine and shall show it unto you, mark I beseech you the
commanding power of God, for Christ Jesus who in the true and perfect God, he
says expressly, that the spirit of truth shall receive of his, and shall show it
unto you: Now by that spirit of truth which Christ has given unto me, I will
show you in brief the true signification of Christ and his glorious Church
with those holy Ordinances which does belong unto it, for there are three that
bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these
three are one, 1 John 5.1. the Word signifies Christ Jesus who is the second
person in Trinity, and all those people that will be reconciled to Christ and
to the divine power of his word, their spirits shall be joined to the glorious
Trinity, my first proof is in 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether ye be
in the faith, know you not that Christ Jesus is in you, except ye be
reprobates: But how is Christ in his people? my answer is, by the virtue and
divine power of his word which is revealed in his Gospel. Again, 1 Cor. 6.19.
What, know you not that your body is the temple of the holy Ghost which is in
you. Again, Ephesians. 4.4. There is one body, one spirit, one faith, one God and
Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all: These three
places of Scripture does plainly prove and justify, that all those people that
will be reconciled to Christ, and to the obedience of his word, which is
revealed in the New Testament, their spirits shall be joined to the holy and
glorious Trinity, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, which shall be all ingraffed as
in one man, though they shall be in number thousands of thousands, and thus I
praise God I have showed you in brief the true foundation of true and sound
Religion, which by the help of God I dare boldly say, that the Devil and all
his carnal Ministers shall never be able for to overthrow or shake this
foundation. Now by the help of God I will show you in brief, how and after
what manner children are to be baptized, for I think it fit that the Minister
first read that portion of Scripture Gal. 3.21. For if there had been a Law
given that could have given life, verily righteousness should have been by
the Law, but the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by
the faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe, but before faith
came, that is, before Christ came we were kept under the Law, shut up unto the
faith which should afterward be revealed, which faith was revealed by Christ
and the twelve Apostles, For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ
Jesus, for as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on
Christ, and then after this Scripture is read, I think it fit for the Minister
to read the Lords Prayer, and then the Minister shall baptize the child,
naming it by the name as the Father of the child, or some other in his stead
shall give it, and shall sprinckle water on the face of the child, saying, I
baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost,
for a seal and pledge that for ever hereafter thou shall not be ashamed to
fight under the banner of the suffering of the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
but to continue his faithful soldier even to thy lives end: So when the child
is baptized with water, I think it fit for the Minister to declare these words,
saying, Christ so loved his Church and gave himself for it, that he might
present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle or any
such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish, Ephesians. 5. that is,
Christ will have his Church which are baptized to his glorious body to be so
chaste unto himself and to his glorious Gospel, that it should be free from
false doctrines and false worship which proceeds from the devil, I do not
say that we shall be free from failings and infirmities here in this world, for
a child as soon as it is baptized it is joined to the gloious body of Christ,
but then God will have them as they grow in ripeness of years, that they
should be fed with the sincere milk of the word in the doctrine of the New
Testament, that they may grow thereby in heavenly wisdom, from grace to grace
and strength to strength, until we all come into the unity of the faith, and
of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, to the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. that ye be no more children in
understanding tossed too and fro and carried about with every wind of doctrine
and slight of men, and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to
deceive. but speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things
which is the head even Christ, for God our glorious Father gave us his Son
Christ to be head over all things to the Church which is his body, the fullness
of him that fills all in all, unto whom be all praise, honor, power and
glory both now and evermore world without end, Amen. Thus I praise God I have
showed you in brief a true form for the baptizing of children, which will be
to the praise and glory of god, and to the edifying of the hearers, but for
Godfathers and Godmothers, and the Cross on the forehead, be laid aside. Now
by the help of God I will show you concerning the Sacrament of bread and wine,
it is written 1 Cor. 11.28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat
of that bread and drink of that cup, for he that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself: And why does he so? the
answer is, because he does not discern the Lords body: Now I understand as
Circumcision and those Ordinances that are written, Heb. 9. did belong to the
Old Law and Testament which Christ has abolished by his suffering, now on the
other side, baptism and the bread and wine they are the holy Ordinances which
does belong to the mystical body of Christ, and to the second covenant of
grace, for Christ says plainly, Luke 22.20. This Cup is my blood in the New
Testament which is shed for you: therefore I say again, the Sacrament of bread
and wine does belong to the body of Christ, and to the New Testament, the
Apostle says, He that eats and drinks unworthily eats and drinks
damnation to himself, because he does not discern the Lords body: Wherefore I
pray God give the Bishops and the Clergy all grace for to forsake the old Law
and Testament which Christ has redeemed us from, and that they may be
reconciled to Christ and to the second Covenant, which if they shall wifully
refuse to do, they will be sure to eat and drink their own damnation.

Again, if any man or woman have committed the sin of theft or adultery, or
any other heinous sin, I pray God give all such grace to forsake it by turning
to Christ by true repentance, and then let them eat of that bread and drink of
that cup, to their everlasting joy and comfort: for Christ is the fountain of
mercy and love, which does not desire that any should perish, but rather that
all should come to the knowledge of the truth and be saved: for the office of a
Preacher is this. First, he must show the people how they must be ingrafted
into the true vine. Christ, by the divine power of his Word, and then the
people may grow in grace after they be ingrafted into the true vine: for as
grace and virtue do grow by degrees, by the divine power of the Word of
Christ, that will be a means to cause sin and wickedness to die and vanish out
of the people. Again, I think it fit that the Minister read the first chapter
to the Ephesians and the Lords Prayer before he deliver the bread and Wine: and
then the Minister shall deliver the bread, the people receiving it upon their
knees, saying, take and eat this in remembrance that Christ's body was crucified
on the cross for to redeem your soul from the bondage of hell and death, and
honor and glorify his blessed name for ever: and then the wine, saying, take
and drink this in remembrance that Christ's blood was shed on the cross to
redeem your soul from the bondage of death and hell, and honor and glorify
his blessed name for ever: and when the people have received the bread and
wine, I think it fit for the people to sing a Psalm to the glory of God, and
after that these words, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God
the Father, and the most sweet and comfortable fellowship of God the Holy Ghost
bless, keep and defend you from this time forth and evermore, Amen. Thus I
praise God I have proved, that no people have any due or right to the holy
Sacrament of bread and wine but such as will be reconciled to Christ and to the
second covenant of grace. Now I will show you in brief for the marriage, for I
think it fit that the man and woman take one another by the hand, and say these
words after the Minister, I John take Anne to my wedded* wife, to love and
cherish in sickness and in health, until death us depart, according as God
has commanded, by the divine power of his Word, and thereunto I give thee my
troth: and then for the woman, I Anne take John to my wedded husband, to love
and to cherish in sickness and in health, until death us depart according as
God has commanded by the divine power of his Word, and thereunto I give thee
my troth. And after this the Minister shall read that part of Scripture as is
written, Ephesians. 5. beginning at the 22. Verse, and read to the end of the
chapter. And thus I praise God I have showed you in brief what will be
sufficient for marriage, which is agreeable to Gods Word, and will now for the
burial of the dead: I think it fit that the dead body be carried into the
Church, and there may be Divine Service or Preaching, for the edifying of the
people, and then lay the dead body into the grave, and the Priest and people
may sing to the praise and glory of God the 113. Psalm; for there is no cause
of mourning for those that die in the faith of Christ: therefore I say again, I
think it fit when the dead body is laid in the grave for the Priest and people
to sing a Psalm. And thus I have showed you in brief what will be sufficient
for the burial of the dead. Now for Church-govemment, I think it fit for to
have a Justice of Peace in every Parish of note for to bear the sword of
justice, for to punish the evil doers, and for the upholding of the just and
good. Again, I think it fit for to have Churchwardens and Sidemen in every
Parish as already is, for to keep the Houses of God in repair, and for
gathering of money for the poor, that the hungry may be fed, and the naked may
be clothed, that so the members of Christ may rejoice in glory together. Now
some with say, this Church Government has been held here in England a long
time. My answer is, in some respects it is very good: but by the help of God I
shall prove in brief, that in some respects as it is held forth, it is
abominable in the sight of God: for the Magistrates and Churchwardens they
will suffer none to declare their mind to the people in the Churches, but those
which have been brought up in the Universities, and in so doing they deny God
of his divine power, for God breaths his Spirit where it pleases him. Again I
say, if God give a man a great and perfect gift concerning the art of
preaching, the Clergy and Magistrates will not suffer him to exercise his gift
unto the people which God does allow and command by the divine power of his
Word, as I shall prove in brief. My first proof is in 1 Pet 2.9. Ye are a
royal Priesthood, an holy nation, that you should show forth the praise of him
who has called you out of darkness into his mavelous light. Now I pray how
shall the Saints and servants of Christ set forth those praises, and honor,
and glory which does belong to Christ and his glorious Church: but by the
manifestation of his Word which is revealed in his Gospel. Again the Apostle
S Paul says expressly 1 Cor. 14. When the Church are come together, let the
Prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge, for ye may all prophecy
one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted. This saying of S.
Paul does plainly prove and signify, that God has appointed that every man
should have free liberty for to exercise his gift in the Church in an orderly
and decent way, for he says, All may prophecy one by one, and for to
prophecy is to open and unfold the mysteries of God, to the true meaning and
signification. Again, I plainly understand, that prophesying and preaching,
they are both as one in signification: for prophesying is to unfold the
mysteries of God, to the praise and glory of his grace, and to the confounding
of false power and false doctrine which proceeds from the devil, and
preaching is for the very same purpose, I say that which does proceed from God.
Now the Apostle maintains his argument with a commanding power, for to prove
that God does allow that every man should have free liberty to declare his mind
in a decent way, for he says expressly in the 37. Verse of the same Chapter, if
any man think himself to be a Prophet or spiritual, let him acknowledge that
the things that I write unto you are the commandments of the Lord. Thus I
praise God I have proved by plain and clear signification of Scripture, that
God does allow and command by the divine power of his Word, that his Saints and
servants should have free liberty for to declare their mind in the Church in an
orderly and decent way, but the Clergy and Magistrates and Churchwardens, they
will not suffer those things to be done in the Church which God has commanded
by the divine power of his Word. I pray God give the Clergy and Magistrates and
Churchwardens all grace to forsake that wicked practice, and that henceforth
they will suffer those things to be done in the Churches as God has commanded,
which if they shall wilfully refuse to do, they will be sure to have their
portion in hell for ever. Thus I praise God I have showed you in brief how
Church Government may be held to the praise and glory of God. Again, I have
showed you how Church Government in some r^spects is held forth, which is
abominable and hateful in the sight of God. Again, I acknowledge the Lords
Prayer, and other gol^ly prayers, and David's Psalms shall abide in the Church
of Christ for ever: for the Psalms, those that are in prose to be read for
Divine service, and those that are in meeter for the people to sing to the
praise and glory of God; but for the old Law and Testament that is quite
abolished by Christ. Now if there be any Protestant, Papist, Anabaptist, or
Brownist, that can be able to show and set forth Christ and his glorious
Church, with those holy Ordinances that does belong unto it, in a plainer, and
cleerer, and briefer way then I by Gods help have done, I shall rejoice to see
that man^ and I will be of his Religion, if it shall appear so to be by the
plain and clear truth of the word of God, and by the judgment of the high
Court of Parliament, which I hope are gathered together for the trial of the
spirits.

FINIS.

