The Humble REPRESENTATION OF THE Committee, Gentry, Ministry, And other well
affected Persons, in the County of LEICESTER:

To His EXCELLENCY THOMAS Lord Fairfax, and the Generall-Councell of Officers
of the ARMY,

In reference to the Agreement of the People, tendered to the KINGDOM, as
touching Religion.

March.1st LONDON, Printed for Henry Hood in St Dunstans Churh-yard. MDCXLVIII.

blazon or coat of arms
The humble REPRESENTATION of the Committee, Gentry, Ministry, etc. of the
County of Leicest.
Shows,
THat the many great and glorious blessings, which the Lord of Hosts has
bestowed, upon this shattered and almost ruinated Nation, by the remarkable
Valor and fidelity of your Excellency, and the Army under your Command,
ascending from one high degree of service to another, with many clear
evidences of your Loyalty to the Nation; together with the Candor of your
Excellency, and Council of War, as it were inviting all Persons, in your
draught of the Agreement of the People, to give in their apprehensions, and
reasons of approving, or dissenting from any thing contained therein; And
knowing that it is in the Nature of the very best of Men, to be subject to
frailty and error, (which we ought seriously to bewail in our selves and
others) sometimes by Mistaken Zeal carried beyond its proper limits, and often
by an Exorbitant Charity giving more Latitude to tenderness and pity, then can
well stand with Divine Truths; God in his wisdom having set bounds to both,
whose laws challenge in all things exact obedience, (especially in so high a
point as concerns the salvation of souls.)

These considerations have moved us, humbly to present our thoughts to your
Excellencies perusal and review, about some things of greatest weight, as
concerning the glory of God, the preservation of Religion, and the Peace and
happiness of the Reformed Churches; And we most humbly desire, that the things
so proposed by us, may be taken into your grave examination, without prejudice
against us, as if we were overbyassed by the Example of Others, or any sinister
ends of our own.

We shall take leave to profess our selves unsatisfied, concerning some
Particulars, in the Ninth Article of the Agreement.

First, that Christian Religion, which we justly account the greatest
happiness, Deuteronomy. 32.47. Prove. 3.13.19. 1 Samuel 4 12.
(the very life and glory of a People) is not reckoned as any of the
Fundamentals of our Common rights and freedoms; Notwithstanding our Possession
thereof so many years, and that we have found it the Parent of all our
chiefest blessings and Privileges. And farther we think it strange, that the
said Christian Religion is only to be Recommended, as the Public profession
in the Nation, and not Established, as the Public profession of the Nation.
Yea, it is not so much as Actually recommended, its only Intended to be
recommended.

Christian Mugistrate, (but he to be divested of all power in things touching
Religion) notwithstanding the Gospel promise so well known, Isa. 60.16, 17,
18. Isa. 60.16, 17, 18.
Isa. 1.26. Isa. 1.26.
as also those eminent glorious examples of Moses, Samuel, Joshua, Asa,
Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, Ezra, Nehemiah, etc. All which were famous in
their times, for the exercise of their power, for restoring Religion to its
purity.

instructing of the People in the said Christian Religion, by able and
faithful Teachers, is but barely allowed and tolerated. Notwithstanding the
necessity thereof for the salvation of souls; the Religious care of Iehosaphat
and others, who sent sorth and encouraged Levites to instruct and teach the
People; and Paul's weighty charge to Timothy, I charge thee before God and the
Lord Jesus Christ, Preach the Word, etc. together with Christ his treble charge
to Peter, John. 21.15.

universally engaged to the Profession thereof; It is nevertheless propounded
as a Fundamental right of the People, that they should in no wise be
Compelled, to hold fast the said profession, or attend the Ordinances for
instruction therein; whereby (as we conceive) a wide door is opened to
damnable Apostasy, yea even to brutish Heathenisme and Atheism: for prevention
whereof, no provision is made, or mentioned in the said Articles,
notwithstanding clear and pregnant Scriptures, for constraining those who had
received the true Religion, to continue in the Profession and practice thereof,
2 Chr. 15.13. 2 Chro. 34.32. Ezra 7.26, 27.

opened, to all manner of impiety and profaneness, by repealing and making
void all Laws of restraint, to the great dishonor of God, the heartbreaking
of many dear Christians throughout the Kingdom, and opening the mouths of
Gods enemies to blaspheme, deride and triumph.

sins of our own Nation were not yet enough, to draw down more and heavier
Judgments from heaven upon us) encouragement is hereby implicitly given, to
Idolaters, Turks and Heathens, to come in and exercise their gross Idolatries
amongst us; against which practices, Deuteronomy. 7.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Deuteronomy. 12.30,
31, 32. Rev. 2 20.
the Lord from Heaven has declared, as the highest abominations; and upon
these very grounds straightly charged his People of old, to drive them out from
amongst them, lest they should learn their ways, and the land be defiled.
Which grounds we conceive to be Moral and Perpetual; Lev, 18.25.27, 28.
and if the Land Spued them out for these abominations, O let not us lick up
the vomit; And although we may think our selves out of danger of such
infection, yet the fearful example of Solomon's Apostasy, and Isreal's
defection upon Admissions of like nature, do deter us from entertaining such
perilous temptations, to our selves and all posterity. And if the Lord require
us to come out from amongst them, 2 Cor. 6.16 ^7.
how shall we invite or permit them to come in to us.

Seventhly, whereas we have eves seen, and at the present feel, the sad
effects of the destructive principles of Popery, both upon our selves and our
neighbor Nations, in Murders and Massacres of all manner of persons, by all
manner of means; Witness two Kings successively murdered upon the same
account in France, their many bloody designs upon Queen Elizabeth, that horrid
attempt of blowing up the Parliament, these late barbarous Murders and
Massacres in Ireland; (all which may stand as unanswerable arguments, for the
rooting up of that pernicious profession, which has been found to grow up and
spread in this Nation, under the sharpest laws enacted against it): yet in
your third particular concerning Religion, wherein you would seem to make some
provision against it, you have so slenderly and obscurely, provided (and upon
the matter not at all, if not held forth as the Public Profession in the
Nation) that it fills us with amazement, Hab. 3.1.6.
makes our bellies to tremble, and rottenness to enter into our bones.

Eighthly, by the third clause, all that do profess faith in God by Jesus
Christ, as Papists, Socinians, Familists, etc. will pretend to do, have liberty
to profess their faith, and exercise their Religion in any place whatsoever,
(even in such places as are appointed for Public worship if they may have but
leave) Which liberty being granted, although it should not disturb the Civil
peace, yet, may prove infinitely pernicious, and destructive to many thousands
of ignorant and unstable souls; as we already find by sad and deplorable
experience, even now, before this liberty be granted.

What strange and woeful issues, may we then expect, when not only boundless
liberty, but (as we humbly conceive) most unwarrantable Protection, is to be
provided? So that hereby, Errors are under as safe and powerful a shelter, as
truth; and the most corrupting sedueers, as the soundest and most Religious
Christians; which seems extremely against the very current of Scriptures,
which tell us that seducing will eat as does a Gangrene, and overthrow the
faith of some. 2 Timothy 2.16, 17, 18. Deuteronomy. 13.
And if God commanded such false Prophets to be put to death, how then may we
dare to give protection to them?

And besides all this, casting our eyes further upon the Agreement, we perceive
that you intend not only to settle it for the present, but now (at once) to
form it into an Irrevocable Establishment, which (as far as it relates to
Religion, being our business in hand) adds heaviness unto our spirits;
against which we humbly offer these ensuing reasons.

dangerous, as has in part been here presented; others (at least) dubious; and
so not to be immutably established.

safe, by the experience of any Church or State; and to establish immutably, in
matters of high concernment, such untried expedients (we conceive) cannot be so
suitable to piety or prudence.

irrevocable establishments, seems to be inconsistent with a common principle
of reason, obliging us to endeavor and awaite the increase of light and
knowledge, in things both Civil and Religious: in which (through mercy) we
have found much increase of late years; and so have no ground to conclude,
that we are now grown up, to such perfection in them, as may not yet receive
additionall and future improvement. From all benefit whereof, We, by this
Agreement, conceive our selves from henceforth for ever excluded.

Establishment, we conceive, we shall (under the pretense of liberty) but
inthrall Posterity, and tie them fast with a Gilded Chain. And therefore we
are unsatisfied, concerning the immutablenesse, of the Establishment proposed.

And lastly, although we do, exprofesso, in this address, decline such things
proposed in the said Agreement, as are merely of Civil Concernment; wherein we
shall resign up our selves to the determination of those in whom the great
trust and supreme authority of the Kingdom does reside, (as we hope your
selves and others will, which is our earnest desire:) yet, forasmuch as the way
proposed, for settling and determining the Civil interest, and also that of
Religion, is one and the same, viz. by offering the same form of Agreement to
the People, to be established or laid aside, as it shall be received or
disliked by the Generality of them; We humbly conceive that gathering
Subscriptions, in the way you suggest, and which (as we understand) is already
practiced, may be of dangerous consequence, for dividing the Kingdom;
especially the godly and well affected therein, who being already Generally
engaged, by the National Covenant, to maintain the power and privileges of
Parliament, in the maintenance of true Religion, and the fundamental laws of
the Kingdom, must needs, by such intended subscriptions (for and against your
Agreement) be dangerously engaged, in such oppositions one of another, as may
greatly advantage the designs of the Common Enemy, hazard the ruin of the
honest party, and hinder the settlement of the Nation in Peace and Safety.

Thus having briefly, plainly, and sincerely, summed up our thoughts of the
premises, we now leave them in your bosoms, with our Prayers and Tears, from
Hearts and Eyes lifted up to Heaven, for a spirit of wisdom and holiness, to
direct you in all your proceedings referring thereunto; Beseeching you would
not repute us, among the number of those, whose souls can mingle with none
however Godly, but such as in every point concur in Judgment with
themselves. For as (we know) Christ's own Heart, and Arms are open to weak
Saints; so by his grace, are ours, and ever shall, to conscientious Brethren,
as far as the word allows, though in matter of Discipline they may differ
from us, or in other points also, that shake not the foundation of faith, or
enervate the power of Holiness. Nor are we such as have been back friends to
your Excellency and the Army. No (God knows) we are of them, that have loved
and honored you, (for what we have seen of God in and upon you,) and have
often ^efended you from the strife of tongues: Ye^, (...) ^^^se many prayers
and praises, are laid up in Heaven for you. Pardon us therefore (we beseech
you) Noble Sirs, if we have been somewhat bold, in this our humble address
unto you: for our business concerns our own immortal souls, and our
Posterities, yea the very foundations of precious Truth, the least whereof laid
in the balance, is more weighty, then the lives of many. It is this we now
plead for, and (God will bear us record) it is truly this, and not any private
Interest of our own. You are Gentlemen that are tender to consciences, we beg
it that you will tender ours, and many thousands more, of the Godly in the
Nation, who, (we are confident) might a true estimate be had, are clearly of
out minds herein.

Other things might have been mentioned, referring to Religion, and
particularly, that no mention is made of the function of the Ministry; which
Christ has undoubtedly established in the Church, and greatly prospered in his
work; which has been ever mainely opposed by Satan, and is by many in these
times. But that Ordinance being so clearly founded by Christ in the Holy
Gospel; and hoping that your intentions are more full for that and other
things, then your words in that Agreement express, we forbear to insist
further thereon.

In short, these particulars are most considerable.
1 That Christian Religion is not asserted as a fundamental of our safety. See
Agreement, Artic. 9. part. 1. With the form of subscription in the close.

2 That protection of Errors and Heresies is declared as a fundamental. Artic.
9. part. 2. and 3. with the form of subscription.

3 That all the declared fundamentalls in this Agreement are irrevocably to be
established. Artic. 8. limitation. 6.

4 That the fundamentalls, and only they, shall be maintained to the
uttermost, as God shall enable. See the form of subscription.

So that by this Agreement tendered to the People, (we fear) natural Liberty
is endeavored to be set up above divine prescripts, and the everbinding Laws
of God.

THis Humble Representation was presented to the Lord General his Excellency,
upon Thursday the 22 of Febr. 1648 by diverse Gentlemen of the Committee, and
some Ministers, in the name of many others well affected of the County of
Leicester: and was received with Noble Candor; His Excellency promising to take
it into consideration, to communicate it to his General Council of Officers,
and to endeavor the satisfaction of these and all other well-affected in the
Nation.

Imprimatur,

Job: Downham.
Febr. 23. 1648.

