THE HUMBLE PETITION OF THE VVRETCHED, And most contemptible, the poor Commons
of England,

To the blessed ELIZABETH of famous memory.

Also a most gracious Answer, with a Divine Admonition and Prophetical
Conclusion.

LONDON, Ptinted for E. P. and E. B. July 23. 1642.

TO THE BLESSED St. ELIZABETH OF FAMOUS MEMORY; The humble Petitions of the
wretched and most contemtible, the poor Commonons of England.
IF Saints in Heaven can eather see or hear
Or help poor mortals, O then lend an ear;
Look down blessed Saint, O hear, O hear us now,
Whose humble hearts, low as our knees do bow:
Look on our sufferings, think but on our wrongs,
That hardly can be told with mortal tongues;
Oh be not now less gracious then of old,
When each distressed vassell might be bold
Into thine open hand to put his grief,
And timely thence receive a fair relief,
Be not less good, less gracious then before,
In heaven the supplications of the poor
Are heard as soon as suites of greatest Kings:
If our Petitions then blessed Saint want wings
To mount them to the Judge of Judges Throne,
O help then blessed Sovereign with thine own,
Carry our just complaints, since just they are,
And make a tender of them at the Bar,
Where no corruption, no friend, no fraud, no bribe,
No griping Lawyer, no avaricious Scribe,
No favorite, no parrasite, no minnion
Can either lead or alter the opinion:
Of that great Chancellor there, O lay them down
And merit praise on earth, in heaven renown.
So intricate is this, our wretched story,
Where to begin deserver of all glory.
Heaven knows, We do not know, nay which is worst;
Thy once blessed Subjects been so often cursed
For offering up petitions of this kind,
That we even tremble till we call to mind
Thy wonted goodness, that O that does cheer us,
That only gives us hope, that thou will hear us,
When heaven was pleased great Queen to take thee hence,
And make us wretched for our great offense.
This sinful land, O then began our fears,
And had we then this Kingdom drowned in tears,
And in those floods conveyed our souls to heaven,
To wait on thine, we had not then been driven,
To call and cry thee from thy fellow Saints,
To hear and pity these our just complaints,
O pardon, but such is our gross commission,
And daine to further this our poor Petition,
And we will make the name of blessed Eliza,
Equal the Aves of the great Maria:
No snuffling Rascal through his hornepipe nose,
Shall tell thy story in his ill tuned prose;
Nor show thy Statue to each penny groom,
The monument we will raise, shall make proud Rome
On pilgrimage to come, and at thy shrine
Offer their gifts, as to a thing divine,
And on an alter, framed of richest stones,
We Will daily tender tears, and sighs, and groans
Eternally shall sleep, and long tongued same
Forget to speak, dare we forget her name?
Read blessed soul, O read ^^^d believe us,
And give it to his hands that can relieve us.
Finis Petitions ad Reginam.
To the high and mightiest, most Just, and yet most merciful, the great
Chancellor of Heaven, and chiefest Judge of all the Earth.
IF bleeding hearts, detected souls want grace,
Thou all-disposer, turn not back thy face
From thy suppliants, thrice seven sons have worn
Their summer suits, since we began to mourn;
Egypts ten plagues we have endured twice told,
Since blessed Eliza was with Saints inroul'd;
Thy messengers of wrath their vvalls power
Each day upon our heads, nay every hour
Plagues beget plagues and fearful vengeance grows
As if there were no end set to our woes:
Have our great sins raised up such a cloud,
'Twixt us and heaven, as cries, though never so loud,
Can get no entrance to thy mercy seat;
Are our iniquities good God so great,
So infinite, as neither greatness, nor tears
Can get a passage, remember but the years
Of our afflictions, then forget we crave,
Our sins, and bury them in deepest grave
Of dark oblivion, hide them in the side
Of our Redeem, O let them be tide
In chains that they may never rise again,
Let us no longer sue, and beg in vain,
Let this our supplication, this our plaint,
Tendered by our blessed Sovereign now thy Saint
At last find grace; wast not enough we pray
That at the first thou took'st that Queen away,
VVa^ not that done, that lamb of innocence
Sufficient sacrifice for our offense.
O no, our sins outlive her, and our crimes
Did threaten to outlive the last of times,
Thou did remove her that he might not see
The sad beginning of our misery:
Then like the showers of hailestones fell the darts
Of angry death, how many thousand hearts
Were wounded in one year, how many bled
And wished to die, since that they loved was dead,
Mothers left childlesse, children quite bereft
Of careful parents, nay there was not left
A pair of friends to comfort one another,
Who wanted not a Sister, who a Brother?
Where was the husband, where the wife could say
We shall not be devorc't this night, this day,
Death so his power and large commission showed,
That men on earth like corn on ground lay strewn
The sad remembrance of this still remains
Next thy stretched hand of vengeance bound in chains,
The fruitful fields, both birds, beasts, plants, fruits, trees,
Did famish, faint, droope, die, wither and freeze,
So nothing issued from the barren earth,
But that lean monster, pale and thinfac't death;
Next inundations rose, such as before,
Since Noah's flood, never topt our british shore,
Where men and beasts alike engraved their bones
Under moist waves, in stead of marble stones,
How often has the Sun withdrawn his light
And turned our day into the shape of night.
Had Egypt greater darkness then had we,
When clearest eyes at midnight could not see
Unwholesome nights, strange fogs, rumors of wars,
Evil portending Comets, Blazing Stars,
Prodigious births, and most unnatural seasons,
Spurning Philosophers beyond their reasons,
Frighting the poor, the rich likewise exhorting
From their soft beds whereon they lay a snorting:
Heaven seemed in combustion, the sky in arms
The Spheres beat Drums, the Orbs did sound Alarmes.
The air did often bloody colors spread,
And all to Rouse us from the blown up bed,
Of base security, yet naught could fright us,
Till heaven had robbed us of what did most delight us.
Henry our Joy, Henry whose every limb,
Threatened to conquer death, and not death him,
In whom great Britain set up her last rest,
Henry our pride, ever Henry the blessed,
Resolving, loosing him, to play no more,
But live for ever wretched, ever poor,
Who had not in that one an ample share,
What Subject had not rather lost his heir,
What tender mother did not wish that Dart
Had glaunc't from him, and pearst his darlings heart:
All that were virtuous, all that lived good
Turned their eyes rivers into Seas of blood.
The Egyptian waters, bitter were, but know,
This touched the heart that did not so:
O pardon heaven, all plagues that went before
Have left themselves in this, and never more
To be remembered, this, O this alone,
Might well have made us weep our selves to stone.
The spawne of Pharaoh, could their bloods be prized
All the first borne that so were sacrifiz'd,
All that base Fry, compared to our Henry
Deserve no mentioning, no thoutht, no memory:
Lustful Sodom, such has thy mercy been,
Although she did abound in crying sin
Could not take fire until they were removed,
That thou in mercy, like in goodness loved,
And thy anointed she may save this City
Before it was destroyed, such was thy pity,
Such was thy goodness: Ah is there yet full ten,
Is there yet good God a number yet of men,
Whose innocence may slake thy kindled ire,
And save this Sodom Britain from the fire
Of thy just anger, is there yet a soul
Whose virtue has but power to control
Thy heaved up hand of Justice if there be,
For his or their sake, rouse thy clemency,
Awake thy mercy, let thy Justice slumber,
And save the greater by the lester number;
For his or her sake, we do humbly pray
Respite of time, give us a longer day.
And then enabled by thy grace and favor,
We Will purchase pardon by our good behavior:
Plague, famine, darkness, inundations
We have endured, fear of innovations
With expectation of the worst can f^llow,
Daily torment us that we hourly swallow
Our very spittle, even with fear and horror;
We might sl^epe in fear, awake in terror,
Nor are we all this while from vermin free,
There Is Catterpillars hangs on every tree,
Lousie projectors, monopoly-mongers,
A crew of upstart Rascals, whose sharp hangers
Can never be satisfied, a sort of slaves,
More greedy far, then either whores or graves,
A crew of upstart parasites, that rise,
And do more mischief then the Egyptian slies:
Cankers in gardens, and in our houses swarm,
One drinks a Manor, another eats a Farm,
This with a Lordship warmes his lusting whore,
This by the fall of Justice does procure
A Tenement or two, which being got
By violence, he drownes it in a pot,
They enter Cities, Corporations,
Work not, but live by occupations,
They have no trade, and yet no trade is free
From paying them a tax a sine, a fee.
Egypt did G^ashoppers bring forth, and yield,
That eat the fruit and corn of every field,
And we have Skip-Jacke Courtiers I dare say,
That devour far more in one poor day,
Then they in Pharaohs age could e're have done,
They bounded were, praid but from Sun to Sun:
But these for three apprentiships, have eat
The fruit of all our labors, all our meat;
Have we no Frogs? Oh yes in every ditch,
Devouring the poor, impo verishing the rich,
Busy Intelligencers, base informers,
Like Toades and Frogs, lie croaking in all corners,
Promooting Rascals, whose venomous tongues
Have done thy suppliants infinite wrongs:
Where they desire to enter, there is no fence,
No ancient Title, no inheritance
Can serve for plea, they wresh the Law,
Keep Majestrates and Officers in awe.
They pluck the balance from fair Justice first.
And make her ministers do what they list:
There is no equity, no law, no right,
All causes go by favor, or by might.
Oh God of mercy, what more can be said,
Justice is bought and sold, become a trade,
Honor's confen'd on base unworthy grooms,
And Clownes for coin may perch in highest rooms.
Job he had many scalds, but none so bad
As we these one and twenty years have ^^a^^.
Egypt had Botches, Murrians, sores that sinarted,
But yet they lasted not but soon departed.
Half forty years in this vaste Wilderness
We now have traveled, and yet there is no redress.
Bowman and Fowler, Ringwood and his mate
Compared to us, are in a better state.
They can be heard, it is they can be revvarded,
When we are slighted, cursed and unregarded;
Is there a people, (heaven) fallen a degree
Below the condition of a dog but we?
Was there a nation in this universe
More daring, once, more stout, more bold more fierce,
And is there now upon the worlds broad face
Any that can be reckoned half so base?
Is there a people so scorned, so much dispis'd,
So laughed at, trod on, and so vassalis'd?
Where is our ancient Nobility become?
Alas they are suppressed, and in their rome
Like proud usurping Lucifers, there si^s
A sort of upstart, fawning parasites;
Where is the gentry? all oppressed, disgraced,
And Errant Knights, above them now are placed,
Fiddlers and fools, with dancers and with rimers
Are now in England here the greatest climbers;
We had a Parliament, a cure for sores,
A Magna Charta, all is cast out of doors;
The bold and hardy Britains conquered are
Without a Drum, a Sword, or sound of war:
If without cause, just heaven we do complain,
Then send our supplications back again;
Much more we could say, much more we could speak,
But with the thought of this, our hearts even break.
As humbly then, as we began we crave
A gracious Answer: O be pleased to save
The remnant of thy flock, and turn thy face,
And let us once more taste thy saving grace;
Forsake us not for ever Lord, but give
New life to those, that now desire to live.
Deo finis petitionis.
A most gracious answer, procured by the blessed Saint Elizabeth, with a divine
admonition and Prophetical conclusion.
YOur bold Petitions mortals I have seen,
And find them full of passions, full of spleen,
Prayers that enter heaven, and gain a hearing
Are winged with charity, here is no appearing
With supplications stuffed with Rue or Gall,
I do confess poor souls, the truth of all,
And wish a period to your miseries,
But first your infinite iniquities
Must have an end; alas you must begin
To love fair virtue, as you have done sin,
You must redeem the time that is lost, and know,
As heaven has ever been to vengeance slow,
So by degrees is grace and mercy won:
Eyes that are foul by gazing on the Sun
Increase their pain, if you will mercy gain
From unjust actions, you must first refrain,
How dares an unjust servant once require
Of his just master, either grace, or hire.
You must off with the shoes wherewith you trod
The ways of sin, ere you discourse with God;
Give me but ground for commendations,
Encourage me, and then your supplications
I shall deliver, I left you rich it is true,
But proud withal, you fear none, all fear you,
You were so far from fear, that you denied
To pay him fear that gave you cause of pride,
You must be humble, he ever punished yet
All kind of rankenesse with an opposite:
He that will surfeit 'ere he gain his health,
Must strangely fast; had you still sat in wealth,
You never would have bovved your stubborn knee
Either to God, to Saint in Heaven, nor me.
I will not grieve your troubled soul too much
Yet gently your ingratitude I Will tutch,
And that the better you may know your errors
I Will bring into your memory all favors
By you received, ungratefully forgotten
Long time before the flesh I wore was rotten:
It is no ostentation to relate
Courtesies done to such as are ungrate,
I found you like a hunted scattered flock,
Your very souls beating against the rock
Of ignorance and superstition,
Just in the high way of the souls perdition
I played the shepherd, and the Pilat too,
And yet no Lamb, no Fleece more then my due
Was e're exacted from the common store,
Where all alike were rich, alike were poor,
For thine and mine: and mine and thine are things
Not for to be, twixt Subjects and their Kings:
Princes like the Sun should from the floods exhale
The wealth they raise therein, and let it fall
In every place, as they have cause a share,
And not consume it, like the vvanton heir,
The'r full Exchequers must like Conduits be,
Open to all, to rich and poor, like free.
And subjects should like fields be full of Springs,
And naturally should fall toward their Kings,
The commonwealth should always be in motion,
Seas fall to brooks, and brooks should to the Ocean,
Such royal and such loyal community
Keep Kings and subjects still in unity.
I cannot say I grieve, this place is free
From passion, as from all iniquity;
But yet I muse since Scotland's to it joined,
Englands Exchequer should be no better coined,
Sure there is false play. I fear the younger brother
Is grown too wise, too crafty for the other;
It is an ill made marriage where the bride
Spends all, before the husband can provide,
I did maintain, far be vain glory hence,
A well Rig'd Navy, for your own defense,
A royal Fleet, that like a Brazen wall
Circled the Land, the Armies were not small,
The Garrisons and Forts I did uphold,
Kept you like sheep in peace within your fold.
What well deserving Soldier went away
Without reward, much less without his pay:
To neighbor States in amity we lent
Money and men, what servant ever went
Without his hier, what pension was denied
From the first hour, until the hour I dyed:
In brief I seldom borrowed, often did lend,
Yet left enough to give, enough to spend;
How comes it then, that neither Fleet nor Fort,
Money nor Garrison, nor House nor Court,
Wages nor debts, nothing repaid or paid,
Naught purchased, naught lent, naught built, wrought, played,
And yet there is naught remains, naught to be found,
All is not perfect sure, all is not sound.
I no less muse to see the vvoods cut down
The ancient vvoods, revenues of the Crown
Disposed of so to favorite or friend,
That should hereditarily descend
From King to King, as does the dyadem,
The Lands of the Crown, are the Crowns chiefest Jem;
Customs, subsidies, sines and accidents,
Naught is substantial but the annual Rents;
There are deservers sure that service do,
That would not be made known to heaven nor you,
Princes are gods on earth, and subjects eyes
Upon their actions should not stand as spies,
It is dangerous and ungodly thing
To pry into the Chamber of a King.
The arc of State is sanctified, and must
Be only touched by them are put in trust,
But you expect an answer to your petition?
Then know poor souls, it is given me in commission
From heavens great King, to tell you all that is past
To what is to come, is but a spark, a blast,
Your sorrows yet alas, like women's throws
Do come and go, but there will follow blows,
Ere England will be delivered, it will make
Your very entralls bleed, your souls to quake,
The time shall come when bravest minds shall mourn
And children wish they never had been borne.
The Sword shall eat, what plagues have over-slipt
And sier consume what famine has not nipt;
The Gospel sound shall loose his glorious light,
And ignorance as black as darkest night,
Shall spread her sable wings about our I Will,
And Babylons great Whore once more defile
Albions white cliffe, the Israelites shall double
The brick they made, yet be allowed no stubble.
The Egyptian with an Hebrew shall contend,
And the Hebrew want a Moses to his friend.
There is an execrable sin lies hid,
Such a thing as modesty does forbid.
My Sex to mine, till that he brought to light,
And Acan punished, look to be put to fight.
Before the men of Ahi you shall not stand,
Nor shall ought prosper that you take in hand;
The Levite from his wife shall be devorc't,
And every poor man's virgin shall be forced:
Vriah shall be murdered for his wife,
And Naball sleep in danger of his life.
You lusted for a King, heavens King relieve you
And grant you pardon, as I here forgive you.
You took a surfeit of my happy reign,
And paid my well deserving with disdain;
But Oh you cast not me away, 'twas not I
You slighted, 'twas the Lord of hosts most high,
And therefore you shall call and cry in vain,
Bootlesse you shall lament, bootlesse complain;
From forth the North the Plague is come at last,
The Lion is rowz'd from's Den, that shall lay wast
Your towns and cities, who stands up alas
To stop the gap, where such his wrath shall pass,
Englands disease is desperate, and it is decreed
That e're she can recover, she must bleed,
Hark, hark, heavens trumpet summons me away,
Now my commission's ended, I must not stay:
Farewell poor souls, go pray, repent and fast,
The deaf and unjust Judge is won at last
By importunity, much more is he
That is inclined and prone to clemency.
I shall attend your prayers every hour,
And to the utmost will extend my power
With him, that one, that can and may relieve you,
There Is hope of pardon if he do reprieve you.
Greeve for what is past with resolution
To mend your lives, defer not the execution;
Then to the horns of the Altar timely fly,
Timely repent least you untimely die;
How wretched is the state you all are in,
That sleep secure in unrepented sin,
When not the greatest King on earth can say
That we shall live until the break of day,
No Saints in heaven, or blessed Angels know
Whether the last and dreadful trumpe shall blow
To judgment of the living and the dead,
Before these words I speak be uttered;
Awake, O watch, O weep, repent and pray,
And have in mind the last and dreadful day.
FINIS.

