The humble PETITION OF The Well-affected of the County OF SOUTH-HAMPTON IN
Behalf of the Ministers of the Gospel and for continuance of their Maintenance.

With Mr. RECORDERS Speech.

AND The Parliaments Answer thereunto.

LONDON, Printed for R. Ibbitson dwelling in Smithfield near Hosier Lane. 1653.

THE Humble PETITION of the well-affected of the County of SOUTH-HAMPTON, IN
Behalf of the Ministers of the Gospel and for continuance of their MAINTENANCE.
Wednesday 28 of September 1653.
Cornelius Hooper Esquire, Recorder of the City of Winchester; Edward Hooper,
Henry Dawley, James Milles, and Robert Pescod, Esquires; were this day by Order
of the Parliament called into the House, and being brought in with the Mace
before them, Mr. Recorder made a Speech as follows.

Mr. Recorders Speech.
May it please you Mr. Speaker,
THese Gentlemen, with my self, do humbly present you with a Petition from the
well-affected Inhabitants of the County of Southampton; It is not for their own
Interests but for the ancient Rights and Proprieties of the Ministers of this
Nation, so ancient that they have enjoyed them for 500 year and upwards, and
are also confirmed to them by sundry Acts and Ordinances of Parliament, the
fear they have of the shaking of those Acts and Ordinances by a late Petition
presented unto your Honors from the County of Kent, has caused them by us to
make this humble Address unto you: It is usual for men that do either fear
or feel a storm to seek out for shelter, and in danger to fly to the
sanctuary; Parliaments through all successions of ages have been the reputed
Shields and Asylums to the Rights and Proprieties of the People, and we bless
God, that by his Providence we have such a Sanctuary as this at this time to
fly unto: Such a one that we may say of it, as was said of Salomons Throne, The
like was never to be seen in our Nation before.

Mr. Speaker,
Your Petitioners glories not in great Attendance, nor in an innumerable train
of names, yet if we had hoped thereby to have obtained the more favor in your
Honors eyes, we might have had many thousands to have subscribed it; As it is
we humbly present it unto you: And with all humility crave the favor of your
gracious Acceptance.

The Petitioners were then desired to withdraw. And then the Petition was read,
and is as follows:


To the Supreme Authority of the Nation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England. The humble Petition of many of the well-affected of the County of
Southampton, and Town and County thereof.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners taking notice of a late petition to this Honorable
Assembly exhibited in the name of many of the well-affected of the County of
Kent, by which they desire Tithes of all sorts root and branch may be
abolished, and that they may not be ensnared with forced maintenance, or any
thing like it in the stead thereof. Being herein of different judgments from
them, and foreseeing the great misery and distress that thereby inevitably
must befall the Ministers of the Gospel and their families, Impropriators of
Tithes and their families, having for the most part of them none other
livelihood wherewith to sustain their charge, and moved with a deep sense
thereof, and with bowels of compassion toward their Brethren, as
fellow members of one and the same Body: Do humbly desire, that Tithes (which
are above 500 years growth confirmed by Magna Charta, by diverse and sundry Acts
and Ordinances of Parliament unto this present time) may not have the axe laid
to the root of it, nor cut down, nor abolished. That you (who are the
Protectors of our Laws, lives, liberties and estates) will maintain and
continue all the Laws, Statutes and Ordinances in force, for the due payment of
Tithes, at lest wise until the right of Patrons be legally determined, the
Ministers, faithful dispensers of Gods word, may by some honorable, sure and
no less profitable way be provided for, and the Impropriators of Tithes
satisfied for their respective interests, that equal right may be done unto
all men, whereby your Justice shall shine forth as the Sun at noon day
throughout the world, have Gods blessing upon your endeavors, and the unfeigned
prayers of

Your humble Petitioners, etc.



After a short debate the Petitioners were again called in, to whom Mr.
Speaker gave Answer, That the House had commanded him to give them thanks for
their good Affections; And that the particulars by them petitioned for were
under Debate, And the Parliament will proceed therein as God shall direct them.

FINIS.

