The humble PETITION OF THE OFFICERS Now Engaged for IRELAND: TO THE Supreme
Authority OF ENGLAND, The Commons assembled in Parliament.

WITH The ORDERS of Parliament in Answer thereunto.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Petition and Orders
thereupon be forthwith printed and published:

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of England. July
10. 1649.

To the Supreme Authority of England, The Commons assembled in Parliament:
The humble Petition of the Officers now engaged for Ireland,
Humbly shows,
THat we do in all faithfulness and truth of heart, seal to those
acknowledgements made by many others of your great travels in behalf of this
Commonwealth; persuading our selves your Integrity will be owned by God, in the
management of what remains, which does encourage us, being now upon our march,
to communicate unto you our sense of our dear Native Countries present
condition, which we offer unto you, as the longing of our souls, in these
ensuing particulars: which being granted, may prove a Monument or Stone of
Remembrance of your respects unto us, who desire to approve our selves faithful
to all your just Interests, as well abroad as at home, although attended with
great difficulties.

That the great Authority the Lord has clothed you withal, may be laid out for
its proper ends ( viz.) A terror to all wickedness, in the encouragement of all
good; that neither Profane Swearing, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, open abuse of
the Lords day, etc. may be tolerated under your power.

That all Proceedings in Law may be in English, that Justice may be speedy,
cheap and certain; to which purpose, that no Suit or Action may be commenced
against any man, till three honest men of the Division or Hundred in the County
where the Defendant lives, have a hearing of the Difference without Fees; which
three Peacemakers we humbly desire may be chosen yearly to end Controversies as
aforesaid; and in case agreement cannot be made by them, they then to certify
the state of the case to the Court, to which the Plaintiff applies himself.

That all men's Lands and Houses may be Registered in every Parish, with all
their Encumbrances and Alienations, and a Copy of the said Register kept in
every County town, which we humbly conceive will be of great ease in matters of
Commutative Justice; for how sadly does this Nation groan under Law quarrels?

We desire that Tithes, which occasions so much trouble and contention, may be
taken away; and in stead thereof, Two shillings per pound upon Land, and One
shilling six pence upon Houses, may be orderly raised in all Counties, and that
to make a County Treasury, whence may issue convenient Maintenance for
Preachers, and sufficient for Poor, and many other uses, of which we suppose
you have a Model already.

That Public Debts may be paid to those that are necessitous, before
Gratuities to particular Friends bestowed.

That all Public Treasurers and Receivers be effectually and speedily
accounted with, and Delinquents in that kind made exemplary.

That the case of Prisoners for Debt, so often committed, may be speedily
considered and dispatched.

Thus you have before you the earnest breathings of our souls for England,
which we love, though leave; beseeching you, as ever you would strengthen our
hands in this present difficult work, these Petitions may not dye at your
doors, they may be our last: which if granted, we shall depart with joy;
resolving, in the strength of God, to own and stand by you in all just things,
against any opposition whatsoever.

And we shall ever pray, etc. Geo: Cook Richard Lebund. R. Laurence. Daniel
Axtill. Isaac Ewer. J. Hewson. Peter Stubbers. Tho: Goddard. Peter Wallis.
Robert Phaier. Th: Beecher. Will: Throgmorton. Io: Hurdman.


Die Sabbathi, 7 Julii, 1649.
THe humble Petition of the Officers now engaged for Ireland, was this day read:
ORdered, That this Petition be referred to the Committee who are to consider
what things are fit to he done before Adjournment, who are to consider thereof,
and to s^^ d^ die in diem, and to Report their opinions therein to this House,
what therein is thought necessary to be done, in order to the things contained
in this Petition before Adjournment, and all that come to have Voices.

Ordered, That this House taking notice of the good affections of the
Petitioners, showed in this Petition, and in their undertakings for Ireland, do
give the Petitioners the very hearty thanks of this House; And that the Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland be desired to return the hearty thanks of this House to
them accordingly.

Ordered, That this Petition and Orders thereupon be forthwith printed and
published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

FINIS.

