The Humble REPRESENTATION AND PETITION OF The Justices of Peace, the Grand
Juries, and other well-affected persons to this Commonwealth, At the
General-Sessions and Jail-delivery FOR THE COUNTY PALATINE OF CHESTER, in the
Name of the said County: PRESENTED To the Supreme Authority of this Nation, The
PARLIAMENT of England.

Friday the 16th of May, 1651.

ORdered by the Parliament, That this Petition be forthwith printed and
published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England, 1651.

To the Supreme Authority of this Nation, The Parliament of England:
The humble Representation and Petition of the Justices of Peace, the Grand
Juries, and other well-affected persons to this Commonwealth, at the
General-Sessions and Jail-delivery for the County Palatine of Chester, in the
Name of the said County;
Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioners do with all thankfulness acknowledge your Honors care
and indefatigable diligence in watching over the good and safety of this
Commonwealth; and that you have with impartiality administered Justice,
especially in visiting the Iniquity of Blood, Murder, Oppression and
Injustice, upon the Heads even of the greatest Contrivers of, and Actors in our
Miseries. And they cannot but gratefully take notice of your constant
Resolutions and Endeavors for promoting Religion in the power and purity
thereof, with the suppression of Sin; a full manifestation whereof the whole
Nation has received in your late Acts past against Blasphemies, Profane
Cursing and Swearing, Sabbath breaking, Adultery, Fornication, and the like.
Neither can your Petitioners look upon it as the least Argument of your Care of
the Public, that you have professed to give all just ease in respect of the
Burdens and Taxations of the Nation, when the Necessity of the continuance
thereof shall abate.

That your Petitioners do from their hearts abhor and detest all designs
tending to create New Troubles; and do bless God for the happy discovery of
them, and especially of that lately hatched in these Northern parts; and do
make it their earnest Request to your Honors, That all those in these parts who
may be proved to have had any hand in such ill Designs, whether they be Old or
New Malignants, may be brought to condign punishment; And that the rottenness
of some few amongst your Petitioners (Enviers of, or Enemies to this happy
Change of Government) may not draw any imputation upon this County, which is
still ready to manifest its adherence and good affection to this present
Government, with the utmost hazard of their Lives and Fortunes; whereof as they
have hitherto for time past given undeniable Testimonies, so they will be still
ready to demonstrate the same upon all good occasions; and your Petitioners do
in their judgments conceive, That the War with Scotland is Necessary, and
undertaken for your own and the Countries peace, they being fully satisfied.
That the Malignant Interest against which they have so long Contested, with the
Expense of so much Blood and Treasure, is that only which is carried on by
those of that Nation.

That this County is burdened beyond its proportion, for want of fit persons
to represent in Parliament their Condition, and has very much suffered through
the marching Soldiery to the Irish Wars, it being in the High-Road, and
endamag'd very much that way; in respect of which Burden and Sufferings, it
has in former times been much eased, and sometimes freed from Taxes common to
others.

And lastly, your Petitioners do humbly Represent unto your Honors the great
inconvenience and loss that falls upon Infants and others, for want of a settled
Office for Probate of Wills, and granting Letters of Administration, there
being yet no legal course established for this County in that particular; The
Prerogative Court having no power amongst your Petitioners, and for want of
such an Office the course of Justice is very much obstructed.

Wherefore your Petitioners humbly pray, That your Honors will be pleased to
take the premises into Consideration; and, so soon as your great Occasions will
permit, to afford them such Relief as to your Wisdoms shall seem meet; And that
they may have liberty to proceed to New Elections of fit persons to Represent
them in Parliament, wherein they will be ready to observe such Rules and
Cautions as you in your Wisdoms have or shall direct.

And your Petitioners will ever pray, etc.
FINIS.

