AN HVMBLE REMONSTRNCE TO THE Kings most Excellent Majesty, in vindication of
The honorable Isaak Pennington, Lord Major of the honorable City of London,
Alderman Foulkes, Captain Venne, Captain Manwaring,
Whom his Majeste desires to be delivered to custody, to answer an accusation
of treason against them.

Desiring that His Majesty would make them no let to his return to his
Parliament nor hinder the accommodation of peace.

LONDON, Printed for T. Wright. MDCXLIII.

An humble Remonstrance to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
Most gracious Sovereign,
THough warlik glory does so much fasten the eyes of some about your sacred
Majesty upon her reputation, that as (Ambrose says) they think fortune to be
preleall, and to belong only to the field, Amb. offic. lib. 1 39. As those did,
who persuaded King Antiochus to raise forces against Zion, to destroy the City,
who therefore raised an Army of an hundred thousand footmen, and two thousand
horsemen, and thirty two Elephants, insomuch that the Sun shining upon the
Armor and golden Shields, the mountains glistered therewith, and gave lights
as lamps of fire; what was the event? when he thought to conquer by his army,
he contracted a covenant of peace with them; 1. Macc. 16.

Surely your best subjects had rather see you peaceably in your height of
glory, sitting in your royal throne with your Parliament, in that splender and
glory, which would protect your sacred person, crown and dignity, from those
many dangers to which you are now exposed by being separated from them; from
your ancient Court, from your City of safety, with so many Papists and Popish
officers about you, with so many soldiers, Commanders under foreign Princes
near you; pardon us to speak (dread Sovereign) you are near and dear unto
us, you are our life and the breath of our nostrils: It is dangerous both to
you and us, to have so many young raw heads, great Malignants, and dangerous
Cavaliers about you, and your self at a distance from your Parliament. Ennius
an ancient Roman says well, moribus antiquis res stat Romana virisque, old
manners and old men uphold Rome; To whom Augustine does agree with T^^ly, that
it was spoken as out of an Oracle for neither the men unless the City had had
such manners, nor the manners unless the City had such men, could either have
founded or preserved a Commonwealth of that magnitude, justice, and empire. And
therefore before these our days the predecessors conditions did still make the
successors excel, and the worthy men still kept up the privileges of
honorable antiquity. Agust. Civi. Dei. lib. 2. chapter 21.

In your two Houses of Parliament, most gracious Sovereign, is your best
safety, there is the fountain of law and manners, there are your Ancients, and
Worthies, to determine of that law; there is your highest Court of justice,
your great Council, your royal throne in the highest sphere of magnitude,
there are those statutes which your and our predecessors established, by which
we excel other nations. In a word, there are those good and happy laws that
makes you our King, and we your subjects: Oh do not think most royal King,
that there can be such safety in your Army, as with your Parliament; guilt
hopes, cracked fortunes, desperate conditions, may abuse your goodness there,
which can have no hope here: It was this service that the Signior Ambassador
from Spain (Gundamor that Arch-plotter of mischief boasted before the
Council when he returned) that he had done, One of the princepall services
(says he to the Popes Nuntio, in the open Council) in working such a dislike
betwixt the King, and the lower House, by the endeavor of that honorable
Earl and admirable Engine a sure servant to us and the Catholic Cause whilst
he lived) as the King (speaking of King James your royal father of happy
memory) will never endure Parliament again, but rather suffer absolute want,
then receive conditional relief from his subjects, besides the matter was so
cunningly carried the last Parliament, that as in the Powder plot the fact
effected should have been imputed to the Puritanes (the greatest zelots of the
Calvinian sect) so the proposition which dammed up the proceedings of this
Parliament, how soever they were invented by Roman Catholics, and by them
intended to disturb that Session yet were propounded infavour of the Puritanes,
as if they had been hammered in their forge (as is expressed in vox populi more
at large) Consider most gracious King, how dangerous it is to hearken to such
Incendiaries of mischiefs, what was the end of this but intended for the
overthrow of all Peace, Church, and State as the Inquisitor himself said: how
(said he) if this act of the Kings wherein he is most earnest and constant
should so far thrive as it should effect a perfect union both in the Church,
and Commonwealth, I tell you in my conceit it would be a great blow to us, if
by a general meeting Peace should be concluded, at which we see their politic
King aims.

Whereas it is your Royal will, and pleasure to require that the Honorable
Isaac Pennington Lord Major of the Honorable City of London, Captain Venne,
Master Foulks, Captain Manwaring, should be apprehended and committed to
custody to proceed against them as guilty of high treason, before you will
return to your Parliament: May it please your most excellent Majesty to think
on them as innocent, and clear from all suspicion of treason or treachery
against your Sacred Majesty, and more loyal, and faithful subjects in doint
their duty to you in obedience to the High Court of Parliament, then those that
smother their hypocrisy in Martial attendance on you against your Parliament
and Metropolitan City.

1 They have been dutiful subjects to you in obeying the Ordinances of your
Parliament, made for your Honor, and for the safety, and good of the Kingdoms
concerning which King James your Royal Father said in the upper House of
Parliament, in the presence of the Lords, and Commons together before him, I
protest (said he) that your welfare shall ever be my greatest care and
contentment, and that I am a servant it is most true, that as I am Head and
Governor of all the people in my Dominions who are my natural vassalls and
subjects, considering them in number and distinct ranks; so if we will take the
whole people as one body and mass, then as the Head is ordained for the body,
and not the body for the Head: so must a righteous King know himself to be
ordained for his people, and not his people for him, for although a Knig and
people be Relata, yet can he be no King, if he want people and subjects. But
there be many people in the world, that lack a Head, wherefore I will never be
ashamed to confess it my principal Honor to be the great Servant of the
Common wealth, and do think the prosperity thereof, to be my greatest
felicity, etc. At the beginning of Parliament 1. Anno 1603 March 19. King James
speech printed by Robert Barker Printer to the Kings most excellent Majesty.
How much then did it concern these, and us all to perform our best and truest
duty and allegiance to you and them, bringing thither our grievances, that by
them the Law might be laid to the cause, as Lod Vives brings in Salust in his
Wars of Cateline speaking of the ancient Romans he says thus, The Law is a
civil equity either established in literal Laws or instilled into the manner
by verbal instructions. Good is the fountain, moderatour and reformer of all
Law all which is done by the prudence of the great Judges of the Law adapting
it self to the nature of the cause, and laying the Law to the cause, not the
cause to the Law. August. Civit. Dei, L. Viv. lib. 2. cap. 17. Who are these
great Judges but the Parliament?

2. They have been dutiful subjects to you in opposing the enemies of your
Crown and dignity, which are of many sorts.

1 The Papists, these your faithful subjects have; and daily seek by all
opportunity to find out, and prevent their damnable sedition: when was there
ever a Parliament, against which they were not ever great disturbers, and
secret underminers, as of that of the Gunpowder treason. It cannot, says King
James, be enough admired, the horrible, and fearful cruelty of their device,
which was not only for the destruction of my person, nor of my wife and
posterity alone, but of the whole body, of the state in general, wherein
neither should have been spared, or distinction made of young nor old, of great
nor of small of man, nor of woman, the whole Nobility, the whole Reverend
Clergy, most part of the good Preachers and the most part of the Knights and
Gentry, yea, and if that any in this society were favorers of their
profession, they should all have gone one way, the whole Judges of the Land the
most part of the Lawyers and the whole Clerks: and as the wretch himself which
is in the Tower does confess it was purposely devised by them, and concluded
to be done in this House that where the cruel Laws (as they said) were made
against their Religion, both place, and persons should all be destroyed, and
blown up at once. King James speech last Sess. Parliament. 1605.

These be the Incendiaries against whom this Land is provided with so many good
and wholesome Laws. How many Emperors Kings, and Princes, have they deposed,
murdered, and poisoned from time to time, yea the Popes themselves, how few is
there of them that die a natural death in their beds? but against Protestant
Princes. Churches, and Kingdoms, they never cease to conspire all they can
invent to overthrow and bring them to ruin.

These indeed they have been careful to find out, and to bring to condign
punishment, or at least to disable them of doing mischief witness some of
their quarters on the gates, others in several prisons, though some cannot yet
be discovered.

2 To punish those that make, or cause the continuance of the separation
between you, and your Parliament, diverse of the Clergy that labor to make the
breach greater, by railing against such things, as nothing at all concern them,
also all such who are of evil life and conversation, not fit to meddle with
matters of State. 2 Many Printers who do accustom themselves to fill the
Kingdom with scandalous lying Pamphlets. 3 Those who cause any tumults in
Churches. 4 Such as have spoken words, and done actions that may give occasion
of suspicion to judge them for such who are malignants and hinderers of
accommodation between your Majesty, and the High Court of Parliament.

3 All manner of traitors whatsoever.

4 All kind of offenders according to Law, etc.

3 They have been dutiful subjects to you in their sense and fellow feeling of
the miserable effects of the same condition of Ireland, and their readiness to
help them: Dread Sovereign, they are known to have been so active herein,
that they have neglected their own private profit, the care of their own houses
and families, to promote and help forward all the assistance they can possible
in each of their several places. 1 They have been earnest suitours to God in
their behalf by prayer which is a thriving way to help a nation, as David
prayed for the redemption of Israel, O that the salvation of Israel, were
come out of Zion, when God brings back the Captivity of his people, Jacob
shall rejoice and Israel shall be glad. Psalm. 53. 6. this he prayed because
that the eyes of the Lord are open upon the righteous, and his ears are open
to their cry. Psalm. 34.15.

So these are and have been earnest suitours to God for the poor distressed
Kingdom of Ireland. 2. They to express that these their prayers have not been
dissembling, (like many who are ready to tell us a fine tale of dissimulation,
commiserating the bleeding condition of the Protestant Church, when indeed and
truth, they rejoice to see it, and labor to make the breach the greater,
witness that scandalous Pamphlet entitled the Cities complaint, seconded with
another entitled the complaint of the Clergy, written by a professed Papist,
(calling us in plain terms monstrous heretics but these dread Sovereigne,)
are not such they have not bin only ready to pray for them, but they have also
bin always ready to pay to help them, they have given largly to relieve them,
according to each of their estates; hearing that poor Kingdom groaning under
that burden of popish cruelty, to which they first thought to have subjected
us, as Troy was by the treacherous seditions of L. Saturninus Tribune, C -
Caesar Servilus, Praetor, and M. Drusus, whence there arose not only civil
slaughters, but they brake openly out into confederate war, which brought all
Italy into most miserable and desperate extreamities, whence it is strange to
record what fields were pitched, what blood shed, and what murder stuck upon
the face of all Italy, as far as the Romans had any power or seigniority.
Augusti civet Dei. lib. 3. chap. 26. And even in such a miserable condition is
Ireland now in, and such a condition had we bin in ere now, had not almighty
God kept us: these men have bin ready and willing to relieve and help this poor
Kingdom of Ireland, are they to be blamed for this, God forbid.

4. They have bin very active and studious to preserve your Kingdom from plots
and conspiracies, especially your Metropollitan City of London. 1. They have
found out many insendaries of mischief, and have found quantities of shot,
powder, arms, etc. about their houses. 2. They have caused their dangerous
intents to be discovered, to murder some of the Members of your honorable
Houses of Parliament; to bring foreign forces from beyond the Seas, to spoil
the City if not to blow it up; to rescue Delinquents from the hands of justice.
3. They have caused the City to be strongly guarded and prepared in times of
greatest danger: At such times (notwithstanding all their care) such has bin
the boldness of the Papists in the very heart of the City, theat the Priests
and Friars have bin taken notice of to revile them, and call them Roundhead
fellows, etc. We have had women with their beads in their hands open, and
their Crucifix in their breasts; and the Papists have called after the trained
bands, and bid them go like a company of traitors and Rebels, or to that
effect; certainly if Your Majesty would be pleased to clear these men, and call
for the execution of justice against the Priests and Jesuits, and subdue the
Papists, it would procure more safety to your Majesty's person, Crown and
dignity, which was indeed a great reason of the making of those Laws against
them; as once an Ambassador from Spain said at his return home of England, when
he had made a speech before the Council there; I have bent my self says he
to weaken them (namely England) and strengthen us (namely Spain) and in all
these have advanced the Catholic cause, but especially in procuring favors
for all such as favor that side, and crossing the other by all means: and
this I practice my self, and give out to be generally practiced by others, that
whatsoever suecesse I find, I still boast of the Victory, which I do to
disharten their hearts, to make them suspicious one of another, especially
between their Prince and their best statesmen; and to keep our own in courage,
who by this means increase, otherwise would be in danger to decay: Gundemour's
speech in vox populi, printed Anno 1620. Surely your faithful Subjects have
not been Traitors or disloyal Subjects; in discovering and preventing these
plots and dangerous designs, which the Papists and their Agents contrived
against us.

May it therefore please your most Excellent Majesty to consider of the lives
and conversation of these men, and you shall we hope find them such as your
Kingdom cannot afford you, (nor any Kingdom in the world their Prince) more
truly loyal and faithful subjects then they, and that really from the very
sentor of their hearts, not in smothered Hypocrisies, as it is to be feared too
many now near your Majesty do; who when it shall please God that there shall be
an accommodation of peace between You and your two Houses of Parliament, will
for ought we know be as ready to serve a Foreign Prince against you, as now
they are to encourage you against your Parliament.

1. These men are none of them Seperatists, but do constantly repair to the
church with the congregation, though they do desire that your Majesty would be
pleased to join with your Parliament, in the calling of an Assembly of Divines
for the settling of a thorough Reformation.

2. They are true protestants of the Church of England, and enemies of Popery
and traditions of men, and desire to advance the kingdom of Jesus Christ, the
propagation of the gospel and the peace of the Church and State.

3. They are men fearing God, and living in an honest and religious way, not
given either to cursing, swearing, drinking, cozening, usury, gaming, etc. but
honest godly men, such as are examples to those about them. 4. They are men who
were never tainted with, or taxed for any crime in violation of the law in any
point. 5. They were, and are forward and willing to take the oath of Alegiance
and Supremacy, and to bind themselves in the strongest tie that can be to your
Ma: in duty and obedience, because they know what the duty of a subject is to
his King; and therefore with their estates and lives are ready to defend and
maintain the honor of your Crown and dignity: Most Royal Sovereign; we do
humb^y emplore your Ma: to return to your high Court of Par^iament, and hearken
not to those (...) of mi^chief, that labor to work an ill affection (...)
them: or to such your truly loyal sub^^^^^ (...), it is a (...) that (...) so
to settle your hearts ease in this Jordan, it would cure all the diseases in
your Kingdom; We do observe says the father, that an acquiring council,
honesty of life, the prerogative of virtue, the use of good will, the grace of
frugality does much avail, for who looks for clear water in a pond of mud,
who setcheth water to drink out of troubled pits, etc. how can there be place
to council, where there is no place to peace and tranquillity. Ambrose.
Chrisost. Hell lib. 2 cap. 12.

With your great Counsel the Parliament, you will find the fountain of law and
honesty, the prerogative of virtue, the good will and loyal subjection of all
your people, presented to you in the House of Commons, the representative Body
of the Kingdom, and a Council that will make you greater then any of your
predecessors, by their wisdoms and care through the blessing of Almighty God;
there is the fountain which your presence will set open, for England, Scotland
and poor distressed Ireland to wash in, that they may be healed: O how does
poor distressed Ireland bleed with the rebellion of the papists, and how does
this Kingdom of England mourn in the month of war, the joy and only hopes of
the Papists here: O most gracious King return to your Parliament, and we doubt
not but these woeful tragedies will end; we should have all our grievances
relieved if we did but enjoy your presence; for whereas now your sacred person
is at so great a distance from your Parliament, that what they do here is much
cumbred with prevention of many dangers and evils, and being done, meets with
many obsticles before it can have admittance to your Majesty's presence; and
how many and how great enemies it finds there experience shows; whereas, was
your presence daily with them, they would counsel and advise with you in such
a way, as you would soon comfort all our people.

1. By passing such Bills as they have made ready for you, for the clearing of
diverse great matters of difference both in Church and State.

2. By putting an end to War, and contracting an inseparable union between you
and your people, which would produce many great and happy blessings for all
your Kingdoms and people. First, this Kingdom would then discourage those hopes
which now the enemies has at home and abroad. Secondly, it would discourage
the Rebels in Ireland to see us settled in Peace. Thirdly, It would give us an
opportunity to help the distressed Protestants there, by sparing but part of
that great expense, and sending part of our Soldiers to them (which are raised
in a strange and dangerous War in our own bowels) to them. Fourthly, It would
settle your Kingdom of Scotland, and free them also from many fears and
jealousies wherewith they are now replenished.

3. By bringing Delinquents, and such as have been the grand causer of these
distractions to punishment, which would be a means to prevent all such future
disasters, and settle you, your Parliament and Kingdom in a sweet and happy
Peace and union.

4. By settling a constant Trade, which now is distracted through all your
Kingdoms; the increase of Trade, advances a Kingdom to great happiness, and
is attended with many comforts, both to the King and people. First, It would
replenish your Majesty's Coffers, both the Custom and Tolledge thereof.
Secondly, It would make your poor Subjects that are Tradsemen, the more able to
pay and furnish the Nobility and Gentry with such Money, as their lands and
places require. Thirdly, It would enrich the estates of all your poor
Subjects. Fourthly, It would fill the Kingdoms with both Money and Commodities.
Fifthly, It would make you great, by being a King over such a plentiful and
prosperous Country; whereas now all is in a contrary way, by reason of your
absence from us, and the maintenance of two Armies in the bowels of the Kingdom.

5. Hearing all our grievances in your Houses of Parliament, the proper place
of helping us.

6. By enjoying your presence, which to us is above all the rest; That there is
not a settlement, and an happy Reformation amongst us; it is a great grief to
us, Wars are a horrible trouble, that the Incendiaries of mischief are not
stopped, increases our misery; want of Peace, is want of comfort, and want of
Trade, takes away our livelihood, and our grievances are not relieved, but that
your Presence is kept from us; This agravates all the former miseries, were we
relieved in all, and you at such a distance from us and your Parliament, it
were too little to comfort us; but do you but return, and then all our misery
is ended, let us but enjoy the Presence of your sacred Majesty, and then our
joy will be full.

We are your humble and loyal Subjects, and we are deeply wounded to find
mis-apprehensions of the love and loyalty of this your City, as if they should
do any thing to give you cause of fear, or cause you to suspect there loyalty;
should your Majesty return to your Parliament, and think better of them, you
would find them better Subjects, and prevent that desolation and destruction,
which does now threaten your sacred Majesty, and the whole Kingdom; and you
would find more fidelity in your Parliament, and from us, than with them whose
hypocrisy is smothered in our distractions.

And to clear the innocence of our hearts, we do protest before Almighty God,
as we hope for a blessing on us and ours, That we are no ways conscious of any
disloyalty, and abhor all thoughts thereof; who are ready to make good their
Protestation, even to the last drop of their dearest bloods, and that with as
much Loyalty, love, and duty, as ever Citizens expressed toward your Majesty,
or any of your Royal Progenitors in their greatest glory.

And we would be heartily glad, that Armies of our Kingdoms might cease to
devour our own bowels; and part of them be transported with their means to
relieve the miserable oppressed Church of Ireland, from the cruelty of the
Papist there; and two parts of them be transported to redeem the Palatinate for
your royal Sister and her Posterity, that she and they might again be settled
in their former honor; and that the rest may remain at home to defend our own
Kingdom: That the Honor and safety of your Crown and dignity may be secured,
your honor advanced, the propagation of the Gospel established, and the Church
and Kingdom settled in Peace, to Gods glory, your Majesty's Honor, and your and
our happiness, to the memory of everlasting Posterity.

FINIS.

