A true account and character of the times, Historically and Politically drawn
by a Gentleman to give satisfaction to his friend in the Country.
Sir:
With a grateful acknowledgement of your manifold favors, etc. I cannot upon
any occasion, but show my prompt obedience to do you service, and as part of
it to continue my Intelligence. Truly, Sir, in my judgment, the face of things
has not been more distracted since the beginning of this impious war, then it
is at this present. Were Tymanthous to draw it, we might well allow him a
veyle, lest it too far overcome his art, and contristate the spectator.
Jealousies daily heighten, new parties appear, and new interests are
discovered, that we seem to oreact some well contrived Romance. In which, every
page begets a new and handsome impossibility. Such sicknesses have now seized
on the body politic, that is nothing but crampes, convulsions, and fearful
dreams. But to come nearer an account, give me leave to represent unto you the
present being of things, not gathered from any whispers, or rumors, which like
broken glasses, offer a visage scattered into many pieces, and not to be
collected into one. But out of the ground and maxims of the parties themselves,
which give us the best light, both of what we may think of the present, and
think for the future. The Kings party, which before these times was visibly
overspread the face of the Kingdom, and since the tumults were so formidable,
that occasioned that unfortunate and costly counsel of calling in the Scots,
(who nevertheless were of very small action, saving that their reputation
plucked up the spirits of the Parliamentarians, and stopped Newcastles
progress southward) and brought over that profitable piece of Tyranny, the
Excise. But the Parliament fed by the City of London, (which was unexhaustible,
and contribution moneys failing the King, and the Countries though excessively
poll'd, not able to supply him) the former party began to overweigh, and with
their many victories confirmed these two sage maxims, That it is the safest way
in a civil war to be seized of the Metropolis: and the other, That people are
never so forward, nor so daring, as to preserve or regaine their Liberties.

This party being quelled, (and in it the bravest of the Nobility and Gentry
brought on their knees) the government of the Kingdom removed from White Hall
to Westminster, and from the Privy Counsel to the great Counsel. Now began
the whole frame of State to be taken in pieces: but it is easy for a child
to discompose a Watch, but tantu^s non impossible to set it right again. Those
Offices which had mere dependence upon the Prerogative, to be either deaded or
laid asleep, and all such as might advance popular liberty and ease revived,
the ancient and happy government of Justices of Peace in their several
Counties in a manner forgotten, and Committees raised of men of contemptible
condition, and till that time scarcely known. For the flower of the Gentry
having engaged in the other party, which was now so shattered, the Parliament
pretended there was not much security in their trust, who with Sequestrators (a
vermin which might well make an eleventh plague in Egypt) so handsomely
behaved themselves, that under the pretense of the public, more scraped
together visible estates, to the ruin of many fine families, it cannot be
denied, but the sufferings of some of them before for the cause had been high
and exemplary. But when they were once to weile some power, their arms were
too weak, and they struck at random, many times point blanke against Law.
For having been men for the most part nuzzeled up under some nonconformist
Ministers, and by them a little enslaved in their consciences, they made little
scruple of any thing that was in pursuance of so good a work, especially
backed with an Ordinance of Parliament, though flat against the reason and
letter of the Law. Nay with such violence proceeded they, that some men out of
bare suspicion, were outed of their livelihoods, and put to compound. But why
do I talk to you whose person and family have suffered so much by them, that
I fear me 'twill be a work of difficulty to make you hear that which
rationally might be said in their excuse.

But the greatest alteration of all was, that though in the State we had some
provision, yet for the Church we did like that foolish Gentleman, who pulled
down his house with an intent to repair it, before he had another to put his
head in, and this was that which left us open to so many storms: For the
Parliament had some months before, first taking away the Lordships, and then
the dignities of Bishops, with all their etc. called a Synod, which being not
generally chosen, but only named by particular Members, was made up of a great
many of none of the wisest Clerks: men they were, who by their constant
preaching in the days of the Bishops, and withal some petty suffering, had
gained the high esteem of their Electours, (who never considered how weak and
unfit they were for controversy, the chief end that brought them together.)
These being once warm set, and creeping into the fattest places that were
left, most unhappily began a new model of Ecclesiastical policy, which has
been a second cause of reviving our differences. A government it was which
rather necessity then serious cause has brought upon some scattered Churches
abroad, who by reason of their dispersednesse and poverty, were never so wise
as to know how incompatible it is with civil government. Public toleration
it had only gotten in Scotland; but with what stir it was attended in that
Kingdom, is not the present talk of this pen to declare; but surely from the
Scotch copy we wrought out ours, the Authors of it some doing out of
Episcopacy, some out of a desire of the thing it self, and some out of
novelty. The Houses seemed to countenance it, rather to settle men's minds for
the present, then any way leave such a burden to Posterity. But the King
utterly disfavoured it, and there wanted not Ministers of his party that were
ready to show the novelty and basefulnesse of that government to the full. Nay
to parallel it with Episcopacy, taken in the worst sense, and to show that a
few years would render it more odious than the other had been in many
Centuries. But this rather confirmed those whom it found averse from it, then
made any so. That which gave it the greatest streake was this; five of the
Assembly who out of a panicke fear of the Prelacy had slipped beyond se^s, had
gathered together private congregations, and out of their liberality lived in
such a height of pride and luxury, that that of the Poet might be applied to
them.

Exul ab octava Marius bibit and fruitur Diis Iratis. These refusing to be cast
in that mould, published a little book called the Apology, which was licenced
by Herle the Chaireman, who by this justly incurred the Odium of some of his
hotter Brethren, who disdained that he should be successor to Dr. Twisse in
that place. The book was modestly penned, (though Herle himself confessed to
me he modified many expressions) and showed what course they had taken in their
transmarine Churches, and from thence they rather wished a congregationall then
parochial way. This congregationall way never thought on till within a few
years, being free and leaving a scope to men's consciences, was much
entertained by many Sectaries; nay some who carried only the characters of
pious and orthodox, and some under the color of it broached opinions which
were as new as the government. This occasioned the detestable Mr. Edwards with
a great deal of waspish and violent rancour to write his Gangrena;
questionless this book did a great deal of harm, for being full of
falsities, and almost monkish forgeries did engage many to a justification, who
it may be would otherwise after the first eventitation of their fancies have
sat still. Sir Thomas Fairefax his Army was much composed of people, who were
of the Independent (as they call it) way, These muttered at this book, and
some proceedings of the same nature, insomuch, that the Presbyterian Party,
which by some countenance of the State grew haughty, sought to oppose them, and
in pursuance of it, wrought so far upon the consciences of the Aldermen and
Common-Counsell (men verst in little else but their trades, and utterly
ignorant of State affairs) though the greatness of their City sometimes
engaged them, that they petitioned the Parliament to disband the Army, and to
send the Volunteers out of it into Ireland, under Field-Marshall Skippon. The
Army repined at this, alleging that they who had served the State, with such
fidelity and success, ought not now to be slighted: This delaid their
disbanding, and in the end caused them utterly to refuse it. Now had the
Independents a visible party, and the best way to make it good, was either to
close with the Royallists, or else carry it by Votes. To the former purpose,
they seized of the King at Holdenby by Cornet Joyce, who had been Tailor to
Mr. Hollis, entertained him with a great deal of freedom, and gave
countenance and hope to his party: To carry on the latter, they impeached
Eleaven Members, of the choicest and wisest of the other party, the rather to
take away their Votes, then for any guilt of the men. Others of the same party
in the House seeing things so carried, deserted it, and left the dominion of
votes to them that stayed. But the discountenanced Parties were not idle all
this while, but wrought so upon the City, that there was of a sudden a great
party petitioned the House for the recalling of the King, and entering in league
for the pursuance, the House voted these mutinies Treason. But they assuming
courage, came in a rout to the House, and denied egresse, till that the
disposal of the Militia was revoked, which the House pusillanimously obeyed.

The King all the while carried himself with patience, and his party are
resolved to suffer as well as they have acted with their Master.

Thus you have it Historically, take politically these general maxims.

1. It is a great argument of weakness in a State, when parties subdivide into
such fractions, and every small party able to uphold it self and become
terrible, while the greatest party is unable to move.

2. Violent alterations, and taking away of one government, before they be
certain of another, are extreme dangerous, as also,

3. To suffer Clergymen to gain upon the conscience too much in matters
indifferent, for they are a race of people, who though they least ought, have
ever the basest ends of their own: And this their offending against knowledge
is questionless the justice of Providence, that they ran into contempt.

4. It Is dangerous to let the head City of a Kingdom to grow so potent, for it
will insensibly bring the rest under the slavery of a few Prentises or
Mechanickes.

5. That the government of one coming into the hands of many, who are
unskilful Pilots, is to be wished again, though accompanied with some
inconveniences.

6. Men in a new government, had need be careful who they employ, for the
Odium of their government falls upon them.

7. They need to press the People as little as they can, but if extremity
force it, to satisfy them by fair accounts, and not lavish it upon one
another by Largesses.

8 Not to bring themselves into contemptible want, nor bring their thumbes
under the girdles of their Creditors.

9 It is no great policy to give heterodox opinions life by opposition, nor to
draw on the hate of a victorious Army.

For particular maxims:

1 It is not conceivable the King will favor any party, but that which comes
homest to his principles.

2 That party that does it, is not only sure of immunity, but reward.

3 That Sir Thomas Fairefax has missed a good opportunity to do it, and the
distrust of the Royalists will henceforth render him incapable.

4 If he had not gaind the major number of Votes, he had questionless done it.

5 This new party of London, its to be feared, have too much of the Presbytery
to be true to the Prerogative.

6 That if things had been carried by the Parliaments party with moderation,
things had been in a calmer condition then now.

7 The Kings party have had some faylings, and so have the Parliaments, but
this is the first of the City, if it be not favored with success, which
cannot in much reason be promised it.

8 That Edwards and Burges and some of the hotter spirited men deserve
punishment as Incendiaries.

9 That the Presbyteriall government is incompatible with our civil government.

10 That regard to tender consciences, is as necessary as a general
consideration would be inconvenient.

11 That most of the Kingdom seem to breath after a moderate Episcopacy.

12 That the King seems to have this advantage by all his troubles, that he
has showed to the world the incomparable excellencies that are in him, and
extorted a confession even from his enemies.

13 That the Queen taking her at the worst morally, as faithful to her
husband, and industrious in carrying on her designs, is the best in all the
catalogue.

14. That learning has incomparably sufferred by these times, and twere good
to cherish it lest the next age feel a decay.

15. That it were a good way to mollify peoples minds to suffer Play Houses
again, and that it would be a considerable addition to the education of the
Gentry.

16. That it is a brave and a gallant way to peace, to extinguish the names of
parties, and not to discountenance Malignants. That all branches may at last be
recollected in the same boat.

Thus Sir have I with as much faith and simplicity as I can opened unto you my
thoughts. I am the least of men, and man indeed can see little, what he sees
behind is from Histories, and these either maimed or false; what for the
present, either by his own observation, or partial intelligence, but for the
future he has no help, but the comparison of what is past; it is Gods great
Prerogative, and fit for only such busy pieces of ignorance as Lily to pry
into. Things may as soon alter, as you can burn this paper, which kisses your
hands from,

Your affectionate humble Servitour. N. LL.


