ANIMADVERSIONS AND CONSIDERATIONS UPON A Sheet, Printed for Francis Smith,
CONTAINING A Confession of the Faith of several Catapaedobaptists, whose Names
are thereunto subscribed. As also the Absurdities of the Doctrine of
Arminianism, Free Will, and General Redemption; and that it is a Popish
Doctrine; and their Objections briefly answered.

By J. H.

Toll, Lege, Judica.

LONDON: Printed for W. Marshal, at the Bible in Newgate-street. 1679.

THE PREFACE.
TO all true Protestant and Christian Readers, into whose hands this little
piece may come; I desire to let the World know that it is not for the sake of
any Interest I have in the World, or in any Sect or Party of People, this day
in the present Age, that engages me to this present Affair: No, let the World
know, that I knew long since, upon whom I have cast the infinite weight of both
my Soul and Body, viz. upon Jesus; that is, upon him, as fulfilling, and having
fulfilled in his mediatory person, the whole Law of Works; and for
justification of Faith and Love, for me, and for all his Elect that were given
to him by the Father before the world was. The Truths once delivered to the
Saints, declared in the Scriptures of truth, witnessed by the Fathers and Sons
of the true Protestant Church, since the Apostles days, before the Supremacy of
the Pope of Rome to the five or six Centuaries, though then opposed by the
Arrians, Nestorians, Sabellians, Manichees, and others, and since by the
Papists, the Head of Antichrist; and by the Kenites, and pretending Reconcilers
of Protestants and Papists: I mean the Bridge-makers for a passable way for
Papists over to us, or we over to them; viz. the Grotians, Armenians, and all
that hang that way, since those unhappy names, as well as persons, received
their Being in the World, are the alone and only Motive that carries me into
this Affair at this juncture of time: And particularly, by providence, hearing
this man, for whom this Sheet was printed, by name Mr. Francis Smith, a
Stationer in London, preaching up at the Field Town, in the County of Oxford,
this Novel, Papistical Doctrine of Arminianism, Free Will, and General
Redemption, and Conditional Election in time, under the notion of an
Anabaptist, or Catapaedobaptist, if you rather please; and having then opposed
him, as to his Doctrine, and finding him and his Adherents stubborn and
Heretical, and withal scattering the Poison of their Doctrine in this Sheet,
under the notion of a Confession of their Faith, to the subversion of the
unsettled and ignorant people, I, as a Servant to the royal truths of my
Sovereign Lord Christ, and for the better information of his Elect, have,
according to my poor abillity, cast in this Mite into the Corban, as my
Testimony to him and his truth, in this lowering yet Evening Tide of Antichrist.
The Apostle Paul is my President, Gal. 2.5, 6. who would not give place for an
hour to the Enemies of the Gospel, neither did he respect any man's person;
though they seemed by their external deportment and manners to be some body in
the peoples Eyes. My Judge is Christ my Sovereign; my Jury, the twelve
Apostles, at that great and approaching Sessions, when he shall again descend
the pregnant clouds to judge the World, Acts 1. Heb. 9. ult. and crown his
Saints and witnesses. If any shall think my Language too harsh, or Unchristian,
let them know it is not the Sword of the Flesh, but that of the Spirit I fight
with. The Prophet Isay called them in his days dumb Dogs; the Apostle of the
Gentiles, Heretics; and I call but all such as come forth in any of the
Whores Trinckets but barking Dogs, who are far worse than those dumb Dogs and
Heretics were, because they are stubborn Promoters of the Papal Doctrines,
though not of Popish Ceremonies, according to that ancient definition of
Heresic; by that ancient witness of truth Bishop Grosthead, once of Lincoln:
Heresis est sententia contraria sacrae scripturae palam docta pertinaciter
defensa. And as it was said by the Protestant Divines of Germany concerning
Grotius, Quod Hugo Grotius papizat; so say I of all these who promote the same
Doctrines as he did: who instead of flying out of Babylon, as the Holy Ghost
exhorts, Rev. 18.4, 5, 6. they hover under her enchanting skirts; to whose
charge, if they repent not, all the Blood of the Martyrs will be laid, as well
as to the direct Papists, when the Lords time shall be accomplished. And till
they have answered Jewel, White, Willet, against the Papists in the very same
points, they say nothing against me or my Animadversions, though they attempt a
Reply. And so Reader Farewell. Thine in what I may, as to these truths herein
defended, while I am

Joh. Humphrys.

ANIMADVERSIONS and CONSIDERATIONS upon an Heretical, Catabaptistical,
Pelagian, Arminian, Papistical Sheet, lately published, entitled, A Confession
or Declaration of Faith; lately presented to King Charles the Second: Printed
for one Francis Smith; which, because the Doctrine therein contained is partly
Papistical, and partly mixed with the Ingredients of of Quakerism; as
Free Will, General Redemption, and falling away from Christ, and such like
Trash, against the Doctrine of the Gospel, primarily taught by Christ and his
Apostles, and secondarily witnessed to by the Protestant Christian Divines of
all Ages, and by the Martyrs in the past times of Popery; I think fit to
declare to the World, for the sake of Gods Elect, chosen in Christ, by the good
will and pleasure of God alone, from before the foundation of the World, to
Eternal Salvation by the Transaction of their sins by the Father on Jesus, and
the free imputation of the Righteousness of the Law, fulfilled in him to them,
which they do in his time, when he gives them Faith, receive it by Faith alone.

LET me tell you, you Arminian, Pelagian, Papistical Baptists, are not built on
the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 3. but upon the Foundation
of the Papists, and Antichrist; for the Papists are true in nothing, but in the
Doctrine of the Trinity, as said Mr. Philpot, Martyr; and dying men, especially
Martyrs, should be believed. You peep your Heads out to show your Antichristian
Horns, because you are in hope, that some lately honored at the Sturn, may
countenance your Sect, as being inclinable to the same Opinions, as being newly
whasted (by Divine Providence) from the Transmarine Territories of Papistry,
upon the Christian Protestant Shores; who yet, it is yet to be doubted has too
much of the Pelagian dust of S. Omers cleaving to his feet, or shoes: But this
will fail you in the day of the Lord, when the true Jesus, Son of God, and Son
of Mary, High Priest, Prophet, and King, in one Person, will plead his own
Truths, that you, and such as you, have most abominably abused and belied.

Your first Article professes Faith in one God, and the Father, of whom are all
things; which the Turk and Mahometans do acknowledge as much as you, or more.
See the Alchoran, Chap. 17. entitled, Of the Voyage by Night; and Chap. 18.
called, the Chapter of the Cave, 27, 28, 29, 30 lines.

To the second, that all the misery, and death, and condemnation of the World,
brought in by the fall of the first Adam, is but temporal, corporeal, and only
as to this life, is a Lie against Scripture, Reason, and the Authority of good
and approved Authors. This Opinion was held by Jacobus Faber, and many other
Papists, but not by Bellarmine, Genesis 2. In the day thou eatest, thou shall die
the death; is a Hebrew phrase, signifying, eternal and temporal death, moriendo
morieris, Ephesians. 2.23. Romans 8.6, 7, 8. Romans 5.6.8. Romans 6.23. Romans 7.14.17.20.23.
Romans 5, 14. to 21. Ezekiel. 16.3. to 9, 10. Mat. 25.41. Gal. 3.1. the wages of
all. sin is death in that kind, that the gift of God is life: But the gift of
God is life eternal to all Abraham's Seed; ergo, the wages of all sin is
eternal death, by the Rule of compar. contrar. My Authorities are Calvin
Instit. lib. 2. cap. 1, 2, 3. the Assemblies Catechism, Quest. 19. and Answer
to it: Dr. Willet against Papists in his eighteenth general Controversy read
at large, besides Luther, Zuinglius, Melancthon; and more Ancient, Augustine,
Hierom, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Tertul. Justin Martyr.

The third Article professes General Redemption; that the Father gave Christ
out of his love to the whole world, and a Ransom for all universally: wherein
1. The Fathers gift is diminished; and 2. The Sons Ransom belied; for the
Father gave him to be a Propitiation for the sins of the world of the Elect,
and none else; that is, to all the Elect of Jew and Gentile: so is all taken, 2
Cor. 5. definitely; and John 17.6, 7. and 10. he gave him to the Sheep only,
whose sins he laid on him, Isai. 53.6.11.1 Pet. 2.24, 25. 2. Cor. 5.21. and to
whom only he gave and imputed his Righteousness, 2 Timothy 1.9, 10. Gal. 1.15, 16.
The Elect Jews were his Sheep; and other Sheep I have, that is the Elect of the
Gentiles; and the Reprobates he called Dogs, Wolves, Lions, etc. which he
ransomed not, neither was given to ransom; so he did more for his Elect than
you acknowledge, viz. transacted and bore their sins on his own body. 2. He did
it not for all, but only for them whom the Father gave to him, and him to them,
Joh. 17.2.6.8.9.11.29. Joh. 6.44.39.37. Joh. 10.3.11.15, 16, 26, 27, 28, 29.
These only by his Blood has he cleansed in his sight, not by Water Baptism,
but by his Blood, 1 John 1.7.9. and Chap. 5. and of this is the Water of
Baptism a Figure; and by his Blood has satisfied Justice for all their sins,
past, to come, and present, and redeemed them; and of this is the Supper a
Symbol or Sign, 1 Cor. 11. etc.

The fourth Article sings the same Song, wresting the word All to a false
sense; that God is willing that all should come to repentance, and none should
perish; and that the pardon of sins should be preached to every Creature, that
none might suffer in Hell: The Word of God is belied, making it speak what it
intends not, and the Gospel sophisticated: For first, the Gospel is
ministerlally offered to all, Mark 16.15. but by recommunication of the Spirit
only to the Elect; Romans 9.11, 12, 13, 18, 19, 20. with 1 Pet. 3.17. Mat. 13.11.
To the Elect it is given to know the Gospel, but not to the Reprobate, Joh.
12.40. Romans 11.7, 8, 9, 10. And Piscator a Protestant Divine says, Gratia
affertur a deo, animo communicandi eam folis Electis hand quaque singulis.

To the fifth; I say, degrees of Christianity abstractively adapt not to the
Ministry; beside, I deny you to be a Church of Christ: Ergo, have no power to
give your approbation in Ordination: Beside, the Church alone, though true,
cannot by Divine Authority ordain Ministers, or Commissionate them to go forth
to Preach.

The sixth Article is ambiguous as most of your Preachments are, to deceive the
simple, and obtain Proselites, Romans 16.17, 18, 19. Submelli Hybleo venenum
latet: Faith don't justify, as an Act; nor is it the Root of Justification, as
Papists say; it is Christ, and his Personal Righteousness, that justifies the
ungodly, being Elected, Romans 4 Romans 8.33. Psalm. 32.1, 2, 3. and they by Faith,
when God gives it them, Ephesians. 2. apprehend and receive this Righteousness of
Christ, wrote in his Person for their justification, Romans 8.2.3. Joh. 1.12.
where you say, Believers commit themselves to his Grace: I boldly assirm, you
Arminians, Grotians, and Pelagians don't mean, by Grace, to the imputation of
his Righteousness, wrought in his Individual Person for all his Sheep, and
given to them for their justification, and received by Faith of them. Thus all
true Protestants but you, with Bellarmine, and all the Papists, mean, that the
Act of Faith, in this your Opinion and newfangled Gospel, and Christ, with
repentance and obedience to your holy Baptism, this is your justification, and
the Papists, for which you will be ashamed in the day of the Lord Jesus, when
the Thrones of the Kingdoms of the World shall bow before him, Phil. 2. and all
that own and receive not his imputed Righteousness shall be slain, and cast in
the Lake, Rev. 21.8. and 22.15.

The seventh Article tells a loud Lie, like his Fellows; for God gives his
Spirit to his Elect Sons, before you do believe, or can believe, repent, or
obey; for all these are done by the Spirit, or some Power else; but no Power
else but the Spirit can work these: Ergo, the Spirit is given first, not before
their Redemption, Reconciliation, and Justification, but before the Application
of this Grace; by the Office of the holy Spirit, this Grace is revealed,
received, and applied to the Elect only, Gal. 4.6. Col. 2.10, 11, 12. Joh.
14.15, 16. Chap. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11, 12. Romans 8.15, 16. Ephesians. 1.13.18, 19, 20.

The eighth Article is swollen big with the poison of Sophistication and
Contradiction; and that because you hide your Errors under a disguise, like a
hitter Pill wrapped up in a little Sugar, or Wormwoodseeds in Plumbs, to deceive
the simple, and Children; for you would make us believe you own the Decrees of
God, while indeed you deny them. 2. Acontradiction, because if they be Elected
for foreseen Faith, works, or repentance, then it is not of mere mercy, and
good will, and nothing in the Creature but sin: So that the second part of your
Article contradicts the first, and the first is sophisticated: You say, God
Elects from the Foundation of the world such as believe; that is, when they
believe he Elects them, that is, he has decreed to Elect all that believe; but
he Elects them as mere sinners, and because he Elects them they believe, and
not that he Elects them because they believe.

The ninth is like his Fellows, full of falsehood, for they were ordained to
Condemnation before they were ungodly men, and because of their Reprobation
became ungodly men, because they were before ordained to destruction; (...)
before decreed, or before written for destruction; and therefore became ungodly.

The tenth lies like the father the second Article. For Adam's fall brought in
Eternal deaths as well as Temporal, I said before; and if all are under that
Condemation, Romans 5.16, 17, 18, 19. Ex. 16. Romans 6.21. then Infants for Infants
are part of all. Beside, all that are fallen into Condemation, which all are,
cannot be saved till they are born again of Water and the Spirit, or baptized
with Fire and the Holy Ghost, Mat. 4. Jo. 3.3, 5. 1 Jo. 5. Heb. 10. Ez. 36.
Water, in all which places, is not your Baptism, but the cleansing of Christ's
Blood, applied by the Spirit to the Elect in their Conversion and Regeneration;
of which Baptism is but a mere figure to Abraham and his believing Seed, as
Circumcision was before the actual payment of the Debts of the Elect, by Christ
on the Cross at Jerusalem, Heb. 13.11, 12, 13. Heb. 9.26. Heb. 1.3. Heb.
10.54.10, 14. see 18 Q. of the Assemblies Catechism, and Answer: Four things
issue to all Adam's posterity by his fall. First, The guilt of Adam's first
sin. Secondly, The privation of Original Righteousness. Thirdly, A depravation
of the whole nature of Body and Soul, by Hereditary descent. And fourthly, All
actual Sins flowing from it, To. 5.12, 19. and 10. Ephesians. 1.1, 2, 3. James
1.14, 15. Mark 15.29. To. 7. See Doctor Willet's 81 Genesis Controversy against
Papists; the Elect have their Sins transacted on Christ, and his imputed
Righteousness covering them, and the Spirit of Christ in his time converting
them to it, and the rest, great and small, are blinded and damned, To. 11. The
whole Law broken by Adam, and his Posterity in him, comprehends both Faith, and
perfect, and sinless obedience; which Covenant being broke, he brought both
himself and posterity under Condemnation Romans 5.18, 19. temporal and Eternal;
for such is the Wages of Sin, To. 6.21. and lying under the breach of the whole
Law of God, are eternally condemned, except they be elected, called, justified
and sanctified freely by his Grace, Romans 8.29, 30, 31.

Christ did not come into the World to save men if they would, Ephesians. 2.1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. for then none would be saved; but he came positively and
absolutely to save them that were eternally given to him to save, Jo. 17. and
Jo. 10.26. to 29. Christ's death and passions were not Temporal and Bodily
only, Mat. 27.46. and Chap. 26.36, 37, 38, 42. Mark 14.3, 4. Luke 22.42, 44.
Joh. 18.11. but Spiritual and Infernal passions, Acts 2.31. Ps. 16.10. Lament.
1.12. And if Christ's Sufferings were such, then Adaw's fall must procure such:
But this Hellish Doctrine denies both: By this Doctrine the Covenant of Grace
was made since the fall of Adam, and not from Eternity, as the Scripture
inculcates, Titus 1.1, 2, 3. Ps. 89. and Zach. 6.13. 2 Samuel 23.5. and then the
Covenant of Grace is but a new Covenant of Works, viz. Faith and Obedience; as
if Faith was not included in the Covenant of Innocence, and fulfilling the
conditions of the pardon of Sin in the Gospel, upon pain of Eternal Damnation;
so that by this Doctrine the new Covenant of Grace is a thousand times more
bondaged, servile, and legal than the Covenant of Innocence: For the
forfeitures of that, say they, was but bodily and temporal, and so was Christ's
death that satisfied for it: But the forfeitures of this new Covenant of Grace,
according to their Doctrine, is Spiritual and Eternal Damnation, and no help or
satisfaction neither: in the Covenant of Innocence Christ made up the breaches,
but the breaches of this Covenant of Grace we our selves must make up by our
Free Will, Faith, Repentance, and Obedience, or else perish eternally: And from
the Pelagion, Arminian, Papistical new Covenant of Grace, wherein Christ is
only or chiefly an example, only by his Kingly and Prophetical Offices in
Heaven, he prays for me, my Faith, Victory, and Repentance; but if I do it not,
or cannot, his Prayer is in vain. And as for his Priestly Office, as Dr.
Hammand says, it dyed with him: For it was only to remove the Covenant of
Works, which was by a temporal death easily removed, its forfeitures being but
a temporal death; from such a New Covenant, Lord deliver me, and his Elect, and
from the Promulgators of it. Another Juggle they have is, that Election is not
in the Covenant of Works, or from Eternity, but in Christ since; that is, they
that do believe the Doctrine they preach, believe, repent, obey, and be
baptized, are Elected; and this God foresaw, and knew, and willed: And to
uphold this Babel, and Whores Doctrine of Babylon, they turn upside-down the
very Heart and Entrails of the whole Scriptures, to the last of the tenth
Article: I say the Jews were under a Covenant of Grace, and by the sign
thereof, Genesis 17. brought by Divine Command their Children into the visible
Church. We are under the same Covenant of Grace, and the matter and manner of
the sign was changed under the New Testament, or Administration of Grace, but
not the Subjects; for then it had been necessary that Christ should have
forbidden Infants Baptism, or John Baptist his Messenger, for Christ knew it
was once commanded as the New Covenant sign; but he never repealed the Subject,
nor his Messenger that came before him, or the Ministers that followed after
him; Ergo, what is not repealed by Divine Institution, abides steadfast, as a
Nail fastened by the Masters of the Assembly, given by one Shepherd, Christ
Jesus: Therefore till the Catabaptists prove by Scripture, that Christ, or his
Predecessor John Bapt. or his Successors, the Apostles, forbid the Subjects in
Genesis 17. licensed, till then you do all of you shamefully beg the Question; and
you shall be with your Antichristian Spirit famished for me, before you shall
have a Morsel from me to feed your Heresy: wherefore leave that unlawful Trade
of Begging, and work for your livings; that is, prove out of the New Testament,
by Gods Word, that Infants are commanded not to be Baptized, or that
Circumcision was not a Sign and Seal of the Righteousness of Faith. Or, that
Baptism did not come in the room of Circumcision; do one of these or be silent
before the Lord for ever: For, because you have rent the Seal of his Covenant,
God will rend you and your Sect into a thousand pieces: This will be the end of
you, to perish in your own Dung, Phil. 3. Except the Elect among you, and true
Converts, they only shall be preserved, and in due time come out of your
Babylon, as well as Rome's or England's Babylon.

The Eleventh Article builds up your Idol Baptism, and sets it on your sandy
Foundation; for there is not one word of Teach before Baptize; but contrary,
after Baptism to Teach, Mat. 28. latter end: For the first word rendered to
Teach, is, in the Greek, Matheteusate, that is, Disciple all Nations. But the
Question may be asked, How shall we Disciple them? the Answer is, Baptizeing
them, etc. then teach them to observe all things, etc. the Jews did so Disciple
their Children; and Children Acts 15. are called Disciples; and doubtless the
Righteousness of Christ, and the Kingdom of Heaven, is given to the Elect of
them, Mat. 18.4, 5, 6. 1 Cor. 14 20. Mark 9.42. Luke 17.1, 2. and belongs to
them; and therefore the Sign of the Covenant belongs to them, which is the
Water of Baptism, and the very rantizing or sprinckling in the Figure is
sufficient, because the Sprinckling the Blood in the Substance is sufficient, 1
Pet. 1.2. The same way that Abraham was Discipled are all aged ones in all
times; that being ignorant of God's Covenant never knew it, or received the
Figure before: and this by teaching them the Covenant of God, as God taught
Abraham, and then set the Sign on them. But the way to Disciple Infants, as in
that day by Circumcision, so in this day by Baptism, Acts 15.10. 1 Cor. 12.13.
Their Children were called Disciples, and so are ours Disciples of right, if
the Substance of the Covenant of Grace be the same, as it is, for there is no
new thing sub Coelis; and our Baptism now does Baptize into the whole Body or
Church Universal, 1 Cor. 12.13. that is, into the number of the Elect, and not
into particular, visible Congregations, and when they do actually believe, then
are they Members of the visible, particular Church, actual Members; and then,
as Baptism, shadowed out their cleansing by Christ's Blood, and the Application
of it to them in the Womb by God. So does the Supper, when they believe, figure
out Christ's Redemption and Satisfaction to them by his Blood, Joh. 6. ult. 1
Cor. 11. ult. And though the Sacraments be distant in Administration and
Respect of time, yet Satisfaction, Redemption, and Cleansing, was actually done
at once for all the Elect by Christ, John 18.34, 35. with 1 Jo. 5.6, 7, 8. and
yet, I say, the Elect have their cleansing sealed and signed Externally, (for
the Internal Seal is the Spirit, Ephesians. 1.13. Romans 4.) mostly in their Infancy,
because God imputes Christ's Righteousness to them in their Infancy, Romans 9.10,
3. Gal. 1.16. Mat. 19.14. And because Baptism is not a Communion Sacrament, as
the Supper is, 1 Cor. 11. hence they did not eat the Pascal Lamb, till they
were able to stand on their Feet, eat bitter Herbs, and walk, Exodus 12. for the
Pascal Lamb, under the old Administration of Grace, was the Sign of Christ's
Death for the Elect, as the Supper is now, both figuring out the same thing; to
wit, the pardon of Sins by Christ's bearing them, as the Lamb taking them away,
John 1.29. only that figured out the actual time of discharge of the Elect to
come, but the Supper that the actual time is past, Heb. 9.29. and chapter 10.14.
Neither is Baptism the way of making visible Churches, but Profession of the
true Faith of Christ, Romans 10.11.10.12. Gal. 3.26. By Faith, and not by
Baptism; you make Baptism your Christ, and so slight the Lords Blood, by
placing life in the Figures. But the Apostle, when some in his time, see 1 Cor.
1. did too much magnify it, he thanked God that he he had not Baptized but a
few Families, and tells them, His Mission was to preach the Gospel: A more
weighty Affair than administering Baptism, though both belonged to him. The
Apostles never preached up Baptism, as the Catabaptists do: And though
Circumcision did make Disciples of right, yet it did not make them visible and
actual Disciples, but Faith in God's Covenant, and the eating the Pascal Lamb
was a, or the, visible Communion, as the Supper is now to professed Believers.
You belie the word of God to prove your own Heresy. For this you must answer
one day; mark it, Generation was not the way of the Jews, intromiting
Church Members, or making them. It was the knowledge of God's gracious
Covenant, Genesis 15.6. Faith in Christ, as now. Christ's Priestly Office took away
the Sins of the Elect under the old Administration or Testament, as well as now
under the new. The Covenant was and is substantially and formally the same,
only differs diathetically, and by way of Administration, Heb. 8. Jer. 31.31,
32, 33. 1 John 2.1, 2, 3. Why do you lie against the Scriptures? and say, That
Unscriptural Sprinckling, for, 1 Pet. 1.2. as the Blood of sprinckling purges
away the Sins of the Elect, so will the Water of sprinckling sufficiently
figure it out. A little Wax will seal a great Lease when the Covenants therein
are firmly agreed. do you know what you prate of, the Bondwoman and her Son?
You your selves are Children of the Bondwoman, Gal. 4, The Seed of the
Adulterer and Whore, Isay 57.34, 10. and 12. You trust in the life of your
hand, in your Faith, Repentance, and Obedience for your formal justification,
as all Papists do; and as the carnal Jews did suppose that the Law of works was
given for them to fulfill in their own persons, and what they failed of it was
to be supplied by the Sacrifices and Ceremonies. Thus mistaking the whole Order
and End of the Law, which was to carry them to Christ the Mediator, who was
ordained in his person to fulfill all the Law of God, and that Righteousness of
his to be imputed to the Elect for their justification, and received by Faith,
when God gave it them to believe: And so the Law at Sina, given in Thunder and
Tempest, was to show them their Sinfulness, Romans 3.19, 20, 21, 22. and God's
Wrath boiling against Sinners, Romans 1. and 2. chapter who all in Adam have violated
Gods holy Law, Romans 3. and come short of the Glory of God by it; and to break
the Rock of their Carnal Confidence and security, 2 Cor. 3. Exodus 19. and 20.
To bring the Elect thereby humbly to submit to Christ, the Everlasting
Mediator, on whom the Lord laid all the Sins of the Elect, Isay 53.6, 11. 1
Pet. 2.24, 25. Mica 7.18, 19. Psalm. 89. and Psalm. 80. ult. and imputes his
Personal Righteousness to them for their justification, 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13.
Now as they corrupted their Administration of Grace under the Old Testament, so
do you and your Generation, Pelagians, Arminians, and Papists, under the New
Testament: For, the Apostle in that Text, Gal. 4. opposes the Covenant of Grace
to the Covenant of Works, or to the Law, made by the Jews, as a Covenant of
Works, as aforesaid; and not the New Testament or Administration of Grace
against the Old; for as they did take the Law for a Covenant of Works, so do
you the Gospel; calling Faith, Repentance, and Obedience, the Conditions of it;
which are freely given to them as Fruits of the pardon of Sins, not procurers;
and rejecting the imputed Righteousness of Christ, as Papists do, and make the
Acts of your Faith to justify you, which is full of Sin, yea full of Error
and Heresy; and therefore your Righteousness shall not profit you in the day
of Christ, because you are not wholly freed by Christ, but Sons of the
Bondwoman.

There were never but two Covenants, for Matter and Form, that of Works, and
that of Grace, directly opposite one to the other. The Covenant of Works was
never by Divine Institution established to men since Adam's fall; but
immediately taken up by Christ, the Elects Surety, and laid on his Shoulders,
Isay 9. Being freely wrought in and by him for them, is a Covenant of Grace to
them, but of Works to Christ; who obtained all by his Works for them. This
Covenant of Grace has two Administrations; one under the Old Testament, before
the Law at Horeb, and after the Law to Christ's time in the Flesh: Then began
the New Testament and Administration of Grace to the Elect; more glorious by
far than the other for Administration; though in respect of the very Substance
of the Covenants, the Stipulator and Mediator Christ, who undertook it for
them, the Father gave him from Eternity, Titus 1.1, 2. 2 Timothy 1.9, 10. Romans
8.29, 30, 31. Ps. 89. Isay 53.6. Zac. 9.11. and 6.14. In that of Works in
Paradise, there was Faith and perfect Obedience, but no Repentance, Confession,
or Sorrow of Sin, or new Obedience was admitted in that; but in that of Grace,
there is Faith, but different from that Faith in the Covenant of Works, and new
Obedience and Repentance, Confession and Sorrow for sin admitted of none of
these, but to formally justify, only Faith in Christ receives justification,
and Repentance, and New Obedience follows as fruits of Faith, and of the pardon
of sin, which sundamentally hangs on Christ's bearing sin away, and satisfying
for it once for all. Neither does our Faith, or Repentance, or new Obedience,
make us Righteous, but Christ's Righteousness, fulfilling the Covenant of Works
in his own person, and imputed to us, and received by Faith, as given of God
for that purpose, Ephesians. 2.5, 6, 7. Neither is our Repentance, or Confession,
or New Obedience, or sorrow for sins committed any part of our Righteousness
before God, (but as to man) being wrought by the Spirit of Christ in us; follow
the pardon of our sins, and our being made Righteous; and follow Faith also in
this administration of Grace publicly, Gal. 3. and are not the Grounds or
Causes of pardon or Receivers, but the absolute Fruits and Effects in the Elect
believing. Besides: The Law at Horeb was to the Jews a conditional Covenant for
Temporal Blessings, and being broke, incurred Temporal Cursings; which, as such
a Covenant, expired when Christ came, and the Paedagogy of the Jews ceased;
only the Law, as in the Spiritual Power, of it, as a demonstrative Law in the
hand of Christ and the Spirit, to humble the Elect, and make them sensible of
their condition and misery, by the fall from the Covenant of Works in
innocence, as in Adam, the only Hole at which all Curse, Wrath and Misery,
Spiritual and Temporal entered, Romans 5. That they may fall on Christ, and at his
Feet for all Redemption and Help, out of themselves; thus the Law continues
still, and for want of this Spiritual Ax, Mal. 4. to cut down and humble you,
that you may appear as nothing but Firebrands for Hell, it is that you and all
your proud Generations have perverted Christ's Gospel, and established a new
one, Gal. 1.8, 9. the which makes your case worse, you are insensible of it,
but glory and triumph in your cursed Bondage, Gal. 4. Your justification is
full of sin, and you make Christ to purchase a sinful justification, Gal. 2.
and so the Minister of sin you make him, while you prate that he removed the
Covenant of Works, and satisfied that, and procured a Lex remediens, a milder
Law; that is, that by Faith, Repentance, and Obedience, we may be justified;
and so you make sin to justify; for all our Faith, and Repentance, and
Obedience is but filthy Rags, Isay 64.6. Phil. 3. and full of sin: And Christ
faith, That when they have done all that is their duty, that is to believe, to
repent, and obey, Luke 17. then are they unprofitable Servants. Ergo you make
sin to justify when you make Faith actually to justify. 2ly you make Christ
the upholder of sin, when you, with the Papists your Brethren, make Christ's
Blood to purchase a sinful justification; that is, that our Faith, and
Repentance shall justify. Do you see the Pelagian, Arminian, Papistical Crew!
upon what Rocks and sholes you split your selves, and all to bring in a new and
another Gospel to damn you, and to exclude Christ's everlasting Righteousness,
or the Law of works perfectly fulsilled in his person, to be imputed to poor,
sinful, undone, ruined Worms, for their free and real justification.

Now all these Imperfections are covered to true Believers with the same
Righteousness that covers their persons, Tit. 1.15. And so both they and all
their Performances and Righteousness, though in it self faulty, is accepted and
sanctified, and all the sinfulness of it and them covered, Ps. 32. Romans 4.5, 6,
7. This is a benefit peculiar to the Elect, who truly believe and receive the
imputation of Christ's Righteousness, and not to you that cannot cry (...), but
(...), whose Ruin, Damnation lingers not, except in infinite Mercy he give you
humility and poverty of Spirit; Faith in that truth of the true Jesus, and
everlasting Covenant, and Repentance for your Blasphemies and Errors, as a
Fruit of the pardon of your sins by their transaction on him, and the Evidence
of your Faith in receiving his Righteousness, etc. So unless you are freed by
Jesus from all sin and misery in esse or posse coming on you in Gods sight from
Adam's fall, or by your own actual and daily Transgressions, and from all the
sin and spottedness of all your most holy Duties, your Faith, Prayers,
Repentance, and new Obedience, though wrought puerly in you by Christ's Spirit
as true Believers, and freed from allsin, past, present, and to come, by the
transaction of them on Christ by the Father, Isa. 53.6. and the imputation of
his pure Righteousness to your persons, received by Faith alone, you are not
free indeed by the Son, Jo. 8.31, 32. but in Bondage under the Law and Curse
thereof, Deuteronomy. 27. ult. with your Children.

Your twelfth Article is swollen big with an absolute Error drawn from the
practice of the Apostles, laying on of hands, not ministerially, as a sign of
the approbation of Elders, but as an Apostolical practice, which did with them
cease, as being fruitless and uneffectual, beyond their time, and unpractised
in the ordinary Churches, nor at all upon any Record of Command -- more than
James anointing with Oil, which Papists make a Sacrament; or Christ's washing
his Disciples Feet: But because it is sufficiently confuted by Colonel Danvers,
a Brother of yours in the water, but I hope in the Spirit built on better
Principles, I desist to prosecute further; only I observe this by the way, That
your Tribe and Fraternity, having sinned most against the Covenant of God's
Grace in Christ, in founding your selves upon Popish, Pelagian, and Arminian
Principles, he has hardened your hearts, and left you to more Horrible Errors
than others.

Your thirteenth Article is double tongued -- runs with the Hare and holds with
the Hound; for Communion, Prayers, and use of Sacraments, are the duty of
Believers -- but not the immediate duty of damnable Heretics. For first
repent, and believe the Gospel, if you can, according to its primitive
Institution, then those follow in order.

To your fourteenth Article I answer that you have neither the true Form or
Power; and if you had the Form and not the Power, it is enough for us to depart
your Tents, because they are Tents of Darkness. You have not the true Faith,
ergo not the true Spirit; ergo not the true Love, ergo not the true Power. And
for your Form it is not Apostolical or truly Scriptural. Antichrist's
Foundation, ever since the false Apostles seduced the Galatians, is that you
are built on.

Your fifteenth Article is a Beggar too, and presupposes that which we cannot
grant you, That you are the true Church and Ministers of Christ; It Is true, the
true Ministers of Christ are to be free, and Hospitable, not like your
ltnierants, who trade it in the World, and prate of what you know not, and have
not observed the Apostles Rule, 2 Timothy 2.4. and 15.16. verse. for you do not
Orthotomounta rightly cut down in twain the Law and the Gospel; preaching one
to the proud, selfconceited Hypocrites, and the other the humbled Sinners; and
as for Hospitality, when God shall give us Gosel-wages, 1 Cor. 9.12, 13, 14. 2
Cor. 11.7, 8. I trust we shall by his help do our duty in that. You preach not
the true Jesus, nor the true Gospel, as Paul did, 1 Cor. 15.3.17. 2 Cor. 11.4.

The sixteenth Article opposes his Fellow afore-going, and gives him the Lie to
his face, where Ministers are to be hospitable -- But here you take the means
of hospitality from them, and tell them, they must preach freely. You forbid
Tithes, that sticks in your throats -- though Christ's Covenant dashed in pieces
you can swallow down like the Pharisees Camel, ex ungue Leonem: But pray, where
are Tithes forbid (jure Humano) as a Gospel Maintenance, if not jure Divina. I
would Gospel Ministers had the Tithes by the godly Magistrates Anthority, it
would be no sin against Christ.

I ask you a Question, Did Constantine sin, or not sin, in giving the Tithes to
the Clergy; which thing was done by him: 1. Before the Roman Antichrist arose.
2. In love to Christ, notwithstanding that Voice that is said to tell him, that
he had by so doing ruined the Church. If you say it was a sin, then prove
against what Law he sinned? for where there is no Law, there is no
Transgression. Is it not lawful for Gospel Magistrates to provide for Gospel
Ministers? if they may not, by what Law may they not? if they may, by what Law
may they not give them the Tenths? 1. You Will say, perhaps, because the Tenths
are the Husbandmans own; it may be when Christ has taken the Kingdoms in his
own Power, he will give it up to them; but till then it is in the power of Kings
to dispose it as they will, and your duty to be subject to them, Romans 13. And
it is a custom, e memoria hominum, and therefore not ours, but the Princes; and
may not he give it to whom he will? 2. You Will say, 'twas an Antichristian
Maintenance, brought in by the Pope: This Reason is of most prevalency, could
you prove it. For first, it is apparent that Tithes were given to the Pastors of
Churches, before the Roman Antichrist rose up. -- So, you make Baptism of
Infants Antichristian, as brought in by the Pope, which was practiced from the
Apostles days, and never questioned till about the fifth Cent. and then by the
Insurrection of Catabaptists. See Calv. Instit. 4. lib. 15, 16. Chapters. But
to close all, pray why do you bring in, and establish the capital Errors of
Antichrist and Papists; as Free Will, General Redemption, falling from Grace,
etc. which were established by Huberus, Phygius, Hemingius, Bellarmine, and
many other Papists: Yet wipe your mouths, like the Whore in the Proverbs; Come,
let us take our fill of love, I have offered Burnt-offerings and Peace Offerings
to day: So you, Come, let us build on their Foundation, for we are baptized with
Believers Baptism, and have gathered Churches, and separated from the Church of
England. Don't you know that Separation is not a mark of the Spirit sufficient
to carry you out, Jude Ep. 19. No, nor giving your goods or bodies to the fire
neither, 1 Cor. 13, no, nor the multitude of your Party, 1 Kings 18.22. and
Chap. 23.20.21, 23, 24. For your pretended holiness, prayers, and zeal, Mat.
6.5, 7, 8. Phil. 3.6. -- Now seeing you build upon the Foundation of
Antichrist, the very Doctrines of the Whore, and cloth your selves with his
Scarlet Coverings, hating all that are not of your Sect, especially of the
Element of Water, and with her Whores Righteousness, viz. that of Works, for
Faith and Repentance are our Works for Justification; and yet rail so
egregiously against others for holding some of her Ceremonies and Figures, --
which at worst cannot be so bad as her Doctrine is; therefore sweep your own
doors, and pluck the Beam out of your own eyes, ye Hypocrites, Luke 6.42.

The seventeenth Article cuts its own Throat, for none are more notorious
Heretics than you Pelagians, Arminians, that have drunk down the Poison of
Antichrist in these damnable Principles, which never no true Protestant held,
since the Reformation, till Arminius and Grotius in Germany, and the Socinians
in Muscovia, till King James his days, who gave a breathing time to the
Promulgators of it, and permitted it liberty, to the rooting it self in the
British Soyls. All the Martyrs died professed Enemies against it, and charged
it upon the Papists, who ever owned it as the Foundation of all their Doctrine.
See Foxes Martyrol.

-- O! monstrum horrendum ingens -- Augustine opposed it in the fifth Cent.
wherein Pelagius first broached it in the Western World; and being banished
from Rome, brought it into Britain. Not a word of it in the first four hundred
years after Christ, though the Arrians, Nestorians, Eutychians, and Manechees
swarmed with damnable Heresies, yet not a word of this new Gospel; though I
believe the Basis of it was laid by Cerinthus and Cerbion, in Primitive times,
and by the false Apostles before the Apostles death, as the Apostle
demonstrates in his Epistles to the Galatians, Romans, and Hebrews. Therefore
we must leave to do with you after the first and second Admonition, and reject
you, as the poison of the Church, and the greatest Enemies to Christ, his
imputed Righteousness, and our precious Souls.

The eighteenth Article proclaims loudly falling away from Grace, and so
speaks perfectly the Language of Rome. See Dr. Willet against Papists, in his
Fifth Absurdity of General Redemption and Universal Grace, page 912 of his
Sinopsis. This Error was detested by the Fathers of the Primitive Times; as
first Dionysius the Areopagita, in his Eleventh Epistle to Apollophanus, who as
he says of himself, was 25 years of Age at Christ's death. Next Justin Martyr,
163 years after Christ, in his Explic. Quest. a Gentibus Christ. positaram,
Quest. 23. and Quest. 98. he declares against it, That the Saints cannot fall
away, being once in Christ. Then Ireneus, about 182 years post Christ lib. 5.
Cont. Here Is. page 550. to 558. and page 564. accordingto the Edition at Basil,
571. -- And Clemens Alexandrinus, a learned man, Anno Christi 200 -- Then
Tertullian, about the same time, in his Book Adversus Hereticos. cap. 2. Editio
Beati Rhenati Parisus, 1566. Tom. 1. par. 161.162. -- Nemo sapiens, nemo
fidelis, nemo major est, nisi Christianus. Nemo autem Christianus, nisi qui ad
finem usque perseveraverit. And Origin -- And Cyprian, Anno 270. post Christum.
Arnobius, Hilarie, and Basil, 370. Ambrose 400 Epiphanius and Chrysostom, Anno
Christi 230. and Angustine in cent. 5. Cyril, prosper, and Gregory the Great,
600. and Bid 700. Anselme, 1093. since the Conquest; and Bernard, Anno 1140.
As in a Sermon on Can. 7.9. and Can. 3.4. I held him, and would not let him go,
until I had brought him into my Mothers house. He descants thus. Venerunt
flumina flaverunt venti and impegerunt in eam and non cccidit, co quod fundata
esset supra petram, petra autem est Christus, Anno Christi, 1616. And Luther,
and Calvin, Melancthon, Zuinglius, and Zanchy, and all the Councils, as
Milivitan. Can. 3.4. Jo. Hus. and all the Protestants beyond the Seas, have
wrote against the Papists, and defended the impossibility of a Believers
falling finally. And to shut up all, take Christ's own words, Joh. 10.26, 27,
28, 29. And lastly, take August. once more, lib. de cor. rep. and great. Chap.
7. Eorum qui Electi sunt, si quispiam perit fallitur Deus, sed nemo eorum perit
quia non fallitur Deus, 2 Timothy 2.19. Rev. 3.3. Heb. 6.4.5. are, with other such
places, spoken of Hypocrites; as Mat. 13.5, 6, 7. which were never elected, or
truly converted and called. Where are you now? can you subvert Christ's words,
Joh. 10.26. Ye believe not, because ye are not my Sheep; And Romans 8. latter
end; My Sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me; and they
shall never perish, and none shall pluck them out of my hand. And then for that
Text, Joh. 15. you pervert it, as you do other Texts, to your own destruction,
2 Pet. 3. For every Plant or Branch in Christ the Vine, by external profession,
that brings not forth the fruit of true Faith, for Faith is the fruit of the
Spirit, shall be taken away from that profession, to some damnable Heresy or
Atheism: And that Scripture is verified in you, and hundreds more of you
Baptists, who since you have forsaken your Baptism, and the Covenant of the
Grace of God, are given up to damnable Heresies, to Arminianism, Pelagianism, a
Popish Principle, and some to Quakerism, and flat Atheism: And therefore this
day is that Doctrine of Christ fulfilled upon you. O! that God would grant you
repentance, 2 Timothy 2.25. it is God that gives repentance; and it is to be
feared, because you have stolen that Prerogative from God, and placed it in your
selves, that God will harden your hearts, as he did Pharaoh's, Romans 9. and give
you up to believe a lie, that you may be damned, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. and Joh.
12.40. blind your eyes, and harden your hearts, lest you should be converted:
For to him is all Power, and Glory, and Freedom, to do what he will in Heaven
and Earth, for ever and ever, Romans 11. last.

The nineteenth Article makes provision for the poor, and belongs to the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor, and to the Kings Justices of the
Peace at the Quarter Sessions, and Monthly Meetings: Nevertheless, I desire to
give of my Morsel to every one that wants, and a Cup of Water to a Disciple in
the name of a Disciple.

This is the Mode of all Sects and Heresies, this day in the World, to call all
their own Brood Saints: so do the Papists, Arrians, Arminians, Socinians,
Quakers, and Baptists. This is that Christ prophesied of, Mat. 2.11. Lo here
is Christ, lo there is Christ; but you are all deceived, for Christ is not
confined to your secret Chambers, to your Societies, or to your Wilderness: he
is wherever the Faith of Christ is, which you deny, having brought another
Gospel, Gal. 1. and are therefore accursed.

The twentieth Article professes the Resurrection from the Dead, which the
Quakers do seem to deny; that is, that the Bodies of the Saints that died,
shall rise again, and together with Christ their Head be glorified; and the
Bodies of the Unbelievers be raised, and their Spirits and Souls be
re-conjoyned, and suffer together with the Devils to all Eternity. But some of
you Baptistical Arminians do hold, that the Soul is mortal, and dies with the
Body, till the Resurrection, -- contrary to the true Churches confession in all
Ages, and to the Scriptures, Phil. 1.21, 22, 23. ver. If Paul's Soul had died
with his Body till the Resurrection, it had been no gain to him to die; for
then there had been more gain to have lived, though in a wicked World, because
here he by Faith enjoyed Christ, and his Soul lived with his Body; but when
dead, his Soul also slept at least, and then he could enjoy no Communion of
Christ, till the time of the Resurrection: But to die is gain; Ergo, his Soul
did live and enjoy Christ immediately after his dissolution, as verse. 23.
Again, Heb. 9. after Death comes Judgment, yea a particular Judgment of the
particular Soul: but if the Soul die with the body, though but for a time, then
no particular Judgment, which the Scripture allows: if the Soul dies with the
Body till the Resurrection, what need then is there that Christ should
intercede, Heb. 9.24. and appear there before God for the Saints, Heb. 6.20.
What does he appear for the dead? then he need not intercede till they live,
that is, till the Resurrection: Beside, Christ's Argument to the Sadduces, your
half Brethren, may serve to confute you, God is not the God of the dead, but of
the living; Ergo, the Souls of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all do live, though
their Bodies be dead, and Christ, in respect of his Body, is the Forerunner,
because the Bodies of the Saints shall also (their Souls being reconjoyned)
enter with him, Joh. 17.24. 1 John 3.2. Phil. 3.21. and the Souls of the damned
are now in Hell, Jude Epist. verse. 7.2 Pet. 2.7. Ergo, the Souls of Saints are
now in glory with Christ the Lord. And lastly, the old Whores Purgatory is
better than your mortality, for a live Dog is better than a dead Lion, Eccles.
9.4.

The one and twentieth Article acknowledges a general Judgment, but tacitly
denies the particular Judgment, because the Authors of the Article deny the
Immortality of the Soul, from the time of the death of the Body, to the general
Resurrection, as I said before: It is, says Paul, appointed once for every man
to die, and after that death, to Judgment; that is, every particular man; for
the Premises is particular, therefore the Assumption must be particular: the
death he speaks of is a particular death; Ergo, the Judgment that follows is a
particular Judgment; which, I say, these good Gentlemen tacitly deny: It is
absurd, that the Soul should not live a moment; for if the Soul be immortal, a
part post, that is, from the instant of its infusion into the Body, it may not
desist from life a moment, for then it would lose its Immortality. If we grant
you Mortality of the Soul for a time, they may as well beg its Mortality for
ever; for to unreasonable persons that have not the true Faith of Christ, grant
an Inch, and they will crave an Ell.

But I pass to the two and twentieth Article, which is like a Jewel in a Swines
Snout: What, the Kingdom of Christ set upon the Foundation of the Whore of
Babylon, and Antichrist? it loathes my Soul to see it. The Reign of Christ in
the Kingdoms of the World in his Saints, in a restorative Apostolical manner,
before the final dissolution of the World, is and ever was the Judgment and
Faith of Saints; and not only so, but at the general Judgment, when Christ
shall again the second time appear, Acts 1. in that glorified body of his, and
descend from the Throne, in that flesh he did ascend with, the innumerable
Societies of Saints and Angels, the then living Saints being changed, 1 These.
4. ult. Phil. 3. ult. to meet the Lord in the Clouds of Heaven, and together
with him, to return to take the Kingdoms of the World into his possession, Dan.
7. Rev. 11. and so to judge the Earth, and give his beheaded and suffering
Sons, Rev. 20. quiet and peaceable enjoyment of the new Heavens, and new Earth,
Isai. 63. and 2 Pet. 3. till the second and last Trumpet, 1 Cor. 15. whether
numerically for a thousand years, or less, or more, may be disputable by some;
but for the sum and substance, has been owned from the very Apostles days by
the Fathers; as Papias, Justin Martyr, and Irenaeus, and almost, if not all,
except August. and Jerome, who yet spoke very favorably fo the Chyleasts, or
fifth Monarchical Judgment. Licet non sequamur, tamen damnare non possumus,
quia mult^ Ecclesiasticorum virorum ista dixerunt, Jer. 23. Ep. de regnand.
secundo Christi. But to set up this glorious Truth and Kingdom of Jesus Christ
upon a rotten Papistical, Pelagian, Arminian, Heretical, Antichristian
Foundation, you will receive the reward of the Pharisees, Mat. 7. Lord, we have
prophesied in thy Name, and cast out Devils: but, says Christ, depart from me
ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for unbelievers.

The three and twentieth Article pleads for the holy Scriptures to be the Rule
of Faith and Life; it is one thing to take the Letter of the Scripture, with
the Doctrine and sense of the Holy Ghost included, and another thing to accept
for our Rule the humane glosses of men's natural or deluded spirits, the latter
of which is equal with their Error that deny the regular Authority of the
Scriptures: The Letter of the Scriptures, and the Spirit of Jesus, are both in
Commission from Christ our Prophet to teach his people: they that exclude the
Spirit, and pretend the Letter, are as unfortunate as Arminians, Socinians,
Pelagians, and other Carnal Heretics: but they that reject the Letter, and
pretend the Spirit, are swallowed up of Enthusiastical Delusions, as Quakers
and such like: For whom God has joined together, we must not dare to separate
asunder, without incurring the Curse of adding or diminishing.

The twenty fourth Article pleads for Liberty of Conscience in spiritual
matters: It is not to be doubtted but that the Saints of God ought to have
their liberty to worship God; and to hinder them, is the greatest sin, next to
the sin against the Holy Ghost: but the question is, who are the Saints? 2.
Whether false worshippers may have liberty from godly Magistrates? 1. Saints
are either called to the Faith of Christ, and so to the profession of it; and
such are visible, though they may differ among themselves in some
circumstances: 2. Saints that are Elect, but uncalled, may be among them that
are false worshippers, till called: the first only worship God truly; because
none can worship God truly, but such as truly believe in the Son of God,
according to the Declaration of God, and that Record he has given in the Word
of his Son; viz. that Christ was made Sin, and a Curse; that he laid their sins
on Christ, and so freed them, and their Curse; and so that Righteousness of the
Law fulfilled in his Person as God-man, is imputed to them for their whole
Righteousness, which they by Faith alone receiving, are visible Saints, and do
worship God truly: they that have not this Faith, though Angels in appearance,
are but false worshippers, because the Law of Faith in Christ, is the
fulfilling of the whole Law directly, the first Table toward God, Exodus 20.
containing first four Commandments, that is fulfilled completely in a true
Believer: and forasmuch as Love flows from Faith, so is the second Table
fulfilled in a true believer; but this fulfilling the Law by Faith in a
Believer, is not his Justification or Righteousness before God, for that is
Christ's fulfilling it in his Person, Romans 8.2, 3, 4. and Gods imputing it to
the sinner, Romans 4.5, 6, 7. and Faith as an Instrument receives it, and applies
it to its self: So then the Act of Faith in us does not justify, for then our
Works and the Law would justify, but it is still Christ alone that justifies,
Romans 8. To the second question; the Magistrate may restrain false worshippers:
See Rev. 2.20. and 2 Cor. 10.5. the Instruments of the Church for this purpose
are spiritual, 1 Cor. 5. delivering the proud and contemptible to Satan; and
the godly Magistrate is but a Ruling Elder, whether in a Congregation or
Nation. Let the Tares grow with the Wheat -- some say is meant of secret
Hypocrites: but I suppose that bloodshed, consiscation, or any corporal
persecution in this day, is not to be in any wise inflicted on deluded
Consciences.

The twenty fifth and last Article, seems to contradict his Predecessor; for he
allows the Magistrate to punish evil doers, and encourage the good, but his
Predecessor flatly denies the Magistrate to have any thing to do with matters
of Divine Worship. Now among the Pretenders to Spiritual Worship, three parts
for one may be supposed to be erroneous: Now, what is more cruel than false
worship? Ergo, the Magistrate is to punish false Worshippers, or else he must
not punish all evil doers, forasmuch as such are the greatest evil doers in
quality, if not in quantity, or number. But here lies a Falacy occult to most
men's judgments; false worship, say they, consists in mode, or manner of
worship, not considering that the greatest evil in worship lies in the
substance, not in the mode: For false worship consists either in the substance,
as in a false Faith, and false Principle, or else in false mode, or manner of
worship: the last is bad, but the former worst of all, because it is the ground
of the latter; the latter, though true, is but a form of godliness, if the
former be wanting. Hence all Arrians, Socinians, and the greatest part of
Rattabaptists, Arminians, Free-willers, General Redemptionists, Conditional
Decretists, and Quakers err in the former, though some of them may not in the
latter; therefore, at best, have but a form of godliness, and from such we are
commanded to turn away; for the Power consists in true Faith, and true
Principles, and true love to God and Man, both arising from the diphthongued
Union between the Soul, and the Man Christ Jesus, by the Spirit of the Lord;
and then mode, order, and disciplinal method will be soon rectified, if the
Premises be truly grounded, or else not.

The Doctrine of Quakers, Pelagians, Arminians, Grotians, Pharisees, Assidians,
Papists, and Justitiaries.
ABsurdities from your Errors arising, That God gave his Son for all
Universally, upon condition that they believe, repent, and, obey him; and so
Election, upon condition of something in the Creature; either naturally, as
restored by Christ at once, as the Pelagians, or else wrought in them by the
Spirit, upon the assent of their free will, as the Papists, and Council of
Trent, only by Gods foreknowledge, ab Eterno; but not determination, and free
act, and without considering any thing in the Creature, and particular free
Personal Election from Eternity, merely of good pleasure, without any thing in
the Creature, but to be wrought in the Elected, as the purchase of Christ's
Blood after Election.

1. You make Christ the Minister of sin, Gal. 2.17. for you make man's act of
Faith, Repentance and Obedience, the formal cause of their Justification, not
only without which (sine qua non) but by which they are justified before God,
and not by Christ's Merits only: But man's act of Faith, repentance and
obedience, is sin, and filthy rags, Isay 64.6. Phil. 3. Ergo, that which is sin
you make to justify, and consequently Christ must be then the Minister of sin,
if his Righteousness alone be not sufficient to justify (being imputed by God,
and received by Faith) for something that is sinful, and of man's, must help to
justify, and Christ's Merits only make it passable and acceptable: so then
Christ's Merits makes sin passable and acceptable, for all our righteousness is
but filthy rags, Is. 64.6. Phil. 3. dung and dross, yea loss, which is worse
than sin; for man has no righteousness, except it be wrought in him by the
assistance of the Spirit; therefore it must be that righteousness wrought in
man that the Prophet means, and the Apostles; for in him we live, move, and
have our being, Acts 17. Now the major is proved by all the Testimonies and
Writings of Arminians, Baptists, of that Sect, and Pelagians and Papists, and
is notoriously known; The minor is made good from Isay 64.6. and Phil. 3. Ergo
the COnclusion is true, That they make Christ the Minister of sin.

The second Absurdity is, That those of this Error do make the Souls of Men,
before Christ's coming, mortal, and to dye with the Body; which is contrary to
the Apostle, Phil. 1.23, 24. worse than the Papists, their Purgatory, For a
live Dog is better than a dead Lion; and agreeable to Atheists, Stoics, and
Heathens: Besides, it makes all Christ's Sufferings on the Cross (as they say)
to remove the first Covenant of perfect works, and to bring in a Lex remediens,
a milder Law, to be only Temporal Punishment: For such as was our Deliverance,
such was his Passion, 1 These. 1. ult. to deliver us from the Wrath to come, did
he die. Ergo our first death is both Eternal and Temporal. Again such was Gods
promise to Adam, had he stood; such was his punishment if he fell. But if he
had stood, he had life Eternal; Ergo, falling, Eternal death; besides, The
wages of Sin is Death, Romans 5. and Romans 6. ult. and James 1.13, 14, 15. But all
man's Sin entered with his first fall, Romans 5.12. Ergo, the first fall is the
ground of Eternal Death: And that Unbelief only is the cause of Damnation, is a
Lie against the Scriptures. For it is true, Unbelief is the cause of all sins
efficiently -- And Sodom and Gomorrah were damned instrumentally for Adultery
and Fornication, Ep. Jude 2. Pet. 2. and not instrumentally and directly for
Unbelief in the Son of God: Yea Originally because they were reprobated from
Faith, effectual Calling, and Glory, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. and because he did
not taste death for them nor deliver them, because they were not elected, ab
eterno, 2 These. 2.13. 1 These. 5.9. John 22.40. Heb, 2.9. (...) (v. 10. (...))
(...). That by the Grace of God he might taste Death for every Son.

The third Absurdity is, 2 Timothy 2.19. then by these men's Doctrine the
Foundation of God is not sure, if the acceptance of Christ and his Merits
depend on man's Free Will; for conditional is not certain, for Faith is no
condition on man's part, but a Necessary Qualification wrought in the Elect to
apply his Grace, and purchased by his Blood too, and wholly wrought by his
Spirit in them, as effectual Calling, Romans 9. Fph. 2. Cratia non offertur Deo
singulis, animo communicandi eam, sed solis Electis. Piscator against Papists.

The fourth Absurdity is, That God's Grace is not free, which is by his word
declared to be most free, Romans 7. and Romans 4. not at all of our works wrought
in us, for then it is not free: Now Election is the top of his free Grace from
whence flows all the other Justification and effectual Calling and Glory, Romans
8.29, 30, 31, etc. for if it be upon any condition in us, then it is not free;
but it is most free, Ergo, upon no condition in or by us at all, Acts 13.48.
None can believe but who are pre-ordained to live, Ephesians. 2.8, 9, 10. The Elect
are created unto good works, according to his good pleasure, Phil. 2. Huberus
and Hemingius, the great Jesuits, and Patrons of this Sophistry, say, non
absolve statuit, sed defixit in Christo, ut credant in eo, salvi fiant; but
predestination is de scientia Dei and voluntate ejus, and Act of his Will,
Ephesians. 1.4, 7. as well as of his prescience, Romans 8. Whom he knew he did
predestinate; there is his Knowledge, act of Will, and determinate Counsel; and
the word (...) prius denifinivit prepositus, signifies an act of his will,
(...) pono and (...) terminus, by his determinate Counsel; and it was 500 years
before this Error was seen or heard in the Horrizon of the World, till in the
fifth Century Pelagius preached it at Rome; and all the Fathers then,
especially St. Augustine opposed it. Now says Tertullian, id est verius, quod
est prius; and id est prius, quod est ab initiis, and ab Apostolis. Then in
latter times, about six hundred years ago, when Popery and the Babylonian Whore
brought forth her great Bastard Antichrist, she laid him on the Foundation of
this Metropolitan Error: And then in Germany, Arminius and Grotius licked up
the Dust of the crooked Serpent; and King James tollerating it in England, then
it began to spread and infect with its poisonous Breath, the Universities and
Doctors of our Island, and then since our Vineyard has been rifled and
undertrod by the croaking Jesuits, they have filled every Puddle and Lake, not
only Fountains anf Rivers, with their Horrible Spawn.

The fifth Absurdity, that Man has power and free will of himself to believe,
and to convert, or help to convert himself; he would have all (say they, to
believe) then all have power to do it, or else God mocks them: All in that Text
is not Universal, but Definitive, all the Elect of Jew and Gentile; as in 2
Cor. 5. it is used, and so is All taken; for the whole World lies in
wickedness, but we are of God: there all the World is taken for a part; and
Christ healed all Diseases, and John Baptist baptized all; yet Herod, and many
more, were not by him baptized; all put for many, Isai. 53.11. and Joh. 12.40.
it is apparent, that God does harden and soften whom he will, and it is no
derogation to his Justice or Mercy; for Romans 9. he may do with his Clay what he
will; and he only offers Grace universally by the external Ministry, but by the
Spirit internally, only to the Elect, and none else, Acts 13.48.

The sixth Absurdity, Man may resist his Effectual Calling if he will; and the
Jusuit Hemingius brings in Mat. 23.33. but that Bone will not be so picked, for
Christ speaks that in reference to his external Ministry and Manhood, as an
external Minister; only in that place, and so in other places too, you may find
him acting the part of an external Minister, though he was God blessed for
evermore.

The seventh Absurdity, is falling away from Election, and Faith, and Unbelief,
the only cause of Damnation. This last I have elsewhere answered to; but to the
first part of the Absurdity, there are a Cloud of Witnesses against Saints
falling away; for Hypocrites falling away we admit readily, according to which
acceptance, Heb. 6. and such like places are to be understood. Tertul.
Ireneus, Justin Martyr, and Jerome; yea all the Fathers of the first five
Centuaries, yea and all the Orthodox since; and Bernard, though living in
corrupt times, in the twelfth or thirteenth Cent. on Cant. 3.4. v. Venerunt
flumina, venti slaverunt, and impegerunt in eam, and non recidit eo quod
fundata supra Petram and ea est Christus. And Tertul Nemo sapiens, nemo fidelis
nisi Christianus, and nemo Christianus, nisi qui ad finem usque perseveravit.
And S. Aug. on Joh. 10.26. Eorum qui Electi sunt, si quispiam perit, fallitur
Deus, sed nemo eorum perit. quia non fallitur Deus. And Bernard on Romans 5.
Seoumdum tempus pro peccatoribus and inimicis sed seoundum praedestinatinem pro
amicis. And August. Cent. 5. Electi sunt ad regnandum cum Christo. And Ambrose,
Cent. 4. Omnibus qui sunt ex ejus corpore vitam acquisivit. And August Illi
Christo intelliguntur dari qui praeordinati sunt. And John 10.26, 27, 28, 29.
Joh. 17.2.6.9, 10. and Jon. 6.29.37.44. cum multis aliis, quae nunc longum est
praescribendum.

The eighth Absurdity, is general and universal Redemption, contrary to the
Scriptures, and to Joh. the 6.37.44. and Joh. 10.26, 27, 29. and the whole
Chapter; and Ephesians. 1.4.7. and to Acts 13.48. he only Heb. 2. 9, 10. tasted
death for every Son whom, Joh. 17. the Father gave him from Eternity. If Christ
died for all, he either died effectually, or sufficiently; effectually he did
not, because all are not saved: sufficiently he did not, because his death only
extends to them the Father gave him, who are beloved in the Womb, Romans 9.
before they have done good or evil: If he died for all, and all are not saved,
then is his Death and Grace in vain; but that is against both the Honor of
God, and Dignity of Christ. Compare Isai. 49. to Isai. 42.

The ninth Absurdity, that Unbelief is the only cause of Condemnation. I have
said something to this before; but this is contrary to Romans 2.12. to Heb. 6. to
Romans 5.12.16. Then all the Gentiles before Christ and Faith was preached, were
freed from condemnation, and all the Jews too, for ought I know, for Faith was
not publicly preached to them till Christ came, Gal. 3. ult. Acts. 17.30. and
14.16.17. Then Infants of Unbelievers cannot be damned; contrary to Ezekiel. 9.
for they were slain that belonged to the Parents that did not mourn for sin --
and if you say that was only but a temporal death. I answer, God did not, even
under that temporal conditional Covenant, destroy his own People that were
saved by Christ so rashly, they were certainly the Reprobates.

The tenth Absurdity: Why did the Apostle cry, Romans 11.33. Oh the depths of
God, etc. his Counsels, etc. if your Doctrine be the truth? there is no
mystery, no depth in that, for its built on Reason, and every Creature that
has but common Reason may fathom it easily, that God gave Christ for all. 1.
To put them into a condition of peace, and re-instate them in Innocence, as
before the Fall, that they have naturally free will in part, or whole, to
convert themselves, and to believe that Christ abolished the Covenant of
perfect obedience, and purchased a milder Law, that it they obey the Command of
Christ in the Gospel, and repent, and be sorry for sins committed, which they
all have power to do, if they will, and that but sincerely, in your sense; for
in the sense of Truth, sincerely is to do the Will of God without any flaw; as
the word, and the use of it, truly imports: Sincere, id est, sine cera, all
Honey without any drege of wax, (...); the first word is derived of (...),
splendour solis, and (...) secerno, to do ones works in the light of the Sun. A
Metap. taken from the Eagles, that try their young, by holding them up to
Sunbeams, which if they cannot endure, they cast them down as none of their
own: it is to do all works, obedience, and repentance, and quid non, in the
light of Christ's Righteousness, and Justification from all sin, guilt, and
wrath by Christ, and then it is freely done, and not for any reward; for repent,
believe, obey, is to be justified, but sincerity is to do them, because I am
freely justified by Christ's transaction of my sins, and his perfect
Righteousness imputed to me: This is the mark of Popery, and Pharisaicality,
which in the end will batter you all to pieces. The 2d. word is (...), which
signifies. Innocence, and Simplicity; as it were non cornibus feriense, ex a
privative, and (...), not to stick with horns, or to be pushed at, as only the
innocent perfect Keepers of Gods Law, as freed from Deuteronomy. 27. ult. for except
all sin be clearly abolished, without any spot, wrath will break out: Now is
your Arminian Faith, and Repentance, and Obedience so spotless, else wrath will
break out upon you one day or other; and (...) forum, (...) aufero: as if all
sin must be quite taken away, or else the work is not sincere: but Faith and
Repentance is our work, because done in us, though by the Spirit. And the
Apostle in 1 Cor. 2. says, The natural man cannot receive the things of God;
which it might, if yours were the things of God; for there is no Mystery in
your Arminian, Pelagian, Papistical, and Socinian Doctrines, but merely Reason:
And that word in 1 Cor. 2. may be well and properly read, the rational man, or
reason it self, cannot receive the things of God, for they are a mystery;
Pseuchicos Anthropos, the rational man; for the Soul is the subject of Reason,
and before Faith is given, is rational, but not spiritual; it is Faith in the
Blood of Christ, wrought by the Spirit of Christ, that makes it truly
spiritual. But Pucksius the Jesuit answers for you to that place in Romans 4.
alleged, that the Apostle admired, because he knew the depths of Gods
Counsels; and that it was beneath so great an Apostle, not to know the depths
of God. I leave his foolish Assertion, as not worth the answering, and refer
you and all your Tribe to Doctor Willet against the Papists, in his Synopsis of
the Controversies between the true Protestants and Papists, where all your
Doctrine is fully answered and confuted, by irrefragable Argumentsl, which when
you have answered, we will prepare new ones for you.

The tenth Absurdity: if this universally be true, then all have power to
believe if they will, contrary to Romans 3.3. then all have Faith given them, and
then their unbelief resists Gods gift.

Consider which is the greatest Mystery, the Doctrine of Election and
Reprobation of persons freely from Eternity, or conditional Election, upon
foresight of works or Faith, or the Election of Seed, not persons, as the
Quakers prate; Arminians and Papists would be justified by obeying Christ
without them, Quakers by obeying Christ within them. What difference is here,
but as much as is between an Heretic or Papist, without doors in a plain
dress, and a Papist dressed up in a Mystery, or an arrant Whore in honest
Women's apparel, sic etiam.

But neither will be justified by the obedience of Christ for them, that they
scorn that any man should pay their debts for them, but give them but leave,
and let God have patience, and they will pay him all their own way, Mat. 18.

2. Consider which is most for the glory of Gods Justice, Truth, Mercy and
Love, and for exalting of Christ, and Gods free grace, for that of necessity
must be the truth, and all men liars.

3. Consider which is most for the security of Gods Children, for that is Gods
great care, either to leave all men to their free will; an invention much like
the Popes Purgatory, of later years, congenerated out of the drunken Pates of
filthy dreamers, Jude Ep. to overthrow the Grace of God, and Righteousness of
Christ imputed; for this Doctrine knows, nor owns nothing of that kind of
righteousness; or to secure them in the hands of Christ without and above
themselves, and he and his Spirit to do all for and in them freely.

They object, that by Jacob and Esau in Romans 9. are meant two Nations and
Peoples. I answer with Calvin, they do so; But the Apostle does not bring them
in so, but as two Persons, signifying the Eternal free Personal Election and
Reprobation of God; either Gods will or man's will are most prevalent: God
desires not the death of a sinner, yet they do die, because they will not
believe, and repent, when the Ministry bids them; therefore to conclude, that
man's is more prevalent, is blasphemy against God; but if Gods Will is, then is
there eternal free personal Election and Reprobation. I demand, when did God
give this grace to all men? when did Christ restore all men? if as soon as they
fell in Adam, then all are conceived, and born pure; contrary to Psalm 51. to
David's experience, and contrary to Psalm 58.3. for then the wicked could not
err from the Womb; and contrary to Prove. 22.15. for then is not iniquity bound
up in the heart of a Child.

Now there are a parcel of Feminine and Womanish Objections drivelling at the
unclean mouths of Quaking and Arminian Jezabels, all which, were they a
thousand more, and the strongest that their Jesuitical Tribe can bring, are
anticipated with an Answer by our great Apostle, Romans 9.19, 20. in the 19th
verse is the protoplot of all Objections, and the Answer in the 20th verse.

Octject. (...)? Who has resisted his Will then, if it stand in the Free and
Personal Election before and without any thing in man, or of man? Why then does
he find fault? Or, Why does he accuse us, seeing we cannot help it? Or, Why
does he expostulate the Case with men? As Why will ye dye? etc. Ans. v. 20.
(...). Yea, say you me so! O! man! But who art thou that replyeth against God?
(...). Or that judge from the Truth against God, as the Word signifies. What
will these busy Bodies and Tatlers not stick to meddle with God? Shall the
Clay oppose the Potter? Shall the Ax resist the Hewer? O! monstrum horrendum
ingens cui lumen ademptum! for indeed these Sophisters have but one Eye.

Object. 1. If Christ dyed for all what need preaching? Acts 13. ult. 48. He
that ordained the persons, has ordained the end for them, and the means to
come, as via regnandi, to that end. Let this suffice for an Answer.

Object. 2. If there be a particular Election, then they shall be saved, and
the rest damned. Answer, Sape etiam stultus opportune loquitur, Fools may tell
truth: and so in this do you.

Object. 3. This renders God unjust and unequal. And so thought the unbelieving
Jews under the Law, so do you under the Gospel, and with the same Irony as the
Prophet did them I answer you. Go to then, make you a clean heart, and purge
away all your sins clean out of God's sight; get you a sinless Faith and
Repentance; and fulfill the whole Law in your persons perfectly, and then God
will perhaps receive you. But, secondly, I answer, Who art thou that replyest
against God?

Object. 4. The Scriptures bids all repent and believe. Answer, It speaks
especially to all the Elect of Jew and Gentile: Or ministerially to all
universally, but spiritually and effectually, to the Sheep the Elect.

Object. 5. God don't desire a Sinner's death, but that he repent. Answer, He
don't desire the death of Elect Sinners, nor never did; for he has loved them
with an Everlasting love, a part ante and post, Jer. 31.3.

Object. 6. Then is God a respecter of persons. Answer, So he is: 1. by way of
decree; for he respected Abel and rejected Cain, because he had elected the
one, and rejected the other; and so the person of Jacob, and hated the person
of Esau; before they did good or evil. Secondly, Officially he respects men's
persons; for Ministers shall shine as the Stars; and I have said, ye are Gods,
to Magistrates, and not to all; and the Man is the Image and Glory of God,
according to the place and Authority of an Husband: So is not the Wife as a
Wife, and a Woman: See 1 Cor. 11. therefore they that contend, and despise, and
rule over their Husbands, are meritricious Gentlewomen, and Amazon's, terrible
Monsters, generated out of corruption and the worser part of Evah, but the
works done by his redeemed and justified Children -- he respects not their
persons for their works, but for Christ's Righteousness imputed he respects both
them and their works, and will reward them. Neither does he respect the Beauty,
Riches, or Wisdom of any man, so as to respect the person for those things,
though good in themselves.

Object. 7. He gave himself a ransom for all. Answer, for all his Elect
definitively; which shall be testified in their proper times, Kainois idiois,
that is, when he by his Spirit calls, and does convert them.

Object. 8. It is not our works, but Christ that works in us Free Will, Faith,
Repentance, and new Obedience. Answer, Though he does, it is but filthy Rags,
Isay 64.6. Phil. 3. but Dross, Dung, and loss, as to our justification. Nothing
can justify in any Covenant, but a perfect Righteousness performed in a
perfect and righteous person, that never sinned, Romans 8.2, 3. Hab. 1.13. Romans 7.

Object. 9. This Doctrine of Election and Reprobation will dishearten people
from using the means. Answer, It will not Gods Elect, but rather hearten them.
Secondly, All are commanded ministerially to use the means, and have Abilities
to do it; yea the blind may hear, Romans 10.10, 11, 12, 13. but spiritually the
Spirit blows where it lists, John 3. the Spirit is but given to the Sons
alone, Gal. 4.6. Mat. 13. John 12.40.

Object. 10. Disobedience to the Law brought and incurred but temporal
punishments, but to the Gospel Eternal punishments, Heb. 12.2. Ans.
Disobedience to every, or to one Tittle of the Law, incurs now, and ever did,
Eternal Condemnation; for the wages of Sin is Eternal death, and Sin is but a
transgression of the Law; Ergo, the transgression of the Law deserves Eternal
Death. But the Jews as they were under the Law given at Sinai, had a Temporal
Conditional Covenant, to restrain their exhorbitant Spirits, and allure them by
Temporal Blessings, 1 Timothy 1.5, 9. There were three ends of the giving the Law
at Sinai. 1. To show the dreadfulness of the fall and breach of that Law in
Paradise; and that at the last Day God shall in Thunder and Flame, judge the
Bodies and Souls of all that fell and are not reconciled by Christ, or covered
with his Righteousness, Romans 4.6, 7, 8. Psalm. 32. or for whom he has not
fulfilled it in his most sinless and excellent person; and so it is a
demonstrative Covenant of works, Romans 3.19. showing Sin, and breaking in pieces
the self-conceited carnal hearts of Gods Elect; that they may receive the Grace
of God in Christ by Faith, Gal. 3.24. Isay 42.18, 19, 20. And this was then
Externally and Internally, and Spiritually and internally now, in them that are
called, the use of the Law, to bring them (in the hand of Christ) to nothing
but despiration, in and because of sin and self-impotency within and without,
that so they may, in emptiness and poverty, receive by Faith a full and able
rich Christ. Which when it has done by Faith, the Law vanishes out of the
Conscience like a baffled Giant, and retires into the Flesh to curb that to its
duty; and is then a Commandment and Law of Love upon the new Covenant heart of
a Believer, to freely move him, according to the External Rule and Matter of
the means, to glorify Christ in the World, 2 Cor. 3. and 2 Cor. 5. the love of
Christ constrains us. Secondly, a second end of the Law at Sinai, was to be a
rule to the Elect Believers then, to walk with God, whose Heart and Will the
Law represents. And so it was put in the Ark, A Type of Christ, in whom now the
Law is for a Believers Rule. Thirdly, It was given as a Temporal, Conditional
Covenant, to frighten the stubborn Jews from Rebellion, and to engage them to
Righteousness, a thing God did and does delight in: And so the breaches were,
as in this respect, punished, but with a Temporal Death and Punishment; and the
Performers with Temporal Life and Blessings; and as such a Covenant, its Epoca
began at Sinai, and did end when Christ came in the Flesh. The ignorance of
this distinction is the root of all Errors and Heresies: And so it was to the
Jews under that Testament of Grace, as it is now to us under the new and last
Testament of Grace, sealed and confirmed, not with the Blood of Creatures and
Beasts, but with the Blood of Christ, the Son of God, to the everlasting
Comfort of the Elect Believers.

Object. 11. This Doctrine, General Redemption, sets all on work to use the
means and to endeavor. Answer, Have ye never read or heard of Penelope, that
famous Wife, that when her Husband was gone to the Trojan-war, and thought to
have been slain, by his long tarrying, and she having many Woers perplexing
her, not delighting her as they do the Ladies of these times, was spinning; for
Ladies, in those more ancient times, were good House-wifes, though now they are
many of them Sluts, and she put back the sharp importunities of her Rivals with
this defense, That when she had spun off her Web she would answer them. Now to
prove her self Loyal to her Husband, and deceptious to her Rivals, she unspun
in the Night what she had spun in the day. Hence we call all labor in vain,
The spinning of Penelope 's Web: And such is the Works and Endeavors of all
unconverted and unbelieving persons whatsoever, though not to so good an end as
hers was; and this is as good an Answer as your Objection. Add to it the
Testimony of Christ, Mark 7.7. In vain do they worship me, and of Jer. 12.1, 2.

Object. 12. What if this Doctrine be Popery, yet if it be true it is not to be
rejected. Answer, Philpot, the Martyr, said to Bonner, Bishop of London, That
the Papists held not one Truth, but the Doctrine of the Trinity, and yet they
held this of Universal Grace; and the Words of a Dying Man are true, ut aiunt,
much more of a Dying Martyr, and Christian Man.

Object. 13. It Is Life and Conversation that saves us and makes us like God,
and not Opinion. Answer, The living Principles of the Doctrine of Christ are
not Opinions but Fundamentals, preached by the immediate in spiration of the
Spirit, confirmed by the ancient Testimony of the Prophets, and sealed with the
Signet of real Miracles; and attested to by the ancient Fathers of the first
500 years, and by all the true Churches to this day; and the Scriptures are the
rule and ground of Faith, Ephesians. 2.20. But such is the Doctrine of Election, ab
eterno, and Reprobation, free and personal; a good Life and Conversation built
upon Christ is the fruit of Christ's Spirit working love in the called Elect:
But such a visible Conversation, built on the Law and man's own Righteousness,
or man's Faith and Repentance, though wrought in time, is no other than the
superstructures of the Scribes and Parisees of old, and of Mistical Papists.
and Antichristians, the Bastards of the great Whore, in this day, Rev. 17.1, 2,
3. Rev. 2.26. It Is Christ's works, Faith, and Conversation, in him that gives
life to his -- and not that wrought in them, though by the Spirit; that does
but testify that they have life in Christ to the World.

14 Ob. God then made man to damn him. Answer with the Apostle; But who art
thou man that reply against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that
formed it, why have thou made me so? And beside, the Scripture says, He that
made them, will not save them, Isai. 27.11.

15. Ob. The easiest way is the wrong, but eternal free Personal Election is
the easiest. Answer, you know not what you say, no man is saved, no man
believes, no man truly repents, but it cost Christ his dearest Heart-blood, and
must cost us the farewell of dearest delights, and sin, and the loss of our own
hearts, self, and interests, Luke 14.28, 29, 30. 2. That that is the
rationallest way, is the easiest, because all men have naturally reason; but
your General Redemption, and Conditional Election, and Free Will, is the most
rationallest, and agreeable to reason; therefore the easiest, and the way of
God above reason, and is only fathomed by Faith; as Heb. 11. Chap. appears: And
that gate is straight and narrow, Mat. 7. and few enter into it.

16. Ob. That whatever we do or sin, we shall be saved by the way of Election.
Answer, that is your carping Calumny against the Truth; Gods people cannot sin
that sin that God cannot or will not forgive, 1 John 5. ult. There is a sin
unto death, and a sin not unto death: the Elect are beloved when they do no
good, or evil; they are beloved when they do evil, their persons, not their
sins, I mean, Gal. 2.20. Romans 9.11. and 13. 2 Timothy 1.9, 10. and they are
beloved when they do good, and they shall do good, because they are beloved,
Phil. 2.13. Heb. 12. two last verses. Again, the Truths of Christ believed and
received, and not Errors, is the only ground of sobriety, righteousness, and
godliness, Tit. 2.12. and 13. 2 Cor. 5.14. And again, pray, inspicite vobis,
look upon your Peacocks feet, how much unlike the Devils they are; though, like
the Pharisees, your Feathers be fine; your envy, your malice, your pride, your
errors, your instability, your factions and schisms, and Popish Principles,
backbiting, whispering, tale-bearing, vain discourse, tatling, 1 Timothy 5.
busi-bodying in other folks matters, 1 Pet. 4.15. these, and such like, are the
Ingredients that your holiness and righteousness is composed of, crying out
with the Pharisees, Isai. 66. Stand far off me, I am more holier than thou art.
And this is the manners of you Baptists, most of you, in this latter day, and
Quakers, and others too, the more is the pity. Ob. But we love one another.
Answer, O! Do you so, so do the Papists, so do the arrantest Heretics in the
World; and it is but self-love, and with dissimulation neither, for to prop up
Self, and honor Self, and secure your Reputations, that is dearer to you than
Christ's Blood, or love: Prate not thus, See you what Christ says, Mat. 5.46,
47. Luke 6.30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37. 1 John 2.10, 11. and Chap. 4.20.
Joh. 5.40, 41. Measure your life by these Scriptures, and deal truly with your
hearts.

Because you have Free Will, answer me these Questions.

1. Had the Angels Free Will to stand or fall? if they had, why did they fall?
or did the Elect Angels stand by their Free Will, the other having no sin to
tempt them to fall, more than the Elect had? and why are they called Elect that
stand, and the other not that did fall?

2. Had Judas free will to believe and repent, as much as Peter? if he had, why
did he not do as Peter did? or did Christ pray for Judas, as he did for Peter?
Mark that.

3. When Satan entered Judas and Saul, had they power to resist and abandon him,
or not? if they had, why was it so great a burden to them, that the one was
mad, the other hanged himself?

4. If no sin be damnable, but unbelief against the Gospel, how came the Angels
to be damned? and how came Sodom and Gomorrah to be cast into Eternal Fire, if
the sin against the first Covenant be only the cause of a temporal death and
punishment, as is by you asserted? Ocellos vobis Jehovah aperito, etc.

Per Johannem H.

FINIS.

