The Humble PROPOSALLS OF THE ADJVTATORS in the ARMY, Presented to his
Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX.

In the behalf of Diverse that suffer in matters concerning the KING.

ALSO A Declaration from his Excellency, and the Council of his ARMY, held at
Putney Septem. 9. 1647.

Concerning the fundamental Authority, and Government of the Kingdom.

BY the appointment of His Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, and the General
Council of his Army

Signed, Jo. Rushworth, Secretary.



7ber: 13 Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson, and are to be sold at his house
in Smithfield, 1647.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown and flanked by
the English lion and Tudor rose on one side and the Scottish unicorn and
thistle on the other
The Humble PROPOSALLS Of the ADIUTATORS IN THE ARMY Presented To His
Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, Concerning diverse that suffer in matters
concerning the KING.
May it please your Excellency,
HAving received information from some persons of good affections, and fidelity
to the Army, and Kingdom, that several persons, are now under unmercifull
sufferings, by confiscating their goods, and Imprisonment of their persons, for
words spoken against the King (acting in His Tyrannical practices in the late
War they having been Soldiers).

We being made sensible of their misery, not knowing how soon it may be our
own condition, there as yet being no provision for their, or our own
indemnity.

For want of which our Enemies have so great advantage of all the well-affected
in the Kingdom, That if not timely remedyed they will recover more upon our
words, then we of them by our swords.

We are engaged to supplicate your Excellency in the behalf of these
Prisoners, named in this enclosed paper, that you would be pleased to use some
means for the restoring them to their freedom, and to deliver them from their
Tyrannical sufferings, according as your Excellency shall find agreeable to
justice, and reason.

Presented to His Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, signed by these Adjutators,
John Reynolds. Francis White. Edward Chillendon. Tobias Birdge. Richard Nixon.
Nicholas Andrews. John Wilson. Not. Underwood. George Stenson. Richard Grant.
Thomas Raulings. William Young: John Tailor. Robert Stedman. John Wells. John
Dober. Edward Vaughan William Pryer. Thomas Shephard Timothy Thornebury J.
Willoughby. William Jones. Edward Twigge. H^nry Gethings.
A DECLARATION from his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX AND The Council of his
ARMY, held at Putney, Septem. 9. 1647.
Concerning the fundamental Authority, and Government of the Kingdom.
WHereas a Member of the General council of this Army has publicly
declared, and expressed himself, That there is now, no visible Authority in
the Kingdom, but the power, and force of the sword.

We therefore the said General Council (to testify how far our hearts and
minds are from any design of setting up the power of the sword, above, or
against the fundamental authority, and government of the Kingdom: And our
readiness to maintain and uphold the said authority.)

Have by a free Vote (in the said council, no man contradicting) judged the
said Member; To be expelled the said council.

Which we (hereby) thought fit to publish as a clear manifestation of our
dislike; And disavowing such principles, or purposes.

Putney 9 Septem. 1647. By the Appointment of his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax,
and the General Council of his Army, Signed, JOHN RUSHVVORTH, Secretary.

Septem. 11. 1647.
This Declaration from His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Council of
His Army, held at Putney Sep. 9. 1647.

Concerning fundamental Authority, and Government of the Kingdom.

Is published, By the appointment of His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the
General Council of His Army

Signed, JOHN RUSHVVORTH. Secretary

FINIS.

