THE HUMBLE PETITION OF THE Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London in Common Council assembled: To the Right Honorable THE LORDS and
COMMONS IN Parliament Assembled.

TOGETHER, With the Answers of both Houses to the said PETITION.

Printed by RICHARD COTES Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON, 1648

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The Commons IN THE High Court of Parliament assembled:
The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London, in Common Council assembled.
SHOWS,
THat as your Petitioners in all humility do thankfully acknowledge the many
former favors of this honorable House manifested to this City; so in
particular in granting their desires, expressed in their late Petition,
concerning the Tower and the Militia of London: And in communicating unto the
Petitioners several Votes of both Houses of Parliament, wherein to your
Petitioners great joy and comfort are expressed, your Resolutions that you will
not alter the Fundamental Government of the Kingdom, by King, Lords, and
Commons: That you will preserve inviolably the Solemn League and Covenant, and
the Treaties between the Kingdoms of England and Scotland; and that you will be
ready to join with the Kingdom of Scotland, in the Propositions agreed upon by
both Kingdoms for the speedy settlement of the Peace of both Kingdoms; and the
preservation of the union according to the Covenant and Treaties.

And your Petitioners do further humbly present to this honorable House, That
the Inhabitants of the City are much grieved; in that their Magistrates and
fellow-Citizens have for a long time been under restraint, and the City thereby
deprived of their Service. And humbly pray,

That in prosecution of your said Votes, you will be pleased to improve all
good opportunity in perfecting so desirable a good as is therein expressed, for
the speedy settlement of the Peace of both Kingdoms, and preservation of the
Union according to the Covenant and Treaties, and preventing a new and bloody
War.

That the Aldermen now in the Tower, the Recorder, and the rest of their fellow
Citizens, restrained upon the same occasion may be discharged and restored,
whereby the City may be the better united, their hands strengthened, and they
made more serviceable to the Parliament and City for their preservation and
safety, which they shall endeavor to the uttermost of their power and
abilities.

And the Petitioners shall humbly pray, etc.
Die Martis, 23. Maii, 1648.
THe Lords have commanded me to let you know, That they receive the
acknowledgments of gratitude, and the great expressions of fidelity and good
affections from the City of London, with such a satisfaction, as that they
return you their hearty Thanks: They have commanded me to assure you, that they
will improve all good opportunities for the attaining that desired end of these
unhappy troubles, the speedy settlement of a safe peace in both Kingdoms, and
the preservation of the Union according to the Covenant and Treaties. They will
endeavor to the utmost of their Power, to prevent any new and bloody War. As
to the particulars mentioned concerning the Aldermen now in the Tower, the
Recorder, and the rest of the Citizens restrained: They have commanded me to
declare to you, That they having had an Impeachment brought up from the House
of Commons against those Aldermen, have proceeded no otherwise then by the
usual course of Parliament they ought to have done. As to the Recorder, there
has been no Commitment or proceedings against him by this House. As to the
rest of the Citizens against whom there is no Impeachment, but only a
Commitment by a Committee of both Houses; their Lordships will proceed to
endeavor their speedy release. And they desire that the Lord Major, Aldermen,
and Common Council, and that the whole City may rest confident, That their
Lordships will use their endeavors for their satisfaction: And as it has
always been the study and labor of this House to express their Care for
advantage and union of the City of London; so, much more now will they endeavor
a Compliance with those desires of the City, which may firmly unite them one to
another; and fasten their Hearts, and strengthen their Hands in a
serviceableness to the Parliament, in order to these ends, The establishment of
Religion, The peace and safety of the Kingdom, according to our solemn League
and Covenant.

Ioh. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

Die Martis, 23. Maii, 1648.
THe House being informed, That the Sheriffs, Aldermen, and other Citizens were
at the door, they were called in, and Mr. Sheriff Bide, after some preamble by
way of Introduction, acquainted the House, That he was commanded by the Lord
Major, Aldermen, and Commons in Common Council assembled, humbly to present to
this House, An humble Petition: The which the Petitioners being withdrawn, was
read, and was Entitled,

The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London in Common Council assembled: In which they desire the discharge of the
Aldermen now in the Tower, the Recorder, and other their fellow-Citizens under
restraint upon the same occasion.

The Sheriffs, Aldermen, and other Citizens the Petitioners, were again called
in, and Mr. Speaker by the Command of the House, acquainted them that the House
had considered their Petition, that in it are many desires, which in the
Petition are expressed, to tend very much to the union of the City in it self,
which how much this House desires, will appear by the Votes this House has
passed upon their Petition. And then Mr. Speaker acquainted them with the Votes
concerning the Recorder, Colonel Bromfield, and other Citizens: As to the
business concerning the Aldermen in the Tower; he informed them, that it is a
business of very serious and important consideration: they have therefore
resolved to resume the debate of it on this day seven night.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

