HONI SOIT MAL Y PENSE
emblem

THE HVMBLE PETITION OF The peaceful, obedient, religious, and honest
Protestants of this Kingdom, presented unto the Honorable House of Commons,
in their behalf, by Doctor Hynton, 1642.

With an Answer to the several Objections proposed against him concerning the
Protestants Petition, by a Committee appointed from the Honorable House of
COMMONS.

Printed in the year 1642:

The humble Petition of the peaceful, Obedient, religious, and honest
protestants Of this Kingdom, presented unto the Honorable House of Commons,
in their behalf, by Doctor Hynton.
THat you will be pleased to reflect upon the divine Service of God, according
to the ancient laws of this Kingdom, that thereby the poor Protestants
between the two extremities of zeal may not suffer a disturbance of their
religion.

That you will be pleased to preserve Gods anointed his immediate Vicegerent
our true and lawful Sovereigns Lord the King, in his person in all his Regal
dignities and lawful immunities without any impeachment of his Regality, in
whose honor the reputation of the Kingdom depends.

That you will be pleased to ratify and confirm all things both concerning
His Majesty and the state of this Kingdom as they were in those blessed days
of Queens Elizabeth and King James, that we may thereby live in these latter
and turbulent times, with as much peace to our consciences, with as much
dignity to our Nation, in as true love and obedience to our lawful Sovereigne,
and with as much liberty and liberality of our fortunes as our forefathers
hertofore have done.

That you will not suffer Learning to be defaced nor discountenanced by the
ignorant, but rather that you will be pleased to advance is to its Dignity, it
being the maine supporter of lawful obedience, of order, civility, and
regularity in all States.

That you will be pleased to qualify the exorbitances of the S^ and unworthy
persons, that thereby the City of London and the Suburbs may be disburdened
from their continual cares and fear it besides their loss of time, healths,
and fortunes, which the T^bands, and the double and treble watches and wards
continually (...) sustain.

That you will be pleased, as the State has by election both made you members
of this Honorable House, and adopted you our Fathers to govern our fortunes,
to establish our Laws, and to regulate our actions: so we now beseech you to
satisfy our consciences, to preserve our reputations, and to admit of a
liberal and free debate in Parliament, concerning all these particulars,
without interruption, that thereby the glory of God may be exalted, the dignity
of our King and Kingdom preserved, the immunities of the House according to
the ancient custom of England continued, all precipitated tumults appeased,
all discords amongst us peacefully united, the valiant and re^ned acts of our
predecessors revived, our tottering fortunes established, our King and Kingdom
united; that so our minds and conscTences may be fully satisfied, etc.

Answer to several Objections concerning the Protestants Petition.
1. Quest Upon what reason do you present this Petition in the name of the
Gentlemen of the four Innes of Court?

Ans. My meaning was; because the Gentlemen of the Innes of Court, having
lately appeared before the face of the Court, to preserve the Kings person,
according to their allegiance, his Majesty being in eminent danger, as they
conceived, which might not s^eme altogether conformable in these turbulent
times, being not invoked by public authority, therefore I deemed it not much
incongruent for me; having been a member of that Society, to make my address
unto this honorable House, without their especial advice, by preferring an
humble Petition, which might manifest a perfect intention of their true
devotion, both toward your Honorable Assembly; as also unto their country.

2. Quest. Why did you not take the advice of some particular friends, or of
some one Innes of Court rather then the general, and for all the Protestants
of England?

Ans. My meaning was, because I did conceive that the Petition being universal
and concerning all the loyal Protestants of this Kingdom, it required a
general counsel of the whole four Innes of Court; that thereby through a
perfect and judicious judgment it might receive the better influence from the
whole Kingdom, upon whose Counsel this Nation does most depend.

3. Quest. What do you mean by the reflection upon the divine service of God?

Ans. My intention was that the divine service of God might be duly executed,
by reason of our daily schismatical interruptions, frequently appearing in some
of our Churches, manifestly repugning the Protestant professed faith in our
Religion.

4. Quest. What do you mean by the two extremities of zeal?

Ans. My meaning was Jesuits and Brownists.

5. Quest. Do you not think that we have as much care to preserve the Kings
person as you, what do you mean by that?

Ans. My meaning was, that you would be pleased to appoint an especial guard
to preserve the Kings person, by reason of the multitude of people which pass
by the Court gate in troops, with acclamations, and in a tumultuous manner.

6. Quest. What do you intend by the Kings immunities?

Ans. My meaning was, all the Kings Regal dignities, it being the glory of our
Nation.

7. Quest. Do you intend by settling things as they were in Queen Elizabeth's
and King James his days, to abrogate those Laws which we have enacted in this
Parliament?

Answ. God forbid: but my meaning was, that you would be pleased to settle us
in that happy peace among us which our Predecessors most happily enjoyed in
those precedent days both with our King and Country, without any impeachment
or diminution of those laudable and worthy Laws by your Honorable House
hitherto established.

8. Quest. What do you mean by the peace of your conscience?

Ans. My meaning was, that being devoutly employed in the divine service of
God, we might not be interrupted in our devotions by the Papists and
Separatists.

9. Quest. What do you intend by the defacing of Learning?

Answ. My meaning was, the manifest and daily affronts which our honest and
learned Divines sustain by schismatic persons, both in the Church and
public places, to the great dishonor and dis-repuration of Learning.

10. Quest. What do you intend by the advancement to its dignity?

Answ. My meaning was, that Doctors and Cobblers might not be equal
competitors, but that the Cobbler might not go beyond his Last.

10. Quest. What do you intend by Separatists?

Ans. My meaning was, the Brownists and non-Conformists to the established
doctrine in our true Protestant Church of England, so anciently professed by our
predecessors.

12. Quest. Why do you endeavor to introduce the Gentlemen of the Innes of
Court to petition for the Train Band, and double Watches?

Ans. My meaning was, because the Gentlemen of the Innes of Court having the
custody of many and great estates, ought to endeavor a general pacification,
that thereby the Train Bands, and extraordinary Watches may as well be
relieved from their chargeable and careful attendance, as we of our continual
fear with dangerous tumults.

13. Quest. What do you intend by free debate in Parliament, without
interruption or fear of punishment?

Ans. My meaning was, that there may be some on the behalf of the Petition
admitted to a liberal and free discourse before the Parliament, concerning the
particulars, without fear of punishment.

14. Quest. What do you intend by the valiant and renowned acts of your
predecessors?

Ans. My meaning was, but only a lively expression, to retain the dignity of
our Nation.

Quest. 15. What do you mean by this Protest?

Ans. My meaning was, no more but to testify my innocence, and the reality of
my heart to serve my God, my King, and Country.

16. Quest. What advice and counsel had you to draw up this Petition, and is
this your true Copy?

Ans. I do confess this to be my true Copy, and do most seriously protest,
that I had neither counsel nor advice from any man toward the contriving,
either of the heads thereof, or this rough and impolished draught; and I take
God to witness, the publication thereof was never. Intended without a general
and exact counsel upon every particular, that thereby it might appear
laudable before God and man; and therefore I humbly crave and beseech your
favorable construction of this loose Paper, submitting my self in all
humility to the grave wisdoms of your Honorable Assembly; and with a
cheerful heart ready to sacrifice my life and fortune at your commands.

FINIS.

