THE HUMBLE PETITION OF THE Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
LONDON, IN Common Council ASSEMBLED, With the annexed Papers: Presented to the
Right Honorable THE LORDS and COMMONS in Parliament Assembled: WITH The Answer
of both Houses to the said PETITION.

Printed by RICHARD COTES, Printer to the Honorable city of London, July 24.
1648.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lords and Commons In Parliament Assembled. The
humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London
in Common Council assembled.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners being very sensible of the great discontents and
jealousies for the present, and great dangers like to ensue for the future to
the Parliament and City, by reason of diverse listings of Horse and Foot, within
this City and liberties thereof, by servants and apprentices Listing one
another in a clandestine way, at unseasonable times in the night; and taking
power to grant Commissions to other Apprentices and servants to do the like,
pretending to do the same by virtue of printed Papers which they call
Commissions (one of which is hereunto annexed) tending to the raising of
tumults, dividing and breaking of the Trained-bands and Auxiliary forces of
this City, thereby disabling them to preserve the Parliament from force and
violence, according to their many former engagements, and endangering the peace
of this City: All which practices the said Listers conceive to be warranted by
the Order of the House of Commons of the Fifth of this present July, and an
Ordinance thereupon of the 12. of the same.

In consideration of the dangerous consequences whereof, your Petitioners
humbly pray, That this honorable House would be pleased to take the premises
into speedy and serious consideration, and to put a period to the power and
execution of the aforesaid Order and Ordinance granted to Major-Generall
Skippon for listing Horse and Foot; And that all persons listed by authority
thereof, may be discharged; And that by the speedy passing of the Ordinance for
uniting of the Militia's of the City and the parts adjacent; and for the
raising of Horse therein mentioned, they may be the better enabled to defend
the King, Parliament, and City, according to their former engagements; the
which your Petitioners will be ready to make good with their lives and estates,
according to their solemn League and Covenant.

And shall humbly pray, etc.

Die Mercurii, 5. Julii, 1648. The annexed PAPERS.
Resolved, etc.
THat the House does declare it an acceptable service in any persons that will
List themselves, Horse, or Foot, under the command of Major General Skippon,
for defense and safety of the Parliament, City, and Kingdom: And that the said
Major General Skippon is hereby authorized to Inlist all such persons, and
Command them, and draw them out of the late Lines into any Part, as he shall
see occasion; and to conduct and lead them, and to fight, kill and slay all
such as shall oppose, rise, or make any Insurrection against the Parliament, or
to the disturbance of the peace of the Kingdom.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

In pursuance of an Order from the honorable House of Commons, bearing date the
5. of July, 1648.
THese are to desire you to Inlist all such persons as shall voluntarily offer
themselves, for the defense and safety of the Parliament, City, and Kingdom;
and to return their names unto Me with all convenient speed you may. And for so
doing, This shall be your warrant.

Dated the 17. day of July, 1648. Ph. Skippon.

To Mr. John Manly, and to such others as he shall desire to further the
service above-written.
In pursuance of the abovesaid Order from the honorable House of Commons,
bearing date the 5th. day of July, 1648. directed to Major General Philip
Skippon, and by virtue of his Warrant to me directed, bearing date the 7th. of
the same.
THese are to desire you to Inlist all such persons as shall voluntarily offer
themselves for the defense and safety of the Parliament, City, and Kingdom; and
to return their names unto me with all convenient speed you may, that I may
return them to the Major General: And for your so doing, this shall be your
Warrant.

Dated the 9 day of July, 1648. To Mr. John Brown, or such as he shall desire
to further the said service.
RIght Dear and beloved friends, so many as are resolvedly willing to be fellow
Assistants in this so just and commendable service having no less then the
authority of this Parliament, as by their Order above inserted appears, with
Major General Skippons special Warrant, to justify this our practice and
proceedings: Be pleased therefore freely to subscribe your names, with the
places of your abode, and whether you are most willing to serve with Horse,
Musket, or Pike; as also whether you are provided with such Arms, as you intend
to serve with; and this is expected from you only at such hours and seasons as
all that is near and dear unto us shall appear to be in imminent danger; your
names shall be returned with what speed may be to the Major General, that so
having distinct knowledge of our numbers, with our resolutions, he may as he is
resolved, grant us authority to choose fit persons from among our selves, to
lead, order, and conduct us with security, when a sudden Alarm or confusion
shall be in this City or near adjacent, that so for future we may not be, as
formerly, in an incapacity to preserve ourselves in case of danger. And in thus
doing, you shall not only answer the desires of the Parliament, and of the
Major General, but also of us your faithful friends, who are jointly resolved
in every respect to enjoy the same measure with you, whether it be life or
death, or any other condition, we being fully sensible that what, concerning
visibility, is lovely in our eyes, lies at the stake; thus in the discharge of
our duties and places, we shall be satisfied, quietly waiting and expecting
comfortable success, as it shall by the God of our strength be handed unto us,
as the fruit of our labors and endeavors.

Die Sabbathi, 22. Julii, 1648.
THe Lords have commanded me to let you know, The Answer of the Lords.
that they will be ready to make good the confidence that the City of London
has of their Lordships care to preserve the safety and quiet of the City,
which has merited so much from them, and to prevent those things that may
occasion any distraction or disorder amongst them; the inconveniences which are
now expressed by your Petition, were not apprehended when the votes passed,
giving that authority to Major General Skippon, but since the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common Council are sensible of danger and distraction that may
arise in the City by such a power, they will do what in them lies for the
recalling of those Votes, that so the quiet and order of the City may not be
disturbed, and that no interruption may be given to the endeavors of the City
for the perfecting their former engagements to the Parliament.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parlia.

Die Sabbathi, 22. Julii. 1648.
THe House being informed that the Sheriffs of London were at door, they were
called in; and after a prologue made by Sheriff Bide, presented a Petition in
the name of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London, which
after the Petitioners were withdrawn was read; and was entitled, The humble
Petition of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London in
Common Council assembled; and the Petitioners being again called in, Mr.
Speaker by the command of the House gave them this answer; Mr. Sheriff, and
the rest of you Gentlemen, the House has considered of your Petition, and taken
it into serious consideration, and have commanded me to give you this answer,
That when the House made this Ordinance there was very great cause of danger,
and just grounds to this House to proceed accordingly, that as great danger
does appear still to the House, and therefore they have resolved to continue
the same; and this House does desire and expect of the Common Council of the
City, and the Militia, that they do suppress all Listing whatsoever within
the City, and Liberties of the same, unless the same be done by authority of
Parliament; and the House has appointed a Committee to receive the complaints
of any indirect carriages in Listing of any Forces, and to examine and redress
the same.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

