The humble PETITION OF THE Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London, in Common Council assembled:

TO THE Right Honorable the Lords and Commons assembled in High Court of
PARLIAMENT.

Whereunto is annexed, TWO PETITIONS; The one Entitled, The humble Petition of
diverse well-affected Citizens of the City of London.

The other Entitled, The humble Petition of diverse Young Men, Citizens, and
other Apprentices of this Honorable CITY.

Printed by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON, 1647.

TO THE HONORABLE THE House of Commons assembled in High Court of Parliament:
The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London in Common Council assembled.
Humbly shows,
THat the Petitioners have by Ordinance of Parliament, dated the 23 present,
taken notice of the pleasure of both Houses, for constituting a new Committee
for the Militia of the City of London, and the Liberties thereof, and of all
other places within the Lines of Communication, and the weekly Bills of
Mortality, and for determining of a former Ordinance for the Militia of this
City, etc. dated the Fourth day of May last: Which being taken into serious
consideration, the Petitioners could not but first call to mind, how far both
Houses of Parliament had formerly honored the City, when they first established
the Committee for the Militia, and since enlarged or altered the same, to take
the sense of this Court, before they finally resolved thereupon; Which
confidence the Petitioners are not conscious to themselves to have forfeited:
And next being sensible, by two Petitions presented to this Court, (the Copies
whereof are annexed) the one entitled, The humble Petition of diverse
well-affected Citizens of the City of London; and the other entitled, The
humble Petition of diverse Young Men, Citizens, and others Apprentices of this
City; what a general distemper this sudden change has already made, and may
further raise in the City; besides that hereby the City is for the present put
out of all regular posture of defense:

The Petitioners could not but return unto this Honorable House, and humbly and
earnestly pray, That the Militia which was established by Ordinance of the
fourth of May last, as aforesaid, and then ordered to continue for one whole
Year, may be re-established; That so the present fears and distempers in the
City may be dispersed and appeased; whereunto as the Petitioners humbly
conceive this to be the only present safe means, next under the mighty hand
of God; so they will not doubt but that the said Militia, as hitherto they have
done, will in all things perform their duties according to their Trust.

And the Petitioners shall pray, etc.
To the Right Honorable the Lord Major, the Right Worshipful the Aldermen and
Commons of the City of London in Common Council Assembled.
The humble Petition of diverse well affected Citizens of the City of London;
Shows,
THat whereas we have lifted up our hands to the High God, for the Reformation
and defense of Religion, his Majesty's just power and authority, the Liberties
of the Subjects, and the Privileges of Parliament; and seriously considering
the late transactions to violate all these, and to weaken the zeal and
forwardness of this City, and this Honorable Court in the maintenance of the
same; by indevouring to remove the present Militia confirmed by authority of a
free Parliament for a year, and made choice of by this Honorable Court: In
this straight and exigency we are bold in all humility, yet with all
earnestness to pray; that this Honorable Court would sadly weigh the present
dangers: and as in former times it has bin your honor to be isntrumental for
the preservation of this miserable and dying Kingdom, by the interposition of
your courage, power, and wisdom in a time of need, so you would not suffer it
to be buried in perpetual oblivion and reproach by yiedling up that Militia,
which by the good providence of God and the authority of a free Parliament,
has bin invested in your hands, the only visible means under God we have now
left for the security of our Religion, Lives, and Liberties.

And we shall pray, etc.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The Lord Major, the Right Worshipful the Aldermen, and
the Worshipful the Commons in Common Council assembled.
The humble Petition of diverse Young men, Citizens and others Apprentices of
this Honorable City.
Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioners being sadly affected with the distractions of these
times (wherein diverse discontented Persons (for the advancement of their own
Interests) labor to sow new seeds of Division and discord amongst us, whereby
Incendiaries are encouraged, the well-affected discountenanced, the privileges
of Parliament violated, the public Worship of God slighted, the Liberties and
properties of the faithful subjects of this Kingdom, and especially of this
City much endangered, and the long desired for end of these troubles (by his
Majesty's gracious compliance with, and his safe and Honorable return to his
Parliament, which we hoped was almost obtained) now retarded, and for present
altogether frustrated) have presented their humble Petition to both Houses of
Parliament, a Copy whereof is hereunto annexed, the which they have thought it
their duty, likewise to tender unto this Honorable Court; being confident, that
as their desires in these their humble Addresses, arise from no other ends
whatsoever, but, the glory of God, and the discharge of their consciences, in
pursuance of that solemn League and Covenant which lies upon them, To
endeavor to their utmost in their places and callings, to use all lawful
ways and means, for the conservation and maintenance of the just Rights and
Privileges of Parliament (lately so much violated;) The preservation and
defense of his Majesty's Royal Person and Authority, together with the true
Religion and Liberties of this Kingdom, And for the discovery and bringing to
condign punishment all evil Instruments whatsoever, which labor by fomenting
groundless fears and jealousies, to divide and make parties amongst the
people, thereby to retard the settlement of Church and State; So we doubt not
but this Honorable Court (who have been Isntrumental to Invite us, Declaration
to the Kingdom, 12 July 164^.
both by example and persuasion (according to several Ordinances and
Declarations of Parliament,) to engage our selves to the Prosecution of the
said ends, An Ordinance for Sr. Tho. Fairfax, 15. July 1644.
wherein you have already done very much to your everlasting praise and
commendation) will still with all Reality, constancy and undaunted magnanimity,
pursue the same, and likewise encourage all those, that shall according to
their duty, labor to promote the same ends: Wherefore we humbly pray,

That this Honorable Court would be pleased to use their uttermost endeavors,
by their addresses to the Parliament, and otherwise, as they in their wisdoms
shall think fit, for the furthering of your Petitioners desires, contained in
the above mentioned Petition.

We cannot (likewise) but with all thankfulness take notice of what this
Honorable City has done, for the putting in execution of several Ordinances
of Ordinance 27. June 1643. Ordinance 30. Nov. 1643. Ordinance 2 Feb. 1643.
Parliament, That none be put into any place of trust, either in Church or
Commonwealth, but such as have taken, and now stand well affected to the
Covenant, to which we are confident that you will still adhere.

And whereas there have been and still are several factious persons, who style
themselves the well-affected of this City (though unworthy of that name) who
labor to T^aduce the actions thereof, thereby to bring an Odium upon it, and
to lay it open to their malice; A fresh Instance whereof, we have in a late
Petition presented to the Parliament, pretented to be the Petition of the Young
men and Apprentices of this City; As likewise by a Petition pretended to be
presented to Sir Thomas Fairfax, the which we are ready to produce, and refer
the Consideration of them to this Honorable Court. And further pray,

That as both the Militia of this City, has been legally chosen by this
Honorable Court, according to Ordinance * of Parliament, and the
Common Council legally chosen by the several Wards (according to the ancient
Custom of this City,) you would be pleased to retain the same Power both
Civil and Military in your own hands. And

That you would be pleased (for the prevention of the many Imminent dangers, to
which this City may be liable by reason of these distractions) to take such
effectual and speedy course for the safeguard and defense thereof; that the
fear, either of any Mutiny within, or of any unwarrantable Power from abroad,
may in some measure be taken away, whereby Trade (the main support of this
City) now mightily impaired, may be again revived, and the Franchizes and
Liberties of this Honorable City (to which we are the Apparent heirs)
maintained and defended.

And as your Petitioners are in duty bound, both by that Relation which they
stand in to the Honorable City, as by that solemn engagement whereinto they
have entered, so they will be always ready to hazard their lives for the
defense thereof, and not suffer themselves directly, or indirectly, by any
terror or persuasion to be drawn from their duty herein.

FINIS.

