The humble PETITION OF THE MINISTERS Of the Church of England desiring
Reformation of certain Ceremonies and abuses of the Church: with the ANSWER Of
the Vicechancelor, the Doctors, both the Proctours, and other the Heads of
Houses, in the University of OXFORD.

Printed Anno, 1641.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of the Ministers of the Church of England, desiring
Reformation, of certain Ceremonies and abuses of the Church.
MOst Gracious and dread Sovereigne, seeing it has pleased the divine Majesty,
to the great comfort of all good Christians, to advance your Highness,
according to your just title, to the peaceable government of this Church and
Commonwealth of England: we the Ministers of the Gospel in this Land, neither
as factious men, affecting a popular Paritie in the Church, nor as Schismatics
aiming at the dissolution of the State Ecclesiastical: but as the faithful
servants of Christ, and loyal subjects to your Majesty, desiring and longing
for the redress of diverse abuses of the Church, could do no less, in our
obedience to God, service to your Majesty, love to his Church, then acquaint
your Princely Majesty with our particular griefs. For as your Princely pen
writes, The King as a good Physician, must first know what peccant humors his
patient naturally is most subject unto; before he can begin his cure: And
although diverse of us that sue for Reformation, have formerly in respect of the
times subscribed to the book, some upon Protestation, some upon exposition
given them, some with condition, rather then the Church should have been
deprived of their labor and Ministry: yet now we, to the number of more then
a Thousand, of your Majesty's Subjects and Ministers, all groaning as under a
common burden of humane Rites and Ceremonies, do with one joint consent humble
our selves at your Majesty's feet, to be eased and relieved in this behalf. Our
humble suit then unto your Majesty is, that these offenses following, some may
be removed, some amended, some qualified.

1 In the Church Service.
That the Cross in Baptism, Interrogatories ministered to Infants,
Confirmation as superfluous, may be taken away. Baptism not to be ministered by
Women, and so explaned. The Cap and Surplice not urged. That examination may
go before the Communion. That it be ministered with a Sermon. That diverse terms
of Priests, and Absolution, and some other used, with the Ring in Marriage, and
other such like in the book, may be corrected. The long-somnesse of service
abridged. Church-songs and Music moderated to better edification. That the
Lords day be not profaned. The rest upon Holidays not so strictly urged. That
there may be an uniformity of doctrine prescribed. No Popish opinion to be any
more taught or defended. No Ministers charged to teach their people to bow at
the Name of Jesus. That the Canonical Scriptures only be read in the Church.

2 Concerning Church Ministers.
That none hereafter be admitted into the Ministry, but able and sufficient
men, and those, to preach diligently; and especially upon the Lords day. That
such as be already entered and cannot preach, may either be removed, and some
charitable course taken with them for their relief: or else to be forced,
according to the value of their livings, to maintain Preachers. That
Non-residency be not permitted. That King Edwards Statute for the lawfulness
of Ministers marriage be revived. That Ministers be not urged to subscribe,
but, according to the Law, to the Articles of Religion, and the Kings Supremacy
only.

3 For Churchlivings and maintenance.
That Bishops leave their Commendams: some holding Prebends, some Parsonages,
some Vicarages with their Bishoprics. That double-beneficed men be not
suffered to hold, some two, some three Benefices with Cure, and some two,
three, or four dignities besides. That Impropriations annexed to Bishoprics
and Colleges, be demised only to the Preachers Incumbents, for the old Rent.
That the Impropriations of Laymens fee, may be charged with a sixth or seventh
part of the worth, to the mayntenance of the preaching Minister.

4 For Church Discipline.
That the Discipline, and Excommunication may be administered according to
Christ's own institution. Or at the least, that enormities may be redressed. As
namely, That Excommunication come not forth under the name of lay persons,
Chancellours, Officials; etc. That men be not excommunicated for trifles and
twelve penny matters. That none be excommunicated without consent of his Pastor.
That the Officers be not suffered to extort unreasonable fees. That none having
jurisdiction or Register places, put out the same to farm. That diverse Popish
Canons, (as for restraint of marriage at certain times) be reversed. That the
longsomnesse of suits in Ecclesiastical courts, (which hang sometime two,
three, four, five, six or seven years) may be restrained. That the Oath ex
Officio, whereby men are forced to accuse themselves be more sparingly used.
That licenses for marriage without Banes asked, be more cautiously granted.

These with such other Abuses yet remaining and practiced in the Church of
England, we are able to show, not to be agreeable to the Scriptures, if it
shall please your Highness further to hear us, or more at large by writing to
be informed, or by conference among the learned to be resolved. And yet we
doubt not, but that without any farther process, your Majesty (of whose
Christian judgment we have received so good a taste already) is able of your
self to judge of the equity of this cause. God we trust has appointed your
Highness our Physician, to heal these diseases. And we say with Mordecay to
Hester, who knows, whether you are come to the Kingdom for such a time? Thus
your Majesty shall do that, which we are persuaded, shall be acceptable to God,
honorable to your Majesty in all succeeding ages, profitable to his Church
which shall be thereby increased, comfortable to your Ministers, which shall be
no more suspended, silenced, disgraced, imprisoned for men's traditions: and
prejudicial to none, but to those that seek their own quiet, credit, and
profit in the World. Thus with all dutiful submission, referring our selves to
your Majesty's pleasure, for your gracious answer, as God shall direct you, we
most humbly recommend your Highness to the divine Majesty; whom we beseech for
Christ his sake to dispose your royal heart to do herein, what shall be to
his glory, the good of his Church, and your endless comfort.

Your Majesty's most humble Subjects.
The Ministers of the Gospel, that desire not a disorderly Innovation, but a
due and godly Reformation.

The Answer of the Vicechancelor, the Doctors, both the Proctours, and other
the Heads of Houses in the University of OXFORD, To the Petition of the
Ministers of the Church of England desiring Reformation.
In their Petition, there are three principal parts.

1 A Preface. 2 A Complaint consisting of four special points; In every of
them they desire, that certain Ceremonies and Abuses may be, some of them
removed, some amended, some qualified. 3 A Conclusion.
For answer whereunto:

1 In General.
WE most humbly beseech his most excellent Majesty, that it may be considered,
how inconvenient and unsufferable it is in Christian policy, to permit a long
and well settled state of government, to be so much as questioned, much more to
be Ipsa mutatio consuctud. nis ctiam quae adjuvat utilitate, novitate perturbat
August. ad I anuar. ep. 118. cap. 5.
altered, for a few of his subjects: especially considering the matter,
pretended to be the cause of these men's grief, and of their desired
Reformation, unjustly so called. For it is either the Ceremonies of the Church,
or Abuses in the Church, as they allege. Wherein we humbly recommend to his
Princely remembrance.

First, concerning Ceremonies, that they are either superstitious; and then no
ways to be admitted. Of which sort it should seem by the Petitioners, (and we
are ready to prove) that the Ceremonies of our Church are not. Because these
men confess, that in respect of the times they did subscribe unto them: or if
they were such, with what conscience did they subscribe, in respect of the
times?

Or else, things in themselves indifferent. And then the supreme Christian
Magistrate has lawful Melan. in 13 ad Romans Peccatum mortale est violare
edicta Magistrate. etc. Heming. in Syntag. c. de Adiaph. Qui violat
Ecclesiasticam politiam peccat multis modis, etc. Bez. Epist. 24. ad artic. 7.
authority to forbid, and we must forbear: to command, and we must obey;
not only for fear, but for conscience sake. Of which kind if these Ceremonies
be (as we will justify, and they cannot deny) where is then their pretended
obedience? Where is their applause of his Majesty's peaceable government? Why
do they trouble both Church and Commonwealth, in respect of matters which in
duty and conscience they may well, and ought willingly to submit themselves
unto?

Secondly concerning Abuses, be it considered: first of what quality they are;
secondly, of what degree.

1 Touching the nature or quality of them, whether they are in the very
Constitutions of our Church, or rather in the Execution of the said
Constitutions. If not in the Constitutions themselves, (as when we descend to
the particulars it will appear:) there is no cause why the government should
be changed; or these men suffered thus to calumniate the State, wherein there
is nothing Positive, that is worthy of blame. If in the Execution; (which as we
will not absolutely deny, so these men cannot easily prove,) that may be
remedied by amending or removing of some certain offenders, without alteration
of the State.

2 Touching the degree or grievousnesse of these abuses, (whether in the
constitution, as they suppose, and we deny; or in the Execution, which simply
and in every particular, Calv. adv. Anab art. 2. Vtrique (sc. Cathari and
Donatistae) in eodem errore fuerunt, Quo isti somniatores; Ecclesiam quaerente,
in qua nibd posset desiderari, etc.
no Church in Christendom is able to justify, and yet none, so much as this
of ours:) we undert^e to prove against the Thousand, that mask unknown under
that generality, that they are not such, nor so heinous, as deserve this their
bitter reprehension: much less such an alteration, in the Church and Common
wealth, as would ensue; if these Petitioners might have their desire.

2. In Particular.
Concerning the Preface.
We do but note.

1 WHat reckoning (in truth) the men do make; of just titles unto Kingdoms,
who favor them so De jure reg. apud Scot. De jur. Magist. in subd. Vind. cont.
tyr. Hotto. Francog.
much that were wont to subject all Kin gstitles unto popular election and
approbation.

2 What comfort (indeed) the Petitioners take in the peace of his Majesty's
government; who in the very entrance thereof, by seeking this, and the like
dangerous alterations, do disquiet and disturb the same. Were other men as
little inured to peace and subjection, it might occasion some inconvenience.

3 Howsoever in words they decline the imputation of factious men affecting
popular parity in the Church, and of Schismatics aiming at the dissolution of
the state Ecclesiastical; yet it is too well known in this Kingdom, and by
experience it has been felt in that of (...), page 39.40, 41, etc.
Scotland, what manner of men they be: as also, what have been the lamentable
effects of their Reformation there, and would have been likewise here, had not
the prudent foresight and constant resolution of our late gracious Sovereigne
continually repressed their attempts.

4 These men might have performed better, Their obedience to God, their service
to his Majesty, their love to his Church, (as in the particulars will appear)
if they had forborne to trouble his Majesty, the Church of God, and this
Commonwealth, with these their causeless griefs and discontentments. They
have thereby made such a breach as will not easily (without much wisdom and
patience) be cured. For what are these men, that they should assume so much? or
what are the whole Clergy of England besides, that they should be so abased and
contemned?

5 That which they allege out of his Highness (...), is a childish fallacy;
absurdly taking that for granted, which is the mayn question. They must prove
(and not assume) that these are the peccant humors of this Church, which in
truth is the Iuel. Apo. 170 Accessimus quantum maxim potuimus ad Ecclesiam
Apost. etc. Et 46. Ea omnia quae aut superstitiosa, etc. Aut cum sacris literis
pugnantia, aut etiam sobriis hominibus indigna, etc. prorsus sine ulla
exceptione repudiavimus.
least peccant of any in the World, and would be much less peccant, if it were
clean purged, of these unquiet and malecontented humors.

6 That diverse of them have formerly subscribed to the book, (as skornfully
they term it) does manifestly evince, that either our Liturgy is
justifiable, themselves being Judges; or else that they did liberally dispense
with their own consciences, which is not the part of honest men. To do that in
respect of the times, which in it self is not lawful, proves little less
then hypocrisy: to allege unknown Protestations, expositions, and Conditions
in their subscription, does argue no sincerity; and upon due examination, will
fall out to be nothing but mere falsitie.

7 As for their labors in the Ministry, be they such as they are. This Church
of England had been happy if it had not been troubled with their factious
Sermons and Mart. Mar. P. Miles monop. Hay any work and the rest of that spirit.
scurrile Pamphlets: which have given the Adversary much matter of advantage,
distracted the minds of many weak ones, and quite turned some other from the
love of the Truth.

8 The number of more then a Thousand, is but a vizard, which we humbly
entreat, may be pulled from their faces, that we may see and know the men, that
thus groan under the yoke of a Christian and commendable government; which
(maliciously and injuriously) they would have reputed, a most heavy burden of
humane Rites and Ceremonies. The vanity of which their complaint, comes now
more particularly to be discussed.

Concerning the matters of their Complaint:
1 Of the Church service.
1 IN the Church service we are ready to maintain, (but they must object first
and prove the contrary) that the Tert. de Cor. mil. cap. 3.
Cross in Baptism, Aug. Ep. 23.
Interrogatories ministered to Infants, and Hieron. cont. Luc.
confirmation, are most ancient, justifiable, and convenient Ceremonies, and
therefore to be continued.

2 That the Church of England, nor the book of Common prayer does not
prescribe, that Baptism should be administered by women. Though we deny it not
to be Chytrae. de Bap. and in Lev. Sneph de Bap. Zuingl de Bap. Hicrbr. in
Comp. Theol.
Baptism, if perchance de facto, it be by them administered. Fieri non debuit,
factum valuit.

3 That the Cap and Surplice be not urged, it is an absurd speech and implies
confusion. For so every man should be suffered in that behalf to do what him
likes. Again, do not their own words import that they may well be used? but
they must not be urged. why? what is there in a Cap or in a Surplice that
should Buc. de revest. page 707 Pet. Mart. Ep. ad Hap. Aug. Ep. 154. Calvi. in
Ex. 23.
offend any man of judgment.

4 That Examination where need is should go before the Communion, who
disliketh? Or that it be ministered with a sermon? But that it should not be
ministered without a sermon, is absurd; and has bred in many a vain and false
opinion, as if, not the word of Christ's institution, but rather the word of a
Ministers exposition, were a T. Cl. 1. p. 158
necessary and an essential part of the Communion. Besides he that reads our
Communion book, shall see that therein the whole manner, end, and use of that
holy Institution, is so excellently described, as may be instead of many
Sermons. Also that none should be admitted to that blessed Sacrament (of what
age, state, or condition so ever) except they were first examined after the
Consistorian fashion, were insolent, injurious, and in many respects most in
convenient.

5 The terms of Isay 66.21. Where the Geneva note does show, that the Ministers
of the new Testament are to be termed Priests.
Priests and Absolution: the Bucer. in Censur. cap. 20.
Ring in Marriage and such other, which they have heretofore traduced in their
unlearned discourses, are by diverse of our learned Divines, and shall be
justified. As contrariwise by the Petitioners they will never be evicted worthy
to be abolished.

6 Their desire to have the long-somnesse of service abridged does well befit
their great Devotion. Who notwithstanding are wont to spend an hour sometimes
or little less, in extemporary, inconsequent, and senseless prayers conceived
rashly by themselves. From hence, their dislike of set and stinted forms of
prayer, it does proceed, that some of them omit, some refuse to repeat, some
condemn the use of the Lords Prayer; from hence has Barrow and Greenewood
taken their beginning, and fetched the premises of their pestilent and
blasphemous Conclusions.

7 Church Just Mart. in quaest. ad Orth. q. 107. Aug Confess. lib. 10. cap. 33.
songs and Music are much beholden to these men now: in as much as they can
be content to digest them, so they be moderated to better edification. The
time was when we have heard them speak in this point after another sort.
Meritricious Church Music, Tossing of tennis bals, and such like were their
phrases of Gods divine service: but thanked be God that his Majesty's devout
affection in this kind has forced from them this moderation.

8 That the Lords day be not profaned, he is very profane that desires not
from his heart. But what manner of lawgivers are they that lay down their
coustitutions in such Negatives, in such Comparatives? for who can divine what
they would have, when they desire that the Rest upon Pet. Martyr. Epist. ad
Hopperum.
Holy days be not so strictly urged? Would they have men upon such days go
to plough and cart, as some of their humor have caused their servants to do, on
the very feast of Christ's Nativity? Or do they mean, that we should take to our
selves such liberty therein, as certain persons lately have done; who being
commanded by lawful authority to celebrate the fifth of August, with joy and
thanksgiving for his Majesty's most strange and wonderful deliverance upon the
said day, did notwithstanding spend the same (as we are credibly informed) in
fasting and mourning and such like works of their obedience? Nay, these and the
like experiments do cause us, humbly and instantly to desire, that both Sundays
and Holydays may be religiously observed, and the intolerable profanation of
them, which is the rather brought in by these men's preachings and examples, may
be very severely punished.

9 That there may be an Uniformity of Doctrine prescribed: That no Popish
opinions may be any more taught or defended. What imputations are these? how
prejudicial? How injurious? Not only unto the Church government, but unto the
Christian faith established in this Realm? What advantage do these men in
these shameless suggestions reach unto the Papists? as if there were no We
refer to the Articles of Religion agreed upon and established in Convocation.
Anno 1562.
uniformity, no consent of doctrine among us: (so ye except them.) As if there
were some popish opinions taught and defended in our Liturgy? (as they deem who
are ready to make every thing Zanch. conf. cap. 24. de Eccl. Milet. Aph. 19.
Popery which they do not fancy) These are the weapons with which Bellarmine
and that Brood, are wont to wound, or rather falsely to reproach our faith and
profession. Good had it been that these men had never been able to write,
rather then to write thus, to the scandal of Gods Church, and his sacred truth.

10 Reverence done at the name of Jesus, is no superstition, but an outward
sign of our inward subjection to his divine Majesty, and an apparent token of
our devotion. Why do they not likewise fin I fault with kneeling, sighing,
weeping, lifting up of eyes, knocking of breasts, holding up of hands unto
heaven? All which good men may use in Gods service with great piety, though
Hypocrites do otherwise.

11 They are grossly ignorant if they know it not, or wilfully malicious and
turbulent, if knowing it to be lawful, they yet oppugn the reading of the
Apocryphal Scriptures or Writings in the Church. Non ad confirmationem fidei,
sed ad reformationem, or institutionem morum, as the Ancient Hiero. Praef. in
Pro. Cypr. in Symb. Pellic. praefan Apocr.
fathers speak and approve. As also the Articles of convocation, and the
Prefaces before the Apocryphal books in the English Bibles, do directly show:
adding that hey give light, to the divine story.

2. Concerning Church-ministers.
1 WE heartily desire that able and sufficient men be admitted into the
Ministry. That they preach diligently, and that on the Sunday especially. But
who shall judge of their sufficiency? Or does not the sufficiency of
Ministers Suscipere magis and minus? Were the Ministers of the Primitive
Church, all of them able to preach? Did not some of them preach the Gospel,
Chrysostom in 1 Cor 1. Pet. Martyr. in 1 Cor. 1. Gualtan 1 Cor. 1 Call. in 1 Cor.
1. Bucer. in Ephesians. a.
and other some read the Scriptures, and administer the Sacraments? Or has
not the urging of that strange doctrine, viz. That he is no Minister that
cannot preach, first forced men to take upon them to expound Gods Word, that
thereby have brought the Word of God, and the sacred exercise of preaching into
lamentable contempt, through their absurd, senseless, and irreligious
glosses, and paraphrases, and discourses: whiles they have chosen rather so to
do, then to be accounted, Idol-shepheards, Dumb dogs, No Ministers, and
such like? Secondly has it not made the Brownists confidently to reproach us,
that our Barrowes books, etc. Perpetual government of the Church. Page 339.
Church is no Church, our Sacraments no Sacraments, our Prince and people
infidels, as not being baptized at all, our Christian Congregations profane
multitudes, etc. only because some in the Ministry could not nor did not
preach? But in this point it would be considered especially, first that it is
not possible to have all Ministers men of worth, till all Church Livings be
very sufficient to maintain men of worth. Secondly, that the way to invite men
of best parts to take upon them the Ministry, is not to expose and subject
that calling to want and beggary, which in the third part of this their
complaint, these men do principally intend. And lastly that howsoever these men
do please themselves in their extemporary gift; yet many of them, though in
show very audacious, do to withstanding deserve for their gross ignorance, to
be blotted out of the number of preachers, truly so called.

2 How charitable these men are, that would have men Har conf. ex Helv. Post.
De Minist. ca. 18 Agnoscimus, etc. Vnde ne hodie quidem rejicimus simplicitatem
quorundam probam, etc.
removed out of the Ministry, because they cannot preach; (whereas some of
them were entreated to take that function upon them, when men more able could
not be gotten; and others in their younger years, have been of more
sufficiency, then now their age, sickness, or other infirmity, will permit
them to be:) And how judicious, that would have them to maintain preachers,
who (for the most part) have not wherewith for to maintain themselves, we
leave to the consideration of the wise. How much better has our Church
devised, to supply the defects of some men, in some places of mean value, by
other means? As namely, 1. By the frequent reading of the Scriptures: A matter
more Zanc. Conf. obs. in cap. 15. Aph. 10.11.
availeable unto faith and godliness, then the Petitioners do imagine; and
would be much more, if it were not brought into contempt, by their suggestions.
2. By a most religious and excellent B. Ridley to M. Grindall then beyond the
seas. Alas that brother Knox could not bear with our book of common prayer,
etc. The reasons he makes against the Letany, etc. I do marvel how he can or
dare avouch them, etc.
form of Common prayer. 3. By Sermons and Homilies printed and appointed to be
read, both for the confirmation of the faith, and for reformation of manners.
All which in a Church not new to be planted, but now settled and well grounded
in the profession of the truth, are ordinary effectual means, to continue and
increase them, in the true faith and fear of God. Hereunto may be added the
manifold provisions in our Church, for sermons quarterly, or more often, in
those Cures, where the Incumbents cannot preach.

3 That Non-residency be not permitted. It is a matter of wise and sound
deliberation: first, The bounds of Parishes are not de jure divino.
what Non-residencie is; for many men in our Church, have two parishes
committed to their charge, which both will not make one living. Again, many
have but one parish under them, which yet would require more then two, or ten
men to speak at once to all the Congregation. Secondly it is, and long has
been permitted, by wise and godly Magistrates, that have given way to it, by
their positive prudent Laws, as necessary, in some Cases, in a few men, and
them (generally and by intendment) of the best deserts. Thirdly that it is
absolutely unlawful, and in The answer to the 2. treatise of the Abstract.
no sort to be suffered, neither has been proved, nor ever will, by all the
Scismaticks in the Land. Fourthly, in what congruity may he be counted an idle
Non-resident, that is always present and takes pains, in some part; and
often in every part of his charge; Fifthly, there are not more intolerable
Non-residents in England, then some of those, that are either included in the
Thousand before mentioned, or that favor this their attempt: Especially if they
shall be measured by those places of Scripture, which they are wont to alledg
against Non-residents after the Texts be well examined. Lastly, it is not
possible (as Church Livings are now* allotted) that simply no Non-residency
should be permitted, To alter the precincts of parishes, is a matter of greater
consequence, then the Abstractor, or many more such shallow heads can possibly
conceive.
and yet withal a learned Ministry maintained, Princes and Peers of the Land
attended, Colleges and Cathedral Churches continued, the Universities present,
and hope of succession in them for hereafter, preserved, propagated and
supported.

4 The Marriage of Ministers we do not dislike, but maintain the lawfulness
thereof against the Church of Rome: and humbly desire (if there be need) that
the supreme Magistrate, will add thereunto, by his royal authority and the law
of the Land, such farther strength and confirmation, as shall seem fit to his
high wisdom.

5 We know of no Subscription that is urged, which is not agreeable to law,
required by the orders of our University, necessary in a Christian
Commonwealth, profitable for the Church of God, approveable by all judicious
learned men, and disliked of none, but of a few folk, that are overmuch
addicted to their own opinions. Who notwithstanding, where The laws and
statutes of Genesis In the form of Oath, which the Ministers receive. Sect 2. Beza
in veta Call. page 910.
they bear the sway, it is worth the consideration, how strictly they tie all
them that will live among them, to the observation of their Church government.
And in truth (so the things in themselves be not intolerable) better so, then
that which is here proposed. For the not urging of a conformity in Church
discipline, is to to set open the high way to all disorder and Confusion.

3. Concerning Church maintenance.
1 THat Bishops leave their Comme^dams. In case some of the ancient revenue
might be restored to their Bishoprics, he were utterly unworthy to be a
Bishop, that would desire a Commendam. But, as now the most of them are
impaired, to take away from all Bishops all manner of Commendams, is (in truth)
to tie the Kings hands, that he shall not be able, though he would, (and where
he will not, no Commendam can be given;) to make his most faithful servants,
or other men of best desert in the Ministry, able to maintain their places and
callings, by his Majesty's favor, and gracious dispensation, when otherwise
their Bishoprics are not sufficient so to do. So as if it be well wayed, they
do not so much intend in this particular to impoverish some few Bishops, as
indeed utterly to overthrow them, and generally to restrain the Kings
Prerogative.

2 Of the same nature is that which follows. For no man, except he be the
Kings Chaplain, may hold three Benefices with Cure; and those of his Highness
own gift. So that here also they desire to limit the Kings favor. Again, it
is not known, that there be five in all this Land, that hold three such
Benefices. And then what good dealing is this in the Petitioners, to make the
world believe, that it is a common fault, which is scarce to be found in a few?

3 Their disposing of Impropriations, The Ecclesi. asticall discipl. page 114.
does notably bewray their lack of Conscience, their little love to learning
and Religion, their temporizing and fitting their motions to the Laieties good
liking. For who sees not that it would be the certain overthrow, and utter
ruin of Bishoprics, Colleges, and Cathedral Churches, if their
Impropriations should be demised to Vicars or Curats, the Incumbents, at the
old rent, without fine, without improvement? Again, who be they, and how many,
that by this means would be provided for? A few, and those the meanest of the
Clergy. But the inconveniences that would hereof ensue, are very many, and
intolerable. Therefore we reserve that discourse to a fit opportunity. On the
other side, who does not know, that for a Layman to hold an impropriation
(which is a Tithe) is originally unlawful, and clean contrary to the first
institution? Yet these men in all their purity, zeal, and conscience, can
content themselves, and their preaching Incumbents, with the seventh part only
of an Impropriation, in a Lay-mans fee.

4 Are these all, or the best means, that a Thousand me^, such as they would
be reputed, can propose to his Highness for the bettering of the Church
maintenance? If we might know, that it would stand with his Majesty's good
liking, and should not be imputed unto us as a breach of duty; It were very
possible, that the men whom they so much contemn, would be able to propose
some other course for the bettring of the Church maintenance, with out the
alteration or injury of any other state.

4 Concerning Church Discipline.
1 UNder the name of their Discipline, we have bin hertofore taught by these
men to understand, The kingdom of Christ upon earth. A thing of no less
importance then the Eccles. Disci. page 13. T.C. Epist. to the Church of
England.
Gospel of Christ Jesus; An essential part of the Gospel. A matter of faith
to be received upon pain of damnation: An essential mark of the true Church
without the which our Church was no Church, our faith no faith, our Gospel no
Gospel, etc. And it is now come to be so indifferent, that it may be
administered accordingly; Or else at the least, that these enormities may be
redressed? Will it now suffer such an Or else, at the least.

Were we persuaded that their Discipline, their Presbytery, the life and being
of their Discipline, were indeed of Christ's institution; were we persuaded it
were a part of Gods Word, an essential part of his Word; could we be contented
to be without it? Could we content our selves to live any where but under it?
Would we not redeem it with much peril and pain? With certain loss? And that
willingly?

But the experience that his most excellent Majesty has had, of the manifold
mischiefs and miseries that attend their pretended Discipline, does make them
not dare to speak plainly for it. They therefore faulter in seeking to obtain
that, which yet in heart they do affect, and specially desire.

But to these Enormities; these heinous Enormities. Is it not well, that now at
length, these quick-sighted men can epsy no fouler Enormities in our Church
government?

Enormities.
1 THAT Excommunication come not forth under the name of Lay persons. First, it
may truly be said, that though it did come forth under the name of a
Chancellor or a Commissary, yet came it not forth under the name of Lay
persons. For a Chancellor or a Commissary is not a Layman in this case: The
Ordinary and He are but Vnus Judex. Or rather, whatsoever the Chancellor does
in this behalf, he does it in the authority of the Ordinary, according to the
power that is committed unto him. A thing not unusual in the Civil state,
wherein the Lord Chancellor does dispose of many things, which are originally
in the Crown; and again, writes Test meipso unto many particulars, that
never pass by bill assigned.

Secondly, No Lay-Chancelor or Comissary whatsoever does at any time
excommunicate any man; or sends out in his own name any exco^mmunication. But
this is the practice of the Church of England. In Constable. Eccle. 1597. cap. de
Excess. circa Excom. refor.
the censuring of notorious and more grievous crimes, the Arch-Bp, the Bishop,
the Deane, the Archdeacon, or a Prebendary that is a Priest, pronounces the
sentence of Excommunication in his own person. And in matters of less offense,
as contumacy in not appearing, and the like, the Vicar-generall, Official or
Comissary, that is not in holy orders, holds this course. First, upon
knowledge and examination of the cause, he adjudgeth the party worthy to be
excommunicated; then the Minister (associated unto him by express authority
from the Ordinary) does pronounce the sentence of Excommunication against him;
Lastly, the Chancellor sends to the Pastor of the Parish where that party
dwells, requiring him, publicly to declare the said party to be a person
excommunicated by the sentence of the Minister his associate. And all this,
according to the form of the Articles set forth by her Majesty's authority,
Anno 1597.

Thirdly, are not these execellent Enormity makers, that can find such an
Enormity in the Name of a Layman (in whose name notwithstanding, the
excommunication never comes forth) when yet, if it did come forth in his
name, the nature of the thing it self is such, as justly cannot be reproved?
They are not ignorant, that excommunication does proceed as is aforesaid; if
not in the name, yet in the Authority and Jurisdiction of the Bishop, or some
other chief Clergyman, to whom the power of the Keys does belong, and unto
whom the Church of England has assigned the execution of that part of our
Discipline. Who, if they use the advice and Ministry of a wise and religious
Civilian, in decreeing who is to be excommunicate, (whereupon those Perpetual
govern, of the Chu. pa. 320.
outward penalties do ensue, which attend the authority, and follow the
sentence of Excommunication, in this Church and Common wealth:) how does that
in any wise violate Christ's institution as touching excommunication?

Lastly, if the Discipline they long for, were once on foot among us, we should
then hear tell of certain Lay-Parsons that ought to have a principal hand in
their excommunications. Thus, as they are weak in judgment for matter of
learning in this point, not being able to resolve of any thing in certain; so
are they as partial in prescribing their plots for matter of practice; whiles
they reprove that in others, which in themselves they do allow. Except
peradventure they will tell us (and we must needs believe them) that their
Lay Elders become Clergy men ipso facto, because they are of their Consistory;
and have voices (according to their learning) in these Ecclesiastical censures.

2 That none be excommunicated for The order of Excom. etc. in the Church of
Scot. Printed June, 1571. Cap. 4. Thus any small offense may justly descrve
Excommunication, by reason of the contempt and disobedience of the offender.
trifles and twelve penny matters. They are not. Contempt is then the greater,
when the matter wherein they show their contempt is of lesser value: As
contrariwise, obedience is then more commendable, when it is seen in a matter
of greater difficulty. But these men are so accustomed to disobedience, that
they account it but a trifle; And therefore calumniate us and our discipline;
as if with us, men were excommunicated for trifles, when (in truth) they are
censured for their contempt.

3 That none be excommunicated without consent of his Pastor. Without consent,
is a captious term. For in our understanding, the Minister of the Parish does
give his consent, when he publishes the excommunication; as also when he does
certify what he has done in denouncing the same. And this manner of consent
we take to be sufficient, and as much as is requisite in a private Pastor, that
has no Jurisdiction.

But what is it that these men do mean? Would they (think you) that every
Pastor should have a Negative in the excommunicating of his Parishioners?
Undoubtedly they would: threby intending the utter overthrow of the present
Church government, and in steed thereof the setting up of a Presbitery in every
Parish. Or rather, that which is worse (if worse may be) the enabling of every
particular Pastor to Excommunicate by himself Perpetual government of the
Church, page 321.
alone.

Except peradventure they will say, that the particular Pastor ought to be
joined in commission with the Chancelour. And then behold what would ensue. On
the Minister, a world of troubles: he must be sent for as often as any of his
parish is presented, he must attend the hearing and debating of the whole
cause; he must be present as often as the Chancellor sits, as long as the
matter depends, to his great travail and pains, his excessive charge, and
the causlesse neglect of his calling. On the other side, if this Minister will
be wilful, and in fine dissent from the Chancellor in opinion; then is all the
labor lost; the Judge has spent his skill and care in vain, and the Bishops
Consistory must down to the ground: either Pastor must prevail, or nothing
must be done; To the intolerable hinderance of Justice, and excessive
detriment of the plaintiff. These and the like, are the well advised
Propositions, whereof there is store in their Discipline. By which it does
sufficiently appear, that as yet it is not thoroughly refined.

4 Extorting of unreasonable fees, who approves? Who disliketh not? Who would
not have it redressed, in any that offend? Besides there are very Constit.
Eccl. 1597. cap. de Feodisquae off. Eccles.
severe laws already made in that behalf.

5 Farming out of Jurisdictions and Registers places, though we commend it not,
nor greatly like of it; yet it is of it self a matter indifferent; neither good
nor ill, but as it is used.

6 The restraint of Marriage at certain times (falsely called a Popish Canon)
was Consil. Laodi. Can. 52.
anciently used in the Church of God; and being rightly understood, is now
commendable in this of ours.

7 The Long-somnes of Suits in Ecclesiastical Courts, is a matter of fact, not
of Constitution; nor is the fault of the Court, nor of the Judge necessarily
(as these men would seem to imply,) but sometime error in pleading, sometime
the intricatenes of the cause, sometime the perverseness of the Clyent,
sometime the cunning of the Proctors, are the occasion that suits depend long.
And when all is said, that they can say, this is none other fault than is
incident to the course of Justice at the Common Law; and might befall their
Consistory, or a better and more equal kind of trial.

8 The Oath ex officio, is used as it ought, by men of place, of wisdom, and
experience; by men of Religion, learning, and conscience. Unto whom the
authority to administer it as occasion is offered does justly belong, not by
special Commission only, but by the laws of this land, by the two Laws Canon
and Civil; and by the warrant of sundry examples of the word of God: as that
worthy and learned Dean of the Arches (the ornament and honor of his profession
in his time) in his judicious The Apolog. 2 part, Cha 9. and so sorth to the
end of the same.
Apology of certain proceedings in Courts Ecclesiastical, does prove at large,

9 Licenses for Marriage without Banes, are most cautiously granted; and that
upon Constable. Eccl. 1597. cap. de mother. indulg.
severe punishment to ensue, if so be the Constitution be violated. But what
will satisfy these men, who thus intimate unto his Highness, that there is
rigor in the former point, and negligence in this, when as all moderation and
carefulnes is used in them both?

And are not these heinous enormities?

Their Conclusion.
THe ilde vaunt that the Petitioners make of being able to show that these and
other such abuses (as they call them) remaining and practiced in the Church of
England, are not agreeable to the Scriptures, does appear to be the more
ridiculous; because they have passed over in deep silence many learned The
perpet. gover of Chri. Chur. Asurvey of the pret. holy disc. The answer to the
Abstract. The Apol. of certain proceed in Court Eccle. A treatise of Eccles.
Discip. De Presbyt. ejusque nova etc. De div. Minist. Evan. grad, etc. The
Remonstrance. Querimonia Ecclesiae. The 5 books of the laws of Eccles. polit.
Tracts published long since, wherein their vain fancies, and illiterate
objections are refuted at large. If notwithstanding they will yet venture to
write, it will be answered; If they will needs argue and dispute, there are
ready that will either satisfy them, or by argument silence them. And were it
not in regard that we would not seem as undutifull in accepting, as they have
been in the offering of this Challenge: it is the thing we would urge, and
instantly entreat, that these matters might be debated between us in writing.
But in the mean time, what motions are these for the reformers to make unto a
most prudent Prince in his settled and peaceable government; who for many
years, has had trial in that his other kingdom, of their pretended
reformation; and in this also has seen the gracious effects under her
Majesty's late hapy Reign of that Church Discipline, which they would ruinate
and overthrow.

God has appointed his Majesty unto this Kingdom. It is true; and we magnify
the goodness of God for it, and congratulate his Highness in the prosperous
possession of it, from the ground of our hearts. But that God has appointed
him to this kingdom for such a purpose as they conceit; what spirit of
divination is in them, that they should forespeake it? Nay rather, seeing
almighty God has ordained him as the great Physician (next and immediately
under himself,) to take care of the body politic, both of his Church and
Commonwealth; he will surely cure such diseases, as these men are sick of.
(For turbulent and discontented humors are like to breed very dangerous
deseases in a civil State:) And not be persuaded (as they fondly imagine) by
such suggestions as these, to alter that state of the Church, which is
acceptable to God, honorable to his Highness, comfortable to many thousand
Ministers, the Nurse of good learning, admirable to strangers, approved by our
The letters that Mr. Beza. has written to the Arch. bish. of C. that now is.
Opposites, envied of our enemies, distasteful unto none, but such as know
neither how to rule, nor how to obey.

The very names of punishments are unpleasant indeed; but the things themselves
are necessary sometimes, and their effects good and profitable for preservation
of the whole; howsoever the enduring of them, may be grievous in the particular.
And he that will indifferently consider the true causes of the corrections here
mentioned; shall have just cause to approve the Justice, Conspiracy for
pretended Reformation.
and commend the mildnes, that has bin used toward this sort of men.

As for that clause of Men's traditions, it is too too odious; and would imply
Superstition or Popery to be in some of them; But how vainly, and how
injuriously, has in some sort been heretofore declared.

That other of being prejudicial to none but those that seek their own, etc.
is as injurious to all the rest of the Min sters of this land. Be we the men
that are so addicted to our own quiet, credit, and commodity in the world?
Where then be the the fruits of our covetousnes, the effects of our ambition,
the marks of our idleness? We be the men, that in the testimony of a good
conscience, for the repelling of such a malicious contumely, and slanderous
reproach, may truly say: We put not out our money to usury; we detest all filthy
lucre; we contain our selves within our Vocations; we forsake not our holy
callings, we omit not to labor in our several charges; we sustain the places
of great labor, travail, and expense; we neglect not in public, in private,
in word, in writing, at home and abroad, to put to silence, and stop the mouth
of the common Adversary, which these men have enlarged against us, and our most
holy faith.

To conclude, the thing they seek is so prejudicial, both to the Civil state
in general, and in particular, to so many of the very best of the Ministry;
that if it should take effect, but God of his mercy, and the Kings most
excellent Majesty in his Christian wisdom, will not suffer it) it would breed
a strange alteration in the One; and in the Other it would for the present, not
only impoverish us, and our Universities, but make both them and us, and the
whole Clergy very base and contemptible in the eyes of our own people, as also a
byword and scorn to our neighbor Nations; And for succeeding ages, it would
cut off all hope of a learned Ministry, and of that grounded learning, which
as yet is, and heretofore has been, the glory and honor of this kingdom.

For manifestation of this point, look upon the face of all the reformed
Churches in the world; and wheresoever the desire of these Petitioners does
take place, be it duly considered; first, how well their proceedings do suit
with the state of a Monarchy; And then, how poverty on the one side, and lack
of learning on the other, does creep upon the whole Clergy in those Dominions.

As to the first: would it not beseem the supereminent authority and Regal
person of a King, to be himself confined within the limits of some particular
parish; and then to subject his sovereign power, to the pure Apostolical
simplicity, of an over-swaying and all-commanding Presbytery? Would it not do
him much good, in a time of need, that his people should be rooted and grounded
in this truth; viz. That his meek and humble Clergy, have power to bind their
King in chains, and their Prince in lincks of iron? that is (in their
learning) to censure him, to enjoin him penance, to excommunicate him? yea (in
case they see cause) to proceed against him as a tyrant?

We speak not here of other points, as namely, that all appeals in causes
Ecclesiastical (and what do they not make Ecclesiastical?) must finally lie,
not unto the Prince, but unto the Assembly Provincial; That they allow the
supreme Magistrate, not potestatem juris, but only facti; while they make him
the maintainer of their proceedings, but no commander in them. These and the
like, are but petty abridgments of the Praerogative Royal, while yet the King
T.C. l. 1. p. 180
submits his Scepter unto the Scepter of Christ, and licks the dust of the
Churches feet.

Neither may it be truly said, that these are only Speculations. There are
some of high place yet alive, and other some are dead, that have felt the smart
hereof in their own experience, and have seen the worst of all this put in
woeful execution.

As to the second. Do we not see it at this day verified among them, which has
been so often truly said, and as often unadvisedly denied, that honos alit
arts; and contrariwise, where due reward of learning and liberal maintenance
of the Ministry, is fraudulently impaired, or injuriously taken away,
Ecclesias. difcipl. page 114.
there Religion and learning com to decay? There Atheism and Barbarism and
confusion must needs ensue? It is too aparent, that as the revenues of those
Churches have been embeazled by men of corrupt minds, Psalm. 83.11.
which said in their hearts, as it is in the Psalm, Let us take to our selves
the houses of God in possession: so the remainder of that grounded learning,
which was bred up in former times, is now through succession of time, almost
clean worn out.

Nec bona tam sequitur, quam bona prima fuit. Insomuch, that there is neither
sufficient maintenance in those parts, for any store of excellent learned men,
nor yet many men brought up among them in this last reforming age, worthy of
that wonted honorable maintenance.

God knows we speak not this with a detracting Spirit but with grief of heart:
to see the ruins of the Ministry in particular, and generaly of all profound
learning in other reformed Churches. As likewise to stir up this whole nation
to a thankful acknowledgment of that singular blessing in this behalf, which
God of his goodness has long, and yet does continue unto us of this Realm. And
withal, to put to silence the malicious ingratitude of those evil men, which
looking upon us and this Church through the colored glass of their prejudicate
opinions; can see nothing among us but defects and deformities, and abuses and
enormities, and the like. And therefore in their high discretion, would have us
reduced and made conformable to the calamities of other places.

Whereas, in truth, if we shall bring back the eyes of our minds from foreign
parts, and indifferently (without either detraction or flattery) take notice of
the present state of this Church and Comon-wealth; we shall easily discern,
that it were an incomparable happiness for them, if all that profess the truth
as it is in Christ Jesus, were in our condition.

We shall see, how that our Church government is duly subordinate unto the
supreme civil state, and withal does mightily support the same. That our
reverend Prelates (men of singular worth, not to be matched in any one kingdom)
though preferred unto highest rooms, do yet contain themselves within such
bounds as preserves that estate from creeping to any Papal corruptions. That
our inferior Clergy, by their godly and painful labors in their vocation, have
been and are the most effectual means to settle the tranquillity of this land;
by inducing men's minds to Piety toward God, Loyalty to their King, and civil
honesty among themselves. That our people generally (excepting some few
malcontents of all sorts, whom we leave to the mercy of the Magistrate) are
inured unto Peace, accustomed to subjection, detest disloyalty, and with all
alacrity yield their obedience unto their Sovereign.

That the Colleges, the Cathedrall-Churches, Saravia de facrilegiis, ca. 9.
the Bishops and other Ministers of this land, have yet remaining unto them
(yet after the many and great spoils of this Church; which notwithstanding,
never prospered with them that got them, but were as rust to the rest of their
silver and their gold, or as a Canker, that fretted out themselves, their
posterity or their possessions) that yet there is remaining unto them more
competent and sufficient maintenance; more comfortable and honorable
encouragements, then there are to all other reformed Churches in Christendom.

That answerable thereunto (to stop that mouth of iniquity, which is wont to
traduce us, for a dumb, unlearned Idol Ministry) there are at this day more
learned men in this Land, in this one kingdom; 1 Cor. 9. 2 Cor. 13.
then are to be found among all the Ministers of the Religion in France
Flanders, Germany, Poland, Denmark, Geneva, Scotland; or (to speak in a word)
all Europe besides.

Which yet, may not justly be imputed to us for vanity, the Apostle that knew
how to be abased, and to make himself of no reputation; yet when the
impeaching of his personal gifts was abused to the disgrace of his calling;
did without either arrogance or folly, give his Detractors plainly and roundly
to understand, that he was not inferior to the chief Apostles, nay that he
labored more then they all; and so by his own just defense and commendation,
did free himself, his worth and his vocation, from their base and odious
imputations. In a like case (we doubt not) a truth may be averred of our
selves, even by our selves, without any ostentation at all; when it is so
injuriously impeached and trodden under foot, to the high dishonor of God, the
disgrace of his Gospel, and to the slander of this most Christian
Comon-wealth. Psalm 47.10.
Yea the rich mercies that God has continued unto us these 45 years, ought to
replenish our hearts with joy, and that our lips should break forth with
thankfulness and sing, Non facit taliter omni natione; neither have the Regions
round about us been made partakers of the like blessings.

Now the father of Mercies, and God of all Consolation, enlarge the wise and
understanding heart of our thrice noble King, noble in birth, noble in wisdom,
noble in all manner of good learning; assist him ever with his holy Spirit, the
spirit of Council, of Sanctification and of Truth: make him admirable in the
swaying of this Scepter as was Solomon in all the world, as long as he walked
in the first way of his father David: That so he may long wear this mortal
Crown, in all abundance of piety, peace and prosperity, and hereafter obtain
that immortal Crown that Christ has purchased for them which by continuance
in well doing seek glory and honor and immortality.

FINIS.

