THE HUMBLE PETITION OF THE Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
LONDON, IN Common Council ASSEMBLED, Presented to the Right Honorable THE
LORDS and COMMONS in Parliament Assembled: WITH The Answer of both Houses to
the said PETITION.

Printed by RICHARD COTES, Printer to the Honorable City of London, July 31.
1648.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lords and Commons In Parliament Assembled.
The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London in Common Council assembled.
SHOWS,
THat last night your Petitioners sitting in Common Council, there was by
diverse grave and well-affected Citizens presented unto them a Petition
subscribed by a great number of hands; wherein was represented the sad and
dangerous condition of the Parliament and City, (which this Court is also very
sensible of) by reason that the power, by Ordinance of the 12th. instant,
granted to Major-Generall Skippon, to list Horse and Foot, is still made use
of, to put the power of the Sword into the hands of Servants and Sectaries;
which, by many testimonies of very credible Witnesses, has been clearly proved.

All which, your Petitioners do conceive, will endanger the safety and peace
of Parliament and City; is contrary to the Ancient laudable Customs and usages
of the same; inconsistent with the Power by Ordinance granted to the Militia of
London; and is feared, will (if not speedily prevented) put this City into a
sudden distemper.

In consideration whereof, and in discharge of their Trust, your Petitioners
are again necessitated to be humble suitors unto this honorable House:

And do pray,

That the said Ordinance granted unto Major-Generall Skippon may be repealed;
and the Forces raised by authority thereof discharged. That there may be no
Listing nor raising of Forces in this City or Liberties thereof, but by the
power of the Militia, settled by Ordinance of Parliament; That so the
Petitioners may be the better enabled and encouraged to defend the Parliament;
unto whom (notwithstanding the many false and scandalous aspersions of
disaffection and malignancy cast upon them) they are resolved with Lives and
Fortunes faithfully and constantly to adhere according to their Solemn League
and Covenant.

And shall pray, etc.

Die Sabbathi, 29. Junii, 1648.
THE Lords gratefully receive the acknowledgements which you have made to them
in the name of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City, and
have commanded me to assure you that their care shall never be wanting to
improve all means for the preventing of those inconveniences that may
threaten their danger or disquiet to the City of LONDON. In this particular
mentioned in your Petition, they have already recalled that power given to
Major General Skippon: they will pursue a further and as effectual a means
as they can for the perfecting of what is desired by you, that the confidence
the City of LONDON has expressed of them may be confirmed, and that the City
may be still encouraged and enabled to intend the security of the Parliament
according to their engagements.

Jo. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Sabbathi, 29. Julii, 1648.
THe House being informed, that the Sheriffs and Aldermen of London were at
the door, they were called in; And after a short preamble made by Sheriff
Bide, he presented a Petition which after the Petitioners were withdrawn was
read, and was Entitled, The humble Petition of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Commons of the City of London in Common Council assembled.

The Petitioners being again called in, Mr. Speaker gave them this Answer,

Mr. Sheriff and the rest of you Gentlemen of the City, The House has read
your Petition, and have considered thereof, and had a sad and serious debate
thereupon, and are sensible of the respects of the City, and of your expression
in the latter end of your Petition, of your good affections and resolutions;
And I am commanded to give you very hearty thanks for the same: And to let you
know, That the House has appointed a Committee to go to the City of LONDON,
to acquaint them with the dangers of the City and Parliament; and with the
grounds and reasons of making and continuing the Ordinance. And this House has
put into a way of reforming all irregularities in listing Soldiers by color
of the said Ordinance.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

