A BRIEF EXPOSITION OF THE PROPHECIES OF Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk
and Zephaniah.

BY GEORGE HUTCHESON Minister at EDINBURGH.

Luke 24.25. Then he said unto them, O fools, and slow of heart, to believe all
that the Prophets have spoken. Ver. 27. And beginning at Moses, and all the
Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures, the things concerning
himself. Act. 10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his
name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins. Romans 3.21.
But now the righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, being witnessed
by the Law and the Prophets. Imprimatur, EDM. CALAMY.

The Second Edition with Amendments by the Author.

London, Printed for Ralph Smith, at the Bible in Cornhil, near the Royal
Exchange, 1654.

The EPISTLE of the LICENCER to the READER.
CHRISTIAN READER,
THis Book which Gods providence puts into thy hand, contains a brief
Exposition upon Six of those Divine Prophecies which are called, * Ruffinus in
Praefatione in Oscam. Duodecim Prophetas minores dici respectu quatuor majorum,
puta Isaiae, Jeremiae, Ezekielis et Danielis, non ed quod iis sententiaerum
gravitate and rerum verborumque majestate cedant; sed ob sermones, et librorum
brevitatem.
Prophetae minores, The small or lesser Prophets; not because their authority
or excellency is lesser then those who are styled Prophetae majores, The
greater Prophets: but because of the brevity and littleness of their Books,
which are so little, that all the lesser Prophets put together, do but contain
67 Chapters, whereas one of the greater, ( viz. Isaiah) consists of 66. Hence
it was, that these Books were anciently put into one Volume, and called but One
Book, lest by their littleness and smalnesse any of them (says Calvin) should
be lost. These Prophets are in number twelve, according to the twelve Tribes,
to which they were sent. Now though it cannot be denied, but that there are
very many excellent Commentaries already extant upon these lesser Prophets,
(which may happily deter some men from buying, of this;) yet I desire such to
take notice,

First, That such is the Profundity and unconceivable Abyss of the Divine
Scriptures, that they cannot be exhausted by any Writers or Commentators
whatsoever; but when men have dug all the spiritual gold and silver they
can, out of this precious Mine, there will be enough left behind for others to
gather.

Secondly, That this Reverend Author has gone in a way unusual, and (almost)
untrodden, and has a peculiar excellency in him, which others have not. For
his chief scope is, after a short and yet full Analysis and Exposition, to
collect choice and pithy Observations out of every Chapter. And in this
undertaking he is very happy, and I may truly say, another Mr. David Dickson.

Now though the work it self is sufficient to commend the Author, yet because
there are many in our days that prize Books for their Authors sake, not
Authors for their Books sake; I was desired to write something to make this
Reverend Minister known to this Nation, unto which he is altogether a stranger:
And for this purpose I have received testimony concerning him, from those whom
I dare trust, that he is a man of singular parts, and deservedly in high esteem
in his own Country, for his Learning, Godliness Modesty, Peaceablenesse and
Humility. That he was earnestly entreated by some of his learned Brethren,
(especially those in Edinburgh where he is Minister) to make this work public,
for the good of the Churches in both Nations. The truth is, the Book it self
represents him to the world in a very fair and beautiful Character: For it
comprehends much in a little, breathes out much of God and godliness. His
Observations are so excellent and suitable, and sometimes so unexpected, and
yet so natural, that I verily believe they will be very acceptable, not only to
private Christians, but also and especially unto Ministers, affording them many
rare and unthought on Doctrines, for the spiritual edification of their
Congregations. That which was said of Socrates, That whosoever know him loved
him, and honored him; and they that did not so, it was because they did not
know him; may truly be said of this Book: They that know it, will prize it, and
the Author of it; and they that do not so, it is because they do not know it.
My prayer to God shall be, that the learned and religious Author of this short
and brief Commentary upon these six Prophets, may find such good success of
his endeavors herein, that he may be much encouraged to make a further
progress in this way, and other able men may be stirred up by his example to
do the like upon other Scriptures, which no doubt will tend much to the glory
of God; and the profit and edification of his people.

I am Thy Servant, in the Work of the LORD, EDM. CALAMY.
Jan. the 27. 1653
TO THE Most Noble and truly Religious LADY, ANNE, DUCHESS of HAMILTON, etc.
Grace, Mercy, and Peace through Jesus Christ be multiplied.
IT is ( Madam) the verdict, not only of the wisest of men, but of the unerring
Spirit of God, concerning all things under the Sun, Vanity of vanities, all is
vanity, Eccles. 1.2. and that not only as the Creation is made subject to the
vanity of corruption, because of men's sin, Romans 8.20. but chiefly in respect of
men, who are not content with the lawfulness of things for which they are
appointed, and are very good; but study to place their happiness in them,
neglecting God the only fountain of true felicity; as the creature cannot
answer the expectations of such, nor satisfy their vast desires; so do they,
by their way, provoke the Lord to discover unto them the folly of their choice,
whether in mercy to his own, that he may train them up to better things, or
in justice to the wicked, who seek after no more, that they may be no better
for all their endless endeavors, then they who voluntarily mortify their
affections to those things; and that all may see the folly and madness of
their way, who sell their souls, and spend out their money and strength for that
which is no bread, and does not profit nor satisfy.

And albeit this way of attaining felicity, has been essayed and not found by
him, who for outward enjoyments had cause to say, What can the man do that
comes after the King? Eccles. 2.12. And albeit experience in all ages does
discover what a sandy foundation they build upon, who seek by these means to
satisfy their own souls, made after the image of God; yet how few are they who
will believe this truth, till they also essay it themselves? This their way is
their folly, yet their posterity approve their sayings, Psalm. 49.13. Yea, when
our selves are finding this truth verified, we do hardly trust our own eyes
and senses, but are still ready to imagine that we may find it yet otherwise;
or if we be put from that hope, yet often times are we little the better, but do
sit down in bitterness, as if all felicity were lost, if we find it not where
we expected it; and thus do we neglect the true remedy of our gievances, and do
provoke God to consume our days in vanity, and our years in trouble, Psalm.
78.33.

How great cause then have we to admire and lament the folly of the children
of men, who do so far mistake, and upon their mistake do forsake their own
mercy, whereunto they are led by the discovering of the emptiness of all
things beside God? who do quarrel with the wise and holy dispensations of God,
whereby a foundation might be laid for much good, if they were wisely
considered; when yet their quarrellings can avail or help them nothing: and
who do not improve such dispensations for the end for which they are
appointed, but either sit down stupidly under them, or grow the worse that
pains are taken on them, or at least do pine away under the punishment of
their iniquity, and do howl upon their beds for corn, and wine, and oil, but
return not to the most High? Hos. 7.14.16. And on the other hand, we have cause
to admire the mercy of God toward his own chosen ones, in that he will (so to
say) make them happy against their wills, and when they would destroy and
deceive themselves with a vain show, he in mercy to them will famish their
idols, and drive them from snares, as he did Lot out of Sodom. And when the
Lord has dealt so hardly with them, as many times in their bitterness they
want language to express it, yet he will let them see their mistake, by giving
them meat even out of that eater, and by setting them on work to mind their
country more, and to see the Commandments exceeding broad, when they have seen
an end of all perfection. Psalm. 119.96. And he will discover the riches of his
grace, and fullness of his spiritual comforts, by making his people bless him,
and acknowledge the mercy of these dispensations, which sometimes they so much
startled at. Psalm. 119.71, 75. and causing the voice of rejoicing and
salvation, even in the pilgrim tabernacles of the righteous, Psa. 118.15.

Herein ( Madam) your Ladyship has cause to observe the loving kindness of the
Lord toward you, who from your tenderest years, having been exercised with
difficulties of sundry kinds, and having experienced this truth of the vanity
of all things; yet your Ladyship has obtained mercy to be led thereby (and
much more by the Law, and by the love and hope of mercy through Jesus Christ)
to seek after a more enduring substance, and after Christ that pearl of price,
which is indeed a token for good, even in lots wherein God seems to write
most bitter things, when they set hearts on work this way. And as it has been
refreshful to such of the Lords servants and people, as know your Ladyships way
and exercise, to see your sweet submission under the Lords hand, and your
desire and care to have afflictions rather blessed then removed, and to make
sure your interest in Christ, when the throng of other things might rather have
put flesh and blood to other exercise; so it has laid a special obligation
upon my self (as having been a witness thereunto at several occasions,) to be
instrumental, as the Lord shall enable, for your Ladyships furtherance and
encouragement therein, which together with my obligations, to make some
acknowledgment of the many respects it has pleased your Ladyship to show unto
me for the truths cause, have induced me to make bold in dedicating unto your
Ladyship this piece, upon some of the Lesser Prophets; who were the faithful
Interpreters of the Law of God, applying the same unto the sins of several
times, and who do point out the infallible and true causes of calamities
lamities, with the use to be made thereof, and the true remedy thereof; to wit,
Christ, the hope of whom to be manifested in the flesh for the Redemption of
lost man, was the godlies life in these days, and much more ought he to be so
now, when the substance is come, and that abundance of grace and truth
treasured up in him is brought to light by the Gospel. If these my weak
endeavors may prove serviceable to any of the Lords people in their exercises
and journey toward Heaven, and in special to your Ladyship, that shall be more
then abundant recompense unto

(MADAM) Your Ladyships obliged Servant in the Gospel, GEORGE HUTCHESON.

To The READER.
Christian Reader,
I Do here present thee with an Exposition of some of the lesser Prophets;
concerning which, and my undertaking thereof, I do in the entry give this
brief account.

As I have looked upon a short Exposition of holy Scripture joined with the
principal doctrines flowing there from, after the mould of the Reverend Mr.
David Dickson, his late piece upon Matthew, as a special means (through Gods
blessing) for promoting of truth and piety, and for preventing of errors; so I
little thought to have undertaken any such thing my self, when so many godly,
able, and experienced Ministers of the Gospel, did not, (for reasons known to
themselves) put hand to it: But being some years ago seriously invited with
diverse others, by the Reverend Author of that Exposition on Matthew, to concur
with him in prosecuting that purpose which he had begun, and has since made
further progress into, upon the book of Psalms; I did then essay some of
these Prophets, being at that time recommended unto me, and of late at his
desire (living now through Gods providence in one City) I have looked upon them
over again, and adventured to present these to public view, if so be it may
invite others who have more ability and leisure, to mind and help forward such
a work upon the whole Bible: which is a study (beside the profit the Church of
God might reap thereby) I am confident, will richly recompense the undertakers
in their own bosom by many advantages.

As this recommendation did determine me to the choice of these Prophets in
this undertaking: so this narration may shorten my account concerning the mould
of this piece; seeing I have conformed my self (so far as my weakness could
reach, or the nature of the subject, being oftentimes very dark and obscure,
would admit) to the mould followed in the Exposition upon Matthew formerly
mentioned. I have found it necessary (beside a short sum of each Chapter in
the entry) to premit some short Exposition of the words before the doctrines,
which is enlarged, when need is, in clearing the deductions of each Doctrine.
In the Exposition I have pointed, upon occasion, at other Scriptures helping to
clear the place; but for the Doctrines, I did not set my self to bring
Scripture confirming them, it being my desire that no more be admitted, or
received here, then such as clearly flow from the text in hand; only where a
passage occured to memory, for illustration of the Doctrine, I have added it,
as affording further ground of meditation to the Reader, if he please. It
cannot be a voided in a piece of so many Doctrines, and on diverse subjects, but
the same Doctrines, at least for substance, will occur often; but the Reader may
consider, that every time it occurreth, it is confirmed of new, from a new
ground; and Gods inculcating of truths often calls on us to hear, and consider
them much. If any man thinks the doctrines sometimes more prolixe, he would
consider, that in this sort of writing it is required to say much in little
bounds, that sometimes two truths flowing from one ground, will speak more fully
being conjoined, then if every one of them were made a doctrine alone; and that
some doctrines, nakedly propounded, could not satisfy, unless they were
either limited, or cleared a little.

As the Doctrines will be found (I hope) to arise naturally from the text
explained: so in exposition I have studied to keep by the rule of faith, and
set down that Exposition which is most agreeable to the context it self: and
where diversity of interpretations could agree together, as tending to one
scope, I have conjoined them; and but seldom held forth diverse and different
interpretations of one place, where there was no such affinity betwixt them.
There is only one thing of which I would premonish thee in a word, and that is
concerning some promises made not only to the Church of the Jews, but to all
Israel, wherein not only their future conversion, but their restitution to
their own land seem to be held forth. I am not ignorant how peremptory many
have been of old, and of late, in determining of such future events from the
Word; and that many who have asserted the restitution of Israel to their land,
have asserted with it also a reign of Christ, not only in his spiritual
government, but in his person also on earth; and that the Church shall be in a
very flourishing and glorious estate for a thousand years. Both of which
assertions, as they have no sure footing in Scripture: so the first speaks but
little comfort to the Church (which is that they intend in it;) for, seeing
Christ has a circumscribed body, he can be but in one place at once; and it is
more comfortable to the Church in all quarters of the world, to be governed by
his Spirit, and instruments employed by him, sitting at the Fathers right hand,
then by deputies employed by him, while he remains in one corner of the world,
as that opinion must grant he will. And for the second, albeit the Church may
(and belike after the conversion of Israel will) have some glimpses and
breathings of tranquillity and prosperity, yet that happy condition which many
speak of, seems not to be very consistent even with common sense; for, if the
Church and particular Saints, shall have corruption while they are within time,
that fire will necessarily produce sparks of trouble; and how any trouble can
be consistent with such a condition as these men speak of, I see not. The
experience of the Jews at the first coming of Christ, and of the Church in all
ages, may sufficiently clear, how much carnal conceptions of the glory of
Christ's Kingdom have been disappointed, as savouring too much of flesh. Yet in
this business whereof I speak, this would seem (at least) probable; that as
many passages scattered in the Prophets, whatever they foretold to the Nation
of the Jews at the first coming of Christ, or say daily for the comfort of
Israel in the spirit; yet have not their full accomplishment till all Israel be
converted, as the Apostle clears, Romans 11. who citing a more obscure place to
clear it, does warrant us to make use of others that speak more clearly: So
there are also many passages in the Prophets, which however they may be applied
to a spiritual restitution of every true Church, and of Israel after the
Spirit; yet in their full accomplishment, seem to take in the restitution of
the Nation of Israel: and this interpretation seems not to want Christ's own
warrant, where he says. Luke 21.24. They shall fall by the edge of the sword,
and shall be led away captive into all Nations, and Jerusalem shall be trodden
down of the Gentiles until the time of the Gentiles be fulfilled, where he
seems to set the same term-day to their Captivity, and the desolation of
Jerusalem (including the land) that the Apostle sets to their conversion, Romans
11.25, 26. And indeed, if the conversion of Israel will be National, as is
clear, not only from Romans 11. but from Hos. 3. where they are foretold, ver. 4.
that they shall neither have a true nor false religion in their exile, which
must be understood of them taken as an incorporation, and Nation, (for as
private men they have still some Religion wherever they are) and consequently
their conversion, ver 5. must be National; If, I say, their conversion will be
National, it is agreeable to right reason that they will get a Land for
habitation, as a Nation, and what Land more expedient, then their own (though
not now any more typical unto them) which God gave to their fathers of old? and
which there are so plain promises (as would appear) for? And for a taste, any
that pleases may consider on these passages, spoken not only to Judah, but to
Jacob, Ephraim and Israel, Jer 30.13, 18. and 31.17. Ezekiel 37.16, 17, 19, 21,
22, 25. Hos. 11.9, 10, 11. and many others; which I will not now insist to name,
or discourse upon; only as I take no pleasure in singular opinions, nor to be
peremptory in those things, which time will be the best commentary unto; so
there being so much to this purpose spoken in the Word, I could not but briefly
point at such passages in any of these following Prophets as seem to tend that
way, that so the godly may be stirred up to pray more earnestly for the
conversion of Israel, at which time the Lord, by performance, will give his own
commentary to these and many other promises.

I shall detain thee (Christian Reader) no longer in the entry, but to add
this, that if this piece prove acceptable, and may be useful to the Church of
Christ, I purpose (the Lord continuing life, and assisting me) to follow with
the rest of the small Prophets in the same Method; provided that some others,
more fit, do not take the work in hand. Mean time, that this present piece may
be blessed unto thee; and that thou may more and more fall in love with God
to thee in Scripture, shall be the prayer of

Thine to serve thee in the Gospel, GEO. HUTCHESON.

Christian Reader,
IT cannot be denied on the one hand, that as the Lord in this last age has
manifested unto Britain, more then in any former time, the riches of his grace,
in the clear and long continued offer of Righteonsness, reconciliation, peace,
sanctification, and salvation, freely to be had by the hearty embracing of his
eternal Son Jesus Christ; So for the long steighting of his gracious and rich
offer, he is now manifesting his just indignation and wrath against this
unthankful and froward generation, not only by inflicting many sad bodily
judgments, but also by sending upon the spirits of many, who have not received
the love of the truth, strong delusions, that they should believe a lie, and be
damned all of them who will not believe the truth, but have pleasure in
unrighteousness, according as was foretold, 2 These. 2.11.

And it cannot be denied on the other hand, that in the midst of this great
wrath, the Lord remembers his tender mercies toward us, by continuing
hitherto the open preaching of the offer of his contemned grace; and by
stirring up from time to time, the spirits of sundry of his servants, to open
still more and more clearly the little book of holy Scripture, by pious and
learned Annotations, larger Commentaries, shorter Paraphrases, brief
Explications, and other sorts of fruitful writings. By these, and by all other
means, he testifies his lothnesse to depart altogether from this I Will, which is
engaged unto him by all sorts of Obligations; and wherein, besides these who
are already converted blessed ones, he has many Elect sou^s to bring home from
their pernicious wanderings: and this his gracious purpose does appear in this,
that as Satan is bestirring himself in the maddest manner that any age has
heard of, to darken the light held forth in Scripture, by the hellish smoke of
so many pernicious errors: So the Lord is daily discovering more and more
fully, the folly and vileness of the vessels of dishonor, and of these
abominations vented by them; thereby giving hope, that when they with Jannes
and Jambres, have done their worst to with: stand the truth of God in the mouth
of his Ministers, they shall proceed no further, then to carry away with them
the uncleanesse of the household to their own shame and perdition, 2 Timothy 3.
from verse 1. to 9. and chap. 2. from ver. 16. to 21. This hope has inclined
the Author of this piece, among others, to offer his service unto the Church,
whom I need not to commend unto thee, nor speak of the measures of the grace of
God bestowed upon him, because his work will speak for it self, and thou after
perusing of any part thereof, wilt readily allow more unto him, then his
modesty will allow me to say of him, before thou shall read what follows.
Therefore let the prefixing of my name to this book, be judged to be no more,
save my presuming (upon thy acceptance of what I have heretofore written in
this kind,) to come forth for making his acquaintance with thee: ^ praying God
the Father of lights, to bless unto thee this his first essay, and his
intention, by the grace of God to do more service unto thee in this sort; and
for this end to increase his talents, and lengthen his life, and to stir up
other able Laborers to take share in this service, till it be perfected to thy
Edification. In which Petition let me entreat thee to join with.

Thy Servant in the Gospel, DAVID DICKSON.

A BRIEF EXPOSITION OF THE PROPHECIES OF Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habbakuk
and Zephaniah.
OBADIAH.
The ARGUMENT.
THIS Prophet among others, is raised up by God to denounce and foretell the
judgments that were to come upon the posterity of Esau, because of their
cruelty against Judah in the time of their distresses which accordingly were
executed (as Histories record) by the Caldeans, some years after the
destruction of Jerusalem: And to comfort the Church of the Jews, unto whom it
could not but be a sad tentation, and addition to their sorrows, to see those
who had been ordained to serve them, Genesis 25.23. so prosperous and insolent,
white as they were sharply afflicted. We need not curiously enquire, who this
Obadiah was; seeing that adds nothing to the Authority of his message; and
however the time wherein be lived and prophested be not expressly set down,
yet considering the substance of his doctrine, and the affinity it has with
that of Jeremiah, chap. 49. and of Ezekiel, chap. 15. it appears that he
prophefied after the Captivity of Judah under Jehojakin, 2 Kings 24.10, 11, 12.
etc, if not also after the captivity under Zedekiah, at which time specially
their neighboring enemies were cruel and insolent, and Edom among, if not
above the rest, Psalm 137.7.

The Prophecy (omitting the inscription) may be taken up in two parts. 1 The
Lord threatens Edom with destruction by war; ver. 1, 2. notwithstanding their
pride and conceit of their Countries situation, ver, 3, 4. or or of their
treasures, ver. 5, 6. confederates, ver. 7. their wisdom, ver. 8. and valor,
ver. 9. and that because of their injurious dealing with their brethren of
Judah, ver. 10, 11. which they ought not to have done, ver. 12, 13, 14. in
regard a day of vengeance upon enemies was certainly approaching, wherein they
should have a share, ver. 15, 16. 2. The Lord comforts his afflicted Church
with a promise of deliverance, of holiness, and restitution, ver. 17. of
victory over their enemies, ver. 18. of enlargement of their border, ver. 19,
20. and of fitted instruments and rulers with their King, ver. 21.

Ver. 1. THe vision of Obadiah: Thus says the Lord GOD concerning Edom; We
have heard a rumor from the LORD, and an ambassador is sent among the heathen:
Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle.

THe Authority of this Prophet and his Doctrine is asserted; and the judgment
of Edom is summarily set down, that God, who is the Author thereof, has all
things in readiness, that the Prophets and Church had received some intimation
of the Lords dark counsel concerning Edom, and that as men by their
Ambassadors, so the Lord by his effectual providence was about to stir up the
Nations that served Nebuchadnezzar, and make them willing to come against them.
Doct. 1. The Prophets of God did not speak, nor are Ministers to speak the
dreams of their own brain, but what they have received in commission from God.
This Doctrine is the Vision of Obadiah, that is, what he received by prophetic
revelation, represented either to the senses or understanding; and thus says
the Lord, is prefixed to it. 2. The Word of the Lord (and especially
threatenings against impenitent sinners) will have greatest weight, when it is
received as indeed the Word of God, and proceeding from such a dreadful
Majesty; Thus says the Lord Jebovah, he who has an established Dominion and
Lordship over all creatures, and who can give being and performance to what he
says, and therefore not to be slighted. 3. Such as make defection from God,
and renounce their interest in heaven for their belly and sensual pleasures; it
is righteous with God to brand them with infamy, and make them bear the prints
thereof unto all generations; for not only Esau, but his posterity also bear
the name of Edom to perpetuate the memory of his selling his birthright for
red pottage, Genesis 25.29, 30. etc. 4. The counsel and providence of the Lord
extends it self, and is exercised, not only about his Church, but even among
enemies, he who reigns in the midst of enemies, has to say concerning Edom.
5. Albeit the enemies of God and his people be little sensible of their own
condition, and what God intends against them; yet the Church is not left
ignorant of what God will do with these enemies, but in his Sanctuary, and from
his Word it may be seen; We, says he, that is, I and my fellow Prophets,
Ezchiel and Jeremiab, and by our Ministry the Church of God, have heard a
rumor from the Lord concerning Edom, that is, some taste of his dark counsel
before it break forth in effect. 6. It is a comfortable and useful doctrine to
the Church to be instructed concerning Gods judgments to come upon her enemies;
partly that she may be comforted in her troubles, in expectation that God will
clear his affection toward her, in plaguing those that wronged her: And partly,
that she may hereby see what sins especially God is angry at, to avoid them;
for these ends is a Prophet raised up to preach, not in Seir, but in Judah,
concerning Edom. 7. War is one of the sharp scourges whereby God punishes
wicked Nations; and it comes upon a people not accidentally, but by the
especial providence of God, who has Peace and War in his own hand; and who,
when he has any work to do, can make instruments (however led by their own
principles and ends) active and willing. For, it is from the Lord an ambassador
is sent among the Heathen, who not only stirs them up, but makes them mutually
to excite one another: Arise ye, and let us rise up in battle against her.

Ver. 2. Behold, I have made thee small among the heathen: thou art greatly
despised.

The greatness of Edom's calamity by this war is held forth from its effects;
that hereby the Lord would diminish their number, power, wealth, and
reputation, and put them beneath all other Nations, and load them with contempt
and ignominy, Doct. 1. What ever instruments be employed in inflicting any
judgment, yet God is to be eyed as having chief hand in them all: I have made
thee small, says the Lord. 2. The Lord pursuing for sin, can bring down the
greatest person and people in the world, and lay them in the dust, and pour
contempt upon the most honorable: I have made thee small, and greatly
despised. 3. As the Lords judgments upon enemies are not readily foreseen or
expected by them; so when they come, they are remarkable, and to be remarked:
so much does this Behold import. 4. Things undertaken by God, and foretold by
him in his Word, ought to be reckoned as certain as if they were already come
to pass: I made thee small: thou art despised, says he; Whereas yet it was
but in his purpose, and not accomplished. 5. To be singular in afflictions or
judgments, or in the measure of them, adds to the weight, and renders them
more grievous: for to be small among the Heathen, or Nations, implies not only
that Edom was reckoned among the Heathen Nations, not of the Church, but that
God by his judgments should make him one of the smallest of them, and that
none should be so far brought under as he; and this is told him as an
aggravation of his stroke. 6. As the Lords showing mercy upon any makes way for
man's mercy toward them also, in so far as may be for their good, Jer. 42.12.
So when the Lord becomes a party in anger, men's affections and respects will
dry up; for however Edom was esteemed of before, yet when God deals with him,
he is greatly despised.

Ver. 3. The pride of thine heart has deceived thee: thou that dwell in the
clefts of the rock whose habitation is high, that says in his heart, Who shall
bring me down to the ground?

Ver. 4. Though thou exalt thy self as the Eagle, and though thou set thy nest
among the stars, thence will I bring thee down, says the LORD.

For further confirmation of the judgment, the Lord enlarges and amplifies
the former sentence, from several considerations, overturning all their vain
confidences wherewith they were puffed up, as supposing to be exempted from the
stroke by them. Whereby also the Lord partly discovers their pride and conceit
because of these, to be one of the causes of his controversy against them; and
partly also he explaines further the judgment to come upon them, by threatening
to pull down every one of these confidences, and so make them completely
miserable and contemptible. The first vain confidence, is the situation of
their hilly Country, and their Cities built upon inaccessible rocks; of which
(as of the rest) they were intolerably proud, as conceiving their Country to be
inaccessible, and their Cities to be invincible: Against which the Lord
threatens, that though they dwelt as high as the Eagle builds her nest, yea, as
the Stars toward which Eagles mount, yet he should reach them, and debase them,
and so their Country should be invaded, and their cities taken. Doct. 1.
Outward advantages and accommodations concurring with a natural heart, usually
do produce pride, self-confidence and insolency, for Edom whose habitation is
high, is proud; and says in his heart, Who shall bring me down to the ground?
whereas a renewed heart in all these is poor, and depends on God. 2. The Lord
judges of men's pride, no: so much by their outward carriage, which may be
masked over with a show of humility, as by looking to their heart, and
diseerning the conceit and losty imaginations that reign there; He eyeth the
pride of Edoms heart. 3. Of all the deceits that men are essayed with,
selfdeceiving is one of the greatest, when they are given up to delude
themselves with vain imaginations and confidences; thine heart has deceived
thee. 4. As pride and conceit, however it muster up men's excellencies before
them, is but a deluder, and makes a show of what will prove nothing; as being
either an evidence of being nothing in reality, or that what they conceit of,
is blasted and withered: so in particular, however presumtion promise great
things to make sinners secure, and contemn Gods threatenings; yet it does but
deceive and feed with vain hopes; and will prove a deceiver in the end, when
there is most need of what they promised: The pride of thine heart has
deceived, etc. 5. Pride in the creature is looked upon by God as a party
against him, as striking eminently at his glory in not depending on him, and as
affecting his throne, and therefore provokes God, though there were no other
quarrel or enemy, and ingages him to prove his power in abasing it. Therefore
that general defiance, Who shall bring me down to the ground? is answered by
God, as especially concerned, I will bring thee down, says the Lord. 6. The
Lord is able to reach man, and bring him down in his most eminent strength and
greatness imaginable; and cannot only make strong holds a vain refuge in a day
of vengeance, but is able to overturn more confidences then man can build up
for his own security: To dwell in the clefts of the rock, is but a small thing
for Gods power to reach, and yet it was the height of that which Edom had to
boast of; for, Though thou exalt thy self as the eagle, and though thou set thy
nest among the stars, thence will I bring thee down.

Ver. 5. If thieves came to thee, if robbers by night, (how art thou cut off?)
would they not have stolen till they had enough? if the grape gatherers came
to thee, would they not leave some grapes?

6. How are the things of Esau searched out? how are his hid things sought up?

A second vain confidence is their wealth and treasures, wherewith men use to
help themselves in their extremities. The Lord threatens to make these a prey
to their enemies, who after their victory, being without fear of ambushes,
should at leisure seek out, and carry away even their hidden Treasures, and so
their spoiling should not be ordinary, but complete, even to admiration.
Whence learn, 1. Riches treasured by those whom God has a quarrel at, are so
far from helping or delivering them in a day of wrath, or from doing the owners
good, that they are justly given as a prey to their enemies: Edoms things an
searched out and sought up. 2. As the children of the Lord art to read the
mercy of their trials by considering how moderate they are in respect of
judgments upon enemies; so the wicked may see the severity of God in what
their strokes are beyond ordinary: for this end is Edoms spoiling set before
him, as being beyond what thieves and robbers by night use to do, who use not
to take all away, but what may suffice; as not being able to carry all, or not
daring for fear to stay and search out all: and beyond what grape-gatherers do
in vineyards, who according to the Law, Lev. 19.10. or, because they cannot
reach all with their eye, do still leave some grapes; whereas the things of
Esau are searched out, and his hidden things sought up. 3. The strokes that God
has appointed for such as not only live wickedly, but also turn enemies and
persecutors of his Church, are complete, and far beyond the ordinary
visitations that come upon the children of men: This comparison betwixt Esau's
stroke, and robbers their picking imports, that the one had been in some sort a
mercy and delivery, in respect of the other. 4. However the wicked be
senseless and fearlesse when God threatens them, yet his stroke will make them
feel, and awake them: for this Exclamation, How art thou cut off? how are the
things of Esau searched out? etc. does imply not any pity in the Lord or his
Prophet toward them, but that the judgments should astonish and affect
themselves when it came upon them.

Ver. 7. All the men of thy confederacy have brought thee even to the border:
the men that were at peace with thee, have deceived thee, and prevailed against
thee: they that eat thy bread have laid a wound under thee: there is none
understanding in him.

8. Shall I not in that day, says the LORD, even destroy the wise men out of
Edom, and understanding out of the mount of Esau.

The third vain confidence is the help of their confederates, the Narions round
about them, and especially Egypt, whose interest it was to engage the Edomines,
who lay in their frontiers, against the Chaldeans: The Lord threatens to make
these the occasion and instruments to promote their ruin, for all their
confederates should engage them to oppose the Chaldeans at the border of their
Country, which was in effect to cast them out of it; as the phrase also in the
Original signifies; their friends and intimate familiars by subtilty and fair
pretenses should ensnare them to run on their own hurt and ruin, as if they
had given them a bed to lie on, and yet hid a dagger in it, with the point
upward, to slay them. And this is more fully cleared by reading the words thus
(as the Original h^th it, without addition of any words which are put in the
Translation) They have laid thy bread a wound ander thee: signifying, that
their bread which they had from Egypt was the snare that drew them on their
ruin. Doct. 1. According to the sin of a Person or Nation, so ordinarily is
their judgment; for Edom broke off that brotherly amity that ought to have
been betwixt his brother Jacob and him, therefore he is peid in his own coin,
his heathen confederates are his ruin. He sinned in breaking bonds, and he is
plagued in that other bonds break him, and are broken to him: All the men of
thy confedracie have brought thee even to the border, etc. 2. God can make
those to be instruments of sinners ruin, who in appearance are very near
friends; and can make confederacies wherein men conside, the short cut to their
destruction: Edom was ruined by his confederates, and the men that were at
peace with him. 3. The confederacies and alliances of politic men, are not to
be trusted in, they being led only by their own Stateinterests, and not minding
their benefit with whom they carry fairest, but only their own advantage; for
so did Edoms confederates, The men that were at peace with him, deceived him,
they gave him bread for a wound under him, to put them betwixt themselves and
the dint of the enemy. The fourth vain confidence is, their wisdom and
prudence, whereby they might think to manage their affairs dexterously, and to
the best advantage, as it seems they have been famous for this, Jer. 49.7.
Concerning this the Lord foretells, that for all their wisdom, they should not
be able so much as to discern and prevent the treachery of their confederates:
And that because the Lord would, when they were ready for the stroke, deprive
them of wisdom, either by taking away such as were wise, or turning their
wisdom into folly. Hence learn, 1. When the Lord has ruin to bring upon a
people, their wisdom and policy will not avert it. He can deprive men of
wisdom to manage their affairs, he can make the wisest to be overreached and
outwitted, and can make what they think their wisest course, prove greatest
folly in the issue; for Edom is wise, and many confederacies seemed a wise
course to strengthen themselves; and yet in all this, there is no understanding
in him, to discern the snares in it. 2. That wherein men are most eminent, and
are ready to conside most in, will prove vain when they have most need, that
the pride of all glory will be stained; for, The wise men are destroyed out of
Edom, and understanding out of the mount of Esau, who were a wise people.
Excellencies confided in are a disadvantage, 3. Whatever wisdom or
excellencies be in men, they are all Gods gift and dependent on him, who gives
or takes them away at his pleasure, and according as he has a people to raise
or to ruin; for, He destroys the wise men when he will. 4. Men's wisdom and
prudence is ordinarily looked upon by God as an enemy to him, and ground of a
controversy, in regard that men's conceit of their wisdom is the cause why they
give God little to do; and acknowledge not his providence, but take all upon
themselves; for this question, Shall I not, says the Lord, even destroy the
wise men out of Edom? imports, that there is some necessity for his doing of
it, and that their wisdom may not escape without a stain. 5. It is a singular
demonstration of Gods Sovereignty and providence in the world, when he
overturns the wisdom of the wise, brings all their well-contrived projects to
naught, snares them in their own works and counsels, makes eminent fools of
them, and causes them to reel like drunken men, who were in reputation for
wisdom; for, When there is no wisdom in him, the Lord declares himself the
Author of it, that we may see his hand in it, and give him the glory of it, and
may believe his power to do the like when the wisdom of Adversaries is the
Churches fear: Shall I not, says the Lord, destroy the wise men, etc? 6.
However the threatenings of Gods Word may oftentimes seem improbable when they
are pronounced, yet in the Lords time the accomplishment will be remarkable:
for albeit Edom, notwithstanding the Lords threatening, retain his former
wisdom, (the Lord in his holy providence ensnaring wicked men so, who do
contemn threatenings, when they are not speedily executed, Jer. 17.15.) yet, In
that day, to wit of his calamity, shall I not destroy the wise men, says the
Lord?

Ver. 9. And thy mighty men, O Teman, shall be dismayed, to the end that every
one of the Mount of Esau may be cut off by slaughter.

The fifth vain confidence is, their valor and strength, for which also that
Nation was eminent, as living by the sword, according as was foretold, Genesis
27.40. concerning this, the Lord threatens to confound with terror, the mighty
men of their Country, or some part of it, most renowned for valiant men, and
called Teman, from Esan's Grandchild, Genesis 36.15. or from its situation
Southward (as the word signifies) from Judea. And so these being laid by, there
should be an universal slaughter of the inhabitants of the Country, at least of
every one of note (as the word in the Original signifies, and is translated so,
Psalm. 49.2. and 62.9. and elsewhere) as was usual for the Chaldeans to do where
they prevailed, 2 Kings 24.15. Doct. 1. Natural men are in a sort endless in
their carnal confidences, and hard to be put wholly from them; but when one
fails they will have another to fly to; Therefore is all this pains taken to
show the vanity of Edoms refuges, who if the situation of his Country fail
him, has treasures to gather forces with; and failing that, confederates; or
if they be wanting, prudence; which has delivered people in great extremities;
and if he, be yet put to it, he has mighty men to run on all hazards. And
every one of these needs to be particularly threatened, to make them sure of
vengeance. 2. The terror of God is sufficient to crush and overthrow the
mightiest of men; man's valor is not terror-proof, when the terror is from
God; Thy mighty men, O Teman, shall be dismayed, and broken with terror, as the
word also signifies. 3. As terror upon a people is an ordinary forerunner of
great desolation; Thy mighty man are dismayed, and every one of the mount of
Esau cut off by slaughter: So where the Lord has a judgment to go through a
Land, no probable or promising furniture will turn it away, but what would
hinder it shall be made useless: The mighty men shall be dismayed, to the end
that he may reach his purpose, and cut off every one, etc.

Ver. 10. For thy violence against thy brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee,
and thou shall be cut off for ever.

The Lord having pronounced sentence against Edom, proceeds to show the equity
thereof from the cause procuring it, upon which the sentence is again repeated.
In general, Gods quarrel against them, is for their violent carriage toward
Judab, for which they are again threatened. Doct. 1. As the Lord does not strike
a people, but where he has a just quarrel; so the stupidity of men, in not
laying sin to heart, and their blindness and selflove is such, as Gods quarrel
will not be taken up till himself discover it; Therefore does the Lord himself
here reveal it. 2. Of all the injuries and evil deeds committed by wicked men,
none are so remarked, or so suddenly and severely punished as the injuries they
do to the Church and people of God; The Lord threatens Edom for violence
against Jacob, as if he had committed no other fault, and as filling his cup
speedily. 3. The Lord will not forget enemies their interest in, and
obligations to the people of God whom they oppress, that thereby he may
aggravate their guilt, and double their punishment; Therefore the Lord reckons
Edoms kindred to Jacob, that his unnaturalness might appear, and to be a
ground of the sentence, Thy Brother Jacob. 4. Much ignominy and shame is
abiding those especially, who ought to be friends, and are foes to the Church
of God; partly in that they shall be disappointed of their expectation to see
the Churches ruin, and partly in that judgments from God shall make them base
and contemptible, if not also confound them with horror, that they should have
taken part against the Church with those who ruin themselves; for, shame shall
cover Edom, when he is destroyed by the Chaldeans, with whom he joined against
Judah. 5. Judgments upon the troublers and enemies of the Church, are without
moderation and hope of recovery, as coming from the hand of Justice, and of a
jealous God; Thou shall be cut off for ever; for, however there may be some
relenting under this or that particular stroke, yet (unless that repentance
prevent) justice makes what they get but an earnest of more, and pursues them
to all eternity, as this stroke of Edom is expounded, Mal. 1.4.

Ver. 11. In the day that thou stoodest on the other side, in the day that the
strangers carried away captive his forces, and foreigners entered into his
gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem, even thou wast as one of them.

Edom's violence is more particularly described, by showing positively what he
had done, to wit, that in the day of the Churches trouble, he not only was an
idle spectator, as to assisting of his brother, but concurred with the enemy,
as one of themselves, to help forward the affliction. Whence learn, 1. Many
sad afflictions may come upon the privileged people of God when God is
provoked, and those not only cleanly trials and sufferings for Truth, which
have their large allowance of comfort, but judgments full of bitterness and
calamity; for here Strangers carry away their forces, enter the gates by force,
and cast lote upon Jerusalem, or divide their prey by lots, as Joel 3.3. Nahum
3.10. 2. However the Lord in great feverity punish his people, yet he has an
eye upon the carriage of every instrument of their calamity, to requite them
accordingly, and would have his humbled people comforted in believing that his
love is such as to do so; for, whereas it might have been thought, that the
Lord when he was afflicting Judah had cast of all pity toward them; yet
afterward he reckons with Edom for his behavior, as that which he had
narrowly marked, and reveals this Doctrine to the Church for her comfort. 3.
An idle beholder or onlooker on the people of Gods distress, as not concerned,
or affected with it, is in Gods account an enemy, especially being one who is
obliged to do otherwise: for, it is a part of Edom's violence and cruelty that
He stood on the other side, staid aloof, looked on, and came not near to
condole, as the same word in the Original is used, Psalm. 38.11. 4. It is
horrible wickedness before God, and will be especially remarked by him, when
false brethren not only countenance, but actively concur and partake with
enemies in oppressing the Church of God; Even thou wast as one of them, in all
their hostility; and a remarkable one, as being not only a brother, and they
but strangers and foreigners; but a most active instrument setting on the
rest, Psalm. 137.7.

Ver. 12. But thou should not have looked on the day of thy brother, in the
day that he became a stranger; neither should thou have rejoiced over the
children of Judah, in the day of their destruction; neither should thou have
spoken proudly in the day of distress.

Ver. 13. Thou should not have entered into the gate of my people in the day
of their calamity: yea, thou should not have looked on their affliction in
the day of their calamity, nor have laid hands on their substance in the day of
their calamity.

Ver. 14. Neither should thou have stood in the cross way to cut off those
of his that did escape, neither should thou have delivered up those of his
that did remain in the day of distress.

Edoms violence is yet further described by showing negatively, what he ought
not to have done, and yet did; to wit, that in the day of Judah's calamity by
the Caldeans, he a brother, who is borne for adversity, Prove. 17.17. ought not
to have looked on their condition with delight, nor insulted and spoken
blasphemously against God and his people, (as this is expounded, Ezekiel. 35.12,
13.) not entered the City with the enemies, and spoiled them of their goods, nor
have laid wait for such of the Jews as fled, to cut them off, or deliver them
into the enemies hand. Doct. 1. The hour of the Churches trial and conrection,
is a very sharp, dark, and violent blast: It is a day of calamity, destruction
and distress, a day wherein he becomes a stranger; That is, not dealt with as a
privileged people, but as strangers, and sent to a strange Country in exile,
and were exercised with strange lots. The Churches heinous sins, and Gods
jealousy over his confederate people causes this; and withal, the Lord
minds to haste over the Churches affliction, and therefore sends it thick on.
2. The Church of God suffering much, must not therefore think to be exempted
from more trial; but must, by what they suffer, be taught submission to yet
further exercise, if the Lord will: For Judah in their distress and calamity,
must yet have more from Edom. 3. However wicked men walk after the lusts and
passions of their own hearts, and stick at nothing which they will, and have
power to effect, yet the Lord will let them know, that they stand obliged by a
Law to duty, the violation whereof he will remark, aggravate, and punish: For
though Edom satisfied himself and his passion, in what he did against Jacob;
yet the Lord tells him, thou should not have done thus and thus, but wast
obliged by the Law to do otherwise, being both a brother and a neighbor. 4. To
add affliction to the afflicted, is great cruelty, especially when it is done
by those, from whom comfort might in reason be expected: Thou should not
have looked on the day of thy brother, in the day that he became a stranger,
etc. This adds to Edoms sin, that he chose such a time wherein to let out his
hatred. 5. As a careless or greedy look on the affliction of the people of God,
as it were a pleasant spectacle, is a further degree of their trial and
affliction: So it is Esau-like, and the badge of a reprobate condition, to take
pleasure in such a sight: For, it is twice marked, that he looked on the day
of his brother; (as an evidence of his cruelty, in adding that to their
affliction: See Ps. 22.17.) 6. As rejoicing of enemies, and their blasphemies
against God, his truth, and his peoples privileges in him, is an usual and
sore trial of the Church, when she is in affliction; So it is the badge of
wicked men to become insolent with success, and a cause wherefore God will
plead with them: For it is another challenge, as for great cruelty, that Edom
rejoiced over Judah in the day of their destruction, and spoke proudly in the
day of distress. 7. The Lord will not forget the least injures done by any to
the Church, even when greater wrongs are in doing to them, which might seem to
hide the lesser; For, albeit the Caldeans were now bringing all to ruin; yet
the Lord takes notice of an insolent eye, proud looks, entering into the gate,
and laying hands on substance. 8. Apostates and false brethren are most cruel
enemies and persecuters of those whom they desert; For, Edom the brother,
beside all his insulting and joining with the enemy, did yet more, and stood in
the cross way to cut off those that did escape; and delivers up the remnant,
when it seems, the Caldeans had given over. 9. Even when God is afflicting his
Church, and letting loose the reins to the fury of men against them, yet he
does not quit his interest in them: For, in the midst of all this storm from
the Chaldean and Edom, the Lord gives them the Covenant-title, My people, as
not only standing unrepealed, but forthcoming for much sympathy from God,
and a reason why he thus pleads their cause; Sin may procure affliction, but
every provocation will not make void the Covenant.

Ver. 15. For the day of the LORD is near upon all the heathen: as thou have
done, it shall be done unto thee, thy reward shall return upon thine own^ head.

16. For as ye have drunk upon mine holy mountain, so shall all the heathen
drink continually: yea, they shall drink, and they shall swallow down, and they
shall be as though they had not been.

The Lord repeats the threatening, and shows that whereas no brotherly
obligation, nor sense of duty to God had moved Edom to desist; yet there is
another reason more touching, why he needed not be so insolent: because the
heathen should have their day of it, and that shortly, and particularly Edom;
it being just with God to recompense their injuries done to the Church: and as
his people had drunk of the cup of affliction; so to make Edom with others,
drink of his judgment to their own destruction. Doct. 1. God by his universal
providence, is Sovereigne Lord and Judge of all men, even of those who know him
not, nor acknowledge him, to take trial of their ways and punish them; for
there is a day of the Lord upon all the heathen, a day of judicial cognition and
recompense, and a day wherein he will prove himself God upon them. 2. The Lords
correcting of his Church, is a presage and pledge of vengeance to come on the
world and enemies: for, when Judah is in distress, the day of the Lord on all
the heathen is near: when they have drunk, the heathen shall drink. 3. The
Lord will not be owing his enemies any thing for afflicting his people, but
will pay them in their own coin, and make them Scholars at the School they
bred the Church with: For, such is Edoms doom, as thou have done, it shall be
done unto thee, thy reward shall return upon thine own head. 4. No external
privilege exempteth a people from ffliction, when it is for their good, and
their sinful temper calls for it; Ye have drunk upon my holy mountain, says
the Lord to Judah. 5. It is the Churches advantage to get the first essay of
trials and judgments, that they may be easiest unto them, the cup of Gods wrath
having still, the nearer the bottom, the more dregs, which are reserved for the
wicked, to destroy them: For, They have drunk upon my holy mountain, and yet
are preserved and spoken to; but the heathen shall drink continually, and
swallow down, and be as if they had not been; that is, utterly consumed. 6. The
Lords correcting of his people is a means to endear them the more to him, and
make them more precious in his eyes: For this sentence against the Heathen, is
directed by way of encouragement to the Church, ( as ye have drunk, -- so shall
the heathen, --) to comfort and assure her, and make her confident of his good
will, in that he will avenge her quarrel.

Ver. 17. But upon mount Zion shall be deliverance, and there shall be
holiness, and the house of Jacoh shall possess their possessions.

The rest of this Prophecy contains comfortable promises unto the Church now
in trouble, whereof however Judah had some taste at their return from the
Captivity, and afterward; and albeit the Church of the Gospel begetting
continual performance of them in a spiritual way; yet (some of them at least)
seem to point more especially at the time of the conversion and saving of all
Israel, Romans 11. In this Verse there is promised to the Church deliverance and
evasion from her troubles; holiness, and wonted privileges, and restitution to
their wonted possessions; not only of the Jews, to what they were deprived of
by the captivity, but of the whole house of Jacob, to what was given them by
Covenant, made with their Fathers, which is yet unaccomplished. Doct. 1. Albeit
the Lord in the time of the Churches trouble, withhold from her the possession
of her pleasant things; yet his thoughts and purposes of love are then as large
and sure to her as ever, as she may read from the Word, though she see it not
in dispensations: therefore the time of Judah's trouble is a time wherein he
makes many promises. 2. Not only is there in the greatest arflictions of the
Church still some to escape, it being impossible she should totally perish: but
the Church may expect complete deliverance from all her evils in due time; For
upon Mount Zion shall be deliverance. 3. Holiness is the unseparable companion
of blessed deliverance, and is a means to secure it to the Church: for when
there is deliverance, there shall be holiness. Holiness is an evidence of
Gods dwelling in the Church, who will establish his own habitation; and a token
that God will preserve them as his consecrated people, and not suffer them to
be profaned and polluted with invasion of the enemies as formerly: And thus
also Holiness is sometime to be taken, Joel 3.17. Isa. 52.1. as the fruit of
the Holy Lords dwelling among them, and setting them apart for himself, and as
the free reward of their studying Holiness. 4. Holiness is not only the
Churches duty to study after it, but as the Lords promise, who undertakes to
work it in her: For, it is a promise, There shall be holiness; they shall be
an holy people, enjoy Gods presence in holy Ordinances, and be preserved from
violence of enemies. 5. The mercies of the Church, whether spiritual or
temporal, in so far as God has promised, and they need them, are sure, and
such as will be recovered after they have been suspended from the comfort and
use of them for a long time: For, the house of Jacob shall possess their
hereditary possessions, (as the word is) after long captivity and exile.

Ver. 18. And the house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a
flame, and the house of Esau for stubble, and they shall kindle in them and
devour them, and there shall not be any remaining of the house of Esau, for the
Lord has spoken it.

The next promise is of the utter ruin of Edom for the Churches sake; and of
all the most inveterate enemies (such as Edom was) of the Church, and
especially of the Church of converted Israel, who shall be the occasion and
cause, if not also the instruments of their enemies destruction. Doct. 1. The
Church of God will never want inveterate and cruel enemies, nor difficulties,
while she is in the world: For, not only Judah in the time of their Captivity,
but the Church in her restoration by Christ, and the house of Jacob and
Joseph, (which takes in all Israel, and the ten Tribes expressly,) when they
share of this deliverance, have an house of Esau against them. There is no time
wherein the Church has corruptions, but she is to look for difficulties in it.
2. Opposition of enemies unto the Church, does but contribute to make way for
Gods letting out many proofs of his love in helping and delivering her, as this
promise does teach. 3. Opposition to the Church, is a certain pledge of the
utter destruction of opposers, and the Lord is able when he pleases, to make
his weak people strong to bring it about: For this promise that Jacob shall be
a fire, etc. imports not only that Edom shall be utterly consumed as a flame
consumes stubble; but that their meddling with the Church shall be cause of
their ruin; as if stubble endeavoring to put out a fire, were burnt it self;
or that God should make the Church active to effect it, as was in part
accomplished when the Jews after their captivity destroyed the Edomites, as
History records. 4. The Word of God, and his Omnipotency and fidelity who
speaks it, is sufficient to confirm the Churches faith in the certainty of most
improbable things: For, whatever unlikelihood be in this promise, it is removed
by this; For the Lord has spoken it.

Ver. 19. And they of the South shall possess the mount of Esan, and they of
the plain, the Philistines: and they shall possess the fields of Ephraim, and
the fields of Samaria, and Benjamin shall possess Gilead.

20. And the captivity of this host of the children of Israel shall possess
that of the Canaanites even unto Zarephath, and the captivity of Jerusalem
which is in Sepharad, shall possess the Cities of the South.

It is further promised, That the Church shall not only have restitution, but
enlargement of their possessions, enjoying all their own, and possessing what
had been their enemies. The Jews in the South taking in Edom with their own
portion; they who dwell in the plain enjoying the Philistines land as lying
nearest them; and all their own borders recovered, not only Ephraim, Samaria
and Benjamin, but Gilead also beyond Jordan; and for further confirmation, the
Lord foretells that the numerous captivity of Israel should possess their
Northern border to Zareph^^h, or Zareptah toward Zidon, 1 Kings 17.9. And that
the Captives of Jerusalem and Judah in Sepharad, (conceived to be a place in a
Chaidea,) should possess their South-border. Now concerning the accomplishment
of this promise, it cannot be said that any thing done by the Maccabees, and
their successors, or obtained by Herod and his successors from the Romans, was
the full performance, these things coming far short of what is here foretold;
besides, that the children of Israel or ten Tribes are expressly mentioned in
this Prophecy. Nor does the taking the place in a spiritual sense fully
exhaust the meaning, there being such express designation of places to be
possessed, and of several troops of captives to possess the several places;
And therefore it seems to point further at the restitution of Israel to their
own land, and the enlargement of their border, when they shall turn to Christ
in the latter days, Romans 11.25, 26. However the Promise may teach us: 1. The
afflictions of the Church, through Gods blessing, tend to their advantage and
gain; For the Captivity are to get not only their own land, but the mount of
Esau and the Philistines, and what they had not before their Captivity. 2.
Christ in his Church will gain ground on his enemies, and possess and reign
over them, either by their voluntary conversion, or violent subjection and
destruction: For so much does the scope of this promise, being spiritually
taken, import. 3. The privileges of the people of God are irrevocable and
immurable, and will break forth in comfortable fruits after long and sad
interruptions. This is again signified and taught by Isreal's possessing the
fields of Ephraim, and Semaria, and Benjamin with Gilead (as the Original has
it) of which they have been so long deprived. 4. The Lord marketh every
distress, and captivity of his people, and what becomes of them; and may
manifest much of his goodness to such as he has sore afflicted, and brought
down with corrections: For though the Captivity was sent away with much
ignominy, and carried far off; yet the Lord marks that they are the captivity,
and where they are, and will restore them to their possessions, and cause them
to possess the gates of their enemies.

Ver. 21. And Saviors shall come up on Mount Zion to judge the Mount of Esau,
and the kingdom shall be the LORDS.

A further Promise of fit instruments to be raised up in the Church to deliver
her, and manage the cause of God against enemies as of old, when the Lord
raised up Judges to deliver Israel: Whereby we are to understand, not only
spiritually that Christ will send to the Church his Apostles and Messengers,
who instrumentally save the Elect, 1 Timothy 4.16. by holding forth Christ in the
Word of Salvation, and by their Doctrine do condemn the world: but that in all
Ages, and especially in the Church of converted Israel, God will raise up
instruments of deliverance to the Church, as he did also in the times betwixt
the captivity and coming of Christ. Doct. 1. The Church of Christ will not want
fit instruments to promote her happiness: For, Saviors shall come up on Mount
Zion. 2. The allowance of the Church of God, is Salvation eternal and temporal
also, in so far as is fit for her to receive: Therefore are the instruments
sent to her called Saviors; to wit, in an instrumental way. 3. The Doctrine of
the Gospel in the mouth of Christ's Servants, does reprove, judge and condemn
the world, and all the enemies of Christ, and this judgment is seconded with
spiritual plagues, and sometimes temporal, till the day come when the World
shall judge them, and they receive a complete recompense according to it. Thus
do some of Christ's instruments judge the mount of Esau. 4. As the Lord is
Sovereign in all the world, even over his enemies: So when he raises up
instruments for the Churches good, he will bless them, and by them bring his
enemies to an account, and execute his sentence against them; For these
instruments of the Churches temporal deliverance do judge the Mount of Esau,
when God delivers enemies into their hand as his delegates to pour his
vengeance upon them.

The last and great promise is, that God in his Christ shall have a Kingdom in
his Church, and among their enemies for their behoof. Doct. 1. Where Christ
sets up his Church, there he sets up his Kingdom also, and will be acknowledged
as such: For, the Kingdom shall be his. 2. No dominion or sovereignty is to be
acknowledged in the true Church, but Christ's only; he alone has power to make
Laws binding the conscience, to institute Ordinances, enjoin censures, appoint
Officers, by his own Courts to judge his own House, etc. For, the Kingdom shall
be the Lords. All other Saviors or instruments of deliverance must serve him,
and his Officers must content themselves with his Ministry. 3. The Kingdom of
Christ is matter of comfort to the true Church and godly, it being sweet to
live under his yo^k and protection; for it is a promise, The Kingdom shall be
the Lords. 4. Christ holds his kingdom by a certain and firm tenure, as being
made sure to him by the infallible promise of God, as here is recorded in holy
Scripture, and upon this ground may the Church notwithstanding all opposition,
expect the day when the kingdoms of this world shall become the kingdoms of
our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever, Rev. 11.15.

JONAH.
The ARGUMENT.
JONAH having prophesied in Israel, in or a little before the days of Jeroboam
the son of Joash, 2 Kings 14.25. but with little success, as may be gathered,
confidering the times wherein be lived; is sent to preach to Nineveh, the chief
City of the Assyrian Empire: But disobeying the command, he it sharply punished
by God till he was humbled for his f^lly. And being brought to follow the
second call, after he had fulfilled his message; God, upon Nineveh's
repentance, spares them: whereat he repining, is reproved of God. In sum, the
Prophets frailty is a preaching to all, and especially to disobedient servants;
and the Ninevites their repentance, and Gods dealing with them, holds out his
riches in mercy, and may convince all those, who are unfruitful under the
plenty of preaching. Albeit this be a History, yet it is justly reckoned among
the Prophets, in respect of the Penman who was a Prophet, and in respect of the
chief subject of it, which is a prediction of things to come: And however Jonah
was in some things a type of Christ, Matthew. 12.37, 40. Yet as the confideration
of that is to be remitted to its proper place, so to speak of him as a type,
further then in what is opened by Christ, is unsafe.

CHAP. I.
THe parts of this Chapter, are 1. Ionah's disobedience to the Lords call, he
essayed to fly to Tarshish, when he should have gone to Nineveh, to ver. 4.2.
The correction of his disobedience; The Lord by a mighty storm at sea, pursues
him, til by lot and his own confession he is found guilty, and gives out his
own doom, which is executed by the Mariners, though with much reluctance, to
ver. 17.3 His preservation in his correction by a fish prepared to swallow him,
ver. 17.

Ver. 1. NOw the word of the LORD came unto Jonah the son of Amittai, saying,

2. Arise, go to Nineveh that great City, and cry against it, for their
wickedness is come up before me.

HEre Jonah gets a commission and calling to go and preach against that great
city Nineveh, and stoutly accuse and threatten them for their great
wickedness, which was crying unto God for vengeance: Whence learn, 1. The
servants of God are not to be at their own disposing, but to be employed in
service, as the Lord thinks fit; for Jonah, after his employments in Israel, is
put upon strange service of leaving his country, and going to a barbarous and
wicked people to carry hard tidings, which might be very full of hazard in
appearance. 2. Great and flourishing places have ordinarily great and crying
sins; for, The wickedness of Nineveh that great city is come up before God. 3.
As abounding sin is not in a cold rife way to be spoken against, but with all
zeal and fervencie; so the Lords servants having commission from him, may and
ought boldly to plead his controversy, and for him, against greatest persons
or places: For J^nab is sent to cry against the great City, and their
wickedness. 4. Greatest sinners are ordinarily most secure and insensible;
Therefore also does Nineveh, whose sins are come up before God, need that the
Prophet should cry, 5. The Lords reason for sending Jonah thither to preach,
was not only to show that God is Lord of all the earth, and a punisher of sin
even among Pagans, or to give some essay of sending his Word unto the Gentiles:
but more especially, 1. To leave a standing witness in the repentance of
Nineveh, against all those who obstinately contemn the Gospel, as this passage
is commented upon by Christ, Matthew. 12.41. 2. To forewarne all of the removing
of the Lords messengers, when their message is not received. Therefore was
Jonah sent away from Israel, which was now desperate in its backsliding; see
Mat. 21.43. 3. To convince all, that he takes no pleasure in the death of
sinners; Therefore though Nineveb's wickedness is come up before God, yet
Jonah is sent to warn them ere the stroke come on.

Ver. 3. But Jonah rose up to fly unto Tarshish from the presence of the LORD,
and went down to Joppa, and he found a ship going to Tarshish: so be paid the
fare thereof, and went down into it, to go with them unto Tarshish from the
presence of the LORD.

Here we have Jonah's disobedience to this call, he being surprised with the
novelty of such a charge, and fearing hazard, or want of success, or as may be
gathered from Chap. 4.2. that if either on their repentance, or in Gods
long-suffering, threatenings should not be executed, he might be reputed a
false Prophet, and so be exposed to contempt, (whereof the Prophets of God had
many trials in Israel it self, 1 Kings 22.8, 18. 2 Kings 9.11.) Therefore he
resolves to flee from God to Tarshish, in Cilicia; not that he denied his
universal presence in all the world, but (as the original bears) He fled from
before the face of the Lord, that is, from the land where God usually
manifested himself to the Prophets, and from obeying the Lord, as a rebellious
servant flying from his Master, in whose presence he uses to stand. And this
resolution he follows, and finding at Joppa a ship, he sets to the journey,
it being safer and nearer to travel by sea then by land. Doct. 1. It is an
usual fault in men to examine Gods command by their own wisdom or will, and
accordingly as they judge, to obey or disobey; for, so does Jonah here, He rose
up to fly, etc. and so do all they, who look more to see a reason of Gods
commands satisfactory to them, then to the will of the Commander. 2. Even the
precious servants of the Lord have so much unmortified corruption, as (being
left to themselves) may drive them on in very high fits of disobedience; For
Jonah, a Prophet, does avowedly resist the will of God. 3. Rebellion in the
children of God may not only be a sudden tentation or a fit shortly shaken
off, but they may go on long in it, and with great deliberation; for, Jonah all
the while he was going to Joppa, fraughting the ship, and launching out (by
all which the Lord tried his abiding by it) continues in his resolution. 4.
Men in their rebellion are ordinarily so addicted to their own will, that they
are blind and inconsiderate, not pondering any inconvenience that may ensue,
but will hazard all, rather then be crossed in their purposes. This does appear
in Jonah; he who knew the Lord will disobey him, and yet think to prosper; he
will rather lose that great privilege of standing before the Lord, to receive
prophetic revelations, then want his will, which is twice marked, to show his
great madness: yea, he will rather be at charges to pay the fare, and hazard
to Sea with Pagan men, then go among Pagans at Gods command. 5. Success in a
way of rebellion against God, is a snare, leading on the rebel to sadder
corrections; Therefore Jonah found a ship ready, and opportunity to launch out,
that he may get a sharper rod at sea, where Pagans should be witnesses, and not
Israel.

Ver. 4. But the LORD sent out a great wind into the sea, and there was a
mighty tempest in the sea, so that the ship was like to be broken.

Follows Jonah's correction; The Lord by a violent tempest, likely to break
the ship, pursues him till he be found guilty, and cast into the sea. Whence
learn, 1. A storm will sooner or later overtake them who rebel against God,
though they were his own people; for, Jonah went on in his way, but the Lord
sent out a great wind, etc. 2. God is Sovereign Lord of the winds, and in the
sea, as well as the dry land, and can arm any creature he pleases against a
rebel; for, The Lord sent out a great wind, and caused a mighty tempest in the
sea. 3. To be in company with wicked men, or with men in a wicked way of
rebellion against God, is dangerous, and may involve the society in hazards
with them; for, the ship was like to be broken, and all the rest in danger of
perishing with Jonah.

Ver. 5. Then the Mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his god, and
cast forth the wares that were in the ship into the sea to lighten it of them:
but Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship, and he lay and was fast
asleep.

In the next place we have some effects and consequences of this tempest, by
which at last Gods purpose in it is brought forth: The first effect upon the
Mariners is fear, stirring them up to do all that is usual in such desperate
cases for their own relief, both such means as they accounted divine, in
calling on their gods, and such as were humane, in casting out of their
commodities to lighten the ship; all which is amplified from Jonah's security,
who in the mean time was sleeping. Doct. 1. God can shake, and by trouble will
shake the hearts of stoutest men, and make them fear; for, the Mariners,
otherwise stout at sea, are afraid. 2. Men may be afraid, and much exercised
about troubles, whom yet the Lord intends not to hurt by them; for, the
Mariners are afraid of the storm, sent out to pursue Jonah, and not them,
however they had their own gross sins. 3. Even natures light may teach men to
ascribe singular effects to the hand of a Sovereign Lord, and that without
acknowledging thereof, there can be no safety in eminent dangers; for so does
these Pagans practice teach us, while in their fear they cried every man to his
god. 4. As natures light in corrupted man will mislead him in taking up the
true God; so when men turn their back upon the true God and the knowledge of
him, they become vain in their imaginations, and endless in their seeking out
of false gods and confidences; therefore among Pagans, even in one ship, there
are more false Gods then one worshipped; They cried every man to his god. There
is no certainty when the true God is forsaken. 5. Although men ought not to be
unwilling to yield up their life to God, when or wheresoever he in his
providence shall be pleased to call for it; yet life is so precious, that
nothing worldly beside, is too dear to be employed for preservation of it:
Natures light teaches this to these Mariners, who cast out the wares that were
in the ship, to essay if that could be a means of preserving their life. 6.
Ordinarily those who are most guilty, and whom affliction is pointing at, are
most secure under it; for, all this while Jonah the guilty man was fast asleep.
7. The conscience of a renewed man may, after it is wounded by a gross sin, be
a very dead and stupefied conscience for a time: for, Jonah flying from his
Master, in the midst of the storm lay fast asleep, and was gone down to the
fides of the ship for that end. 8. It is ordinary for guilty consciences to
think to shift and sleep away challenges, without essaying the true remedy; for
Jonah in his rebellion was gone down to the fides of the ship, to sleep away
his trouble.

Ver. 6. So the shipmaster came to him, and said unto him, What meanest thou, O
sleeper? Arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon us that we
perish not.

To the end the Lord may discover the guilty man, and cause of this tempest, as
he made the Mariners sensible themselves, so the Shipmaster is set on work to
waken Jonah, to try his interest with his God (whom they knew not yet to be the
true God) if possibly he had more power or good will to such as worshipped him,
then theirs had: Which is the first step to his discovery. Doct. 1. A child of
God may sometimes miscarry so far, through infirmity, negligence and tentation,
that even a Pagan by natures light, may see him reproveable and blameworthy;
for so is Jonah reproved by the shipmaster, What meanest thou? etc. 2. It is
deeply censurable and absurd, even to natures eye, to be secure in trouble:
What meanest thou, O sleeper? arise, etc. 3. Variety of false Gods hold men in
great suspense and incertainty; therefore every man having cried to his god,
ver. 5. yet they are not settled, but will have Jonah to essay his God, if he be
better then the rest, Arise, call upon thy God; so much also does that doubtful
speech, if so be that God will think upon us, etc. import in this place, in
part. 4. Natures light will acknowledge that he who is the true God, has power
to deliver in most extreme dangers; for in this great tempest, they assert it:
If God think on us, we will not perish. 5. Howsoever in a calm day, nature
conceit and boast of merit, yet in a strait even natural men are forced to have
their recourse only to the favor of God; for these Pagans have no ground of
hope that they shall not perish, but in Gods thinking (or being bright and
shining, as the word signifies, that is, looking favorably) on them.

Ver. 7. And they said every one to his fellow, Come, and let us cast lots,
that we may know for whose cause this evil is upon us. So they cast lots, and
the lot fell upon Jonah.

The second effect of this tempest tends to a further discovery of Jonah to be
the guilty man. He being awaked and not confessing his sin, the tempest
continues notwithstanding all they had done. Therefore the mariners, in stead
of searching every man into himself, that all might take with guilt, and find
favor, begin to suspect that God was pursuing some notorious guiltiness in
some of them, and none voluntarily confessing it, they resolve with common
consent to seek it out by an extraordinary way of lots. Wherein whatever fault
there was, yet Gods providence ordered it so, as the lot fell on Jonah, to
awake his conscience. Doct. 1. Nature may lead men so far as in great
difficulties to take up sin to be the cause thereof; for so much does this
consultation import, which however it was true in this case, and it be always
true that sin is the root affliction springs from; yet nature uses not to go
so far as to lead men to lay sin to heart in common and ordinary crosses, or to
look on common and ordinary sins as provocation sufficient to bring on saddest
trials; for they must seek some singular cause here; far less to look on
afflictions as trials of faith, or for preventing of sin. 2. Men in nature use
not so much to take up, and be sensible of sin, from the law of God having
authority in their heart, as grope it in some trial and difficulty: Therefore
they of whose sense of guilt we hear not before, do now in their trial begin
to think for whose cause this evil is. 3. Prayer never so much essayed in a day
of distress will not avail, till sin procuring it be searched out and taken
with; so much do these Pagans acknowledge, while with the former means of
prayer, they set themselves to seek out the guilty, and to know for whose
cause this evil is upon them. 4. Afflictions sharply pursuing, may have such
efficacy as to put men, otherwise careless, to it, to seek out sin, and not
let them sleep on who gladly would, and have been insensible of sin; for, these
men are so put to it, as they are willing to have the quarrel sought out, and
to submit themselves to a lot for that effect: They said every one to his
fellow, Come, and let us cast lots, that we may know, etc. Afflictions will
command men to turn from iniquity, who would not hear such a charge in any
other language, Job 36.10. 5. The Lords all-seeing eye perceives every secret
sin, and his providence overrules most contingent and uncertain events, and
holily orders the rash actions of men so, as to bring about his own purposes
by them: For, these men acknowledge that the guilty is known, though not to
them, and that the determination of a continge^^ lot overruled by a Deity, is
a true evidence for whose cause this evil is. And albeit it was a fault in them
not to search every man himself, or to consult by lots without special
warrant; yet God over-ruleth the lot to discover Jonah. 6. The Lords
controversy is sometime greater and more severely prosecuted against his own
children for their miscarriages, then against Pagans and gross Idolaters among
whom they may be; Therefore, the lot, guided by God, fell upon Jonah,
signifying his rebellion to be the cause of all their danger, rather then their
Idolatry, though openly practiced in the height of their straight: for, 1.
Rebellion is as Idolatry, 1 Samuel 15.23. and so much the grosser, as it is in a
child. 2. Albeit they worshipped that which was no god; yet none of them had so
behaved themselves toward a supposed Deity, as he had done toward the true God,
Jer. 2.10, 11. 3. God may wink at sin in Pagans, but will not let his own child
go on unreclaimed, Amos 3.2. it being mercy to pursue them for their folly, and
amend them.

Ver. 8. Then said they unto him, Tell us we pray thee, for whose cause this
evil is upon us. What is thine Occupation, and whence come thou? What is thy
Country? and of what people art thou?

The guilty man being now discovered by God, is examined by the Mariners to
find out the particular fact, but very discreetly, as supposing that possibly
the sin might be somewhat whereof his Nation and people were guilty, and not
any particular guilt of his own. And therefore concerning himself they enquire
of his calling and journey, if so be they might be unlawful; and of his
country and people, if so be they were accursed. Doct. 1. Men have need of
full information, before they give out sentence upon any; for, though Jonah was
taken by a lot, and these men not knowing him, might in passion shortly have
rid themselves of him, who had been the occasion and cause of their trouble;
yet they will farther inform themselves, and that very meekly; tell us, we
pray thee, etc. 2. Charity, even in refined nature, does not easily admit of an
hard construction of any, or without sure grounds; Therefore they first
enquire, tell us for whose cause this evil is upon us, as desiring to be more
particularly informed, and not being willing to hold him for a wicked man in
his own person, till they should hear further. 3. As in men's callings,
employments, country and people, there is hazard of sin; so by those
circumstances, much of men's faults may be found out: Therefore is Jonah posed
concerning all these; For, beside unlawful callings, and places where it is not
lawful to haunt, every particular country and people have their own
tentations to particular sins, from which sins of a generation or calling, it
is hard to keep free. 4. Men do oftentimes, following their own ends, engage in
courses without all consideration, till a day of trouble set them to trace them
back and make enquiry: For, these Mariners, minding their own gain, put none of
these questions to Jonah, when they took him aboard, till the storm led them
to see their folly and rashness. 5. The Lord, in pursuing for sin, knows how
to order challenges, so as may make sin most bitter to the guilty; Therefore
does he order the Mariners moving of these questions, What is thine occupation?
etc. every one of which might be a sting to Jonah's conscience, that he, a
Prophet, should be fleeing from God; coming from the holy land and the Church,
should be rebellious and pursued rather then Pagans; that he should be on a way
and not have a warrant from God for it, etc.

Ver. 9. And he said unto them, I am an Hebrew, and I fear the LORD the God of
heaven, which has made the sea, and the dry land.

10. Then were the men exceedingly afraid, and said unto him, Why have thou
done this? (for the men knew that he fled from the presence of the LORD,
because he had told them.)

Ionah's confession in answer to their question, cleers up the matter of fact,
for which God was pursuing him; whereat these Idolaters (being dazzled with the
apprehension of the Majesty of God) are astonished through fear, admiring at,
and reproving his presumption. Hence learn, 1. God will not suffer iniquity,
how well soever concealed, to lurk; but will bring it out to light, especially
where he has a purpose of mercy to the sinner: Therefore is Jonah pursued till
he confess his sin, even before Pagans; He told them that he fled, etc. 2. Sin
is not barely to be confessed, but ought to be aggravated by every person that
would be approved as sensible of it: For so much does this speech, I am an
Hebrew, and I fear the Lord God of heaven, etc. implie; and it was a great sin
in him, a member of the Church, to dally, and that with such a great God. 3.
The true God is to be commended by all his children, and set forth, as they are
able, before natural men, that they may have no occasion to think basely of
him: For, so much also does this description of God, The God of heaven, which
has made the sea, and the dry land, (intimating, that he only had raised
that tempest) import. 4. It is a fearful condition to be found in a way of
rebellion against the great and mighty God; therefore these Pagans hearing of
the greatness of God, and of Jonahs fact, were exceedingly afraid, and said
unto him, Why have thou done this? etc. 5. The more men see of Gods hand in
judgments, especially that he is pursuing for sin, they will affect the more:
For, they who were afraid before at the tempest, ver. 5. now when they see God
pursuing Rebellion by it, are exceedingly afraid. 6. The light and judgment of
natural men may be more clear in many things, then the light of a child of
God under tentation; For, they fear exceedingly, and tremble at what Jonah
hazarded upon, in fleeing from the presence of the Lord; Why have thou done
this? etc.

Verse. 11. Then said they unto him, What shall we do unto thee, that the Sea
may be calm unto us? (for the sea wrought, and was tempestuous.)

12. And he said unto them, Take me up, and cast me forth into the sea; so
shall the sea be calm unto you: for I know that for my sake this great tempest
is upon you.

Jonah being now found out, and by his own confession convicted of guilt,
pronounces his own sentence against himself, that he, as the cause of all
their trouble, should be cast into the fea, in regard that it still raged,
testifying that Gods anger was not appeased. Doct. 1. Confessing, yea, and
repenting for scandalous sins, will not sometimes exempt from such correction,
as may make the guilty see more of Gods displeasure, and so the desert of sin:
For albeit Jonah had now confessed his sin, and that with remorse, as may
appear from the confession, and that which follows here; yet the sea wrought
and was tempestuous, as seeking him. 2. It is a kindly fruit of affliction,
when men are taught tenderness and humanity, and a greater subjection of
spirit to follow the revealed will of God under it; therefore the Mariners in
this strait consult with Jonah himself, What shall we do unto thee? as minding
in humanity and compassion to do nothing without his own consent, and intending
to reverence what he should say, as being a Prophet of God. 3. A sinner truly
humbled will be sensible of the huge desert of sin, and will submit and
reverence the righteousness of God in saddest punishments: Therefore Jonah
counsels, Take me up, and cast me into the sea; not out of any bitterness, or
hatred and weariness of his own life; but from a Prophetic spirit, knowing
Gods mind, and from the sense of sin, acknowledging the equity of the sentence
in his conscience. 4. It will be most sad and bitter to an humbled sinner to be
accessory, by his provocation, to the affliction of others, and to be a drawer
on of common calamities; Cast me forth, says he, so shall the sea be calm
unto you, for I know that for my sake, etc.

Ver. 13. Nevertheless the men rowed hard to bring it to the land, but they
could not: for the sea wrought, and was tempestuous against them.

Ver. 14. Wherefore they cried unto the LORD, and said, We beseech thee, O
LORD, we beseech thee let us not perish for this man's life, and lay not upon us
innocent blood: for thou, O LORD, have done as it pleased thee.

15. So they took up Jonah and cast him forth into the sea, and the sea seized
from her raging.

Jonah having pronounced sentence against himself, the Mariners execute it; but
first out of compassion toward him, they used their utmost endeavors to get to
any land by rowing; but to no purpose, for God made the sea fight against them.
Therefore they pray and protest, that their executing of the sentence might not
be imputed to them as bloodshed, he being innocent in respect of them: and
what they were now to do, being undertaken only in obedience to Gods Sovereign
providence and will revealed by Jonah himself. And on these conditions they
proceed to execution, upon which follows their deliverance from their strait.
Doct. 1. Even humanity in natural men will be tender and compassionate toward
those who are in trouble, though justly procured; especially if they know them
to have relation to God, and to be sensible of their condition. Therefore
albeit Jonah had been the cause of their trouble; yet looking on him as a
Prophet of God, and pitying him when they heard his confession and sentence
against himself, they rowed bard to bring it to land, and would trouble
themselves to exempt him. 2. Even refined nature has an antipathy against
bloodshed, and manslaughter, if in justice it could be avoided: This appears
in their endeavors and earnest protestations before they execute a just
sentence. 3. The utmost endeavors of men will not frustrate the purposes of
God, nor free a guilty sinner from his stroke: For, they rowed hard to exempt
him, but the sea wrought, and was tempestuous against them, as pursuing him,
and them also, if they did not what God revealed to be their duty. 4. God in
his Sovereignty disposes of all things at his pleasure and will: This do they
acknowledge and see in this sentence, Thou, O Lord, have done as it pleased
thee. 5. Extremest necessities give no latitude to men to do any thing, but
what is warranted of God; For they judge that no necessity could free them from
the guilt of innocent blood in casting out Jonah, but only Gods revealed will:
For, say they, as a reason, Thou, O Lord, have done as it pleased thee. 6. Men
are to go about actions in obedience to the Sovereign will and pleasure of God
revealed to them, which otherwise their inclinations are much averse from: For,
in obedience to the Lords will, They took up Jonah and cast him forth, much
against their own hearts. 7. As God is a severe chastiser of rebellion in his
own dearest children: so rebellion against him deserves that the Rebel should
be cut off in a violent way, and that the Lords earth or sea should not carry
him: For, so is Jonah cast forth into the sea. 8. The execution of justice upon
the guilty in a society, is a means of turning away judgments from the rest;
For, Jonah being cast forth, the Sea ceased from her raging. See Ps 106.30.

Ver. 16. Then the men feared the LORD exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice
unto the LORD, and made vows.

All those passages are amplified from an effect they had upon the Mariners,
who abserving all that was done, and having no doubt heard Jonah preach more of
God, then is recorded, (as appears from ver. 10.) are moved to tremble and fear
the true God, and testified it by sacrificing unto him, (whether presently,
they being as yet ignorant, or at Jerusalem, we will not determine,) and making
vows for the future, belike, that they would dedicate themselves to God, and
profess the true Religion. Doct. 1. In one work the Lord may have more holy
purposes then one, and besides what we see, may be doing many other things:
For, while he is pursuing Jonah, he is also setting forth himself, and
preaching his power and justice to Pagans, when Jonah refused to go to Nineveh
and do it. 2. The Lord can in a short time, and by few means, produce strange
effects and changes upon the children of men, even although they had not heard
of him before: For, however it cannot certainly be determined, whether these
Mariners were indeed converted, or whether it was Ionah's Doctrine revealing
God, and misery, and mercy, or their apprehension of God in this work, that
wrought most upon them; yet this is certain, that this short while of the
tempest and calm, and Ionah's preaching, made a great change: The men feared
the Lord exceedingly, etc. 3. As the Lord can easily make up men's losses which
they sustain in his providence; so it ish is way sometimes to make up temporal
losses with some spiritual advantage: So these men, whose ship and lives were
in hazard, and their goods lost, are made up, in that they had a Prophet among
them, and are brought to know somewhat of the true God, which made it a rich
voyage. 4. The Lords dispensations among a people, especially when they are
accompanied with any thing of his Word, calls for their improving them to some
spiritual advantage; so much does their practice press upon us, while by
considering on what they saw, felt and heard, they feared the Lord exceedingly.
5. God rightly considered and taken up, as he has revealed himself, and as he
appears in some special acts of providence, is exceeding dreadful, and to be
stood in aw of: For, they feared him exceedingly. 6. It is not a sufficient
proof of men's getting the fruit of Gods dispensations toward them, when they
only affect and draw to some acknowledgement of him for the present, but grow
negligent for the future: This they acknowledge in their practice, they offered
a sacrifice unto the Lord, and made vows, for the time to come, and engaged
themselves to God.

Ver. 17. Now the LORD had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah; and Jonah
was in the belly of the fish, three days and three nights.

The Chapter closes with the narration of Jonah's preservation (though thus
pursued by justice) in a fishes belly, where, in a miraculous way, he was kept
three days and three nights. Doct. 1. When God is pursuing the rebellion of
his children in a most severe way; yet does he not altogether cast off his
mercy toward them, but out of the abundance thereof, moderates their
affliction: For, The Lord, pursuing Jonah, had yet prepared a great fish to
swallow him up. 2. Gods providence overrules and directs the motions of
irrational creatures and Sea Monsters, as pleases him: For, the Lord had
prepared a great fish, etc. whereas it knew nothing but to range up and down in
the Sea, and swallow him as any other prey. 3. God may have a mercy, and proof
of love waiting upon his people, in a time and place where it would be least
expected: For, Jonah meets a mercy in the heart of a raging Sea, into which he
is cast in anger, as to be destroyed. 4. Albeit the mercy of God will not
destroy his guilty people in their afflictions; yet his wisdom sees it not
fitting at first totally to deliver them, but will have their faith exercised:
For, Jonah is here arrested three days and three nights between hope and
perplexity for his further exercising. 5. God can, when he sees fit, preserve
his people from ruin in an incredible and miraculous way: Therefore Jonah is
not only swallowed whole by the fish, not being hurt by its teeth; but is
preserved in the belly of the fish three days and three nights, where he was
in hazard of choking for want of breath, or of being digested by the fish into
its own substance.

CHAP. II.
THis Chapter contains, 1. Jonah's exercise in the fishes belly, ver. 1. And
2. An ample declaration of that his exercise, penned after his deliverance,
with an addition of praise; wherein he summarily rehearses his trouble,
exercise and deliverance, verse 2. and more fully enlarges the narration of
his trouble and exercise, and how by faith he obtained victory while he was yet
in the strait, verse 3, 4. And again, declares how his tentation assaulted him
afresh by reason of his hopeless condition, that he may set forth Gods great
bounty in his actual deliverance, verse 5, 6. All which being again summed up,
^^^se 7. He by way of conclusion condemns men's following of crooked ways, ver.
8. and promises praise, v. 9. 3. A declaration of the way of his deliverance
out of the fishes belly, v. 10.

Ver. 1. THen Jonah prayed unto the LORD his God, out of the fishes belly.

FRom Jonah's exercise in this his prison, learn, 1. It is a kindly fruit of
sanctified exercise in trouble to get insensiblenesse, bitterness, quarrelling
and the like distempers overcome, and to set about humble prayer: for, Then
Jonah prayed, 2. It is requisite for the right performance of prayer in a
strait, that the Supplicant take up God in the Covenant of Grace, as his own,
that so he may pray with humble confidence: For, Jonah prayed unto the Lord his
God. 3. The Lords correcting of his people for their sins, is no evidence of
his breaking Covenant with them, now ought to hinder a convinced Saint from
claiming an interest in God, as a ground of his approach unto him; for Jonah
being under this sad stroke; yet by faith prayed unto the Lord his God. 4. As
no condition or estate ought to discourage from prayer, as if it were in vain
to use it: so rebels against God may have his favor to sue after by prayer in
hard conditions, because they would not otherwise study to please him: for,
Jonah prayed out of the fishes belly, where for disobedience to God he is put
to pray with much disadvantage.

Ver. 2. And said, I cried by reason of mine affliction unto the LORD, and he
heard me, out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou heardest my voice.

The sum of his trouble, exercise and issue of it, as he records it after his
deliverance, is, That being by affliction brought as to the grave, and under
the dominion of death, yet he prayed and got audience. Doct. 1. The exercises
and experiences of the children of God ought to be communicated one to another,
as they have a calling and opportunity, for mutual instruction and edification;
for so does Jo^ah here, He said, I cried, etc. which is not to be understood,
as if he had said this in the fishes belly, (for it is not a prayer, but rather
a thanksgiving) but shows what he expressed after his deliverance, and that
he made a rehearsal of his whole condition for the edification of others. 2.
Great afflictions or tempeations arising from them, are so far from being just
cause of discouragement to hinder our praying, that they ought to stir us u^ to
more fervency and earnestness; for Jonah cried by reason of affliction, when
he was straightened on every hand, (as the word signifies,) that he could not flee
or find relief; he took it as a Call, to seek enlargement in God, and turn to
him, and as a whet-stone to sharpen his (otherwise) sluggish desires; yea, Out
of the belty of hell he cried; when he was buried quick, and put as it were
under the dominion of death in the ^^shes belly, and when he felt the ange^ of
God in all this, as an hell on earth, yet faith directs him to God, and when
he was as far (to his own sense) from God and his favor, as hell is from
heaven; he looked on that but as an argument to move him, to cry the louder.
3. As God can help in greatest distresses: so the prayers of the children of
God in their deep afflictions, flowing from real indigence and need, will get a
good answer; for Jonah's faith, strengthened of God, saw the one, when in
affliction and out of the belly of hell he cried, and in his experience he found
the other, that he prayed not in vain, He heard me. Prayer speedeth best, when
felt necessity instructs the sincerity of it; and when it is spoken out of the
dust, then faith will by prayer bring help from heaven to one little better
then in hell. 4. The Lords seasonable answering of his peoples needy desires in
their extremity, will not only ease their griefs, but be refreshfull
afterward, to think much upon it, as appears in his repeating and dwelling
upon this mercy; I cried and he heard me, twice over, and the oftener he looks
on it, sees the more in it; That his voice should be heard from the belly of
bell; and the more it be thought on, it ought to enlarge our hearts the more
with affection toward God, as is imported in his directing of his speech at
last to God; Thou heardest my voice: as one overcome with the kindness of God
in it.

Ver. 3. For thou had cast me into the deep in the midst of the seas, and the
floods compassed me about: all thy billows, and thy waves passed over me.

Jona^ is not content to have spoken so briefly of so rich a purpose, but to
the end that he may glorify the grace and mercy of God, in supporting him in
his strait, and delivering him from it, and that he may edify the Church, he
enlarges the Narration, and speaks more particularly of every step of it. And
first, he shows the greatness of his trial, in that he had to do with an
angry God, pursuing him in anger, who had taken and cast him into the sea, and
into the depth and midst of it, where waves of seas without, and of tentations
within, overwhelmed him; Hence learn. 1. Serious thoughts and apprehensions of
trouble, are needful, not only when we are in it, for stirring us up to
prayer, but when delivered also, to set forth the greatness of mercy, for all
this variety of expressions in setting out his trouble; Thou have cast me into
the depth, in the midst of the seas etc. tend to this purpose, to show that it
had set him on edge; I cried, for thou had cast me, etc. And to show from how
great danger he had been delivered, and what a mercy he thought it to be heard
of God, even when he was so dealing with him. 2. Much of God seen in our
trouble, will hide those from being too much eyed, who have been most
instrumental and active in it; therefore there is no word of the Mariners, but,
Thou had cast me into the deep. 3. Unto the child of God afflictions are
nothing to bear, in comparison of Gods displeasure, who afflicts, and of the
tentations, which looking on him as a party does raise; for his affliction is
imbittered with this, Thou being angry, had cast me into the Sea: all thy
billows, and thy waves, (not only raised by thee in the Sea, to pursue me a
rebel, but tides of tossing tentations, begotten by the sense of thy
displeasure,) passed over me, so that he could do no more then be
overwhelmed, and run down with one of them after another. 4. It may comend the
rich mercy of God toward his children, and furnish rich matter of praise to
him, that he suffers them not to quit him, out causes them to follow him, when
he seems to forsake them, and flee in to him, when he is pursuing in hot
displeasure; for, the scope of all this account of his trial and tentation,
tends also to set forth the grace of God, that had enabled him to cry to him in
all this extremity, it being the admirable power of faith, supported by grace;
that he durst call on an angry God, durst follow after him when he went away,
durst lay hold of him when he smorte, and pray him to desist from anger when
he was threatening him with worse, and durst look and seek for better tidings,
when he was run down with the current and tide of tentations.

Ver. 4. Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight, yet I will look again toward
thy holy temple.

He rehearses further his exercise upon this trial, that there was a conflict
betwixt unbelief and despair, concluding his rejection from Gods favor and
care any more, and faith looking to God in heaven, and the Covenant made in
Christ with the Elect (a sign whereof was his presence on the Mercy-seat in
the Temple at Jerusalem, toward which the godly were to direct their prayers, 1
Kings 8.) which gave him yet ground of hope. Doct. 1. It is the usual lot of
the Lords children, to have not only outward afflictions to wrestle with, but
spiritual tentations and sad conclusions, gathered from their troubles, which
are ^orer to endure then many simple afflictions; for, so was it with Jonah,
while he was in the sea. 2. The children of the Lord in their troubles, may be
so tossed and divided betwixt hope and despair, that faith and unbelief will be
taking word about; for, so does Jonahs, experience teach; I said. I am cast
out, yet wilt I look again. 3. In a time of tentation, unbeliefes word is
ordinarily first out, till faith come and correct it; ordinarily what is said
in haste is unbeliefes language, and to be un-said again; for, this comes first
out, I am cast out of thy sight. 4. A child of God may not only be assaulted
with fits of despair, but for a time be overcome with it, and yield to it, and
yet for all that recover his feet again; for Jonah once concluded, and said, I
am cast out of thy sight. 5. As it is ordinary under tentation, to judge of all
Gods respect, care and love, by our sense of his present dealing: so to be cast
off by God, as one that he will not favor nor care for, nor take notice of, is
the forest of trials, especially to the child of God, who lives by Gods
favor, and is made up in all his afflictions, when he finds that God thinks
on him, and that his troubles indear him to Gods care; for this is Jonahs
apprehension and saddest complaint; I am cast out of thy sight. 6. It is no new
thing to see a child of God, and vessel of mercy apprehending reprobation and
rejection from God, in his sad and dark hour; for, this also is Jonahs
temptation. 7. Nor is it strange to see the children of God exercised, and
sadly afflicted with that which has never been, nor will be, save in their own
fearful apprehensions; for, so is Jonah with casting off. When we reckon by
our own deservings, and by probabilyties in a strait, and not by Gods love and
all sufficiency, we cannot but draw sad conclusions, and our own spirits will
make us work enough. 8. Tentations, even when they have overcome for a season,
are not to be lien under, and given way to by the children of God, but ought to
be resisted and set against, though they should (if it were possible) perish in
the attempt, this being the way to honor God and get deliverance; for
vanquished Jonah will not quit it so; Yet will I look again. 9. That whereby
the children of the Lord must oppose all troubles inward and outward, and
resist tentations, is naked says, closely adhering to the Covenant of grace
made in Christ, and gathering hope of better dealing; this is imported in his
looking again toward the holy Temple, or eying God in his Covenant, whereof
that was a sign. To cast away confidence as useless in a strait, or not to
essay faith till we be hired by sense, or to lie by in wilful unbelief,
thinking that is the way to get sense, to loose our doubts; or to seek any
footing for faith but in Gods Covenant and free grace in Christ, is the height
of folly. 10. The weakest act of faith may do much good in a day of greatest
need; For, in all this extremity Jonah had no more but a looking again, as a
poor banished man. 11. Faith in a time of need will find a way through many a
dark impediment to meet with God; Therefore Jonah, enclosed in the sea, and not
knowing where the Temple (toward which they were to pray) stood, will set faith
at need to seek it out. 12. It speaks much of Gods praise, that when his people
are laid by with their tentations, yet he will not lose them, but recover them
out of their deepest swounes, and make vanquished faith yet again to triumph
over difficulties, which they had judged insuperable; For, this is also
recorded to his praise, that not only Jonah persevered crying when his trouble
was great, ver. 2, 3. but that he was strengthened after he had once yielded
to the tentation, to believe and look again.

Ver. 5. The waters compassed me about, even to the soul, the depth closed me
round about, the weeds were wrapped about my head.

6. I went down to the bottoms of the mountains: the earth with her bars was
about me for ever: yet have thou brought up my life from corruption; O LORD my
God.

He rehearses further how his tentation left him not so, but gathered strength
anew from his hopeless condition in his trouble, seeing no deliverance, but as
a condemned man cast into the prison of hell, for the waters (drunk in by the
fish) or by himself before he got into the fish, or the huge sea wherein he was
endangered his life, and closed him in on every hand, and the sea-weeds were
wrapped about him, either when the fish swallowed them down, or when the fish
went down with him among them; the fish went with him to the very bottom of
the sea, to the roots of the hills; and though he had got out of the fish, and
could have swimmed out of the sea, yet the steep rocks on that shore where the
fish ranged with him, as so many bars, would have held him as in a perpetual
prison. All which grounds of fear he here records, to set forth the mercy of
God; who when neither depth of sea, no^ steepness of shore could allow him any
hope, had brought him out in saftey, as if he had been revived and brought out
of the grave. Doct. 1. It is no unusual trial of a child of God under
tentation, after he has resolved to adhere to God, and hope in him, not to get
his resolution followed, but by casting his eye upon his trouble, and po^ing on
it, to judge himself yet to be in a hopeless condition, and that he has been
a fool ever to think otherwise; and for all this he may yet be happy: For Jonah
now delivered, gives an account, how after his resolution to believe, ver. 4.
tentation set upon him again, and made him conclude himself a lost man, and a
perpetual prisoner. 2. The sense of an afflicted and sad condition is not soon
to be forgotten, but to be kept fresh, and carried along with every sight of
mercy: therefore did the Lord suffer Jonah to take a second view of his
condition, and Jonah by his rehearsal of it, testifies that he is yet more
sensible what he had been without Gods help. 3. The more we study the
difficulties of our afflicted conditions, we will still see more reasons
wherefore we should admire and magnify the Lord in his delivering of us: For,
after his former sensible sight of his troubles, ver. 3. when he takes this
other view of it, he sees yet more (as trouble without eying of God is
endlesly difficult) of impossiblities to be delivered without God. 4. It is the
Lords way with his people to let them see their difficulties to be past hope
and irrecoverable, before he appear for them, that he may be the more
eminently seen; for, Jonahs aggravation of his trouble from hazard of life,
depth of seas, and steepness of shore, does import that in his eyes deliverance
was impossible. 5. Whatever be the fears and apprehensions of Saints under
their troubles, yet in due time all that they will have to say of greatest
trials, is, that they have made way for Gods manifesting himself in them:
therefore is that sweet return subjoyned to his hopeless trouble; Yet have
thou brought up my life. 6. Albeit the Lord would have his people enjoying an
escape in the midst of their trouble, in living by faith, and will have faith
tried, how it will follow its look; yet it is his way also when he sees it fit,
and has tried their faith, to refute all their doubtful thoughts with real
deliverance: therefore after the former breathing, ver 4. and Jonah's fresh
assault, he gets actual deliverance to end the controversy. 7. The Lord can
give deliverance fom deadly extremities, and can re^tore his people in safety,
and their mercies to them, when they are no better in their own eyes then dead
and rotten in their graves; For thou have brought up my life from corruption:
that is, his body from the fishes belly, where it was as in a grave ready to
rot, and his soul from those terrors that would have consumed him. 8. In Gods
working for his people much of his power, and love is to be seen and
acknowledged; This is imported in that sweet compellation, O Lord my God. The
Lord, who has brought him out of deaths pangs: and his God who had respected
him in this low and guilty condition.

Ver. 7. When my soul fainted within me, I remembered the LORD, and my prayer
came in unto thee, into thine holy Temple.

Ionahs exercise and deliverance is again summed up in this, that when his
spirit was ready to faint under a burden of affliction and terrors of
conscience, he calling God to mind, found encouragement to pray, and got
audience. Learn hence, 1. The spirits of men, how stout and courageous soever,
yet being left alone in trouble and tentation, will soon be overthrown and
faint; for, his soul fainted, (or was overwhelmed with anxiety,) within him.
2. Before the Lord do for his people, he uses to lay them, and all their
courage once by, that he may stain the pride of all glory, and no flesh may
glory in his presence; for, says he, my soul fainted within me. 3. Much
unbelief and discouragement flows from ou^ infirmity and weakness, in not
fixing our hearts to meditate on God, casting off other perplexing thoughts,
which we cannot resolve, and in not pondering seriously what God is and will be
to his people, or has at any time been unto our selves; therefore his remedy
and antidote against fainting is, I remembered the Lord. 4. Remembering, and
serious apprehension of God by faith, is a notable encouragement to prayer, and
gives a good account of prayers success; whereas to the misbelievers sense his
prayers wander and go he knows not whither; I remembered the Lord and my
prayer came in unto thee. 5. Gods mercy is to be much seen and magnified in his
answering of his peoples prayers in their distress; My prayer. says he, Came
into thy holy Temple; that is into heaven the habitation of thy holiness,
where it was a wonder such a rebels prayers should be admitted, and were
accepted by virtue of the Covenant and Promise made in Christ, not for any
worth in them. 6. Gods manifestation of himself in any place calls for
holiness, therefore is not only heaven, but the Temple at Je^usalem called,
Thy holy Temple, or the Temple of thine holiness; because not only he is holy,
but his presence there calls for holiness in all that approach unto him. 7. To
be delivered from fainting in trouble, and to get access unto God by prayer,
it the child of Gods greatest mercy in trouble, as speaking special love,
whatever his outward issue be: therefore does Jonah so much insist in
commending this mercy of enlargement of soul and support, ver. 2, 4, and 7.

Ver. 8. They that observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercy.

From all this his exercise and deliverance, he gathers some Conclusions by way
of instruction and use from it; and first, he gives out his verdict of all
by-ways, as depriving man of true happiness, and disapointing him in the end:
by which we are not only to understand the courses of gross Idolaters, but more
generally all courses which men lay down for attaining happiness in any thing
beside God: and particularly his own former folly and ^ebellion, wherein,
imagining to have found happiness and content, he by the contrary ran quite
from it, and plunged himself in misery, Doct. 1. The experience of Saints, from
many changes and variety of conditions, ought to imprint in their hearts more
serious and settled thoughts concerning true happiness, and the right way of
attaining it; therefore Jonah thus exercised and daunted, gathers this
Conclusion as a certain Truth, They that observe, etc. 2. All things beside God
when they are not made use of (if lawful,) for the end for which God appointed
them, but happiness sought in them, or confidence placed on them; and all
ways and courses beside these prescribed of God, will not be able to answer
the expectation of the creature, but being observed as man's happiness, they are
vanities in regard of their emptiness to supply the creatures need, or to
satissie its desires; and lying vanities, in regard that for the present, if we
be not attentive, they delude us with a vain show and in the issue do
miserably disappoint. 3. Albeit things stand thus; yet men are so deluded and
doated, that they will place their confidence, and look for happiness in those
things which will disappoint them; for, there are who observe (with all
estimation, care and expectation depend upon, and pursue after) lying v^nities.
4. Men by their pursuing happiness not in God, no^ in his way, do indeed
deprive themselves of happiness, and consequently run upon their own ruin;
Therefore such do for sake mercy; for as happiness is only to be found in God:
so they who follow vain courses, do in effect renounce and forsake God, who
will not be joined with Idols, and withal is provoked to plague such things as
we put in his room. 5. The portion of such as seek happiness in God and in
his way only, is mercy, and what mercy (in so all-sufficient a God) can afford.
Therefore men taking another way, forsake mercy, that is, their happiness,
flowing from the infinite mercy of God: all happiness to lost man being
mercies gift. 6. Men by forsaking of God can take nothing from him, but all the
prejudice redounds to themselves; for, they forsake their own mercy, but do
not deprive him of happiness. 7. Men in their forsaking of God or his way, can
have no just challenge or ground of exception against him, as putting them
away, but must take all the blame upon themselves; for it is their own mercy
which they forsake; their own, I say, by offer; for God, notwithstanding his
secret purpose, yet secludeth not any from mercy to whom the offer is made,
till they seclude themselves.

Verse. 9. But I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving, I will
pay that that I have vowed: salvation is of the LORD.

The second conclusion that Jonah gathers, is, that seeing the Lord had thus in
his folly reclaimed him, and in his deep distress delivered him, he will
testify his thankfulness by offering praise, and performing what he had vowed
in his trouble, and will learn by this experience, that deliverance can be
expected from God only, and may be expected from him. Doct. 1. Received mercies
call for praise at the Receivers hand, as a testimony of his thankfulness for
the merc^e, and of his estimation of God who gave it, and as a means speeding
in new straits: for, Jonah, thus delivered, will sacrifice, etc. 2. The Lords
crossing and afflicting us in our wanderings till we be brought back to obey the
will of God, is to be acknowledged as a mercy, and matter of praise; for, such
is the subject of Jonah's song, compared with the former verse; he will bless
the Lord not only for deliverance, but, that (though to his own cost) he had
not been permitted to prosper in a wrong way. 3. Praise is that true sacrifice
pointed at in the law, by the thanksgiving-offerings in the Temple; therefore
does he give unto praise the name of what shadowed it out, I will sacrifice
with the voice of thanksgiving. See Hebrews 13.15. 4. The truly godly under the
law were taught of God, not to rest upon these outward performances and
offerings, but to press and seek after the spiritual duty and substance, and
to make use of Christ in whom alone even our best moral actions are accepted;
therefore does he hold forth that the voice of thanksgiving (or affectionate
praise) was the sacrifice indeed. See Psalm. 69.30, 31. Hos. 14.2. And withal
the joining of sacrifice with the voice of thanksgiving, shows, that his
praise was offered up in and by that true sacrifice. 5. The Lords people in
their afflictions and deliverances, will be made to see great necessity of
making vows, and binding themselves more firmly to their duty; for, Jonah in
his trouble had vowed, that that I have vowed; which was a binding of himself
with his own consent more accurately to observe and follow the will, and
Commandments of the Lord: the reason of which engagement is, because they will
find when it comes to strait, much short coming, and little fervor in their
ordinary walking, which needs upstirring; they will find also much obligation
laid upon them, by the Lords merciful remembering of them in trouble,
voluntarily to take on his yoke; and much sense of their own instability,
needing such bonds and ties. 6. It is the duty of the Lords children, being
delivered, not to forget their condition in trouble, nor their resolutions and
obligations following thereupon, as if once being out of trouble, they were out
of Gods reverence, but to study to walk answerably in their calm day, to that
they resolved upon in greatest extremity; therefore, says Jonah, I will pay
that that I have vowed. 7. Salvation and deliverance of all kinds is Gods
perogative royal; none can save, or give peace when he commands trouble, and
he has the prererogative to save and deliver, when reason, probability, the
sentence of the law, and all things else have condemned and given over for
lost, and in despite of all opposition whatsoever. And it is the duty of such
as have had any experience of this, to cleave to it as an undeniable truth in all following extremities: For, Jonah having found this in his present case,
lays it down as a fixed ground of faith in all extremities, that salvation is
of the Lord: the force of the Hebrew word comprehending salvation, both
temporal and eternal.

Verse. 10. And the LORD spoke unto the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the
dry land.

In the last part of the Chapter, Jonah, after his miraculous support by faith,
rehearses the way of his deliverance, that the Lord by his effectual
providence (as by a commanding speech) made the fish to vomit him out upon the
Land. Whence learn: 1. The Lord, by the afflictions of his people, is but
schooling and bettering them, and not seeking to destroy them; whereof he can
give proof in setting them in freedom and safety from deadly dangers and
extremities: For, Jonah being humbled, The Lord spoke to the fish, and it
vomited out Jonah, etc. 2. The most insensible of creatures have an ear to
their Makers speech, and do (at least by obediential subjection) obey his will;
and will not hinder but help forward his purposes of love toward his people:
for, The Lord spoke unto the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry Land.
3. In the ordinary paths and motions of creatures, God may be bringing about
especial purposes and providence; as this fish is made to vomit out and
deliver Jonah, when it is minding no such thing, but tumbling to and again;
much more may it be so in the ordinary ways of men, as in Ioseph's going to
Bethlehem, Luke 2.4, 5, 6, compared with Mat. 2.5, 6.

CHAP. III.
IN this Chapter we have, first, Jonah's second calling to go to Nineveh, and
his obedience in going thither, and denouncing Gods judgment against them, to
verse 5. 2. The success of his preaching there, appearing in a general and
solemn Humiliation countenanced and enjoined by authority, to verse. 13. 3. The
Lords acceptance hereof, and revoking of the sentence given out against them,
verse. 12.

Ver. 1. ANd the word of the LORD came unto Jonah the second time, saying,

2. Arise, go unto Nineveh that great city, and preach unto it the preaching
that I bid thee.

JOnah being now humbled for his rebellion, and delivered from his affliction,
is again called to go and preach against Nineveh, it being needful to have his
calling repeated, lest if he had gone on the first call, which he had
disobeyed, it might have tared with him as with Israel, who resenting their own
disobedience would go up to the Land, but without the Lord, Number. 14.40, 41.
Doct. 1. As sin does justly deprive men of all their privileges which they
enjoy of Gods free favor; so a true penitent will not only obtain pardon, but
may also be restored to his former forefaulted dignities; for Jonah is not
deprived of his Prophetic office of which he was so careless, Chap. 1.3. but,
the word of the Lord came unto him. 2. No endeavors or struglings of men will
free them from such services and lots, as God has to employ them in, and
exercise them withal; for, Jonah, resisting the first call, is brought to obey
on his own charges, The word of the Lord came unto Jonah the second time, and
his duty which he had refused, is enjoined him again. 3. The servants of the
Lord ought to stick close by their commission, and faithfully to publish it,
without adding or diminishing; for, so is Jonah commanded, Go unto that great
city, and preach the preaching that I bid thee.

Verse. 3. So Jonah arose, and went unto Nineveh, according to the word of the
LORD; now Nineveh was an exceeding great City of three days journey.

Ver. 4. And Jonah began to enter into the city a days journey, and he cried
and said, Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be overthrown.

In the next place we have Ionah's obedience, wherein also is recorded a
description of the greatness of Nineveh, which was of three days journey in
circuit, or if one would go through all the streets of it; and a brief sum of
his preaching, which for a whole day (going from place to place, as God
directed him) or going through a third of the City (it being in whole three
days journey) he proclaimed; whereby we are neither to understand that he
preached no more of the causes procuring this judgment, or of God, in whose
name he threatened, but that the result of all was, that Nineveh was to be
destroyed; nor yet that he preached no longer, nor in any more of the City
during the forty days: but the meaning is, that before he got any further, his
word took effect with those that heard it, and by their means, with the rest of
the City, as appears, ver. 5, 6. Hence learn, 1. Obedience to God in a calling
and commanded duty, is a sure evidence of an humbled man; for, Jonah before
rebellious, now arose and went to Nineveh. 2. It is our duty to obey the will
of God, not because of our inclination, but with an eye to his command, to whom
our wile and inclinations ought to stoop; unto whom we should study to approve
our selves in all things, and from whom we may expect help in following his
way; for, Jonah went to Nineveh, according to the word of the Lord, as being
now taught to look more to God's will then to his own. 3. Gods servants
following his Commandment, and trusting in him, have been and will be enabled
to oppose and denounce vengeance against the wickedness of greatest persons or
places; for, albeit Nineveh was an exceeding great city, etc. yet Jonah cried
with zeal and courage, and said, etc. 4. God is able to reach and utterly
overthrow greatest persons or places, when he prosecutes a controversy against
them; for Jonah in his name denounces, that Nineveh that great city shall be
overthrown. 5. The Lord oftentimes sees it fit in great wisdom to conceal any
thoughts of love toward a people, and hold out only threatenings and severity to
induce them more seriously to repent: for this cause is the sentence absolute,
Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be overthrown, without any mention of a
condition, that upon their repentance they should be spared, as afterward he
did only the granting forty days unto them, carries an invitation to repentance
in the bosom of it.

Verse. 5. So the people of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a Fast, and put
on sackcloth, from the greatest of them even to the least of them.

6. For word came unto the King of Nineveh, and he arose from his Throne, and
he laid his robe from him, and covered him with sackcloth, and sat in ashes.

7. And he caused it to be proclaimed and published through Nineveh (by the
decree of the King and his nobles) saying, Let neither man nor beast, herd nor
flock taste any thing: let them not feed, nor drink water.

8. But let man and beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God;
yea, let them turn every man from his evil way, and from the violence that is
in their hands.

The success of Ionah's preaching among the Ninevites, is, their receiving of
the message; and humbling of themselves before God, which being generally held
forth in the 5. verse, is more fully enlarged in the following purpose; that
the King hearing of this threatening, (belike before Jonah came unto him) in his
own person set about the duty of humiliation, and by his Authority with his
Nobles ordained a public Fast, wherein not only rational creatures, but even
beasts (which they used to deck in the time of peace) should for a time be
deprived of food, and clothed with sackcloth, that so by this sad sight men
might be set on edge to cry fervently unto God, and that with their repentance
they should join Reformation of their evil ways and oppression. Albeit it
cannot be said, that all those who were employed in this exercise had true
faith and repentance unto conversion (as neither can it be aledged that none
were really converted, for Jonah did preach much in forty days to them (having
in shorter time taught the Mariners much) yet considering that Christ calls
it Repentance, Matthew. 12.41. we may safely conclude that there was no gross
dissimulation in it, but that at least they had legal faith and contrition.
Doct. 1. The Word of the Lord may, when he accompanies it, have strange and
speedy effects among such as men would look for very little from; for, when
Israel are despising the word, Nineveh is set on work by it, and that so
speepily as before Jonah had got through the city, verse. 4. the work is begun,
and report from hearers only sets others on work. Word came to the King, and he
arose from his throne, etc. 2. To belive the truth of Gods Word, when it is
spoken, is the ready way to make it effectual, and have place; it being
ordinarily slighted, because it is not credited; Therefore Ninevehs reformation
begins at this, The people of Nineveh believed. 3. What is spoken by messengers
in the Name of the Lord, must be taken up as Gods speech before it can be
effected; therefore the people of Nineveh hearing Jonah, believed God, in whose
Name he spoke. 4. Extraordinary causes of a people under wrath imminent or
incumbent for sin, call them to extraordinary courses and remedies for
averting the same; therefore the Ninevites in this strait, count it not
sufficient to use an ordinary way of dealing with God but proclaimed a fast,
and put on sackcloth, etc. 5. In a time of great extremity it becomes those,
who would approve themselves to God, so to carry themselves, as may testify
most sense of the desert of sin, their abjection and low condition before the
Lord, and so as may stir us up to earnest prayer; These things contained in the
Kings edict of covering with sackcloath, and withholding food from man and
beast, tended to these ends; for hereby they declare, how all sorts had
offended God, and abused the creatures unto sin; they testify also their
sense of their own deserving, that the Lord might cut them all off, and their
beasts for their sake, and that because of this, they were in an abject and
deplorable condition in their own eyes; and withal, by this mournful face of
all things, they would stir up themselves to entreat the face of the Lord. As
for the external performances, as they were never of any worth, but abominable,
if they were rested upon without the substance: so they (especially that of
sackcloth) were more called for under the shadows of the Law, when the Promises
were not so clear as under the Gospel, and when people were trained on to their
duty by that Paedagogie; and as abstinence is still required in solemn
humiliations in so far as may be subservient to spiritual duties, so it might
be more practiced in warm Countries then in colder Climats. 6. A lively sense
of Gods authority and of his wrath kindling against sin, my make a King quit
his throne and robes, and take a place in the dust with the meanest of his
subjects, to deprecate the anger of God; for, The King of Nineveh arose from
his Throne, and laid his robes from him, and covered him with sackcloth, and
sat in ashes. 7. Kings are obliged, not only by their Authority, but by their
example also, to promote Piety among their subjects; for, the people having
informed the King, he in his own person arose from his Throne, etc. and by his
Authority caused in to be proclaimed and published, etc. Authority and Law
without example will not avail so much. 8. Albeit men in Authority cannot
compel the consciences of their subjects unto faith and obedience, yet they may
by their Authority enjoyne them to perform the external duties of Religion;
for, the King of Nineveh made a proclamation and Decree to this purpose,
whereby he did testify his own repentance, and promote it in others. 9. Men in
highest Authority are not to rule and do all by themselves, but with the advice
and concurrence of those who ought to have Authority next unto them: for, He
caused to be proctaimed by the Decree of the King and his Nobles. So much did
these Heathens see of humane frailty, even in the greatest of men needing such
assistance. 10. All external ceremonies and performances of Fasting and putting
on of sackcloth, are no sufficient means of averting the anger of God, except
there be fervent prayer to God; therefore it is subjoyned in the Decree, And
cry mightily to God; all these other performances ought to stir up to that as
the kernel. 11. Prayer, though never so apparently fervent, is not acceptable
without an endeavor of Reformation. Therefore are they also exhorted and
enjoined to turn every one from his evil way, and from the ^iolence that is in
their hands. Their Idolatry (being convinced of the true God) may be
comprehended in that general of evil ways; and they name violence in
particular, in regard that all men by nature are more clear in Duties of the
Second Table then of the First.

Ver. 9. Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his
fierce anger, that we perish not?

The exhortation and injunction in the decree, is seconded from this motive and
encouragement, that there was some hope, though much born down, that the Lord
being instantly sought unto, would be reconciled with them, and in his mercy
avert his judgment. Doct. 1. There may be some sight of Gods mercy, even when
he is peremptorily threatening, attained to by such as are sensible of sin, and
acknowledge the justice of Gods correction; for, notwithstanding Ionah's
preaching, ver. 4. there is here a possibility seen of Gods turning and
repenting even by those who apprehend his fierce anger; who can tell if God
will turn, etc? The very taking pains to threaten and warn forty days before
he executed, might give ground for such an hope, that there was some purpose of
love kept up, till he saw their repentance. 2. Sensible sinners under fears of
felt judgments, look on Gods being reconciled with them as the fountain of
their happiness, and from that only can they expect any comfortable issue of
their calamities; therefore their eye is chiefly upon Gods turning, repenting,
and turning away from his fierce anger; from which only they can gather hope
that they shall not perish. 3. Such as are most earnest with God, under the
sense of sin and judgments, will be ready to see most of his grace and free
love in showing favor toward them; therefore all their hope, when they cry
mightily, is built on Gods turning and repenting, and quitting the
controversy, and that grace and compassion must be eminently active, if the
peace be made up at all. 4. This way of speech, Who can tell if God will turn?
etc. used likewise by the Church in like extremities, Joel 2.14. does hold out,
1. That sensible sinners may have many sad tossings betwixt the expectation of
Gods mercy, and the sense of their own deservings, so that albeit the Promise
be most absolute to such, yet they can neither speak the pure language of
faith, nor yet wholly the language of unbelief, but mixed and made up of both.
Therefore albeit it be beyond all controversy that God will be reconciled with
a penitent; and no doubt Jonah had preached so much concerning God, yet they
can attain no further then, Who can tell if God will turn? etc. 2 As it is no
small difficulty to get free from a stroke, where provocations are great, and
God has entered in process, and severely threatened; and as God is not always
pleased upon repentance to keep off temporal afflictions, when iniquity is come
to an height; so exemption from them is to be looked for by the penitent, with
very great submission, considering his guilt; and that happiness is not to be
placed therein, if God otherwise be reconciled: therefore does this suspended
hope look chiefly (not so much to remission, as) to temporal preservation, that
God may turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not. 3. The Lord, by
keeping our minds in suspense, betwixt hope and discouragement, would stir up
to more diligence; therefore is this doubtful hope subjoyned as a reason why
they should cry mightily to God; and reform their ways, ver. 8.4 Such as are
convinced of sin ought not to be deterred from duty, though it seemed never so
hopeless, but ought to resolve to follow it, get what they will; therefore
they will cry to God, though they be not certain of deliverance.

Ver. 10. And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way, and
God repented of the evil that he had said that he would do unto them, and he
did it not.

God is graciously pleased to accept of this, and recalleth the sentence which
is expressed in terms taken from amongst men. Whence learn, 1. The Lords most
peremptory and absolute threatenings are always so to be understood, as that
the penitent may look for Gods acceptance; for, notwithstanding the absolute
threatening, ver. 4. God saw their works, and repented, 2. God does chiefly
take notice of and reward men's practices, and real endeavors of reformation,
and not their external performances of religious exercises; for, God saw their
works, that they turned from their evil way, rather then their fasting and
sackcloth. 3. Albeit the Lord be not debtor to any, nor can they merit at his
hand, yet free grace will so reward weak endeavors, as may encourage all to
seek him; yea, he will reward with temporal favors, even temporary repentance,
as an image of true repentance, to show how he loves, and of grace would reward
true repentance; for, He saw their works, and repented, etc. both the works of
those who were truly converted, and of those who came not to that length. 4.
When God is said in Scripture to repent, we are not to conceive any change in
God, or of his eternal purposes, but only a not executing of his revealed
threatening, which includes the exception of repentance, which God decrees to
give those whom he spares; for, Gods repenting of the evil, etc. is expounded
to be. He did it not. Not a changing of his purpose, but a not executing of
what he said, to wit, conditionally.

CHAP. IV.
THis Chapter contains, 1. Jonahs murmuring at Gods dealing with Nineveh, and
his wish to be dead, verse 1, 2, 3, 4. The Lords reproving of him; first, by
words, verse 4. and then by deed; for by a Gourd, in the shadow whereof (being
gone out of the City,) he delighted, verse 5,6. and at the want whereof he
repined, verse 7, 8, 9. he is reproved, that he should be so much taken up with
so small a thing, and yet be angry at Gods sparing so populous a City, verse
10, 11.

Ver. 1. But it displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was very angry.

2. And he prayed unto the LORD and said, I pray thee, O LORD, was not this my
saying, when I was yet in my country? Therefore I fled before unto Tarshish;
for I knew that thou art a gracious God, and merciful, slow to anger, and of
great kindness, and repentest thee of the evil.

JOnah is discontented with this mercy of God toward Nineveh, and expostulates
with him about it, applauding himself in his former rebellion as having done
more wisely in it, then in following Gods Call: The ground of all which
distemper was (as appears,) that God sparing of Nineveh (which it seems he
knew by Revelation, or gathered from their repentance, or from the standing of
the City after the forty days were expired) was a ready means as he thought
to make his Ministry, and Gods Name and Authority to be vilipended; or, (as
tentation is full of invention) that such an enemy as they were to be to the
people of God, was not cut off. Doct. 1. Corruptions may lurk and remain
alive, in those who have gone through many straits, and so might have had them
mortified; for, Jonah after many difficulties, is yet passionate and impatient;
He was displeased exceedingly, and very angry. 2. It is a great iniquity in the
children of men, to seek to have Gods dispensations framed after the molde of
their mind; for it is Jonah's sin, to be very angry and exceedingly displeased
with what God did. 3. Corruption may sometimes so prevail with the children of
God, that it shall not only be a tentation smothered, out of love to him,
within their breast, but may also break out with their own consent against God
for a season: for Jonah vents his passion, He prayed unto the Lord and said. 4.
Much of that which we vent under the name of prayer, may indeed be our raving
in our Fevers, and a letting loose our corruption and passion; for, that is
called prayer here, which in effect is a bitter expostulation with God, and a
venting of his passionate desire to die. 5. Crooked ways, for which the people
of God have been corrected, and which they have been made to condemn, may yet
again in an hour of tentation be approved and liked of by them; for, Jonah
applauds himself in his former way of rebellion which he had condemned, Chap.
2.8. and thinks he had done well; Was not this my saying? etc. therefore I
fled, etc. 6. It is a tentation insident to Adams posterity, to presume that
they would guide things better, if they had their will, then God does guide
them; for, this expostulation implies, that he thought it had been better to
have gone on to Tarshrsh, then to have come to Nineveh, as things went. 7. A
person under tentation will not want his own fair pretenses, wherewith he may
think to justify his way, and to make it specious and seem reasonable; for,
Jonah seems to have such reasons, that he dare appeal to God himself, whether
he foresaw not well in his own Country, that Gods mercy would make his
threatening to be in vain, and bring his Ministry in contempt, and did not well
in flying; was not this my saying, says he to God? but our reasonings must
submit to gods sovereign will, and give place to his infinite wisdom. 8. The
mercy of God toward lost man, is so far beyond man's mercy, that it may
sometimes be a discontent to his tenderest children, in that he is so merciful;
for, Gods mercy to Nineveh, and that he is so gracious and merciful, etc. is
Ionah's eyesore. 9. God is so gracious, that as he is not easily provoked by
sinners; so he is easily, when provoked, reconciled again unto them; for, this
Jonah knew in his own country, that he was a gracious God, and merciful, slow
to anger, and of great kindness, and repented of the evil: and this did he now
see veryfied. 10. It is a great mistake to think that mercy manifested to
humble sinners should make them contemn God or his servants, it being a most
effectual means to produce fear of God, and respect to his ordinances and
messengers, Psalm. 130.4. Therefore is Jonah's reasoning against Gods mercy
grounded on a mistake, and an evidence of his being carried headlong with
passion.

Ver. 3. Therefore now, O LORD, take I beseech thee my life from me: for it is
better for me to dye then to live.

Jonah subjoynes to his expostulation an impatient wish, that God would take
him away by death, since he got not his will, and could not endure the infamy,
which he apprehended would come upon him Whence learn, 1. Death, (not as it is
a releasement from sin, or a chariot to convey us to the place where we will be
with God for ever, but as it takes away from a present imagined or real
bitterness) is the ordinary refuge of imbittered spirits, and the back-doore
unto which, out of impatiency, weariness of life, pride and contest with
providence, they seek; therefore does Jonah now pray, Take my life from me. 2.
It is the fruit and the evidence of an imbittered spirit, that any condition,
how ill soever, seems better then the present case unto them; therefore Jonah
thinks it better to dye then live, without any affectionate eye to glory, but
rather having respect to his rest from present trouble, (as appears from Gods
reproving of it,) whereas it ought rather to have affrighted him to think of
going out of the world in such a bitter frame. 3. The children of God under
tentation, may be very ardent in expressing the dross of their own heart, and
in seeking that which is altogether wrong; for, Jonah in his passion beseeches
the Lord to take away his life. Great is the mercy of Saints, in having a
Mediator to reform their petitions. 4. It is a sign af great corruption and
self-love in men, to seek their own contentment and satisfaction in dying or
living, rather then in these to be subject to the Will of God; and it is
baseness and cowardice, to seek passionately to be out of this life, because
of any trouble we may meet with in it, in our following of God; for, such is
Jonah's infirmity, and this is his reason in his passion: take my life from me;
For it is better for me to dye then to live.

Ver. 4. Then said the LORD, Do thou well to be angry?

The Lord does first reprove Ionah's passion by Word, and appeals to himself,
whether he thought it seemly so to repine? Doct. 1. The Lord does in great
meekness and patience bear with the infirmities of his servants while they
are in a distemper, and while there is hope of recovery; so much does this
gentle reproof of great passion and stubbornness teach. And so the mercy of
God which he envied, that it should be showed to Nineveh, is the cause of his
own safety. 2. Gentle reproofs from God, and his tender dealing with his
children, ought to take deepest impression upon them: for, therefore does the
Lord choose this way, that Jonah, seeing therein his goodness toward him, who
was so often out of course, might be the more deeply convinced. 3. The children
of God, when they cool of their fits, will be most severe against themselves
for their impatiency and miscarriage; therefore does the Lord appeal to Jonah
himself being sober, to judge of his own way: Do thou well to be angry? as
being the fittest Judge to pass an hard censure upon himself. 4. It is a
great iniquity and presumption in the creature to be angry at, or quarrel with
any of Gods ways, who is absolute and unsearchably deep in his counsels: for,
says he, Do thou (a worm, a potsheard, and an owl, who can not discern
my ways) well to be ang^y?

Ver. 5. So Jonah went out of the city, and sat on the East Side of the City,
and there made him a booth, and sat under it in the shadow, till he might see
what would become of the City.

Jonah not pacified with this reproof, perseveres in his humor, and goes
forth of the City, and eases himself the best he may from the Suns heat,
till he yet see what may become of the City. Whence learn, 1. A child of God
under tentations may be very hard to convince of his error; and may go on in
his course, even when God reproves him for it; for Jonah thus reproved, verse
4. goes on, and is intent upon the ruin of the City. 2. Inordinate affections
may not only carry men to show themselves in opposition to the Will of God,
but is a ready way to draw them to delusion, while as men will not believe
truth, but according as they fancy and wish, so will they still expect and look
that things should be; for, the forty days being expired, and Jonah being
informed of Gods Will, yet expects the satisfying of his desire; He went out
to see what would become of the City; as judging possibly, that since the
precise day of Nineveh's ruin, after the forty days, was not fixed, therefore
they might perish yet, or that possibly they would give over their repenting;
or, that Gods sentence being formerly altered, so might his purpose of mercy
be. 3. Even the children of God, in the hour of tentation, may vent such
dispositions as are monstrous among men; so much of old Adam is there in the
most mortified, and so much need is there to pray, that we be not led into
tentation: for, whereas Jonah, a Prophet, ought to have rejoiced at the
success of his Ministry, and the repentance of sinners, his mind is only bent
upon the destruction of Penitents, and it is his great eyesore to see that
City standing; He sat to see what became of it, as daily wishing its
destruction, and grieving that he saw it not. 4. Smaller contentments and
accommodations are to be chosen, rather then greater delights, by abiding in a
place where Gods judgments are imminent, therefore does Jonah, who expected
and wished the ruin of Nineveh, well in this respect, that he will rather sit
under the shadow of a Booth, then abide in the City. By which also the
Ninevites might take occasion to repent yet more seriously, seeing his removal
might tell what he expected.

Ver. 6. And the LORD God prepared a gourd, and made it to come up over Jonah,
that it might be a shadow over his head, to deliver him from his grief. So
Jonah was exceeding glad of the gourd.

7. But God prepared a worm when the morning rose the next day, and it smote
the gourd, that it withered.

8. And it came to pass when the Sun did arise, that God prepared a vehement
East Wind, and the Sun beat upon the head of Jonah, that he fainted, and wished
in himself to dye, and said, It is better for me to dye, then to live.

Here the Lord does first give Jonah matter of delight in a plant miraculously
raised up to cover his booth, and keep him from the heat which increased his
grief; then again, his passion is stirred up by occasion of the Lords sudden
removing of the gourd, and raising such a wind, as might effectually make the
Sunne-beames beat upon him; by all which the Lord lays a ground of more
sensible reproving of him for his former biternesse. Doct. 1. A spirit once
broken and imbittered with troubles, is easily grieved and stirred up; for, to
Jonah heat is a grief from which he must be delivered, and which he cannot
well bear. 2. The Lord in healing the infirmities of his people, uses first to
lance their sores, and discover more of their putrefaction, before he apply any
healing plasters; therefore is Jonah's passion more kindled, ere the former
distemper be healed. 3. God in his holy providence may ensnare men who are
wilfully given to passions, with more occasion to make them vent more of their
corruptions; for, so does he deal with Jona^, he gave him delight in a gourd,
and then took it from him, and sent the beating Sun, to cast (as it were)
oil in the flame of his passion; so dangerous is it to walk contrary unto God,
or to be violently carried on with any corruption. 4. From this sending of the
gourd and the worm, and the effects of it in Jonah, we may see; First, the
vanity of all earthly delights, in that they all carry a worm of instability
in their root, which in short time will turn upside-downe all the expectations
which men have from them; for there is here the one day a flourishing gourd,
and the next day it is withered. Secondly, much delight in earthly contentments
is ordinarily a forerunner of much for-row in their removal; for, Jonah was
exceeding glad of the gourd, but when it is withered, he fainted. Thirdly
passion given way unto, will soon turn men furious and absurd; for Jonah upon
the least discontent would be gone: He wished in himself to dye, and said, It
is better for me to dye then to live, when the Sun beat upon him, and the gourd
was gone; as if he should be exempted from bearing any thing; so little are men
themselves in their passions.

Ver. 9. And God said to Jonah, Do thou well to be angry for the gourd? and
he said, I do well to be angry, even unto death.

Before the Lord make use of all this to his holy purpose, he challenges
Jonah concerning this his discontent, that so he confessing his passion, way
may be made for the reproof: Whence learn, 1. In every action it is our duty
to look on our selves as accountable to God for it, and to examine how it is
done, whether well or not? for, so does Gods challenge, to give an account, and
to examine, teach: Do thou well, etc? 2. To be excessively discontent at
Providence, especially for small matters, is a thing no way beseeming the
servants of God; for this also is imported in the challenge, that it was not
right in him, a Prophet, to be angry, (yea, exceedingly angry, as the words may
be read) for the gourd. 3. The pride of man's heart is such, that it will
justify it self, and stand it out even against the verdict of God, if he be
given over to tentation; for, so does Jonah's Answer to the Lords question
teach: I do well, says he, to be angry, or, I am greatly angry, even unto
death. Nothing will please him but death, to be by it rid of those troubles.

Ver. 10. Then said the LORD, Thou have had pity on the gourd for the which
thou have not labored, neither made it grow, which came up in a night, and
perished in a night.

11. And should not I spare Nineveh that great city, wherein are more then
sixscore thousand persons, that cannot discern between their right hand, and
their left hand, and also much cattle?

The Lord does now apply all that is past to his present purpose; and from this
discontent of Jonah, lets him see the absurdity of his former murmuring; for,
if he had given way to himself so passionately to commiserate so small a thing
as a gourd, in producing whereof he had no hand, which was of so short
continuance, and which needed no pity, and that only because he received some
profit and refreshment by it, why did he so much stumble that the Lord spared
Nineveh, which was his handy work, and every way considerable; there being so
many in it that eminently called for pity, being neither sensible of any thing,
nor yet by gross actual transgressions had provoked the Lord to denounce that
judgment? So that here the Lord is not approving Ionah's passion, but by a
reason drawn from the less to the more (wherein Jonah a creature, and the great
Lord, a stick, and great Nineveh are compared,) Jonah is convinced of
selfishnesse in approving himself in doing that unjustly, which he condemned in
God, when done most mercifully and rightly. Doct. 1. Self-love will easily
blind men so far as to make them approve themselves in doing of worse things
then those they condemn in others; for this is the scope of this reproof, to
show Jonah, that he would not allow the Lord on just causes to be merciful; and
yet could allow himself in his selfish passion. 2. Much more latitude ought to
be allowed to God in his way of working without our quarrelling, then we may
take to our selves; for, says the Lord, Thou, who may be blinded with
fancy and humor, had pity, and allowedst thy self in it, and should not I,
a wise and sovereign Lord, spare Nineveh being he to whom absolute submission
of spirit is due, though I thus reason thee out of thy folly? 3. The Lord can
easily take off the veil of fair pretexts from selfish men, and let them be
seen in their own colors; for, whatever Jonah might pretend as the cause of
his grief for Ninevehs sparing: the Lord by this demonstrates, that his
bitterness flowed indeed from love to himself, as might be seen in the matter
of the Gourd. 4. Men under tentation and in an ill way, are not without much
difficulty convinced that they are wrong; therefore the Lord uses all these
means that Jonah may take with the reproof, when by lively demonstrations and
deeds he should see his error, Thou had pity upon the Gourd etc. And should
not I spare Nineveh? 5. The Lord is so constant in his good will, that he will
not only show mercy, but will maintain his so doing, against all who will oppose
it; for here he pleads for his mercy to Nineveh against Jonah, Should not I
spare Nineveh? 6. The Lord by his practice teaches us, to let out our
affections upon objects according as they are of worth in themselves; therefore
albeit nothing can be of worth to him, yet he reprehends Jonahs pity on the
gourd: a thing of so small worth, coming up in one night, and perishing in
another, as far worse employed, then his mercy in sparing Nineveh that great
City, and therefore the more to be tendered by him. 7. The Lords creating of
men, may give ground of hope to the sensible sinner, that God delights not in
his destruction, but upon repentance will be willing to spare; for, while he
reasons from Jonahs pity on the gourd, for which he had not labored, neither
made it grow, he teaches that he could not but spare repenting Nineveh, it
being his own handiwork. 8. Not only persons come to maturity, and turning to
God, but even their children, yea, and cattle, who cannot sensibly acknowledge
him, do concur to plead for pity to the penitent at Gods hands: and his mercy
will look on their condition and number as a reason of sparing; for, he knows
what Infants are in Nineveh, how innocent they were of gross provocations, and
that there was much cattle there, and from that pleads, that so great a City,
wherein there are so many Infants, and so much cattle should be spared. 9. The
children of the Lord will at last be cleared and satisfied with all the Lords
dispensations, and will submit to Gods way in them, as only right and wise,
however they repine under their fits of tentation; for, the Lord gets the last
word in this debate, and therefore it is evident from Jonah's silence, and not
answering again, that he submitted at last; in testimony whereof, and of his
unfeigned repentance for his miscarriage, he glorifieth God, in registring all
these passages for the edification of the Church: whereby also is held forth
the infallible certainty of holy Scripture, in that the Penmen thereof were so
little their own in writing of it, as they spare not at Gods command, to
register their own infirmities, that he may be glorified.

MICAH.
The ARGUMENT.
THis Prophet living almost in the same time with Isaiah (only he was sent out
a little after him, and his commission is also extended to the Kingdom of
Israel) is much like him in matter, and is recorded in aftertimes to have been
a faithful man in declining times, as it is, Jer. 26.18. If we compare the
beginning of the first and the sixth Chapters, which are almost one and the
same, we may take up the whole Prophecy in two solemn Sermons: in the first
whereof he foretells the captivity of the ten Tribes, and calamity of Judah by
the Assyrians, because of Idolatry, Chap. 1. and because of covetousness,
oppression and contempt of the Messengers of God, Chap. 2. and the wickedness
of Rulers both in Church and State, for which Judah is yet further threatened,
Chap. 3. Then he arms the godly against the Babylonish captivity then
approaching, with the promise of restitution under the Messiah, (some taste
whereof is mixed with the threatenings, Chap. 2.12, 13.) chap.4. whose birth and
government is held forth, chap.7 In the second Sermon, having in the Lords Name
challenged and threatened Israel for ingratitude, hypocrisy, injustice, and
Idolatry, Chap.6. and having lamented the general defection of the time, be
comforts himself and all Believers, under their troubles of al sorts, by many
ample promises; concluding al with one solemn acknowledgment of the mercy and
fidelity of God, chap.7 Many particulars in this Prophecy will be best
understood by considering the times wherein the Prophet lived, of which see 2
King. 15, 16, 17. and 18 Chapters. and 2 Chronicles. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31.
Chapters.

CHAP. I.
IN this Chapter, after the Title, v. 1. The Prophet sets forth the Lord as in
a solemn Court-day, appearing with great power, severity and Majesty to take
order with Israel and Judah for their sins, especially Idolatry, verse 2, 3,
4, 5. Then he particularly foretells the desolation of the kingdom of Israel,
ver. 6, 7. the greatness whereof, together with Judah's stroke by the same
Assyrian, is particularly and pathetically held forth by the Prophet, from his
own sorrow for it, ver. 8, 9. from enemies rejoicing at it, ver. 10. -- from
declaration of the calamity of particular places where the enemy should come,
ver. -- 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. and from the mournful face that then should be
of all things, v. 16.

Verse. 1. THe word of the LORD that came to Micah the Morashite, in the days of
Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah Kings of Judah, which he saw concerning Samaria and
Jerusalem.

THe Inscription or Title of the Prophecy does contain a description of the
messenger employed, from his name and the City where he was born, (conceived to
be that City Marshah in the Tribe of Judah, Josh. 15.44. 2 Chronicles. 11.8. and
14.9, 10. which is here threatened, v. 15.) as likewise his commission from God;
the time of his prophesying under several kings of Judah; and a declaration
that his commission extended to both the kingdoms of Israel and Judah, and
especially to the chief Cities thereof. Whence learn, 1. Men are not to run
unsent on public employments in Gods house, but to wait upon a call and
commission; and, having received it, to cleave closely to it; for, the Word of
the Lord came to Micah, and he published only, the Word of the Lord that came
to him, and which be saw, etc. 2. The messages and challenges sent by the Lords
servants unto the Church, are to be looked on as sent from him, whose challenge
the conscience cannot flee, as being more then our party, and as being most
certain and infallible: Therefore this doctrine is held out to be the Word of
the Lord, and Micah saw this; to wit, in vision, or by prophetic revelation,
implying that what he said, was as certain as if it were seen accomplished. 3.
The Lord in his great mercy and long suffering, is pleased not to withold a
testimony from his backsliding people, but by multiplication, and long
continuance of Prophets, is pleased to forewarne them of ruin, if so be they
may turn and prevent it. Therefore is not only backsliding Israel honored
with Prophets, but there are many at once in both Kingdoms, and these
prophesying long in the time of many Kings; for, not only is Isaiah at the
same time with Micah prophesying in Judah; but Hosea, if not also Amos in
Israel; as may be gathered from the inscription of their Prophecies. Frequent
sending of Prophets and messengers is either a means of stirring up to
reformation, as when Haggai and Zechariah were sent out almost at one time,
Hag. 1.1. Zech. 1.1. with Ezra 5.2. or a presage of speedily approaching ruin
where their message is not received, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16, 17. 4. The servants of
God must not resolve to have always sweet times and fair weather in the
service of their generation; but ought to look for variety of times and
conditions to wrestle with; such was the lot of this Prophet, he lived in the
days of Jotham, Ahaz, etc. Having to do not only with wicked Kings in Israel,
who lived in the same time with these Kings in Judah; and in Judah he had not
only a pious Hezekiah to deal with, but a wicked Ahaz, and a Jotham, in whose
days reformation was not so through, as under Hezekiah or Josiah; and he did
see the total ruin of Israel, and the affliction of Judah by the Assyrians. 5.
As the Lord will not spare his own people when they provoke him; so does he in
equity deal with them according to the degrees of their provocations: therefore
is there a sad message concerning Jerusalem and they must not take it ill to be
joined with Sam^ria in the procass, whom yet they hated as vile Apostates; yet
it is so ordered, as Samaria is placed first, it being first and chief in the
provocation, (which is a poor preferment) and consequently, first and deepest
sharers in the punishment, as getting only threatenings; whereas Judah is
comforted, and punished at this time with greater lenity.

Ver. 2. Hear all ye people, hearken, O earth, and all that therein is, and let
the Lord GOD be witness against you, the Lord from his holy Temple.

To conciliate Authority to the ensuing Doctrine, the Prophet summons all the
creatures, and all people to be witnesses to this process, against Israel and
Judah, and to one solemn Court day; wherein the Lord would judge and witness
against his people, and by his judgments should vindicate the sentence of his
servants against sin, from all contempt of unbelievers. Doct. 1. The Word of
the Lord ought to be gravely, and with all Authority delivered by his
Messengers; therefore does Micah by this solemn charge to all creatures to
appear, declare that his message was a grave purpose, not to be slighted, and
that it was the Lord who has command of all creatures, and not men only they
had to do with. 2. It is usual for the visible Church, not only to slip through
inadvertency, but especially to drown her self in Apostasy; and having once
fallen away, to prove so void of all sense of Piety, so selfish and so
obstinate, as not to be easily convinced; and so stupid in sin, as not to be
sensible of approaching wrath: therefore must there be a solemn citation of all
Nations, as if there were need of a dayes-man to awake them from their sleep,
and the Lord must be a witness against them, ere they be convinced. 3. God is a
witness, whose testimony may and will convince of sin, as not only knowing all
things perfectly, but when he declares this with power, either inwardly to a
conscience only, or outwardly by corrections also, he will convince the most
obstinate; Let the Lord be witness against you, and he will carry his point.
4. When sin is come to an height in the Church, and they will not take with, or
strive to amend it, then the Lord will publicly, in view of all the world,
convince and correct them by his strokes; therefore does he call all people,
the earth, and all that therein is, to hear and see the Lord witnessing against
his Church: which is a bitter case when our betrothed Lord is provoked to go
out of doors to the streets with his beloveds faults. 5. The justice and equity
of the Lords dealing with his people, even when he proceeds to severity in
correction, is so uncontrovertedly clear, as that it may be seen and read of
all, therefore also are the creatures called to appear, as witnesses of his
proceedings, and that affliction is justly procured by Israel. 6. If this
passage, from his holy Temple, be understood of heaven; it teaches, that
however men may obstinately bear out against all convictions from men, yet the
glorious Majesty of God, when he lets forth any rays of it from heaven, (as v.
3, 4.) in his works, it will so dazzle them, as they shall not be able to stand
out: If we understand it of the Temple at Jerusalem, it teaches, that the
Jews their confiding much in the Temple, should not exempt them, but rather be
a part of their ditty; that the mercies of God, manifested there, and from
thence unto them, should effectually convince them of sin, and aggravate it,
who have not walked answerably; and that Isreal's renouncing of that Temple and
the worship of God, there shall be matter of a sad challenge, which they will
not be able to answer. In all these respects the Lord God will be witness from
his holy Temple.

Verse. 3. For, behold, the LORD comes forth out of his place, and will come
down and tread upon the high places of the earth.

4. And the mountains shall be molten under him, and the valleys shall be
cleft: as wax before the fire, and as the waters that are poured down a steep
place.

To stir them up the more, and to make them heed the message, he declares in
general Gods purpose concerning them; that he would manifest himself in his
glory from heaven, and trample under his feet whatever is most eminent, and
make high and low feel the effects of his Presence and Justice, according to
his infinite power, which when he pleases to let forth, will make mountains to
tremble and resolve into dust; and vallyes to cleave, as wax melts before a
fire, and as waters run with violence down a steep place. Doct. 1. However the
Lord do most clearly manifest his glory in heaven, and Atheists and carnal men
think he is shut up there; yet as he is every where filling heaven and earth;
so will he, when he pleases, manifest his presence on earth, in glorious
effects of providence; for so does this speech import, The Lord comes forth
out of his place; that however heaven be in a peculiar way his habitation, yet
he will from thence appear in glorious majesty on earth. 2. The glorious
manifestations of God in the world, ought to be looked upon with reverence,
admiration, and humble wondering. So much does behold prefixed to this
manifestation, import. 3. It is quite beside the expectation of a backsliding
Church, that God should appear in severity against them; and therefore such a
dispensation surprizeth them: so much also does this Behold teach, that to them
who still dream of peace with God, notwithstanding their wicked way, it should
be an unexpected and sudden thing to see him appear in glory to punish. 4. The
greatness and majesty of God, ought to be well studied and considered upon, by
all those who oppose him, and reject his will, not to drive them yet further
from him, but rather to crush their obstinacy, and induce them to repent; for,
Gods Majesty is here held forth to make them tremble, to be found in a way
disapproved of his Word. 5. Men in their declinings from God, seek unto
themselves false refuges, whereby they think to shelter themselves against Gods
vengeance, but are herein deluded; for, there are high places of the earth;
whereby are signified their Idols worshipped on these high places, wherein they
trusted, or their strong holds, or high and lofty men, who thought to be
exempted from common judgments; or, generally their high and lofty
imaginations, all which, or whatsoever else they can oppose, the Lord is potent
to crush; He will come down and tread upon the high places of the earth. 6.
Greatness of opposition against God, contributes to set him out more eminently
by crushing thereof; for, He treads on the high places, that is, not only
crushes and commands them, but is the more eminently seen in so doing, in that
they are high; their height making them conspicuous from afar, while he stands
upon them. 7. The Lord is able to overturne what is greatest and most stable in
the world, and make all creatures feel his power and indignation in an
effectual way; this is held forth in that the mountains shall be molten under
him, and thevalleys cleft as wax before the fire, etc. 8. Sin in the people of
God, makes that which otherwise might be comfortable, matter of terror to
them; for, whereas the Majesty and Power of God is comfortable to the Church,
in that she has such a God to crush her enemies, and wherein they deal proudly
to be above them; yet now, because of sin, it is the matter of her terror:
However it be so far comfortable, as that all this is done to drive her to his
mercy.

Ver. 5. For the transgression of Jacob is all this, and for the sins of the
house of Israel: what is the transgression of Jacob? Is not Samaria* and what
are the high places of Judah? are they not Jerusalem?

Follows the Lords quarrel, or the cause procuring his appearing thus in
glorious severity, which is the heinous transgression of his people, who came
of Jacob, otherwise called Israel, and withal, he declares, that the Original
and rise of this transgression in Israel, was from the chief City Samaria,
while as Omri and Ahab did there erect Idolatry (having translated the regal
dwelling thither, which was before in Tirzah, 1 Kings 16.23, 24.) which had now
in process of time, spread through the Kingdom, and had daily influence from
the Court and chief City: and that in Judah the City of Jerusalem had cast a
Copy to all the Land, and not only in sins against the Second Table, but in
corrupting the worship of God with their high places, which Iotham tolerated,
and his son Ahaz proceeded to grosser abominations, 2 Kin. 16.10, 11. 2 Chr.
28.24.25. and so drew on the people to imitate their ways. Doc. 1. The
provocations of the Lords privileged people may bring on very remarkable
strokes; for, all this (that is, all this appearing in severity,) is for the
transgression of Jacob. 2 Albeit the Lord in his great mercy look over the
infirmities of his people; yet rebellion, and idolatry, and corrupting of his
worship, especially when multiplied, is that which he will not tolerate: for,
this stroke is for their transgressions (or, rebellions) their sins and high
places. 3. In times of defection and controversy, the Lord has a special eye
upon, and a chief quarrel against such as have a leading hand in bringing on,
or carrying on the Apostasy; for, these questions, What is the transgression
of Jacob? What are the high places of Judah? imports, that God observes, and
would have the cause of all the defection, and who began it, sought out. 4. In
universal defections, eminent places and persons are ordinarily most culpable,
as misleading others by their example and authority; for, the transrgession of
Jacob is Samaria, the high places of Judah are Jerusalem; that is, iniquity
abounds most in these Cities, and the sins of the Land have their rise and
countenance from thence. 5. The Lord has an especial eye upon his own Church
and people, to whom he manifests himself and marks their declinings narrowly,
especially in the matter of his worship: for, Judahs high places are especially
pointed at, whereas all Isreal's desperate defection is named in a gen^^al of
transgression.

Ver. 6. Therefore I will make Samaria as an heap of the field, and as
plantings of a vineyard: and I will pour down the stones thereof into the
valley, and I will discover the foundations thereof.

The Lord pronounces a more particular sentence against Israel for their sins,
and particularly against Samaria, that when theten Tribes should be led
captive, that City (as being chief in the sin) should have a remarkable stroke;
the buildings thereof should be rased to the very foundation, the stones
thereof cast down from the hill whereon it stood, to the valley, to lie as
heaps of stones do, which are gathered by Laborers of the ground; and the
place thereof should be only for planting of vineyards in it. Doct. 1. Iniquity
entertained, will lay most eminent and strong places desolate; for, Therefore
will I make Samaria as an heap of the field, etc. although it endured a siege
for three years, 2 Kings 17.5. yet this threatening takes effect at last. 2.
Eminency in sin, causes eminency in judgments; therefore Samaria is made an
heap, the stones poured down, etc. whereas other Cities of that Kingdom were
not so ruined, but there are some Cities of Samaria, or, of the Country about
to be inhabited, 2 Kings 17.24. when it lies desolate. 3. Wicked men,
prosecuting their wicked and ambitious ends, may be made use of by God in an
holy manner, as instruments to execute his judgments upon his backsliding
people, and are so to be looked on by all, who would have the use of their
condition; therefore, the Lord, for his peoples instruction and direction, does
own the stroke to be inflicted by the Assyrians, I will make Samaria as an heap
of the field, etc.

Ver. 7. And all the graven images thereof shall be beaten to pieces, and all
the hires thereof shall be burnt with the fire, and all the Idols thereof will I
lay desolate; for she gathered it of the hire of an harlot, and they shall
return to the hire of an harlot.

Samaria is threatened with further ruin, in that not only her private things,
but her supposed sacred things should be destroyed, her graven images broken,
that the metal thereof might be carried away; and her gifts given to Idols,
(as harlots do to their Paramours) or her riches, out of which she gave these
gifts, and which she accounted to be the reward of her idolatry, shall either
be burnt by the furious soldiers, or go as they came, and perish as they are
purchased, and so her idols should be desolate. Doct. 1. As it proves the
vanity of idol-gods, that they are obnoxious to destruction and desolation, so
in days of vengeance Gods special quarrel is against them, to show their
frailty, and the folly of all those who cleave unto them; therefore all the
graven images thereof shall be beaten in pieces, and all the idols thereof will
I lay desolate, by withdrawing respect, worship, and gifts from them. 2.
Idolatry is in Gods account spiritual harlotry and adultery; for their gifts
given to idols, are hires, such as are given unto, or by harlots, as the word
signifies, and their riches the hire of an harlot. Idolaters break that
Covenant betwixt God as their Husband, and them as his Spouse, and do pour
out that affection due only to God, on idols, and therefore provoke him, in
his jealousy to punish. 3. As men may, through Gods permission, prosper in an
ill way: so are they ready to sacrifice their prosperity to a wrong cause, and
by their prospering to harden themselves in their way: for Samaria's gifts
bestowed on her idols, or her great riches enabling her to offer, she gathered
it of the hire of an harlot: that is, she acknowledged not God for her riches,
but conceived that they came to her for her unlawful leagues and treaties with
idolaters, and as a reward of her idolatry, and defection from the Tribe of
Judah, and the worship of God; and therefore persevered in it. See Hos. 2.5.
Ier. 44.17, 18. 4. Riches purchased in a wrong way, or abused to confirm men
in a sinful course, shall come to naught; for, the hire thereof shall be burn^
with fire, and they shall return to the hires of an harlot. Whereby we are not
so much to understand, that the Assyrian Idolaters should take the riches and
gifts of Samaria, and abuse them, as Israel had done, in putting these gifts in
the Temple of their Idols, and acknowledging the riches as given them by their
god: as that it is a proverbial speech, signifying, that as these riches were
ill purchased by Israel so they should go as they came, and do them no good,
but vanish; for an harlot purchases her hire ill, and ordinarily it is as ill
spent.

Ver. 8. Therefore I will wail and howl, I will go stripped and naked: I will
make a wailing like the dragons, and mourning as the owls.

The sentence being pronounced, the Prophet proceeds to set forth the
greatness of the judgment, together with that which was to come on Judah, that
they may be stirred up to lay it more seriously to heart in time. And first,
he declares what their calamity shall be, by his own sorrow for it, which was
extremely bitter, as of dragons and owls, whose horrible howlings in desert
places, is made use of in Scripture, to express the condition of men sensible
of great calamities, I^h 30.29. Psa. 102.6. and by his going naked, and stripped
of his upper garments, as a sign of total desolation, Isa. 20.2, 3. By all
which the Lord does not declare his allowance of any bitter carnal mourning in
trouble; but by the Prophets practice the Lord would teach, 1. When his people
provoke him, he can send affliction beyond expression, and such sorrows as no
outward signs can sufficiently vent; for, this bowling, wailing, and going
naked, does import so much in the Prophet foreseeing the storm, and does
foretell, that it shall be so with the people, when they feel it. 2. It is the
duty of faithful Ministers, not only to denounce judgment against sin and
sinners, but so to do it as may make them most sensible of their danger before
they feel it in reality; therefore does Micah wail, and howl, etc. that they
might thereby read the reality and weight of the threatening, and study to
prevent the execution. 3. A most effectual way of making people sensible of
threatenings, is, when the messengers themselves are affected with them when
they deliver them; for, therefore does Micah, who carried this message, wail
and howl. 4. Threatenings from the Lord ought to be denounced with great
affection and sympathy in the Messengers, that so they may evidence, that it
is no revengefull and bitter spirit in them, that makes them speak so sharp;
and withal, that their affection thus evidenced, may make way for an
unpleasant message: Therefore will I wail and howl, etc. (says he) as a
sympathizer with the people of God, however, as his messenger, I carry the hard
tidings.

Ver. 9. For her wound is incurable; for it is come unto Judah, he is come unto
the gate of my people, even to Jerusalem.

In giving a reason of his sorrow, he yet further describes the calamity from
the universality of it, that Samaria, as she is desperately sick of
provocations, without any hope that ever she should amend; so her stroke was
incurable; and that the Assyrian having destroyed them, that fire should burn
through all Judah, even to Jerusalem, the mother-City, and seat of justice to
all the Jews, of whom he was one, and whom he loved dearly: And so he comes
to the second branch of the Threatening which is against Judah and Jerusalem; as
was likewise foretold by Isaiah, chap. 8.7, 8. and accomplished, 2 Kings 18.13.
etc. Doct. 1. It is a bitter cause of complaint, when strokes inflicted by God
are irremediable, whereas a stroke is easy wherein there is hope of
deliverance; therefore does Micah wail, for her wound is incurable. 2. Albeit
the Lord begin his punishments for sin where it pleased him; yet when he lifts
up his hand, such as are guilty of the same sins, may think not to escape;
for when the wound is begun at Samaria, it comes unto Judah, he is come to the
gate of my people, etc. Jerusalem being so called, because it was the seat of
justice, which used to be administered publicly in the gate. 3. The Lord may
suspend his corrections upon his Church for her backsliding, until a time of
reformation, and then inflict them; for, however Ahaz had his own fears from
Rezin King of Syria, Isa. 7. 2 Kings 16. yet the correction for the high places
of Judah (of which ver. 5.) is by the Assyrian, who destroyed Samaria, and that
in the days of Hezekiah the Reformer, 2 Kings 18. It is come (to wit from
Samaria) into Judah. The reason of which, is partly, because Reformation being
not set about sincerely and cordially, (as it was in the body of Judah in
Josiah's time, Jer. 3.6, 10.) does so much the more provoke the Lord to punish
for former Apostasy; partly, the Lord chooses a time of Reformation to punish
in, that a people, being at such a time sensible of the sin procuring the
stroke, the affliction may be blessed to make them reform the more thoroughly;
and partly, the Lord chooses this time, that the stroke may be the more
moderate, there being some standing in the gap, and no total backsliding; and
accordingly we find Jerusalem preserved, though threatened. 4. The affections
of the Lords servants in a time of distress, ought to be set on work to
sympathize chiefly with such as are most dear to God; therefore says Micah, He
is come to the gate of my people Not so much his, because he was their
countryman, (which ought not to sway with Ministers in public
administrations, Deuteronomy. 33.8, 9. though otherwise to be tender even in that
respect, is commendable) as because they were more upright in Religion then
Samaria, and therefore the enemies coming even to Jerusalem where the Temple
stood, is most bitter.

Ver. 10. Declare ye it not at Gath, weep ye not at all: in the house of
Aphrah roll thy self in the dust.

In the next place, the calamity of the people, and cause of the Prophets
sorrow, is held forth to be so great, that it were to be wished, that their
enemies (such as the Philistims in Gath) never knew of it, and so might not
insult over them in their misery, to add to their affliction; and therefore in
a figurative way (usual in Lamentations, and borrowed from 2 Samuel 1.20.) they
are enjoined to conceal their affliction from such, by suppressing their
weeping, lest they should hear it: Whence learn, 1. There are still some in the
world waiting for matter of joy in the Churches calamities, whose gladdest day
will be to see her in trouble; For, so much does this prohibition to declare it
in Gath, import. 2. Of all enemies, such are among the most inveterate, as
being nearest unto the people of God, yet partake not of their mercies, for,
such were these at Gath, lying hard upon the borders of Judah, from whom
especially they would conceal their grief. 3. It is a new grief, and great
addition to the afflictions of the godly, that enemies by reason of their
calamities, take occasion to reproach them, their God, and Religion. And it
would be a deliverance in part, to have their case concealed from such, and an
ease to smother their grief, if that could conceal it; for, this charge,
Declare ye it not at Gath, weep ye not at all, does import the Churches wish,
that such knew it not, and her ease if it were so. 4. The Church of God must
resolve not only to have afflictions, but also to have them noted and observed
by enemies, and to lie under all their insolences and reproaches because of
them, till their trial be perfected; for, while in a figurative way the
Prophet thus prohibits, it intimates that it could not be hid, and that the
Church had this added to her trial.

In the rest of this Chapter to the last verse, the greatness of this stroke,
and the cause of the Prophets sorrow, is yet further set forth, in a particular
and pathetick enumeration of such places (especially as would appear in Judah)
as should feel the calamity of War, and what their calamity should be; and
albeit we find no mention elsewhere of diverse places named here, especially
these, ver. 11, 12. yet we are to conceive, that they are either proper names
of places (though unknown to us) chosen out from among other places, in regard
the signification of their names, does illustrate their condition by the War:
or, that they are appellative and borrowed names given to some places from
their qualities, properties or condition, to illustrate, their calamity in the
ensuing tempest, as may be seen in the particulars. And so here by Aphrah
signifying dust, we are to understand either that City in Benjamin, Josh.
18.23. where the Assyrian was to come (and which was far from the Philistines
hearing,) or, generally, a place brought to the dust, and made dusty by
affliction, who therefore are to roll themselves in the dust, in token of great
sorrow for their dusty and afflicted condition; see Ier. 6.26. Doct. 1. As the
children of God by their behavior in trouble, are to give no occasion of
reproaching unto enemies; so are they before the Lord to evidence, that they
are sensible of his hand; for, as they are not to weep at all in Gath, or where
the Philistines may hear it, so are they notwithstanding in the house of Aphrah
amongst themselves, to express their sorrow. 2. As great afflictions will be
very grievous and bitter, making men without any regard to themselves, wallow
in dust and ashes; so the sweet use of trouble is, when men stoop to their
condition, and to what it calls unto, while Aphrah made dusty by affliction
descends to the dust; in the house of Aphrah roll, etc. 3. Our kindly bed in
trouble, is dust, as being dust by our Original, and the end of affliction
being to let us know we are such, In the house of Aphrah (or, of dust) roll thy
self in the dust.

Ver. 11. Pass ye away thou inhabitant of Saphir, having thy shame naked; the
inhabitant of Zaanan came not forth in the mourning of Beth-ezel; he shall
receive of you his standing.

The next place mentioned is Saphir, the signification whereof leads to this
Interpretation; That such as dwelt beautifully and pleasantly (for so much does
the inhabitant of Saphir signify) should either flee, or be carried into
captivity by the enemy, in much ignominy and reproach; as this manner of speech
is used to express great ignominy put upon captives by licentious soldiers,
Isai. 20.4. and 47.3. Ier. 13.22. It teaches, that as pleasures and delectable
situation and dwelling will be no guard against God pursuing a controversy for
sin; so pleasure abused will be forthcoming for double ignominy, and will
contribute to imbitter a cup of affliction; for, the inhabitant of Saphir
passes away, having her shame naked: her glory keeps her not from ignominy,
and it is so much the sadder as that she had been a Saphir. The next place,
Zaanan signifying a place of concourse like flocks; and Beth-ezel signifying a
place that is near, lead us to this exposition of the rest of the verse; That a
place of great concourse and many people, shall not come out to help or
comfort, when their nearest neighbors are mourning: the reason whereof is
subjoyned in these words, He shall receive of you his standing; that is, Zaanan
shall not appear in Beth-ezels trouble, as having their own difficulties, and
learning by the example of their neighbors, that there is no standing out or
resisting of the enemy; or they dare not express compassion, as looking that
the enemy will settle his camp among them, and take a sore recompense if they
make him continue in a siege against them. Doct. 1. Humane helps and greatest
probabilities, will prove but vain in a day of vengeance; for, a place of
repair such (as Zaanan) will not be able to help, no not a place near unto
them; whereas either their number, or the vicinity of the place afflicted,
might seem to promise otherwise. 2. It is an usual thing in a day of calamity
to see men selfish and taken up with their own grievances, without regarding
others, and to see the Lord give every man and place so much to do as shall
give him no leisure to look about him: Zaanan came not forth in the mourning of
Beth-ezel, etc. See Ier. 47.3. 3. Universal discouragement ordinarily goes
before an instrument of Gods vengeance, especially once prevailing to make way
for his further success, one place learning by the example of another that
there is no resistance; for, so much does the first interpretation of that
passage, He shall receive of you his standing teach. 4. However it be both
lawful and necessary for a people to bestir themselves for their own defense in
danger; yet such is the fierceness of Gods anger pursuing forsin, as all
opposition made to the instruments thereof, does but tend to the opposers
greater disadvantage, while as the enemies loss of time, means or men, is made
up by their spoil and further ruin; for so much does the other interpretation
of that passage (which agrees also with the principal scope) import.

Ver. 12. For the inhabitant of Maroth waited carefully for good, but evil came
down from the LORD unto the gates of Jerusalem.

This verse contains another evidence that there shall be no standing against
that calamity, and therefore comes in, as a farther clearing of that in the end
of the former verse, as appears by the Particle, for. The signification of
Maroth (which is bitterness) and of the Original word rendered, waited, which
signifies also to be grieved, and of the word rendered But, which signifies
chiefly Because; leads to this interpretation of the verse; That those whose
condition is made bitter by affliction, should earnestly expect for some good;
but in vain, they should yet be more grieved for want of it, and for
disappointment of these expectations, and that because the trouble should
overspread, and reach to the gates of the royal City where the Temple was.
Whence learn, 1. When the Lord arises to plead against sinners, he can put
them in a very disconsolate condition, and make all their pleasures end in
bitterness: for, in this calamity there is, The inhabitant of Maroth, or of
Bitternesses, even many of them; See Ruth 1.20. 2 Howsoever afflicted people do
usually much look out for some issue, yet grief may be oft-times but growing,
when such as have felt some bitterness, are expecting an end of it; for, The
inhabitant of Maroth was grieved (or sick with grief) for good, which they
wanted, though they waited carefully for better, as the word also signifies.
See Jer. 14.19 3. Sometime the only comfort left a people in trouble may be
this, that a greater trouble is coming to shoulder out, and make them forget a
lesser: Evil coming unto Jerusalem, to make them forget particular grievances;
and from the Lord, to make them digest the Assyrians fury. 4. Afflictions sent
from God upon the Church, are to be observed and laid to heart, as not only sad
in themselves, but as Presages of great anger to come on the rest of the world
beside; for, they were grieved for good, because evil came down from the Lord
unto the gate of Jerusalem; that added to their grief, and was an evidence of
their own hopeless condition.

Ver. 13. O thou inhabitant of Lachish, bind the charet to the swift beast:
she is the beginning of the sin to the daughter of Zion: for the transgressions
of Israel were found in thee.

Lachish, a City in the Tribe of Judah, Josh. 15.21, 39. Jer. 34.7. is
threatened, that they should endeavor speedily to flee from the enemy, but to
no purpose, as accordingly it was besieged by Sennacherib, 2 Kings 18.14, 17.
and 19.8. the reason of which judgment is, that they having first of any in
Judah, received the idolatrous worship of the ten Tribes, occasioned the
spreading thereof even to Jerusalem. D^ct. 1. The Lord has in his wisdom so
ordered the writing of holy Scripture, as every particular passage and book
has somewhat in it for our further information, which would not be so clearly
had elsewhere, to the end we may be allured to study it much; as here, we have
Lachish receiving of Idolatry first, which is not mentioned in the history. 2.
As sin will drive men from their habitations; so flight will perish from the
swift, when God has judgments to bring on; for, bind the chariot to the swift
beast, implies, that they should be made glad to flee from their City on any
terms, and that they should not be saved by flight. 3. To be the first
occasion, and a chief stumbling block in a Lands defection, brings an exemplary
judgment; for, Lachish is shut up in her enemies hand, because she is the
beginning of sin to the daughter of Sion: for the transgressions of Israel were
found in thee.

Ver. 14. Therefore shall thou give presents to Moresheth-Gath, the houses of
Achzib shall be a lie to the Kings of Israel.

Lachish's further judgment is, that when they should send Presents and Gifts
to some Town or Country called Moresheth, belonging to Gath of the
Philistines, (and so is distinguished from that Moreshah in Judah;) or (as the
word signifies) to the inheritance (and people) of Gath, for aid and assistance
against the enemy, they should disappoint them, as the Kings of Israel were by
some other Confederates. This Achzib, with some other cities was not at first
subdued by the tribe of Asher, Judge. 1.31, 32. And it seems the Kings of
Israel had covenanted with them for aid against the Assyrians, but were
deceived, as Lachish was by the Philistines. Achzib is only named, either
because the rest dpended on it, and are called the houses of Achzib; or because
the signification of its name (which is a lie) does serve to illustrate their
disappointing of their friends. Doc. 1. Wicked men had rather employ any means
in their strait, then seek to God, and so do provoke God to disappoint them;
for, Thou shall send presents to Moresheth Gath, to wit, to no purpose. 2. The
Lord has given many experiences of the vanity of all humane helps when he is
angry, though men will not be wise to make use of them; for, the disappointment
of Lachish is illustrated from another, which might have learned them wisdom:
The houses of Achzib are a lie, etc. 3. The vanity of all refuges when God is
provoked, is conspicuous to an observant eye, as if it were their very name,
and written on their forehead, The houses of Achzib (which signifies a lie) are
a lie answerable to their name.

Verse. 15. Yet will I bring an heir unto thee, O inhabitant of Mareshah: he
shall come unto Adullam the glory of Israel.

He threatens Mareshah in Judah, Josh 15.44. which seems to have been his own
City, that (according to the signification of the name) the Lord should bring
the enemy to be their heir, and possess their goods; and then summarily sets
forth the extent of this stroke, that it should reach to Adullam, which lay
Southward of Jerusalem, toward the border of Judah, Josh. 15.21, 35. That which
is subjoyned, The glory of Israel, may be understood of Adullam, that it was a
strong City wherein Israel gloried; or, that in coming to Adullam, he should
come to Jerusalem, which was the glory of all Israel, Adullam being beyond
Jerusalem to the Assyrians, who came from the North; or, by way of Exclamation,
O the glory of Israel, being now stained by this universal overflowing scourge,
which went from the North to the very South-border of Judah. Do. 1. The
Messengers of God ought not to let forth the mind of God partially, according
as affection or interest would direct them: but are to publish it freely and
fully without respect to friend or foe: for the Prophet spares not his own City
Mareshah. 2. Provocation against God makes men purchase unsure, and may make
their enemies their heirs; for, I will bring an heir to thee, O inhabitant of
Mareshah. 3. When God raises up instruments to scourge a Land for sin, men are
not to expect that lying afar off, and out of the way, will exempt them: but
that God will find out those whom he is to chastise, wherever they be: for,
He shall come unto Adullam, which was the remotest border to the Assyrian. 4.
Which soever of these ways above mentioned we understand this glory of
Isreal's, it teaches, that albeit the visible Church enjoy the great privilege
of Gods presence in his pure Ordinances, which is her glory: and albeit
particular places have their own excellencies, whereof they glory and boast,
yet when God is provoked, and these priviledgs abused, they will not keep off
corrections: The glory of Israel will be come unto, and laid in the dust.

Ver. 16. Make thee bald, and poll thee for thy delicate children, enlarge thy
baldness as the eagle, for they are gone into captivity from thee.

In the last place, the greatness of the calamity is summarily comprehended in
the mournful face of all things, and the great sorrow that shall be when it
comes to pass; to which the body of the people, or chief and mother-cities are
invited; and called (as it were) from their vices, to hearken rather to the
bitterness abiding them, and to consider what ruin they cast themselves upon
by sin; their sorrow to come is expressed in such signs as were usual in
those times, such as making themselves bald, even as the Eagle when she casts
her feathers, and polling of their hair, of which see, Ezra 9.3. Job 1.20. Isa.
22.12. Ezekiel. 27.31. and the cause of their sorrows is foretold, that their
pleasant children were to be carried into captivity, as Ashur dealt with
Israel, and (it seems) with some of Judah; and for this, they who are left are
to mourn. Doct. 1. It is fitting, that men in a sinful time were thinking on
the bitterness that may ensue, and of the wormwood that God will pour in
among their delights, to mar their mirth: therefore does he call to make bald
and poll: that is, in their sinfulness to be thinking of such times: See Isa.
10.3. 2. Sin will in the end resolve in bitterness; and as calamity for sin
will be grievous on the Church; so sin procuring it, and want of reconciliation
with God under it, will make it sad and intolerable: This is signified by these
expressions; Make thy self bald, poll thee, in large thy baldness as the
Eagle. 3. Captivity from the place of our habitation, and restraint of outward
liberty, is a sharp trial, and matter of sorrow, not only to those who are so
dealt with, but ought to be looked on by others, as matter of sympathy, and by
the body of a people as matter of their affliction, in diminishing of their
number, and leaving them who are left behind weak and contemptible: for this is
the cause of baldness and sorrow to the body of the people: for thy delicate
children, for they are gone into captivity from thee.

CHAP. II.
IN the first part of this Chapter the Lord prosecutes his controversy against
his people for several sins: and first, he accuses them for assiduousness in
sin, especially covetousness and oppression, ver. 1, 2. and threatens them
with insuperable and lamentable difficulties, and casting them out of their
Land, ver. 3, 4, 5. 2. He threatens and expostulates with them for their
opposition to his Messengers, ver. 6, 7. 3. He again accuses them for cruel
robbery, not sparing so much as women and children, ver. 8, 9. and threatens
them with exile, ver. 10. 4. He accuses them for their approbation of, and
delighting in false Prophets, v. 11. In the second part of the Chapter he
comforts believers with promises of restitution by Christ, ver. 12, 13.

Verse. 1. WOE to them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds: when
the morning is light, they practice it, because it is in the power of their
hand.

THe judgment of God is declared to be already upon them, and yet further to be
inflicted for their assiduousness and activity in plotting and practicing of
evil; hereby learning us how to discern a condition plagued of God, and which
without repentance will be pursued with more plagues (for this Woe implies, both
that such a case is a plague of it self, and that it will be plagued) of which
there are these evidences: 1. When evil ways become habitual to men, so as
they are never out of them, but by night as well as by day carried away with
them; for, it is on their beds, (when they should rest or examine themselves,
Ps 4.4. or be instructed by their reins, Ps. 16.7. or meditate on God, Ps.
63.6. etc. as well as in the morning, when they should direct their prayer unto
God, Ps. 5.2. and go forth to their lawful callings, Ps. 104.22.23.) that
they are thus employed, their sin sleeps not. 2. When men not only sin through
infirmity, being surprised and made to stumble in a fit of tentation, but their
wits are bended to project and plot sin; for, Woe to them that devise iniquity.
3. When men's spirits are so taken up with wickedness, that they delight
themselves with acting it in their own imaginations: Woe to them that work evil
on their beds: that is, are so transported, that their spirits and fancy
imagine themselves, as acting those wickednesses, which they cannot for present
get really acted, and thus think to delight themselves. 4. When men's hearts are
so far engaged in their premeditate wickedness, that without taking leisure
betwixt their deliberation and practice, to bethink themselves what they are
doing, they run eagerly about the execution of their purposes, which is the
woeful fruits of giving sin too much room in the heart, that being Master
there, it violently and effectually commands our practice: for, Woe unto them,
who having devised iniquity, when the morning is light, they practice it. See
Jer. 8.6. Ephesians. 4.19. 5. When men ill-affected have power to effect their
desires, and that they succeed with them, God laying no impediment in their way
to stop their progress in sin; for it is Woe upon them, that it is in the
power of their hands, to practice the ill they have devised. 6. It is also an
evidence of woe upon, and coming upon men, when having power, and wanting
external restraints, they have no inward principle or tenderness of
conscience, to make them loath an ill way, as Joseph had. Genesis 42.18. but count
everything right enough which they are able to effect, and go on as far as
their power will reach; for, They practice it, because it is in the power of
their hands.

Ver. 2. And they covet fields; and take them by violence: and houses, and take
them away: so they oppress a man and his house, even a man and his heritage.

He gives an instance of that general challenge, ver. 1. and what were the
evils they plotted and acted: in that when they saw houses and fields that lay
commodiously for them, they did covet them, and violently deprive the true
Owners of them, whereby not only a man's self, but his family and posterity were
oppressed, by taking away, not some of his means only, but his very heritage,
which belonged unto him by the Law of God and man. Doct. 1. Covetousness is a
root of much evil and wickedness, and will embark men in desperate and violent
courses; for, They covet and take by violence. 2. It is an high aggravation of
oppression, when the oppressor is not straightened with necessity and want,
driving him on such courses; but his covetous disposition is the only cause of
all his miscarriage; for, here the quarrel is, that because they covet,
therefore, they take by violence. 3 Covetousness given way unto, and
entertained in men's hearts, will drive them beyond all bounds and moderation;
for, They covet fields and houses: every thing they get, serves but as a bait
to draw them on further; so dangerous is it once to transgress the bounds of
contentment prescribed by God. 4. Albeit covetousness be a lawless sin, and
Oppressors think every thing good purchase, which they can compass; yet in Gods
account violent usurpation is no right; for, however they take away, yet it is
still the man's heritage. 5. Not only the wants of such as are presently
oppressed, but all the wants of their posterity will be laid to the Oppressors
charge, and cry to God against them; for, they oppress a man and his house;
they ruin him, and his family and offspring, by taking away his houses and
heritage, which are a constant livelihood.

Ver. 3. Therefore thus says the LORD, Behold against this family do I devise
an evil, from which ye shall not remove your necks, neither shall ye go
haughtily: for this time is evil.

The Lord pronounces sentence against them for these sins, and explains that
Woe which he had threatened, ver. 1. showing that the Lord is about to bring on
such a judgment and sad time, as should effectually and irresistibly seize
upon them, and lay their pride and bring them down. Whence learn, 1. In times
of violent oppression the Lord is not to be looked on as one misregarding, or
as an idle Spectator, but as a Lord, ready to appear for the oppressed in a
remarkable way; for, Therefore thus says the Lord, Behold, etc. 2. The Lords
Word ought to be received and believed as a sure evidence, that he will so
appear, albeit the performance seem to be delayed: for, Thus says Jehovah: we
ought to judge according to what he says, and not according to what we think.
3. The Lord will recompense all his delays in executing vengeance for sin,
with the severity of it when it comes; therefore, in opposition to their
devising iniquity, verse 1. (that they might execute it well, as they thought)
the Lord devises an evil, says he, that is, it shall be as sore and sharp an
evil, as if it had been most seriously devised, and all the time of delay had
been employed for that effect. 4. Sin publicly acted without controlment, will
bring on judgments against a whole people; Therefore, (because oppression was
committed publicly) against this family do I devise an evil; that is, against
this whole Nation, Amos 3.1, 2. even the notorious sins of private persons,
(much more of public Ministers of Justice) not being punished: or such sins
becoming universal, cannot but bring judgments upon a whole Land. 5. However
Oppressors may think to shift the Lords visitations, yet when they come they
shall seize upon them, and their violence shall be met with afflictions, which
they cannot shake off; for, it is an evil from which ye shall not remove your
necks. 6. Albeit men also dream, that if they cannot exempt themselves from
judgments, yet they will courageously and undauntedly bear out under them; yet
the Lord by his rods will make the most haughty to stoop, for, Neither shall ye
go haughtily. 7. God has our time, and the revolutions thereof so in his own
power, as he can thereby when he will, cause the stoutest to fall before him;
therefore it is subjoined as a reason why they shall not walk haughtily, for,
this time is evil: God shall make the times to crush them. 8. Men by their
transgressions, do provoke the Lord to make their time bitter and evil unto
them, wherein otherwise they might comfortably serve their generations: for,
because they had oppressed, etc. therefore this time is evil.

Ver. 4. In that day shall one take up a Parable against you, and lament with a
doleful lamentation, and say We be utterly spoiled, he has changed the portion
of my people: how has he removed it from me! turning away, he has divided our
fields.

Their calamity is further set forth, that it should not be ordinary, but the
matter of a Proverb in all men's mouths, and of a bitter lamentation, composed
by themselves to bewail their calamities, or by their enemies counterfeiting
their sorrow; wherein they should bewail their utter desolation, in that the
Lord had transferred the possession of the holy land, (which he had given as a
portion to his people,) to their enemies: and had not only cast his people out
of it, but turning away in anger, had given it to the enemies to divide it
among them; and so had put them out of hope to return to it again: all which
relates especially to the case of the ten Tribes, whose lands were thus
possessed by the Assyrians, 2 Kings 17.24. Doct. 1. Sinning against God with an
high hand, will at last make the sinner a remarkable spectacle of justice, and
will end in bitterness and lamentation; for, In that day shall one take up a
Parable, (or Proverb) against you, and lament with a doleful lamentation. 2.
The sinners desert is to be utterly ruined without hope of restitution, and to
be left in that condition to bewail their want and misery; for, this is the
sum of their lamentation, that they are utterly ruined, put away from their
land, their enemies dividing it as their own inheritance. 3. The seeing of God
as a party, and affliction as flowing from his anger, they make the afflicted's
lamentation yet more bitter; for, so do they lament: He has changed and
removed, turning away be has divided. 4. The Lords judgments upon a sinful
people, will surprise them with astonishment, and be more sad then any thing
they did expect or dream of, when they were wallowing in their iniquities;
for, so much does their admiration import: How has he removed it from me?

Ver. 5. Therefore thou shall have none that shall cast a cord by lot in the
Congregation of the LORD.

Their utter desolation is here positively denounced by God in confirmation of
their lamentation, that being cast out of their land, they should want the
benefit of dividing their inheritances by lot, before the LORD in his
Congregation, as of old Joshua had done, Josh. 18.4, 6, 10. and they used to
do on several occasions, especially every Jubilee, when they returned to their
possession; but should remain exiled, and their enemies in possession of their
Country. Doct. 1. It is a bitter case, when an hard condition is not only
feared or apprehended by us, but proves in reality as sad as we imagine: For,
here the Lord confirms their lamentation in apprehending desolation, by a
positive sentence; Thou shall have none to cast a cord by lot. 2. Iniquity will
make a Land spue out even a confederate people, and detain them in exile,
destitute of their wonted privileges; This is imported in that threatening,
Thou shall have none to cast a cord, etc. 3. The causes procuring judgments
are still to be taken along in our thoughts with the judgment; Therefore,
says he, because of these sins mentioned, ver. 1, 2. Thou shall have none,
etc. This will make us justify God in his afflicting, and will set the
afflicted on work by repentance to make up their outward losses in God. 4.
Afflictions will be so much the more bitter, as the mercies of which we are
deprived by them, have been given unto us by a special providence, and as a
sign of Gods favor; for so the land from which they are to be banished, is a
land which they had by lot in the Congregation of the Lord; that is, a land
divided to them by especial providence of God, and wherein the Congregation of
the Lord was. See Ps. 47.4. and 137.1.

Ver. 6. Prophecy ye not, say they to them that prophecy, they shall not
prophecy to them, that they shall not take shame.

The second accusation is, for their contempt of, and opposition unto Gods Word
and Messengers: the sense of the words, (which in the original are concise and
short) is; when the wicked heard the Prophets of God threaten sin so sharply,
they could not endure this sound doctrine, but either would have them silent,
as Amos 7.10, 11, 12, 13. or would limit them to preach only what they
pleased, as their false Prophets did; and so some read the words, Prophecy ye
not. let these, (to wit, the time-serving Prophets, and such as would follow
their way) prophecy; upon this the Lord threatens to add this to their
judgments, that he will take away his Prophets, and hereby give them up as
dogs, to whom holy things are not to be cast, and prevent the shame and
ignominy which his Prophets suffered at their hands, as Matthew. 7.6. or (as the
words may be read by way of interrogation, If they shall not prophecy unto
these, shall they take no shame? although they were rid of faithful messengers
to warn them, yet that would not hold off jugements, nor exempt them from
shame and confusion. Doct 1. The Lords Word in the mouth of his messengers,
ought to be refreshing, and a means of fructifying unto the Church; and will
prove so, except it be to such as are near unto cursing; therefore is
prophesying in the Original called dropping, by a name taken from rain, which
refreshes and fructifieth the earth. 2. A declining time, and a faithful
Ministry will be still at odds and contending; decliners would either be rid of
the Word and Ministry altogether; or if they think that too gross, yet they
will allow of none but such as are made to their mind; not of such as may be
isntrumental to frame them according to Gods mind: Prophecy ye not, say
they to them that prophecy; or Prophecy ye not, let these prophecy. 3.
Howsoever, the Lord will have his truth published, so song as he sees
fitting, or has use for it, oppose who will; (and so the words may be read,
that when the wicked said, Prophecy not, the Lord answered, They shall
prophecy,) yet when men become so desperately wicked, as not only not to care
for the Word, but study to affront and injure the Carriers of it; it is
righteous with God to deprive them of it, for a judgment to them, and the good
of his wronged servants: They shall not prophecy to them, that they shall not
take shame; See, Ezekiel. 3.26 4 Albeit wicked men think all sure enough if they
were freed from that eyesore of a reproving and threatening Word and Ministry,
yet that would put them never a whit the further from judgments for sin; for so
much does that other reading hold forth; If they shall not prophecy, shall
they take no shame? as if he said, will that exempt them from judgments, that
upon their contempt the Word is removed? No verily; but as it is a judgment in
it self, so it is a presage of more following.

Ver. 7. O thou that art named the house of Jacob, is the Spirit of the LORD
straightened? are these his doings? Do not my words do good to him that walks
uprightly?

Unto this accusation and th^eatning the Lord subjoyns a sad expostulation with
this people, now so far degenerated, as thus to contemn and oppose his
Messengers; as if they might limit his Spirit to speak only what pleased them:
or, as if his Spirit were straightened to do them good, and preach comforts, if
they were fit for them; that he must only threaten, and poseth them, if their
ways and doings were approved of God, and such as called for comfortable
doctrine; and whether they could allege that threatenings and judgments were
his usual way of dealing with his people in which he delighted, if he were not
provoked thereunto by their sin, and appeals to themselves if his words did
not both speak and perform good things, and would prove so to them if they were
holy; and consequently it was not he nor his Prophets, but themselves that were
to blame, that the Word spoke hard things unto them, and that accordingly they
were punished. Doct. 1. It is a deplorable case, and sadly to be lamented, when
men stand in opposition to the Word of God, and the Carriers thereof: so much
does this expostulation, and these pressing interrogatories imply. 2. Men may
both think and do many things with great boldness, which yet if they should
seriously think upon, they would be forced to condemn and find a witness
against in their own bosoms: for, these questions put to their consciences,
imply, that God had a witness for him there, and they durst not say nor do as
they did, if their consciences were put to it as in his sight. 3. Many have,
and study to keep up a name which they are ill worthy of, and no way answerable
to it. O thou that are named the house of Jacob, says he, but no way like that
which Jacob was, and should be: See, John 8.40. Hos. 12.3. 4. God can discover
betwixt shows and substance, and will see a fault in such as glory in fair
titles, for he calls them as they are: Thou art named the house of Jacob, and
have but a name. 5. It is an evidence that a visible Church is degenerated
whatever show they have, when they turn opposers of the Word of the Lord in the
mouth of his servants, and of his servants for their message cause, it being
the true glory of the Church to have messengers carrying Gods mind unto them,
and to entertain the message and messengers as becomes; for, it is upon this
account they get this title, Thou art named, etc. 6. Such as oppose and fight
against the Word of God and his Messengers, do in effect fight against the
Spirit of the Lord, whose Word it is; for, these opposers are challenged, as
straitning the Spirit of the Lord. 7. It is an high presumption and injury done
to the Spirit, to think to imprison and deny him liberty in the mouth of his
servants to speak any thing but what men please: for, Is the spirit of the Lird
straightened? imports, that it was not seemly they should limit him in giving
Commission to his servants. 8. The Lord has a storehouse of spirit to bring
forth comforts, and of power to produce mercies, if his people were fit for
them; for, Is the spirit of the Lord straightened? imports also, that it was not
for want of fullness in his Spirit, to publish or perform good things, that
the Prophets got only commission to threaten; see, Isa. 50.2. 9. When the Lord
sends forth sad threatenings in the mouths of his servants, it becomes a people
seriously to examine their ways, to see them disapproved of God, and deserving
such entertainment: therefore he leads them from quarrelling with the Spirit of
God or his servants, seriously to consider, Are these his doings? that is,
whether their own ways are agreeable to the law, or such as the Spirit of God
works in his people. 10. The Lords ordinary way of dealing with his people, in
which he delights, is mercy; for, Are these his doings? imports also, that
however he did now threaten and deal harshly with them, yet they might be
abundantly convinced that it was not his usual way so to do, nor a course in
which he took pleasure, if their case did not call for it. See Mic. 7.18. Lam.
3.33. 11. That which God looks to and requires in his people, is not so much
their profession and speaking, as their walking and carriage, and that they
study a constant course of uprightness and sincerity, although they cannot
attain to perfection; for, it is required that they walk uprightly. 12. As the
upright walker will need the Word much for direction and encouragement; so to
such the Word speaks only good, however they may read and apply it wrong
sometimes, by reason of their distempers and fears, and may mistake when the
Word speaks against their corruptions, which is without prejudice to their
sincerity, and when the Word speaks hard things, whereby their further good is
promoted in the end: for, do not my words do good to him that walks
uprightly? 13. The Words saying of good, is indeed a doing of good, not only
because comfortable messages do encourage, strengthen and revive the heart; but
also in regard of the certain performance of what the Word says: when it is
said, it may be counted done; My words do good. 14. The goodness of God to
his people may deeply convince and humble them, who by sin provoke him to do
otherwise; Therefore is all this set forth to be in God, that their sin may be
seen great which causes such strange dealing.

Ver. 8. Even of late my people is risen up as an enemy: ye pull off the robe
with the garment from them that pass by securely, as men averse from war.

A third accusation is for their cruel robbery, whereby he also sets forth the
sad fruits of their contemning the Prophets, and the true cause why God, by
their Ministry, handled them so roughly; The sum of the accusation is, that
they whose fathers had been famous for valor in Wars, and defending the
country against a common enemy, were now of late turned robbers of the
innocent; and, as cruel enemies, did take away both the upper and nether
garment from those who were traveling peaceably, as minding no War; or did so
deal with them, as if they had taken them in War; and sent them away
stripped, as if they had been in a battle. Whence learn. 1. Contempt of, and
opposition unto Gods Word and Messengers, turns men barbarous and inhumane,
without all civility; and men following such courses cannot expect that the
Word should speak peace to them; for, this is a fruit of their opposing the
Prophets, that they were given over to such cruelty; and is the cause why hard
things were prophesied. 2. The degenerating of men from former good ways, and
the present evils of the time, are much to be observed, and hammered on by the
servants of God; for, this is the subject of his accusation, that even of late,
or yesterday, they were thus degenerated. 3. As declining professors are
ordinarily plagued with singular profanity, so profession and privileges will
serve to aggravate the guilt thereof; therefore, howsoever they were only in
name the house of Jacob, ver 7. yet in the challenge the Lord gives them their
titles, my people is risen up, etc. that since they would be accounted so, he
would make use of it to their disadvantage who would not walk answerable to
what they pretended to. 4. Oppression of others, and for men so to carry
themselves toward friends as open and violent enemies use to do, is a practice
not beseeming such as call themselves the people of God; for, this is the
challenge, My people is risen up as an enemy: ye pull off the robe, etc.

Ver. 9. The women of my people have ye cast out from their pleasant houses,
from their children have ye taken away my glory for ever.

He insists in the accusation, and gives a further instance of their
inhumanity, in their carriage toward women and children, whom Wars ordinarily
spare; they cast women violently out of their houses, where they lived
pleasantly, and by bringing children unto slavery and misery, did for ever
deprive them of that dignity allowed to them by God as his people. Doct. 1.
There are none of the children of men but in divine providence may meet with
their own share of trials, and should look for them; for hear very women and
children are not exempted more then men. 2. However the Church and particular
members thereof may deserve afflictions at the Lords hand, yet these same
afflictions will endeere them to him, at least in so far as to be a ground of
challenge against instruments, that they have meddled with such; wherefore
whatever these afflicted ones were otherwise, yet in their trouble, and in the
challenge against oppressers, they are the women of my people. 3. God, the
preserver of men, has a special regard to the weaker sex and tenderer years
of persons; and will aggravate injuries done to them from such considerations;
as here, ye have cast out women, and taken away glory from their children, or,
little ones. 4. Pleasures and tender usage are not to be looked upon by those
who enjoy them as abiding things, or a constant allowance, but, considering
them as transient, they ought to look for changes when the Lord shall be
pleased to call to it; for so much are we taught by the experience of these
tender women cast out of their pleasant houses. 5. There is an especial glory
allowed by God unto his Church, whereby she may be separated from all people,
which the Lord will maintain her in, against all who would deprive her thereof;
this is signified by that external glory, and the privileges conferred on
Israel, (called, my glory, because allowed of him) which now he challenges
oppressors for depriving their children of while they were put in a condition
not beseeming the free people of God; From their children ye have taken away my
glory. See Exodus 33.16. 6. Perseverance in an ill way does exceedingly
aggravate the sinfulness thereof; ye have taken away glory for ever; that is,
without giving over that wicked way, or ceasing to rob, 7. It may also be
interpreted, that by making children bondmen, they aimed to deprive them of
their glory perpetually; and so however children might be relieved from
bondage, yet they are reckoned with according to their aim, and the nature of
their work: and it teaches, whatever the Lord may do in interposing to
moderate the afflictions unjustly inflicted by men; yet instruments must answer
to God for all that the nature of their work tended to, and for all they
intended in it.

Ver. 10. Arise ye and depart, for this is not your rest, because it is
polluted, it shall destroy you, even with a sore destruction.

The Lords sentence and threatening for this wickedness is, that as they had
cast others out of their houses: so the Lord would banish them from the holy
Land, which was given them for a rest, only on condition of Covenant-keeping:
and that, because they had polluted the Land by sin; therefore it should
violently cast them out. Doct. 1. It is incident to men when they have
committed great wickedness, yet to promise to themselves peace by reason of
some external privileges; for, this charge, Arise ye and depart, implies, that
notwithstanding of sin, they were not thinking of removing, because there land
was a rest. 2. Sin does provoke God to turn up-sidedown great privileges,
which are conferred upon a visible Church on condition of her obedience; yea,
it does provoke him to prove himself superior, of whom they hold all their
enjoyments, and to deprive them of rest and quiet who were restless in sin:
for, whereas the Land of Canaan was given for a rest, Psalm. 95.11. now the Lord
summons them to remove, and threatens it should not be arest because of their
sin; Arise ye, and depart, for this is not your rest. See Numb. 14.34. 1 Samuel
2.30. 3. Men by their sinning do not only set themselves against God, but do
pollute and defile all the creatures and mercies given them of God, by
employing them to the dishonor of God; for, the promised Land is polluted by
these sinners. See Lev. 18.25, 28. Man going in rebellion draws many
creatures, abused by him, away with him. 4. Mercies being given that we might
serve God with them, and not defile them; therefore it is just with God, that
what we dishonor him in or by, be taken away: This is not a rest, because it
is polluted. 5. Abuse of Gods mercies draws on sharpest judgments of any;
for, it (that is, the Land) shall destroy you even with a sore destruction. This
the land did, not only in spewing them out as it did the Canaanites, Lev.
18.28. as loathing to bear or feed them who dishonor God: but in that it was
the great cause of their sore judgment that they had polluted a Land of
promise, where God in his Ordinances dwelt: and so it had been better for them,
when God should reckon with them, that they had dwelt elsewhere.

Ver. 11. If a man walking in the spirit of falsehood, do lie, saying, I will
prophecy unto thee of wine and of strong drink, he shall even be the Prophet
of this people.

In the fourth place they are accused for that, however they opposed true
Prophets, yet they did approve of, and delight in false Prophets, and such as
pretending to inspirations, and to be in office Prophets, would flatter them,
and without warrant, promise prosperity to such as were continuing in sin:
Whence learn, 1. The most profane in the visible Church may ye^ desire some
show of divine institutions and ordinances, and some sort of divine approbation
to their way, if they can have it; for, he shall even be a Prophet to this
people; imports, that they would not willingly want Prophets, but desire to
have them, provided they go their way; that so albeit they reject true
Prophets, yet they may have Prophets, and may seem not to want divine
approbation; men may be profane enough, albeit they come not to the height of
rejecting all ordinances, nor openly to profess they care not for Gods
approbation. 2. It is no new thing to see men pretending to the Spirit of God,
and revelations and light from him, who are but deceivers, if not deceived
also, and sent for a plague to a sinful people; for, there are, who walk in the
Spirit (that is, pretend to inspirations as Prophets) and yet all this is but
falsehood, and their doctrine a lie. 3. There will never be false Prophets and
clawbacks wanting, to humor and soothe up a declining people; for, it is
imported, there will be such as prophecy of wine, etc. 4. As it is a great
snare and judgment to a people to find any shelter against naked truth, and
Prophets against Prophets; so these false Prophets are discouragements to the
true Messengers of God, while such do flatter those whom faithful Messengers
threaten; for, it is the peoples judgment, that they have prophets to oppose to
those whom they reject, ver. 9. See Jer. 18.18. And it is a great cause why
Micahs threatenings take no effect, that they in the mean time prophecy of ^ine
and strong drink: such was Micah's trial when he had to do with Abah, 1 Kings
22.12, 13, 14, etc. 5. Such as pretend to any eminency in Gods house or
service, without his call or approbation, are ordinarily branded with badges of
his displeasure; for, these walking in the Spirit, or pretending to revelation,
are plagued either with delusion or impudency, (as such ordinarily are, who
abuse light most,) in that they dare prophecy of wine, and strong drink to a
rebellious people. 6. Albeit the Lord may for a time forbear gross sinners;
yea, and plague them with prosperity also, yet it is false doctrine to preach
peace and prosperity to a profane people, so as if God approved of them when he
gives them prosperity, or as if any prosperity they got were not ripening them
for sorer judgments: for, as these false Prophets lied, in respect they wanted
a revelation and commission to deliver such a Doctrine, when on the contrary
God was threatening that people: so it is still a lie in these terms, to
prophecy of wine and strong drink to such a people. 7. As it is a woeful
condition, when all that the visible Church is set upon, is pleasure and
prosperity, and all they have to do with Prophets, is to make them glad with
hopes thereof: (he is their choice, not who speaks to them of their sin and
Gods grace, but who prophesies of wine,) so a people are in a desperate case,
when they delight only in such Doctrine as may please their fancy, and will
not admit of freedom in Doctrine. Therefore it is a matter of challenge, and a
cause of Gods contemning of them, (as being not my people, but this people)
that such a one shall even he the Prophet of this people, and not such as
faithful Micah. See Isai. 30.10. Jer. ^.31.

Ver. 12. I will surely assemble, O Jacob, all of thee: I will surely gather
the remnant of Israel, I will put them together as the sheep of Bozrah, as the
flock in the midst of their fold, they shall make great noise by reason of the
multitude of men.

Ver. 13. The breaker is come up before them; they have broken up, and have
passed through the gate, and are gone out by it, and their King shall pass
before them, and the LORD on the head of them.

The Lord in the close of the Chapter sweetens the former threatenings with
promises of restitution of his Israel under Christ; wherein are contained their
recollection and gathering, that Christ as their shepherd shall gather them in
one, shall feed, secure and multiply them, ver. 12. that all impediments shall
be taken out of their way, that might hinder their progress, and that their
march shall be stately, and their conduct safe; Christ their King who is the
Lord, going before them as their general on the head of them. Whence learn, 1.
In the throng of greatest displeasure, the truly godly are allowed comfort,
that they be not crushed with threatenings, whereof they are most apprehensive
by reason of their tenderness; for, in the midst of these threatenings, Jacob
and Israel get a promise; See, Matthew. 28.4, 5. 2. The children of God ought to
study much the certainty of Promises, that they may without hesitation rely
upon them; I will surely assemble, I will surely gather, says he, or in
assembling assemble, which imports his persisting in that work till he perfect
it. 3. Spiritual restoration by Christ, is ample matter of comfort to all
believers in times of public calamities: for that is the substance of this
promise held forth for their comfort: it was their comfort under the Law to
foresee it, and ought to be ours for to enjoy it; See John 8.56. Luke 10.23,
24. 4. As no vicissitude of dispensations has buried in oblivion that Covenant
made with Jacob and his seed, so the Catholic Church of Believers of all
Nations have right to the spiritual promises made to Jacob and his seed: for
these to whom the promises are made are called Jacob and Israel, to show unto
the seed of Israel that he would assemble them, being mindful of his Covenant;
and to confirm all his Elect, that by believing in Christ they are made his
Israel, and heirs to Isreal's promises. 5. Christ the great shepherd, will want
none of his chosen ones, howsoever scattered, dispersed, and far from him, but
will have them all gathered and brought in to the fold of his Church; I will
surely assemble Jacob all of thee; I will surely gather the remnant of Israel,
says the Lord to scattered Israel, and to his scattered Elect, through the
world; See John 10.16. 6. Christ, having gathered his people as in one flock,
will do the duty of a faithful shepherd, in feeding and securing of them from
dangers: I will put them together as the sheep of Bozrah, (a place in Edom or
Moab, where there were many flocks and good pasture, 1 Chronicles. 1.43, 44. Jer.
48.24. and 2 Kings 3.4.) as the flock in the midst of their fold. 7. The Lord,
who of remnants can make multitudes, will in his own time bless his Church
with increase and multiplication of Converts, and hereby will make up the loss
of their scatterings and sufferings: The remnant shall make a noise by reason of
the multitude of men; See, Isai. 49.20, 21. 8. Howsoever there may be many
difficulties in the ways of God, which his people are to follow; yet a people
waiting upon him shall find impediments removed to their hand; and that they
have nothing to do, but go on till they dip their feet in Jordans brink, and he
will make it dry; for, the breaker is come up before them; they have broken up
and have passed through the gate, and are gone out by it. The speech alludes to
the custom of armies who usually send some before to prepare the way, and
break through stait passages that the army may march without trouble, Passes
being opened in all places; See Isai. 57.14. and 62.10. 9. Christ's Church does
not want a King to go out and in before her, to protect, defend and guide her
in her way, and as a General to fight her battles; for, Their King shall pass
before them, and the Lord in the head of them, 10. There is none to be
acknowledged as having kingly power in or over the Church, as she is a Church,
but he who it the Lord JEHOVAH, for, their King passing before them, is JEHOVAH
in the head of them: that is, their General in the forefront of them, as the
word is translated, 2 Chr. 20.27. See Hos. 1.11. Is. 52.12.

CHAP. III.
THe Prophet having hitherto faithfully discovered the sins of the body of this
people, and denounced Gods judgments because of sin; he comes more particularly
to tax the Rulers both in Church and State; especially in Judah, and to
threaten them for their sins; and this he does, 1. Severally, in relation to
their own particular punishments; The Princes, for that they ought to know
right and wrong, and walk accordingly, and yet were most perverse and inhumane
in oppression, v. 1, 2, 3. are threatened, that in their strait they shall not
be owned of God, ver. 4. The false Prophets, who deluded the people, and
preached so as might be most subservient to their base ends, ver. 5. are
threatened with such confusion as should make them ashamed of their trade, ver.
6, 7. whereas he, a faithful man should bear out in his duty, ver. 8. 2 He
deals with them conjunctly, in relation to the judgment, which they by their
sin procured to come on the Church of God: whereas the Rulers perverted
Justice, ver. 9. and built the holy City with goods taken by oppression, ver.
10. and generally, both Rulers and Teachers were corrupted with bribes, and
love to gain, and yet would presumptuously rely on God, ver. 11. therefore he
threatens, that for their sake Sion should be laid desolate, v. 12.

Ver. 1. ANd I said, Hear I pray you, O heads of Jacob, and ye princes of the
house of Israel, is it not for you to know judgment?

HEre he challenges the Rulers in peace and War, for affected ignorance of the
Law of God, and lays a ground for aggreaging their wickedness, in that it
concerned them to be better acquainted with the Will of God in the matter of
Justice and equity then others, and so ought to be exemplary in their knowledge
and obedience, (knowledge including consequent affection and practice) whereas
they in their practice proved themselves ignorant, or despisers of the Law. We
need not curiously enqure, whether by Jacob the Kingdom of Judah be
understood, as by Israel, the ten tribes; seeing the latter part at least of
the threatenings in this Chapter, is especially directed against Judah, Ier.
26.18. but by these names we are generally to understand that people which were
come of Judah otherwise called Israel. Doct. 1. When a land in general is
culpable of defection, rulers in Church and State have their own eminent guilt
in it: This is imported in the Prophets scope, while as having reproved the
whole body of the people, he now comes to challenge the rulers in an especial
manner: Hear O heads of Jacob. 2. Faithful Ministers ought not only to inveigh
against sin in general, or of the commonalty only, but in particular ought to
reprehend the sins of every rank, even of Rulers; for, so does Micah's
practice teach. 3. Men in greatest eminency are bound to hear God speaking by
his messengers, and to receive what messages are sent unto them, as being under
the law as well as others; Hear O beads of Jacob, and ye Princes of the house
of Israel. 4. As Rulers especially are unwilling to be brought to an account
for their ways by the Ministry of the Word, so Ministers are bound to omit no
point of discretion, and tender insinuation, which may consist with their
fidelity and zeal against sin, and which may be instrumental to make the word
take, and not to be stumbled at; for so does Micab's way of entreaty teach;
Hear, I pray you, which imports both the Rulers averseness to hear, and his
tender condescendence that they may hear. 5. Whatever may be the success of a
faithful Minister in the discharge of his duty, yet his faithfulness and
diligence will be matter of peace to him, when the conscience reflecteth upon
it; as here Micah gives a comfortable account of his pains; I said, Hear etc.
6. Beside the general obligation lying upon all men, (especially within the
visible Church,) to know and obey the will of God, it is especially incumbent
to rulers and great ones among the Lords people so to do; as being by reason of
their education, means, encouragements, leisure, offices, etc. enabled with
advantages, and bound to know more then others, and to put their knowledge in
practice, that they may be examples to others: O heads of Jacob, and ye princes
of the house of Israel, is it not for you to know judgment? 7. It is a good
evidence that a man is one who delights to know and obey the revealed Will of
God in all things, when he is careful in the matter of his particular station
to walk by that rule; therefore he puts them to trial in the matter of knowing
judgment, or justice and equity, which belonged to them in their particular
station, as being Judges to the people. 8. Whatever men may oppose to the
challenges of Ministers in the matter of affected ignorance, or wilful neglect
of known duties; yet these excuses will not satisfy their own consciences,
when they are seriously put to it; therefore the Prophet poseth them with a
question which they could not deny; Is it not for you to know judgment?

Ver. 2. Who hate the good, and love the evil, who pluck off their skin from
off them, and their flesh from off their bones.

3. Who also eat the flesh of my people, and flay their skin from off them,
and they break their bones, and chop them in pieces, as for the pot, and as
flesh within the cauldron.

In opposition to what they ought to be, he sets forth their contrary
disposition and practice, that they were abhorrers of what was good, and lovers
of ill; and they did so cruelly oppress and undo the Lords people, by taking
away the very means of their subsistence and livelihood, as if they had flayed
their skin from off them, eaten their flesh, and broken their bones to boil
them for meat, as Butchers and Cooks do, with beasts for man's food. Doct. 1.
The Lord does not reckon that men know ought, when the truth being known is
not affected, nor any endeavors used to put it in practice; for so does he
clear here their not knowing of judgment, in that they hated the good, and
oppressed. 2. The Lord respects chiefly the disposition and affection of men's
hearts toward good or ill, it being a desperate condition, when not only
practice is out of course; but affection also is alienated from God, and
inclined to evil; Who hate the good, and love the evil. 3. Whatever oppressors
may pretend to be the cause of their cruelty toward their inferiors, as if
they stood in need, and behooved to live of their own, etc. yet the Lord sees
it to flow from their perverse and corrupt affections: Therefore, says he of
oppressors, Ye hate the good, and love the evil. 4. Greatest perversity is
usually found in such, as ought, and may, and will not, or neglect to make use
of such means, as might promote piety and justice; for, all this pervesitie is
in the heads of Jacob, who had means and occasion to set them on to do
otherwise; Ye are they, says he, who hate the good, etc. 5. Oppression is in
Gods account inhumane butchery, and murder, in a degree far above simple
slaughter, while the oppressed pine for want, and the oppressors (as
barbarians or wild beasts) eat that which is the poores very life and flesh;
so much does this description of oppression teach us; Who pluck off their skins
from off them, and their flesh from off their bones, who also eat the flesh of
my people, etc. 6. Albeit Magistrates and great men think themselves to be
above all law, yet they have no power to oppress a people, (especially if they
be Gods people,) and deal with them as they will, but must be accountable for
their carriage toward them; and howsoever the oppressed or others dare not
challenge them for their injurious dealing, yet there is a God who will lay it
to their charge; for, here they are challenged by God for their oppressing his
people.

Ver. 4. Then shall they cry unto the LORD, but he will not hear them: he
will even hide his face from them at that time, as they have behaved themselves
ill in their doings.

Follows their particular sentence and judgment by way of retaliation, that
as they oppressing the poor, had a deaf ear to their cries: so they would
meet with judgment without mercy or compassion, and should not be owned of
God, though (out of feeeling of their trouble) they seek unto him. Doct. 1.
The greatest of men, and they who most wickedly forget God, shall at one time
or other be sensibly in Gods reverence, and their errand come in his way; for,
so does this threatening import, that they shall be put to seek God, whom
otherwise they misregarded; Then shall they cry. 2. Natural men may make some
show of seeking God in trouble; not in faith, or out of love, but out of sense
of trouble; Then (that is, when the common calamities formerly threatened, or
their own particular corrections for their sin, are lying on) shall they cry.
3. It is righteous with God not to own this crying of the wicked in their
trouble, because of their former wickedness and present unsoundnesse, and
particularly, that he may recompense them, for not hearkening to the cry of the
poor, oppressed by them: They shall cry unto the LORD, but he will not hear
them. 4. It is extreme misery to be deserted totally of God in trouble, and
to want his favor and sense of reconciliation, which might support them in any
extromity; for, it is here the extremity of misery, that in their trouble, he
will even hide his face from them as that time. 5. God, by not owning of a man
in trouble, would have wickedness seen and lamented as the cause of it,
(however he seem also to do this sometime that he may try the faith of his
children;) for, so does this reason import: As they have behaved themselves ill
in their doings.

Ver. 5. Thus says the LORD concerning the Prophets that make my poople err,
that bite with their teeth, and cry, Peace; and he that puts not into their
mouths, they even prepare war against him.

In the next place he accuses the false Prophets, who by false doctrine
deceived the people, and who by preaching peace did in effect destroy peoples
souls with delusion, (as if these dogs had devoured the Lords sheep with their
teeth) or, they flattered the people in sin that they might get somewhat to
eat, and devour their substance; wherein if they were not satisfied and
humoured, according to their own desire, they turned bitter enemies, and
denounced judgments, though they formerly flattered them. Doct. 1. False
teachers are not the least among the sad companions of a declining time; nor
will the Lord forget to reckon with them; for, here the Lord has such to deal
with: Thus says the Lord, (and not one Prophet envying another) concerning the
Prophets, etc. See Lam. 2.14. 2. An unfaithful Ministry is a most effectual
means to prevail with people, and carry them out of the way of God; for, the
Prophets make my people err; see how far they prevail above any means, 1
Kings 22.20, 21, 22. 3. As it is a great sin against God, to seduce and mislead
a people, wherein he has interest; so the negligence and treachery of Pastors
does indeare the Lords people so much the more unto him, and call for his
especial care; for so it is imported in this epithete: They make my people
err; See Ezekiel. 13.23. 4. It is a great cruelty and murder to proclaim peace
to a sinful and impenitent people; for, They bite with their teeth, and cry
peace; their very crying of peace is cruel biting and devouring of souls,
Ezekiel. 22.25. 5. It is a mercenary and hireling disposition in Pastors, to seek
themselves or their commodity, as their chief and only scope in their
calling: for, so much also does this challenge teach: They bite with their
teeth, and cry, Peace; that is, they flatter the people, that so they may get
occasion to eat them up, and live upon them. See Ezekiel 13.18, 19. or, they
preached for their own advantage, seeking the things of the people and not
themselves, 2 Cor. 12.14. 6. It is also unbeseeming the faithful Messengers of
God, to accommodate the discharge of their Ministry, so as may best promote
their own ends, and to threaten, discountenance, bless or curse, according as
they get or want their aimed at gain: such is the practice of false prophets,
while they have to bite with their teeth, they cry, Peace; and he that puts not
into their mouths, (or, he that gives not according to their mouths; that is,
as much as they desire or seek) they even prepare war against him, and turn
his mortal enemy in their doctrine. 7. Men who are covetous, and given to
filthy lucre, can hardly be faithful in a Ministerial calling, to divide the
Word aright, as the example of these false Prophets teaches, who look not to
the mind of God in discharge of their office, but to what might best suite with
their ends, and accordingly did frame their doctrine.

Ver. 6. Therefore night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a vision;
and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine: and the Sun shall
go down over the Prophets, and the day shall be dark over them.

7. Then shall the Seers be ashamed, and the diviners confounded: yea, they
shall all cover their lips, for there is no answer of God.

The Lords sentence against these false Prophets is, that they shall have no
visions or divinations from God; Not that ever they had any from him, but that
the dark night of trouble and calamity coming on, and the Sun of their
prosperity and delights going down, (as the form of speech is taken, Jer.
15.9.) they shall thereby be so overwhelmed and confounded, that they shall not
dare any more to feign false prophecies, or pretend to revelations, as formerly
they did. This is amplified, ver. 7, from the effects of it, that these who
gave out themselves for Seers and diviners, when it shall appear by events,
that they never had any vision from God, and that (being confounded by
trouble,) they dare not speak so boldly as they did, they shall be despised of
all, shall think shame of themselves, and cover their lip in sign of grief and
confusion; See Lev. 13.45. Doct. 1. God will have false teachers seen in their
own colors, and will decipher them to the world; so does this threaning teach.
2. Events will prove, that peace preached to a backsliding and impenitent
people, is no vision from God; for, the Lord threatens, that by sending night
and darkness of trouble, contrary to their doctrine, he shall depose the false
prophets, and make it manifest that they had no vision from him: See Jer. 28.5,
6, 7, 8, 9. 3. Howsoever deluded and presumptuous men may bear out in the day
of their prosperyty and sunshine, yet trouble will confound their presumption,
and dry up their delusion; for, when it is night and dark, and their Sun goes
down, and their day is dark, then they shall not have a vision, nor divine. 4.
False teachers, and unfaithful men in Gods house, shall in due time be plagued
with confusion, contempt and ignominy, and be made to think shame of
themselves and their way; for, then shall the Seers be ashamed, and the
diviners confounded, etc. See Zechariah 13.4. Malachi 2.8.9.

Ver. 8. But truly, I am full of power by the Spirit of the LORD, and of
judgment, and of might, to declare unto Jacob his transgression, and to Israel
his sin.

While Micah is denouncing Judgments against false prophets, in opposition to
their unfaithfulness in their callings through disloyalty and fear, he sets
forth himself as furnished with gifts and endowments, requisite for the
faithful discharge of his Office, though he had few or none to second him in
carrying hard tidings, and great ones of all ranks against him; whereby as he
clears himself that he was not a false prophet, so also that he should not
be confounded, nor think shame of himself or of his Office, as they should do.
Doct. 1. It is no way contrary to true humility, for a man to assert his own
calling and endowments from God, when otherwise he, and in him his message is
ready to be brought into contempt by the humors of men; for, so does Micah's
example teach, who vindicates himself from any contempt which false Prophets
and such as affected them might cast upon him. 2. A man's clear testimony in his
conscience of his calling, fidelity and furniture from God to discharge his
calling, will prove comfortable, when the Lord is about to reckon with such as
run without his calling; for so does Micah upon the back of the threatenings
against false teachers comfort himself: But truly (there is the certainty of
his testimony) I am full of power, etc. 3. Albeit Micah had some qualifications
extraordinary, yet from this we may gather several characters of a faithful
Minister, every one whereof is a lesson, teaching Ministers what to seek
after: As, 1. However the Lord may bless the mean gifts of such as are
honest, yet neither are Ministers to be empty vessels, nor swelled with
ostentation, but a large measure of real furniture is to be sought after; I am
full, says he. 2. Their endowments must be not only such as are acquired by
the use of ordinary means and helps of literature, much less ought their own
spirits or humors to bear sway here; but they should seek the Spirit of the
Lord to sanctify their spirits and abilities, and furnish them in their
dependence on him; for, says he, I am full by the Spirit of the Lord, which he
had extraordinarily as a Prophet, and Ministers ought to have in an ordinary
way: They ought, I say, to have not only the Spirit of their calling, but the
Spirit of sanctification also, as their duty, and for their own souls good:
though otherwise a man may be a true Minister, and may be an instrument of true
good to others, who yet is not regenerate himself. 3. As Ministers need not
only furniture of matter, but such life and zeal in publishing the Word, as
becomes the Oracles of God; so where the Spirit of the Lord is the furnisher,
there will be efficacy, life and zeal accompanying the doctrine; for, I am
full of power by the Spirit of the Lord, says he. 4. A faithful Minister
ought also to be endowed, not only with sufficient knowledge to speak
according to the Word, and not falsify the mind of God through ignorance, and
with prudence to speak it seasonably; but with fidelity and streigtnesse in
telling the mind of God according to equity and truth, without partiality or
regard to one or other; for, so much does the word judgment import. 5.
Ministers also stand in need of fortitude and courage, to speak out boldly
what is the mind of God, and constantly adhere to it, without fear of any, or
being blown over with the wind of flattery, and this a faithful Minister must
and ought to expect from God only: I am full of might by the Spirit of the
LORD. 6. A faithful Minister looks on all his endowments, as not given to be
laid up and contract rest beside him, or for himself only; but that he ought
to improve them for God and his people, in his place and station: I am full,
says he, to declare unto Jacob, etc. and empty out that goodness for their
good and behoof. 7. It is an evidence of a faithful and able Minister to be
much in opposition to sin, and freely to charge it home, and declare
transgression and sin to the sinner: and not be deceived or blinded with fair
titles or shows, but to discern and reprove sin even in Judah and Israel.

Ver. 9. Hear this, I pray you, ye heads of the house of Jacob, and Princes of
the house of Israel, that abhor judgment, and pervert all equity.

10. They build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity.

11. The heads thereof judge for reward, and the Priests thereof teach for
hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for money: yet will they lean upon the
LORD, and say, Is not the LORD among us? none evil can come upon us.

In the second part of the Chapter, Micah gives a proof of what he has said
of his own fidelity in speaking to all sorts of rulers, Civil and
Ecclesiastic, Ordinary and Extraordinary, conjunctly; seetting before them
their sin; and how they procured Zions ruin: he accuses the Rulers in State
that they who ought to have been patrons of Justice, did abhor and pervert
it, ver. 9. that in stead of adorning the holy city with justice and judgment,
their care was set upon stately buildings, and they gathered means for that end
by cruel oppression. ver. 10. And generally he accuses all of them, that
justice was perverted through briberie and covetuousnesse, and that their
Churchmen were mercenary, and made their calling of ordinary teaching and
extraordinary divining, subservient to their gain: and yet all of them were
carnally confident and presumptuous of Gods favor and presence among them, and
of exemptions from judgments ver. 11. Doct. 1. Persons in eminency, especially
being accustomed to sin, are usually deaf to what the Lord says, and
therefore must be often called to hear, as here they are after that former
call, verse. 1. 2. The messengers of the Lord must not give over, when their
message is not received, but must cry till either they get audience, or have
delivered their souls; for Micah repeats, Hear I pray you. 3. It is the duty
of faithful Ministers in reproving the faults of Rulers, to give evidence they
do not condemn their Authority, when they reprove their faults; and not to be
wanting in any respective carriage which is due unto them; therefore does Micah
give them their titles, and again entreat; Hear I pray you, ye heads of the
house of Jacob, and Princes of the house of Israel. Where the Princes of Judah
to whom this was spoken, Jer. 26.18. are called Rulers in Jacob and Israel, not
only because the house of David had still a right to govern all Israel (and
therefore such a title seems to be given to Jehoshaphat, 2 Chro^. 2.2.) or
because their carriage was more like Israel then Judah, (and therefore it is
given to Ahaz. 2 Chronicles. 28.12.) Gr. because there was no more left of all
Jacobs race after the Captivity of the ten tribes (which was in Hezekiah's
days) but only Judah to govern; but because they were Rulers of a people that
came of the stock of Jacob, otherwise called Israel. 4. The Lords quarrel
against men is not so much for sins of ignorance and infirmity, as for such
as flow from a perverse disposition, going wrong, because they love to do so,
and do hate what is right; therefore are they again challenged; that they
abhor judgment, and so pervert all equity. 5. The Lord will admit of no fair
precences to palliate any sinful deed; for it is no excuse that they build
Zion, if it be done by blood and iniquity, or with goods taken by bloody
oppression from the poor; but on the contrary, as it is incident to all
pretenses, that they prove snow-water, and defile that the more which they
endeavor to cleanse: so it is the matter of a sadder quarrel, that they should
build the holy City by such means; They build up Zion with blood, and
Jerusalem with iniquity. 6. Those are unsurely built houses and estates, at the
way of raising whereof, and gathering means for that end God is angry: for, it
is a quarrel against them, and the house which they build with blood and
iniquity. See Hab. 2.12. 7. Howsoever the Lord allow lawful maintenance to such
as are publicly employed in Church and State, yet to receive hire or gifts so
as to judge partially, because of the gifts received, is gross iniquity; for,
it is a quarrel here: The heads thereof judge for reward, etc. See Exodus 18.21.
8. When bribes are received by men in office, either in Church or State, it is
an evidence they will not do their duty faithfully and in singleness; for,
judging for reward, teaching for hire, and divining for money, is all one with
false judgment, and erroneous teaching, and divination; for, true is he who
said, A gift blinds the wise, etc. Exodus 23.8. 9. Presumption will feed up
men with delusion under very gross sins, and when a stroke is near; for, Yet
will they lean on the Lord, etc. 10. External privileges of the Church, and
external reformation of Worship, are ordinarily turned by secure sinners into a
snare or plague to themselves, making them dream of Gods favor, and of peace,
when wrath is upon them, and trouble at hand. Such a snare was Gods presence in
his Temple, and Hezekiah's reformation to these profane rulers, Is not the Lord
among us? etc. 11. External privileges will not exempt profane sinners from
deserved judgment, nor will external reformation hold it off, but rather ripen
the faster for it; for it was their presumption even under reforming Hezekiah,
to say, Is not the Lord among us? no evil can come upon us; so long as they had
not repented indeed, as it is, Jer. 26.18, 19. 12. God will approve of no faith
but such as is fruitful, and stirs up men to purify and cleanse their heart
and way; for, they are here challenged, that when they have done all the former
iniquities, and are going on in them, Yet they will lean upon the Lord, or
pretend to true faith, whereby a man casts himself and all his burdens on God;
and say, Is not the Lord among us?

Ver. 12. Therefore shall Zion for your sake be plowed as a field; and
Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high places
of the forest.

Follows the Lords sentence subjoyned to this accusation: He threatens that
for their sins the stately buildings of the holy City should be made desolate
heaps; and the ground it was situate upon, especially the Kingly dwelling,
should become arable and to be plowed as a common field; and that the mountain
Moriah, whereon the Temple stood, should become wild and dishaunted as a
forest, and filled with shrubs and bushes. See Chap. 1.6. Doct. 1. No place or
visible Church has any such privilege, but that sin will make it desolate:
for, no place has such promises as Zion, Jerusalem, and the mountain of the
house had, and yet they were to be plowed as a field, etc. 2. The servants of
God must be bold and faithful, not only in speaking against the sins of the
Rulers, but even against a Church having great privileges, when she is found
in transgression: for, this passage is recorded as a proof of Micah's fidelity,
Jer. 26.18. 3. It is our duty to look upon sin, and to be affected with it, not
only as procuring corrections upon our selves; but especially as it has an
hand in drawing on calamities on the Church and Kingdom where we live; this he
tells them: For your sake Zion shall be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall
become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high places of the forest.
4 Universal defection of a Land, especially of Rulers and Teachers in their
Offices and Judicatories, will bring on speedy desolation, unless that by
repentance it be prevented, (as the execution of this threatening was in
Hezekiahs days, Jer. 26.18, 19.) For your sakes Zion shall be plowed, etc.
says he to the corrupt Rulers and Teachers, in regard their corruption had a
chief hand in procuring this ruin, and could not but involve the people in the
like defection, to hasten the judgment. 5. Judgments on a backsliding Church
are most severe and sharp, howsoever there be moderation in them to the Elect;
for, no less is here threatened then being plowed as a field, becoming heaps,
and as the high places of the forest; So great a sin is the contempt of mercy
offered to a Church. 6. As for this part of their calamity, that the ground
whereon the holy City and Temple stood was plowed as a field, albeit when it
was first denounced in Hezekiahs days, it was suspended on their repentance,
Jer. 26.19. And albeit we find not that it was accomplished at the first
destruction of the Temple; yet common history informs us, that after the second
destruction thereof, it was performed by the Romans; who, according to their
custom, plowed up the very ground whereon the Temple had stood, in sign of
perpetual desolation. So infallibly certain is the Word of God, that after so
long a tract of time it will take effect; albeit upon repentance it had been
delayed; yea, and after they had past through many troubles, and had been
delivered, and so might think they had done with it, yet upon new sin and
provocation that sentence is still standing against them, and at last takes
effect.

CHAP. IV.
IN this Chapter (which agrees with Isai. 2 1, etc.) the Lord comforts the
godly against the calamities which were foretold, Chap. 3.12. by setting forth
the glorious blessings of Christ's Kingdom, or of the Church of Jews and
Gentiles under the Messiah, wherein is contained the glorious excellency and
increase of the Church, v. 1, 2. her peace and tranquillity under the
government of Christ, ver. 3, 4. her zeal and constancy in Religion, ver. 5.
and her delivery from former misery, such as Israel was to be under, ver. 6, 7.
To whom (which is the second part of the Chapter) he makes a more comfortable
and particular application of the Promises; by promising that the Kingdom as it
was of old, should begin at them, ver. 8, and by showing his mind concerning
their troubles, ver. 9, 10. and concerning the enterprises of their enemies,
ver. 11, 12, 13.

Ver. 1. But in the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of
the house of the LORD shall be established in the the top of the mountains,
and it shall be exalted above the hills, and people shall flow unto it.

2. And many Nations shall come and say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain
of the LORD, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his
ways, and we will walk in his paths: for the Law shall go forth out of Zion,
and the Word of the LORD from Jerusalem.

The first Promise for comfort of the godly, contains the excellency of the
Church, and accession of many Nations to it: It has two branches.

First, That however the Church of the Jews was to be in great misery for sin;
yet it should come to pass in the days of the Messiah that the Church (called
by the name of old Zion, or the mountain of the house, as best known to the
Jews) and the Church of Israel as eminent and chief among the rest, should be
glorious and exalted above every society that is excellent in the world; as if
the mountain whereon the Temple stood, were made higher then any hill, or set
upon the top of them: Whence learn, 1. As the Spirit of God is a Spirit of
unity and does not differ from himself in his manifestations to his servants;
so it is a comfortable thing when the Messengers of God do concur and unite in
bearing testimony to any Truth in the Church; for thus it was with Isaiah and
Micah, who being contemporary, do preach the same things here; and Is 2. 2. God
does no sooner afflict his people, but as soon mercies, to make up their losses
come in his mind; and the Churches afflictions are never to be studied, but
when the promises making her up are taken along in our thoughts; for,
immediately upon the back of that threatening, Chap. 3.12. this promise comes
forth, as testifying his affection, and for her to look upon with the other. 3.
The Churches happiness and felicity is much in gracious promises, and to come
in respect of performance: It shall come to p^ss^, says the Lord: This was
indeed especially true under the Law, in comparison of the days of the Gospel;
and yet even under the Kingdom of Christ her felicity is yet to be completed
when eternity shall come; and she is to live on hope of that. 4. The chief
and great glory of the Church within time was reserved for the days of the
Gospel, and of the manifestation of Christ in the flesh: The Church before,
(however knowing and enjoying the Messiah by faith, yet) being kept under a
paedagogie of the Ceremonial law, and the shadows of good things to come: In
the last days it shall come to pass, etc. See Luke 10.23, 24. Heb. 11.40. 1
Pet. 1.10, 11, 12. 5. The days of the Gospel are the last days, wherein all
things foretold by the Prophets being accomplished, we are daily to be
expecting eternity, and the closure of time; for so is the time betwixt the
first and second coming of Christ called the last days, or evening of the
world. See 1 Cor. 10.11. 6. The true Church of Christ is firm and impregnable,
and elevated above the world; for so much does this name of the mountain of
the house established teach us: A mountain denotates what is strong and fixed,
and what is elevated above other things. 7. The Church of Christ, however in
outward appearance base (as the little hill Moriah on which the Temple stood)
yet shall be, and is truly excellent and glorious above all worldly estates and
kingdoms, and above all Idols and Idol-services; for, the mountain of the
house shall be established on the top of the mountains, and exalted above the
hills, that is, above potentates (which are compared to mountains, Jerem.
51.25.) above Idols which are worshipped on hills or high places; and
generally, above all that is eminent in the world: This is accomplished, partly
when the Church is made to rise upon the ruins of kingdoms and Idols which
oppose her, Isai. 60.12. partly when Kings bring their glory to her, Is. 60.10,
11. (which is yet more to be fulfilled when Antichrist shall fall, and all
Israel shall be saved,) their eminencies are but as hills to set her up higher:
But chiefly this is daily accomplished in respect of Gods presen^e in her, Ps.
68.15, 16. 8. The excellency and glory which God puts upon his Church, is not a
transient or vanishing thing; but however she may be tossed, and dust cast upon
her, yet her excellency will remain; for, she is not only exacted, but
established in this emineny.

The second branch of this promise, is the increase and spreading of the Church
(which is both an effect, and an instance of her spiritual glory and eminency)
in that people of all Nations (as it is Isai. 2.2.) shall (not go up to earthly
Jerusalem, but) embrace the Gospel, and join themselves unto the true Church,
whose fervor in coming is held forth in their mutual encouragements, and
upstirrings to come unto the Church, for direction how to order their
conversation; all which as it has already been verified, so it will be yet
more accomplished, when the fullness of the Gentiles being converted shall
profess their communion in the Christian Religion with converted Israel, and
shall receive from them a perfect directory for Gods service, and join in faith
and worship with them, when God shall remember his Covenant, and prove himself
to be the God of Jacob. Doct. 1 It is the glory of the Kingdom of Christ, that
it is universal, and that he shall prevail with those who were enemies
thereunto, to become subjects, and acknowledge the Church to be the Princess
of societies, and shall persuade even whole Nations under the Gospel to become
a Church to him, and a part of his kingdom; for, people shall flow unto it, and
many Nations shall come. The Church shall not be confined within the bounds of
Judea or of one Nation only; nor shall the party of a Nation only, but the whole
Nation join. 2. Under the Gospel the distinction and prerogatives of Nations
are taken away, all have access unto the Church, and some of all sorts will
come; for, people and many Nations shall flow and come, as well as the Jews.
See Col 3.11. 3. The glory and privileges of the Church of Christ, being well
seen, would make people not only come, but flow with zeal and fervor, and in
great number to him, in her: for so much does the word flowing teach us, that
they shall flow as abundantly, and with as much fervor as rivers run downward.
See Jer. 31.12. yea, a sight of this would make Kings desire to partake of the
portion of Christ's poor, Psalm. 72.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 4. In a time of
conversion, especially of Nations to the Gospel, and to Christ, there will be a
willing and cheerful people; for, so is it here, many Nations shall come, and
say, Come, etc. See Psalm. 110.3. 5. Our willingness to come unto Christ in his
Church, ought to be evidenced by stirring up one another to come to him; for,
they shall say, Come, and let us go, etc. 6 A converted people do yet stand in
much need of mutual edification and stirring up of one another in their
stations; for, so does the practice of these converts teach us, Come, let us go
up, say they. 7, True mutual edification consists not in mutual exhortations
only, but especially in practice, and walking so as may edify and excite
others; Come, and let us go; they are going themselves, who can rightly exhort
others. See Zech. 8.21. 8. True converts must be drawn upward in their aim,
affections and practice from the earth; and albeit there be seeds of good and
willingness in them, yet they will find the way of godliness a strait and
steep path to their nature; Therefore their course gets the name of going up to
the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, alluding to
their ascending to the Temple. 9. Such as draw near unto God, and join
themselves to him in his Church, ought to lay hold upon the Covenant, wherein he
has engaged himself to be gracious in his Christ to all who seek to him; for,
they go up to the house of the God of Jacob; that is, he who has entered in a
Covenant with Jacobs posterity, and with the Israel in the spirit. 10. That
which is most eminent in a true convert, and which is first gained in one whose
heart is touched, is their affectionate willingness to obey God: We will walk
in his paths say they, their affection is gained, when yet they are to get
teaching. See Romans 7.22. 11. Affection toward God is not sufficient for a
peoples walking, to render their way approved, but they must have knowledge of
the will of God also, to direct their path; for, He will teach, and we will walk,
say they. 12. Every true convert is made sensible of his natural ignorance and
proneness to error, and becomes docible and willing to receive instruction:
Let us go (say they) and he will teach us of his ways; they account it a mercy
to be taught; and that not what they like, or as they effect, but what is his
will. 13. Albeit the Lord has appointed a teaching Ministry in his Church,
which his people ought and will acknowledge, yet every true convert is taught of
God: partly, while they hang not their faith on men's authority, but exalt God
alone to be the infallible Teacher and Lawgiver in his Church, and do try if
what men say, be agreeable to his mind; and partly, while they feel God in and
by his appointed means, teaching truth effectually and perswasively to their
hearts; He will teach us of his ways, say they. See John 4 42. 1 These. 1.13.
14 As all knowledge of divine things ought not to rest in contemplations, but
stir up to practice; so however men of much literal knowledge may be more
profane in their conversations then others; yet such as are taught of God, and
acknowledge his Authority in the means of instruction, and feel the efficacy of
his Spirit conveighing what is taught to their hearts, their knowledge will
resolve in practice: it being the Lords prerogative, to convince the
conscience, and subdue and stir up inclinations to practice what is taught: He
will teach us, and we will walk in his paths.

Unto this promise the Prophet subjoynes a reason, why Nations should seek to
join with the Church; to wit, because the doctrine of salvation should go forth
from the Jews, among all Nations, to stir them up to seek the Lord, and this
light shall shine forth in the Church in all ages to invite Nations to come and
seek teaching. Doct. 1. The glory of the Church of the New Testament consists
not in idle ceremonies, but in the profession and holding forth of true
doctrine according to the Word, which is the badge and mark of the true Church:
for, the Law (or, generally the true doctrine, as the word in the Original
bears) shall go forth out of Zion, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem,
that it may shine in all the Churches of the Gentiles, and this is a part of
the eminency of the mountain of the Lords house. 2. The Lord has made it
clear, that the Doctrine of salvation in the days of the Messiah, was not to be
treasured up among the Jews only as of old, Psalm. 147.19, but to spread
throughout the world; for, the Law shall go forth of Zion, etc. 3 The Doctrine
of the Gospel is the same for substance with what was in the Church of the
Jews, though clothed with new circumstantials. Therefore it is called a Law,
alluding to the old name, and comes from among them to us, though not from
Sinai, clothed with dark shadows and fearful terrors; but from Zion, adorned
with cleernesse, and seasoned with sweetness. 4. As the Word of God published
in his Church is the instrument of true conversion: so it is the means whereby
Christ inlargeth his Kingdom, and will prevail in the world to persuade
Nations to join themselves to him in his Church; therefore is this given as a
reason of the enlargement of the Church, and activity of Converts; for the Law
shall go forth of Zion, etc.

Ver. 3. And he shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong Nations afar
off, and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into
pruning hook: Nation shall not lift up a sword against Nation, neither shall
they learn war any more.

Ver. 4. But they shall sit every man under his Vine, and under his fig tree,
and none shall make them afraid, for the month of the LORD of hosts has spoken
it.

The next promise contains her peace and tranquillity (setting out yet more the
Churches glory) under Christ's government; that God in his Son Christ shall by
his Gospel have and exercise a spiritual jurisdiction and kingdom in the
world, whereby he shall subdue them to his obedience, and having subdued, shall
govern them so, as to procure peace and tranquillity to the Church, that the
converted may serve God quietly in their particular stations, and become useful
each to other. This their condition is expressed in terms taken from the usual
practice of peaceable times, wherein men being out of use of war, do turn
their weapons of offense into instruments of husbandry and utility, and wherein
men go about those callings and abide abroad in the fields without fear of
danger, as 1 King. 4.25. Doct. 1. Christ coming with his Gospel, is to reign
as a King, and have authority over those who receive him; for, he shall judge
among many people. 2. It is a truth to be much and frequently studied, that
Christ's Kingdom is universal, his Church spread over the world, and he having
power over all for her good; that he may have his glory, and every particular
Church and believer be comforted in such a head, and in hope of the enlargement
of his dominion, when by Apostafie or persecution it is confined to narrow
bounds; therefore is it again promised; that he shall judge among many people,
and rebuke strong Nations afar off; to wit, far from Judea, and meaning all
people far and near. 3. The Lord may deal very terribly with such as he
purposes to do much good unto; he may convince, rebuke, and afflict them for
sin, that he may drive them to his mercy; for that is a part of his work in
gathering a Kingdom, to judge and rebuke. 4. Albeit the Lord in gathering of
his Church, do not make use of weapons of war, but only his Word with the
reproofs and terrors thereof, yet that will suffice to subdue them to him,
nothing in the creature being able to stand out against the Lord, convincing
and rebuking for sin; for, if he judge and rebuke many people and strong
Nations, they will feel it, and beat their swords into plowshares, etc. and
come under his government. 5. This promise of great tranquillity and peace, is
not so to be understood as if the Lord did condemn Christians their undertaking
of lawful wars; for, Magistrates bearing the sword of Justice (which must
oft-times be executed by force of arms) is the Ordinance of God, Romans 13. Nor
are we so to understand it, as if the Church were always to enjoy outward
peace and tranquillity; for, Christ refuses that himself, Matthew. 10.34. Nor
does the godlies spiritual peace in all troubles exhaust the full scope of this
promise. But the scope is to teach us, 1. The saving effect of the Gospel upon
men, is, when it daunts and subdues their corruptions, and so makes them, as
tractable and pliable to the will of God; so, peaceably study to serve God in
their stations, and to be useful each to other; for, when these strong Nations
are rebuked, they beat their swords into plowshares, etc. Which are instruments
of their lawful calling, and of utility to themselves and others. 2. This
taming of men's corruptions by the Gospel, will appear farther, in that the
Saints and converted will live at peace, in so far as they are renewed
(otherwise a Saints corruption as well as our own, may be on our tops,) and
that there shall not be such an enmity betwixt believing Jews and Gentiles, as
was before the partition was taken down; in these respects, Nation shall not
lift up sword against Nation, neither shall they learn war any more. 3.
Whatever troubles the Church may meet with from enemies, yet she shall give no
cause nor occasion thereof, albeit their corruption may take occasion to raise
troubles because of the profession of the Gospel; for, the converted shall be
peaceable men, and beat their swords into plowshares, etc. 4. In despite of all
the power and imaginations of enemies, the Church of God shall have even
outward peace and tranquillity in so far as is needful and subservient to their
spiritual good, otherwise when it proves hurtful, it is better to want it, as
the Church has many times found in experience. And as the Lord has often
given tastes of this to his Church: so it will be more fully accomplished when
the fullness of the Gentiles and all Israel shall be turned to the Lord, as
sometimes before in the Church; so, then they shall fit every man under his
vine, and under his fig tree, and none shall make them afraid. Doc. 6. The
fidelity of God who promises, is sufficient to assure our hearts of the
performance of greatest things, as being omnipotent, and having all things
under his power, and at his command, which may either promote or seem to impede
the execution of his will: Therefore is this promise, which might seem
improbable by reason of the great desolation which was threatened should come,
sealed with this: for the mouth of the Lord of hosts has spoken it.

Ver. 5. For all people will walk every one in the name of his god, and we will
walk in the name of the LORD our God for ever and ever.

In the Parallel place, Isai. 2.5. instead of what is here, is contained an
exhortation to the Jews, that since the Church under the Messiah was to be
glorious, they would faithfully cleave to God and true Religion in all their
calamities, till these days should come; and seeing the Gentiles were thus to
flow in to Christ, they would not slip away, but be provoked to jealousy, and
come in to partake. And indeed the hope of the Church of God is so great and
sure, that it may well encourage men to be honest under any disadvantage: and
albeit this exhortation was not hearkened unto at the first Conversion of the
Gentiles, yet the day will come, when it shall be effectually upon them, Romans
11.11.25, 26. But Micah seems to hold forth further the resolution of the
Converts of Jews and Gentiles under the Gospel, to renounce all heresies and
sects, and to adhere constantly and zealously to God, and the Profession of the
Chrstian Religion, exciting themselves hereunto by the example of idolaters,
who were pertinacious in their irreligious courses: and this is a third
evidence of the glory of the Church: and ground of encouragement to the godly,
that instead of the manifold Apostasies and pollutions with the ways of the
Pagans, which appeared formerly in the Church of the Jews, the Church of God,
especially Israel being converted, should then prove constant in their
Religion. Doc. 1. Constancy in adhering to the true Religion, is the great
glory of a Church, and encouragement of the godly, to whom backslidings are a
sad affliction, as here we are taught. 2. The Christian Profession and Religion
consists in walking in the Name of the Lord, that is, in professing and
practicing according to the revealed rule, which is his Name; not seeking to be
wise above what is written, and going about these things in his strength, as 1 Samuel 17.45. Psalm 118.11. being furnished with encouragement from him; for, so
his Name in Isa. 2.5. is the light (to wit, of direction and consolation) of
the Lord. 3. Such as would walk in these paths, and adhere to them, ought to
make sure an interest in God by Covenant, and make use of this interest for
daily influence, and ought to be filled with much affection toward their
Confederate Lord; We will walk in the Name of the Lord our God. 4. For right
performance of our duty, there is much need also of frequently renewed
resolutions, and gathered together motives to set us on edge; as here they
gather arguments from idol-servers, and put on resolutions; We will walk etc.
5. Eternal resolutions, or resolutions of persevering constantly, are fit and
beseeming so high a duty as walking in Gods Name; we will walk, say they, and
walk for ever and ever. It being a way wherein there is no cause of wearying,
and the benefit thereof being but in its prime, and fully to appear, when time
and its contentments are ending. 6. Even in the days of the Gospel, there are
still so many blindfolded and deluded, as not to see the glory of Christ's
Kingdom, but will pertinaciously follow their Idol-gods: for, there are, all
people (that is, many who) will walk in the name of their god. 7. The Lords
people ought (and by grace will) be so far from being shaken or drawn away by
the multitude of men who forsake their true God, that idolaters their
observancy and exactness in their way should give occasion to the seekers of
God to put on resolutions of more exactness; their blind zeal toward that
which is no God, may teach us our duty toward the true God; for so does this
comparison instituted teach, that not only Christians would not join with
them in their way, but seeking these were so careful and resolute, much more
ought they to be so in the right way; For all people will walk every one in the
name of his God, and we will walk in the Name of the Lord our God for ever and
ever. See Ier. 2.10, 11.

Ver. 6. In that day, says the LORD, will I assemble her that halteth, and I
will gather her that is driven out, and her that I have afflicted.

7. And I will make her that halted a remnant, and her that was cast far off
a strong nation: and the LORD shall reign over them in mount Zion, from
henceforth even for ever.

The fourth encouragement does yet further evidence the glory of the Church,
from the consideration of her former misery by affliction for sin, which he
would now make up, and of such constitute his Church, and Kingdom, over which
he should reign for ever and ever. And however this promise be of general
verity, pointing out what base and contemptible like matter he will gather his
Church of, yet it has a special relation to the presently afflicted, and yet
further to be afflicted Church of Israel, whom he comforts against all her
afflictions and impediments that might cut off all hope of her restoration, by
promising to gather them under the Gospel, and make them a great Nation, and
that Christ in his spiritual government shall constantly rule over them in
their own land, after their conversion, or in the Church which was prefigured
by Mount Zion. Doct. 1. The Lords afflicting of his Church does in a special
manner, endear her to his affection, and makes that she shall not be behind,
when mercies are a dealing; for, says he, I will assemble and gather her that I
have afflicted: See Jer. 31.20. 2. Great afflictions are no impediments to the
Churches restitution, when the time of it comes, when Omnipotency is employed
about it, and when he in love remembers them in their low estate; for, such as
are so crushed with trouble, as they are made to halt, such as are afflicted,
driven out and cast far off, he can and will assemble and gather them, and
make a remnant and strong nation of them; that is, he will preserve a remnant
and keep them from total ruin in trouble, and at last restore and multiply
them. 3. The glory of a Church restored, and the height of their felicity, is
to have the Lord reigning and acknowledged as a King in all his prerogatives
amongst them; therefore it is added to their restitution, And the Lord shall
reign over them in Mount Zion. 4. The Churches King is not subject to
mortality, nor such a one as may be put from his kingdom, and leave them
exposed to hazard; but, the Lord shall reign over them (and so protect them)
from henceforth even for ever: which also imports that he will still have
subjects to reign over.

Ver. 8. And thou, O tower of the flock, the strong hold of the daughter of
Zion: unto thee shall it come, even the first dominion: that kingdom shall come
to the daughter of Jerusalem.

Here the Lord makes a more particular application of his comfortable promises
unto the Church of the Jews; for however the Promise be of general verity in a
spiritual sense, being applied to the Catholic Church, that Jerusalem which is
from above; yet the following verses clear, that it is to be understood
specially of the Church of the Jews, whom he here calls the tower of the flock,
or Eder, of which Genesis 35.21. conceived to be a place near, or in Jerusalem,
and in particular that part which was after called the sheep-gate; and the
strong hold of the daughter of Zion, or Ophel, of which, 2 Chronicles. 27.3, Neh. 3
26. The first encouragement given to them for the comfort of the godly, is;
that not only the Kingdom of Christ should first begin at them, as the History
of the New Testament does evidence; but that under Christ they should be
restored to their wonted dignity, resembling that which they had of old enjoyed
under David and So^omon, before their rents and calamities. Doct. 1. The Lord
in gathering the universal Church has an especial regard to the Jews his
brethren; this does appear in the special allowance given to them in the
promises concerning the Kingdom of Christ; of which, as the Lord gave them the
first offer, so from them the Apostle, Romans 11. gathers, that much mercy, shall
yet be manifested unto them. 2. The Church of God is the receptacle and fold of
all his true sheep, wherein they gather themselves under his government, and
are environed with strength for safety; so much is signified to us by these
names given to Zion, The Tower of the flock and strong hold. 3. The Lords own
Application of spiritual comforts, is especially requisite for his afflicted
people; therefore the Lord counts it not enough to have propounded ample
promises in general to the Church, which might answer all their cases, and
which they were bound to be applying; but he holds it also necessary to apply
these to the present Church in her need. 4. The glory of Christ's Kingdom is as
great and greater spiritually, then ever the glory of David or Solomon's reign
was outwardly; all the valor, strength and victories of David, all the riches,
honor, and wisdom of Solomon, even to admiration, and all the felicity of
Israel under both, are but shadows of that substance; therefore is it called
the first dominion, that is, not so much the dominion at first offered to the
Jews, as a dominion like the first flourishing times of Israel, 5. As Christ,
to fulfill the truth of God, did make first offer of his Kingdom and Gospel to
the Jews; so in due time he will bring them under his dominion and spiritual
Government; and will restore them to their wonted dignity thereby; uniting all
Israel in him, the seed of David, as they were before the rent made by
Jeroboam; adorning them eminently with the spiritual excellencies and
privileges of his Kingdom; if not also appearing gloriously for them in
outward things: for, says he, Unto thee shall the first dominion come. the
kingdom shall come to the daughter of Jerusalem.

Ver. 9. Now why do thou cry out aloud? is there no King in thee? is thy
Counselor perished? for pangs has taken thee as a woman in travel.

10. Be in pain, and labor to bring forth, O daughter of Zion, like a woman in
travel; for now shall thou go forth out of the city, and thou shall dwell in the
field, and thou shall go even to Babylon; there shall thou be delivered: there
the LORD shall redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies.

The next encouragement given to the Church of the Jews, is by showing his
mind concerning her troubles that were shortly to ensue; and that he may the
more effectually comfort her, he very pathetically propounds her trouble, as if
she were now under it, and shows unto her, that however in outward appearance
she had cause of bitter sorrow, her King and Counselors being to perish in
that calamity, she being to be driven from the City and Temple which were to be
destroyed, to sojourn a space in the fields, till the rest of the Captivity
were gathered, and then to be carried captive unto Babylon; yet upon better
consideration, she might find she had no such cause of fainting, but ought
rather resolutely to provide for, and courageously to bear that trouble, seeing
God should be King and Counselor to her, and in Babylon, where she might have
least hope, she should find deliverance; and so he clears his mind to be this,
that by trouble she is going on toward deliverance. Doct. 1. The troubles of
the Church may in their hour, prove very sharp and bitter, as the pangs of a
woman in travel, crying out aloud. 2. Albeit the Church of God in her trouble
seem to have reason for excessive sorrow, and bitter discouragement, yet
really it is not so, but she has still some reason of encouragement, and ought
to set about it; therefore whatever her troubles were, yet says he, why do
thou cry out aloud? as if he had said, there is no reason for such excess in
anxiety and sorrow. The reasons of this principal doctrine held forth in the
Text, are as so many doctrines, all of them concluding that she ought not to
give way to discouragement. 1. There is nothing the people of God want in
trouble, which might be helpful or comfortable to them, but it will be made up
in God; for however her King and Counselors were useless, and enemies to her
safety in that strait, and were afterward cut off for their sins, and that she
might be emptied of all created comfort and helps, yet the Lord will not admit
that she should think she wanted a King, while as he lived and reigned to
preserve her in her trouble, and in due time to re-establish his Kingdom in
her; so much does this sharp question teach, Is there no King in thee? Is thy
Counselor perishid? 2 As the Lord sees it often times fit not to remove, but
continue and increase a peoples trouble; (for they were to be in pain, to go
out of the city, dwell in the field, and go to Babylon:) so the people of God in
such cases ought to arm themselves with resolution for such lots, rather then
by discouragement to make their own cross heavy, which is all they can do:
so much are we taught, in that, howsoever he reproves their cries, v, 9. yet,
says he, be in pain; which does not only import an assuring of them that the
trouble was to come, nor yet only a concession, that it is no marvel they have
pain, and sorrow, but a command also to set themselves resolutely to bear it,
as they are commanded to build houses in Babylon, Jer. 29.4, 5, 6, and to make
their captivity as comfortable as lawfully they may. 3. The right pondering of
the fruit which the Lord brings out of the troubles of his people may help to
crush discouragements under them; labor to bring forth like a woman in travel.
He sets her out in her trouble, as traveling in birth of some mercy to make
her forget her sorrow, which she should mind much, and press after. See John
16.21, 22. 4. The Lords tender affection toward his people, especially under
trouble, may be a great lenitive to their bitterness: Therefore is she here
called the daughter of Zion, which is a style of tenderness. A room in his
heart will make an affliction to be no affliction, or very tolerable. 5. Every
step of the people of God in affliction is a step toward deliverance: and the
utmost degree of affliction, is the door next to deliverance, so much does the
scope and drift of this place teach; the Church going out of the City, and
dwelling in the field, was going toward deliverance, and when she went even to
Babylon, where in outward appearance she might have lost hope, yet, there
shall she be delivered, and is nearer to a deliverance there then in the holy
City. These things, rightly studied, may take away much seeming ground of
discouragement under trouble. Doct. 3. The Lord is to be eyed as undertaker for
the performance of improbable -- like promises, which may cause all
difficulties to vanish; Therefore after that promise, There shall thou be
delivered, is subjoyned, There the Lord shall redeem thee from the hand of thine
enemies: when he undertakes, it will be easy to raise a Cyrus and make him do
it. 4. While as the Lord promises in delivering to redeem them, it teaches: 1.
That the Lord will reckon kindred with, and interest in his afflicted people,
that he may appear for them; for it was the part of the neerst in kindred to
redeem, and the word in the Original intimates so much. 2. That they having by
sin sold themselves into captivity, Isaiah 50.1. Christ, by the price to be
paid to justice for the Elect among them, should procure their deliverance
also, and of the visible Church for their sake: All temporal deliverances to
the children of God, flowing from that eternal Redemtion from sin, and as an
appendix to the new Covenant, and the visible Church getting deliverance for
the Elects sake among them. 3. That for enemies, who had captivated them, as
they had sold themselves to them for naught; so they should be actually
asserted unto liberty without any price, save only strokes to the unjust
possessors, Isa. 52 3.

Ver. 11. Now also many nations are gathered against thee, that say, Let her be
defiled, and let our eye look upon Zion.

For further confirmation of his mind concerning her afflictions, he sets
forth, in the last place, his great and holy design concerning the enterprise
of her many enemies, who in her ensuing calamity, and after her return from
captivity, and after her conversion to Christ, should be gathered against her,
as also against the Church of Christ in all ages; and first, he holds forth
what is their purpose, (to the end his purpose overturning theirs, may be seen
to be the more glorious) to wit, that they intended, and set themselves to deal
with her not as a privileged place, but that they might pollute her as a
profane place, with blood and other abominations, and take her ornaments from
her, and put her from her dignity; and that they might feed their eyes with
such a sight. Doct. 1. The true Church has the most enemies of any society;
for, many Nations are gathered. 2. It is useful for the Church to remark what
enemies intend, and what our troubles would seem to threaten, to the end that
more of God may be seen in delivering; for this end is the consideration of the
enemies design premitted to the consideration of the purpose of God: See Psalm.
124.1, 2, 3, 4. 3. As the wicked see no privilege the Church of God has, why
she may not be dealt with as other profane societies: so the greatest
bitterness the people of God have in their affliction, is, that hereby not
only they, but their privileges are trampled under foot by enemies; for, it
is the sad sight they get of enemies designs, when they hear them say, Let her
be defiled, or profaned. See Isa. 10.9, 10, 11. Lam. 2.15. 4. There are many
so wicked, as to account the Churches calamity a pleasant spectacle, and sweet
sight to feed their eyes with; for, there are who say, Let our eye took upon
Zion, which is an evidence of a desperately wicked condition.

Ver. 12. But they know not the thoughts of the LORD, neither understand they
his counsel: for he shall gather them as the sheaves into the floor.

Ver. 13. Arise and thresh O daughter of Zion: for I will make thine horn iron,
and I will make thy hoofs brass; and thou shall beat in pieces many people:
and I will consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their substance to the Lord
of the whole earth.

Follows the Lords purpose concerning this their enterprise; which is
incomprehensible and unsearchable by enemies, and quite contrary to their
intention; as minding, by their gathering together, to ripen them for vengance:
(as sheaves are gathered that they may be threshed) to the execution whereof he
encourages the Church, promising to enable them, and give them a complete
victory, which should be ascribed to him. Doct. 1. Enemies are not permitted to
run at random in their ways, but the Lord has an effectual and wise
Providence overruling in all their designs; for, in all of them he has
thoughts and Counsel, and therefore we are not to eye much their brags, but
look to him who sets bounds to them, and sits at the helm of Providence. 2.
The Lords holy purposes of good to his people, and wrath to his enemies, may be
so conveyed in deep wisdom, and so contrary to the way of carnal reason and
probability, that they will not be seen by any natural eye, nor can be
discerned by enemies themselves, who are given up to run blindfold upon their
own ruin: They know not the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand they his
counsel. See Psa. 92 6, 7. 3. In one and the same action God may have an holy
work of his Providence, and men their wicked intents and sinful courses, they
being carried on without an eye to his revealed will, which is the rule of
duty; nay, not to his providence either, but merely for their own ends; and he
making use of the same work of theirs to overreach them, and bring about his
purposes; for in this enterprise, They gather themselves for a sinful end, ver.
11. And God gathers them as sheaves for an holy purpose. See Isa. 10.5, 6, 7.
4. The Lords end in letting enemies loose upon the Church, beside her trial
from them, is to ripen and fit them for judgment; for, he shall gather them as
the sheaves unto the floor; to wit, to be trampled under foot, as their corn
was by beasts that tread it out. See Ier. 51.33. Such as the Lord abhors,
are let come in opposition to his people; and they are ripened for destruction
thereby, partly while their cup is thus filled to the brim, which in other
transgressions might be long a filling; partly, while he lets affliction out
upon his Church, that secret enemies may discover themselves, and so be brought
to the floor for threshing. 5. Christ's Church is not to look what she has in
her self for opposing these enemies that assault her, and for bringing about
the mercies intended for her; but what he will make her, and how she shall be
enabled to set against and overcome all difficulties; and in the faith thereof,
ought cheerfully to set to her duty; Arise, says he, as to one laid by dead or
discouraged, and thresh, O daughter of Zion: for I will make thy borne (to push)
iron, and thy hoof brass, to thresh as was their custom, Deuteronomy. 25.4. Upon
these terms, the weak may say, I am strong. 6. The Churches victory over her
enemies will in due time be made complete, and in due time Israel, and the
Church of God shall have their many enemies under their feet, either as ruined,
or true subjects, or tributaries; This is imported not only in that she shall
tread them with her hoofes, and heat in pieces many people, but in that their
gain shall be consecrated, or devoted, which alludeth to that of Jericho, Josh.
6.17, 19. wherein there was a complete victory given to Israel. 7. The glory of
all the victories of the Church, and of the benefits obtained thereby, ought to
be given to God only; for so much also does the consecrating of their gain and
substance (as the corn that is threshed out) to the Lord, import: that as
Jericho was offered to the Lord, and it was a sin in Achan to take ought of the
consecrated things; so it should be a sin in the Church to exalt her self, and
not the Lord only, in and by these successes. 8. The Lord only must be the
undertaker to get himself the glory of all his wonderful dealing for his
people, and make them forthcoming to his praise, and will also crush and
suppress whatsoever among his people would come betwixt him and his glorious
design: and I will consecrate their gain, is the Lord speech, though afterward
he speak of himself in the third person. 9. The Lord, by his vengeance on the
Churches enemies, will have himself manifested and known in the world; and by
his gracious dealing for his Church, and blessing her endeavors, will have
himself acknowledged through the earth, and the kingdoms of the earth to
become his; for, so much does the style, the Lord of the whole earth, teach,
that as he is so indeed, so not only by these victories shall he be known to be
so through the world, Psalm. 9.16. and 59.13. but shall at last have his
dominion acknowledged and submitted to more generally through the earth.

CHAP. V.
IN this Chapter the destruction of Jerusalem, and overturning of the kingdom
being foretold, ver. 1. The people of God are comforted with the promises of
Christ's birth under whom they should be restored, ver. 2, 3. and of his
government in relation to his peoples tranquillity, their deliverances,
increase and victory over their enemies, v. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. his purging his
Church from carnal confidences, v. 10, 11. and idolatrous courses. v. 12, 13,
14. -- that so he alone may be seen to do for them, ver. 14.15.

Ver. 1. NOw gather thy self in troops, O daughter of troops: he has laid
siege against us: they shall smite the Judge of Israel with a rod upon the cheek.

HEre is foretold the destruction of Jerusalem by the Caldeans, and the
ignominious and base usage of their Kings and Judges, 2 Kings 25.7, 18, 19, 20,
21. as a forerunner of the taking away of the Scepter from Judah, to make way
for Christ's birth, Genesis 49.10. which began to be accomplished in the Babylonish
captivity, in that none of the Tribe of Judah swayed the Kingly Scepter after
that time, all which the Prophet foretells by way of defiance given by the
Church to their roving enemies to do their utmost endeavors, according as God
by his effectual Providence should permit them to enterprise and execute, in
regard that however Jerusalem were taken, and their rulers so abused, yet they
had a King to come out of despised Bethlehem, ver. 2. Doct. 1. Christ's ordinary
harbingers and forerunners, when he is to come with mercies to his Church, are
afflictions to fit them for such manifestations; for, so is this destruction
premitted to the promise of Christ's birth and kingdom. Afflictions are Gods
means to purge out and cut off many whom he will not make partakers of those
mercies, to invite others to repentance for sin obstructing these mercies, to
endear them to his heart, and make them capable of these consolations, which in
their prosperity they would readily despise. 2. Jesus of Nazareth is the true
promised Messiah, who was to be raised to rule his people Israel, when their
Judges and Rulers were ignominiously entreated, and put down from their
Authority, who was held forth in the promise for the Churches comfort, when
this desolation began in their captivity, and actually exhibited when it was in
completeing, their Kingdom then being by the Romans reduced into the form of a
Province, Herod, an Idumean made King, the power of their Judicatories
restrained before, and in the time of his Ministry, and shortly after his
Ascension, their City, Commonwealth and Temple being utterly overthrown. So
much does this verse, compared with ver. 2. and the accomplishment in the New
Testament teach us. 3. The Church of God, rightly pondering her advantages in
him, may in him give a defiance to enemies utmost malice, seeing they can do no
hurt but what he will make up with advantage, nor can they hinder any of his
gracious purposes toward his people: So much does this manner of speech
directed to the Caldeans teach, N^w gather thy self in troops, etc. 4.
Oppression backed with authority and great power, does nothing diminish the
hainousness thereof before the Lord; for, albeit the Caldeans had ordered
armies marching and acting at the command of Authority, and they would esteem
what they subdued to be lawful conquest, Isai. 49.24. yet the Lord styles
Caldea, O daughter of troops; or, as the word signifies, bands of robbers; to
show that their great conquests were but great oppressions. 5. Whatever good
the Lord brings out of the afflictions of his Church, yet she may expect to be
distressed with them in the mean time; for, He has laid siege against us,
shall the people say, importing that all the Land should be subdued, the City
besieged, and the inhabitants thereof made to acknowledge their felt distress.
6. The contempt and injury done to Authority and Magistrates; under whom a
people may be kept from confusion, and the Church protected, is a special
ingredient in the affliction of the visible Church; for, they do resent it as a
part of the affliction, They shall smite the Judge of Israel: so also does
Jeremiah lament the stroke even of Zedekiah, Lam. 4.20. 7. As Princes and men
in Authority being wicked, do dishonor God more then others, by reason of
their greatness, and it is their eminency, which oft-times makes them so much
stand out against God: so the Lord in his righteousness makes contempt to be
their punishment, they are smitten with a rod on the check, which is a
contemptible stroke, Lam. 3.30. See Job 12.21. Psalm. 107.40.

Ver. 2. But thou Beth-lehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the
thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is, to be
ruler in Israel: whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting.

Follows the consolation of the godly, from a Promise of Christ to be the
Ruler in Israel: whose birth as man is foretold to be in Beth-lehem Ephratah
the City of David, (whose heir he was) in the Tribe of Judah, Judge. 17.7.
called Ephratah, Genesis 35.19. and 48.7. to distinguish it from another
Beth-lehem in the Tribe of Zebulun, Josh. 19.10, 15. By means whereof it is
likewise foretold, that this City though base in respect of others, should
become great and indeed famous; and lest any should look on this Ruler as only
man, and beginning to be at his incarnation; therefore it is also declared that
he is the Son of God, whose generation is eternal. Doct. 1. Christ's incarnation
and manifestation of himself, is the true Churches chief comfort in all her
troubles; for, therefore is his birth subjoyned to the desolation mentioned,
ver. 1. as the salve for that sore. 2. Mercies manifested to any place or
person, ought to be taken notice of, and marked, that they may be thankfully
acknowledged, and use made of them: Therefore is the speech directed to the
City; that they may consider the privilege, and thou Beth-lehem-Ephratah. 3.
Christ uses ordinarily to make use of, and honor most such things as are
least considerable in outward appearance; As here, he will not be born in
Jerusalem, but in Beth-lehem Ephratah, which is little among the thousands of
Judah, that is, a small City of few people, and governed by mean Rulers in
comparison of other Cities. The speech relates to the division of the people by
thousands under the government of their several Rulers, 1 Chronicles. 12.20. And
therefore, Matthew. 2.6. in stead of thousands, the Princes are named who
governed them; See 2 Cor. 1.27, 28, 29. 4. Smallest and basest things, by
enjoying of Christ, or having relation to him, do become great; Therefore
considering the event, this text is read thus, Mat. 2.6. Thou art not the beast
among the Princes of Judah; and the Hebrew text here may be read by way of
question, which includes a denial; Art thou little, etc? No verily, though thou
seem to be so; For out of thee shall come forth, etc. 5. The Lord in his
providence uses to bring about the performance of his promises in strange and
wonderful manner; As may be seen in the accomplishment of his promise, Luke
2.1. etc. Joseph and Mary dwelling in Nazareth all the time after the
Conception of Christ, and little thinking on a removal: at the period of his
birth, are charged by the Emperors Edict, to go up to Bethlehem, that so the
Word of the Lord might not fail, and that the prediction concerning the Messiah
might be fulfilled in the person of Jesus Christ. 6. Christ is Ruler and King
in his Church, he will be acknowledged to have dominion, and will perform the
duties incumbent to a faithful Ruler; He shall come forth, that is, to be Ruler
in Israel. 7. Christ in his Mediatory Office, as he is a King acting for God
the Father, so does the Lord especially allow of him, and will maintain and
desend him and his Kingdom; He shall come forth to me, says the Lord. See,
Psalm. 2, 6. 8. Christ the Mediator is not only to be considered as Man, but
that the same Christ born in Bethlehem in the fullness of time, is also true
God begotten of the Father from all eternity; and so is God and Man in one
person; for, He (that same individual person, though not according to one and
the same nature) who comes forth of Bethlehem-Ephratah, He, I say, it is whose
goings forth have been from of old, that is, from everlasting, or, the days of
eternity, as the Original has it. 9. Christ's eternal generation as God, is
superexcellent and incomprehensible; Therefore it is called goings forth, in
the plural number, to show its excellency, wherein all excellencies, and
infinitely more then we can comprehend are summed up, though I do not seclude,
but that herein both his eternal generation and eternal designation to the
Office of Mediator, may be imported.

Ver. 3. Therefore will he give them up, until the time that she which
travelleth has brought forth: then the remnant of his brethren shall return
unto the children of Israel.

The threatening and promise in the former verses are conjoyed, and the way of
bringing about this mercy is further explained, to wit, that he would give up
that Church unto her enemies hands, to be vexed as a woman in travel, till
Christ be born of that Nation, or of a Virgin among them; and then should all
his scattered brethren return unto, and be joined in one body with the Church
of Israel, which was in part accomplished when the Gentiles were ingrafted in
the Olive, and shall be yet more, when the salvation of Israel, after their
long rejection, shall be a resurrection from the dead to the world, and the
fullness of the Gentiles shall come in to Christ, and join with them. The Church
of the Jews had indeed a birth after her pain, at her deliverance from
Babylon, but that was but a forerunner of a more joyful bringing forth of
Christ the Author of her spiritual deliverance, until which time she was for
the most part under the power of strangers, and did not at all recover the
wonted dignity she enjoyed before the Captivity, and therefore she is said to
be given up until that time. Doct. 1. The Church had need of great troubles to
prepare her for Christ and his spiritual Kingdom; for, as all their troubles
will not exhaust his treasure: so it is needful by afflictions to make them
sensible of sin, to fit them for him; and it was needful to take away from the
Church of the Je^es their carnal doting upon the Ark, the Temple and their
other privlledges, that they might seek after the spiritual things of his
Kingdom; Therefore, says he, will he give them up, or reject them, until the
time, etc. 2. The great ground of confidence that the Church has for not
perishing in her troubles, is, that she is to bring forth Christ; He will give
them up until the time that she which travelleth has brought forth, wherein is
held forth, not only that their sorrows should resolve in joy, as the pain of
a woman in travel when she brings forth; but because she is to bring forth,
therefore she shall not perish, however she be given up, but her sorrows shall
have a period. This was the promise that might assure Ahaz, that the Church of
the Jews could not perish, seeing Christ was not yet born in her, Is. 7 4. and
is yet a ground of assurance that Christ's Catholic Church shall not cease in
the world, because she has Christ mystical to bring forth. 3. Christ is a true
brother and kinsman to all his people, and makes them to be brethren among
themselves; for, they are the remnant of his brethren. 4. Albeit no effects of
Christ's especial love appear toward a man, so long as he is unconverted, yet he
has a relation toward his Elect, and loves them from all eternity; for, the
remnant of his brethren, are the Elect Gentiles then unconverted, who are his
brethren in respect of his eternal love in election, and of his purpose to make
them brethren by Conversion, and so give them actual right to the privilege,
and a comfortable looking back to this purpose of good toward them, which was
in his heart from all eternity. 5. All Christ's elected brethren shall
undoubtedly be converted and brought in to him; for, he undertakes for it, that
the remnant of his brethren shall return. 6. As all the Gentiles have right
unto the Covenant and salvation, by flying in to Christ, and in him, serving
themselves heirs to the spiritual promises made to Israel, and being ingraffed
in that stock where they were; so the full fruit of Christ's incarnation is not
accomplished, till Israel also be brought in, and both they and the Gentiles be
joined in one body; for, this promise, the remnant of his brethren shall return
unto, (or, together with) the children of Israel, imports, both that the
Gentiles are brought in to the stock of the Israelitish Church, and that the
children of Israel shall be brought in; to whom and with whom the Gentiles
shall return: 7. That which is propounded as matter of comfort in a promise,
may be much mistaken and stumbled at when it is seen in performance; for, here
it is a comfortable promise to the Church of the Jews, that the remnant of his
brethren shall return to the children of Israel, and so be one sheepfold; and
yet when it began to be performed, they repined, even believers of them for a
long time: But in its full accomplishment they will look otherwise upon it.

Verse. 4. And he shall stand and feed in the strength of the LORD, in the
Majesty of the Name of the LORD his God, and they shall abide: for now shall he
be great unto the ends of the earth.

In the next place, the government of Christ, formerly hin^ed at under the name
of a Ruler, is more largely spoken to, for the comfort of the Church, and
particularly of Israel: Here it is held forth under the similitude of a
faithful shepherd, feeding his flock, wherein he shall declare such care and
stability, such invincible Power and Majesty in his Providence, doctrine and
miracles according to the tenor of the Covenant of Redemption, as his Church
shall be established, and his Name become famous, and his Kingdom increased by
the Conversion of the Gentiles throughout the earth. Doct 1. Christ is a
painful and watchful Shepherd and overseer of his Church, and souls of his
people, and will bear out in his charge; for, he shall stand, imports both
vigilance, as being always on his feet, Psalm. 121.4. and stability, that his
government shall endure for ever. 2. God will both feed his people with
wholesome food, and not suffer them to starve, and will rule and direct them in
their ways, and these two are to be conjoined by us, that if we expect his
feeding, we must submit to his Government; for, the word in the Original
imports both, he shall feed and rule. 3. Christ has alsufficiency of
endowments for discharging his duty to his flock, which shall gloriously shine
forth in the performance thereof; for, He shall feed in the strength of the
LORD, and in the Majesty of the Name of the LORD; that is, he shall have divine
Omnipotency to carry him thorough, and the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in
him bodily, shall gloriously manifest it self in drawing in, caring for, and
maintaining his flock against all opposition: See, John 10 28, 29. Psalm. 89.19.
4. Albeit Christ as God have power and glorious Majesty equally with the
Father, yet as Mediator he is also furnished for his calling, by virtue of the
Covenant of Redemption, past betwixt the Father and him concerning the
Redemption and Salvation of the Elect, wherein the Father does undertake to
furnish him with all endowments needful for his Office, and to give him
success; and he undertakes to be faithful for attaining that end, which
accordingly he performs; for, it is in the strength and Name of the LORD, who
is his God that he feeds, with whom he is in Covenant, and whose servant he is
in this work. 5. By Christ's care and Providence, his flock and people shall be
established and protected, so as they shall persevere, and be out of danger of
perishing, for. He shall feed or rule, and they shall abide. 6. Christ's care of
and for his Church, if it were well seen, would make him famous and precious,
as an ointment poured out, to invite others to come under his yoke, and it is
his prerogative to have an universal Government and Kingdom over Jews and
Gentiles throughout the earth, which he will still prosecute till he obtain all
that is in his Charter; for, He shall be great to the ends of the earth,
imports all these. See, Zech. 8.23. 7. The Conversion of souls unto Christ, and
bringing them under his yoke, tends to the setting forth of the greatness of
Christ, and the conversion of many does set out his greatness the more, who
does draw all these, does care for them, and to whose fullness they flow and
depend upon, and it should be the care of all who are converted, in their
expressions and carriage to commend and set him forth as great and
superexcellent: therefore is the enlargement of his Kingdom described from
this effect of it, He shall be great to the ends of the earth. 8. Whatever is
promised in the Word, is to faith so certain, as if it were then performed, and
ought to be looked on as coming speedily; the Lords choosing of times and
seasons for performing his promise, being no delay in a believers eyes, nor
impediment unto his faith to feed upon it as present, for this cause it is
said, now shall he be great. Gods keeping his appointed time, is great haste to
the believing man, Isa. 60.22. and the promise apprehended by faith, gives the
thing promised a present subsistence to his use and comfort.

Verse. 5. And this man shall be the peace, when the Assyrian shall come into
our land: and when he shall tread in our palaces, then shall we raise against
him seven shepherds, and eight principal men.

6. And they shall waste the land of Assyria with the sword, and the land of
Nimrod in the entrances thereof: thus shall he deliver us from the Assyrian,
when he comes into our land, and when he treads within our borders.

Follows some special fruits of Christ's governing his Church; such as peace
and means sufficient, not only to oppose the disturbers thereof (such as the
Assyrians were to Israel of old) but to offend them also, and so they shall be
delivered. However this promise spiritually considered belong to the whole
Church, and literally also, in so far as is for her good, yet it seems to have
a special relation to the Church of Israel, when they shall be converted and
restored to their land. Doct. 1. Christ is the only Author and Maintainer of
the Churches Peace; for, this man (or this one, the word implying a
demonstrating of him to others as one remarkable) shall be the peace. He
pacifies Gods anger toward us, establishes our hearts in the faith thereof,
in him only have we true peace among our selves; for luke-warmnesse breeds
divisions, and he it is that makes peace in his Churches borders, and creates
a cloud over he^. 2. The Church will not want enemies of her peace, and such as
will study to disturb it, and may seem to prevail much, at some times; for, the
Assyrians (or such enemies as the Assyrians were of old, and the Babylonians,
or the land of Nimrod, v.6.) shall come into our land, and tread in our
palaces; she must resolve to have peace with continual ba^tels. 3. The Church
has her peace secured in Christ in the midst of trouble, and, through him will
have means sufficient to oppose her enemies and maintain her peace; for, he
shall be the peace, when the Assyrian shall come; and there are seven
shepherds, and eight principal men to raise against him, or a sufficient number
of leaders ( seven being a number of perfection, and eight yet more) with
armies to oppose him. 4. It is a great blessing upon a land when the Lord
furnishes them with able men for government and rule in all exigents; for that
is Isreal's mercy to have such to employ, and they are the means of their peace
and safety: We, say they, shall raise (or call and send out) she herds and
principal men: where their Princes are called shepherds with relation to the
people as a flock. 5. The enemies of the Church, do oppose her always to their
own great disadvantage in the end: for, the Church shall not only defend
themselves, but they shall waste the land of Assyria with the sword, and the
land of Nimrod in the entrances thereof, or their borders, or with their own
swords. Babylon is here called the land of Nimrod, because he founded that
Kingdom, Genesis 10.9, 10, 11. and was a great oppressor, as his successors were.
6. The inconveniences which the Church sustains by her troubles, do not prove
so great as they may seem to be: for, however he tread in our palaces, ver. 5.
yet ver. 6. it is but treading within our land, and borders. See, 2 Cor 4. 8,
9. and 6.9. 7. As the Church is sure to be delivered from her enemies: so the
glory of all he^ enterprises and victories by them, are to be ascribed to
Christ only, whatever be the part of instruments in bringing them about:
therefore albeit they raise up shepherds, etc. ver. 5. yet ver. 6. Thus shall
he deliver us.

Ver. 7. And the remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many people, as a
dew from the LORD, as the showers upon the grass that tarrieth not for man,
nor waits for the sons of men.

The similitude of Dew made use of here, leads us to a twofold interpretation
of this passage. 1. That the Lords blessing of the rest, given by these
deliverances to the Church of Israel, shall make her to multiply and flourish
marvellously, as the dew and rain falls down in great abundance, suddenly and
unexpectedly without humane industry; and thus the similitude is used, 2 Samuel
17.12. Psalm. 110.3. 2. That the Church of Israel shall not only flourish
themselves, but be instruments of the flourishing and increase of the Church
among the Nations, as the Lord is the principal refresher and fructifier of his
Church, and therefore his operations are compared to dew and rain, Hos. 14.5.
Psalm. 72.6. So they shall be instrumentally as dew and rain to many Nations;
that is, being furnished with the Spirit from above, and with refreshing
doctrine, they shall water them therewith. as dew and rain does the ground,
and so conquer them to the Kingdom of Christ, and be instruments of their
fruitfulness and blessings to them.

Both these interpretations agree in one, to hold forth the miraculous increase
of the Church, either of Israel her self, or of the Gentiles also by her means,
as another fruit of the government of Christ over them, and may safely be taken
both in here. From the first interpretation, Learn, 1. That afflictions may
make many sad and sore breaches on a Church, before they recover out of them,
for they are now brought to the remnant of Jacob. 2. The Lord can easily when
he pleases, restore his broken people, and make them increase, as admirably
and incredibly as their decay was singular, and will so do when they return to
him: for, the remnant shall be as a dew, etc. 3. The Lords singular
dispensations toward his afflicted people, will make them admirable and
remarkable to all people, and above them; for, they shall be as dew in the
midst of many people, imports that they should be conspicuous, and exalted
above all the people about thereby: See, Deuteronomy. 33.29. 4. Rest and deliverance
from troubles is then a blessing to the Church, when it is followed with
fruitfulness and increase of the Church; for, so this promise is subjoyned to
that, ver. 5, 6. as a completing thereof. See, Act 9.31. From the second
interpretation, Learn, 1. The Church of God is a blessing to the world, if they
forsake not their own mercy; partly, in that she is a means of bringing
blessings on every place where she gets shelter and protection; and partly, in
that she is by her Ministry a means of men's conversion, begetting still more
and more to Christ, for which there is a promise here, She shall be in the
midst of many people as dew, etc. See, Isa. 19.24. 2. The greatest good that
can be done unto the world, is to be a means of their conversion, and of
bringing down spiritual blessings upon it; for, so is here implied, that the
Church shall be as dew and rain upon them, which are choicest blessings. 3. All
the spiritual felicity of a people, and the efficacy of the means bringing it
about, is of God, and from above; for, it is as the dew and showers that
tarrieth not for man, nor waits for the sons of men, that is, that depends
not on humane industry: See, 1 Cor. 3.6. 4. The means of Conversion, especially
the Word preached and accompanied with the power of the Spirit (which God has
placed in his Church,) are as dew and showers: 1. Because as dew is the presage
of a fair day, so these means do flow from the favor of God toward the Elect,
and are an evidence thereof. 2. As dew and small rain are but small things, and
yet have great effects, so is it also with the Word, Romans 1.16. 1 Cor. 1.21. 3
Dew and rain cannot be hindered by men, no more does the power of the Word
depend on men's consent. 4 Dew and rain makes fruitful, so is every true Convert
made by the Word and Spirit. Doct. 5. A converted person or people, joining
themselves to the true Church, come under a sweet yoke, and under the drop of
many blessings; for, so does the similitude also teach, that as their
conversion is by this dew; so being converted, they shall constantly enjoy
thereof, and their fleece shall be wet with his dew, when other places are dry:
6 Israel being converted to Christ shall be the means of blessings, and of much
conversion to the Lord among the Gentiles; for, it is the remnant of Jacob that
shall be in the midst of many people as dew, etc.

Verse 8. And the remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles, in the midst of
many people, as a lion among the beasts of the forest, as a young lion among
the flocks of sheep: who if he go through, b^th treads down, and teareth in
pieces, and none can deliver.

9. Thine hand shall be lift up upon thine adversaries, and all thine enemies
shall be cut off.

Another fruit of the government of Christ over Israel, and a fruit of their
deliverance, ver. 5, 6. is, that all their neighbour-enemies who are not
brought in, they shall be dreadful to them, as a Lion is to other wild beasts,
who tears his prey, and none dare interpose. This being spoken of the Church in
borrowed terms, v. 8. is again spoken to her in plain language, v. 9. for her
greater encouragement, wherein she is assured that she shall be above all her
enemies, and that they shall be so far crushed at least, as they shall not dare
to profess their enmity. Doct. 1. The Church in her most thriving times, will
not yet want enemies, nor will she be as dew, and a savor of life to all; for,
so is here imported. 2. There is as great odds betwixt the Church of God, when
he is pleased to arm her with his strength, and all her enemies, how potent
soever, as is betwixt a Lion, (^ beast not so big as many others, yet God has
imprinted some stamp of Majesty upon it) and other beasts, or weak sheep, whom
he easily and without resistance destroys; for, so much does this comparison
teach us. 3. The Lord requires that his Churches heart be settled in the
confidence of his giving her victory in due time over enemies: so much the
rather as it is hard to get it believed; for, this repetition of the promise,
ver. 9. does teach the difficulty of believing it, and his will notwithstanding
that she should be established. 4. The Church of God needs expect no less then
that in due time even all her enemies shall be cut off, and so may be assured
of complete victory, and converted Israel shall get a special proof of this
within time, in being above her adversaries: and their enmity against her
crushed: Thine hand shall be lift up upon thine adversaries, and all thine
enemies shall be cut off.

Verse 10. And it shall come to pass in that day, says the LORD, that I will
cut off thy horses out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy charets.

11. And I will cut off the cities of thy land, and throw down all thy strong
holds.

12. And I will cut off witchcrafts out of thy hand, and thou shall have no
more soothsayers.

Ver. 13. Thy graven images also will I cut off, and thy standing images out of
the midst of thee: and thou shall no more worship the work of thine hands.

Ver. 14. And I will pluck up thy groves out of the midst of thee: so will I
destroy thy cities.

15. And I will execute vengeance in anger, and fury upon the heathen, such as
they have not heard.

A further fruit of Christ's Government, in his purging his Church from these
evils whereby they were corrupted of old, showing the posture and condition
wherein he will put them, to fit them for these deliverances and victories; He
for^^els: 1. The taking away of all their humane confidences, such as horses,
chariots, cities and strong holds, wherein they confided of old, and despised
his threatenings. 2. The cutting off of devilish arts and idolatrous
confidences, such as witchcraft, divinations, idols and groves for worship,
which were much used in Israel of old, these were all to be destroyed and
purged away by judgments to come on Judah and Israel, shortly after this
prophecy; and in the time of their restitution, it is promised here that
Israel shall be a people stripped of all confidences, that they may depend on
God, and a people worshipping the true God only in a pure way: and being put in
that condition, he promises remarkable victories over the heathen their
enemies. Doct. 1. Christ will have nothing seen in his Churches protection and
deliverance but himself only, nor will he make use of any thing which might
seem to obscure his glory in doing all: therefore whatsoever might seem to
challenge any of that glory, must in that day be cut off: See, Judge. 7.2. Zeph.
3.12, 13. 2. Humane helps confided in, prove a great hinderance of deliverance:
therefore Cities, Horses, etc. will he cut off, not only by judgments to come
on that people, but even in that day of restitution, they will be laid by as
impediments. 3. Confidence in outward things is idolatry: Therefore, here their
cities, horses, chariots, (to wit, as they are depended on) are ranked in with
witchcrafts and idols. 4. It is rare to see a people enjoying outward things
that may seem to promise any thing unto them, and yet not confide in them; this
is evident in that their cities, chariots, etc: must be cut off: they can
hardly enjoy them and acknowledge God as becomes them. 5. When the Lord is
pleased to deprive his people of probable means of help, and calls them to
depend on him, it is a pledge of his appearing in an eminent way for them: for,
their cities, etc. being cut off, ver. 10, 11. so will he destroy their
enemies, as the latter part of ver. 14. ought to be read, as agreeing with the
Original also, and fitting the scope best in this place. 6. In the Church of
God there is hazard of falling into grossest evils: for, here it is supposed
there may be witchcraft or magi^k whereby men, wanting the fear of God, enter
into one express or implicit league with the devil, for attaining such ends
as their coffeehouse in their condition, impatience under affliction, envy,
malice, or curiosity propound unto them, there may be soothsayers, or,
divinations, whereby men not con^ent to know their duty, nor with what God has
revealed of future events, do take sinful and damnable courses, and put other
things in Gods room to foretell what they desire: there may be also images, and
the work of men's hands set up in Gods room, as the object of worship, and
groves or shadie places, where they pretended to worship God, or indeed worship
their idols after their own imaginations. There are no evil courses but the
Church of God, how reformed soever, is to be afraid of falling into them. 7.
These devilish courses, and corruptions in worship do hinder the Lords
appearance for his people: for, these must be cut off, that he may do for them.
8. The cutting off of idolatry and wicked courses is a work of the Lords own
hand: it is he who oft-times destroys them by sore plagues: and it is he only
who can banish these things out of men's hearts: I, says the Lord, will cut off
witchcrafts out of thy hand: or make thee not to practice it, I will cut off
thy graven images, etc. 9. There can be no blessed delivery from trouble but
when there is a complete and thorough reformation of Religion endeavored, and
a destroying of the very monuments of idolatry: for, not only shall they not
worship any more the work of their hands, but their images and groves shall be
cut off and plucked up, and so will he destroy their enemies. 10. The Lord will
appear for his Church in a singular, and wonderful manner, and plague their
enemies with unuseful judgments, after that he is reconciled with them, and
has brought them to walk in his ways; for, after all this is done, I will
execute vengeance in anger and fury upon the heathen, such as they have not
heard, says the Lord.

CHAP. VI.
IN this Chapter the Lord again after these many promises, stirs up the Prophet
to plead his controversy, and expostulates with his ungrateful people, v. 1,
2, 3. showing forth his kindness toward them, v. 4, 5. and what duty they
offered to him, v. 6, 7. with what they ought to have done, v. 8. which seeing
they did not obey, therefore he gives an alarm of the rods coming upon them, v.
9. then he more particularly sets forth and proves their several transgressions
of their duty, in sins against the second Table, v. 10, 11, 12. for which he
gives out sentence against them, v. 13, 14, 15. and for their idolatry against
the first Table, v. 16.

Verse. 1. HEar ye now what the LORD says, Arise, contend thou before the
mountains, and let the hills hear thy voice.

2. Hear ye, O mountains, the LORDS controversy, and the strong foundations
of the earth: for the LORD has a controversy with his people, and will plead
with Israel.

The Prophet propounds in general the Lords controversy, given him in
commission to plead publicly, as it were in view of all the creatures, from
the high mountains to the low channels or foundations of the earth, this way
of procedure formerly used, chap. 1. v. 2. does yet further teach us: 1. That
sin causes a controversy betwixt God and the sinner; for, the Lord has a
controversy. 2. The controversy is so much the sadder as it not breaks out
betwixt God and strangers, but betwixt him and his Church with whom he dealt
friendly, and who professed friendship and subjection to him, and therefore he
can endure their offenses the worse; The Lord has a controversy with his
people, and he will plead with Israel. 3. The Lord is zealous to have the
controversy discussed and himself cleared; Arise (says he, the Prophets zeal
coming short of his forwardness to plead this cause) contend thou, etc. and he
will plead with Israel, that is, not only will he have his quarrel showed, but
will have it clearly demonstrated, that he gave no occasion of the discord, and
therefore will justly punish, as the following purpose cleares. 4. Even
insensible creatures are, so to say, more fit to be spoken to then an obdurate
people, and will bear witness against them; for, therefore (beside other
reasons insinuate on chap. 1, 2. are the mountains and strong foundations of
the earth called to in this process; they keep still their obediential
subjection to their Creator, and do tremble if he threaten, whereas Israel was
stupid; and withal, these had sometime been shaken and discovered for the good
of Israel, Psalm. 18.15. and 114.3, 4. and therefore might bear witness
against their ingratitude. 5. A backsliding people are for the most part dull
of hearing, and plagued with obstinacy, and cannot be sensible of their case
and danger; therefore is the dispute repeated again, and they called to hear,
Hear ye now what the Lard says. 6. Messengers of God their reproofs are not to
be slighted, but taken notice of as the Lords controversy; for, Micah by
contending, is to cause the Lords controversy to be heard.

Verse. 3. O my people what have I done unto thee, and wherein have I wearied
thee? testify against me.

Follows the pleading of the controversy, wherein God first appears, and
challenges them for their ungrateful departing from him and his obedience,
which he proves by purging himself of, any wrong done to them, showing that
they had nothing to say against his dispensation toward them, and nothing to
lay to his charge wherefore they should have forsaken him, charging their
consciences, that as he had called the mountains to witness against them; so
they would declare, if they had any injury on his part to complain of, and
would bring out any thing they had to say, to clear themselves of that crime of
ingratitude. Dect. 1. It is the Lords love to his people that makes him
challenge them for forsaking him, and this should make the challenge affect
their hearts, and will aggravate their guilt if it do not. So much does this
style, O my people, prefixed to the challenge, teach us. 2. The Church of God
by her backsliding, does raise an evil report on God, as if he dealt not well
with his people, and as if he were not easy to serve, for his enquiring, what
have I done unto thee? wherein have I wearied thee? imports that their
backsliding said in effect, he had done them injury, and wearied them with
rigorous service. 3. However our corruptions do snuff and weary in Gods
service, as Mal. 1.13. yet there can be no true cause showed why any should
choose to forsake God, but rather should cleave unto him, seeing his commands
are not grievous, his yoke easy, trials sent by him not above measure,
punishments not above deserving, and a Mediator ready to undertake for his
people in all exigents. Therefore the Lord will have it disputed, and will have
the consciences of backsliders to clear him: wherein have I wearied thee?
testify against me: See, Jer. 2.5, 3. 4. To forsake the Lord without cause,
and when men have nothing to lay to his charge, wherefore they do it, is great
ingratitude; for, this is the scope of the challenge, that fince they could lay
nothing to his charge, and yet turned away from him, they could not shun the
crime of ingratitude.

Verse. 4. For I brought thee up out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed thee out
of the house of servants, and I sent before thee Moses, Aaron and Miriam.

A further proof of his challenge for their ingratitude, is taken from his
mercies toward them, whereby he further vindicates himself, and proves that
they were so far from having any harsh usage to lay to his charge, wherefore
they did forsake him: that on the contrary, he had manifested many rare and
singular favors toward them, which did aggravate their fault: This proof he
cleares from several instances. The first instance is, his redeeming them from
Egypt, and that when Egypt dealt most hardly with them, and had made them
bondmen, although the Egyptians themselves ought rather to have been slaves,
as coming of cursed Cham, Genesis 9.25. A second instance is taken from his
conducting them through the wilderness, giving unto them a well-setled
government and faithful Governors, such as Moses in the State, to give laws
from Gods mouth, and to conduct the people, Aaron to be Priest, and Meriam
their sister to instruct the women in that extraordinary time, Exodus 15.20.
Doct. 1. Mercies received do contribute much to aggravate the defection of a
people, so much does this instancing of mercies in a time of defection teach.
See, 1 Samuel 15.17, etc. 2. Our delivery from bondage spiritual or temporal,
inward or outward, that we may serve the Lord, ought to be an eternal bond upon
the delivered to be for God: therefore, their bringing out of the land of Egypt
(a shadow of spiritual deliverance by Jesus Christ) wherein God had manifested
himself gloriously, is brought to remembrance, though past and done long ago,
as yet obliging, if it were well considered: I brought them up out of the land
of Egypt, etc. 3. The Lords conducting and guiding of his people in this world,
under a sweet and orderly government, and honest governors in Church and
State, working to others hands for advancing Gods honor and the good of a
people, is a singular and obliging mercy, though the people enjoying it were
otherwise in a wilderness; for, it aggravates their ingratitude, that he sent
before them Moses, (who received Gods mind in Laws, to them, Psalm. 103.7. who
was singularly meek, Numb. 12.3. and vehement in his affection to that people,
Exodus 32.31, etc. Numb. 14.13.) Aaron who was the Saint of the Lord, Psalm.
106.16. and Miriam, though a weak woman, and extraordinarily employed, and not
to be imitated in ordinary, yet the sense of the mercy should not have died
with her.

Verse 5. O my people, remember now what Balak King of Moab consulted, and what
Balaam the son of B^^r answered him from Shittim unto Gilgal, that ye may know
the righteousness of the LORD.

A third instance of mercy is taken from a particular passage of his goodness
in the wilderness, turning Balaks intended curse into a blessing, and causing
Balaam against his own inclination to bless the people, and publish Gods good
will toward them. See, Numb. 22.5. and 23.7. and 24.1, 14. Deuteronomy. 23.4, 5. This
instance is yet further enlarged, that when Balaam had counseled Balak to
tempt Israel to whoredom and idolatry at Shittim, that so God might turn their
party, Rev. 2.14. Number. 25.1. yet the Lord spared them, and justly brought
Balaam to a violent death, Josh. 13.22. Numb. 31.8. He gave them victories over
Og and Sihon, Numb. 21. he brought them unto the promised land, and in Gilgal
renewed the Covenant by circumcision and the Passover, Josh. 3.1. and 5.2,
etc. By all which they might be sufficiently convinced of his fidelity in
keeping promise in every thing. Doct. 1. Forgetfulness of mercies is the cause
why they take so little effect, and produce so small fruit. Therefore he calls
them to remember now. 2. The Lord in assuring his people that he takes pleasure
in their prosperity, is pleased so far to condescend to our capacity, as to
express himself as one whose heart warmed at the remembrance of wonted
familiarity, and consequently would be content to have it renewed, therefore
upon rehearsal of this benefit, he repeats again, O my people; as if his
affection were kindled and revived by the rehearsal; See, Jer. 2.2. much more
should it so work upon us. 3. As the Lord has the power of cursing and
blessing in his own hand, however men be disposed, so does he turn intended
curses against his people into blessings, he can when he will protect them
against the fraud as well as the violence of enemies, yea, and make their very
enemies befriend them; for, so much does that history of Balaam and Balak here
pointed at teach us. 4. The Lords sparing mercies, his goodness striving with
his peoples wickedness, and his keeping and renewing of a Covenant when their
sins deserve that it should he broken, and his just judgments upon their
violent and fraudulent enemies, ought to convince and engage his peoples hearts
much to him; therefore ought they to remember for their conviction, what had
past from Shittim to Gilgal. 5. There are standing monuments and experiences in
the Church, which may abundantly satisfy them of the Lords truth, mercy and
steadfastness in good will toward them, for their encouragement in walking in
his way, and against every tentation they meet with therein, and for their
conviction and clearing of the Lord, when it is otherwise; for, all these
passages are rehearsed, that ye may know the righteousness of the Lord, or the
manifold proofs of his fidelity in keeping promise.

Verse 6. Wherewith shall I come before the LORD, and bow my self before the
high God? shall I come before him, with burnt-offerings, with calves of a year
old?

7. Will the LORD be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of
rivers of oil? shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of
my body for the sin of my soul?

Having proved their ingratitude, the next fault challenged; is their
hypocritical formality; and therefore the Lord having cleared himself, and
showed what he had done, in the next place, the people are brought in for their
part making great offers of service and duty to God, wherein they manifest nor
only their formality and affected ignorance, but their malicious hypocrisy
also; for, whereas the Prophet spoke sharply against them, they are brought in
complaining that they were most willing to appease Gods anger, and ready to
offer him all kind of service, (yea, even what seems impossible, and is
unlawful) if it would please him, and yet he would never be pleased, but his
Prophets still cry out against them. Whence learn, 1. The right way of
worshipping God, and of appeasing his anger, has been an old controversy, and
the truth thereof lighted on by few how clearly soever it be revealed:
Wherewith shall I come before the LORD? (or prevent the face of the LORD, or,
the breaking forth of his anger?) say they, as yet to learn. 2. Whatever
convictions of sin men may attain to, or whatever necessity they may see of
being brought back to God by these conviction; (both which may be supposed here
in heir profession:) yet corrupt men do heal these wounds slightly, placing all
their confidence in external performance of ceremonies or religious duties, and
neither fleeing to Christ, nor regarding the substantial duties of faith,
repentance and new obediences for, shall I come before him with burnt
offerings, etc? is all they mind. 3. Men may have fair and broad professions,
and pretend much reverence to God, whose deeds do prove but stark naught; for,
they pretend to how before the high God, and yet give him no more but a
ceremony. 4. Corrupt and unrenewed men had rather be at any pains, yea, even
what is unpossible and sinfully cruel, then follow Gods way, in fleeing to
Christ quitting their own rightcousnesse, and studying mortification of sin;
for, so are we taught by their offer of thousands of rams, and ten thousands
of rivers of oil (which could not be had in all the world) and their offer of
their firstborn to be slain in sacrifices for sin, as Jdolaters do, and all
this rather then the killing of one lust. 5. External performances of religion
prove oft-times a great snare to wicked men who use them, and a great
obstruction to the Ministry of the Word reproving sin; for, this was their
defense cast in the Prophets teeth, that they were very observant of the
Ceremonial Law, and were ready to do more of that kind, and therefore how
could God be angry at them?

Ver. 8. He has showed thee, Oman, what is good, and what does the LORD
require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy God.

In opposition to their way, the Lord sets down the true way of pleasing him,
and of their duty, containing the duties of justice and mercy whereunto they
stood obliged each to other, and which hypocrites ordinarily neglect, and their
duty of keeping communion with God in humble and sober walking before him in
the exercise of Religion, and all these as a fruit of faith, fleeing to God
through Christ in the Covenant, whereby he becomes ours. Doct. 1. However men
be ignorant, or contentious, yet the way of pleasing God is clearly revealed in
his Word; for, in answer to their question he replies, He has showed thee, O
man. 2. The Lords commands, (albeit they be the Lords injunctions to man, yet)
are not rigid, or severe and unreasonable, as hypocrites would allege, but
gentle and desirable; so is implied in that speech, What does the Lord require
of thee, but to do justly, etc? and in that they are called good. 3. The Lord
requires, especially of men professing Piety, that they make conscience of
justice and equity in their dealing each with other, that so they may prove the
sincerity of their profession, and may adorn it; for, the Lord requires to do
justly. 4. Besides the duties which we owe to our neighbors in justice, there
are other duties which we are also bound to perform in humanity, or by the bond
of Christianity and charity; These are here called mercy, which though no
humane law can reach us, if we omit them, yet the Lord requires them, and
conscience and Christianity does call for them. 5. Though love be required in
performing every commanded duty, yet for performance of mercy, it is especially
requisite, as that which binds the duty upon us, and which must season the
duty when it is a doing: The Lord requires to love mercy. 6. No duties can ever
be acceptably performed by an unrenewed person, or one who has not by faith
fled to God in the Covenant to be reconciled with him through Christ, that so
his duties may be performed as fruits of says, proving the sincerity thereof,
and strength may come from God daily enabling him thereunto; Therefore also
here God must be theirs by Covenant thy God. 7. A man reconciled to God by
faith, ought not only to study to perform duties of the second Table, but to
join therewith a study of keeping communion with God in the exercises of true
piety, by both which conjoined and flowing from faith, he may prove himself to
be somewhat more then either a moral civilian or an hypocrite attaines to, and
also that he may not provoke God to punish his neglect of keeping communion
with him by suffering him to fall into some sin against the second Table:
Therefore also is required to walk with thy God. 8. In relation to God,
humility and sobriety is required in the performance of duties either of the
first or second Table; there is no conceit of righteousness or merit to be
allowed in what we do, but when we have done all, we are to come humbly to
find grace by virtue of a free Covenant we are to debase our selves when we
are before God in religious worship; we are in all sobriety and humility to
receive commands, take on imploiments, and go about them with an humble
dependence on him for constant supply of furniture: Walk humbly with thy God.
9. The people of God are to study constancy in their way, and especially in
humility, and for this end the bond of communion with God, and interest in him
is to be kept fast, and daily made use of; Walk humbly with God.

Ver. 9. The LORDS voice cries unto the city, and the man of wisdom shall see
thy Name: hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it.

This verse contains a general sentente given out against his people, and a
Preface to the following special accusations and sentences. The sum is, that
since they made no conscience of this their duty, though clearly revealed, v.
8. therefore the Lord by his Prophets gives warning of another reacher to be
sent unto them, to wit, his rods and judgments, which they are commanded to
hear, since they will not hear his servants, and to consider the author of
them, that they may be affected therewith; and withal he declares that only
the true fearers of God, who are indeed the wise ones, will take notice of God
manifesting himself either in the admonition, or in the rod. Doct. 1. Slighting
of clearly revealed and commanded duties, will bring a rod upon a person or
people; for, so does the scope import. 2. The Lord does not steal a judgment
upon his people, but in great mercy forewarnes them of their danger, if they
would make use of it; The Lords voice cries, to give the alarm. 3. The
testimonies of the Lords servants against sin, and their warnings of wrath to
come in their public Ministry, is the Lords own warningpeece to the
rebellious; for, so is the Lords voice to be understood of his voice in the
mouth of his servants. 4. As Cities and eminent places have greatest occasions
and incouragments to serve God, so when they come short, their guilt is great,
and they share deepest in the cup of afflictions; therefore the Lords voice
cries unto the City, that is, to Jerusalem, Samaria and other cities of the
land, in which, as the Prophets preached most, so when the rod comes, they are
alarmed especially, as those on whom it will light most sadly. 5. We ought to
be sensible of afflictions sent upon us, as Gods Messengers sent with a Message
to us, and the Lord will cause the most stubborn to feel his hand in them; for,
this Hear the rod, is not only an exhortation to take the alarm, and be
sensible of the rod when it comes; but a prediction, that though they would not
hear the Prophets, yet they should both hear and feel this Messenger. See,
Jer. 1.15, 16.6. We ought not only to be sensible of the smart of the rod when
it comes, but chiefly to look to the hand of God in it, and to what he would
teach by it; Hear the rod, and who has appointed it. 7. It is an evidence of
the fear of God to take warning of a rods coming, or to get Gods mind in the
rod seen, and to be affected with it and obey it, and only fearers of God get
this use of it; The man of wisdom shall see thy Name, that is, take up thy
authority in these warnings from the Word, and discern what thou manifestest of
thy mind by the rod. 8. They only are wise indeed, who fear God, and who
learn to make use of his Word and Providence toward them; for, he who fears
God is called, the man of wisdom, or substantial wisdom, that has a being,
as the word signifies, all other wisdom being but empty and vain.

Ver. 10. Are there yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the
wicked, and the scant measure that is abominable?

11. Shall I count them pure with the wicked balances, and with the bag of
deceitful weights?

12. For the rich men thereof are full of violence, and the inhabitants thereof
have spoken lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their mouth.

To help them to understand his mind in the rod, the Lord enters upon a more
special accusation of them for the sins procuring the same; here he sets
before them their violation of justice and mercy, and charges upon them that by
wicked means they had gathered great treasure, which proved them to be wicked
who did thus enrich themselves. The means whereby they made this purchase, (or
at least endeavored it) and for which they are challenged, are, 1. Scant
measures, or lean in themselves, and starving the buyers. 2. Inexcusable deceit
in the matter of weights, and balances, bringing in more gain to them then was
right. 3. Cruel violence used toward the poor. 4. Fraud and circumventing of
one another, which was universal among them. All these accusations the Lord
refers to themselves to bear witness of the truth of them, and poseth
their own conscience, if notwithstanding their professions by external
sacrificing, the Lord could in justice acquit them, and not rather abhor, and
condemn and plague them. Doct. 1. The Lord abhoreth those sins especially which
are committed after many admonitions, and by such as profess much piety: Are
there treasures of wickedness etc? says he and that after so many admonitions
and threatenings of the rod, and notwithstanding your great Profession. 2. It
is a great sign of unsoundnesse, when such as are eminent in practicing
external duties of the first table, can without scruple commit wickedness
against the second; for, says he, Are there yet (after the great offers of
sacrifices, is there yet so much unrenewednesse as to gather up) treasures of
wickedness? 3. Excessive love unto, and desire after riches driving men to use
unlawful means of purchase, is a sure mark of wickedness, let the purchaser
pretend to what he will, and of Gods displeasure, however in his Providence he
may permit such to prosper; for, they are treasures of wickedness in the
houses of the wicked, and for this the Lord challenges. 4. Deceitfulness in
weights, balances and measures is a sinful means of purchasing riches, and a
clear instance of injustice, which is abominable in the sight of God; for, so
much do the words hold forth. 5. Even our selves seriously considering our
case, may not only see the truth of what the Word challenges, but may easily
judge, that God will not pass by approved gross guiltiness, nor justify the
doers thereof, whatever mask of profession they cover it withal; therefore the
Lord appeals to themselves, both for the truth of the fact, Are there yet
treasures, etc? and for the demerit of it, shall I count them pure with the
wicked balances, etc? or, purify, and declare them just? 6. Men ought not to
dally and sooth up themselves in a dream of Gods approbation of them in their
sinful ways; Therefore he puts them to it, to judge righteous judgment in
this particular, shall I count them pune etc? 7. However men study to blind or
put to silence their own consciences, that so they may sin without molestation;
yet in the day of Gods controversy it will be men's sorest adversary, and
plead Gods quarrel most thoroughly. Therefore he leaves this challenge at the
door of their own conscience, as that which in due time would speak out an
answer to that question, shall I count them pure? 8. It is a great sign of
wickedness in any person to employ the power God has given them above others,
to wicked ends; for the rich men thereof (that is of the City, ver. 9. or of
the land) are full of violence; Because they are rich, therefore they are
violent and bear it out. 9. Violent oppression and deceitful circumvention
are equivalent sins in Gods estimation, as tending both to one end, to gather
riches with wronging of others; and flowing from the same fountain, being only
fitted for diverse times, and according to the diverse conditions of the
wicked; for, if they be powerful they are violent; and if not, they supply
that defect by deceit; Therefore is it joined with the other, the inhabitants
thereof (or, all ranks almost of the land) have spaken lies, and their tongue
is deceitful in their mouths, that is, as often as they speak they bring out
fraud and deceit.

Ver. 13. Therefore also will I make thee sick in smiting thee, in making thee
desolate because of thy sins.

Lest by sparing these hypocrites, they might think he was such a one as
themselves, therefore he gives out sentence, and threatens them explaining what
the rod was, whereof he gave them warning; He threatens that by striking and
making them desolate, he will make them sick, that is, not so much send bodily
sickness (which is a particular judgment of it self, Lev. 26.16.) with their
desolation; as generally, that as they by oppression made others faint, so he
would crush them by judgments, and make them as weak as a sick man. Doct. 1.
Sin will lay a land desolate, and leave a people helpless and friendlesse, and
without comfort against crosses; so much do the words hold forth. 2. Sin is
most of all to be looked unto in our desolations and afflictions; as having a
greater hand therein then the power of enemies; Therefore does he mention only
sin as the cause of desolation, -- because of thy sins. 3. Judgments for sin
will not only affect the afflicted man, but be ready to make him faint and
succumb; for, says he, I will make thee sick in smiting thee. They whose
hearts are effeminate with love to sin, Ezekiel. 16.30. will prove feeble in
bearing the punishment of sin, Ezekiel. 22.14.

Ver. 14. Thou shall eat, but not be satisfied, and thy casting down shall be
in the midst of thee: and thou shale take hold, but shall not deliver: and that
which thou deliverest, will I give up to the sword.

15. Thou shall sow, but thou shall not reap; thou shall trend the olives, but
thou shall not anoint thee with oil, and sweet wine, but shall not drink wine.

Follows a particular enumeration of these judgments whereby he would make
them sick and desolate; The first stroke is famine, flowing not from scarcity
of provision, but from the Lords withdrawing of a Blessing, Lev 26.26. Hos.
4.10, Whence learn. 1. Threatenings giving out of old against sin, stand in
force against the same sins in all generations; for the threatenings of the Law
of Moses are declared to be in force in Michas days. 2. God has so immediate
an hand in feeding men by the creatures, that when he withdraws his blessing,
the creatures, though given in never so great abundance, will not feed; for,
thou shall eat, and not be satisfied. 3. It is just with God to let such as
provoke him in gathering together outward things, know how far they wrong
themselves, while they do it on the creature, forgetting the Creator; Therefore
against such as provoked him by gathering of wealth, he threatens that all of
it should not so much as keep them from starving. The second stroke is, their
casting down to be in the midst of them; that is, they shall be exhausted in
their own land, and with intestine evils, although they were secure of foreign
enemies, or of captivity by them; Teaching, that as instine troubles are a fore
judgment and sharp punishment for sin: so the Lord can reach a person or
people in the midst of all their contentments, and can abase them as low by his
secret curse, as by any outward enemy; thy casting down shall be in the midst
of thee. The third stroke is, that there shall be no possibility of exemption
from his plagues, when they shall essay all means to preserve what is precious
to them, as wives, children, treasures, etc, it shall be to no purpose; for
what escapes at one time, shall be cut off at another. Whence learn, 1. Humane
endeavors will not exempt men from divine judgments pursuing them for sin,
thou shall take hold, to wit, that thou may hold fast, or pull out of
danger, but shall not deliver. 2. When wicked and impenitent sinners are
preserved from one stroke, it is only that they may be reserved for a greater;
for, what thou deliverest will I give up to the sword. The fourth stroke
threatened is, their being deprived of laboured-for comforts, the land being
given as a prey to their enemies, who should devour their provision, as they
had bereft others of the fruit of their labors, so should the enemy, or other
instruments of Gods wrath deal with them, they should not reap (much less eat)
of what they had sowed, they should not as in times of joy anoint themselves
with the oil they had trodden out, nor drink of their own wine. See the like
threatenings, Deuteronomy. 28.38, 39, 40. Amos. 5.11. Zeph. 11, 13. and the contrary
promises, Isay. 62.8, 9. Amos 9.13, 14. Doct. 1. Sin provokes the Lord
(however he be long-suffering and slow to execute) to make man's endeavors for
his own subsistence to be vain, whereof he will give proof when the cup of
iniquity is full: Thou shall sow, but thou shall not reap, etc. 2. The Lord
does so in deep wisdom contrive the way of his judgments, as they may give
the sorest dash to the wicked, and may repay their sin; Therefore as they by
oppression and deceit. reaped where they sowed not: so now he will make them
sow, and not reap; yea, he lets them sow, and tread the olives and sweet
wine, that having employed their pains, and being filled with expectation,
their disappointment may be the greater.

Verse. 16. For the statutes of Omri are kept, and all the works of the house of
Ahab; and ye walk in their counsels, that I should make thee a desolation, and
the inhabitants thereof an hissing: therefore ye shall bear the reproach of my
people.

Here we have another cause of Gods rod, and a further accusation for their
idolatry, which being set up by Omri and Ahab his son, (who beside the golden
calves worshipped Baal, 1 Kings 16.25, 30, 31, 32.) was followed by the people
of Israel, and by Judah also, by reason of the affinity that was betwixt the
two Kings at that time, 2 Kings 8.18. for which sin, whatever pretenses they
held out, the Lord threatens them yet further with extreme desolation. Doct. 1.
Idolatry and corruption of true Religion and the worship of God is the great
cause of Gods controversy with his visible Church: for the statutes of Omri
are beot. 2. The Authors and Promoters of idolatry in the visible Church, are
marked and observed by the Lord; as Omri and Ahab are. 3. No injunctions of
rulers, nor concurrence of public authority can make idolatry lawful, nor
justify those who walk in such ways, being enjoined; for, it is a
controversy, the statutes of Omri are kept, and all the works of the house of
Ahab. 4. No example of multitudes nor shows of prudence, can justify
idolatry, or perverting of truth; The works of the house of Ahab are kept, and
ye (both Judah and Israel) walk in their counsels. They thought it a prudential
way, by conformity with the heathen to keep peace with them, and be free of the
scorn of the wise of the world, because of a singular Religion; but all this
excuses not. 5. Whatever outward advantage men expect by corrupting of
Religion, yet the nature of their work tends to a contrary end, and does draw
on all those evils, which they by sinning study to decline; for, whatever
pretenses they had, yet, ye walk, says he, in their counsels, that I should
make thee a desolation, and the inhabitants thereof an hissing, it exposed them
both to spoil and reproach which they sought to shun. 6 Idolatry is a
land-destroying sin, and makes a people extremely desolate and contemptible, so
much also does this threatening teach, wherein there are sadder things
threatened then for their sins against the second Table: I will make thee a
desolation, and the inhabitants an hissing, etc. 7. As the Lords people have
their peculiar privileges, so also their peculiar reproach, or punishment
proportionable to their profaning of that great privilege of his people, Ezekiel.
36.20, 23. and that because sin in them, who boast themselves to be the people
of God, is singularly great; Therefore, says he, ye shall bear the reproach of
my people.

CHAP. VII.
IN this Chapter Micab in name of all the godly laments the paucity of good
men, and the universal corruption of all ranks (as a presage of approaching
ruin,) verse 1, 2, 3, 4. And that no relations could tie men to saithfulness,
v. 5, 6. yet comsorting himself and the godly in God, v. 7. by the expectation
and hope of a satisfactory deliverance, v. 8, 9, 10. by Gods promise of
restoring them after some trouble, v. 11, 12, 13. by his promise to hear the
prayers of the godly in behalf of the Church, v. 14, 15. and that to the
astonishment of all her enemies, v. 16, 17. he concludes all with exalting of
the infinite mercy, bounty and fidelity of God, v. 18, 19, 20.

Verse 1. WOE is me, for I am as when they have gathered the summer-fruits, as
the grape-gleanings of the vintage: there is no cluster to eat: my soul desired
the first ripe fruit.

The Prophet laments the paucity of godly men, who being as earnestly desired
by him as a traveller would desire fruits by the way, and as precious in his
eyes as the first ripe fruits are to men, Isa. 28.4. Hosea 9 10. yet they were
as rare to be had as fruits are after the gatherings of the vintage, there
being only some few gleanings lew, (as Isa. 17.6.) to bemoan with him this
decay, and in whose name he now laments. Doct. 1. The truly godly are very
precious and useful in the visible Church, as being not only restreshful to
other godly men, but instruments and means of bringing down blessings, by
dealing with God in prayer by standing in the breach, etc. Therefore, says he,
my soul desired the first ripe fruit, so precious were they in his eye. 2. The
truly godly maybe reduced to a very small number in the visible Church, many
who appeared to be such, making defection, and many of these who are indeed
such, being taken away by death I am as when they have gathered the
summer-fruits, as the grape-gleanings of the vintage, says he. 3. The want and
decay of godly men is much to be lamented by the visible Church, and such are
left behind, especially by faithful Ministers; Woe is me, and my soul desired
the first ripe fruit, says he: for, not only is it sae to z^alous Ministers
when they see not the fruit of their labors, but in such a time all the godly
are deprived of sweet fellowship, and are by this decay forewarned of
judgments to come. See, Psalm. 12.1. Isa. 57.1.

Verse 2. The good man is perished ont of the earth, and there is none upright
among men: they all lie in wait for blood: they hunt every man hi^ brother with
anet.

He explains in proper terms what was figuratively for down in the former
verse, to wit, that in stead of justice and humaniry amongst men, cruelty and
craft abounded. Doct. 1. Corruption once beginning among a people, will soon
become universal, if the Lord prevent not: Sins of a time are such as few have
zeal to oppose, or guard against: The good man perishes, they all lie in wait,
every man hunts his brother, says he 2. Those only are truly merciful to
others, who have themselves obtained mercy of the Lord, and from the sense
thereof are tender toward others: for the word rendered the good man, signifies
such a one as is, so to say, mercified, or made up of mercy from God, and is
actively merciful to others. 3. When mercifulness departs from among men, then
also uprightness, or doing what justice or strict obligation requires, will
not stay; the Lord plaguing the casting off of the one, with the removal of the
other; therefore are these linked together, the good man is perished, and there
is none upright. 4. The defection of members of the visible Church is
ordinarily plagued of God by giving them up to be most grossly wicked; for,
they all lie in wait for blood, to oppress or murder, they hunt every man,
even his brother with a net. They are most intent and subtle in undermining
and oppressions, and seek to entrap their nearest friends, as hunters do pursue
wild beasts, and fowlers birds.

Verse 3. That they may do evil with both hands earnestly: the Prince asks,
and the Judge asks for a reward: and the great man, he utters his
mischievous desire; so they wrap it up.

For further confirmation of this universal defection, he instanceth it in
several ranks: The first instance is in the person of great ones, who being
bent on evil, such of them as are in authority, as Princes of the blood, and
delegate Judges do avow bribery; and they whose requests are commands; do ask
for gifts, and expose justice to sale: and so, such others in the land as are
great and can give money, fear not to communicate counsels with the Judge, to
defraud and oppress the poor; and the Judge and the rich man conspire to
perfect what they have agreed upon. Doct. 1. Great men are ordinarily first and
most eminent in public and general defections; therefore they are here first
spoken to. 2. The Lord especially marketh and abhors men's eager disposition
to do evil; whereas he is tender toward such as through tentation and infirmity
do slip; for, says he, that they may do evil with both hands earnestly, the
Prince asks, etc. 3. Albeit it be a sin in Judges to receive bribes never so
privately, yet it does much aggravate the sin if it be publicly avowed: the
Prince asks, and the Judge asks for a reward. 4. Sins are most dangerous,
when they appear veiled under the name of virtue, or committed under the
specious pretense of equity; for, so was it in this time of defection, Bribery
went under the name of reward, or retribution for their service and favor
showed. 5. It is a great iniquity when men in authority do not bear down wicked
great men, but they have encouragement to do wrong, and may get their will
accomplished with Judges, by reason of their greatness and wealth; for, so is
complained of in this time of defection, the great man he utters his
mischievous device, he dares utter it to the Judge for concurrence, and gets it
put in execution on the poor. 6. It is an usual sin also, in declining times
for great men so to play to others hands, as to strengthen themselves and one
another in evil courses; for so was it in this time: so they wrap, or, twist it
up: a similitude taken from cords twisted together to make them strong,
signifying the conspiracy of the Judge and great man, that the one may get his
bribe, and the other may make his prey of the poor.

Verse. 4. The best of them is as a briar: the most upright is sharper then a
thorn-bedge: the day of thy watchmen, and thy visitation comes; now shall be
their perplexity.

A second instance of this defection, is in the persons of such, especially
great ones, as seemed to be better then others: the best and most straight of
which were both hurtful and catching, as thorns are: unto this he subjoynes a
threatening, showing that it portended the near approaching of the judgments
foretold by the Prophets, wherein as they had formerly entangled others with
their thorny griping covetousness, and strengthened themselves as twisted
cords in their wicked ways; so now themselves should be so perplexed as they
should not know whither to turn them. Doct. 1. In times of defection there may
be some ready to shelter themselves under this pretext, that they are not so
evil nor so unjust as others; therefore a word must be directed in particular
to the best and most upright, to let them see the vanity of that pretext. 2. No
goodness or uprightness in men is sufficient to cover their declining after
the sins of the time; therefore does the Prophet speak even against the best
and most upright. 3. Even men who seem to be well-affected and better then
others, are in hazard to be drawn away with the evils of the time; for, so were
they in Micahs days, with covetousness and oppression, which were the sins of
that time: The best of them is as a briar, etc. 4. It is an evident symptom of
a declining time, when men become covetous, oppressors, catching, and dangerous
to meddle withal; therefore are the decliners here observed to be briars, and
sharper then a thorne-hedge. Covetousness is the ordinary evil into which
backsliders fall, and the ordinary forerunner of judgments, for then the world
becomes an idol, and so is fitted for Gods stroke. 5. However the Lord may bear
long with the filthy their being filthy still, providing the righteous be
righteous still, yet when those who have a show of goodness are ^ither wicked
under that mask, or cast it off, and run to the same excess with others, and
when men who are none of the worst, follow the sins of the time, and so the
disease becomes universal, it is a sign of speedily approaching ruin; for,
then the day of the watchmen comes now. 6. It adds much to the weight of a
rod, that the Lord has forewarned sinners of their danger, and yet they have
not taken warning; therefore is their affliction called the day of thy
watchmen, that is, not so much a day of vengeance on their false Prophers and
wicked Governors, as the day which the true Prophets foretold them would come,
unless they repemed. 7. The Lord in the dispensation of his Providence toward
men has an especial regard to his own Word carried by his servants, that the
truth and certainty thereof may be seen; therefore also is their stroke called
the day of thy watchmen, that they might take notice that what his servants
spoke was certain. 3. Gods Ministers ought carefully to study the condition of
his people, and labor to stand in Gods counsel, that they may understand his
mind concerning the Church, and faithfully give warning thereof; therefore are
they called watchmen, by a name borrowed from the practice of Sentinels in
armies or cities. 9. Albeit men in their wicked ways dream that they ought not
to be accountable unto any, yet the Lord will take inspection of their ways,
and call them to an account for them; thy visitation comes. 10. The Lord will
so pursue guiltiness with affliction, as the guilty man shall be entangled,
and have no way to shift the rod; and guiltiness in a time of need will reduce
men to such straits and perplexities, such anxieties and pressures of mind,
that they shall not know whither to turn them; therefore, says he, now shall
be their perplexity, or intangling; whereas to the righteous even in darkness,
there arises light of clearness and comfort.

Ver. 5. Trust ye not in a friend, put ye not confidence in a guide: keep the
doors of thy mouth from her that lies in thy besome.

6. For the son dishonors the father, the daughter rises up against her
mother: the daughter in law against her mother in law, a man's enemies are the
men of his own house.

A third instance of this defection in all ranks and conditions of men, is held
forth in the unfaithfulness and inhumanity that was among them, insomuch that
neither intimate friends, whom men do in a sort entrust themselves to, to be
guided by them, Psalm. 55.14. nor yet wives are to be trusted in, yea, those
whom the strictest bonds of nature, affinity or subjection would tie to be
friendly, do prove treacherous. Doct. 1. Want of natural affection, and men's
turning monstrous in their dispositions and behavior, is the usual companion
and lymptome of a declining time; for, says he, the son dishonors the
father, the daughter rises up against her mother, and so violate the bonds of
nature, the daughter in law against her mother in law, and makes void the bonds
of affinity, a man's enemies are the men of his own house; no bond of subjection
will tie inferiors. This evil temper is foretold to be in the perilous latter
times, 2 Timothy 3.2, 3. 2. There is no sure hold to be had of any man, how
strictly soever he be bound, who is declining from God, and has not a tender
conscience standing in awe of God; for in this declining time, friends, guides,
wives, sons, daughters, etc. are not to be trusted in. He who is false in his
duty to God, will prove true to none. 3. In times of defection and backsliding,
as the godly ought out of love to believe all things, 1 Cor. 13.7. and not
easily take prejudice: so are they also to walk warily and prudently; Trust ye
not, says he, put no confidence, keep the doors of thy mouth, especially none
is to be looked to for help, or trusted in, but only God.

Verse 7. Therefore I will look unto the LORD: I will wait for the God of my
salvation: my God will hear me.

Follows the consolation of the godly, who lament this defection, and were to
be involved in these common miseries and calamities, whom the Prophet by his
practice in their name directs to encourage themselves in God, and look unto,
and wait for him, in hope of acceptance and deliverance; which is the general
ground of encouragement. Doct. 1. The Lord makes use of troublesome and
declining times, to drive his people the more to their duty and thrift; for,
therefore, says he, I will look unto the Lord. 2. There is in God sufficient
matter of encouragement, to counterbalance any difficulty or discouragement
that his people meet with in the world; for, in expectation thereof do they in
such a time look unto the Lord, as an alsufficient remedy to keep them from
being carried away with a declining time, and from discouragement in a sad
time, by eyeing him. 3. In declining and sad times, the people of God ought to
be most earnest in dealing with him, depending on him, and in expecting his
help; for, the word signifies that like a watchman set upon a tower, he will
intently observe and watch, and look to God, and for help from him. See, Psalm.
5.3. Lukewarm dealing with God, however it may please fools in a ca^me day,
yet will not bear out in a time of public defection. 4. In the reeling and
turning upside-down of things here below, the people of God are not so much to
look to these incertainties, as unto the immutability of God in what he is to
his people; for, so much also is implied in his looking to the Lord. 5. With
our faith and ardency in expecting Gods help, patient waiting is also to be
conjoined, by keeping his way, notwithstanding difficulties or delays of
deliverance, and resolving to have faith exercised before it get the victory,
therefore does he resolve also to wait for God. 6. In all the people of Gods
waiting on him there is still hope and confidence, though it be not always seen
to the waiter; for, the same word in the Original signifies both waiting and
hoping. 7. As it is the Lord only who can save and deliver, and as he is the
only Savior of his Church by virtue of the Covenant of grace made with her in
Christ; so will he save all such as will implore him only in their straits,
and have all their salvation from him, and in him according to the Covenant;
for, all this does that style, the God of my salvation, which is made the
ground of his waiting, implie. 8. We ought to encourage our selves to deal with
God, by acting faith, that we shall be accepted, I will look and wait, says
he, and that because, my God will hear me. 9. God is bound by Covenant to hear
the lawful and needy desires of his people in due time; my God will hear me.
10. Gods hearing of our prayers, or confidence that he will hear them, is
sufficient encouragement in hardest times; for such is the Prophets
encouragement here, my God will hear me; A man that gets access unto God, and
knows he will speed in heaven, may defy time to straiten him, having such a
fair back door of enlargement.

Verse. 8. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: When I fall, I shall rise;
when I sit in darkness, the LORD shall be a light unto me.

The Prophet proceeds to hold out more special grounds of consolation and
encouragement; the first whereof is, that the Church has ground of hope of a
satisfactory deliverance, and in this verse the Prophet speaking in her person,
directs her how to manage this hope of comfort, in reference to her insulting
enemies, to wit, that having such ground of hope, she should resolutely
profess the same before them, and contemn their insolent mockery, and
resolutely endure it, till the Lord by actual deliverance put them to silence.
Doct. 1. The Church of God may for sin be deprived of the possession of her
dignities, and be cast into a perplexed desolate condition, wanting both
comfort and judgment to know what to do: for, she may fall and sit in
darkness. 2. The people of God being in trouble will not want enemies to
reproach and insult over them, to embitter their calamity; for, here they have
an enemy rejoicing against them. 3. It is no strange thing to see the Church
brought very low, and yet be raised up again, to see her fall is not to ruin,
and her eclipses not continuing; therefore does she expect to arise after her
fall, and to have light after her darkness: When I fall, I shall arise, etc.
whereas the fall of enemies has no such comfort. 4. The Lord is alsufficient
to give unto his people comfort in trouble, and an issue from it, therefore
does the believing Church seek no other ground for her faith: but, the Lord
shall be a light unto me; it being he who had undertaken, and who by
manifesting his own presence could create comfort and issue in the midst of
troubles. 5. When the Churches privileges and grounds of hope are rightly
seen, neither will enemies be found to have such cause of boasting, because of
her trouble; as they suppose, nor needs the Church be much affected with their
insulting, but may profess her despising them and it both, in hope of his
help; therefore says she, Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy; as if she
said, ^ boast at leisure, ye have no such cause as ye dream of. 6. However
enemies having present advantage against the Church, will not give over their
insolent reproaching, which she must endure in hope: yet the Lord by delivering
her will put them to silence, and let them see that their joy was groundless:
Rejoice not against me, when I fall, I shall arife, etc.

Verse. 9. I will bear the indignation of the LORD, because I have sinned
against him, until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me: he will
bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness.

The Church is yet further directed how to manage this her hope of comfort, in
relation to her guilt, which might seem to stand in the way of it: for,
whereas it might be objected, How could she expect that God would be her light,
seeing she by sin had provoked him to anger, and to cast her into these
troubles, and so was her party? She answers, that she submissively stooping,
and accepting in these troubles the punishment of her iniquity out of his hand,
did expect that in due time, the Lord, whom she had provoked to afflict her,
would plead her cause against her enemies who unjustly oppressed her, and
plague them: and would restore her to her ancient glory, and in public view
give her to enjoy the effects of his bounty and fidelity. Doct. 1. The Lord may
have fatherly indignation against his people for their sins, and may testify
the same by inflicting of outward calamities, and yet not reject their persons;
for this cause is the godlies trouble called here, the indignation of the Lord,
though men were instruments. See, 2 Chronicles. 19.2. 2. It is the duty of the
godly, when God is angry and chastises, to be sensible of their sin procuring
the same, to stoop humbly under his afflicting hand, and to bear it patiently
and submissively, accepting the punishment of their iniquity: I will bar the
indiguation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, says she. 3. Sense
of sin and of its great demerit, will make men submissive and stoop patiently
under the rod, who otherwise would repine more: for, this is the reason of her
bearing the rod, because I have sinned. This is the cause wherefore men get so
many rods dipped in their own guilt, because they bear not cleanly reds
patiently, there being no cross so humbling as a sinful cross. See, Lam.
1.18. 4. True patience and submission unto God in affliction, ought to
pre^sc^ibe no term-day unto it self, but to refer all to his will: I will bear
until he plead. 5. Such as humble themselves before God, and patiently stoop
under a procured affliction, may expect that God will take their part against
all the instruments having hand in the same trouble, and clear their righteous
cause in respect of those who sought only their own ends in afflicting them,
and their humility and patience ought to be seasoned with this hope; He will
plead my cause, says she, who bears his indignation. See, Isa. 47.6. Zech. 1
15. 6. The Lord will not only clear his peoples right against their oppressors
by pronouncing sentence in their favor in his Word, but will accordingly put
his sentence to execution, for so does she expound his pleading; He will
execute judgment for me. 7. The Lord having by affliction humbled his people
for sin, and exercised their patience and faith, will restore unto them their
wonted privileges, and as it were in public view, and make manifest that they
are his; therefore, says he, He will bring me forth to the light, that is, not
only comfort, but publicly own and honor me, and I shall behold, or enjoy to
my satisfaction, his righteousness, or the wonted effects of his fidelity in
keeping Covenant, notwithstanding this seeming interruption.

Verse. 10. Then she that is mine enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her
which said unto me, Where is the LORD thy God? mine eyes shall behold her: now
shall she be trodden down as the mire of the streets.

This hope for deliverance is further commended from the effects thereof upon
the Churches enemies to her satisfaction: she is he^e directed to profess her
hope, that her enemies who mocked her faith, should be confounded at the sight
of her deliverance, and be ignominiously cut off, to her great joy and
satisfaction. Doct. 1. God sees it fitting sometimes to make his peoples
happiness conspicuous to the world, yea, even to their enemies, that it may
make them a sore heart; for, then she that is mine enemy shall see it, to wit,
her deliverance. See, Rev. 3.9. Psalm. 112.10. 2. Faith in God and adhering to
the true Religion has been an old subject of derision to the Churches enemi^s
when she was in trouble: for, they said unto me, Where is the Lord thy God? 3.
Scorning of says and piety, whatever disadvantage seem to follow it, shall
resolve into the scorners, shame and confusion, by seeing God to do for his
people according as they expected from him; for, mine enemy shall see it, and
shame shall cover her, (she shall be utterly confounded with it,) who said unto
me, Where is the Lord thy God? 4. When the Lord has tried his people, then the
cup is put to the head of the wicked, and the enemies of the Church, and
mockers of her considence will be destroyed as contemptible things; for, now
shall she be trodden down as the mire of the streets. 5. It will be a
comfortable sight to the people of God to see Gods justice against their
enemies, and his good-wil toward them cleared and made manifest after long
trials; for, says she, mine eyes behold her Otherwise to take pleasure in the
calamity of others, though enemies, is not lawful, Prove. 24.17. further then in
that God is hereby glorified in the execution of his justice, and clearing of
his keeping Covenant with his peoples. See, Ps. 58.10, 11.

Verse. 11. In the day that thy walls are to be built, in that day shall the
decree be far removed.

12. In that day also he shall come even to thee from Assyria, and from the
fortified cities, and from the fortress even to the river, and from sea to
sea, and from mountain to mountain.

A second ground of encouragement and comfort is held forth in Gods promise to
his Church, confirming her formerly professed hope: wherein he assures her of
restitution, and of deliverance from the yoke of strange authority, and their
cruel decrees, whereby they had been scattered among the Gentiles oppressed by
tyrants, and the work of God obstructed amongst them, as when the building of
the Temple was discharged, Ezra 4.5, 6, 21, 22, 23, 24. And he assures them
further of the enlargement of the Church of Israel, not only by their return
from all the parts where they had been scattered and detained, Isa. 27.12, 13.
but by the Conversion of many Nations who should join themselves to the
Church, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from all the quarters of the world:
This decree may also without wronging of the text, be safely understood of the
Doctrine of the Gospel (called a decree, Psalm. 2.7.) which after the
restoration of the Jews, should be sent through the world for promoting of
this promised enlargement, whereby both Jews and Gentiles should be gathered
to the Church, as by the decree of Cyrus the Jews were set at liberty to
return to their country from all quarters where they were scattered. Doct. 1.
The Church endeavoring to comfort her self with hope in God in her troubles,
will abundantly be confirmed therein by God: for after her professed hope, v.
8, 9, 10. the Lord confirms her here by a promise. See, Psalm. 27.14. 2. The
Church may procure by her sins that the Lord should lay her desolate, exposed
to the fury of enemies, without all government, protection, or apparent being,
and he may for a season in justice so deal with her: lor, her walls were to be
built, and consequently were ruined, not only as a vineyard with the hedge
pulled down, but a city totally desolate. 3. The Lord will in due time restore
and make up the ruins of his destroyed Church and people: for, thy walls are
to be built. 4. Gods time is to be patiently waited upon for restoring of his
Church; for, there is the day for doing it, which he will keep, and no sooner.
5. As it is one of the Churches great trials to lie under the power of
oppressing tyrants and strangers, who by their decrees and injunctions executed
with rigor, do labor to ruin her, and bear down the work of God: So the Lord
when he has wrought his work upon his Church by such a trial will deliver them
also from that yoke, and set them at liberty to serve him, and enjoy
tranquillity without such interruptions: for, in that day the decree shall be
far removed. This the Jews had some taste of at their return from Babylon: and
at some times thereafter, but it shall be more accomplished at their turning to
the Lord, when there shall be no more decrees of captivity to follow. 6. All
sorts of persons of all Nations have free access unto the Church under the
Gospel, and the Lord has undertaken to make them come: for, in that also he
shall come even to thee from Assyria, and from the fortified city, and from the
fortress even to the rive^, and from sea to sea, and from mountain to
mountain, that is, generally from all quarters of the world, by sea and by
land, which seems to be expressed with relation to the situation of Israel; the
borders whereof, according to Gods Charter, were from toward Egypt to the river
Euphrates, and that which they ordinarily possessed, was bounded by the east or
dead sea, the west or great sea, and by the mountains Lebanon, and Hor on the
North, and other mountains in the wilderness toward the South. See, Exodus
23.31. Numb. 34. Josh. 1.4. and elsewhere. 7. In the Church of the Gospel the
Lord has determined that the Church of the Jews or Israel shall be very
eminent, not only as being the Mother Church of old, from whence the Gospel
came to call all Nations to join with her, but as being yet to be made so
conspicuous, as will invite many Nations to come in to Christ, and to be made a
means of their Conversion: In relation to both these times it is said to the
Church of the Jews, in that day he shall come even to thee, etc. alluding to
the Proselytes coming up ^o Jerusalem of old. 8. The privileges and advantages
of the Church of God being rightly seen, may and will prevail even with her
greatest enemies, and with such as have their own good accommodations, to lay
down their enmity, and renounce all, and come and share with her; for, he shall
come to thee from Assyria, her most inveterate enemy, and from the fortified
cities, and from the fortress by which Egypt seems to be signified, which was
well fortified by Nature and Art, and the Hebrew word here has affinity with
the Hebrew name of Egypt, and withal Assyria and Egypt are ordinarily joined in
such promises, Isa 19.23, 24, 25. 9 The Lords means for gathering and
enlarging of his Church, is the preaching of his Gospel, whereby he leads all
captive unto the obedience of Christ; for, so much does the other
interpretation of the decree teach us, the decree shall be far removed, and he
shall come, etc. Where the Gospel may be called a decree, as containing Gods
eternal Purpose and Ordinance concerning the salvation of sinners published in
his Name to the world, for sinners to lay hold upon, and the efficacy thereof
depending upon Gods counsel and decree. 10. The publishing and prevailing of
the Gospel through the world, notwithstanding all impediments and opposition,
is a work wherein the hand and power of God is to be seen for what is already
done, and to be rested upon for what is to be accomplished; for it is he only
who can undertake, that the decree shall be far removed.

Verse. 13. Notwithstanding the land shall be desolate, because of them that
dwell therein, for the fruit of their doings.

Lest the people should flatter themselves in their sins, a caution is
subjoyned, for the right understanding of this promise showing that before the
performance thereof a desolation must be, because of their sins, which was
accomplished first by Nebuchadnezzar, and again by the Romans. Doct. 1. The
promises of God ought to be warily heeded, and rightly understood and applied,
that secure sinners suck not poison from them; therefore is a caution given to
be taken along: Notwithstanding the land shall be desolate. 2. God may carry
thoughts of love to his people, hid in his heart for a long time, and may let
out much trouble on them, whom he loves and purposes to manifest love unto;
for, Notwithstanding, (to wit, that he has a purpose to enlarge her, v. 12.
yet) the land shall be desolate. See, Jer. 29 10, 11. 3. The reason of the
Lords striking a people, toward whom he has a purpose of love, is their sin,
for which he will plague their contentments, lay their habitation desolate, and
make them taste of the bitterness of their way in departing from him, that so
they may be humbled and fitted for his mercy, and that he may cut off wicked
generations, and raise up others to enjoy his mercies: for, The land shall be
desolate, because of them that dwell therein, for the fruit of their doings.

Verse. 14. Feed thy people with the rod, the flock of thine heritage, which
dwell solitarily in the wood in the midst of Carmel: let them feed in Bashan
and Gilead, as in the days of old.

15. According to the days of thy coming out of the land of Egypt, will I show
unto him mavelous things.

A third ground of encouragement is held forth, in an answer to the Prophets
prayer; who upon the mentioning of the ensuing desolation, turns himself to
God, or to Christ the great Shepherd, requesting that he would have a care of
his scattered and desolate people, in whom he had so much interest, and would
at last bring them to enjoy the wonted sweet fruits of his Government, and feed
them as flocks were fed in the fruitful pastures of Bashan and Gilead, Numb.
32.1. Deuteronomy. 32.14. To which answer is returned in a promise, that they shall
get a delive^ance, no less famous and miraculous, then when they were
delivered of old from E^ypt This promise is both spoken of the Church and to
her, no^ only because she was abundantly satisfied of the first, and therefore
it is spoken to her to stir he^ up to believe the other, but to show the Lords
constancy in doing her good in that, so to say, both before her face, and
behind her back he is the same. Doct. 1. Sense of judgments imminent or
incumbent, does call for much prayer and dealing with God: for, such use does
the Prophet make of the threatened desolation. 2. The Church of Christ in her
trouble especially, is in a solitary condition, and full of hazard, being
disconsola^e, and exposed to want and danger, unless he have a care of her;
for, They dwell solitarily in the wood in the midst of Carmel: they are like a
solitary flock in woods and mountains; and albeit Carmel signify a fruitful
place, and was so in the land of Canaan, Isa. 33.9. and 35.2. 2 Kings 19 23.
and elsewhere, yet it is here taken in with the woods, to show that their most
fruitful places in exile should look like a wilderness to them; or, because it
was an open field and mountain, and consequently not safe, though others join
that rather with the latter part of the verse; Let them feed in the midst of
Carmel, in Bashan, etc. and so it is also expressed, Jer. 50.19. 3. Christ is
the only Shepherd, to whose care the Church is concredited, and who will have a
special care of them in trouble; for to him does the Prophet pray, Feed thy
people which dwell solitarily. 4. Christ does not only feed his people, but
does exercise a jurisdiction over them, whereby he keeps them in subjection to
him, drives them to their food, and expels noxious humors, which may hinder
their feeding and thriving; and he does also by his power protect them whom he
thus feeds and governs: all which are desirable, and to be prayed for from
him: Feed thy people with thy rod. See, Psalm. 23.4. 5. Christ has many
relations to, and interests in his Church, not broken off by any trouble, to
endear her to his affection and care, and which may encourage faith to go to
him in need; therefore, says he, Feed thy people, the flock of thine heritage,
which dwell solitarily, etc. Notwithstanding their desolate condition, they are
his peculiar portion, wherein he has not a temporary, but an eternal right, as
men have to their heritage in all generations: and accordingly he will care for
and possess them, and this Charter and Privilege stands fast to the Church of
the Jews here prayed for, to be manifested after all their dispersions. 6.
Christ has ample allowance to bestow upon his people, and all fullness for
faith to lay hold upon in prayer, for the supply of every need; for, he can
make them ferd in Bashan and Gilead, which were fruitful pastures for flocks;
though in relation to Israel this may be understood more particularly of
restoring them to their own fruitful land, to enjoy it in its full extent, even
to Bashan and Gilead, which lay far off beyond Jordan. See, Jer. 50.19. 7. The
Church of God has rich experiences of his former goodness, to encourage her
in her present suits, whereof faith ought to make use; therefore, says he, Let
them feed as in the days of old. 8. Christ will not deny the needy and lawful
desires of his people, particularly such as flow from publick-mindednesse, and
are put up for the Church; but will take charge of his afflicted people, to
give them a blessed issue; for, the request is here granted. 9. As Christ is
Omnipotent, so he will do wonders, if need requires, for the behoof of his
people, and he takes pleasure to convey the expressions of his love to them,
and to bring about their deliverance to their own and others admiration; for, I
will show him (or make him to enjoy) mavelous things. 10. As Christ's
manifesting of himself in former times for his people, engages him to do yet
more for them; so will he make good whatever they have ground from former
experience to expect; for, According to the days of thy coming out of the land
of Egypt, I will show him marvellows things; where faith is not only to feed
upon the great acts he did; but also upon the way of his doing of them, his
passing over their iniquities, their murmurings and unbelief, his reducing them
to straits before he appeared for them, his working by small, unlikely and
contrary means, etc. 11. The Lord stands engaged to his ancient people, to give
them a deliverance from their troubles and bondage, as great and wonderful as
that from Egypt was; for, so is expressly promised: and albeit this be
spiritually accomplished, and daily accomplishing in the spititual deliverances
of the Israel of God, yet this promise is made chiefly to the Church of Israel,
in relation to their desolation; and albeit some pledge of this was given at
their return from Babylon, yet then it came short among other things of the
deliverance from Egypt, in that it was not National, even of the Jews; and
therefore it seems to have relation to the time of the restitution and saving
of all Israel, which will be so great a mercy, as will in a sort obscure former
mercies, Jer. 16.14, 15.

Verse. 16. The Nations shall see, and be confounded at all their might, they
shall lay their hand upon their mouth, their ears shall be deaf.

17. They shall lick the dust like a serpent, they shall move out of their
holes like worms of the earth, they shall be afraid of the LORD our God, and
shall fear because of thee.

A fourth ground of encouragement, and a consequent of the former, is taken
from the effects, which all these shall have amongst enemies, who seeing all
this mighty Power of God appearing for the Church, shall be astonished and made
deaf with the fame of Gods acts, and dumb, that they dare not speak (as
formerly) proud things: and the terror of Gods Majesty appearing in and for
his Church, shall so seize upon them, as to make them with all fear and
subjection submit to God and his Church, stooping as low as serpents and
creeping things. See, Psalm. 72.9. Isa. 49 23. All which does not necessarily
infer their true Conversion, but only that they shall yield feigned obedience,
and pretend friendship to secure themselves. Doct. 1. The deliverance of the
Church of God is brought about in such a way, as natural men consulting with
reason, could never have expected it; therefore the Nations shall see and be
confounded. 2. The Lord sees it fitting at some times, not only to be kind to
his people, but to give public demonstrations of his good will to them, in
such a measure as may astonish all beholders; for, the Nations shall see and be
confounded, they shall lay their hand upon their mouth, etc. See, Psalm. 126.2.
3. The Churches privileges and strength being well seen, will be terrible to
enemies in their greatest power; for, They shall be confounded at all their
(that is, the Churches) might, or, for all their might, that is, all the power
they themselves thought they had, shall not keep them from confusion, but they
shall be astonished so much the more that it has proved vain. 4. Men without
God, and not walking in his way are easily confounded when the Lord turns his
hand against them, and to do for his people; for, they who no doubt were
insolent and proud before, shall lay their hand upon their mouth, etc. 5. Gods
wonderful works of providence in behalf of his people, and against their
enemies, do ordinarily produce but vanishing and empty fruits in the world, and
amongst enemies, as either to confound and astonish them, as if they were dumb
and deaf, when what God has done for his people is mentioned; They shall be
confounded, they shall lay their hand on their mouth, their cares shall be
deaf. Or, if they work any more, it is but pretended subjection, and
friendship out of fear: They shall lick the dust like a serpent, they shall
move out of their holes, etc. They shall be afraid. So hard a piece of work are
men's hearts to work upon, especially being once engaged in enmity against God
and his people, and so hard, if not impossible, is it for any work to work
savingly where the Word has not place, and where men's misery and Gods mercy
are not discovered to them. 6. It is a great proof of Gods power, and metter of
encouragement to the Church, to see their enemies brought so low, as to yield,
if it were but feigned obedience, and pretend friendship, as is usual in the
time of the Churches prosperity; for, it is an encouragement; That they shall
lick the dust like a Serpent, etc. We are to be sensible and wary of the
falsehood of some, who pretend to serye Christ, and to be friends to his Church,
as withal to adore the Power of God, making them to stoop so far, as to lie, as
it is, Psalm. 66.3. in the original. 7. All the glory of bringing down enemies,
and the making them to stoop, is to be ascribed only to God; the Church being
so terrible only, because of Gods interest in her, and presence with her: They
shall be afraid of the Lord our God, and fear because of thee. The latter part
of which speech may either be understood of God, the sweetness of the
encouragement making them turn the speech to him, by way of warm and hearty
acknowledgement; or of the Church made dreadful, because God makes manifest,
that he is hers by Covenant.

Verse. 18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by
the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retains not his anger
for ever, because he delights in mercy.

In consideration of all these encouragements, the Prophet in the Churches name
concludes all with a commendation of God, as singular in his mercy, ver. 18,
19. and his fidelity, ver. 20. He begins at mercy, and sets it out in a speech
full of various affections, sometime directed to God by way of praise, sometime
spoken of God for the Churches own encouragement, sometime spoken with
particular application to themselves, sometime with relation to all the people
of God, to set forth the publick-mindednesse of all such as have obtained
mercy. He instanceth this singular mercy of God in the matter of pardoning
sin, which being propounded in this verse, is further cleared from two
expressions, setting forth more of the riches of this benefit, and of the
security and comfort may be had by it Doct. 1. Mercies received from God, ought
to commend and endear himself to our hearts; therefore after rehearsal of
mercies, he falls to commend the giver. 2. The Lord being rightly seen and
taken up in himself and his dispensations, will be found singular and
matchless, as one of whom we may boast over all idol-gods, whose ways are
only best to be followed, who will do singular things for his people, and make
them singular, and consequently who ought to be singular in their affection;
Who is a God like unto thee? says he. 3. Gods matchlesnesse appears to his
people, and does affect their hearts, not so much in acts of his power
absolutely considered, (though they ought to be sensible of these also,) as in
his acts of grace, and his being great in his Christ pardoning sin; yea, when
great things are done or promised to them, they wonder not so much at these, as
that his mercy should come over their transgressions, to make way for these
great things. Therefore they declare there is no God like him, who pardons
iniquity; and when they hear of all the former encouragements, they admire
this above them all, that their sin had not stood in the way of these mercies,
and that because the godly are sensible of the desert of sin, and of their
inability to satisfy justice for it, and therefore pardon is sweet above all
to them. 4. Outward mercies were they never so great and full, will never yield
true satisfaction, unless they be joined with reconcillation with God, and
pardon of sin, so also are we taught here, all the former encouragements do
refresh, when they may also admire and rejoice in God, who pardons iniquity.
5. God by a free pardon, will for his Christ's sake lift off and take away the
burden of the guilt of sin, were it never so great, from off his wearied
people, who flee to him for refuge, and so ease them of it, and give them
ground of quietness in their conscience: for, so does the word in the Original
tendered pardoning import, and it is extended even to iniquity and
transgression, and this is the only way to get true ease and deliverance from
sin. 6. The self-condemned sinner in looking for pardon from God, ought to look
upon him as singular, and not measure his condescendence or mercy by their
thoughts, or by any other mould, but expect that as he is matchless, so is his
mercy, pity and love; for, Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons
iniquity? does teach us so much: and this is to be taken along with every
expression of pardon, that he is matchless that does that, and does it
matchlesly.

The first expression clearing this benefit yet further is, and ^sseth by the
transgression of the remnant of his heritage; wherepardon is expounded to be a
passing over, or, so to say, a seeing, and yet not seeing the faults of his
people; and withal it is declared to whom this benefit does belong. Whence
learn, 1. So great and many are sinful man's provocations, and so great is his
inability, either to be rid of them, or satisfy God for them, that there is no
way of reconciliation betwixt God and him, but by the Lords qui^ting the plea,
and passing over his faults, not calling him to any strict account for them,
and this he does to those who see their own saults much, and flee to him
through Christ; for, he passes by, or, over transgression, Isa. 57.17, 18.
Genesis 8.21. Psalm. 130.3, 4. 2. These advantages are not to be expected by all,
but by the Lords own, who are his beritage, which imports on their part, that
they close with God as a constant portion, intending to be his heritage, which
is a qualification required in them, who come for quieting of the conscience
from particular guiltiness; and on Gods part it imports, that whatever just
displeasure he conceive against them, yet at last he will be reconciled with
his herita^e. They are also called the remnant, which is another argument why
he pardons, to wit, that being already consumed in part for sin, they would be
utterly destroyed, if mercy end not the controversy. 3. Those whom God does
pardon, are expressed under the name of the remnant of his heritage, or of a
remnant of Israel after trouble: not only because this benefit is reserved for
them also, and spoken of here, with especial relation to them, and will be very
generally let out upon them after their restitution; but further, though
Reprobates may also be spared and reserved in public calamities, yet the
comparison holds, 1. In that the Elect and pardoned ones are the fewer number,
as a remnant in comparison of the bulk which are cut off. 2. In that a remnant
left from trouble, ought in their behavior to resemble much the godly and
elect in sobriety, Isa. 38.15. in needy dependence, Zeph. 3.12. in mourning for
sin, Ezekiel. 7.16. in holy walking, Zeph. 3.13, etc.

The second expression is, He retains not his anger for ever, because he
delights in mercy; wherein his great mercy, and his taking pleasure in it, in
pardoning sin, is amplified and commended from his putting off justly conceived
displeasure against sin and the sinner. Whence learn, 1. The Lord will put on
just anger against the sins of his people, and may possibly not pass them over
at all times, but may testify his displeasure by effects against them, whom he
will yet pardon; for, it is here supposed that he may have anger, and let it
out for a time. 2. The Lord when he is provoked, and testifying his
displeasure, is not unwilling to be reconciled: for, he retains not his anger;
or, as the word signifies, holds it not with a strong hand, but seeks when
he is angry, that we should stand in the gap, and entreat him to pass from it.
3. It highly commends God; and is matter of great consolation to us, that his
anger against his people is not everlasting; That he retains not his anger for
ever, is a mercy, however it may endure for a long tract of time. 4. Gods mercy
is the only cause wherefore he does not pursue his controversies against his
people with eternal wrath, and this is to be seen and acknowledged by all them
who are so graciously dealt with; for, so do they here, He retains not his
anger for ever, because he delights in mercy. 5. Albeit God, blessed over
all, delight in himself and all his attributes, and in the manifestation of
them in the world, yet after the manner of men, he is said to delight in mercy,
in regard that attribute is most manifested in the world, in his bounty to all,
Psalm. 33.5. in his not taking pleasure in the death, even of reprobates, Ezech.
18.32. albeit that for the manifestation of his justice he wills it; and in
that to his own people justice is his strange act, Isa. 28.21. and mercy his
ordinary way of dealing, and all the mercy he shows them he does it not
grudgingly, Jer. 32.41. nor does he delight to be at odds with them, but
always to have them refreshed in his love, and therefore his mercy ends many a
plea, that it may make way, and burst through clouds to manifest it self.

Verse 19. He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us: he will subdue
our iniquities, and thou will cast all their sins into the depths of the sea.

This great privilege is yet insisted in, and further commended and cleared in
several expressions; the first is, He will turn again, he will have compassion
upon us; wherein is declared, not only that the pardon of sin, and removal of
the effects thereof, do flow from the tender mercy of God, but this pardon is
commended from an effect of it, that God in mercy will turn to his pardoned
people with compassion, and from Gods constancy here^n, that after compassion
has been formerly showed and abused, (...) will yet again have compassion, as
the Hebrew way of speech is often taken and translated. Whence learn, 1. Many
of our conceptions and expressions will not be able to take up, or utter the
great goodness of God in pardoning sin, nor the great mercy a self-condemned
sinner sees in it, nor the great benefit he reaps by it; therefore are
expressions so multiplied about it. 2. Albeit it be a sweet sign of a pardoned
man, when he esteems of a pardon, and of God as a pardoner, and when he loves
God, because he will forgive his own people; yet it adds much to the assurance
and comfort of this benefit, when every self-condemned sinner lays hold on
this benefit, and applies it to himself, which should be endeavored, and may
be attained; for, here the Church comes to application: He will have
compassion upon us. 3. God is provoked by his peoples sins to turn away from
them, and to seem to neglect them, their prayers and conditions; so much is
imported, in that he is to turn again to them. 4. Upon the Lords pardoning of
sin, not only is anger taken away, (as v. 18.) but reconciliation, and the
shining of his favorable countenance will follow in due time; for, He will
turn again and have compassion. 5. Albeit favors formerly received, and abused
by us, may be a great impediment to our faith in expecting favor, when we need
it again, yet the Lord in mercy will again and again be kind to his people;
for, so does the other interpretation teach: He will again have compassion.
See, Judge. 10 11, 12, 13, 14. with 16. 6. Albeit the guilty child of God,
having abused former mercies, and lying in his sin and misery, be an unworthy
and contemptible object, having nothing wherewith to commend himself to God;
yet pity in God will condescend to look upon him, and bring an argument from
his very misery to help him; for, He will have compassion upon us, say they. 7.
The Lord is so far from rejecting his people for their unworthiness and
miserable condition, that he will keep them in such a needy condition, as may
make them fit objects of his pity; for, in that He will have compassion, it
implies, that he will keep them in such a needy condition as needs compassion.
The Church needs not expect to be freed altogether of the badges of her misery,
unless she would banish his tender compassions out of the world 8. The Lords
needy and distressed people, will get a room in his tender affection, till they
be helped, and compassion shall carve out their supply and issue; for, so much
also does his having compassion teach us.

Another expression clearing this benefit, is, He will subdue our iniquities;
which may be taken up, either as a further explication of the way of pardon,
that God overcomes the great provocation of sin, standing in his mercies way,
or as an effect of pardon, that God not only pardons the guilt, but mortifieth
the power of sin in his people. Whence learn. 1. The Lord pardons sin in
none, but such as he makes sensible of the great provocation of sin, and
makes them to see it as an army, standing in mercies way, to be subdued; for,
so do they express the way of pardon. 2. Gods mercy is alsufficient to
overcome all provocations, and to overcome the ill deserving of sin; for, He
will subdue iniquity. See, Cant 2.8. Rom 5.20. 3. Whoever get pardon of sin,
they also fall in love with, and see the need of mortification of sin, this the
other interpretation of subduing teaches. The pardoned Church accounts God
singular, because he will subdue iniquity. 4. Mortification of sin is to be
wrought by God, and expected from him, otherwise our endeavors will not
prevail, and when our endeavors of mortification avail not, yet our case is
not hopeless; for, He will subdue our iniquities.

The last expression, Thou will cast all their sins into the depths of the sea,
contains a further effect of pardon, that sins once pardoned, shall not be
remembered nor laid to their charge again, which is held out in a borrowed
speech taken from amongst men; that being without possibility of being
recovered by men, which is cast into the bottom of the sea, and that where it
is deepest. Whence learn, 1. Albeit a pardoned sinner, when he commits new sin,
or is not humble, tender or thankful under the sense of pardon, may have former
sins brought to remembrance, to be matter of humiliation, and stirring up to
repentance; and albeit an hour of tentation may shake loose all evidences of
pardon, yet sin being once pardoned, the remission stands never to be repeated,
only new confirmations are still to be sought after, nor will the pardoned
sin come in account against the pardoned man before God again; for, so much
does this borrowed speech teach. See, Isa. 38.17. Ps. 103.12. Jer. 31.34. 2.
Gods mercy is so infinite, that multitudes of sin in the self-judging sinner,
will not hinder his free and full pardon, nor needs to obstruct to peaceable
effects thereof in the conscience of the pardoned man; and this fountain stands
daily open for the justified man to flee unto with all his faults as they are
committed, with renewing of his faith and repentance; for, so large is this
Promise, Thou will cast all their sins, etc. 3. As the sense of the pardon of
sin, and freedom from the apprehension of Gods keeping it in remembrance, is a
warm and refreshing condition: so it would be much entertained, by frequent
looking to God by faith and praise about it. Therefore yet again is the speech
directed to God, Thou will cast all their sins into the depths of the sea.

Verse. 20. Thou will perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham,
which thou have sworn unto our fathers, from the days of old.

In the next place, God is commended as singular in his gracious fidelity,
keeping the Covenant made with their forefathers. Doct. 1. The privileges of
the Church, are made theirs by Contract and sworn Covenant, and so are certain;
for, so the Word speaks of truth and mercy sworn. 2. The Lord is to be seen
and commended as incomparable in fidelity and promise-keeping, notwithstanding
all impediments in his way, and all our apprehensions of him to the contrary;
for, it is to be repeated, Who is a God like unto thee, that wilt perform the
truth, etc? 3. The sum of Gods Covenant with his Church is mercy, in respect
of the fountain whence all his bounty flows, and in respect of our ill
deservings which we should daily see; and truth, in respect that the freedom
of mercy in promising diminishes nothing of the certainty of performance: but
as mercy opens the door, so truth keeps it open. Hence it is, that those two
are so frequently conjoined in the expectations and desires of Saints. See,
Psalm. 57.3. and 61.7. 4. The Covenant of mercy is the Churches first and
irrevocable privilege; for, it is sworn of old, and so the law which came
after, cannot disannul it, Gal. 3.17. 5. As the spiritual blessings of the
Covenant belong only to true believers, who may reckon Jacob and Abraham with
whom the Covenant was made, their fathers according to the faith: so even the
natural posterity of Jacob and Abraham have a peculiar interest in that
Covenant made with their fathers, not broken off by any interruption or
desolation, but to be still forthcoming for them, as to their being called as
a Nation to be his Church and people, if not also for giving them the promised
land in heritage; for, so do they reckon while they are threatened with much
ensuing desolation; Thou will perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to
Abraham, which thou have sworn; etc. For this cause the Apostle, Romans 11.29.
reckons, that Gods purposes toward them as a Nation, are among the gifts which
are without repentance, and never to be recalled and made utterly void, more
then in his dealing with his Elect, in the matter of their calling and
glorification. 6. It is the duty of the godly, when they are called to trouble,
to confirm their faith in the hope of issue, according to Gods promise, and be
comforted and rest satisfied therewith, accounting it sweet to have hope of
future mercy sure, although it were never so long a coming, and the way to it
never so rough; for, so do the godly, hearing tell of future desolation, close
all, believing and resting satisfied with this: Thou will perform the truth to
Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham, etc. for the accomplishment whereof every
godly man should pray, Even so, Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen and Amen.

Nahum.
The ARGUMENT.
THe Lord, having suspended the execution of the judgments denounced by Jonah
against Nineveh, the chief City of the Assyrian Empire upon their repentance;
they did again return to their vomit, and added unto all their other sins, the
oppression of the people of God, by captivating the ten tribes, and
overrunning Judah: therefore the Lord, for the comfort of his people thus
afflicted, raises up Nahum, (whether in Hezekiah's days, or afterward, is not
certain, yet certainly that oppression of Judah, 2 Kings 18. and 19. is pointed
at by him) to set forth at large the ruin of that Monarchy, especially of the
chief City Nineveh; and for this end, setting forth a description of God, in
his justice, power and mercy, suitable to the present purpose, he foretells the
ruin of the State of Assyria, by the Medes and Caldeans, with the comfort and
advantage redounding to the Church thereby, chap. 1. and the destruction of the
chief City, the preparations against which, with the taking thereof is set
down, chap. 1. and further amplified and confirmed, by setting forth their
provocations, the example of other places, and the fruitlessenesse of all their
endeavors to defend themselves, chap. 3.

CHAP. I.
THis Chapter after the Inscription, ver. 1. contains, First, a Description
of God in his justice and power against his enemies, ver. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and
mercy toward his people, ver. 7. Secondly, in an application of this
description to the present purpose; wherein, 1. The Assyrians are threatened
with violent and total destruction, ver. 8. notwithstanding their insolent
presumption, in thinking to be able to wrong the Church, or defend themselves,
ver. 9. or their formidable union and their prosperity, which God would make
use of to bring on their stroke, ver. 16.2. The cause of all this is declared
to be their injurious dealing against God and his people, ver. 11. for which
they are again threatened, that so he may comfort his Church with deliverance
from their oppressions, ver. 12, 13. 3 To confirm this sentence yet more,
Assyria, or the royal family is again threatened, with utter rooting our, ver.
14. the news whereof should produce comfort to the Church, having liberty
thereby to enjoy and go about the ordinances, ver. 15.

Verse. 1. THe burden of Nineveh, the book of the vision of Nahum the Elkothite.

The Inscription holds forth, 1. The Penman of this Prophecy described from
his name, and the place of his birth, of both which we read no more elsewhere.
2. The nature of the message, containing hard tidings against the chief City of
the Assyrian Empire (called Nineveh, or the habitation of Ninus) under which
the Empire it self is to be understood. 3. The authority and certainty of this
message, in that he had it by vision. Whence learn, 1. Even enemies to the
Church, are under the dominion of Gods Providence, and liable to his rebukes
and corrections; for, he has a burden against Nineveh. 2. There is nothing to
be expected from God to impenitent sinners, or such as seeming to repent,
continue not in that exercise, but return to their vomit, but hard tidings;
for, Nineveh, forgetting to continue in that exercise which they began at
Jonahs preaching, get now from the Lord a burden. 3. Judgments denounced by
God against the wicked for sin, are insupportable and crushing, such as the
creature cannot stand under: therefore are they called a burden. 4. Wrath
denounced against impenitent sinners, is infallible and certain, whatever may
appear to those who judge by appearance; for, This burden is the book of the
vision, containing what God had certainly revealed to his servant, and
commanded him to publish in his Name and Authority. 5. As Nahum saw this by
vision, so they would study to be near God, who would see the ruin of
flourishing enemies, and get it believed from the Word.

Verse. 2. God is jealous, and the LORD revengeth: the LORD revengeth, and is
furious, the LORD will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserveth
wrath for his enemies.

The justice of God, taking vengeance on his enemies, is described from the
cause moving him to it, which is his jealousy, or tender feeling of the
injuries done to his honor and dear people; and from the severity and
certainty thereof, though suspended for a time. Doct. 1. As the Lord is jealous
of his peoples affections toward him, Exodus 20.5. so is he jealous and cannot
endure the wrong done to his honor in hurting his people who are dear to him:
for, God is jealous. 2. This jealousy and affection of God, will in due time
break out in just revenge against his and the Churches enemies, recompencing
the wrongs they do, which his people cannot take course with: for, God is
Jealous, and the Lord revengeth. 3. Vengeance executed by God, jealous for his
people whom he loves, flows from great displeasure, and is most severe: for,
the Lord revengeth all injuries, and is furious. The Hebrew word imports great
fury, as of one (so to say, with reverence to him who speaks so to our
capacity,) transported with it. 4 The justice and severity of God against
wicked men, would be seriously studied, both by enemies to deter them from
doing evil, and by his oppressed people for their comfort; for, this
repetition, The Lord revengeth, and is furious, the Lord will take vengeance,
imports, that there should be many thoughts of it. 5. The Lord ownes his
peoples quarrel, and declares himself a Party against their enemies; for,
they are his adversaries and his enemies. 6 That wrath which the Lords Word
denounces against the wicked, and which their wickedness calls aloud for, and
yet is kept off, is but only reserved for a more fit time, to be poured forth
in greater measure; for, He reserveth wrath for his enemies. The Original has
it only reserveth, without any addition, which shows how inexpressible that
anger is, which God treasureth up to be poured out together.

Ver. 3. The LORD is slow to anger, and great in power, and will not at all
acquit the wicked: the LORD has his way in the whirlewinde, and in the storm,
and the clouds are the dust of his feet.

This justice of God taking vengeance on enemies, is further described from the
way of manifesting thereof, which is flowly, but certainly; the Lord
forbearing, neither because he purposes to forgive, nor because he wants
power; as may appear from his Majesty and State, when he appears environed
with whirlewindes and tempests raised by his power, as, Psalm. 18.8, -- 11. and
the airle clouds being as dust, raised by his stately progress, as armies
raise dust in their march: and this is one part of the description of his
power, for executing this just vengeance, Doct. 1. The Lord, even toward
enemies is long-suffering, and slow in executing of anger, that their
destruction may be seen to be of themselves, that in his holy providence they
may stumble more upon his indulgence, and fill up their measure, and that his
Churches faith and patience may be tried; Therefore, says he, The Lord is slow
to anger. 2. When the Lord spares his enemies, it is not because he is not
able to meet with them, nor ought we to judge because of any outward
appearances, that they are invincible; for, how unlikely soever the destruction
of enemies may be in the eyes of men, yet the Lord, who is slow to anger, is
also great in power. 3. As the Lord is able to reach his enemies when he
pleases, so his forbearing of them, is no evidence that they shall be exempted
altogether; but he will undoubtedly give proof of his power in dealing with
them as their way deserves; for, the Lord is great in power, and will not at
all acquit the wicked. He will punish them, lest his sparing them altogether
should give ground to any to think that he held them innocent, or absolved them
as guiltless, as the word signifies. 4. The Lord is able by his power speedily
to bring to pass greatest things, and can, when he pleases, overturn,
confound and darken all things, which appeared to be stable, well ordered and
clear; for, so much does his way in the whirlwind, storm and clouds teach.
These suddenly confound what they surprise, and clouds and storms do darken
the face of a clear sky, and Gods way in these points at the suddenness
thereof, Prove. 10.25. Isa. 19.1. 5. The Lord manifesting himself in his great
glory does but, so to say, obscure himself in respect of our infirmity, which
cannot comprehend his glory in its brightness, for so much does his
manifestation of himself environed with dark storms, or tempests, and thick
lowering clouds teach. See, Psalm. 97.2. 6. Gods dispensations even when they are
most dreadful and terrible in effects, may yet be deep and unsearchable, and
his purpose and counsel in them hard to discern; for so much further does his
way in whirlwindes, storms and clouds, (which involve and darken all) teach.

Ver. 4. He rebukes the sea, and makes it dry, and dries up all the rivers:
Bashan languisheth, and Carmel, and the flower of Lebanon languisheth.

5. The mountains quake at him, and the hills melt, and the earth is burnt at
his presence; yea, the world, and all that dwell therein.

This power of God is yet further described from the effects thereof, that he
can in his anger dry up seas and rivers, as of old appeared at the red sea and
Jordan; he can blast the beauty of fertile and pleasant places, such as Lebanon
for trees, Bashan for pasture, and Cormel for corn; he can make the stable
hills to quake and melt like wax or snow; the earth to burn up with drought, or
as Sodom was destroyed, yea, and can dissolve all the creatures, and make the
habitable world feel the effects of his power: from all which Learn, 1. The
power of God is much to be studied by all those who oppose him, and by them who
expect help from him in trouble; therefore this ample description of his power
is recorded. 2. Whatever men do conceit of themselves, yet it is no small task
to give God the glory of omnipotency, and fix faith upon him, as able to do
whatsoever he pleases; for, this commendation of his power is no vain
repetition, but imports that neither do enemies fear it, nor his people trust
it as they ought. 3. The Lord does give such ample proofs of his power in his
works of providence upon the creatures in heaven and earth, as may clearly
confirm us in the faith of his omnipotency, which are therefore to be studied,
that we may be confirmed; this is held forth in what he does dailyin the air in
storms and clouds, v. 3. and in what he can do upon seas, rivers, hills, etc.
whereof ample proof has been given, as is recorded in Scripture. 4. All the
creatures are subject to the power of God, to be disposed of, and their
ordinary course to be overturned at his pleasure; for, he makes seas and rivers
dry, makes fruits to wither, hills and earth to melt and burn, and the world to
be turned upside-down.

Ver. 6. Who can stand before his indignation? and who can abide in the
fierceness of his anger? his fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks are
thrown down by him.

From the former evidences of Gods power upon the creatures, the Prophet
infers the inability of any to stand or endure when an angry God calls
them before his tribunal; and that because his anger being attended with
invincible power, would as a fire burn up all before it without mercy, and can
overturn hard rocks, as at Christ's death, and 1. Kings. 19.11. Doct. 1. The
Lords indignation against sin, would be looked upon as attended with divine
Omnipotency, able to make the creature feel it sadly; for, so does this
dependence teach. See, Psalm. 90.11. 2. No attribute in God, how dreadful
soever, is formidable to any but to the man who provokes him to anger, and
continues therein without repentance. Therefore is his dreadful power held
forth as a ground to this conclusion, Who can stand before his indignation? and
who can abide in the fierceness of his anger? 3. It is but mad presumption in
wicked men, to think to decline Gods judgment seat, or to keep their feet when
he is angry; for God will draw them to his tribunal, and having rebuked and
condemned them, will cast them out of his presence, and destroy them in his
fierce displeasure; for, who can stand before his indignation, etc? 4. When
Gods anger is rightly considered, when the effects thereof upon the creatures
are seen, and when man becomes well acquainted with his own weakness, he will
easily see the folly of standing out against God; for, his fury is poured out
like fire (upon combustible matter; such as man is before him) and the rocks
a^e thrown down by him, how much more weak man?

Ver. 7. The LORD is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knows
them that trust in him.

Follows a description of God in his mercy, that he is good and meek a
defense in trouble, and an approver of, and carer for such as are his people
and trust in him: and as the former description of his power and justice was
verified upon the Assyrians, so this has relation to the behavior and
success of H^zekiah and Judah, who trusting in God, 2 Kings 18.5. 2 Chronicles.
32.8. were protected and delivered. Doct. 1 The people of God ought to be such,
as fleeing out of themselves, and renouncing all trust in humane helps and
confidences, do make God their only refuge both against sin and trouble; for,
so does the word rendered trusting import, they trust in him. 2. The Lord in
his greatest majesty and terriblenesse, is still good and favorable to such as
trust in him; for after the description of his power and justice, is subjoyned,
The Lord is good. See, Mat. 28.4, 5. 3. The people of God ought to resolve for
times of trouble and strait, which yet is without any prejudice to the
goodness of God toward them, as being sent to do them good, and to their
advantage; for, the Lord ^s good, and yet it is implied that there will be the
day of trouble, and but a day, not an eternity of it. 4. The power of God which
is employed against enemies, is forthcoming for the comfort of his people in
their need; for, thereby is he a strong hold, or, strength. 5. The Lords
goodness, his protection and defense is best known and discerned in times of
difficulty; for, the Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble. His
peoples wanting of difficulties would take away the sense of what he is to them
and for them, Psalm. 31.7. 6. The Lord not only as omniscient knows, but does
approve and has a care of such as lean to him, and give him the glory of his
attributes, by believing; for, he knows them that trust in him.

Ver. 8. But with an overrunning flood he will make an utter end of the place
thereof, and darkness shall pursue his enemies.

The Prophet proceeds to apply this description of God to the present purpose,
and in opposition to this his goodness, his severity against the Assyrians is
held forth, comprehending the sum of all the threatening, that the City or
Empire shall be so suddenly and violently overthrown, as if a deluge had swept
it away, and in that any who escape that storm, shall be pursued and cut off
with judgments. Doct. 1. The people of God ought to learn to esteem highly of
their safety in him, by considering the woeful case of such as are without him;
therefore is this calamity set in opposition to their safety, that they may
stand as it were upon the bridge of this deluge, and seeing the wicked perish,
may rejoice in him who is become their salvation; The Lord is good, etc. But
with an overrunning flood he will make an utter end, etc. 2. The judgments of
an angry God are as irresistible, and make as great havoc of persons or
places, as if an inundation or deluge brake in upon a land, so does this
similitude import, with an over running flood he will make an utter end of the
place thereof, to wit, of Nineveh, or the Assyrian Empire; it should be so
destroyed and swept away, as the place where the city stood should bear no
monument thereof, no^ should there be any face of the Empire. This form of
speech does frequently point out total extirpation, Psalm. 37.10. Dan. 2.35.
Rev. 12.8. 3. There is no possibility for man to shun the righteous judgments
of the Lord; nor can exemption in horridest calamities secure a sinner from
other plagues; for, though they escape the deluge, or think to flee, yet
darkness shall pursue his enemies. 4. The portion of Gods enemies is to be cut
off and sent out of the world in affliction, ignominy and terror, and
afterward to be sent to the pit; for, so much does darkness import. See, Job
10.21, 22. Jer. 13.16. Matthew. 8.12. darkness shall pursue his enemies, and
where he pursues he will overtake.

Ver. 9. What do ye imagine against the LORD? he will make an utter end;
affliction shall not rise up the second time.

This sentence is confirmed in that their enterprises against the Church would
be so far from taking effect, and their projects to uphold themselves, and
their Monarchy stand in so little stead, that he should totally ruin and cut
them off, so that there should be nothing left for a second stroke to hit upon.
Doct. 1. It is a presumptuous and vain course for men to plot and enterprise
evil against the Church of God, considering that this is to oppose themselves
against God, and to draw speedy destruction upon themselves from him, which
will mar their project; for, what do ye imagine against the Lord? he will
make an utter end, says he to the Assyrians plotting the Churches destruction.
2. All humane endeavors to keep off judgments will prove vain, when God is a
party and about to punish for sin; for, so much also are we to understand in
this place, by imagining against the Lord; which he contemnes, and judges as
foolish thoughts, to think to be delivered thereby; What do ye imagine against
the Lord? See, Prove. 21.30. 2. However the Lord spare wicked States, when his
own Church is often troubled, yet when their cup is full, he will once for all
pay them home with total ruin; for, he will make an utter end; affliction
shall not rise up the second time.

Ver. 10. For while they be folded together as thorns, and while they are
drunken together as drunkards, they shall be devoured as stubble fully dry.

A further confirmation of this sentence, and of the certainty and
compleatnesse of their calamity, is held forth in a threefold similitude. 1. Of
thorns folded togethar, which while one cannot separate, he casts into the
fire, and so all do easily burn. 2. Of drunken men, who are easily overcome and
slain. 3. Of stubble fully dry, which easily takes fire: whereby also they are
taught the vanity of all they had to oppose against Gods stroke; for, whereas
they confided in their numbers, union and terriblenesse (as thorns folded
together, and pricking on all hands, may signify) they should indeed prove a
fit bundle for the fire, and be perplexed in their own counsels, that they may
run on destruction; and whereas they confided in their pleasures, they should
be infatuated thereby, and prove as drunken men, ready to hurt themselves, and
fit to be slain by others; and their sunshine of prosperity should but dry them
as fuel for the fire. Doct. 1. God can make use of such things as men conceive
to be their advantages, for to procure their ruin, and blast all of them; for,
so do these similitudes, before explained, teach us: God can turn their
confided in union and terriblenesse into perplexity and total destruction, as
thorns folded together are fit to be cast into the fire. 2. Abused pleasures
and prosperity do ripen the abusers, and fit them for judgment; while as their
hearts being effeminate therewith, cannot (in Gods just judgment upon them)
stand out against any blast of trouble; and withal trouble comes from God
unexpectedly upon such, while they are taken up with the noise of their
delights; for, while they are drunken as drunkards, who have not their wits
about them, they shall be devoured. 3. There is as little ability in sinful
man to stand out against the just vengeance of God, as in dry stubble to
resist the fire, that it should not kindle in it and burn it; for, though they
be both folded together, and drunken with pleasure, yet that shall not so much
as make them endure trouble, as thorns do the fire, but yet more, they shall
be devoured as stubble fully dry.

Ver. 11. There is one come out of thee that imagines evil against the LORD: a
wicked counselor,

Follows the Lords controversy, and cause of this calamity, which was the
injuries done by Sennacherib: (not excluding others of their Kings before) who
purposed and plotted the ruin of the Church, and by his servant Rabshakeh
uttered blasphemy against God, and counseled his people to quit their
confidence, and yield to him. See, 2. King. 18. 2 Chronicles. 32. Isay. 36 This
verse makes it clear, that the threatenings in this chapter are not chiefly
directed against Senacherib and his army, (though it may sometimes be hinted at
as a presage of great ruin) but against the Assyrian Empire; for Sennacherib
is one come out of thee, that is, out of Assyria or, Nineveh, who are here
threatened. Doct. 1. Injuries done unto Gods people do bring most speedy and
total ruin upon any State; for, such was the quarrel here, imagining evil
against the Lord. 2. Wicked governors and rulers do draw on speedy calamities
on such as they rule over, and lead in wrong courses; for, Assyria and Nineveh
are to be cut off, because there is one come out of thee, etc. 3. When the
Lords people are wronged, he will still appear in the quarrel, and resent the
injury as done to himself, his people being under his protection, and the
design tending to deprive him of a people and of a throne in the Church;
therefore all their enterprises are expounded to be imagining evil against the
Lord. Se^, Zech. 2.8. 4. The Lord does observe and will severely punish the
wicked projects and machinations of enemies, whatever effect he in his
providence permit them to have; for, it is laid to their charge, that there is
one come out of thee, that imagines evil against the Lord, a wicked
counselor, albeit he get no leave to execute all his purpose. See, Psalm.
21.11. 5. It is a wicked imagination in men, that leads them to blaspheme God,
in denying his power and providence, and mocking of his peoples confidence in
him, or to think that this is the way to prosper: and it is a wicked counsel to
persuade Gods people to renounce their confidence, and renounce the way of his
worship, that it may be well with them; the authors of all which God will not
suffer to go unpunished; for, thus also did Sennacherib and Rabshakeh imagine
evil against the Lord, and prove a wicked counselor, as the sacred History
relates, and for this is Assyria threatened. 6. It is the character of one
indeed desperate, and a never-do-well, who dares enter the lists in opposition
to God, by plotting against his glory and people; for, he is a wicked
counselor, or a counselor of Belial, that is, not only one who having cast
off all yokes, and awe of God, has fallen upon such devilish plots, but one
who will never do well, as the word signifies.

Ver. 12. Thus says the LORD, Though they be quiet, and likewise many, yet
thus shall they be cut down, when he shall pass thorough: though I have
afflicted thee, I will afflict thee no more.

Ver. 13. For now will I break his yoke from off thee, and will burst thy bonds
in sunder.

Upon the back of this challenge they are again threatened with destruction,
notwithstanding of their quiet and secure condition, or of their confidence in
their great multitudes: and this sentence is further amplified from Gods end in
it, which is to comfort his Church in Judah, that had been afflicted by the
Assyrians, to whom he promises that she should no more be smitten with that
rod, but that by the destruction of Assyria, she should be delivered from that
slavery and bondage, under which she had been held by them. Doct. 1. As
prosperity makes a people usually fat and rank, so does their waxing gross
call for strokes: for, they being quiet, became likewise many, and therefore
shall be cut down or shorn; while the Prophet says, Thus shall they be cut
down or shorn, he either has in delivering this message, used some gesture,
representing the way of cutting down or mowing; or, he alludeth to the
signification of the word cutting down, which is used of cutting down rank
grass, wool or hair, by sharpened instruments, so signifying the cutting
short their flourishing and luxuriant condition; or, the word translated thus,
may be rendered likewise, as it is immediately before, and so it imports, that
as they had tasted of peace, and likewise of multiplication: so should they
also find cutting down; or, it may be rendered certainly, as it is frequently
used in Scripture. 2. Nothing the creature can enjoy is able to hold off Gods
stroke, nor needs he any time to ruin his enemies, but can do it with one
sudden stroke; for, though they be quiet (free of trouble, and secure in their
fortifications) yet shall they be cut down, and that when he shall pass
through: or, with a sudden stroke, alluding to the stroke on Sennacheribs Army.
3. This repetition of the sentence teaches, how hard a thing it is to get
threatened judgments believed in a prosperous condition; therefore the Lord
does again undertake it, whatever they had to oppose, And teaches, that it is
useful for the Church to look on injuries done to her, as a sufficient quarrel
to bring judgments on her persecutors; for, therefore after that challenge, v.
11. the sentence is again repeated. 4. The Lord would have his Church observing
the kindness showed to her, and the benefits that redound to her by his
judgments on the world, therefore does he direct the speech to her, that she
may observe it. Though I have afflicted thee, etc. 5. The Lord takes with the
style of being the afflicter of his people, whoever be the instruments, and
would be seen of them to be so, therefore, says he, I have afflicted thee.
See, Isa. 10.5. 6. Albeit the Church of God will never get an end put to her
afflictions, until eternity come, when God shall wipe away all tears from her
eyes; yet ought she to acknowledge the Lords great mercy, in cutting off her
present enemies, and giving a breathing time; for, so must this promise, I will
afflict thee no more, be understood in this place, with relation to the present
enemy, that the Church should be free of their trouble, and enjoy a little
rest. 7. The Lords former sharp dealing ought to be no obstacle to our faith in
expecting of good things; for, he can easily, when he will, change his dealing:
Though I have afflicted thee, says he, I will afflict thee no more. 8. As the
Lord sees it fitting, at some times to humble his Church, by bringing her into
bondage; so he easily can, and in due time will set her at freedom; therefore,
says he, Now will I break his yoke from off thee, and will burst thy bond in
sunder.

Verse. 14. And the LORD has given a commandment concerning thee, that no more
of thy name be sown: out of the house of thy gods will I cut off the graven
image, and the molten image: I will make thy grave, for thou art vile.

Albeit it be true, that Sennacheribs glory was stained by that discomfiture
received in Judah, Is. 37.36. and he was shortly after killed in the house of
his gods, Is 37.38. whereby that temple was polluted from being the habitation
of their idols, where the King was slain, and (belike) buried, yet this cannot
exhaust this full threatening, seeing his son reigned in his stead, Isa. 37.38.
and so his name was yet sown, and therefore the threatening is to be looked
on, as reaching the whole Empire of Assyria, the final and irreparable ruin
whereof is yet diverse ways pointed out, 1. By having no more of their name
sown, whereby we are given to understand, that their very memory should be
quite cut off, and the dreadful report which went of them among other Nations
quite forgotten, and so their cutting down, v. 12. should differ from the
condition of grass, or other things which grow up again after they are cut
down, and of corn which is yearly sown after cutting down. 2. By destroying of
their idol^ and supposed sacred things, which is another sign of total ruin
of an idolatrous land continuing so still, when the stroke reaches even to
these. 3. By burying of them, and putting them off the face of the earth, as
being vile and stinking above ground, which seems to have begun, after that
overthrow of their army in Judah. Doct. 1. Such is the presumption of wicked
men, and the heartlesse diffidence of Gods people, that Gods sentence against
his enemies is hardly received and credited: for, this frequent repetition
shows, that this truth is not easily inculcated. 2. It is sufficient ground
of assurance for the coming to pass of greatest things, that the Lord has
determined they should be; for, this is given as a sure ground of Assyria's
ruin, that the Lord has given a Commandment concerning thee, or purposed
their destruction, his purpose concluding as effectually the concurring of all
means to bring it about, as if they were especially commanded. 3. The Lord does
justly root out the memory of such persons or States, as make it their only
work to get a name on earth, and to be eminent and terrible; for, such is
Assyria's doom: No more of thy name shall be sown. 4. The threatening of the
destruction of idols, as a sign of total ruin, should put us in mind of the
Lords great controversy against idolatry and idols, in that he will ruin the
worshippers thereof, to ruin them: as also, if the cutting off of their idols
was a sign of utter destruction, how much more ought it to be grievous unto
us, beyond any of our particular losses, when our God in his h^nour and house
is wronged, and how sad a presage is it of a sad stroke, when God does not
spare his own interests in a land? all this we may gather from this sentence,
Out of the house of thy gods will I cut off the graven image, and the molten
image. 5. God can make the greatest and most formidable Nations contemptible,
not only before him by their vices, but in the view of all the world, by
affronts put upon them by Providence: and so cut them off from the face of the
earth, as unworthy and unfit to live upon it; for, so does this sentence, I
will make thy grave, for thou art vile, import.

Verse 15. Behold, upon the mountains the feet of him that brings good
tidings, that publishes peace, O Judah, keep thy solemn feasts, perform thy
vows: for the wicked shall no more pass through thee, he is utterly cut off.

However a passage like unto this, Isa. 52.7. be applied unto the Gospel, Romans
10.15. (Christ, promised in the Gospel, being the foundation of all the
Churches deliverances, and these glad tidings and deliverances, being but
shadows of the glad tidings of the Gospel, and of the salvation therein held
forth:) yet the proper drift of this place is, to show the effects which the
destruction of the Assyrians should produce in the Church of Judah, now only
left, who hearing these tidings proclaimed openly, as upon the mountains,
should rejoice in them as glad tidings, and tidings of peace: and should
without disturbance keep their solemnities, and praise God, their enemies, who
disquieted and interrupted them, being now cut off: A notable proof of all
which they had, when as Sennacheribs army, who made havoc of Judah, and shut
up Jerusalem was overthrown. Doct. 1. The Lord will refresh his Church, who
has received the glad tidings of salvation, with glad tidings of his appearing
and doing for her in difficulties; for, there are here good tidings, and peacc
published openly upon the mountains. 2. The report of the Lords doing for his
people, ought to be seriously considered by them, and they to be affected
therewith; Behold, upon the mountains, etc. says he. 3. It is the Churches
sorest affliction to be deprived of the free use of the Ordinances of God, and
the enjoyment of them her greatest mercy: for, so is implied in the Command now
to keep thy solemn feasts, (which before she could not) as the great mercy in
her deliverance. 4. The want of public Ordinances, and the solemnities of
worship is a bitter trial, however it may fare well with the people of God, in
their private exercises of Religion, and in their inward conditions; for, so is
also imported in that Judah may keep solemn feasts. 5. Our estimation of, and
respect unto the Ordinances of God, must be evidenced by our great alacrity in
going about them, (especially after we have been deprived of them for a time;)
and by our endeavored thankfulness to God for the enjoying of them; for, this
speech, O Judah, keep thy solemn feasts, is a stirring up to alacrity, and the
Command, Perform thy vows, imports a sensible obligation to thankfulness to
God for the restoring of the Ordinances. 6. The Lord will cut off such sons of
Belial, as do molest his people in the free use of his Ordinances, be they
never so potent; for, so is assured of the Assyrians; for the wicked, or,
Belial shall pass no more through thee, he is utterly cut off: And this
sentence stands still in force to be executed in due time, upon all those who
do trace the Assyrians footsteps, and imitate their sins.

CHAP. II.
THis Chapter contains a lively description of the destruction of Nineveh,
wherein is set forth the preparations for the siege, which they might in reason
now expect, ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. the taking away of the City, v. 6. with the
captivity of the Queen, v. 7. the flight of the inhabitants and desendants, v.
8. the sacking of the City, and the terror, confusion and sorrow that shall be
amongst all, v. 9, 10. All which is amplified from the cause of this stroke,
which is insinuated in the admiration and insulting of such as see or hear of
their ruin, ver. 11, 12. and expressly declared by the Lord, who ownes all
this that is come upon her, as his act punishing her sin, v. 13.

Verse 1. HE that dasheth in pieces is come up before thy face: keep the
munition; watch the way, make thy loins strong, fortify thy power mightily.

The preparations against Ni^eveh are set down in general, that the Medes, and
Nebuchadnezzar, and the Calde^ns, who use to crush all they set upon, are to
assault her also, whom she shall not be able to resist, though she use all
means for defense. And therefore the enemy is spoken of, as if he were already
in sight of the City, and she is exhorted by way of derision to prepare her
self, by keeping her walls, sending out her Scouts to observe the enemies
approach, and by encouraging and strengthening her self all the ways she
could. Doct. 1. The Lord can make a Nation formidable, so long as he has
se^vice for them, who, when their own cup is filled, become also feeble; for,
the enemies by reason of former successes, appear unto the Assyrians, as he
that dasheth in pieces, or, the hammer, Jer. 50.23. and yet they were
afterward brought down. 2. When God sends a prospering enemy against a wicked
people, it is, that it may contribute and add to that terror of God wherewith
he will confound them in their trouble; for, therefore are the enemies named
here, He that dasheth in pieces, to strike Nineveh with terror. 3. Albeit
secure sinners put the evil day far off, yet such as know the mind of God
may see it, as if it were present, and sinners themselves will at last find it
so; therefore says the Prophet, He that dasheth in pieces is come up before
thy face, because he saw it so from God, and they should find it so. 4. Wicked
men are not soon sensible of the hand of God against them, but may think to
bear out against the trouble, which is sent to destroy them; for, so does
Nineveh prepare, as if she would stand it out. 5. The most prudent and
couragiou spreparations of men, are but matter of derision, when God has a
quarrel, and they will prove but fools in trusting in them: for, these
exhortations, Keep the munition, watch the way, etc. are spoken by way of holy
derision, showing that the utmost of their endeavors should not avail them.

Verse. 2. For the LORD has turned away the excellency of Jacob, as the
excellency of Israel, for the emptiers have emptied them out, and marred their
vinebranches.

A reason is given why Nineveh might expect that the Lord would now come
against her, though before she had been by his permission prosperous; to wit,
that the Lord had by the Affyrians, as his scourge, chastised Judah (for so
much seems to be understood by Jacob, as distinguished from Israel,) as well as
the ten tribes, and overturned and trod under foot their proud gloriation in
their excellencies; the one being totally depopulated and emptied by them, and
the other deformed by the taking and sacking of their towns and villages, which
were as branches sprung out of Jerusalem the mother-City; and therefore he
would not spare Nineveh, but it was now time to take course with them, and cast
the rod into the fire. Doct. 1. The Lord has an especial quarrel at the pride
of his people, which arises from the consideration of their excellencies or
privileges, and will have it stained; for, The Lord has turned away the
excellency of Jacob, as the excellency of Israel, and so spares it in none: and
the same word signifying both excellency and pride, shows, that as
privileges and conceiting of them, go often together: so the Lord abhors
such conceit most of any. 2. No less oftentimes will serve to stain pride, and
bring down the conceit of a people privileged by God, then almost total
destruction; for in turning away their excellency, The emptiers have emptied
them out, and marred their vine-branches. 3. The Lord so much abhors the
pride of his people, that he will tolerate even a blasphemous enemy, till they
have been instrumental in bringing it down; therefore, Nineveh is not meddled
with, till by them the Lord has turned away the excellency of Jacob, etc. See,
Isa. 10.11, 12, 4. The Church being humbled, and her vainglory laid low before
the Lord, he will then take order with such as have been instruments of her
affliction: therefore, this is a reason of the enemies coming against Nineveh;
for, The Lord has turned away the excellency of Jacob, etc. The Churches sins,
unmortified by the rod, are the safeguard of enemies, and the reason why they
are so long preserved.

Verse. 3. The shield of his mighty men is made red, the valiant men are in
scarlet: the charets shall be with flaming torches in the day of his
preparation, and the firre-trees shall be terribly shaken.

4. The charets shall rage in the streets, they shall justle one against
another in the broad ways, they shall seem like torches, they shall run like
the lightnings.

5. He shall recount his Worthies, they shall stumble in their work, they shall
make haste to the wall thereof, and the defense thereof shall be prepared.

The army of the Caldeans, and their preparations and actions against Nineveh,
are more particularly described, 1. That the armor and clothing chiefly of
their Leaders, were red and bloody-coloured, to terrify others, and hide their
own wounds and blood, that the sight thereof might not encourage the enemies,
nor make themselves to faint. 2. That their chariots both in preparations and
assaults, for celerity, numerousnesse, and because of the fierce disposition of
such as manage them, should rage, justle and march nimbly as torches and
lightnings, the iron of their wheels striking fire on the streets. 3. That
their lances, which were so many, as if a wood of firre-trees, were divided
amongst them, should be shaken and managed to the terror of the Assyrians. 4.
That the Caldean King, encouraging his Leaders, and calling them by their
names, they shall stumble for haste to be at the wall to assault it, and shall
set up defenses under which they may fight with less hazard; from all which
Learn, 1. To adore the infinite Providence of God, who gives by his Prophet an
exact and particular account of every circumstance in this action, as if it
were already done, intimating, that his purposes, effectual providence and
foreknowledge, do condescend even to particular circumstances of actions. 2.
This large description of their clothes, garments, activity, etc. teaches, how
terrible those are, who are employed to execute the Lords vengeance and
controversy, how strong they are on whose side he is, and how formidable to
those whom he is to destroy. 3. If natural men, for their own ends of ambition
and vain glory, may be made so resolute, as to run swiftly on hazards, and care
nothing for death or wounds, as here is declared, how much more ought the Lords
people to be resolute and courageous in resisting to blood, striving against
sin, and in acting for God in their places and stations? 4. The practice of
these men in preparing the defense under which they might fight, teaches, that
it is no true valor, even in natures eyes, nor warrantable, to run so
desperately on hazards, as to neglect any lawful means of self-defence.

Verse. 6. The gates of the rivers shall be opened, and the palace shall be
dissolved.

Follows the way of taking the City, by the inundation of the river Tygris,
on which it stood, whereby the wall being broken down, way was made for the
enemy to enter as at gates, and the stately buildings, or royal Palace was
carried away by the flood, or dissolved and destroyed by the enemies. Tygris is
here called rivers, either by way of excellency above many rivers, or because
it grew then as big as many rivers. Doct. 1. The Lord will so make use of men's
courage in doing of his work, as that his own immediate hand and judgment may
be seen; for, he will have the river made great by his hand, to make way for
the enemies entry and victory, that so it might be seen not to be their hand
only: The gates of the rivers shall be opened. 2. The Lords immediate hand is
seen in prevailing against his enemies, where they think themselves most
secure: for, so way was made to enter Nineveh by the river, where it seemed
most impregnable, and where, it seems, their Palace was built: The gates of the
rivers shall be opened. As nothing will prove weak which God employeth, so
nothing proves strong where he is a party. 3. Divine vengeance can strike Kings
and wicked Rulers, not only with judgments abroad, on armies or subjects; but
can pursue them to their very Palaces, and pull them down upon their heads;
for, The Palace shall be dissolved.

Verse. 7. And Huzzah shall be led away captive, she shall be brought up, and
her maids shall lead her, as with the voice of doves, tabring upon their
breasts.

To omit the various Interpretations of this verse, I conceive it most clear to
expound it of the Queen, (or, generally of the great Ladies,) who living before
quietly and delicately, in an established or settled condition, as the word
Huzzah signifies, shall now be found out, and pulled away to go into
captivity, accompanied with her maids, who having been with her in pleasure;
shall now condole with her, and lament her and their own miseries. And this is
the first effect of the taking of the City. Whence learn, 1. The most delicate
and weak, and such as have not been accustomed to hardships, may look for a
change when they provoke God, how stable soever their prosperity seem to be;
for, Huzzah shall be led away captive, or discovered, and spoiled, and made
bare, as the word also signifies, and it may be she was handled so. See, Deuteronomy.
28.56, 57. Lam. 4.5. 2. As giving of ones self to much delicacie, contributes
to embitter afflictions unto them; so such as have been companions in pleasure,
may contribute to set an edge on another grief; for, so are we taught by the
example of this mournful company, brought out of pleasure to misery, and her
maids leading her, tabring on their breasts for sorrow, do help to set before
her the bitterness of her condition. 3. It is an addition to common
calamities, that the afflicted must smother their grief, and dare not vent it
openly, for fear of further injuries from enemies, therefore albeit women use
most violently to express their sorrows, yet her maids lead her as with the
voice of doves, which is a secret groaning and bemoaning, not daring to do it
openly,

Verse 8. But Nineveh is of old like a pool of water; yet they shall flee away.
Stand, stand, shall they cry, but none shall look back.

Another effect of the taking of Nineveh is, the flight of the inhabitants and
defendants; which is amplified from her former condition; that, albeit she had
been of a long time, or since she had a being, populous, rich, and at ease, not
stirred with commotions, as a pond of standing water, abounding with fish; yet
at the enemies entry, she should be troubled and forsaken, and men should for
no entreaty stand to it. Doct. 1. Gods former sparing of a people, or their
quiet prosperity, and numbers of men, will prove no shelter against Gods
judgments when their cup is full; for, Nineveh is of old like a pool of water,
yet they shall flee away. 2. No encouragements will hearten a people pursued of
God, and effeminate with security and ease, when their day of trouble comes;
for, to such as had lived in her as in a pond, Stand, stand, shall they cry,
but none shall look back. 3. The great desert of sin may be seen in the great
changes it brings upon most flourishing places; for, so in Nineveh of old like
a pool of water, there is not one now to take her part, or abide.

Verse 9. Take ye the spoil of silver, take the spoil of gold: for there is no
end of the store, and glory out of all the pleasant furniture.

Another effect of the taking of the City is, the spoiling thereof by the
soldiers, unto which, (as being exceeding great for treasures and precious
furniture, and that which the Ninevites gloried much in) the Lord invites them
by his Prophet. Doct. 1. Riches, jewels, and pleasant furniture, are so far
from delivering in a day of wrath, that they are a bait and invitation to
enemies, courageously to set upon the enjoyers; for, so does the Lords speech.
Take ye the spoil, -- for there is none end of the store, etc import, that the
hope of spoil made the enemies bold. 2. God does justly suffer such to be
spoiled of their riches and treasures, as are endless and immoderate in
purchasing, and place their glory in such things; for, so much also does this
speech import. 3. However instruments may unjustly deprive wicked men of their
gloried in riches, yet it is done in, the Lords righteous judgment, who
allows it to be done though he approve not the way of men's doing of it, but
will in due time take order with them therefore; for, albeit the enemies did
for their own ends spoil Nineveh, yet the Lords invitation, Take ye the
spoil, shows, that it was righteous with him it should be given up.

Verse. 10. She is empty, and void, and waste, and the heart melts, and the
knees smite together, and much pain is in all loinee, and the faces of them
all gather blackness.

The sad case of this taken City is further held forth, that it should be made
empty and desolate, and the inhabitants thereof should be utterly discouraged:
the inward, feeble and desperate condition of their minds, through trouble and
fear of death, being expressed by usual signs in their body, such as the
trembling of the knees, when the strength and spirits go in to keep the heart,
Dan. 5.6. pain in the loins, expressing the sorrow of a woman in travel, Isa.
13.8. Jer. 30.6. and blackness in the face, which is a sign of a deadly
condition, reaching to the heart, Joel 2.6. Whence learn, 1. The Lord can (and
will because of sin) lay most populous and flourishing places utterly desolate;
for, Nineveh that great City, is empty, and void, and waste. 2. Guilt, and the
want of reconciliation with God, will make men prove great cowards in a day of
trouble, either in bearing what they are under, or in looking to what they may
expect; for, all these signs of discouragement do teach how heartlesse their
case was, and how little man is able to bear out, when he has to do with a God
dealing in justice.

Ver. 11. Where is the dwelling of the lions, and the feeding place of the
young lions? where the lion, even the old lion walked, and the lions whelp, and
none made them afraid.

12. The lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and strangled for his
lionesses, and filled his holes with prey, and his dens with ravine.

The greatness of this desolation, as also the cause procuring it, are
insinuated in the admiration, or insulting of all, who see or hear of it,
wondering what was become of Nineveh, which had been a safe and delicate place
of abode for magnanimous oppressors, both Princes and people, who, as lions,
had oppressed all others, that they might enrich themselves and their families,
and had brought their purchase thither, but now it was abolished, and no more
conspicuous as formerly. Doct. 1. Oppression proves men to be brutish, and
turns their Palaces and Cities into lions dens, and makes their wealth
abomination, for, here these oppressors are called lions and young lions, and
their city or houses holes and dens, and their purchase prey and ravine, which
they teared and strangled. 2. The judgment of the Lord will so follow
oppression, as the place of oppressors, whither they bring what they have
purchased by oppression, shall not be found, though otherwise it seemed never
so impregnable; for, where is the dwelling of the lions, and the feeding place
of the young lions? where the lion, even the old lion walked, and the lions
whelp, and none made them afraid. 3. The ruin of great oppressors, as it will
be matter of admiration to such as looked on their secure condition by the eye
of carnal reason; so it will be matter of derision to such as have suffered by
them, or do abhor their way, and glorify God in his justice; for, so may this
question be expounded of the admiration of some, and insulting of others, See,
Isa. 14.10, 11, 12. and Psalm. 52.6, 7. and 58.10, 11. 4. A faithless and
irreligious care of a family, and of posterity to have them great, is a great
snare and inducement to draw men to be oppressors, which yet does not assoil
them before the Lord, for, the lion did tear in pieces for his whelps, and
strangled for his lionesses, etc. and yet they were destroyed.

Verse. 13. Behold, I am against thee, says the LORD of hosts, and I will
burn her chariots in the smoke, and the sword shall devour the young lions,
and I will cut off thy prey from the earth, and the voice of thy messengers
shall no more be heard.

The Lord here expressly ownes the stroke, threatening to cut off with fire
and sword their means of defense, and oppressing people; and declares his
quarrel to be their oppression and taking of prey, threatening to take away
what they had so purchased, and to hinder them from oppressing any more, and
that their Messengers or Ambassadors, sent to denounce war against Nations, or
govern Provinces, and especially their blasphemous messengers, such as
Senacherib and Rabshakeh, 2 Kings 18.19. should be made to cease from their
insolences, and not to be any more heard tell of. Doct. 1. The Lords having a
quarrel against a people or person, will produce remarkable effects: for,
Behold, I am against thee, says the Lord. 2. The Lord has alsufficiency of
power and means to bring down any enemy, and to effect what he will; for, he is
the Lord of hosts, who has all creatures at his command, who can make
invincible armies of weakest creatures, and at whose command nothing will send
forth all things. 3. God can easily, and will openly, to the terror of others,
cut off the warlike preparations and confidences of wicked men: for, I will
burn her chariots in the smoke; which may import, that he will overthrow them
by as small means, as if a smoke before a fire were well kinded, should burn
chariots, or that he will openly overthrow them, as in a fire, the smoke
whereof should be seen afar off 4. God will cut off the race of oppressors
continuing in their sins by some remarkable judgment; for, the sword shall
devour the young lions, and I will cut off thy prey. 5. It is a mark of wicked
men never to give over sin, till the Lord by his judgments render them unable
to commit it; for, when the sword shall devour, then only is their prey cut off
from the earth. 6. Oppression of the Church being joined with insolent
blasphemy against the Lord is a quarrel which he will never put up till he have
destroyed all the impenitent authors of it, and rendered them unable to do the
like again; for, then says he, the voice of thy messengers shall no more be
heard; albeit God did cut off Senacherib and his army who were the immediate
actors; yet his hand is stretched out still, till it reach Nineveh also, from
whence they came for the same.

CHAP. III.
FOr the encouragement of the Church of God Nahum in this chapter does again
repeat and further confirm the certain and total ruin of Nineveh, that so also
he may remove all doubts out of the minds of any, who could hardly believe so
ancient and potent a kingdom could be destroyed. And, 1. Nineveh because of
her cruel oppression, is threatened with the terrible preparations of her
enemies coming against her, and with great slaughter, v. 1, 2, 3. And is again
threatened for her enslaving of all Nations, with extreme contempt to be poured
upon her, v. 4, 5, 6, 7. 1. This sentence is amplified and confirmed by the
example of other places, v. 8, 9, 10, 11. and by showing the vanity of all that
she confided in for safety, as strong holds, citizens, hired soldiers,
officers and nobles, v. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. All which should not exempt
her from irreparable ruin, whereat all Nations oppressed by her should
rejoice, v. 19.

Ver. 1. WOE to the bloody city, it is all full of lies and robbery, the prey
departs not.

Nineveh is here accursed for cruelty, oppression and deceit, wherein she was
incessant, and threatened with Woe, or all miseries to come upon her. Whence
learn, 1. The Lord has an especial controversy against a people given to
cruelty and bloodshed: Woe to the bloody city, that is, the city which raised it
self by blood, and cruel practices, and which yet continues in them toward
other Nations, and among themselves, as is usual for them who are too full, to
be very insolent, 2. Dissimulation, which flows from a covetous disposition,
and a desire to oppress, is hateful unto the Lord, as well as open violence;
for, he can see robbery under false dealing; therefore are lies and robberies
yoked together: it is all full of lies and robbery, that is, these evils have
overspread all. 3. This frequent repetition of their oppression, and denouncing
of woe against it, teaches, that whatever men, who judge by outward
appearances, or the people of God in the hour of temptation may think, yet the
Lord exceedingly hates oppression, and oppressors, let them thrive as they
will, they are in a woeful condition: woe to the city that is full of robbery. 4.
The Lord remarks, and especially hates perseverance in wicked courses; for. woe
is denounced also, because the prey departs not: that is, after so long a
tract of time, wherein they have continued in this sin, and not withstanding
they have abundance, yet they give not over oppression; for, no measure of
worldly wealth will fatisfie the appetite of such as do transgress the limits
prescribed by God, 1 Timothy 6.8, 9, 10.

Ver. 2. The noise of a whip, and the noise of the rattling of the wheels, and
of the prancing horses and of the jumping charets.

3. The horsemen lifted up both the bright sword, and the glittering spear, and
there is a multitude of slain, and a great number of carcases: and there is no
end of their corpses, they stumble upon their corpses.

The sentence is enlarged, and the woe explained, wherein they are threatened,
partly with the terrible preparations of the Caldeans coming against them,
which he sets out in every circumstance, as if they were then entering the
city, and the whips wherewith they drive their chariots, and the noise of their
chariot-wheels and horses feet sounding in the ears of the Ninevites, and the
weapons of the horsemen dazzling their eyes; and partly they are threatened with
execution and slaughter by these enemies, which should be so great, that the
dead corpses lying in the way should hinder men to walk on the streets, or to
flee away. Doct. 1. To be under a woe from the Lord, speaks most bitter
judgment; for so that Woe, v. 1. is expounded to partend so great and terrible
slaughter; implying that whosoever are under the Lords curse, will meet with
the like or worse judgments, though it may be not so visible to a carnal eye.
2. The judgments of God sent forth in wrath upon his incorrigible enemies,
will be terrible and dreadful unto them, the very approach whereof will be a
kind of death unto them before they be slain; for, therefore does he threaten
them with the sounding noise, and dazzling sight of enemies, and their
preparations and approaches, as that which would prove dreadful to them. 3
Such as delight in blood and cruelty shall be recompensed of the Lord to the
full, in their own coin; for, in Nineveh, given to blood, v. 1. There is a
multitude of slain, and a great number of carcases, etc. 4. The judgments to
come upon the enemies of the Church are to be looked on by the people of God as
if they were already inflicted, that they may be comforted in that the Lord
executes judgment for them, and that they be not tempted with beholding the
present prosperity of enemies; for, therefore also is every circumstance of
this ruin marked, as if it were in acting, and the Ninevites represented as
dead corpses by the Prophet.

Verse. 4. Because of the multitude of the whoredoms of the well-favoured
harlot, the mistress of witchcrafts, that sells nations through her
whoredoms, and families through her witchcrafts.

Another branch of the Lords accusation and quarrel against Nineveh is, that
by her subtle and politic courses, (resembled to witchcrafts) she enhaunced
the wealth of other Nations, and brought them into slavery, using them for her
own advantage, and that as harlots by their beauty and artifices do ensnare
their Paramours, and bring them and their wealth in their power, so she made
use of her greatness and power together with her policies, to allure Nations
to submit to her, as if it had been for their own good. In this sense horlotrie
understood of Tyrus her merchandising, Isa. 23.15, 17. However, I would not
exclude another interpretation also; that as idolatry (which is frequently
called whoredom) and devilish arts were frequent amongst these eastern people,
Isay 2.6. and 47.13. So she made use of these arts to carry on her designs of
greatness, and enticed others to embrace her idolatry, that so they might be
united the more firmly unto her for her own advantage, as we see, 2 Kings.
16.10. Doct. 1. However men do ostentimes glory much in their wit and skill in
increasing their greatness, and outwitting others, yet before the Lord, such
ways are the ground of a controversy, and nothing else but whoredoms and
witchcrafts, as here we are taught. 2. Men are naturally immoderate and
excessive in their desire and hunting after greatness; for such are compared
to harlots who commit multitude of wheredoms, and are never satisfied in their
lust. 3. Worldly and politic States and people, are still to be looked on in
all their dealings with others, as seeking themselves and their own interests
only, whatever they pretend to the contrary; for, however Nineveh held out her
beautiful condition to other Nations (as an harlot to her Paramours) to invite
them as it were to their own benefit in being under the protection of so mighty
a State, yet her real intentions were thereby to dispose of them to her own
use, as slaves which are bought and sold: the wel-favoured harlot, the mistress
of witchcrafts, sells Nations through her whoredoms, and families through
her Witchcrafts. 4 Wicked men are given to abuse all favors and good things
conferred on them by God, and make them subservient to their lusts and
designs; for, as harlots prostitute their beauty to allure men to filthiness,
that they may reap gain; so did Ninevch make use of her greatness to allure
others to join with her, to her own advantage, and their prejudice, the
wellfavoured harlot sells Nations through her whoredoms. 5. Men given to
their lusts and worldly designs, use to make no scruple of unlawful means to
compass their ends before they be frustrated of them; for, Nineveh was the
mistress of witchcrafts, that is, of wicked policies and deceits, or
(according to the other interpretation) of devilish arts, that so she might be
great, and sell families through her witchcrafts. 6. Wicked men make no account
even of that religion which themselves profess, but in so far as it may be
subservient to their worldly ends; for, so does Nineveh (according to the other
interpretation) seil Nations through her whoredoms. She did pres^e her
idolatry on others to secure them to her, as conceiving religion to be the
surest bond of union, or tie to subjection, that she might reap benefit by them.

Ver. 5. Behold, I am against thee, says the LORD of hosts, and I will
discover thy skirts upon thy face, and I will show the nations thy nakedness,
and the kingdoms thy shame.

6. And I will cast abominable filth upon thee, and make thee vile, and will
set thee as a gazing-stock.

7. And it shall come to pass, that all they that look upon thee, shall flee
from thee, and say, Nineveh is laid waste, who will bemoan her? whnce shall I
seek comforters for thee?

In opposition to her former beauty, the Lord professing himself her party,
threatens her first with ignominy and depriving her of her exellencies and
ornaments, that she may be loathsome and contemptible to all, as if an harlot
were stripped, and her clothes cast back over her head, that her nakedness may
be exposed to mockery in the view of men, and as profane soldiers use to do
with captive women. See, Isa. 47.2, 3. Jer. 13.12. 2. He threatens to put yet
more affronrs upon her beauty, by granting her enemies victory over her, and
power to tread her down; as if women in their pomp were all befouled with dung,
and so made loathsome. 3. He threatens, that by this means she should be made a
publik spectacle, and the matter of horror and detestation to all beholders,
there being none to comfort her Doct. 1. Gods being an adversary to the wicked,
is neither soon seen by them, nor suppose it be seen, is the sadness of such
a condition easily laid to heart; therefore is it again inculcated, Behold, I
am against thee, says the Lord of hosts, though it had been told before,
chapter 2.13. 2 Abuse of mercy will in the end resolve in the abusers misery;
for, beautiful Nineveh who played the harlot with it, her skirts are
discovered, and abominable filth cast upon her, and she with whom the Nations
committed fornication, is made the object of peoples detestation. 3. People in
their greatest pomp and glory, do but fly with borrowed wings, and are in such
a condition as God can easily strip them of what they gloried in, and set them
as contemptible objects; for, Nineveh has shame and nakedness, which he will
show to nations and kingdoms, when he strips her of her borrowed glory. 4. As
wicked men cannot enjoy honor and greatness in the world, and not abuse it:
so the Lord is provoked thereby to plague the abusers with ignominy; for, I
will cast abominable filth upon thee, and make thee vile, says he to glorious
Nineveh. 5. The Lord will make such as have publikly sinned without repentance,
to become publik spectacles of his justice and severity, to the terror and
astonishment of the beholders; for I will set thee as a gazing-stock, and it
shall come to pass that all they that look upon thee, shall flee from thee. 6.
It is righteous with God, not only so to smite his enemies, as the stroke
shall surpass the cure of any consolations from friends; and the terror
thereof so to overwhelm them, as that they cannot and dare not appear to bemoan
and comfort them, but it is rightcous also, that such as have oppressed without
pity, should have none to condole with them in their justly procured and
inflicted corrections; for, all this is imported in this threatening, all that
look upon thee shall flee from thee, and say, Nineveh is laid waste, who will
bemoan her? whence shall I seek comforters for thee? that no sorrow should
express her stroke, nor any consolations prove sufficient, that her friendg
being terrified, should not be able to appear for her, and that she should be
abhorred and detested of all in her miseries.

Ver. 8. Art thou better then populous No, that was situate among the rivers,
that had the waters round about it, whose rampart was the sea, and her wall was
from the sea?

9. Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength, and it was infinite, Put, and Lubim
were thy helpers.

10. Yet was she carried away, she went into captivity, her young children also
were dashed in pieces at the top of all the streets; and they cast lots for her
henourable men, and all her great men were bound in chains.

11. Thou also shall be drunken, thou shall be hid thou also shall seek
strength because of the enemy.

To confirm what has been said, and to crush all presumptuous thoughts in
Nineveh as if she should be able to stand it out; he sets before her the
example of No, or Alexandria, a great city in Egypt, or near unto it, of which
see, Jer. 46.25. Ezech. 30.15. And in this example, 1. He rehearses the
flourishing condition of that city, it was populous, or nourishing, that is, a
great market town, nourishing the country about it; it was strong be
situation, being built among the Channels of Nilus, and environed with strong
ramparts, the sea also enclosing it on diverse parts; it was also strong by
great and many confederates, such as Ethiopians, or ( Arabians, who are
frequently named Cush in Scripture) Egyptians and other people of Africa
wherein the speech is directed to No, as insulting over her vain confidence in
these to the terror of Nineveh. 2. He repeats their stroke; That that City had
been made desolate, her people being carried captive, her young children dashed
in pieces, her honorable men divided amongst the soldiers as prey, and
carried away as slaves; as for the time of this desolation, and the persons by
whom it was acted: it is needless for us further, to enquire, seeing the
Spirit of God puts it out of controversy that it was done before the utter
ruin of Nineveh. 3. This example is applied to Nineveh, wherein is showed;
that since she had no more advantages then the other had, it was but folly to
think her self to be invincible; and she is assured that how potent soever she
be, yet she shall be drunk with the wine of Gods wrath; and that
notwithstanding her former splendor, she should be made to hide her self for
shame and fear, and become obscure, as if she had not been: and that she should
notwithstanding her own strength, be forced to seek help from abroad, or to
supplicate her enemies for pity. Doct. 1. The Lord has given abundant proof
that there is no power nor probable means of defense able to stand out against
him when he prosecuteth a controversy; for, so does the bringing in of this
instance teach. 2. Men are still ready to be presumptuous and confident of
their own standing, whatever they see done to others; therefore is this example
produced and applied, that her conceit may be thereby crushed: Art thou better
then populous No? etc. 3. Men have nothing to boast of as sufficient to
preserve them from ruin, but others have had the same or better, who yet have
succumbed; herefore are all the circumstances of ruined No's strength pointed
out, to show that she might well have compared to Niuevch in any thing that
would have seemed to be a defense. 4. The Lords mind concerning sin and
impenitent sinners, is the same in all ages, and he will so declare himself by
his judgments; for as No for her sins was carried away, etc. so is Nineveh
threatened because of her provocations: Thou also shall be drunken, etc. 5. The
wicked may not only expect to be deprived of counsel and prudence in straits as
drunken men are, but to be totally overwhelmed with the judgments of God in
full measure; for, they are not to taste a little of the cup of wrath, but to
drink of it till they be drunken; Thou also shall be drunken. See, Jer. 25.15,
27.6. The Lord can, and because of sin will, bury in obscurity the greatest of
Nations, as if they had never been, and make them who made great show of glory
and courage, seek holes to hide themselves in; for, says he, Thou shall be
hid. 7. Unto such as are pursued by the justice of the Lord, their enemies are
made terrible, and all their strength and preparations are not sufficient to
secure them from fear, or keep them from being brought into their enemies
reverence; for, whatever Nineveh had to oppose, yet thou also shall seek
strength because of the enemy.

Verse. 12. All thy strong holds shall be like fig trees with the first ripe
figs, if they be shaken, they shall even fall into the mouth of the eater.

For further confirmation of this sentence, the Lord propounds all the vain
confidences of Nineveh, and the Assyrians, and declares that they should not
be able to deliver them from his hand; Her first vain confidence is her strong
holds, which he threatens shall be as easily taken by the enemy, as ripe figs
fall from the fig tree when it is shaken into the shakers mouth, that is to
say, they shall be rendered up at the very first assault. Whence learn, 1. Men
in a wicked way are ready to delude themselves with many vain thoughts of
safety. Therefore is all this pains taken to refute the vain imaginations of
Nineveh. 2. Strong holds are too weak fortifications to hold out Gods
controversy against sin; for, as the sins of the owners ripen them for ruin,
and as they are much desired by enemies, so will they be easily taken; so does
this similitude teach us.

Verse. 13. Behold, thy people in the midst of thee are women: the gates of thy
land shall be set wide open unto thine enemies, the fire shall devour thy bars.

Her second vain confidence is, her formerly valiant men concerning whom the
Lord declares, that though they were enclosed in fortified cities and strong
holds, (which may make coward^ stout,) and in their own cities and country,
which they ought resolutely to defend, yet they should prove timorous and
fainthearted like women, and so should yield up what they ought to defend. See
Jer. 50.37. and 51.30. Doct. 1. Men will prove no longer stout then the Lord is
with them in mercy, or by them is doing some work in the earth; for, the
lion-like Assyrians, shap. 2.11, are now to admiration become feeble: Behold,
faith he, thy people are women. 2. No outward encouragement, or consideration
will put courage into such as God has mad^ faint; for, thy people, even in the
midst of thee are women. A third vain confidence, (the vanity whereof depends
upon the former) is, their frontier garrisons, which they (no doubt observing
that others had been destroyed by themselves through improvidence that way) had
fortified as the gates of their land, and as bars to hinder the enemies
progress into the country: concerning these the Lord threatens, that through
the cowardice of their soldiers they should be set open to the enemies, as if
fire had burnt them up: It teaches, that no politic courses of men, learning,
wisdom from the folly of others, or fortifying themselves, where others through
weakness have been overcome, is sufficient to secure a people from Gods
vengeance; The gates of thy land shall be set wide open unto thine enemies, the
fire shall devour thy bars.

Verse. 14 Draw the waters for the siege, fortify thy strong holds, go into
clay, and tread the mortar: make strong the brick-kill.

15. There shall the fire devour thee: the sword shall cut thee off: it shall
eat thee up like the cankerworm: make thy self many as the canker-worm: make
thy self many as the locust.

16. Thou have multiplied thy merchants above the stars of heaven: the
canker-worm spoileth and floeth away.

The vanity of all the former confidences is yet further held forth in an holy
mocking of all their preparations, which should not avail; for, albeit they
should use never so much diligence to defend their cities, and for that end
should draw water, and diligently repair their strong holds with brick, (under
which other things needful for enduring a siege are to be comprehended) yet in
their greatest strength the sword should destroy them, and the judgment of God
consume them like fire, and as canker-wormes eat all green fruits; and albeit
both the King and the City Nineveh, (for the Original seems to direct the
speech to both) should multiply armies both of their own people, who were most
part merchants, and of their confedera^^ who traffi^ked with them, and that in
as great numbers as if they were swarms of locusts or canker-wormes, or as the
stars of heaven, yet thereby should they not be delivered; but as the
canker-worm having spoiled all, that there is nothing to eat, does then flee
away; so their soldiers, consederates, and their own merchants should desert
them, when there should be no commodity to be had by them, and should waste and
take from them, but do them no good. Doct. 1. The Lords power is so far above
man's, that he will, so to say, defy man to avert his judgments by his
endeavors; for, here he bids Nineveh do her best, draw the waters for the
siege, etc. and make thy self many as the cankerworm, etc. 2. Presumption may
continue with carnal men, even till their ruin; for, Nineveh is preparing for
the siege, and gathering men when she is to be destroyed; not but that it is
lawful to use lawful means to prevent destruction when it is threatened; but
her sin was to confide in these means, without looking to God or his
controversy. 3. Strokes from the Lord may readily light on men where they
think themselves most secure; for, there (that is, in thy strong holds
fortified and manned by thee) shall the fire devour thee, the sword shall cut
thee off. 4. Wrath from the Lord is a sore party to deal with, as destroying
totally without mercy; for the wrath of God against Assyria executed by the
Caldeans devoureth as fire, and eats up like the cankerworm. 5. Multitudes of
men will not aveil nor help in the day of the Lords vengeance; yea, such
helpers may hurt when God is angry; for, however she make her self many, and
multiply merthants above the stars of heaven; yet the canker-worm spoileth
and flees away, and so do they. 6. As men usually respect one another, or
public interests, not sincerely, but for their own ends: so do they desert
what they seemed to affect, according as the wheel of prosperity turns about;
for, their merchants as the canker-worm do spoil, and when there is nothing
left to spoil or reap benefit by, then they flee away.

Ver. 17. Thy crowned are as the locusts, and thy captains as the great
grasshoppers, which camp in the hedges in the cold day, but when the Sun
arises, they flee away, and their place is not known where they are.

18. Thy shepberds slumber, O King of Assyria; thy Nobles shall dwell in the
dust: thy people is scattered upon the mountains, and no man gathers them.

A fourth vain confidence is, their great men, their counselors, and valourous
commanders, concerning whom the Lord threatens, that some of them being only
for eating, and idle effeminate wasters, as locusts and grasshoppers are, and
having made a shelter of Assyria for their own advantage, shall whenever a
storm appears, not only be easily terrified, but seeing some sunshine of a
deliverance, and that they may live without Assyria's favor, they shall quite
desert them and run away. And this seems to be spoken of their tributary Kings,
and Princes, or hired officers; he threatens also that others of them (which
agreeeth most properly to their own Counselors, Princes and Commanders) should
become stupid, base and careless, and destitute of counsel, as men in a
slumber, and that they should not prove active for defense of the country and
city, but dwell or lie still (as the Original has it) in their strong holds,
as if they were sick; so, Jer. 51.30. and that by this means even the King (to
whom the speech is directed) should be undone, and the people be exposed to al
hazards, as sheep scattered upon the mountains without a shepherd. Doct. 1. The
greatness of men, (however it be often too much confided in) can contribute
nothing for standing out against his judgments who is higher then the highest;
for, this also is declared here to be a vain confidence, and therefore ought
not to weaken the Churches faith in expecting vengeance on the wicked. 2. Men
do debase their own greatness, when by reason thereof they take liberty to drown
themselves in sensual delights, and to give themselves to effeminate idleness;
for, such were these crowned as the locusts, and captains as the great
grasshoppers. 3. It is incident even to great men whatever they pretend of
generosity, to make themselves and their own commodity, the scope and drift of
all their actions, and so to walk as may lead to that end; for, says he, thy
crowned (as well as merchants, ver. 16.) are as the locusts, and thy captains
as the great grasshoppers which camp in the hedges in the cold day, but when the
Sun arises they flee away, and their peace is not known where they are. 4. It
is an iniquity and great baseness, and a plague on rulers to be stupid,
sluggish, selfish and careful only of their own defense and safety, when
public hazards are imminent or incumbent. Such was their judgment here, Thy
shepherds slumber, thy Nobles dwell, or lie still. 5. Such as have most
eminently abused days of prosperity, shall be made to feel most of adversity,
were they never so great; therefore is this threatening directed to the King,
as he who should feel it most; Thy shepherds slumber, O King of Assyria, etc.
6. Evil rulers are sent of the Lord, as a plague and presage of ruin to come
upon a sinful people; for, when shepherds slumber, then people are scattered
upon the mountains, and no man gathers them. See, Isa. 3.4, 5, and 19.13, 14.

Verse. 19. There is no healing of thy bruise: thy wound is grievous: all that
hear the bruit of thee, shall clap the hands over thee: for upon whom has not
thy wickedness passed continually?

The judgment is here summed up, and declared that it shall be an irreparable
stroke, a wound not to be drawn together, nor wrinkled as wounds do when they
begin to heal: and that as it should not be healed, so it should be very
painful and grievous; and that there should be none to comfort them under all
this, but all ready, as they should hear of it, to clap their hands for joy,
and insult over them; and that because of a long time they had been wicked
oppressors of all round about them. Doct. 1. As the Lords chastisements of his
people end all in mercy; so his last and final word to the wicked is wrath;
for, this message closes with denouncing of judgment, without hope of
recovery, or comfort under it. 2. It is matter of great comfort in trouble, to
have hope of a blessed issue in due time: for, so much may be gathered from
Assyrias misery, that strokes are then only deplorable, when there is no
healing of thy bruise. 3. It is also a great mercy in troubles, to get an easy
way of bearing them, and breathing under them; for, to the wicked it is not so,
but their wounds are daily ripped up afresh: thy wound is grievous, or painful.
4. It may make afflictions the more easy, when the afflicted have any
sympathizers to bemoan and condole with them in their troubles; for, it is yet
more of Assyria's misery, that all that hear the bruit of thee shall clap their
hands. 5. The world shall in due time be refreshed and comforted with seeing or
hearing of the ruin of oppressors; for, they shall clap their hands over thee,
upon whom thy wickedness has passed. 6. Cruelty and oppression shall be
rewarded in its own coin, by the cutting off of the authors thereof, without
piety or commiseration from any; for, so does that reason of the worlds
insulting and joy import; for upon whom has not thy wickedness passed
continually?

Habakkuk.
The ARGUMENT.
IT cannot be certainly determined at what time this Prophet lived and
exercised his function: whether under Manasseh, in whose reign iniquity was
come to a great height: or rather, at the same time that Jeremiah began to
prophecy, yet certain it is, that he lived toward the latter end of Gods
patience with the Jews, and before the last destruction by the Caldeans: a
part, if not the whole whereof, it seems was to be inflicted in their days to
whom he treached, as appears from chap. 1.5. The prophecy is held forth,
partly, by way of doctrinal prediction, chap. 1. and 2. and partly, by way of
meditation or prayer, chap. 3. and may be summed up in a Dialogue betw^xt the
Lord and his servant, wherein the Prophet, complaining of the iniquity of the
times, and being forewarned of the destruction and captivity of the Jews by
the Caldeans, does again plead with God about the prospering of such a wicked
people as the Caldeans were, chap. 1. and waiting for an answer, he is
commanded to stir up the godly to live by faith, and take heed of Ap^stafie in
the time of their captivity, expecting the ruin of the Caldeans their
oppressors, chap. 2. In which answer the Prophet acquiesceth, submitting unto
the Lords will, and praying and believing that God would preserve, and at
length deliver his work, his Church and Elect, chap. 3. all which exercises the
Prophet publishes and leaves on record, for terrifying the wicked, and
inviting them to repentance, and for the encouragement of the godly under the
sad calamities that were approaching.

CHAP. I.
IN this Chapter, (after the Inscription, ver. 1.) First, the Prophet complains
to God of the iniquity of the times, and that no course was taken to correct or
suppress the desperate wickedness of that people, notwithstanding either his
former complaints, v. 2. or the vexation of his or the godlies souls by it, v.
3. or the fearful abuse of Gods indulgence, ver. 4. 2. The Lord in answer to
this complaint, shows to the Church by the Prophet, the admirable, incredible
and speedy judgments that were to come upon them, ver. 5. and that by the
Caldeans, whose dispositions, furniture and actions, together with the ill use
they should make of their success, is held forth, ver 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. 3.
The Prophet receiving this establishes himself in the faith of the
preservation of the Church, and the godly in the midst of this destruction,
ver. 12. and expostulates with God concerning his holy Providence, in
permitting so wicked a people as the Caldeans to prevail against the Church,
though sinful, v. 13. considering both their unjust and violent conquest, v.
14, 15. -- and their finful abuse of it, ver. -- 15, 16. which therefore he
thinks should not prosper, ver. 17.

Verse. 1. THe burden which Habakkuk the Prophet did see.

This verse holds forth the subject matter of this prophecy, which is
chiefly grievous threatenings, first against the Jews, and then against the
Caldeans, together with the Penman, and divine authority of this Scripture,
that he not only was a Prophet by office, but had this doctrine by vision and
special illumination. Doct. 1. In our making use of any portion of holy
Scripture, we ought to begin at the study of the divine authority thereof, to
the end we may labor to come to it with more reverence, considence, and with
more of that spirit which endited it; for, therefore is it prefixed, that the
Penman of this Scripture was a Prophet, and did see it in vision. 2. The study
of the divine authority of Scripture, may hide and take our minds off, looking
to, or stumbling at the weakness or meannesse of instruments carrying the
same; for the Spirit of God thinks it a needless work for those, who take up
this doctrine as a divine vision to enquire much about the Penman, and
therefore only expresses his name and office, Habakkuk the Prophet. See, 1
Cor. 15.11. 3. The doctrine of divine vengeance against sin and sinners, being
rightly considered, will be found sad and insupportable; therefore albeit all
divine doctrine may be called A burden (as it is, Prove. 30. 1. in the Original)
in regard of the weight it ought to have upon our spirits, whether directions,
how to get them obeyed, Rev. 2.24, 25. or comforts, how to walk answerably
under them: yet in the ordinary Scripturephrase, and by the Prophet here, the
name is applied to threatenings: He calls this doctrine The burden, as being
sent from a God, burdened with the wickedness of sinners, Isa. 1.4. Amos 2.13.
as being a grief and burden to the messengers to carry such tidings, as being
burdensome to the secure, to hear their sinful ways contradicted and reproved,
Jer. 23.33. as being sad to the penitent when they lay it to heart, as
portending sad ruin, however men account them but wind, Jer. 5.13. And
finally, it ought to be a burden, that God, who delights to speak in other
terms to his Church, should be provoked to write only bitter things. 4. Albeit
that vengeance on impenitent sinners, being long forborne, may seem incredible,
yet it is most certain and clear, that it is coming, therefore however that
secure people blessed themselves; yet the Prophet not only hears, but sees
their burden, as if it were present; and albeit the extraordinary gift of
prophesying be ceased, yet every godly man may be as certain from the Word of
judgments on impenitent sinners, as if they saw them with their eyes.

Verse. 2. O LORD, how long shall I cry, and thou will not hear: even cry out
unto thee of violence, and thou will not save?

The Prophet in his own and the godlies name, begins at an expostulation with
God, that the generality of the Jews being so desperately wicked, as he
instanceth in several iniquities, especially against the second Table; yet the
Lord in his patience did bear with them, and took no course to vindicate his
own glory, or abate this deluge of sin one way or other. This complaint he
amplifieth and aggravateth from other considerations; whereof the first is in
this verse, that he having taken so much pains on this people to no purpose,
but their injustice swelling up and breaking out in open violence, had been
forced of a long time to cry to God against them: but neither was his prayer
regarded, nor the oppressed saved from violence, which he thinks strange of. We
are not to understand this so as if the Prophet were quarrelling with God, or
cruel to this people, toward whom he evidenceth so much tenderness afterward,
but that having long dealt with that people, and with God by prayer for some
success to his Ministry, and finding iniquity to abound to the dishonor of
God, and oppression of the godly, he (not so much out of any hatred against
them, as out of zeal to Gods honor, out of hatred of sin, and pity toward the
oppressed) complains that there was no redress of this, and that neither by
amending of them, nor correcting of them, the course of sin was stopped. Doct.
1. As the duties of the second Table are a touchstone, whereby to try the
sincerity of those who profess true Religion, and are within the visible
Church: so when Professors once declare their unsoundnesse that way, they may
readily come to a very great height in it: for, here they were come to the
extremity of violence, and combustions among themselves. 2. The ready way to
make men's endeavors in their calling, (especially such as are employed in
dealing with souls) effectual, is to be much with God in prayer: therefore the
Prophet having spent much time in vain, is put to cry to God about it that he
would interpose; Cries to God are our best weapons against sin. 3. The iniquity
of a visible Church may come to that height, that such as would stand in the
gap, may be ready, if not to cry against them, yet to submit if God should send
judgments: for the Prophet is so put to it, with their sin dishonouring God,
and oppressing the godly, that he cries, that God would one way or other stop
the course of their iniquity. See, Numb 16.15. 4. Zeal for God and his honor,
and hatred against sin, ought to oversway our respects to any creature
whatsoever: for, from this principle it is that the Prophet cries to God
against this people, otherwise dear to him. 5. The truly godly, and especially
such as are called to carry the Lords Name unto his people, are to lay their
reckoning, not to have a smooth and easy life, but to wrestle under much
humbling, toil and vexation; for, such was the Prophets lot here, and the
godlies, in whose name he complains. 6. So unsearchable are the Lords counsels,
as he may see fit to delay the answer of desires, which are put up from much
zeal to his glory, and compassion toward the godly oppressed, against sinful
men and their courses; for, the Prophet here has cried, and that so long, as
he is like to quarrel and question God about it, and yet the Lord did not hear
nor save. 7. The patience of God toward his sinful Church and People, does
sarre surpass the patience of the best of men; for, when the Prophet is
weary, and like to fall into impatiencie at Gods long-suffering; yet the Lord
was not weary to wait upon them.

Verse 3. Why do thou show me iniquity, and cause me to behold grievance?
for spoiling and violence are before me, and there are that raise up strife and
contention.

A second amplification of this complaint (which clears more the ground of
his crying. verse 2. and sets out more of their sin) is, that their
wickedness in vexing and grieving one another, and the godly amongst them, and
their violent spoiling of one another, together with their starting and keeping
up lawsuits and contentions (or, of strife against the messengers of God, who
reproved them, as was usual, Jer. 15.10. Hos. 4.4.) that I say, all these were
not only public and open in the Prophets and godlies view, wherever they
went, but a great grief and vexation unto them; their hearts were overcharged
when they saw such wickedness, and God taking no order with it. Doct. 1. When
once men shake off the fear of God, it is righteous with him to give them up to
break all bonds of love, humanity and civil society amongst men; for these
godless men are given up to iniquity, grievance, spoiling and violence, etc.
Thus the Lord shows, how unfixed they are in all things, who hold not fast
the root of his fear. 2. It may be the lot of the Lords most faithful
servants, to see sad sights of wickedness among the people committed to their
charge, instead of comfortable fruits of their Ministry. This Prophet after
his pains taken, sees only iniquity and grievance, and every where spoiling
and violence are before him, these sins being so impudently committed, that
the actors cared not who saw them. See, Isai. 49.4. 3. Albeit it be the duty of
the Lords people and faithful servants, not to carve out what shall be their
own lot and success in the world, yet they ought not only to keep themselves
unspotted, but to be seriously affected and vexed with the iniquities of the
times: for says the Prophet, Why do thou show me iniquity, and cause me to
behold grievance? Not so much quarrelling with Gods Providence toward him, as
testifying his own and the godlies ve^ation by seeing these things. See, Ezekiel.
9.4. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. To be vexed with the evils of the time, is a way to keep
our selves from falling into them, and a ground of hope that God will appear,
as the Prophets reasoning imports. 4. However the godly may be called to
contend and strive both for God and for their own rights, yet it is a mark of
an unsanctified spirit, to delight in the fire of contention and either to
beget or entertain them needlessely or unjustly: This was one of the vexing
evils of the time, There are that raise up strife and contention.

Verse. 4. Therefore the law is slacked, and judgment does never go forth: for
the wicked does compass about the righteous, therefore wrong judgment
proceeds.

A third aggravation of his complaint (holding out yet more of the iniquity of
the times) is taken from the consequents of Gods indulgence toward that people,
that they were emboldened to sin by it, and grew the worse for that they were
spared: for, when the Prophets preached, and men rebelled, and yet God spared
them, they did hereby take occasion to contemn the Law and Word of God as a
dead thing, having no vigor nor authority, and so ran on all mad courses,
insomuch that no justice was to be found; for, if there were any who respected
equity or right, they were so overpowered with the multitude of wicked men,
that they durst not appear, not could effect any thing, and so justice could
not choose but be wrested. Doct. 1. It should be the godlies endeavor to have
their zeal against sin cleanly, and arising upon justifiable grounds; for, here
the Prophet cleares, that his zeal against the iniquity of the times, flowed
not from any prejudice he sustained thereby, but from the over-turning of all
Religion and justice that appeared therein. 2. The Lords forbearing and
long-suffering oft-times prove a snare to wicked men, hardening them in their
evil course; for, because of Gods indulgence, Therefore the Law is slacked,
etc. 3. It is not the enjoyment of the Word of God or Ordinances, but their
having authority and vigor in our hearts and practices, that will prove
blessed in enjoying them; for, this people had the Law, but it was the quarrel,
that it was slacked or dead in its authority: The Law is slacked; the
similitude is taken from the faint or lifelesse pulse of a dying man. 4.
Contempt of the authority of the Word opens the door to all wickedness, and
justice will go to ruin among men, where Religion has no place; for, these
two are conjoined, The Law is slacked, and judgment does never go forth. 5. It
is a great height of a lands guiltiness when Judicatories and Courts of
Justice become corrupt; for that is the height of their impiety, and the
evidence of a despised Law, that Judgment does never go forth, etc. 6. Times
of general defection prove ordinarily times of great trial to the godly and
righteous, not only are their souls vexed, and they supplanted in their
righteous cause, but they dare hardly appear against the stream of injustice;
or, if they do appear, they cannot be able to effect any thing that is right,
but all goes wrong, do what they can; for, Then the wicked compasses about
the righteous, therefore wrong judgment proceeds.

Ver. 5. Behold ye among the heathen, and regard, and wonder miraculously: for
I will work a work in your days, which ye will not believe, though it be told
you.

Follows to verse 12. the Lords answer to this expostulation, containing a
prophecy of the destruction of the Jews by the Caldeans, which is here
described generally from several properties. 1. That it should be a singular
and wonderful destruction, insomuch that if any of the Heathen should consider
it, it would breed admiration in them, Deuteronomy. 28.37. and 29.24, 25. 1 Kings 9.8.
or if the Jews should consider any stroke inflicted on the Heathen, they
should admire that their own stroke was sadder, as, Dan. 9.12. 2. That it
should be incredible to themselves, who dreamed of ease, and yet be true. And
3. That it should be speedy, and come to pass, even in their time to whom this
was preached. Doct. 1. When men harden themselves in their evil ways, because
of Gods for bearance, and the Word has no authority among them, then the Lord
will speak in another language by his rod; for, because of that contempt of the
Word, ver. 4. the Lord will work a work, that is, will send judgments which he
will own, and wherein he will be seen. 2. The Lords long suffering patience
toward impenitent sinners, will not always last, but when their iniquity is
come to an height, it will also end in sad judgments; therefore albeit the
Lords patience had out-wearied the Prophets patience, yet now I will work a
work in your days, says the Lord. 3. As abuse of mercy offered to the
Church, deserves sadder judgments then the sin of Heathens, who have not such
an offer, Matthew. 11.22, 24. So it is an addition to the Churches calamity, when
the Heathen and enemies, who have been witnesses to Gods working for her, shall
become Spectators and Admirers of the hand of God against her; both these are
held forth in that Preface, Behold ye among the Heathen, and regard and wonder
marvellously: for I will work a work, etc. as has been before explained. 4. It
is usual, that when judgment comes upon an impenitent people, they attain not
to any right use of it, but are surprised with admiration and astonishment
under it: for, so is fore prophesied even of the Jews, that they shall behold,
and regard, and wonder marvellously at their own calamity, and go no further.
5. This stupid disposition, as it flows from former contempt of Gods Word,
which has so stupefied them as judgments cannot pierce; so it will prove
fruitless, and does portend the further ruin of such as continue in it; so
the Apostle citing this place, Acts 13.41. makes clear, that they are despisers
who wonder, as is also clear from v. 4. and that they wonder and perish, or
vanish, that is, as their admiration and astonishment usually vanishes and
comes to nothing, without any fruit; so such a disposition portends ruin, and
such a stroke will undo a people, they not being able to endure and bear out
under both the stroke and fearful astonishment accompanying it. 6. As the Lords
judgments upon the Church may be far beyond the expectation of the Heathen and
her very enemies, Lam. 4.12. so it is just with God, that those, who doting on
their privileges, do contemn the Word, should meet with unexpected and
incredible judgments; for, so says he to these profane Jews: I will work a
work which ye will not belive, though it be told you. 7. Divine indignation
against sin is more terrible, and will appear more sad when it is inflicted,
then secure sinners do ordinarily imagine: so much also is intimated, in that
this work will be above belief; Ye will not believe, though it be told you.
See, Psalm. 90.11. 8. The contempt of the Gospel, and the rejection of Christ,
offered unto lost man, is the height of iniquity, and draws on all the
judgments, that at any time have been threatened against any sin; therefore
the Apostle, Acts 13.41. denounces the same judgment here threatened for
contempt of the law, and sins against the second Table, to come upon the Jews
who opposed the Gospel, and rejected the Messiah, as being then fully
accomplished when wrath came upon them to the uttermost, for casting off of
Christ.

Ver. 6. For lo, I raise up the Caldeans, that bitter and hasty Nation, which
shall march through the breadth of the land, to possess the dwelling places
that are not theirs.

The Prophet subjoynes a particular description of this calamity, in describing
the instruments of it, the Caldeans under Nebuchadnezzar their King, whose
disposition, furniture and proceedings are so exactly set down, as may confirm
the truth of the prediction, may set forth the justice of God in repaying the
Jews in their own coin, may be terrible to the stouthearted among them, and
may confirm the godlies hope of a deliverance from the way of the Caldeans
their managing that work. This description is contained in several particulars;
the first is, that they are a Nation of a bitter, cruel, fierce and active
temper; who therefore, to satisfy their ambitious covetousness, should
speedily and without fear overspread the land of Judea, not only to overrun
it, but to make a Conquest thereof for themselves. Doct. 1. When God has a
controversy against a people, he will not want instruments by whom he may
prosecute it; or, he can fetch the Caldeans from afar, who being already
satiated with victories and conquests, needed not otherwise much to have minded
so remote a corner as Judah. 2. Instruments of vengeance upon the Church, would
be looked upon as employed by God, and therefore the Churches eyes would be
more on God then on them; for, Lo, I raise up the Caldeans, says the Lord. 3.
It is usual for the Lord to give up troublers and oppressors of the world, to
meddle also with his Church, that it may hasten their ruin, however the Church
be sinful, therefore the Church is to be chastised by the Caldeans, who were
the hammer of the whole earth, Jer. 50.23. that this might hasten the filling
of their cup. 4. The Lord can make holy use, even of the sins of creatures,
employed for executing of his judgments; for, He raises up the Caldeans, that
bitter and hasty Nation, and makes use of this their temper, without any
imputation to his holiness. 5. When the Lord arms any instruments with
vengeance against a sinful people, they will not want dispositions and
success for attaining his end: for, if God raise up the Caldeans against the
Church, then they are not only bitter and fierce, but a hasty or active
Nation, and will march through the breadth of the land, without opposition or
fear, and will not only overcome, but so carry all before them, as they may
possess the dwellings that are not theirs, without molestation. 6. The Lord in
executing vengeance, does righteously proportion men's sins and his judgments,
and pay home transgressors in their own coin, therefore the Jews who had been
cruel, meet now with bitter adversaries, and they who had used spoiling and
violence toward others, v. 2. are now overrun and cast out of their own
possessions. The like also may be read in the following purpose. 7. However men
account it purchase good enough, when they are able by power to overturne
others, and sit down in their room, yet the Lord does not so reckon, but will
put a difference betwixt men's power or possession and their right; for, albeit
the Caldeans conquered Judah, yet in the Lords account, They possess the
dwelling places that are not theirs.

Verse. 7. They are terrible and dreadful; their judgment and dignity shall
proceed of themselves.

The Caldeans employed in this work, are yet further described, that being
armed with divine vengeance, emboldened with former victories, and exercising
the same cruelly, they should fill the land with terror and dread of them,
which they should also tyrannically improve, and be their own carvers in all
matters of advantage and honor, standing to no law either of Nature or
Nations, in their dealing with a terrified and subdued people, but merely
following their own will armed with power Doct. 1. Divine indignation pursuing
sinners, will take away their heart and courage in a strait, and make their
enemies terrible to them; for, so are the Caldeans to the sinful Jews
terrible and dreadful. 2. When a people do not stand in awe of God speaking
from his Word to them, he does righteously send judgments upon them, which
will cause their hearts to faint; for, the Caldeans are terrible and dreadful
to these wicked Jews who slighted the Law, and God Almighty speaking in it, v.
4 3. It is a great height of impiety before the Lord, when besides the
unlawfullnesse of a war in general, and many particular acts of injustice in
the heat of hostility, a Conqueror even in cold blood has no respect to right
or wrong; whereas the fear of God should be a law to men, had they never so
much power. Therefore it is the Caldeans sin, that their judgment and
dignity shall proceed of themselves. 4. It is righteous with God to punish
corruption in Judicatories, and perverting of justice and wilful stubbornness
in sin, with unjust oppression from enemies, and to send a Conquerours sword to
give laws to such as have perverted justice; for, because the law is slacked,
and judgment does never go forth, etc. ver. 4. therefore he sends the
Caldeans, whose judgment and dignity shall proceed of themselves.

Ver. 8. Their horses also are swifter then the leopards, and are more fierce
then the ravening wolves: and their horsemen shall spread themselves, and their
horsemen shall come from far, they shall fly as the Eagle that hastes to
eat.

It is thirdly declared in this description, that the Caldeans shall not want
means, wherewith to prosecute their designs and enterprises, which is
instanced in their horses, who are swifter then fierce leopards, and more
fierce or sharp to go whither they are employed, and tread down opposition,
then wolves that are hungry through fasting all the day, and therefore run
suriously to their prey at night: so that their fierce riders may easily, and
in a short time be in every part of the land (being also many of them to
overspread the land) and though the Caldeans be far off, yet their swift
horses shall speedily bring them to Judea, and bring them as swiftly upon their
desired prey, as an Eagle flies to the carcass. See, Jer. 4.13. and 48.40.
Doct. 1. The Lords hand would be remarked, in furnishing the enemies of his
sinful people with all necessaries, for carrying on their enterprises; for,
therefore are the number and swiftness of the Caldeans horses, to carry them
so long a journey, and make such speedy execution, recorded: Their horses also
are swifter then the leopards, etc. 2. The fierceness of divine anger against
sin, may be read in the celerity and activity of instruments executing the
same; therefore are the Caldeans described as speedily spreading themselves in
all places, as coming from far, and flying as the Eagle to get prey; as if
divine displeasure furnished them with wings, and could forbear no longer. 3.
It is in vain for impenitent sinners to lean upon any apparent ground of
security or confidence, when God arises to plead with them; for, Their
horsemen came from far, they spread themselves, and fly as the Eagle that
hastes to eat; showing that distance of place betwixt the enemy and them, or
having of their goods and themselves out of the way, should not avail them.

Verse. 9. The shall come all for violence: their faces shall sup up as the
East-winde, and they shall gather the captivity as the sand.

It is fourthly declared, that the enemy shall be so confident, that they
shall not much mind fighting in this expedition, but only to spoil and prey
on a base people, wherein they shall not be disappointed: for their very coming
and presence shall overwhelme and blast all, like an East-winde, which was
violent in these countries, Isai. 27.8. Jon. 4.8. and they shall not only
destroy peoples substance, but shall lead innumerable people into captivity.
Doct. 1. As it is righteous with God to repay violence with violence; so it is
a very great sin to engage in war, whereby men and countries are destroyed,
without a just quarrel, but merely for the satisfaction of men's lusts;
therefore do they come all for violence, in Gods righteousness, to punish the
oppressing Jews, and yet they sinned in their quarrel and way, as minding only
to run them down, and to satiate themselves. 2. The Lord sees it fit,
sometimes to wink at the sins of evil men, and let them have success in
their evil cause, when he has his Church to punish by them; therefore albeit
the Caldeans be both insatiable and presumptuous, in that they come all for
violence, yet it succeeds with them, their faces, or presence, sups up as the
East-winde, raising a tempest, and carrying all before it; and they gather
captivity as the sand. 3. The Lords justice is to be seen and adored in the
ignominious strokes which he inflicts upon his incorrigible people; for, so
does this stroke by the Caldeans import, that they should come against Judah,
not as a people to be fought with, but preyed upon; and that at their coming or
face, they should destroy all, and gather captives, possibly more then
themselves are; so base are Gods people when he deserts them for their sin,
though invincible while he is with them. 4. It may be the lot of the Lords
Church, not only to suffer the calamities and desolation of war, but to lose
her liberty, which she so much abused, and to be carried into captivity and
bondage; for, the Caldeans faces shall sup up as the East-winde, and they shall
gather captivity as the sand. See, Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48. 5. The consideration of the
cruelty of men, and of the calamities that attend war and conquests, ought to
invite sinners not to provoke God to give them up thereunto, ought to terrify
such as fear not the threatenings of the Word, and ought to point out unto
those who are under such a lot, the bitterness of departing from God; for, for
these ends are the Caldeans cruel deportments recorded, both for the use of the
Jews, while they yet continued in their present condition, and with reference
to their case, when the threatening should be accomplished.

Ver. 10. And they shall scoff at the Kings and the Princes shall be a scorn
unto them: they shall deride every strong hold: for they shall heap dust and
take it.

It is yet further declared, that no opposition shall hinder them from
effecting what the Lord had threatened should be done by them, they shall
slight and contemn all the power, authority and opposition of the Jewish King
and Princes, or any of their Confederates, and having conquered them; shall use
them ignominiously, as was accomplished, 2 Kings 25.7, 19, 20, 21. and they
shall easily take in their strong holds, by raising up mounts against them. In
the Original, this is spoken in the singular number of the Caldeans, pointing
at their King, who was chief and head in this enterprise. Doct. 1. All
opposition against God pursuing for sin, will prove vain; were it Kings,
Princes, or strong holds, as here we see. 2. It is not an easy thing to put
men from their carnal confidences, that they may humble themselves before the
Lord; for, all these things did the Jews oppose to the threatening, to keep
themselves from being affrighted; and all these does the Lord declare to be
empty, that they may stoop. 3. It is just with God to expose the greatest of
men to contempt and ignominious usage when they provoke him, and do not employ
their power and authority for him; for, the Caldeans in executing Gods
controversy, scoff at the Kings, and the Princes shall be a scorn to them.
4. Forts and strong holds, wherein men do oft-times place their confidence,
will prove but matter of derision to the instruments of Gods vengeance; for,
they shall deride every strong hold; and however men boast of these, yet they
are easily reached; for, an enemy can heap up dust which lies under his feet,
and by that means take it.

Ver. 11. Then shall his mind change, and he shall pass over, and offend,
imputing this his power unto his God.

The Lord subjoynes to all this, as a ground of encouragement and hope to the
godly, that the Caldeans, and especially their King, would make a sinful use of
all their victories, and of this among the rest, that he shall be so drunk with
success, as his swelling thoughts of himself shall increase, and in his
arrogancy shall pass all bounds of modesty and humanity, which formerly he
might seem to have; and shall grievously transgress, in ascribing all his
victories, and increase of his power to his idols, and take the glory from God
who employed him as his scourge; all which might assure the godly, that such a
power should not stand long. Some instances of this carriage we may read, Dan.
4.30. and 5.4. Doct. 1. Prosperity is no less a trial, to bring out what is in
men's hearts, and no less difficult to bear then adversity is; for here
adversity tried the Jews, and prosperity brought out more of the Caldeans
naughtiness. Thus also was Hezekiah tried, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. 2. Albeit that many
be employed in wars and making Conquests, yet there are but few who reap any
great benefits by all their toil, the most part of the Conquerours as well as
the conquered being but slaves to promote the ambitious designs of a few, and
furnish fuel to their lusts; for, notwithstanding there were great armies of
the Caldeans, yet all this swelling, which they accounted the fruit of their
victories, is enjoyed chiefly by their King: His mind changes, he shall pass
over, etc. 3. It is the plague attending prosperity in an evil course, that it
is cursed to the enjoyers of it, and wicked men are plagued with pride by
reason of prosperity, and are encouraged, not only to overrun men, but to
transgress all bounds of modesty in themselves, and to be more insolent and
bold upon sin; for, when Nebuchadnezzar prevails against the Jews, then
shall his mind change, and he shall pass over, etc. 4. As it is a judgment
for men, following a false Religion, to prosper in their opposition to the
truth, and it is a further judgment, when men are not led to repentance by
Gods liberal dealing toward them, but are given up to advance a false religion,
the more they prosper; for, this was a plague on the Caldeans, that being
idolaters, and yet prospering against the people of the true God, they go on,
and he offends, imputing this his power unto his god. 5. It is one of the
difficult steps of man's life, and which will never be cleared without the sure
Word, to read the language of divine providence without mistaking, and so
father favorable dispensations rightly, to see aright who bestows them, and
upon what ground; to see what good things in men providence does encourage,
what evil it does reprove; to observe whether the good success men have be
because of any good in their way, or for any evil that is in their opposites:
Herein the Caldeans fail; for whereas the Lord employed them, and punished
Judah by them, not because they were right, but because of Judahs sin, yet they
applaud themselves as if they had prospered because of their idolatry, and do
impu^e all this power to their idols. 6. Albeit it be not the duty nor
disposition of the truly godly to take pleasure in the sin of any; yet it
furnishes ground of confidence to them, that God will own their quarrel in
due time, when they see their enemies abusing their prosperity, they will
gather that insolency, and arrogancy shall not escape unpunished, that it
shall not be a stable conquest, which is either holden of, or consecrated to
idols, and a false religion to the dishonor of the true God; for to this end,
and to clear this truth, does the Lord subjoyn their sinful carriage here to
their great success in the former verses.

Verse 12. Art thou not from everlasting, O LORD my God, mine holy one? we
shall not die; O LORD, thou have ordained them for judgment; and, O mighty
God, thou have estabilshed them for correction.

Follows to the end of the Chapter the Prophets exercise about this answer,
and his reply unto it. In this verse in a speech directed to God, he confirms
his own and the godlies faith in their being preserved from destruction in this
calamity, which is not to be understood only of the preservation of the godly
from ^ternall destruction, what ever become of them outwardly, nor yet of the
particular preservation of any particular person, wicked or godly, further then
they may have a particular promise for it, as Baruch and Ebedmelech had: nor is
it strictly to be applied by every particular visible Church, as if it might
not be destroyed by judgments; for (however the Lord may bring many judgments
on a Church before he give her a bill of divorce, and cause her to cea^e to be
a Church, yet) the sad experience of the Churches in Asia, and many other do
refute that: but the meaning is, that the Lord having resolved to keep a Church
continually in the world, and there being a particular promise of the Church of
the Jews their enjoying that privilege to be the only people of God till the
Messiah should come of them, the Prophet upon that general ground and
particular promise, gathers that the Church of the Jews should not be totally
extinguished, or cut off by her captivity in Babylon: and yet further confirms
this his confidence from Gods Covenant with them, from his eternal
immutability (who had also from of old been in Covenant with them, as the words
will also bear) and his holiness, and from his purpose, power and providence
in appointing the Caldeans to punish and correct, but not to destroy the
Church. Doct. 1. Judgments threatened or inflicted may speak sadder things to
the apprehension of the godly, then God really intends by them; for so is
insinuated, that to die, or irreparable desolation was presented to their mind
in this stroke. 2. As the Lord was pleased to continue a Church of the Jews
under the Law in the midst of all their calamities; so he will never want a
Church and people in the world, however he may correct; and he may inflict many
judgments on a visible Church, and yet not cast her off: and he will be good
everlastingly to the souls of his people albeit he toffe their bodies and their
minds both in the world: all which should be accounted of as great mercy in a
time of captivity and sad dispensations, for all this is held forth by way of
gloriation in the Prophets speech, we shall not die. 3. Believers having Gods
promise, may humbly carve their own answer according to it, and when they come
to God in Prayer may by faith tell him what they look for, and will get;
therefore the Prophet says to God, O Lord, we shall not die. 4. It is a
character of the truly godly man, that in times of common calamity, he is
publick-minded, and his care, Prayer and confidence taken up about the Church
and the godly, and not his own case only; therefore says the Prophet, We shall
not die, that is, the Church and a seed of God in it shall not perish. 5.
Interest in God by virtue of the Covenant made in a Redeemer, speaks
comfortable things in saddest times; for, the Prophet gathers his confidence
from this, O Lord my God. 6. Such as are in Covenant with God, and have
promises made unto them, will be notably confirmed in the faith of them by
taking up the nature, properties, and way of God, the covenanting party, and
promise-maker; for, thus does the Prophet confirm his faith, that his God is
Jehovah, able to give a being to things promised, that he is from everlasting,
and eternal, and so is immutable in his purposes, and will eternally have a
people to be his Spouse and Subjects, as is gathered from the same attribute,
Psalm. 102.27, 28. that he is (as the words will also read) from of old the Lord
my God, or the Churches God, by a Covenant of Grace, even before the Law, Gal.
3.17. and had proved so to that day, and therefore the Law would not disannul
that Coventant to such as renouncing their own righteousness, flee to God
through Christ in that Covenant; and the Lord in his future dispensations would
prove himself to be like himself of old; and lastly, he confirms his faith
from Gods holiness, that he is mine holy One, without all spot of impurity;
and therefore as he disapproveth sin, and punishes it in his people: so he
will not spare it in enemies; far less will he rub any imputation on his
holiness, by falsifying his Covenant and promise made to the Church and elect
in it, as is imported, Psalm. 60.6. and 85.35. In sum, they that know his
Name, will trust in him, Psalm. 9.10. 7. As faith must not expect to go on
without much opposition from within; so it is the duty of a Believer not to
succumbe or give it over at every apprehension or tentation, but to set himself
against it, and shame himself from it by venting it to God: This is imported in
the way of the Prophets expressing his confidence, Art thou not from
everlasting? not importing his total hesitation or questioning of this: but
rather that as Gods dispensations ministered occasion to his weakness to
apprehend death, so also when he would fasten faith on God, sense did question
his attributes, which his heart rising against, he shames his own unbelief by
venting this question to God; wherein he holds forth the absurdity of senses
apprehensions, that as it would take away the believers comfort in questioning
promises: so also it would turn atheist, and deny unto God the glory of his
attributes; and withal shows that the way of curing ^uch distempers, is to lay
them out to God, although faith could do no more but question the truth of what
sense faith. 8. God is sovereign Lord in all calamities, and does set bounds
and limits to them, which (whatever either the power of enemies or greatness
of trouble inflicted by them seem to threaten) shall not be transgressed;
therefore does the Prophet reckon that the Caldeans being sent out for
judgment, to punish the Church, yet such as might keep within bounds of
fatherly correction and reproof or to plague and punish the rebellious, and
correct, and not destroy the godly and Church; and that being ordained or
established, or solidly founded and supported for that work only, and that by
the Lord, who is mighty in power, or a rock (as the word is) unalterable in his
purposes, therefore they should not be permitted to go beyond his commission
and purpose, but they should do his work and pleasure, not their own; we shall
not die, O lord, thou have ordained them for judgment, and, O mighty God, thou
have established them or fcorrection.

Verse. 13. Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil, and can not look on
iniquity: wherefore look thou upon them that deal treacherously, and hold
thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous then be?

The Prophet having confirmed his faith of the preservation of the Church,
subjoynes an expostulation, that the Lord being so pure and holy, as that he
cannot so much as look upon any sin wherein men approve themselves, and for
pardon and purging whereof a Mediator is not sought unto, far less on gross
iniquity and unjust grievance of others, without indignation and anger; yet he
should seem to take no notice, but did tolerate the Caldeans in their treachery
and violence against the Church, who, though sinful, were more righteous then
their persecutors; and that he should rather punish the Church then them. In
which complaint there is not only an expression of the godlies weakness and
wrastlings under such dispensations; but their faith also is insinuated, that
as God in his holy indignation at sin, had not spared the Church; so he would
not long wink at the Caldeans iniquities, but punish them in due time, and
deliver his Church. This way of the Caldeans upon which he grounds the
expostulation, is gathered from the former prediction, v. 6, 7 etc. Doct. 1.
Such is the weakness and instability of the spirits of the Lords people, and so
various the occasions of exercising their graces, that they meet with few
dispensations within time, whereat their hearts are not ready to quarrel; for
the Prophet formerly complaining out of zeal, that God took no course with the
sins of his people, and yet getting an answer he is not satisfied, but his
compassion finds new matter of exercise and complaint. 2. The clearest sighted
Saints may be so bemisted, as not to be able to reconcile Gods dispensations,
with his nature and attributes, but be ready to apprehend a repugnancy betwixt
them; for here the Prophet cannot well reconcile Godsholinesse with his
tolerating of the Caldeans. 3. We are so weak and selfish, that when providence
works not according to our mind and apprehensions, we are ready to succumb
under temptations of Atheism, and to question Providence; for the Prophet looks
on God, as looking on, and holding his tongue, as a Spectator only, when he
tolerated the Caldeans. 4. It is the duty, and will be the care of all the
godly to justify God, and clear him from any imputation, however their
weakness cannot see through all the deep mysteries of his Providence about his
Church and her enemies; and for that end they should prevent misbelife and
temptations language with somewhat of faith. therefore the Prophet in the midst
of his dark mists, begins with this as an unalterable ground, (what ever his
heart say) that God is of purer eyes then to behold ^vil, and cannot look upon
in^quity. See, Jer. 12.1. 5. The only best way to refute ^emptations and
dispell mists is, not to debate dark cases with our own hearts overcharged with
weakness and fears, but to vent the matter and our case to God, and seek his
resolution upon it; for, so does the Prophet, lying under this temptation,
Wherefore look thou upon them that deal treacherously? etc. 6. However the
Lord have just indignation against, and will in due time punish the gross
iniquities of men without the Church, yet considering the many aggravations of
less sins within the Church, and Gods jealousy over his people, and care to
have them reclaimed from every evil course, it is no wonder to see the Churches
sins (though less in their own nature) punished, when more gross sins without
the Church escape for a time unpunished; for, the Prophets complaint, that God
holds his tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous then
be, imports that God does so, and Gods doing of it proves it to be a righteous
act, however we may quarrel. 7. The Lord makes use of wicked instruments to
punish his people, that in the foulness of the rod he may discover the
yilenesse of their sin: for this end are the Jews devoured by the wicked, and
by men viler then themselves. See, Ezekiel. 7.24. 8. Treachery is a great
aggravation of, and addition to oppression, when the oppressor by his practices
belies his great profession, or particular pretenses in a quarrel, or does
otherwise then in reason might be expected, considering either his obligations,
or any provocations given, or injuries done to him. Therefore it is the
Prophets complaint, that they deal treacherously, and devour. Though the
Scripture does not speak particularly of the Caldeans treachery, yet it is here
asserted they had been such, and therefore the Prophet laments that they should
be permitted to prosper. 9. Albeit God be righteous in punishing his Church by
wicked instruments, yet the holiness of God compared with their wickedness,
gives ground of hope that he will at last reckon with them: for, this
expostulation of the Prophets imports this truth, that the holiness of God
would not always fit with this, but in the end would right it, Psalm. 50.21.

Verse. 14. And make men as the fishes of the sea, as the creeping things that
have no ruler over them.

15. They take up all of them with the angle: they catch them in their net, and
gather them in their dragge, therefore they rejoice and are glad.

16. Therefore they sacrifice unto their net, and burn incense unto their
dragge: because by them their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous.

The Prophet seconds and cleares his expostulation concerning the enemies
wickedness from two grounds, whereof the first is taken from their unjust and
violent conquest and oppression; for by their oppression men were no otherwise
dealt with then irrational creatures, such as fishes, where the greater devour
the lesser, or creeping things wanting rulers, who run over other, and are
trodden down by every foot; or yet further, that men should be like fishes, not
only devouring one another, but exposed as a prey to every one who can first
catch them; that as fishes are easily taken, and (when nets and draggs are made
use of) in great numbers: so men and multitudes of people and Nations should
without difficulty be preyed upon by oppressors and that as nets and drags do
promiscuously draw all to land: so oppressors should get liberty promiscuously
to overrun Nations good and bad, the Church as well as others, those who never
wronged the oppressors as well as they who injured them most, etc. All this the
Prophet cannot see how it should consist with the holy Providence of God, and
therefore lays it before him to clear and consider. Doct. 1. Temptations are
very ready to grow upon our hand: and the more we think on them, we may seem
to have the more ground to subscribe to them; and therefore as fast as they are
suggested to us, we should tell them to God, as the Prophet does here with his
fertile invention in expostulating and complaining. 2. Men are so naughty by
nature, as if the Lord would let loose the reins of a restraining Providence,
and give them up to themselves, the world would become monstrous; for, so does
the Prophet teach; men would be as the fishes of the sea, as the creeping
things which have no ruler over them. 3. It is an evidence of monstrous and
brutish wickedness, when men acknowledge no rule of right and wrong, but
power, and employ all the power they have for usurpation upon others; for, then
indeed men are as the fishes the of sea and they take up all of them with the
angle, they catch them in their net and go her them in their drag. 4. Man being
exalted of God above the creatures, it is a great abuse when their way and lot
from others debaseth them from that dignity, that the oppressing Caldeans
should live in the world like monstrous beasts and fishes, depraving the image
of God after which they are made, and observing no shadow of equity, and that
the oppressed should not be used as rational creatures made after the same
image, but as fishes taken up with the angle, etc. 5. However we be unsatisfied
with dispensations, yet it is our safest way, and a step to our issue, to keep
Gods providence about them still in our eye; for, thus does the Prophet better
his former thoughts of God looking on, and holding his tongue, by saying, Thou
make (for the speech is still directed to God) men as the fishes of the sea,
etc. 6 It beseems the Lords providence well to restrain brutish violence, to
see to right and wrong in the world, and to protect the weak and poor from the
strong and mighty, or give a redress when they are injured by them; for, the
Prophets reasoning imports, that it would beseem God not to make men as fishes
of the sea, etc. and so he proved in due time.

The second ground of the Prophets expostulation (clearing yet further the
Caldeans wickedness) is taken from their abusing of their success, and that
the Lord should permit them not only to do wickedly in their purchasing, but
yet more wickedly in their boasting and insulting because of their victories,
and in their glorying in their own wisdom and strength, as if by them they had
conquered the world, and made themselves feasts and a good life. Doct. 1. Evil
purchase is not ordinarily well used, but the purchasers are given up to
insolency, conceit of themselves, and luxury which are the usual plague and
snare of prosperity; for, therefore (that is, seeing they speed in oppression)
they rejoice and are glad, therefore they sacrifice unto their net, and burn
incense unto their drag; because by them their portion is fat, etc. 2.
Dispensations are then saddest to the godly, when they seem to minister
occasion to men to deprive God of his honor, and to exalt any other thing or
way beside him, as the Author of their felicity; for, this affects the
Prophet, that they sacrificed to their net and drag; because by them (as they
judge) their portion is fat. 3. When men have troubled themselves and the world
also to make themselves great, the result of all will be but a poor addition to
their felicity, and that which may be as well wanted as enjoyed; for, all that
the Caldeans reap, is, that they rejoice and are glad, that their portion is
sat, and their meat plenteous; that is, they have good cheer and a merry life,
and yet they who want such abundance live as well they, and they who are mean
may have as much joy and contentment. 4. God will not tolerate, but in due time
punish men's insolency and gloriation in their unlawfully purchased pleasures;
for, the Prophets expostulation on this ground which at last gets a
satisfactory answer, teaches so much.

Ver. 17. Shall they therefore empty their net, and not spare continually to
slay the nations?

Upon all these grounds the Prophet concludes and infers that however the
Caldeans had gone long and far on, yet the Lord would bring their violent
courses to some end, and would not suffer them to empty their net, that they
might spread it for new purchase; nor so much as permit them to enjoy their
desired end in their oppressions, (as if a fisher should not empty his net when
he had taken his fish) and that because of their bloody cruelty toward all the
Nations under their power, in prosecuting their ends. This he propounds by way
of question, to testify his indignation and zeal against its being over-wise.
Doct. 1. Gods people may meet with and apprehend many things in his
dispensations, which will be matter of much vexation and provoke much
indignation in them; so much do these questions teach. 2. Oppression and bloody
cruelty joined with insolency, shall not only come to an end in due time, but
oppressors shall never reach their utmost end and design, but be miserably
disappointed, when their hopes are most bended; for this question includes a
denial, and imports that because of what he has charged against them in the
former expostulation; therefore they shall not empty their net, and shall not
be suffered continually to slay the Nations.

CHAP. II.
IN this Chapter we have the Lords Answer to the Prophets expostulation,
showing that after he has exercised the godlies faith and patience in adhering
to the Word, and tried and discovered hypocrites and hypocrisy, he would
severely punish the Caldeans for their manifold sins. And so in the Chapter the
Prophet waiting for an answer to his expostulation, v. 1. is premonished to
publish the vision, which he was to receive, conspicuously and clearly, v. 2.
and that because it was not speedily to be accomplished, but in the end should
not disappoint them; v. 3. by which delay the Lord would try the faith or
unfoundnesse of that people, or any of them, v. 4. In obedience to which
command, the Prophet publishes the sore judgments that were to come on the
Caldeans for their luxury and ambition; making them insatiable, v. 5, 6, 7, 8.
for their covetousness and aim to be perpetually great, v, 9.10, 11. for
their cruel and bloody purpose, v. 12.13, 14. for their luxury to which they
consecrated their success, or their carnal policy whereby they carried on
their enterprises, v 15, 16, 17. and for their idolatry wherein they hardened
themselves because of their success, and unto which also they consecrated
their unjust conquests, v. 18, 19, 20.

Ver. 1. I Will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the tower, and will watch
to see what be will say unto me, and what I shall answer when I am reproved.

The Prophet having vented his grief, and plunged himself in temptations and
confusions, begins now to recollect himself; and as a watchman attends eagerly
on his watchtower, to get intellgence of any danger for the good of the whole
City: so he being a watchman to the Church by office, resolves by meditation
and prayer to wait for a vision in answer to his expostulation, wherein he had
argued with God; whereby also he might be able to quit his own reasonings, and
to satisfy the people who were ready to quarrel at those hard tidings
concerning their ruin, and did utter to him against Gods dealing that which he
had expressed in his expostulation. By all which he clears that he took not
up the ensuing Message at his own hand, but that he had it from God. Doct. 1.
It Is our safest way in times of temptation and perplexity, not to lie down
under discouragment, but to recollect our selves, and six our eyes on God, who
only can clear our minds and quiet our spirits; therefore the Prophet after
his deep plunge in temptation, sets himself to look to God, and get somewhat to
answer upon his arguing, or reproof and expostulation, (as the Original will
bear) that so his mind may be settled. 2. It is by the Word that the Lord
clears dark cases, and would have his people answer their temptations, and
silence their reasonings; and a temptation arising upon the prosperity of
wicked men is a knot that can only be loofed by God speaking in his Word; for,
the Prophet watches to see what be will say to him, or in him, by way of
vision, and every believer should seek to the Law and Testimony for this end.
See, Psalm. 73, 16, 17. 3. Meditation, earnest Prayer, withdrawing of our minds
off from things visible, and elevating them toward God, are the means in the
use whereof God reveals himself and his mind from his Word to his people in
dark times. This was the watch and tower whereon the Prophet expcted his
vision, and whereon Saints may expect Gods secrets revealed from his
Scriptures. This does lift us up above the mists wherein things below are
ofttimes covered to our sense and will help to lead us safe thorough amidst the
delusions which are frequent at such times. 4. Faithful Ministers ought to
acquit themselves like watchmen in a city or army, to be awake when others
sleep, to be watching with God, and over the people, seeking after faithful
instructions which they may communicate, seeking to be filled from heaven with
light and life, that they may pour it out upon his people, and all this
especially in hard times; for, this does the Prophet profess to be his
practice. I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the tower, and will watch
to see what he will say, and what I shall answer. 5. As the Word of the Lord,
for most part, gets but evil entertainment in hard times, and sharp Messages
meet with hot disputers against the equity thereof; so peoples dispositions at
such a time will give faithful messengers much to do, and many errands to God,
for the Prophet (beside his own arguings within himself) was beset with
reprovers, arguers or quarrellers at these messages, which puts him the more
earnestly to stand and watch to see, says he, what I shall answer when I am
reproved. 6. Albeit the Lords people may have their own debates and faintings
betwixt God and them, yet it is their part to smother these as much as they
can, and to bring up a good report of God and his way to others: for, however
the Prophet afterward records that expostulation which he had with God, Chap.
1. yet it appears, that in the time he had so carried himself before that
murmuring people on Gods behalf, as they were arguing and contending with him,
and he reproved by them.

Ver. 2. And the LORD answered me, and said, Write the vision, and make it
plain upon tables, that he may run that reads it.

The Lord answers his servant attending on him, by giving him a vision, which
is afterward recorded, v. 5. etc. and this vision he is commanded to publish
clearly, and make it plain to every ones capacity, and to affix copies thereof
on the gates of the Temple, or other public places, (as is reported to have
been their custom) and that in so legible characters and plain terms, as
every on might without difficulty read and understand it. Doct. 1. However it
may seem to be in vain for souls plunged in perplexities to pluck up their
loins, and eye and wait on God, yet the experience of the Saints proves it to
be an enriching trade; for, the Lord answered me, says the Prophet, who had
waited for an answer from him in his perplexity. 2. It is the will of God that
what light or ground of encouragement is given to any in a sad time, be made
forthcoming for the good of others; for, the Prophet is commanded to write the
vision for the use of the Church, which though it was his duty by virtue of his
peculiar office, yet it may be a pattern for every one so to act within their
station. 2. It is the Churches great advantage, that in her hard lots she has
the mind of God in his Word; whereby she may expound his dealing with her, her
duty in every case, and what she may expect concerning her self, her troubles
and troublers; for, there is a vision here, which the Prophet is to write for
her use. 4. The Lord has seen it fit in his deep wisdom, and rich love, and
for preventing all occasion of delusion, forgerie or misrepresentation, and for
helping of our forgetfulness, and perpetuating his truth in the world, not
only to deliver his mind to his Church by word of mouth, by himself or by his
Prophets, but to leave it on record in writing with her; on which she may build
her faith as certainly, as if God were immediately, or by his Prophets speaking
to her by Word, from day to day; therefore is the Prophet commanded to write
the vision, on which the godly were to rest their faith in an hard time. 5. The
approved way of publishing Gods Word is not when it is adorned with wisdom or
excellency of words, but when it is delivered in simplicity and plainness,
condescending to the capacity of the meanest: for, says the Lord, Make it
plain upon Tables, that he may run that reads it. 6. The Word of God is
deposited with the Church, not to be read and made use of by some sort of
persons only, but indifferently by all the members of the Church, and
accordingly is fitted to the capacity of all; for, this written vision is not
to be hid up in a strange language, and dark expressions, but to be made plain
upon Tables, that he that runs may read it.

Verse. 3. For the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall
speak, and not lie: though it tarty, wait for it, because it will surely come,
it will nor tarry.

The Lord subjoyns a reason to this command, (which is also a premonition to
the godly, concerning the subsequent message) to wit, that the performance of
his decreed vengeance, revealed in this vision, had its prefixed period, before
which it could not be accomplished, and at which it should certainly come to
pass; and therefore the godly were to look much to the clearly revealed
vision, and laying aside all fervor and haste, patiently to wait for the
accomplishment, which should be seasonable and timely, however their sense
might judge the contrary: Doct. 1. As the mercies promised to the Church, so
also the timing of them is in Gods hand, so that we are not to expect that the
performance of comfortable promises, or of threatened vengeance against
enemies, will be always ready at our call, but must wait the Lords time, who
has his own seasons for afflicting, trying, and delivering; for, The vision is
yet for an appointed time, says the Lord. 2. The Lords delaying to appear,
diminishes nothing of the certainty of performance of what he has promised to
the Church, or threatened against her enemies: for, The vision has an appointed
time, and an end prefixed, so that the exercise will not be perpetual; and at
this time it shall speak, to wit, by performance; though we undervalue other
expressions of it, yet then it shall speak to our satisfaction, and not lie,
nor disappoint us, whatever fears we have to the contrary. 3. Such is our
weakness, haste and distrust, that when the Lord delays to perform promises,
or what he has foretold in his word, we are ready to think that he denies to
do it at all, which is to contradict the Scriptures verdict here published, to
remove such apprehensions; Though it tarry, it will surely come. 4. When we do
not simply doubt of the certain performance of Gods Word, yet we must not
expect to have sense subscribing to all which faith apprehends concerning Gods
method in performing; but faith will oft-times see cause to speak in
contradictory terms to senses verdict; for, Though it tarry, it will not tarry,
says he; sense will soon weary, and say the performance tarrieth, when the
Lord satisfies not its hasty desires, but out-wearieth all carnal confidence
and strength; But faith will say, that considering Gods love and wisdom, his
holy purposes in filling the cup of the enemies, and bringing good to his
people out of every delay, considering our duty, and the exercise of graces we
are called to when he delays, considering that his performances come never out
of date; and when matters were past all recovery, but that still when he comes
he makes up all, as if he had come the first hour; and considering that there
is strength enough in God to carry through till deliverance come, Isa. 40.29,
30, 31. Faith, I say, considering all these, will say, it will not tarry, but
comes in a seasonable and the best time, and before we be fit for it, by
performance of these duties required in a time of such exercise by delays. 5.
The faith of Gods certain and seasonable coming to help his people, will enable
them patiently to wait for him, without limiting of him, and without taking a
wrong way, his issue being worth the waiting for in his own way; for, says the
Lord, Though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not
tarry. 6. In a time when the Lord suspends the performance of his Word, as
Ministers are so much the more to inculcate and cry up the sure Word, neither
eating it because of delays, nor speaking according to probabilities; so it is
the duty of the godly in such a time, to be much in studying the Scriptures, to
fraught their hearts full with promises, that they may commend them, and be
supported by them: for, The visions being for an appointed time, is a reason
why the Prophet is commanded, ver. 2. to write the vision, and make it plain,
etc. 7. It is a sweet help to make us lean to the Word, when we study to see
Christ in it, somewhat of him held forth and promised in it, and he in whom the
promises are Yea and Amen, engaged for the performance of it: therefore the
Apostle, Heb. 10.37. in stead of the vision, holds forth Christ as the
substance of the thing promised, and the party engaged for the performance, He
that shall come, will come, etc. and this makes this particular promise
concerning the Chaldeans applicable to all the difficulties of the Church,
because Christ is alsufficient for every need.

Verse. 4. Behold his soul which is lifted up, is not upright in him: but the
just shall live by his faith.

The Lord clears his purpose and end in delaying to perform and fulfill the
vision, which is to try and discover who are the lofty and unsound, and who the
truly righteous, and so premonisheth all of their hazard in that time of
exercise, and informs the truly godly how they may subsist and hold out. Doct.
1. Times of Gods exercising his Church, by not appearing visibly for her, are
times of narrow trial, and discovery of soundnes or Hypocrisy; for, so does
the Lord teach us, that the lifted up soul and the just shall both appear in
their own colors, when the vision is yet for an appointed time. 2. The manner
of men's behavior in a time of trial and tentation, is of great importance, and
much notice is taken of it by God, as tending much, either to his honor or
dishonor, and to the promoting of our own peace or disquiet; therefore a Behold
is prefixed to this doctrine. 3. However affliction and trial ought to be an
humbling exercise, yet without Gods blessing, and meeting with corruption, it
will discover and bring forth much pride, and high towers of imaginations
swelling against Gods sovereignty, that he should have the disposing of us at
his pleasure, censuring his way of proceeding with us, conceiting of wisdom and
power to secure our selves, better then by waiting on God, etc. for, then there
will be some whose soul is listed up. 4. As a proud, murmuring and conceited
disposition under trouble, discovers men's unfoundness, so it will not long wait
on God, but make apostasy, either from a general profession of being his
followers, or from keeping his way to the use of sinful means, because of which
the Lord does and will testify that he does abhor such decliners; for, His
soul which is lifted up, is not upright in him; and the Apostle in citing this
Text, Heb. 10.38. clears, that the proud soul will draw back, and that Gods
soul will have no pleasure in him. 5. Albeit that trial will sift narrowly, and
discover the naughtiness of many, yet there are still some who find grace to
subsist, and get through in hardest times; for, in opposition to the former the
Lord subjoynes, But the just shall live. 6. The way of the godly in patient
waiting on God in hard times, is neither a senseless stupidity, hardening
themselves in sorrow, but an exercising, feeling and lively way; nor is it a
poor and sorry shift, but a comfortable means of subsistence; for, the just
shall live, he shall have a lively exercise, and a life of it. 7 Before a man
can attain to a comfortable way of bearing trouble and waiting on God in hard
times, he must first make sure his personal reconciliation, and being righteous
before God, which will be only when by faith he lays hold on Christ's
righteousness offered in the Gospel; for, he must be the just and that by
faith, who shall live by faith in trouble, and so it is expounded, Romans 1.17.
Gal. 3.11. and 8; The man who is just and righteous by faith in Christ, shall
not only live a life of grace, begun here, by dwelling constantly under the
shadow of imputed righteousness, whereby he is hid from death and wrath, and
by drawing life and virtue out of Christ to quicken his heart, and to enable
him for every good word and work, and perfected in glory, but also his faith
will carry him through, (not only the snares of prosperity, but) hardest
dispensations, without apostasy or fainting; for, while the righteous man
walks not by present sense, and by faith takes up God as his father in Christ,
studies all the promises made to Saints in every condition, and magnifieth the
truth of them; sees God his Father to be the carver out of all his and the
Churches lots, and that every condition is useful, and has a blessing in it to
the godly; and that waiting on God in his way is the sure path to a blessed
issue; and withal finding now and then Gods presence sensibly with his Spirit;
while, I say, the godly man is thus exercised, he cannot but have a good life,
and be hid from the blasty winds of tentations, wherewith others are assailed
and blown over; The just shall live by faith; his says shall afford him a life
in hardest times, and provide for him in wildernesses. 9. Albeit that many may
be believing in Christ, and so be born through, who yet cannot discern faith in
themselves, yet such as expect righteousness through faith in Christ, and by
faith to be thus supported in evil times, should study the reality and
sincerity of their faith, that it is not a motion or fancy, but real and such
as he has a sure hold of; for, it is his says by which the just shall live, a
faith which he has made sure he has. And for this end, we ought to study
exactly the nature of faith, that neither the presumptuously secure, nor
fainting soul mistake their own case.

Ver. 5. Yea also, because he transgresses by Wine, he is a proud man, neither
keeps at home, who enlarges his desire as hell, and is as death, and cannot
be satisfied, but gathers unto him all nations, and heapeth upon him all
people.

Follows to the end of the Chapter, the vision it self, concerning the
destruction which was to come upon the Chaldeans, propounding for the most part
in general denunciation of Gods vengeance upon gross and impenitent sinners,
such as the Chaldeans were, wherein the Lord threatens wrath and sad judgments
to come upon them for the gross abominations (such as ambition, covetousness,
oppression, sensuality, carnal policy, idolatry, etc.) which abounded amongst
them. This controversy the Lord lays out in several branches, sometimes
repeating the same things in substance, and amplifying them from several
considerations, to the end there may be a more distinct and clear sight of the
sinfulness of their sin, of the vanity of the pretenses they founded their
courses on, and of the equity of God judgments subjoyned to every branch. The
first branch of the controversy is, that the Chaldeans, and in special, their
King, being given to sensuality and ambition, or drunk with pride and ambition
as with wine, was insatiable in his Conquests like death and hell, or the grave
(of which, Pro. 30.15.16. Isa. 5.14.) and not being content with his own
portion, did labor to add one Kingdom after another to his dominions. Doct.
1. As the godlies honest wrestling through an evil time by faith, is an
evidence that God will reckon with their oppressors: so the Lords reproving and
punishing the Apostasy of any within the Church, may assure men that he will
not spare wicked enemies; for this is subjoyned to what was said, ver. 4. with
a Yea also, or How much more? importing that when he made the just to live by
faith, he would also reckon with the Chaldeans; and if he discovered and
punished the listed up soul, how much more the Chaldeans? See, Jer. 25.29. 1
Pet. 4.17, 18, 2. The most part of unrenewed great men's actions and
enterprises, are consecrated to the service of their vile lusts; For, Because
he transgresses by wine, and is proud, he keeps not at home, his great
enterprises are undertaken to satisfy sensuality and ambition. 3. Men once
inslaved to the service of their lusts, do become brutish, and in a manner
renounce their very reason; for, so may the words also be read, The proud man
transgresses as through wine; he is drunk with ambition as with wine, which
depriveth men of the use of sense and reason. 4. It is a sin flowing from
ambition, and a violence offered to nature, which is content with little, when
men cannot acquisce in their lot and portion assigned them by God, especially
when it is competent, but do by all means hunt after more; for, it was the
Chaldeans sin and ambition, that having a Kingdom, yet he keeps not at home. 5.
It is the Lords judgment upon ambitious men, that the more they go beyond
bounds to satisfy their lusts, they become the more insatiable; the more they
drink, they are the more thirsty; for, such an one enlarges his desire as
hell, and is as death, and cannot be satisfied, but gathers unto him all
Nations, and heapeth to him all people.

Verse. 6. Shall not all these take up a parable against him, and a taunting
Proverb against him, and say: Woe to him that increases that which is not his:
how long? and to him that ladeth himself with thick clay.

The Lord threateneth that because of these their sins, his judgments should
make them contemptible, and matter of derision; insomuch, that even those whom
they had oppressed, should insult over them and mock them, and declare them
accursed in their unlawful Conquests, (which however they had groaned under
them, could not endure long) and in their overcharging, and burdening
themselves with the dross of this world. Doct. 1. Even the consciences of
wicked men, if they were awake or suffered to speak, would give out doom and
sentence upon them, and subscribe to the righteousness of Gods judgments;
for, here he appeals to themselves, Shall not all these take up a parable, etc.
So also, v. 7.2. When men sinfully endeavor to satisfy their pride and
ambition, it is right^ous with God to make them most contemptible and
ignominious; for, the proud man, v. 5 meets with a parable and taunting
proverb, or becomes a matter of public derision. 3. However the oppressed and
subdued may seem to be far behind with Conquerors and Oppressors, yet the Lord
will in due time clear that there is but little cause for such an
apprehension, and greatest oppressors will meet with their own stroke, wherein
the lowest may insult over them, and they shall be rather the object of pity
then of envy, or on whom any would wish more cruelty; for, All these, (to wit,
the nations subdued by him, v. 5. even all of them, and those who were sorest
smitten) shall take up a parable against him, and a taunting proverb against
him, and say, Woe to him. See Isa. 14.4, -- 12. 4. As unjust Conquest gives a
man no right to his Purchase: so it brings on Gods curse, and at last makes the
Purchaser an object of derision; Woe here may be taken, both for an insulting
expression, and a declaration of a curse upon him; Woe to him (or Woe he, by way
of triumphing over him, and laughing at him) that increases that which is not
his. 5. Though the oppressed ordinarily groan under the oppressor, and wish his
end, admiring at Gods patience toward him, yet it may be concluded, that
oppression shall not continue so long as either the oppressed or oppressor
might expect, and that disappointment of the oppressors hopes of continuance in
his way, shall be matter of derision; for, all this is imported in that part of
the proverb, How long? 6. Albeit oppressors promise to themselves much ease,
contentment, pleasure and happiness, in their great enjoyments, yet they are
iniserably disappointed; for, riches are in themselves but base, and great
abundance of them beyond that which is needful, is to the ambitious but a
burden and matter of vexation, drawing down the soul from God, and intangling
and polluting it; and this may point out the misery of those, who hunt so much
after these things; Woe to him that ladeth himself with thick clay, that is,
base riches, which do but burden, pollute, and entangle him.

Ver. 7. Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee? and awake that
shall vex thee? and thou shall be for booties unto them.

8. Because thou have spoiled many nations, all the remnant of the people shall
spoil thee: because of men's blood, and for the violence of the land, of the
City, and all that dwell-therein.

The Lord yet declares his mind concerning these sins, and threatens yet
farther, that he will pay them home, as they had served others; for, as the
Chaldeans had ranged up and down the world like ravenous beasts: so he would
suddenly raise up the Medes and Persians, who for present were little dreamed
of to trouble and devour, and prey upon them, v. 7. And as they had robbed and
spoiled many nations, so he would stir up the remnant of the nations (either
such nations as had been reserved from their sury, or the remainder of the
nations, which they had ruined, who should join with their enemies,) to prey on
them: wherein the r^ghteousnesse of God should appear, in requiting them for
their bloodshed; and the great desolation they brought on Cities and Countries
wherever they came, and the havoc made of the inhabitants, and especially for
what they had done to Jerusalem, Judea, and the Jews, v. 8. Doct. 1. The Lords
judgments on impenitent sinners come unexpectedly, and when they least
imagine, and that oft-times by instruments little thought of, till God raise
them up and employ them; for, They shall rise up suddenly and awake, to bite
and vex. They may seem to be asleep and sit very quiet, who shall do this work,
being employed of God. 2. Oppressors will be made in due time disciples at
their own school, and be made to seele themselves, what sad strokes they
inflicted on others, and be dealt with as they served others; for, these
preying beasts shall be bitten and vexed, or be brought into inextricable
difficulties; and they who spoiled many Nations, shall be for booties and be
spoiled. 3. Although oppressors, so long as God permits them to execute his
vengeance, prove invincible, yet when their day comes they will be as feeble
as any; for, the Chaldeans, who before-time had no more to do but come and
gather spoil, are now for booties unto their enemies, who as easily spoil
them. 4. Although oppressors dream that they have all under their feet who
could harm them, so that none dare open the mouth, or move the wing or peep,
yet the Lord has a scourge ready when he pleases to avenge himself upon
them; for, all the remnant of the people shall spoil thee, says the Lord; He
has either nations hid from their fury, whom they think not worth their anger,
or the very remnants of spoiled nations, who if he employ them, will do their
turn. 5. When the Lord denounces or executes his judgments on bloody
oppressors, it is useful to study much his controversy against them, that we
may father his judgments aright, may adore the righteousness of God, and may
learn from their example to abhor all violent and bloody courses, especially
against Gods people, which he so severely punishes; therefore he subjoyns,
that all this is because of men's blood, for the violence of the Land, and of
the City, and of all that dwell therein; which is to be understood with special
relation to Judah.

Ver. 9. Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house, that he
may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the power of evil.

The second branch of Gods controversy (held forth in general terms) is that
out of a desire to build stately Palaces, (as the Chaldean did, Dan. 29, 30.)
or to the end they might establish themselves, and their posterity in perpetual
greatness and wealth, and be exempted from the common miseries of mankind,
and that no aftertimes might move them, they are extremely and sinfully
covetous, for which the Lord pronounces them accursed Doct. 1. The certainty
of Gods judgments on particular sinners and enemies, may be read from general
denunciations against such sins, it being agreeable to the rule of justice,
that all who do such things should be so punished; therefore the Lord accuses
and threatens the Chaldeans in a general sentence; Woe to him that coveteth,
etc. that it may appear how agreeable to justice his sentence against them is,
and that every such sinner in aftertimes may put in his own name, as if he
were the man pointed at. 2. It is a plague on wicked men, when they are given
up to imagine that their prosperous condition shall never change, but that they
shall be able to secure it for them and theirs for ever; for, this is the
prospering wicked man's thought, which brings him to woe, that he will set his
nests on high; as birds do to secure themselves and young ones, and to be
delivered from the power of evil. See Ps. 49.11. 3. Men's vain imaginations and
their apprehending that which will never be, and wherein all others have
failed, does oft-times prove a great snare to engage them in courses which
otherwise they might see, not only to be sinful, but needless and foolish;
for, because the worldly man thinks that he can secure uncertain riches to him
and his, and can guard against any emergent evils to which mankind for sin are
condemned; therefore he coveteth an evil covetousness, that he may set his
nest on high, etc. and stands upon no means which he thinks will make that lie
in his right hand prove a truth. 4. Albeit men may lawfully, and in duty should
endeavor the good of their posterity, even in external things, and may study
to prevent inconveniences, which may prejudice them, yet this endeavor proves
sinful, when either it arises from, or tends to greediness and covetousness,
or insnares men by drawing them to the use of sinful means: for, Woe to him
that coveteth an evil covetuousnesse, though it were even for his house, or
that he may set his nest on high, etc. 5. It may be sufficient to deter men
from courses; that the Word declares them to be sinful, and that a curse
follows them; for, so does the Word import here, that it is an evil
covetuousnesse, and woe is to him that coveteth it, therefore men should be far
from it.

Ver. 1. Thou have consulted shame to thy house, by cutting off many people,
and have sinned against thy soul.

11. For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the Timber
shall answer it.

The Lord expounds his own pronounced woe, and threatens that these their
projects should tend to the ignominy of their family; it being just they
should be so dealt with, who ruin so many to build up themselves, and sell
their souls to make up their outward estates, v. 10. and albeit there should be
none that durst complain of them, yet the very materials of their buildings
should witness against them, that they were acquired by robbery, and should
agree in a sort of music (heard by Gods justice) to cry for vengeance, ver.
11. Doct. 1. Albeit covetous oppressors do ost-times carry themselves in great
state, as the only honorable of the earth, yet their way is in it self
shameful, and will end in ignominy; Thou have consulted shame to thy house. 2.
Men prosecuting their designs by unlawful means, readily fall into the snare
which they would most gladly escape; for, the Chaldean feeking to set his house
on high, not only covets evil to his house, v. 9. but even brings shame (which
he seeks to shift) to it. 3. There needs no more to pull down the family of the
oppressor, then his way of studying to make it great; his very building, his
nest is a plague to it, and enoug to make it totter; for, thereby he consults
shame to it. He could do no more, if he had bended his wits to ruin it. 4. The
Politic projects of men, who lean to their own wit for compassing their ends,
and neglect piety, or to wait on God for counsel, will prove shameful and
sinful; men who lean to their own wits, will find, that their most serious
consultations will leave them in the mire: Thou have consulted shame to thy
house, says the Lord. 5. It is a high degree of impiety, and a clear presage
of ruin, when a man in managing his affairs, casts off all his love to his
neighbors, and not only minds himself only, but stands not upon the
prejudice of others, to rise upon their ruins, or to cut them off, though never
so many, and he but one, if he think it; may tend to his advantage; for, Thou
have consulted shame to thy house by cutting off many people. 6. As men for the
most part neglect their souls, when they are mad upon their worldly designs so
it is a dangerous c^se when it is so, and it will prove a poor bargain in the
end, when men having gained never so much, yet have sinned against their soul,
which the Lord here not only makes use of as a challenge, but declares it as a
judgment on the Chaldean. 7. Sin and guilt will pursue and find out the
sinner, and will of it self call for vengeance, though all the world should be
silent, and not challenge him; for, the stone will cry out of the wall, and the
beam out of the timber shall answer it.

Ver. 12. Woe to him that builds a Town with blood, and establishes a City by
iniquity.

The third branch of the controversy, points chiefly at the way of their
prosecuting of their covetous and ambitious ends, which was (as one fin comes
not readily alone, but dra weth other sins with it) by oppression, cutting off
of people, and other unjust ways. This course the Lord pronounces to be
accursed, however they gilded it over with specious pretenses of public good,
or that thereby they endeavored to perfect and settle their civil State. Doct.
1. The Lord looks much unto, and tryes the dispositions of men much, by the
means they make use of in a course, whether it be right or wrong in it self;
for, the Lord charge upon them here, that they carried on their work with
blood, and by iniquity. 2. Pretense of public good, and zeal to advance the
State and government, is one of the fig tree-leaves where with men think to
cover their oppression, and make it plausible, but all in vain; for, Woe to him
that builds a Town with blood, and establishes a City by iniquity. 3.
Though all oppressions be not alike horrid in themselves, and men readily do
account themselves good enough, when they go not the length they might, or that
others do in that fin, yet the Lord will pursue the fairest way of oppression
men can take with vengeance, as being sinful in it self, and sometime being
more cruel in its lingering way, then the most violent oppression in hot blood:
for, Woe to him that establishes a City by iniquity, be what iniquity it will,
as well as to him that builds a Town with blood.

Ver. 13. Behold, is it not of the Lord of hosts, that the people shall labor
in the very fire, and the people shall weary themselves for very vanity?

The Lord explaineth this Woe, and denounces that he should appear eminently
against them, in making all their endeavors to establish themselves, (wherein
they employed many nations, and had much toil, as in a fiery furnace, every
head being made bald in their wars, Ezekiel, 29.18.) to prove not only vain, and
to no purpose, but to tend also to their own prejudice, as one whose work is
cast into the fire, loses both his materials and his labor and endangereth
himself by following it to get it prosecuted, or rescued, so should they perish
in their hunting after wealth, and with it; See the like threatening, Jer.
51.58. Doctr. 1. Men taking sinful ways to prosecute their designs, may meet
with much toil and vexation in their work, as an earnest of further judgment;
for the people, (that is, the Chaldeans and many instruments employed by them)
labor and weary themselves. 2. The utmost of men's endeavors shall not promote
or perfect a work which God is against, nor uphold what he has a mind to
overthrow; for, though they labor and weary themselves, yet it shall be for
very vanity, and to no purpose. 3. Such as by bloody oppression seek to exalt
and establish themselves, shall not only lose their labor, but incur further
damage by their attempt and lose themselves, their work, and the materials
which they had to begin their work upon; for, the Chaldeans shall labor in the
very fire, which shall not only breed them toil and pain in laboring, but
shall devour all their conquests, themselves, and the Kingdom of Babel, which
they had when they began their tyranny. 4. The Lord will so order his judgments
upon violent oppressors, as that his hand shall be visibly and remarkably seen
by all, to be the inflicter of them, and he shall prove himself omnipotent, by
frustrating men of their wicked purposes, and consuming all their labors; for,
Behold, is it not of the Lord of hosts, that the people shall labor in the
very fire, etc.

Ver. 14. For the Earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the
Lord, as the waters cover the sea.

The Lord subjoynes a reason to this sentence, clearing how he should be so
much seen in this judgment, to wit, that however he seemed to let his own Name
and glory be obscured, when he suffered the Chaldeans to oppress the world,
and lead his people into captivity, yet in due time he would make his glory so
conspicuous in their just destruction, and his powerful asserting of Judah into
liberty, as the Nations should be filled with the knowledge thereof, as the sea
is full of water: and all this as a type and pledge of the glory to be revealed
in Christ, and the knowledge of his Name then to be communlcated. Doct. 1. When
oppressors do prosper, and the Lords people with the rest of the world are
brought into bondage by them, the Lords glory is engaged for his appearing
against them in due time; for, it is subjoyned as a reason of the Chaldeans
evil success; for, the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory
of the Lord, etc. 2. The greatness of oppressors does contribute to illustrate
and set forth the glory of God in bringing them down, and therefore is rather
an argument why the Lord should destroy them, then any hinderance to it; the
Lord will bring down the Chaldeans: for in so doing, the earth shall be filled
with the knowledge of his glory, See Ps. 9.16. 3. As God is most glorious in
himself, so he will make his glory to shine in the deliverance of his people,
though for a time he suffer them to be in bondage; for, in bringing back Judah
at the ruin of Babylon, the Earth shallbe filled with the knowledge of the
glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. See. Ps. 126.2. 4. All the
glorious manifestations of God against his enemies, and for his people of old,
were but shadows of what he manifested, and does manifest in and by Christ in
the latter days; and any effects of these his works which appeared among his
people, or the Gentiles, were but a taste of what the glory of God shining in
Christ, and made known to the world by the Gospel, should produce among Jews
and Gentiles; therefore this prophecy is applied to the days of the Gospel,
Isai. 11.9. as getting then full accomplishment.

Ver. 15. Woe to him that gives his neighbor drink: that put thy bottle to
him, and make him drunken also, that thou may look on their nakedness.

The fourth branch of the controversy, if we take it properly holds forth a
denunciation of vengeance to come upon them for their beastly luxury and
sensuality, usual in the Babylonish Court, and that not only in their own
persons, but they did draw one another to drunkenness, that so they might mock
at their infirmities, which they could not hide in their drunkenness (alluding
to that of Noah, Genesis 9.21, 22.) or that they might abuse one another in an
unnatural way, through their drunkenness; And so it teaches, 1. When men abuse
their prosperity to luxury, it is an evidence of a curse upon them and it; so
it was with the Chaldeans: Woe to him that gives his neighbor drink, etc. as
having no other end wherefore he troubled all the world but thus to abuse
himself and others. 2. Sin is come to a great height, and near a curse, when
men do entice and draw others to the same excess of riot with themselves; for,
Woe unto him that gives his neighbor drink, that put thy bottle to him,
and make him drunken also 3. It is a beastly dispofition, to take pleasure in
making men abuse themselves by drink, a Woe is denounced against it; nor is it a
mark of any true kindness, as the profane reckon, but it is done, that they
may look on their nakedness and bring it out to open view. 4. Intemperance is
an usher to let in any other vice; for when a man is drunk, discovering of, or
looking on nakedness will not be accounted shameful, nor unnatural filthiness
an abomination. But the words may also be taken figuratively, and so the scope
is to tax them for their endeavors, by Politic practices and fair promises,
to engage their neighbors in their undertakings, and that as they were drunk
with ambition themselves, so they filled their neighbors with the like
principles, and drunken heaps of sharing in their victories, though indeed they
minded nothing less, but if any inconvenience should befall their Confederates,
they would despise them, or be ready themselves upon occasion, to bring them
unto slavery, and to make them base. Thus does the whore make the world drunken
with her Idolatrous cup, Rev. 17. and thus did Nineveh entice the world with
her whoredom and witchcrafts, Nah. 3.4. This interpretation teaches. 1, Great
men in the world are ordinarily so infatuated with their hopes and projects
that like drunken men they reel, and cannot be sober, nor ruled by sound
principles: for, the Chaldeans are thus drunken, and they make their neighbors
drunken also, as well as themselves. 2. Carnal policy and interest is the
greatest Steersman of humane affairs among men, which frequently brings a
curse on the users thereof; for, Woe to him who thus gives his neighbor drink,
etc. 3. No true kindness can be expected from men who walk politickly and on
interests of State, pretend what they will: for all that such do this way to
others, is, that they may look on their nakedness.

Ver. 16. Thou art filled with shame for glory: drink thou also, and let thy
foreskin be uncovered: the cup of the Lords right hand shall be turned unto
thee, and shameful spewing shall be on thy glory.

Whatever way we expound the challenge, the Lords judgment is very equitable,
that all these courses should tend rather to their ignominy then their honor;
and that as they had been Butlers to draw others to sensuality, and to
intoxicate and allure them to join in their oppressions of the Church and the
world; so the Lord should bring about the Cup of his wrath to them, and make
them drink of it to satiety, whereby they should be as contemptible, as when a
drunken man is lying naked, and that with his uncircumcised foreskin (which was
an abomination to the Church) uncovered, or when he is polluting all his
bravery or stately house with his filthy vomit, Doct. 1. The sinfnl courses
which men follow to advance their greatness would appear most ignominious to a
clear discerner, and will at last be seen to be so, to the conviction of all:
for, Thou art filled with shame for glory, says the Lord. 2. The measuring of
all afflictions and judgments is in Gods hand, so as none can add to them or
diminish from them, nor get them shifted, when God lays them on; therefore
they are called a Cup, which is a set measure, and the Cup of the Lords right
hand, which is irresistibly powerful. See Jer. 25.28. 3. As the Lord will at
last bring about the storm of vengeance upon the head of wicked men, who were
instruments to execute it upon others; so they drinking last of the Cup, and
therefore nearer the dregs, and having been eminently wicked, and withal, being
oft-times without the Church, (as the uncircumcised) and so without God, their
stroke shall be more eminently ignominious then any others; for, when the Cup
of the Lords right hand is turned to them, (after others have drunk thereof,
Jer. 25.26.) then they shall drink, and their foreskinnes shall be uncovered,
and shameful spewing shall be on their glory:

Ver. 17. For the violence of Lebanon shall cover thee, and the spoil of
beasts which made them afraid, because of men's blood, and for the violence of
the Land, of the City, and of all that dwell therein.

To clear the equity of all these judgments the Lord subjoyns and recapitulates
his controversy, threatening that the Chaldeans should be overwhelmed, for the
violence done to the Land of Israel, bordering upon Lebanon, or the Temple made
of the wood of Lebanon, yea and for the very destruction of that forest, and
spoiling and affrighting of the beasts there, as they came through it, and cut
down the timber for the siege of Jerusalem, and for their beastly and bloody
violence upon the Inhabitants of city and country wherever they came,
especially in Judea. Or it may be thus interpreted, that as in the forest of
Lebanon, beasts are hunted, affrighted, and destroyed, so should they be
pursued and ruined because of their horrid cruelty and violence, and so it is
the same in substance with v. 7, 8. Doct. 1. It is necessary that we study over
and over again the Lords controversy with impenitent sinners, that we may
adore his equity in punishing, and tremble at his severity in so much insisting
to punish for sin; for, therefore are their sins repeated and threatening
renewed. 2. Such as do like brute beasts, trouble and vex all the creatures,
and make havoc of all wherever they come, and especially do oppress the
people of God, may expect to be accordingly dealt with; and that without
repentance they shall be irrecoverably destroyed; for, so do these words,
taking in both expositions, teach us, that they shall be covered or overwhelmed
with calamity, for their violence against the very creatures and the Church;
See Isai 14.6, 7, 8. and for their violence shall be hun^ed and pursued as
wild beasts (whom they in their actions resembled) use to be by hunters.

Ver. 18. What profits the graven Image, that the maker thereof has graven
it: the molten Image, and a teacher of lies, that the maker of his work
trusts therein, to make dumb Idols?

The last branch of the controve rsie (held forth also in geneneral terms) in
their Idolatry, and particularly their making of Idols and Images, to represent
what they acknowledged for a Deity, and to be worshipped in that Religious
state, the vanity of which he proves from their unprofitablenesse and inability
to teach any thing of a deity; for however the formers of them take much pains
on them, and when they have done trust in them, and set them up above men in
Gods room, yet they have no authority so to do. Doct. 1. Few of those who
receive greatest things of this world from God, do acknowledge him for them,
but rather follow Idol-gods to his dishonor, and in defiance of him; for, so
did the Chaldeans, as it is imported here, and so the most part of Adams
posterity do. 2. In a time when Idolaters do prevail, and the true Church is
brought into bondage by them it is necessary to study much the vanity of
Idolatry, and to set it out so to the world, to the end that neither the wicked
may dream of being exempted from vengeance by their Idols, nor the godly
stumble at the prosperity of such as follow them; for, to these ends does the
doctrine of the vanity of Idols here set forth, tend. 3. Besides fearful
Idolatry committed in the world by men's taking that for their god which is no
god; (whereof they cannot be free, who perform religious worship, due to God
only, to any creature whatsoever) the world is also guilty of Idolatry by
making of Idols or Images for representing an invisible Deity, and the object
of their Religious worship, be it what it will, and by worshipping of them in
that Religious state and relation; this is it which is expressly reproved in
the Chaldaans here, that they not only accounted that to be their god which was
no god, but either a creature or a feigned thing, but that they had graven
Images, and molten Images; not that they acknowledged these to be their gods,
but that they were represented by them, and that their god were to be
worshipped in and by these Images: and this challenge is expressed in general
ternies, that all who make use of such devices in Religious worship, (be the
ultimate and last object of their worship what it will) may take their
reproof. 4. Whatever men may conceit of Images, as many ways useful for
exciting of them, and keeping them in remembrance of a Deity, yet upon narrow
search it will be found that they are unprofitable, if not pernicious; as every
thing in worship, which is not instituted of God for profit, proves; for he
puts it to any unbiassed conscience to tell, what profits the graven Image?
5. The original and Authors of Images prove the vanity of putting them in any
Religious state: for, since it has the maker thereof among men, what profits
it? for it cannot be God, Hos. 8.6. and albeit the maker thereof give it a
being, and has graven it curiously, yet he has no authority to command it to
be worshipped, nor can such an Author make it bless the worshippers; and it is
folly in the maker thereof to trust therein, yea, it does sufficiently disgrace
any point of Religion, that it is of man's making or devising. 6. Albeit that
men do commend Images as books for the ignorant, whereby they may be helped to
take up a deity, yet they can teach or represent nothing of God; but only the
makers phantasic; yea, they cause the mind to wander from the true and saving
knowledge of God, as he is revealed in his word, and do imprint false and equal
conceptions of a deity; for, the molten Image is a teacher of lies. 7. Though
such as make use of Images to represent a deity, or that which they worship, do
imagine that they rest not upon the representation, but do ascend up by it to
the thing represented: yet herein their heart deceives them; for whatever they
pretend in their thoughts, yet practically they honor them as their god, and
whatever they pretend to offer unto God in and by them, is expounded by God as
offered really unto them; for the maker of his work, (though he might have made
any other thing of the materials) trusts therein. 8. Such as worship graven
Images, do proclaim their own brutishness, and that they are as great blocks
as these which they adore, when they exalt that which is below themselves, to
be above themselves, and in Gods room; for, what a brutishness is it in a man
endued with sense and reason, to make himself dumb Idols, which have no sense
at all?

Ver. 19. Woe unto him that says to the wood, Awake: to the dumb stone, Arise,
it shall teach: behold, it is laid over with gold and silver, and there is no
breath at all in the midst of it.

Upon what has been said, the Lord denounces a woe upon them who emplore Idols
for help or direction; seeing that however they be curiously framed, yet their
vile matter remains still the same, nor can the Artificers skill put life
into them to move themselves, far less to help others. Doct. 1.
Imageworshippers proclaim their own wretchedness, in that they are given up to
a reprobate sense, void of discerning: and they shall have many sorrowful
disappointments who expect a remedy from them in hard cases, and in the end
shall be confounded by God, who will not give his praise of being an helper and
directer of the children of men to graven Images; For, woe to him that says to
the wood, Awake, to the dumb stone, Arise, it shall teach. 2. Albeit the vanity
of worshipping Idols and Images be palpaply gross, so that seriously to
consider it, is sufficient to refute it, yet such is man's stupidity, when he
delights not to retain God in his knowledge, as he needs much stirring up, to
take notice of the error of his way; for, albeit a little pains discover that
their Idols are wood and stone, and that there is no breath in the midst of it;
and consequently, that it is in vain to worship such; yet man must be called
to behold this, and must have it often pointed out to him. 3. Outward pomp and
splendour in the exercise of Religion, though it be much taking with natural
hearts, yet it is not the thing God looks to, but how his own prescribed rule
is followed, and what reality is there in such shows? for, says he, their
Idol is laid over with gold and silver, and yet there is no breath at all in
the midst of it.

Ver. 20. But the Lord is in his holy Temple, let all the Earth keep silence
before him.

In opposition to the vanity of Idols the true God is commended, who dwells in
heaven, and manifests himself in the Church by the signs of his presence, of
his own appointing, and by prescribing rules of his own worship, whose
authority and greatness is such, as may make all the world give over their
disputing for Idols, and submit to his doctrine, and may cause them to stand in
awe to come in opposition to him, or to wrong his people, when they should be
scattered amongst them. Doct. 1. The consideration of the vanity of Idols, and
misery of Idol-worshippers, ought to commend the true God to his Church, and
set out their own happiness, who have him not only reigning in heaven, but in
the midst of them, and know how to serve him acceptably according to his will;
therefore it is subjoyned to what has been said, But the Lord is in his holy
Temple. 2. The authority of the true God, and his presence among his people
being seriously thought upon, will call for much reverence, will silence all
debates against his revealed will, and may terrific men from being in
opposition to him or his people: for, the Lord is in his holy Temple, let all
the Earth keep silence before him; where silence is the badge of their
reverencing his majesty and authority, as Joh 29.9.

CHAP. III.
IN this Chapter, the Prophet having heard Gods mind, concerning both the
Church and the Chaldeans, expresses his exercise upon the whole of that which
has been revealed to him, in a way of meditation or prayer, penned for the
edification and direction of the Church, in the times they were to meet with,
v. 1. wherein out of his deep apprehension, and fear of the approaching stroke,
having prayed for preservation and moderation of severity in their captivity,
till the time prefixed for their deliverance should come, v. 2. He gathers
grounds of faith, that there should be a deliverance from their future
captivity, from the Lords glorious manifestations of old for his people, in
carrying them from Egypt through the wilderness, to the possession of the
promised land, and settling and securing them in it, ver. 3. -- 15. after which
he changes his style, and instead of praying, expects that present fears
should end in future confidence, v. 16. and glories in the hope of
preservation and deliverance, v. 17.18, 19. -- In testimony whereof he commends
his meditation to be sung with joy, v. 19.

Ver. 1. A Prayer of Habakkuk the Prophet upon Sigionoth.

The Inscription of this exercise holds forth the Prophets scope, which is to
pen a prayer to God, in reference to the ensuing calamities, such a prayer (as
the word signifies,) as is made by a Supplicant to a Judge, which because it
was penned in Meeter for the help of memory, therefore the tune is prescribed,
the clear signification whereof though it be uncertain, yet that which comes
nearest to likelihood is, that the Prayer being endited in a composed and mixed
Meeter, it was to be sung with variable tunes and instruments fitted
accordingly. Doct. 1. when the Lords people abuse their privileges, they may
be put to plead for them before the Lords tribunal by prayer, and be content to
hold fast these things by faith, which sometime they had full possession of;
for Hab akkuk and the Church are put to prayer for their very being, and to
deprecate the total ruin of Gods work. 2. It is the duty of all in a time of
imminent or incumbent judgments, to stir up themselves and others, in their
stations, to get the spirit of prayer, that being exercised in religious
duties, they may be kept from declining or fainting, and may be preserved from
the judgment of senseless stupidity, which usually attends such times, Ezekiel.
24.22. Therefore does the Prophet by his example stir up, and by this public
form (prescribed by the Spirit of God, and therefore lawful) direct the Jews
how to employ themselves in their captivity. 3. The people of God are not to
expect that their prayers will hold in one tenor under trouble, but as their
exercise will be various, in fearing, believing, trembling, rejoicing, etc. so
their prayers may begin low, rise high, fall low, and rise high again; for, so
much may be gathered from the nature of this meeter, wherein the prayer is
penned, or tune to which it was sung, called Sigionoth, or variable; as of one
wandering here and there, and not keeping one way: This appears clearly in the
prayer it self, or the Prophets subsequent exercise, and such variety makes
the consort and melody of that spiritual exercise more sweet.

Ver. 2. O Lord, I have heard thy speech, and was afraid: O Lord, revive thy
work in the midst of the years, in the midst of the years make known, in wrath
remember mercy.

This verse contains that which is properly the Prophets prayer in this
exercise; the sum whereof is, that being afraid of Gods threatened and
imminent judgment of the Captivity, (to which he submits without more
contending) he prays that the Lord would not suffer his Church nor his work
in it to come to nothing by their captivity; but would, during that time, keep
in their life by undeserved tokens of his favor, till he should deliver. And
that notwithstanding their sins procuring wrath, he would magnify his mercy
toward them. Doct. 1. When judgments are threatened against the Church, albeit
she may believe love in them, and that she is the Lords whatever come, yet
threatened trouble ought to be an exercise unto her, and ought to make her
humble under Gods threatening hand, and tremble to deal with such a bitter cup;
O Lord, says he, I have heard thy speech, to wit, concerning the Captivity,
and was asraid. Both the Majesty of the speaker, and the matter of the speech
did affright him. 2. As prayer to God is the kindly vent of all the godlies
fears, without which fear might readily crush them, and by which the thing
feared is either removed, or blessed, and made more easy and comfortable unto
them; so prayer will not speak well in trouble, where there is not some sense
of Gods word threatening, or of his hand striking at the root of it; for the
Prophet being afraid, subjoynes, O Lord, revive, as the issue and result of his
fear, and as being a suitable and fit time and disposition for prayer. 3, When
the Lord has disclosed his purpose, concerning his peoples being in trouble,
it is the duty of the godly to submit without contending, and make them
forbearing of it, till Gods prefixed time of deliverance come; for, the Prophet
supposes that the appointed years of the Captivity were to come, and does not
quarrel as formerly, but prays that the Church may be borne through in that
time. This were a way to make many a cross easy, which our quarrelling makes
insupportable. See Jer. 29, 5.6. 4. The people of God are sometimes left to lie
under a long continued tract of trouble, to the end they may be narrowly tried,
and may have much sorrow to be repayed with joy, Psalm. 90.15. for this trouble
did endure for years, even seventy of them. 5. Besides the Lords general
relation to all his creatures as his handy work, he has a peculiar relation to
his Church and people, whose calling to be his people, and their building up
and establishing in that privilege, is his own peculiar work, and amongst
whom his elect are made anew by him, in a work of redemption and regeneration,
so that they become new creatures, and the work of his hands, Isai. 45.11. In
the midst of whom also he has a work of his Ordinances and Kingdom to be
preserved and carried on: Which relation, as the Church ought to acknowledge
it, and hold all she has of him, and make his work the matter of her chief
care in trouble; so this interest does indeare the Lords people to, him, and is
a cause why he will not let them go to ruin, and so lose all that himself
has done; for, so does the Prophet reason, revive thy work. 6. The Lords
people and work may by reason of long and sore Captivity, and (possibly)
desertion accompanying it, be redacted into such extremities, as all may seem
to be in peril of ruin, and the faith of the godly in peril to faint, and give
it over: There may be such low ebbes, as may put the godly to pray, O Lord,
revive, or preserve alive. 7. As the Lord both can, and will preserve his work,
and people, who wait on him, from ruin, and that in the midst of extremities:
so the Lords doing of this ought to be much esteemed; therefore, the Prophet
resolving on Captivity, makes it his suite which he has warrant and ground of
hope to ask, and the granting whereof will be refreshful, though the trouble
otherwise be pressing: O Lord, revive thy work in the midst of thy years. 8.
It is a very refreshful dispensation, and which the people of God have warrant
to look for, that the Lord will season and sweeten their times of trouble, with
some evidences of his favor, either in their bosoms, or by some token for
good in his providence. Therefore the Prophet is directed to pray further, in
the midst of the years make known, to wit, his wonted favor, by some
manifestation; and was answered in the Lords raising up of Prophets to them in
Babylon, and by raising up the head of their King, about the midst of the
years of their Captivity, 2 Kings 25.27, etc. as a pledge of their future
liberation; and by other favors bestowed upon them. 9. As the Lords proceeding
in wrath against his people would undo them; so the apprehension of Gods just
anger against them for their sins, is a great hinderance to them in their
prayers: Therefore the Propher, when he thinks on wrath, is made abruptly to
cut his prayer, that he may run and deprecate it; make known, (says he, not
expressing what) in wrath remember mercy. 10. As the Lords just indignation
against sin does not so transport him, as that he will forget mercy, or that
he will deal in strict justice, without all moderation, with his afflicted
people: so this may give warrant to all those who are sensible of sin, and of
wrath due, or inflicted for it, to flee to his free favor, and to pray with
the Prophet, In wrath remember mercy. And teaches all to magnify God, when
this prayer is answered in any sort, and that God does mix a cup of wrath with
any mercy or moderation.

Ver. 3. God came from Teman, and the holy One from mount Paran, Selah. His
glory covered the heavens, and the Earth was full of his praise.

Ver. 4. And his brightness was as the light: he had horns coming out of his
hand, and there was the hiding of his power.

The Prophet that he may strengthen his own, and the godlies faith, in
assurance of an answer to his prayer, gathers together several grounds
whereupon he expects it; which are taken from the manifestations of God in
delivering his people from Egypt, in carrying them through the Wilderness, and
settling them in the promised Land; expecting by faith that the Lord (being
unchangeable, still the same, and the people still his) will repeat these in
their future delivery; and so lifts up his heart above all difficulties in the
captivity, or that might impede their restitution; as looking to what had been
done, as pledges of what God would do, before his Word failed, or they perished.

Gods glorious manifestations of old, among and for his people, are branched
out in several particulars; whereof the first (agreeing much with Deuteronomy, 33.2.)
is the Lord manifesting of himself on Mount Sinai., at the giving of the Law,
and on the hills adjacent in the desert, through which he marched after giving
of the Law, before his people, as their consederate God, in glory and Majesty
like himself; insomuch that the splendour, wherewith he was environed, filled
heaven and earth, and was bright as any light: and though these rays like
horns which shined forth from his hands or sides when he appeared, did point
out his power, yet but darkly; as being but a veil cast over his glorious
power which in it self is incomprehensible, as that light could not be
steadfastly looked upon by the infirm and easily dazzled eyes of man. Doct. 1.
It is a thriving way in prayer, not only to put up desires to God, to persuade
him, but to gather arguments whereby to confirm our own faith in the hope of
speeding, which will make us both cheerful in prayer, and quiet, having done
our duty; Therefore though all this exercise be called prayer, ver. 1. yet
after a short suite, ver. 2. the Prophet makes the study of arguments of faith
his chief work here, See 1 John 5.14, 15. 2. The Church is a storehouse of
experience for a time of need; she has treasures of instances of what God has
done, ready to be repeated again in a new extremity; for, the Prophet repeats
here works done of old, which he looks upon as pledges of the like in this new
strait. 3. Gods glorious manifestations of himself in, and for his Church,
ought to be joined with the consideration of his holiness; and his glory and
splendour ought to set out his perfection in purity, that the Church may fall in
love therewith, and study conformity thereto; for, appearing thus he is God the
holy one. 4. The Lords glory amongst his people may shine brightly in a
Wilderness, which will not obscure it when he lets it out; for, all this glory
shined in the barren deserts of Teman, or the South, which is a part of Seir,
or Edom, Obad. 9. Amos 1.12. Deuteronomy. 33.2. Judges 5.4. and mount Paran, a place
also near to Seir, Genesis 14, 6. where Ishmael dwelt, Genesis 21.21. and where
Israel encamped shortly after they came from Sinai, Number. 10.12. and 12.16. and
therefore joined with the former, Deuteronomy. 33.2. 5. The glory of God revealed unto
and for the Church, is not to be looked upon in a transient way, but ought
gravely and seriously to be considered, till our hearts be affected and warmed
with it. Therefore is Selah (no where used, but in the Psalms and this Chapter)
subjoyned, to show the weight of this matter, and how our hearts should pause
and dwell upon it, till it grow upon our hands; yea, to show that a sight of
him indeed, will give our hearts such a set, as they must stand and breath a
while. 6. As the excellency of all the creatures is from God, and does daily
set out his glory; so when he is pleased to appear in any specicial
manifestation, it does obscure all glory beside, and set him out as only
praiseworthy; for, in this progress, His glory covered the heavens, and the
earth was full of his praise in a singular way, beside what ordinarily
appears of his glory in these, which this dispensation did in a sort obscure
and transcend. 7. We ought to commend the infinite wisdom of God and his tender
respect to frail man, that he has chosen fit means and instruments of
Ministers and Ordinances, whereby to make himself known as we are able to bear,
considering that immediate manifestastion of him who dwells in light
inaccessible, would but undo us, while we are in our mortal bodies; for, when
he appeared, his brightness was as the light filling heaven and earth, as if
it had been all a sun; This was acknowledged by Israel, when they could not
endure this glory, nor hear God speak, Exodus 19.16. and 20.18, 19. And by
Eliah, in wrapping his face in his mantle, when God appeared to him. 1. Kings
19.13.18. The Lords most glorious manifestations of himself to mortal
creatures, are but as vailes cast over his infinitely glorious essence, and
attributes, and so to say, an obscuring of himself, that he may reveal himself
to their capacity; yea, it much commends the glory of God, and may help our
faith if we consider that the most glorious effects of his power are but as a
veil cast over his glorious omnipotency, who can do far above what we ask or
conceive; for, he had horns come out of his hands, or glorious manifestations
of his power shining in these glorious rays, wherewith he arrayed himself on
every side, and yet there was the hiding of his power. 9. The Lords taking his
Church by the hand, when she came out from the pots of Egypt, and entering with
her in a Covenant of marriage, and that in so glorious state, as testified what
estimation he had of her, and what respect he would put upon her, gives warrant
to the Church in all ages, to believe, that the glorious Lord will not despise
her in her low estate, but notwithstanding his great Majesty, and her
baseness, he will appear for her, will deliver her out of trouble, will let
out tokens of favor to her, by which he will put respect upon her, and will
renew his covenant with her; Therefore the Prophet by faith looks to all this
as forthcomming for the Church in her second captivity.

Verse. 5. Before him went the pestilence, and burning coals went forth at his
feet.

The Second branch of the description of Gods glorious manifestation is taken
from his attendants, for executing his judgments; he had the Pestilence and
burning coals, (that is destroying lightnings, as Psalm. 18.12. and 78.48. or
pestilential burning diseases, as D^ut. 32.24.) which as Lackeys ran before
him, and at his feet, wherever he went, ready to be hunted out at his command;
at which both the Egyptians and themselves in the Wilderness had proof, Exodus
9.3.23.24. Number. 11.1.43, 44, 45, 46. and elsewhere, and in naming of these
plagues, as being most devouring, other plagues are not to be excluded, but
understood. Doct. 1. The glory of the Lord does shine, and is to be seen and
adored in his works of judgment, as well as in other acts; for, The Prophet
brings it in here, to set out his glory, that before him went the Pestilence,
etc. 2. It is a farther manifestation of Gods glory, and ought to be a ground
of the Churches faith, that he can and will when he pleases, find ways to
plague enemies, though second causes and probable means fail; so does the
Prophet reckon while he brings in Pestilence and burning coals, as ready to do
that work. 3. It is a part of our duty in glorifying God, to acknowledge all
afflictions to be as his pages, ready to come and go at his command, that so
our eyes may be most on him under them; for, so does the prophet set out his
glory, that these plagues went before him, and forth at his feet, attending on
his progress. 4. Faith may safely gather from judgments executed for sins
of old, that judgment shall be executed for the same sins again committed;
and from judgments inflicted on the Church when she sins, that undoubtedly
the sins of enemies will not be past over; Therefore the Prophet records
what had been done on Egypt and themselves, as a certain pledge of Babels
ruin, that the Church may be delivered.

Verse. 6. He stood and measured the earth: he beheld and drove asunder the
nations: and the everlasting mountains were scattered, the perpetual hills did
bow, his ways are everlasting.

A third instance of his glory of old, appeared in his dividing the Land of
Canaan, by Moses and Joshuah to the twelve Tribes; which he stood and measured;
that is, not only fixed their rest when they came there, after they had long
wandered with the Ark of his presence; but he openly manifested himself to be
a sovereign Lord, and their God in doing of it, and that he needed not any
deliberation, or time to it; His glory also shine^ in putting them easily in
possession of that Land, scattering the Nations with a look of his countenance,
in anger, whereby the Lord (who can if he please, remove fixed mountains) did
overthrow, and subdue the inhabitants of that hilly country, whose possession
had been ancient and of old, (as the hills which they possessed) and whose
stable condition, like the hills also, did promise them a perpetuity. And no
wonder; for his ways and purposes concerning his people, Deuteronomy 32, 8. were more
ancient then their possession; and God being eternal, and still the same, will
yet be forth-comming in the like need. Doct. 1. God who is the sovereign King
of all Nations, and who casts down, and lifts up whom he pleases, will
manifest himself in carving out, even the outward lot and condition of his
people, according to the tenor of his Covenant with them for that purpose; for
so he proved when he stood and measured the earth, or the Land to his Israel,
to whom he had promised it, and so made them hold it by the sure tenor of his
free gift. And so does the Prophet expect the Lord will do yet. 2. It is a
notable encouragement to faith, and sets out Gods glory, that look what is most
difficult in men's sight, and may redact them to greatest extremities, yet is
most easy to God, when he puts hand to it; for he stood of old and designed a
Land; he but beheld and drove asunder the Nations; and albeit their possession
was near as ancient, and appeared as stable as the everlasting mountains and
perpetual hills, yet they were scattered and did bow. 3. The Lords eminent
appearing in bringing about a mercy for his people, according to the tenor of
the Covenant, gives a ground of claim, when it comes in hazard again, and is
a pledge that God will assert and maintain his own glorious purchase, though
for a time it seem to be plucked out of his hand; for, so would the Prophet
gather, that the Lord who had not only promised, but gloriously put his people
in possession of that land, would bring them back to it again in due time. And
to this purpose does Jehoshaphat also reason, 2 Chronicles. 20.11. 4. Albeit that
men's having a long and firme-like possession of what is the Churches right, may
be great trial of faith, yet the study of Gods unchangeable nature, and his
eternal and irresistible purposes will strongly support faith; Therefore the
Prophet, in opposition to the Chaldeans power, and long possession. Is. 49.24.
holds forth Gods eternal purposes concerming the Church, which as of old they
had overturned the Canaanites, so yet they would take place in all generations,
Psalm. 33.11. In both these respects his ways are everlasting, as being more
ancient and sure then the Cananites possession, and yet the same unchageably to
overturne the Chaldeans.

Verse. 7. I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction: and the curtains of the land
of Midian did tremble.

A fourth instance of this glory shined in the terror which Gods presence among
his people, put upon their enemies, and all round about, instanced in these of
Cushan and Midian, whose habitation was in tents and under curtains; This was
accomplished, partly when in Isreal's march through the Wilderness, all these
Arabians (descended of Cush, as well as the Ethiopians on the other side of the
red sea) and Midianites, who lived thereabout were affrighted, as not knowing
on whom they would fall; which fear also took hold on other Nations, Exodus
15.14, 15. Number. 22.3, 4. Josh. 2.9, 10.11. and pur them in great affliction and
terror; and partly it was accomplished in that norable defeat of Cushan
Rishathaim, by Othniel, Judge. 3.8.9.10. and of the M^dianites by Gideon, Judge.
7. All this the Prophet looks back upon by faith, and sees the Lord ready to
do the like. Doct. 1. It serves to illustrate Gods glory, and strengthen the
faith of his Church in believing promises, to consider that God can discover
the vanity of creatures, by making stout-hearted nations to tremble, that he
can fight against men with his terror, and can discover himself terrible in
and for his Church, when she is in a Wilderness and low estate; for, this is
array of his glory and a ground of the Prophets faith, that the tents of Cushan
were in affliction (or under vanity, which this terror discovered to be in
them) and the curtains of the land of Midian did tremble. 2. It is a notable
way to strengthen faith, when we consider how satisfactorily God at any time
has made good his word, and when we study much such grounds and props held out
to our faith by God, till we come to a full assurance; for faith the Prophet, I
saw the tents, etc. that is not only the Church (in whose name he speaks) did
at that time see God clearly performing his Word, and therefore should not
doubt in a new strait; but by this practice he teaches every believer to look
back on what Ged has done, and study upon it, till the sight of it afford
ground of comfort in new troubles, and till they see ground to expect the like
if need be.

Ver. 8. Was the LORD displeased against the rivers? was thine anger against
the river? was thy wrath against the Sea, that thou did ride upon thine
horses, and thy charets of salvation?

Thy bow was made quite naked according to the oaths of the Tribes, even thy
word, Selah. Thou did cleave the earth with rivers.

A fifth instance of this glory shined forth in two very contrary effects, of
dividing the red sea and Jordan to give way to his people, Exodus 14. Josh. 3.
and of making hard rocks to furnish water to quench their thirst, Exodus 17.6.
Number. 20.8, 11. The first of these is amplified from Gods great love and
fidelity appearing in it, in that when he had no quarrel against the sea and
rivers, yet he would trouble them, and march through them in state, on his
horses and chariots of the pillar of cloud and fire (opposed to Pharaohs
chariots and horsemen) for the safety and protection of his people, and did
draw forth his weapons against his enemies, to prove his fidelity, and the
truth of his Word, frequently repeated and confirmed by oath to the tribes of
Israel. The second is amplified from Gods liberality, in giving them water in
abundance, so that it clave the ground, and cut it self a channel, and followed
them in rivers, Numb. 20.11. Psalm. 78.15, 16. 1 Cor. 10.4. Doct. 1. Variety of
contrary trials and difficulties on the right hand and the left, cannot exhaust
that fullness of sufficiency and love that is in God toward his people; for, if
seas and rivers trouble them, then he can turn them into dry land, and make a
way therein for them to pass through: If again, want of water trouble them,
he can makrocks furnish and afford it. 2. It is a point of spiritual wisdom to
read and observe Gods mind and scope in his works, and what his thoughts are
toward the creatures he works upon or about, that so none may mistake or
stumble, and that his people may more distinctly read his love to them;
therefore is a question (which includes a denial) thrice propounded, that none
might be so foolish as to think that his dealing spoke any anger against these
creatures, but rather proclaimed his love to his people. 3. Gods great anger
against wicked men, sinfully troubling his people, may appear from considering
his dealing with insensible creatures (who are not properly objects of Gods
anger, as having never sinned; but only accidentally; when God troubles them
for the good of his people, or plagues sinners by smiting them) when in their
ordinary course they stand in the way of his peoples well-being; for thus would
the Prophet have the Church to gather, that not only if he divided seas and
rivers, he may do the like again, if need be; but if the Lord did so make the
sea and rivers to reele, against whom he had no quarrel, what will he do to them
against whom he is justly angry? 4. God can easily appear in great Majesty,
when his Church is at a low ebb; and when he appears, any thing will bring
safety; and in his Churches greatest strait he will get arms to reach his
enemies a sad blow; The troubles of the Church may be full of proofs of love,
and even in her lowest condition the Lord can plague his enemies; for, at the
red sea, the clouds were his horses and chariots of salvation, and there his
bow was made quite naked, or his power manifested (as in those countries they
drew their bows out of cases (wherein they were kept) when they went to
battle) to the Egyptians overthrow. 5. The people of God do never look rightly
on his works, but when thereby their hearts are warmed toward him; and studying
of his working is one means appointed for stirring up of affection; Therefore
both here and afterward, the Prophet who formerly spoke of God, is driven to
speak to God of his own working: Thou did ride, thy how was made naked, etc.
6. The Lord stands bound to his people and to every one of them, conjunctly and
severally, by his word confirmed by oath, to do for them what they need, and
is for their good; for here is the oath of the tribes (made to them by God)
even thy Word. 7. It is anotable confirmation to faith, that in hardest times,
and greatest extremities, God will not err in his Word, but will make it good
by performance; for in this does the Prophet encourage himself, that even at
the red sea, where Pharaoh thought he had Israel enclosed, even there the Lords
how was made quite naked according to the oaths of the tribes, etc. 8. It is
the duty of the godly, seriously to remarke every accompsishment of Gods Word,
that it may be matter of praise, and clearer ground of future confidence, and
relying upon his word; Therefore is Selah again subjoyned to this passage. 9.
Gods people will not want refreshment in a wilderness, and that in abundance,
and God will supply their wants, though every thing should promise the
contrary; for, God did cleave the earth with rivers, when there were nothing
but flints in a dry Wilderness to bring it out of.

Ver. 10. The mountains saw thee, and they trembled: the overflowing of the
water passed by: the deep uttered his voice, and lift up his hands on high.

The Prophet resumes that instance of Gods appearing on mount Sinai, and the
hills about, and that of his dividing the sea and Jordan; and amplifieth both
from the consideration of the great Majesty of God appearing in them, which was
such as made the hills to tremble by an earthquake, Exodus 19.18. Psalm.
114.4.6, 1. and the water which uses to overflow all, ran out of his way. The
depths by making a noise testified how much they were troubled at his presence,
and by standing up on heaps on every side, Psalm. 78.13. Josh. 3.16. they as it
were lift up their hands to adore and testify their subjection to their
Creator. Doct. 1. The Majesty of God appearing for his people, and the truth
and certainty of what he has promised to them, is confirmed by many proofs and
witnesses, which we should take notice of for confirmation of our faith, and
for this and ought again and again to study Gods working, every new fight
whereof will afford a new lesson and matter of encouragement; for, these
confirmations grow upon the Prophets hand, and in this review of Gods work, he
finds yet somewhat more in them to help his faith, and his work on mountains
and waters concurring to prove the same point. 2. It is our duty to study, and
be affected with Gods work, not only as it brings about our good, but chiefly
as it sets forth, and illustrates his Majesty and glory; Therefore the Prophet
in this review, observes it as a chief consideration, that the mountains saw
thee, and they trembled, the overflowing of the water passed by, etc. 3. As the
brutishness of men, who do not stand in aw of God, may be read from mountains,
and seas, their trembling and doing homage to him, when he puts them to it: so
also the vanity of all opposition to Gods saving of his people, may be seen in
what God did to any of these creatures, when they stood in his way; for, this
is held out in the mountains seeing him, and trembling, in that the overflowing
of the water passed by, the deep uttered his voice, etc.

Ver. 11. The Sun and Moon stood still in their habitations, at the light of
thine arrows they went, and at the shining of thy glittring spear.

The Prophet also resumes that which had been spoken, to v. 6 of Gods subduing
Isreal's enemies, and giving to them a peaceable possession of the land. And he
illustrates yet farther the glory of God shining in it, from several instances.
The first whereof is taken from Gods making the Sun, and Moon to serve his
people in their wars, and contrary to their course to stand still in heaven,
and so to order their motions, as they might give time and light to the Church,
to employ their weapons, and might attend and bare witness to Gods fighting
for his Church with hail stones as with arrows and spears, Josh. 10.11, 12,
13. which are called bright and glittering, because of Gods immediate hand in
them, putting a splend or upon them, and because that the Sun shining upon
the hail stones, as they fell made them to glitter. Doct. 1, Albeit the people
of God seem to be low and base things, in respect of many glorious creatures
which God has made, and set in situation above them; and albeit ordinarily
they get but the common use of creatures, with the rest of the world, Matthew.
5.45. yet these singular dispensations do prove that all the creatures are in a
special way servants to Saints, and that the Sun is as a candle, to be
lighted, or put out, when God sees fit, as their affairs require, without any
respect to the world beside; for the Sun and Moon stood still, and went as God
and his people had to do. This may teach the godly to read more especial love
in the ordinary use of these benefits, then is let out to others. 2. Enemies to
the Church may expect, that the Heaven and Earth, and all the creatures will be
against them; and when means, or second causes on earth cannot overtake them,
that Heaven will reach them, for, the Sun and the Moon stood still, to behold
and give light to the execution made upon them; and when Israel could not reach
them in their flight, God overtakes them with arows and a glittering spear.

Verse, 12. Thou did march through the land in iudignation, thou did thresh
the Heathen in anger.

A second instance of Gods glory in that work, appeared in his speedy and sore
destruction of the Canaanites, against whom he was highly offended, as being
Heathens, and enemies to him, and to his people. His chariots went speedily
through them, and trod them down, as corn is threshed out by the feet of
beasts. Doct. 1. Gods anger against wicked enemies, (whether Pagans or such
whose carriage toward his Church is Pagan-like) is a sore party, and will make
great havoc of them; and a short cut of long work; for however the Canaanites
were many and potent, yet, says he, Thou did march through the land in
indignation, thou did thresh the people in anger, 2. God is alone the subduer
of enemies to his people, (though sometimes he may employ more instruments,
sometimes fewer or none at all) and as he is to be seen in what is done, so is
he to be looked to for what is undone; for, Thou did march through, etc.
says the Prophet, acknowledging what was past, and expecting the like to come.

Ver. 13. Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for
salvation with thine Anointed; thou woundedst the head out of the house of the
wicked, by discovering the foundation unto the neck. Selah.

Ver. 14. Thou did strike through with his staves the head of his villages:
they came out as a whirlewind to scatter me: their rejoicing was as to devour
the poor secretly.

He further instanceth the Lords glory in this work, and in several others,
(as in Egypt, under the Judges, David, etc.) as shining. 1. In his design in
all these works, which was to bring salvation to his people by his anointed
instruments, Moses, Joshua, David, etc. as types of Christ, and of eternal
salvation by him. 2. In the remarkable judgments inflicted upon enemies, in
that he did destroy the heads and rulers of those wicked societies, as was
verified on Pharaoh, and other Kings (who troubled them after they were settled
in the land) and overthrew not only the Kings of Canaan, but all the
Sovereignty, and power that was in that land and opposed Isreal's possession;
yea further, he not only cut off the the head of sovereignty, in the persons
of rulers; but rooted them out in their subjects, by overturning ignominiously
their stable condition, as a house when it razed from the top to the
foundation, or as a man's body (which supports the head) when it is made bare
from the heel (which is the foundation he stands on) to the neck, and by
cutting off their sovereignty, not only in Cities, but even in inferior
villages, and the rulers thereof; And this he did even by these same means,
which they employed against the Church: this was accomplished in the sad
strokes that befell Egypt, with Pharaoh, especially at the red sea; in the
strokes that many times came upon the subjects of Isreal's oppressors, and the
invasions, and conquests made of their territories, under David and others, but
especially in the entire conquest of the land of Canaan, wherein the people were
not only subdued, and put under the power of Israel, but the very root of the
Heathens Sovereignty over that land was rooted up, by the utter extirpation of
the inhabitants in cities and villages (except the Gibeonites, and such as they
sinsuily spared) that Israel might possess their habitation. 3. Gods glory
shined in these works, in frustrating the proud hopes of enemies; for the Lord
did thus destroy them, when they were both violent, and confident of victory,
and when they thought to overwhelm the weak Church, as with a tempest and made
it their delight by craft and cruelty to devour her. Doct. 1. Unto such as are
the Lords people, salvation is his scope, and will be the result of all his
enterprises; for it is twice marked, that he went forth for the salvation of
his people. 2. Christ is the ground of all salvation to his people, and every
deliverance they get is a pledge of eternal salvation by him; for he went forth
for salvation with his anointed. These fitted instruments (whom the Church will
never want in her need) were but types of Christ, and employed by him from whom
all safety comes, and these deliverances were shadows of his saving to the
uttermost those that come to God through him. And although the possession of
Canaan, was in a peculiar way typical, yet the godly in all times may look on
temporal mercies, as pledges of better. 3. As in wicked Nations or combinations
those who are chief in authority, are ordinarily most eminent and instrumental
in evil: so the Lord will break the combination, by cutting off those which no
greatness nor eminence shall be able to avert; for Thou woundeast the head out
of the house of the wicked. 4. As wicked States and Nations adding opposition
to the Church to all their other wickedness, do deserve that God should root
but such States and Nations, by utter extirpation: so the Lord has given proof
that he is able, and will not spare so to do when he sees it fit, and when
his peoples need calls for it; for he discovered the foundation to the neck,
and did strike through the head of his villages. 5. The Lord will do that in
due time to his implacable enemies, which may afford matter of serious thoughts
to themselves and others, and such dispensations of his are wisely to be
considered; therefore Selah is again subjoyned to this purpose. 6. When the
Lord has enemies great and small to root out, he need no other means but their
own weapons, or the very designs whereby they think to thrive best, and to
ruin the Church; for Thou did strike through with his staves, the head of
his villages; This was the issue of Pharaohs pursuing Israel at the red sea, of
all the Canaanites enterprises against them, and was more clearly verified on
the Midianites, Judge. 7.22. on the enemies of Judah in Jehoshaphats days, 2 Chronicles. 7.22.23. and others. 7. As the Church has still been exercised with
violent cruel and unsatiable enemies, and must still expect to meet with such,
so the Lord will repay this, and that even when their hopes and earnestness to
carry their designs are greatest; for it was both a cause of their
destruction, and the time of it, when they came out as a whirlewinde to scatter
me, (says the Prophet in the name of the Church,) or violently to overrunne
her, and destroy her, and when their rejoicing was to devour the poor secretly,
or in secret and hiddden places: that is, they took pleasure not only to
overthrow them with great Armies coming like a tempest upon them, but also to
surprise them with sudden incursions when they were exhausted and had fled to
secret holes for shelter and refuge. This does well agree with the condition of
Israel under Midian, Judge. 6 2, 3, etc. under the tyranny of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 13. and 14. and at diverse other times, as at the red sea, Exodus 15.9, 10.
and when the Canaanites made head against them, etc. 8. The Church of God in
all ages is as one body and society, having interest in the same privileges,
communion in the same faith, and the latter ages being heirs of the sufferings
of the former, and of the advantages to be reaped by them, therefore says
Habakkuk in the name of the Church, They came out to scatter me; as if the
Church in his time, in the same individual persons had been under the former
trials, because they were heirs to any benefit, or experience that might be
gathered from them:

Ver. 15. Thou did walk through the sea with thine horses through the heap of
great waters.

The Prophet closes all this with a second look of Gods glorious marching, as
a man of war, guarding his people through the sea and deep waters, gathered on
heaps. Whence learn, 1. Albeit in a time of ease we are ready to satisfy our
selves with a tender view of Gods works, yet a time of trouble will put us to
study them over and over again, to see what we can find in them for our
relief, and though many times we find little in his works, yet when we study
well, we will find that we dwell never enough on them, and that the oftener we
study them, we will find the more in them; particularly extraordinary mercies
would be much and often remembered: so much does the Prophets practice in
looking over again on this act, which was an extraordinary work, teach us. 2.
It is worthy our second and serious thoughts, both for setting out of Gods
honor, and for confirming our faith, to consider that Gods people are so dear
to him, as he will turn the world upside down, and change the course of nature,
if need be, before they perish; and that he can make his people go safely, and
like conquerors, through great afflictions and dangers, for so much does the
repeating of this act of Gods power, in making seas a way, and riding with his
people through it, as if they had been guarded with an army, teach us.

Verse. 16. When I heard, my belly trembled, my lips quivered at the voice:
rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in my self, that I might rest
in the day of trouble; when he comes up unto the people, he will invade them
with his troops.

The Prophet after this meditation concerning Gods way of old, returns to his
former exercise, v. 2. about the ensuing captivity, but with great advantage;
so as in stead of praying, he from the former grounds confirms his own and
the godlies faith against all the imaginable difficulties in it; and first,
against the affliction, and humbling exercise, which the denunciation of this
trouble put him and the godly unto; and although it was a very heavy exercise,
insomuch that his belly, or inward bowels (which the Scripture sometimes puts
for the heart, because of its secrecy, Prove. 20.27. and for the seat of
affections, Isa. 16.11.) did beat, and shake for fear, which made his mouth and
lips to shiver, so that he could not speak; though his body even to his bones,
was consumed with thoughts about it, yea, though he trembled in himself, as in
a total distemper, so that nothing he could do, was able to bear it down, or in
his place, so that through trembling he could neither sit, nor stand, nor rest
in any place; yet he reckons by faith, that God by this exercise, would make
that sore day of trouble more easy, when it came, and when God should send the
Chaldeans against that rebellious people, to cut them off. Doct. 1. Much use of
faith makes easy and comfortable work in prayer; for so the Prophet after this
study and meditation, carveth his own answer, and glories. 2. As the Lord in
his long suffering, uses to give fair warning to his Church before he strike,
if we would observe it from his Word; and as he uses to strike sore when his
Church abuses his patience, and puts him to it: so his Word of threatening
ought to be believed, and our faith of it ought to appear, in our deep sense;
and trembling because of his rod shakenat us; for here is a voice of invading,
or cutting in pieces with troops, sounding against the Church, before it was
inflicted; and this the Prophet heard, and believing it, it makes his belly
tremble, etc. 3. It is Gods way with his people, to humble them by trouble, and
to lay them and their strength of every kind by, before they get a right way
of bearing it; and it is their great valor to renounce their own ability, that
they may lean on him; for the Prophet speaks of himself, as one spent with the
apprehension of the burden, my belly trembled, my lips quivered at the voice;
rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in my self. 4. The Lord
never puts his people to any sore exercise, or trial that is singular, but he
has a purpose of good in it; and will discover that they are not behind with
others who sit idle, when they are kept busy; for in all this exercise of the
Prophet, when others of the Jews were sleeping, the Lord aimed at rest in a
day of trouble; when oaths should be terrified with the invasion. 5. As the
Lord sometimes begins at his own house with trouble, whereby they are exempted
from the dregs of the cup which the wicked drink out, Psalm. 75.8. 1 Pet. 4.17.
Psalm. 91.12.13. so the Lords exercising and humbling of his people with the
apprehension of approaching trouble, is a presage and a means of making it
easy when it comes; for hereby they are prepared, and not surprised with
sinners and hypocrites, Isa. 33.14. they are made to see Gods justice in his
stroke, that they dare not but submit without quarrelling; they are made to
deny themselves and seek strength in God; yea, apprehension may conceive
trouble, as more terrible then it will prove, and so that disappointment will
bring ease: therefore says the Prophet, I trembled in my self, that I might
rest in the day of trouble.

Verse. 17. Although the fig-tre shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in
the vines: the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no
meat, the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no berd in
the stalls;

18. Yet I will rejoice in the LORD, I will joy in the God of my salvation.

The Prophet by faith ascends yet higher, to grapple with the trouble it self;
and though all creature comforts, and means of subsistence under trouble should
fail, (as if means of livelihood from trees, land, or cattle were cut off from
man, as uses to be in a general desolation by war) yet he undertaketh to bear
out, and to rejoice in God for the hope of salvation and deliverance, by virtue
of the covenant, and that interest the Church has in him. Doct. 1. As the
calamities of war and captivity are very great and sore; so it is the Lords way
in the Churches trouble, to blast and lay aside all matter of confidence in any
thing beneath God; for this is no idle or impossible supposition, but what the
Church may expect in her afflictions, that the figtree shall not blossom, etc.
2. Faith never gets right footing or exercise, so long as the believer would
set bounds and limits to trouble, that it may come hitherto and no farther, and
does not see through and condescend and submit to the worst that possibly may
come; for thus the Prophet supposes, that the very course of nature for man's
preservation may fail, to the end he may cast himself wholly and cleanly upon
God. 3. As the promised mercies of the Church, are surer then the very course
of nature, so faith apprehending these promises, will outlive the worst of
storms without fainting; for Although the fig tree shall not blossom, yet
will I rejoyee in the Lord, says the Prophet in the name of the Church. 4.
Faith in hard times gets sure footing, when it considers that God who is
omnipotent and alsufficient, lives whatever come or go; and that it is so
usual for God to give deliverance, according to the Covenant, when all means
fail; and for Saints to get it in such away, and at such a time, and not
before, as God has this as a title, whereby he is known in his Church: for so
does the Prophets faith fix on Jehovah, the God of our salvation. 5. Faith is
given in hard times, not only for bearing up, but to furnish matter of joy and
gloriation, which should be endeavored after, as honoring God, as evidencing
that we got more in him then trouble can take from us, as being a means to make
trouble easy; by avoiding the extremity of discouragement to which it drives
us and a testimony that we expect good by trouble, and somewhat that is without
the reach of it; therefore the Prophet resolves to rejoice and joy in the
midst of his calamity.

Ver. 19. The LORD God is my strength, and he will make my feet like Hindes
feet, and he will make me to walk upon mine high places. To the chief singer on
my stringed instruments.

The Prophet by faith speaks out positively, what he expects from God as the
matter of his joy, in reference both to subsistence, during the time of the
captivity, and to issue from it, to wit, that God would be the Churches
strength when all means failed, that he would gather and bring them back after
scattering, and make them nimble to overcome all difficulties in their way, (as
a Hind skips over mountains and inaccessible places,) till they come to
possess their own country again, which was for the most part hilly, and to
enjoy communion with God in the Temple, which was situate upon the holy
mountains, Ps. 87.1. and the Prophet to avow this his confidence, and edify
the Church, gives out this exercise to be publicly sung by the Musicians of
the Temple, and played upon fit instruments prescribed by him, and therefore
called his. Doct. 1. It is a singular proof of love, and ought to be the
matter of joy to the afflicted Church, when she is supported and kept from
fainting under her trouble, although she have no more; for, here the Prophet
ioyeth in that he has strength. See 2 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10. 2. When all props and
grounds of encouragement on Earth do fail, there is abundance of furniture to
support Gods people and make them subsist, do or suffer, as he calls them,
which will be forth-comming for the self-denyed who wait on God; for of does
the self-denied Prophet reckon: Jehovah the Lord is my strength, See Isai.
40.29, 30, 31. 3. The Lords people are not utterly undone and past hope, even
when they are brought into captivity out of their own land, and under the power
of others; for, the Lord can return their captivity, as here the Prophet
expects. 4. The promises of the Lord are so certainly to be accomplished, as
every promise of a mercy is also an undertaking for the removal of every
impediment that may stand in the way of it: He will make my feet like Hindes
feet, says the Prophet, and carry me over all impediments, and make me to
walk upon my high places. 5. Though Gods mercies be oft-times little thought
of when they are enjoyed, yet the want of them will discover how rich they
were, and make the restitution of them sweet; and to the godly man, enjoynment
of God in his ordinances, is far above any lot beside; therefore does the
Prophet call the land and mountain of the Temple, mine high places; to show,
that albeit it was a hilly land, in comparison of pleasant Babel, yet it was
his choice above all the world beside, that it should be sweet to be restored
to it again with liberty. 6. Albeit faith may be oft-times conjoined with much
fear, that the believer may be afterward ashamed, if he utter any thing of his
confidence; yet what faith gathers from the Word, may be boldly avowed; so does
the Prophet avow his exercise, and make it public: To the chief Singer, etc.
7. Faith having in an hard time apprehended God for strength and a blessed
issue ought to stir up to praise in hope, in the midst of the trouble:
therefore the Prophet directs this to be sung: To the chief Singer on my
stringed Instruments.

ZEPHANIAH.
The ARGUMENT.
THis Prophet exercised his function in the days of Josiah, as appears from
the Inscription of the Prophecy, and after the reformation begun by him, as may
be gathered from Chap. 1.4. where the land is threatened for the remnant of
Baal; and so he has been contemporary in part with Jeremiah, and among the
last who prophefied before the captivity. His scope in a great part is, to
confirm and enlarge that sad sentence, 2 Kings 23.26. whereby, if it were
possible, some might be yet excited to repentance; and (however) the impenitent
might be rendered yet more inexcusable; And therefore having to do with an
obdured people, who were neither bettered by Jeremiahs doctrine, nor by Josiahs
example and endeavors; he begins with a denunciation of Gods sore-judgements,
which were to come upon them for their sins, Chap. 2. exhorting them to
repentance, considering the judgments that were to be inflicted on the Nations
round about them, Chap. 2. And having given them up as incorrigible, he makes
ample promises concerning his Church under the Gospel, for the comfort of any
remnant who feared God, Chap. 3.

CHAP. I.
IN this Chapter, (after the Inscription of the Prophecy, v. 1. we have a
denunciation of the general desolation that was to come upon the land, v. 2.3.
because of the gross iniquities that abounded among them, v. 4.5, 6. And to
press this sentence yet more home, he sets before them. 1. The propinquity of
that bloody day, v. 7. wherein he would punish the dissolute Court, v. 8. and
the instruments of oppression, v. 9: and would render up the City to the
Chaldeans, v. 10. who should make their rich men and Merchants to howl, v. 11,
and spoil Epicures of their wealth, v. 12, 13. 2. He sets that sad approaching
day yet before them in its terriblenesse, making the stoutest to cry, v. 14.
the wrath of God bringing men in distress without any comfort, v. 15.
affrighting them with the alarms and assaults of their enemies, v. 16. leaving
them void of counsel in their greatest calamities, v. 17. and destitute of all
relief wherein they trusted; to be suddenly consumed. v. 18.

Ver. 1. THe word of the Lord which came to Zephaniah, the son of Cushi, the
son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the son of Hizkiah, in the days of
Josiah, the son of Amon, King of Judah.

The Inscription holds forth. 1. The messenger employed in this service, who is
described from diverse of his Progenitors, who were either Prophets themselves,
or men of note in their time; for so is generally conceived, when the
Progenitors of the Prophets are recorded. 2. His commission from God, and the
authority of his doctrine, which he devised not of his own head nor learned by
ordinary means, but received it by immediate inspiration. And, 3. The time
when he was employed. Whence learn, 1. Though the persons of men add nothing
to a divine message, but God can employ the meanest, and make them honorable
by employing them; yet sometime it pleases him to make choice of men of
eminency, to clear that it is the honor of the greatest to be his Ambassadors
to his people, and yet further to make them inexcusable who contemn his message
for the meannesse of the messenger; therefore he employeth this Prophet,
Zephaniah the son of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, etc. whose Parents in many
generations had been of eminent note amongst that people, and consequently
himself famous for descent and pedigree. 2. People through long obduration in
sin, may come to that height, as no endeavors of pious rulers will bring them
to repentance, whereby they might prevent sad threatenings and judgments; for,
this word of sad denunciations is sent in the days of Josiah, a pious King and
zealous reformer, but the son of Amon, who by his corrupt ways, following his
father Manasseh, had made that people incorrigible. 3. In a time of general and
continued defection, the Lords long-suffering is so great, as to multiply
messengers and warnings before he strike, that so men may be reclaimed, or made
inexcusable; for this end was the Prophet sent out with many others about the
time of the approaching captivity, See 2 Chro. 26.15, 16.4, As the divine
authority of God is always to be studied, and seen in messages in the mouth of
his servants; so especially when the Word speaks sad things, it is good to see
God our party, and how little cause we have to fix on messengers or their
humors as the cause of such unpleasing doctrine, therefore, when the Prophet
brings out this message, it is avowed and held out to be the Word of the Lord
which came unto Zephaniah.

Ver. 2. I will utterly consume all things from off the land, says the Lord.

3. I will consume man and beast: I will consume the fowls of the Heaven, and
the fishes of the Sea, and the stumbling blocks with the wicked; and I will cut
off man from off the land, says the Lord.

The Lord begins here as with a closed process, that needs no more but to
pronounce the sentence: and therefore, this people having been abundantly
warned and convinced by former Prophets, he threatens them with a general
desolation of the land, by the destruction and taking away of all things in it,
not only of men who had sinned, but of the creatures which they had abused to
satisfy their lusts, insomuch as the beasts should be cut off and destroyed;
yea, the very fowls should be driven away, and the fish exhausted from their
ponds, lakes, or rivers, as it is usual in countries infested with wars. By
which judgment the Lord threatens to make short work with the sinner, and his
abused riches, or his Idolatry, which no reformation could purge from him.
Doct. 1. The Lords spirit will not always strive with his sinful people, but
will at last give out his sentence, according to their ways; so much does this
abrupt falling on threatening, without any previous dealing, import. 2. A
public reformation, never so piously intended, and zealously prosecuted by
Rulers, after much defection, will be so far from keeping off wrath, when the
people are not cordial and thorough in the reformation; as by the contrary, it
may ripen a people faster for a stroke; for, though Josiah was a pious and
approved reformer; yet considering that the people did but dissemble in the
matter, and dally with God, as is marked, Jer. 3.6, 10. and appeared suddenly
upon Josiahs death, in that in three months they went all wrong with the
succeeding King, 2 Kings 23.31, 32. therefore the Lord gives them up as
desperate; and begins, I will utterly consume all things, etc. 3. When men will
not read the greatness and dreadfulnesse of divine displeasure against them,
from the greatness of their sin, or from the threatenings of the Word, it is
righteous with God to write it in legible characters of extreme desolation, as
here he threatens to do to this incorrigible people, by utterly consuming all
things from off the land, man and beast, etc. 4. Sinful man is a great burden
to the Creation, in his abusing of the creatures to fight against God with
them, and provoking God against them, not for any fault of their own, but that
he may punish man, for whose use they were created, by smiting them; for,
Judahs sins make all things be utterly consumed from off the land, and bring
strokes on beasts, fowls of the heaven, and fishes of the sea, where by the
sea, we may understand any gathering of waters, in ponds, rivers, or lakes;
for, in Scripture the very Laver in the Temple is called A Sea, because it
contained much water, 1 Kings 7.23. so also the lake of Generazeth and
Tiberius, Matthew. 8.24.27. John 6.1. See for this doctrine, Jer. 4.25, and 12.4.
Hos. 4.3. 5. As wicked men's prosperity proves the neck break of their souls,
by their abusing of it, and hardening themselves in sin thereby; and as
Idolatry will certainty end in the eternal ruin of the impenitent Idolater: so
these sins are oft-times so rooted in the heart and estimation of sinners, that
there is no ceasing to sin that way, till the sinner cease to be; and in this
case, the Lord will not spare, seeing there is no remedy; so here, after that
reformation had essayed them in vain, either as to removing their Idols from
them, or making them to cease from abusing the creatures to sin, (in which case
they are stumbling blocks, as well as Idols) God threatens to cut off the
stumbling blocks with the wicked, and so put an end to their sin by destroying
themselves. 6. In a time of general calamity on all the creatures, man is bound
to look upon himself as the chief and only Delinquent, and to see the
controversy pursuing him; therefore is he twice pointed at here; I will
consume man and beast; and again, I will cut off man from off the land, says
the Lord.

Verse. 4. I will also stretch out mine hand upon Judah, and upon all the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and I will cut off the remnant of Baal from this
place, and the name of the Chemarims with the Priests.

5. And them that worship the host of heaven upon the house tops, and them
that worship, and that swear by the Lord, and that swear by Malezham.

6. And them that are turned back from the Lord, and those that have not sought
the Lord, nor enquired for him.

The Lord proceeds to declare more particularly upon whom this desolation was
to come, to wit, upon Judah, which was the head of those that were left after
the captivity of the ten tribes, and particularly upon the chief City
Jerusalem; and he clears up the causes of this sentence, by pointing at the
particular sorts of sinners whom he would cut off. These he instanceth in
several kinds, especially against the first Table of the Law, As, 1. Gross
Idolaters of all sorts: as these, who notwithstanding Iosiahs reformation,
still held up some remnant of Baals worship (which was an Idol of the
Zidonians, the worship whereof was of old followed by Israel in the days of
the Judges, and after that was brought into Israel by Jezebel, 1 Kings 16.31.
and from thence it came into Judah.) These the Lord threatens to cut off,
together with the Ministers of Baal, both Chemarims, (who are mentioned also, 2
Kings 23.5, Hos. 10.5. in the original; and seem to have been some inferour
order of artenders on the Idol, much resembling Monks in Popery,) and Priests
of a superior order. As also he threatens to cut off another sort of
Idolaters, who imagining a Deity in the stars and planets, because of their
splendour or influences, did worship them on the tops of their houses, (which
were flat in those countries,) as intending to do them homage in their own
view, 1. Such as halted betwixt God and Idols, who made a profession of
worshipping the true God, (a part of whose worship is swearing by his name,) or
having sworn obedience to God in that Covenant renewed by Josiah, yet did mix
his worship with the service of Idols, and particularly of Malcham, or Molech,
the Idol of the Ammonites, 1 Kings 11.7. 3. Apostates who after their vows and
Covenant, and begun reformation, had fallen back from God to Idols. 4.
Atheists, who had no respect to God nor his worship, whether they followed
Idols or not. Doct. 1. No former stroke inflicted upon the Church, and no
privilege will exempt impenitent sinners, but if they go on in their way, the
last stroke will be sorest; for, though Judah was not only left of all the
children of Israel, and Jerusalem had God dwelling in the midst of her, yet the
Lord will plague Judah, and all the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and that not in
an ordinary way, but will streth out his hand upon them, which imports a stroke
beyond ordinary, Exodus 3.20. and 7.5. Deuteronomy. 4, 34. even that which is mentioned
here, v. 2, 3. 2. When the Lord plagueth a land, the controversy must be of
his discovering, least we miscarry in taking it up; therefore when the Lord
threatens to strike, he also clears wherefore it is. 3. Albeit common
calamities comes indifferently upon all, and albeit the godly who study to keep
their garments, ought to be sensible in such a time, and to renew their peace
with God; yet it is ground of comfort to them, that the stroke is not
principally for their cause, nor the wrath pursuing them; therefore the Lord
enumerates the gross sinners, who are his party, that the godly (whatever
their lot were) might see their names out of that roll. 4. Men's hearts are
naturally so besotted and addicted to Idolatry, as it is hard to get a thorough
reformation of it, where once it has place: and God is so jealous of his
glory, as for the least transgression of this kind, he may justly destroy a
land; for here, after Josiahs reformation, there is the remnant of Baal,
Chemarims and Priests, and they who worship the host of heaven, for which he
will consume all things that he may cut them off. 5. It is too usual for men,
that when they see any excellency in the creatures, or find any advantage by
them, their hearts dote on them, and are drawn from God by them; for, upon
these grounds did they worship the host of heaven upon the house tops, and
many do yet dote on some creature or other, though that gross Idolatry be
removed. 6. The Lord cannot endure any halting in his matters, or any mixing of
true Religion and his worship, with creature worship or Idolatry, but will make
that a ground of controversy against a land, as well as for grosser Idolatry;
for, they that worship, and that swear by the Lord, and that swear by Malcham,
are here put in the roll to be cut off, with the remnant of Baal, and them that
worship the host of heaven. 7. Oaths are a part of divine worship, wherein is
ascribed unto God the glory of Omniscience, and of power to avenge false
swearers, and he is called upon for that effect, and therefore are not lightly
to be used, nor to confirm a falsehood, nor is this glory to be given to any
creature to swear by them; for, swearing by the Lord, is subjoyned to
worshipping him, as a chief part of it. 8. Apostasy from professions and
engagements is a land-destroying sin, and a great aggravation of sin,
whatsoever it be that the decliner turns to; for, so these words also may be
read; They swear to the Lord, to wit, in renewing the Covenant, and yet swear
by Malcham; and clearly, v. 6. they that are turned back from the Lord, are
put in the roll to be cut off. 9. As it is usual in times of reformation, where
diversity of ways of Religion are justling out one another, that there arise a
generation of Atheists, who care not for God or any Religion at all; so such
are abominable, and in a day of vengeance will be ranked with the grossest
corrupters, as here: Those that have not sought the Lord, nor enquired for him,
bringing upon the rear of them whom God will cut off.

Ver. 7. Hold thy peace at the presence of the Lord God: for the day of the
Lord is at hand: for the Lord has prepared a sacrifice, he has bid his guests.

To make the preceding doctrine take the deeper impression the Prophet to, v.
14. resumeth the threatening, and holds out the judgment as near at hand, to
come on both Court and chief City: and withal clears up yet more causes of
his sentence, especially in sins against the second Table. In this verse he
threatens, that all their opposition to the Prophets doctrine, by defending and
excusing their sins, and rejecting of threatenings, should be compeseed by the
approaching judgment, when the Lord should make another manner of sacrifice
then they dreamed of, wherein themselves should be the sacrifice, the Chaldeans
as Priests to cut them off and slay them; and as they invited friends in their
sacrifices of thanksgiving to a feast, and the Priests got a portion; so the
Lord would bring the Chaldeans to take the spoil, and the beasts and fowls to
feed on their carcasses; as Ezekiel. 39.17. Rev. 19.17. Doctr. 1. The greatness
of Gods wrath against sin, is not soon seen, nor easily laid to heart by them
who are most concerned; therefore, the Lord finds it necessary to inculcate
his sentence over and over again unto them. 2 Howsoever men going on in sin,
without control, readily have low thoughts of God, yet in due time he will
manifest himself to be God, upon them; and as sinners take their time of it,
for walking after the imagination of their own hearts: so God will take his
time for putting things in order: therefore is the day of vengeance called the
day of the Lord, wherein he will appear to be the Lord Jehovah. 3. As sin,
never so long forborne, and yet continued in, will at last bring judgment near;
so especially sin after reformation, ripens fast for speedy judgment: for,
after Josiah had labored in vain among them, then the day of the Lord is at
hand. 4. As it becomes all to tremble and adore the justice of God in his
strokes; so however impenitent sinners be both proud and stout-hearted when
the Word threatens; yet the majesty and severity of God in punishing, will dash
and confound them, and put them from all their boasting, and strike them mute;
then will this be obeyed; Hold thy peace at the presence of the Lord God. 5.
Such as tread under foot, or despise the blood of the Covenant, and those
ordinances which hold it out unto us, and are appointed as means of our
partaking thereof, it is righteous with God to be prodigal of their blood, and
deal with them as they have entertained it; for, in recompense of their
sleighting and profaning of sacrifices, which were types to point out, and
lead them to the blood of Christ; The Lord has prepared a sacrifice, he has
bid his guests.

Ver. 8. And it shall come to pass in the day of the Lords sacrifice, that I
will punish the Princes, and the Kings children, and all such as are clothed
with strange apparel.

He threatens that in this bloody approaching day, he will take order with the
profane Court; with the Grandees royal family and Courtiers, who abounded in
prodigality, as was accomplished, 2 Kings 25, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, Jer. 39.6.
Doct. 1. When the Lord comes to plead a controversy with a land for sin, as
great men are found ordinarily chief in the provocation, abusing their power,
and being effectual by their example to draw others to sin; so the Lord will
not spare such, but reckon with them among the first: for, in that day of the
Lords sacrifice, I will punish the Princes and the Kings children, says the
Lord. 2. When men of what rank or quality soever, give themselves over to
prodigality, and hunting of fashions in apparel, as studying to make that their
glory, which was given at first for a badge of sin: the Lord may justly reckon
that among the grounds of his controversy against a land, and punish because
of it; for, the Lord will punish the Princes, and the Kings children, and all
that are clothed with strange apparel. See Isai. 3. from v. 16. to the end.

Ver. 9. In the same day also will I punish all those that leap on the
threshold, which fill their masters honses with violence and deceit.

The Lord threatens in that day to punish another sin of the Court, and flowing
from it, to wit, their oppressing of the poor by their agents and servants, who
with great insolency invaded the houses of other, as if no door should be shut
against them; and came back rejoicing into their masters houses, to furnish
them with the goods they had purchased by fraud and violence Doctr. 1. As
luxury, superfluity, and prodigality ordinarily exhaustoth men's estates, and
drives them to evil shifts, to uphold what they account their greatness; and
as great men, and those employed by them, think that their will should be a
law, and that they may take what they please without control; so the Lord will
in due time appear an avenger of all such exorbitancies; for they who are
clothed with strange apparel, ver. 8. and their agents boldly leap on the
threshold of those whom they oppress; and the Lord threatens, in the same day
to punish all these, etc. 2. As wicked inferior officers do prove a Court to
be corrupt, Prove. 29.12. so the Lord in a day of anger, will not only reckon
with the authors of oppression, but with all the insolent Ministers and
Instruments thereof; In the same day will I punish all those that leap on the
threshold, which fill their masters houses, etc.

Ver. 10. And it shall come to pass in that day, says the Lord, that there
shall be the noise of a cry, from the fish-gate; and an howling from the
second, and a great crashing from the hills.

From the Court and great ones, he comes to threaten the chief City, that it
should be taken by the Chaldeans, so that from all parts of the City where the
enemies entered, (as the fish gate in the City of David, toward the west; and
the second gate, at which also the Chaldeans entered, Jer. 39.3.) there should
be a terrible noise of enemies assailing, and killing all they met with, and of
the Inhabitants howling; all which should make a great echo to resound from the
hilly places of the City. Doct. 1. High walls and senced Cities, are no shelter
to hold out divine vengeance pursuing impenitent sinners; but will prove as a
pound or prison, wherein they shall be surrounded with judgments; for here the
Chaldeans fall upon them in their City, on all quarters; A noise from the
fish-gate, howling from the second, etc. 2. As the tumults of war are very
dreadful, when they meet with a guilty conscience, so neglect of repentance
will in due time resolve in dreadful and woeful wailings under the heavy hand of
God; for, here they are threatened with it as a dreadful judgment, and fruit of
their sin, that there should be a cry, an howling, and great crashing, by
reason of the noise of assailing enemies and pursued sinners.

Ver. 11. Howl ye Inhabitants of Maktesh, for all the Merchant people are cut
down: all they that bear silver are cut off.

He yet threatens further the Inhabitants of a particular part of the City, to
wit, those who dwelt in the hollow valleys of the City, betwixt the hills,
whereon much of it stood; which places did resemble a Mortar, as the word
signifies; here the merchants, and men abounding in money, by reason of trade,
dwelt: who are threatened, that they shall be made to howl and be cut off: this
place of the City seems to be the same with that, Neh. 3.32. Doct. 1. When
God pursues a controversy, it is folly for any in any place to dream of
safety; for, the Inhabitants of Maktesh, the securest, and inmost part of the
City are threatened with howling and cutting down, as well as those at the
gates. 2. As former abundance of prosperity will make judgments more bitter;
so unlawful courses, whereby men inhaunce and heap up riches, will draw on the
bitter judgment; therefore the Lord not only threatens particularly, that
merchants, and all they that bear silver should howl, as being a fore stroke
to such; but the word merchant, being in the Original a Cananite, imports that
this judgment came upon them, because they had dealt rather like Cananites
then Jews in gathering their riches.

Ver. 12. And it shall come to pass at that time, that I will search Jerusalem
with candles, and punish the men that are settled on their lees, that say in
their heart, The LORD will not do good, neither will be do evil.

Ver. 13. Therefore their goods shall become a booty, and their houses a
desolation: they shall also build houses, but not inhabit them, and they shall
plant vineyars, but not drink the wine thereof.

The Lord threatens yet further in this taking of the City, to take order with
all Atheists and Epicures, who abounding in wealth, lay secure and at ease,
(like wine on its dregs when its not removed) in their heart denying Gods
providence, or that he took any care of things beneath, to reward good or
punish evil; and therefore neither loved nor believed his promises that they
might walk in his way, nor feared his justice, so as to abandon sin. Concerning
these the Lord threatens, that as a man searches for what is hid or lost with
a candle: so he would narrowly search out their sins, and themselves to punish
them for their sins, so as none should escape; and their goods, to give them
for a spoil, whereby their houses should become desolate, and they should be
disappointed for all their expectations from their enjoyments, according to his
sentence pronounced of old in his law, Deuteronomy. 28.30, 39. Doct. 1. Ease and
prosperity slays the fool, and breeds such distempers of security, and
settling on the earth, as justly provokes God to smite: for, God will punish the
men that are settled on their lees. 2. Prosperity and want of exercise, by
vicissitudes of dispensations, its a great feeder of Atheism, and an enemy to
the observation and making use of divine providence; and this again does
embolden and harden men yet more in their secure and wicked courses; for, the
men that are settled on their lees, are also the men that say in their heart,
The Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil; which is both the effect
of their secure condition, and a ground they lay down forsetling themselves yet
more in it. 3. Secure Atheists and contemners of God and his providence may
expect that God will refute them in a language which they will understand, and
make them know his providence upon their own experience, by effects which they
shall not get avoided; for, the Lord will prove his Omniscience, and care of
things below by searching Jerusalem as with candles, that they may not esscape
him, and his effectual providence by punishing them, making their goods become
a booty, and their houses a desolation. 4. When the Lord strips a sinful person
or people of any mercies which they enjoyed, they will find upon narrow
search, that their enjoyment thereof has been a snare to them to draw them to
sin, and they shall read this in the stroke; for, Therefore, (that is because
these things had emboldened them to settle on their lees, and deny a
providence, therefore,) their goods shall become a booty, etc. 5. As the Lord
will prove the infallible verity of his threatenings, however contemned, upon
such as dare run that hazard; so the holy justice of God is to be adored, in
disappointing men of any happiness or contentment they expected in these
things for which they hazard their souls, and so rendering them twice losers,
who will not serve him; for, here an old sentence of the law was to be
executed, wherein this just procedure shines; They shall also build houses, but
not inhabit them, etc.

Ver. 14. The great day of the LORD is near, it is near, and hastes greatly,
even the voice of the day of the LORD; the mighty man shall cry there bitterly.

The Lord having hitherto denounced his judgments to be near, and declared the
causes of them; now, to the end all these threatenings, and the sins procuring
them may have weight, and sinners may yet (if possible) be rouzed up, and put
from all their subtersuges; he holds out this approaching day of Vengeance in
its terriblenesse, which he clears from several instances: whereof the first
is, that the most courageous, (much more the feeble) amongst them should be
affrighted by it, and be made to cry and weep bitterly. Doct. 1. Though secure
sinners contemn all opposition from men, and do put the evil day far off, and
think nothing of vengeance, when it is looked on at a distance, yet God is a
terrible party against such, and can bring evil on a sudden, and when it is
imminent, it will be sad and dreadful; for, it is the day of the Lord, that
they should not eye weak Prophets, or the Chaldeans only: and it is near, and
haste^^ greatly, the sound or voice of its approaching being in their ears
that they may not dream of it as afar off; and being near, it is terrible, and
the great day of the Lord. 2. Natural courage and magnanimity, however it may
promise much; yea, and suffain many infirmities: yet it will not bear out, but
saint, when God pursues a controversy for sin; for, the mighty man shall cry
there bitterly.

Ver. 15. That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of
wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gl^ominess, a day of clouds and
thick darkness,

A second instance of terriblenesse is, that in this day the wrath of an angry
God should be made manifest, by distress and trouble on men, and wasting and
desolation on cities and countries, and that all those calamities should he
without any light of comfort; the clouds of their sin, and of Gods judgment
rendering all things black, and dismal-like Doct. 1. As the Lord may justly for
sin testify wrath against a visible Church, and fatherly displeasure against
his own in it; so that will make a judgment terrible, when his anger is seen
and felt in it; for, that is an instance of the terror of that day, that it
shall be a day of wrath. 2. Though God testify his displeasure against sin
many ways, yet such is the stupidity of men, that his anger is little seen or
laid to heart, till it appear in sad calamities; therefore is that day called a
day of wrath, 3. In a time when God is pursuing a land for sin, none are to
expect case, but in some measure or other to be put to it, and to taste of
calamities; for, that day will be a day of trouble and distress, a day of
wastenesse and desolation to persons and places. 4. As judgments inflicted for
sin, or sin and wrath for sin meeting together, will make a black
representation of affairs, will hold out the judgment in its saddest colors,
and discover many clouds betwixt the sinner and Gods countenance, so it is the
capestone of a calamity, when spiritual comfort, or some favor from God is
denied, or hid under it; when he smites and hides himself, it speaks wrath
indeed; for, this makes the day terrible, that when all this is on, it is
withal, a day of darkness and gloominesse, a day of clouds and thick darkness.

Ver. 16. A day of the trumpet and alarm against the fenced cities, and
against the high towers.

A third instance; that wrath pursuing them for sin, should make the alarm
given, to stir up soldiers against them, terrible and make their enemies
successful against their most fortified places. Whence learn, As the alarmes
and calamities of War, cannot but be affrightful and sad to the most godly,
Jer. 4.19. So it is a great addition to its terror, when guilt makes men read
Gods wrath in it, especially when wrath from the Lord lets it not prove a false
alarm, but makes the enemy so successeful, as nothing stands in his way, nor
can pursued sinners find any place of safety or shelter; for, being a day of
wrath, ver. 15. this adds to the terror, that it is a day of the trumpet and
alarm against the fenced cities and high towers.

Ver. 17. And I will bring distress upon men that they shall walk like blind
men, because they have sinned against the LORD, and their blood, shall be
poured out as dust, and their flesh as the dung.

A fourth and fifth instance is, that the distress shall be so great, because
of sin, as to leave them destitute of all counsel, not knowing what to do, more
then blind men know whether to walk; and that they shall be cut off with the
sword, and their blood poured out in as great abundance, and with as little
regard as the dust they tread upon, and their carcasses left like dung on the
ground. Doct. 1. As it is a dreadful condition in a day of strait to be void of
light to direct men what to do; so howsoever finful men trust much to their own
policy in a calm day, yet a day of wrath will overturn all their designs, and
leave them destitnte of counsel; for, I will bring distress upon men, that
they shall walk like blind men. 2. When judgments are accompanied with
darkness and perplexity, Gods hand is to be eminently seen in that stroke, and
he is to be justified by our reading the bitter fruit of sin in it; for,
says the Lord, I will bring distress, that they shall walk like blind men,
and that because they have sinned against the Lord. 3. It is just with God,
when he has pursued sinners with judgments in this life, to cut them off also
in their iniquity, and send them out of the world, to receive their full
reward: yea, and to testify his displeasure on their very dead bodies; for so
it is threatened, their blood shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as
dung. 4. The gredinesse and cerriblenesse of divine wrath against sin, may be
read in the measure of a calamity, in the ignominy of a stroke, and in Gods not
owning, nor evidencing that he pitties in affliction; for all these are in this
stroke to be matter of terror to them, their blood shall be poured out as
dust, and their flesh as dung.

Ver. 18. Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in
the day of the LORDS wrath, but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of
his jealousy: for he shall make even a speedy riddance of all them that dwell
in the land.

The terriblenesse of this day does appear further in this, that all helps
shall prove vain, and their riches wherein they trusted or whereby they might
think to ransom their lives, should not be able to deliver them from wrath,
nor hinder the Lord, in his kindled jealou^^e, to make short work in wasting
the land, and consuming the Inhabitants. Doct. 1. Many are the false
confidences, whereby men think to secure themselves against a day of vengeance,
which it is no easy work to refine, that wrath may be seen in its
terriblenesse; for, after all their imaginations that this evil day was far
off, that it should be light, that their fenced Cities would shelter them, etc.
which have been declared useless in the former purpose, there remains yet
their riches to be declared vain. 2. The wrath of God pursuing sin, is so
dreadful, as no riches or treasures wherein men trust, can ward off the stroke,
nor any thing else, save the blood of Christ fled unto by the selfe-condemned
sinner; for neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them
in the day of the Lords wrath. See Prove. 11.4. Ezekiel. 7.19. 3. When Gods love
toward his people is provoked unto jealousy, by their breach of mariage-duty,
and embracing strange lovers, it produces most sharp and violent judgments,
and acts as a fire which speedily consumes all before it, and with which no
paction or treaty can be made; for, the whole land shall be devoured by the
fire of his jealousy: for he shall make even a speedy riddance of all them
that dwell in the Land.

CHAP. II.
THE Lord having thus threatened his sinful people; comes now to exhort them to
make right use thereof, by inviting the body of the land to repent, before the
sentence were executed, verse. 1, 2. and the godly remnant, to seek God, and
follow their duty, in hope of favor, when the evil day should come, v. 3. and
that these exhortations may be more effectual, he sets before them the sad
judgments that were to come upon the Nations round about; such as the
Philistines, verse. 4, 5, 6, 7. Moabites and Ammonites, verse. 8.9.10.11. the
Ethiopians, verse. 12. and the Assyrians with their chief City, verse. 13, 14,
15.

Verse 1. GAther your selves together, yea gather together, O Nation not desired.

2. Before the decree bring forth, before the day past as the chaff, before the
fierce anger of the LORD come upon you, before the day of the LORDS anger come
upon you.

The sum of the first exhortation, directed to the impenitent body of the
Nation, is, that no wever they were not a people de^irous of their own good,
nor worthy of any favor, yet the Lord would make offer of it; and therefore
invites them to make a serious enquiry, and fanning of themselves, and one of
another; and that for this end they would gather and recollect themselves, and
meet together in solemn Assemblies for humiliation and repentance, and that
they would do this timously; before he decreed vengeance (which in Gods
long-suffering had been yet suspended) break forth, and before a day of
patience pass over swiftly, as the chaff before the wind; or before the day
come wherein they should be as chafe before the wind, and the decreed
vengeance should break forth in execution suddenly and easily; and wherein the
great fierce anger from the Lord, should inflict judgment without mercy: Doct.
1. When the Lord speaks in hardest terms to his sinful people, yet they are
to read in it an invitation and allowance to come to him by repentance, and not
that he is putting them away from any duty of that kind; Therefore, though the
Lord had uttered his sentence as a concluded business, chap. 1. v. 2. yet here
he shows what use they should make of it, in turnning to him by repentance.
2. Repentance is not acceptably endeavored, where there is not a thorough and
harrow search and enquiry made into our own hearts and ways, and an helping
one of another, in our stations to perform that duty; that so our consciences
from clear conviction, may charge upon us those sins for which the Word
threatens, and the sinfulness of them, and may stir up to turn unto the Lord;
for so the words in the Original may be rendered, search narrowly into your
selves, and search, (as men do after stubble scattered here and there, as the
word is used, Exodus 5.12. or after what is lost amongst it) that is, search,
and search again, and while ye are thus employed about your selve, stir up and
help others to search; for so the original construction does import. 3. For
stirring up to this duty of searching, and making it effectual, it is necessary
that every man recollect his wandering thoughts, whereby he has snuffed up the
wind at his pleasure, and hunted after vanities; and that the communion of
Saints be entertained, particularly in solemn and public humiliations; for,
so does the Word signify, according to the translation, gather your selves
together, yea, gather together. See Joel 2.15, 16. 4. As this duty of
repentance and self-searching is of great importance and concernment in all
times, and cases, and especially when God declares himself to be angry; so it
is a duty to the performance whereof there is need of much stirring up from the
Lord; so much also does the doubling of exhortations, gather, yea gather,
import. 5. It is necessary for our humiliation, and for setting forth the
freedom of Gods love, and how much he tendereth our welfare; that we know our
selves well, and what we are, to whom the Lord gives invitations, or makes
gracious offers: for this end is it declared here, that the Lord invites to
repentance a nation not affected with desire, to wit, of turning to God, or of
their own good; and not desired, or worthy to be beloved of him: the Original
word will import both. 6. It is a great addition unto, and aggravation of sin,
when it is general and overspreads a land, either by general corruption, or by
rulers their connivence at sins of particular persons, which brings guilt upon
the whole land; or by private persons, their not mourning for the abominations
of the time, which involveth them in the guilt thereof: All which also may
contribute to commend Gods kindness in following such a crew, and to hold forth
the necessity of repentance, when the disease is so desperate; for this cause
it is marked, that they were, a Nation not desired, especially by reason of
overflowing sin. 7. As the Lord in his long-suffering, does not always execute
vengeance immediately upon his purposing, or threatening so to do, but allows
some time for bringing forth of that conceived birth (as the word in the
original imports) so the Lords most absolute threatenings do not seclude the
penitent from hope, but rather invite to speedy repentance; so are we taught
here, gather your selves before the decree bring forth; as giving time to them
to repent, and ground of hope if they should so do; for however the Lords
eternal purposes be unalterable, yet his threatenings (which are his pronounced
decree, or sentence according to the law) when most absolutely pronounced, to
exclude the exception of repentance, Jon. 3.4, 10. The Lord threatening so
sharply, that upon our perverting of him, he may not execute it; as, on the
contrary, he promises that he may fulfill. And when his threatenings do hold
forth, even his irrevocable purpose to send outward land-judgements,
notwithstanding the repentance of any, as 2 Kings 23.26.27. yet repentance
before it be executed, is to good purpose, for removing the penitent before the
evil day come, as was done to Josiah; for moderating it to him, if he be
continued as Jeremiah, and the godly remnant found, Jer. 15.11. and for taking
off wrath out of whatsoever they shall taste of the cup. 8. It is an horrid
iniquity to despise the patience and long-suffering of God, or to neglect the
setting up of our furnace of examination, and self-searching when he threatens,
and will provoke him to set up his furnace of judgment so much the hotter, that
it has been long forborne; for, if they let the decree bring forth, and a day
of patience blow over without repentance and fanning themselves, he will make
the day pass, and drive them as chaff, and will send his fierce anger upon
them. 9. None who do believe divine wrath, how forcible it is, and how weak
themselves are to resist, but they do proclaim their own madness, if they set
not about repenrance when God threatens; Therefore it is thrice held out, what
this day will be, that it shall pass as chaff, that the fierce angers of the
Lord, the day of the Lords anger shall come upon them, as sufficient to move
any who were not quite bereft of sense, to gather together before the decree
bring forth.

Ver. 3. Seek ye the LORD all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought his
judgment, seek righteousness, seek meekness: it may be ye shall be hid in
the day of the LORDS anger.

There being little hope of the body of the land, that they would be repentance
avert a day of anger; Therefore the Lord turns to the godly remnant in the land,
who are humbled and made meek under the sense of sin, and Gods hand, and who
have studied to make conscience of their duty enjoined in the word; These he
exhorts to go on in seeking the Lords face and favor, and to grow in humility,
in meekness and in righteous walking, and in making use of the righteousness
of Christ, as being the certain way to be hid from wrath to come, and the only
way giving any ground of hope to get safety in outward judgments, though he
will not make them absolutely sure of it: for this sort of speech, see on Jon.
3.9. Doct. 1. In declining times the Lord has a peculiar eye to the godly, and
expects much from them; Therefore, leaving the wicked Nation, he turns to
them with exhortations and promises. 2. The truth and reality of grace will
manifest it self in men's being of subdued, meek and humble spirits, stooping
to the Word, abasing themselves, trembling under judgments, and tender toward
others, and in their not giving way to discouragement from duty, however they
be humble, but stirring up themselves to seek God for himself, and adorning
their profession with righteous conversation, respecting Gods commands,
whatever their own natural inclinations be; Thus are the Godly described here
to be seekers of the Lord, the meek of the earth (or of the land) which have
wrought his judgment, or obeyed his righteous ordinances enjoined to them. 3.
Though it be incident to the godly to fall into some decay in a time of general
defection, and to be discouraged from their duty by the evil example of others;
yet the truly godly ought to prove themselves to be such by their perseverance,
and needing and seeking more of what they already have, and of Christ's
righteousness to cover all; and especially they ought to be on the growing
hand, if they would bear out and find favor in an evil time; therefore in
such a time is this exhortation given, seek ye the Lord, seek righteousness,
seek meekness, the repeating of the exhortation showing the necessity of the
thing exhorted to. 4. As it is the Lords great mercy toward such as fear him,
that he puts the remission of their sins and their eternal happiness out of
all doubt; so also he is able, when he pleases, in hardest days to give them
proofs of love in temporal favors by taking them into his protection, and
either delivering them from trouble, or moderating it; for, here there is no
doubt made of the first, and even in the second it is declared possible, it may
be ye shall be hid. 5. The Lord sees it fit to exercise his dearest children
with great uncertainties what their lot may be in common calamities, not that
they should doubt of his power, or good will, but that they may be sensible of
the difficulty of the thing it self, and that in so great and overflowing
calamities, the righteous shall scarcely be saved, that so i^ may appear to be
a singular favor when God does it; that the godly having done their duty, may
yet humble themselves before the Lord, as not meriting any such thing as hiding;
That they may be excited yet to more diligence, that they may learn to expect
the free reward of piety, in temporal things, with much submission; and that,
amidst all improbabilities, and incertainties, the seeker of God may learn by
faith to venture much on God, and absolutely rely on his goodness and
tenderness, who will not withhold any good thing from his own, Ps. 34.10. and
84, 11. For these causes it is, that this exhortation is seconded with so
uncertain-like an encouragement, it may be ye shall be hid, etc. 6. Whatever
uncertainty seekers of God may be put to, as to receiving of temporal favors;
yet they ought to be fixed in this, That seeking of God is the shortest cut,
and only way to speed, even in these things; for, though they get but a may
be, yet upon that they are exhorted to seek the Lord, as the only way to be
sure, and their getting but a may be, puts it out of all doubt, that they who
turn aside to crooked ways, may expect nothing of that kind. See 1 Pet. 4.18.

Verse. 4. For Gaza shall be forsaken, and Ashkelon a desolation; they shall
drive out Ashdod at the noon day, and Ekron shall be rooted up.

5. Woe unto the inhabitants of the sea coast: the Nation of the Cherethites the
word of the Lord is against you, O Canaan the Land of the Philistines, I will
even destroy thee, that there shall be no inhabitant.

6. And the sea coast shall be dwellings, and cottages for shepherds, and folds
for flocks.

To make the preceding exhortation have the more effect, the Lord subjoynes a
denunciation of sad judgments to come upon the enemies of the Jews on all
hands of them, intermixing some promises, that these strokes should tend to the
advantage of truth and the Church. The first he begins at, are the Philistines
on their west side; wherein he first threatens four of their great Cities, with
being made solitary and desolate, with being openly and violently stormed, and
the inhabitants led into captivity, when it should be impossible to travel for
heat, and with total extirpation; which judgments are expressed in the first
language, with fit allusions to the names of the Cities, v. 4. and Gath the
fifth principal City of the Philistines, is omitted in this sentence, either
because it was then in possession of the Jews, or because it is comprehended
under the rest, as Amot 1.8. 2. He threatens the inhabitants of the country
about, lying upon the sea coasts; who were either Cherethites (of whom see 1 Samuel 30.14. Ezekiel. 25.16. or Philistines properly so called, who descended of
cursed Cham. Genesis 10.6, 13, 14. These he threatens with his woe, and a purpose
against them to lay them desolate, so that their fertile and populous Country
should be turned into a place of pasture, and for flocks and herds to dwell in,
v. 5, 6. The ground of this sentence is insinuated, in that they are called
Canaan, that is, not only of his posterity, but possessors of a part of the
land of Canaan, which belonged to Israel, Josh. 13.2, 3. And these judgments
were inflicted on the Philistines, partly by Pharach, Jer. 47.1. Partly by the
Babylonians, Jer. 47.2, 3, 4, 5. and partly by the Jews the mselves, after
their return ^ and afterward by Alexander the Great, as histories do record.
Dect. 1. It is a profitable means for stirring up the visible Church to
repentance, and the godly to perseverance, in an evil time, to consider the
hand of God upon nations about, and enemies to the Church, therefore are these
threatenings brought in upon the back of the former exhortations; and subjoyned
to them with the particle for, as pointing out his scope in the subsequent
purpose to be for their stirring up; and we may conceive the dependence thus.
1. Judgments threatened or executed upon others, ought to stir up the wicked in
the Church to repent; Gather your selves, -- for Gaza shall be forsaken. 2. The
godly may perceive Gods tender care of them in calamities, whereof they taste
when they look upon the full measure which he meets our to others: seekers of
God will see themselves hid in all their troubles, when they look on Gaza
forsaken, Ashkelon a desolati^^. 3. It is an encouragement to persevere in
godliness, notwithstanding any trouble, to consider that God will recompense
men for all the wrongs done to the godly, and will yet restore them and make
all tend to their good. Seek the Lord, says he, for Gaza shall be forsaken,
etc. And so Moab, Ammon, and the rest of them, when Judahs remnant shall be
made up, as it is v. 7. D^ct. 2. Such as have been long injurers of the people
of God, and in^eterate enemies to them, God can when he will meet with them;
for these Philistines had long possessed a part of Ornaan, and as sacred
Histories tell us, were vexers of the Church on all occasions, and now the Lord
threatens to pay them home. 3. The Lord can engage with his enemies in their
full strength, and by his stroke undo them, and put them to all disadvantages;
for when he engages with the Philistines in their flourishing condition of
Cities and Country, he makes them to be forsaken, and a desolation drives
them out, and rooteth them up, and destroys them, that there shall be no
Inhabitants 4. When God is angry, no place can promise an exemption to
themselves from judnements, strhug Cities, open Countries, and lurking holes in
it, are all alike potent to his blow; for here he threatens their Cities; the
Nation and the Land, or Country, 5. As there may be much woe intended, and
purposed against them, who little apprehend it, till they be made to feel it in
effects; so the Lords Word writing sad things against a people, is the
begluning of their woe, however for a time they may prosper notwithstanding;
for, Woe says he to the Philistines now flourishing, the Word of the Lord is
against you. It portendeth woe, that God has such a word or sentence in his own
purpose against them, but they were visibly under woe when it was published. 6.
Sin as it highly provokes God, and endeavors to trample under foot his
glory, and wastes fouls and consciences: so when God comes to punish for it,
it wili lay the most fertile and populous land desolate and waste: I will even
destrey thee, that there shall be no Inhabitant, and the seacoast shall be
dwellings, and cottages for shepherds, etc, 7: Places of great confluence and
resort, are ordinarily places of much sin, which draws down remarkable
judgment; Therefore this country is twice threatened under the name of the
seacoast, not only with relation to its fertility, but because much repair of
many Nations treasured up much sin, as fuel to ensuing wrath.

Ver. 7. And the coast shall be for the remnant of the house of Judah, they
shall feed thereupon; in the houses of Ashkelon shall they lie down in the
evening: for the Lord their God shall visit them, and turn away their
captivity.

This judgment is amplified irom an event, that should follow upon i^, to wit,
that the remnant of the Jews, when the Lord, according to his Covenant shouln
manifest his favor in returning their captivity, were to possess the land of
the Philisinnes, as a part of their own inheritance, and as the Lords flock,
they were to feed and dwell there securely, even in the evening, when it is
perilous fot flocks or persons to be abroad in a wasted country. This was
accomplished partly literally, when at the return of the Jews from Babylon,
they possessed these lands, as stories mention, beside what may farther be done
when the Lord saves all Israel, and partly spiritually, when the inhabitants
of these places were converted to the Church, and added to the Lords Israel by
the Gospel, as is marked, Act. 8.26. 40. where Azotus is the same with Ashdod.
Doct. 1. As Gods covenant with a people may stand firm notwithstanding many
afflictions; so that standing Covenant will be forthcomming, for much
tenderness, and restitution in due time, to the afflicted confederates, when
others shall perish in their calamities; for the Lord speaks still to captive
Judah in the Covenant-stile, the Lord their God; and when the Philistines are
gone, he promises to Judah, that the Lord their God will visit them, and turn
away their captivity. 2. Covenant-rights and promise-rights will not fail to
appear in performance, though after long delays and many disappointments; for
this sea coast was Judah's by right, which though they were long kept out of,
yet at last the coast shall be for the house of Judah: 3. The Lord has
reserved choice mercies for his peoples lowest estate, and will do that for
them then, which they could not do for themselves when they were in greatest
power; for the remnant of the house of Judah shall possess the coast, which
they could not do when they were a flourishing kingdom; and when they are but
a remnant, yet they feed thereupon, and lie down in the evening. 4. When the
Lord does afflict his Church, he does not only restore her, but by some special
advantage does recompense her loss by trouble; This is held out to us, by the
remnant of Judah, their getting the land of the Philistines with their own
land, to make up their hard captivity. 5. In all the calamities wherewith the
Lord afflicts the Nations, he has a singular respect to the setting forth of
his own glory, by bringing advantage to the Church and Gospel by these
judgments; so the Lord in destroying the Philistines has an eye to the
planting of Judah there, and to the spreading of the Gospel in those places.

Verse. 8. I have heard the reproach of Moah, and the revilings of the children
of Ammon, whereby they have reproached my people, and magnified themselves
against their border.

The next that God deals with are the Moabites and Ammonites whom he
conjoyneth in this threatening, as being both descended of Lot, and so alike
near of kin to the Jews, and as running both one way against the Church, and
being often confederate together for that end, Psalm. 83.5, 6, 7, etc. The
ground of the Lords challenge against them, is, their proud contemning and
reproaching of his people in the day of their affliction, and their boasting to
encroach upon the Churches border, and to possess their land. Doct. 1. No
relation will tie men who are wicked, to be friends to the Church and godly,
but all of them, though never so near, will run one way to be her enemies; so
did Moah and the Children of Ammon, though both in kin to Juda. 2. Bitter
reproaches and insolent mocking of the afflicted Church, is a great addition to
her trial, which God will take notice of, as a sufficient ground of
controversy against the reproacher; so it is here taken notice of as Judahs
trial from them, and Gods quarrel-against them. I have heard the reproach of
Moab, and the revilings of the Children of Ammon, whereby ^hey have reproached
my people. 3. The Lords chastising of his people in anger for their sins, does
not hinder his affection, to take notice of the wrongs done by wicked
instruments, in due time to repay them; Nor do reproaches cast upon the Lords
people, diminish any whit his estimation of them, but rather increase the
expression of it; I have heard the reproach, says the Lord; and
notwithstanding all that, yea, so much the more, they are my people. 4. Nor so
much as wicked proud boasting, and wicked enterprising, (far more wicked
acting) against the Lords people, their land and rights, but it will in due
time be reckoned for; for, it is put upon these enemies score, that they
magnified themselves against the border, threatening to possess it.

Ver. 9. Therefore as I live, says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel,
Surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorrah, even the
breeding of nettles, and salt pits, and a perpetual desolation; the residue of
my people shall spoil them, and the remnant of my people shall possess them.

10. This shall they have for their pride, because they have reproached and
magnified themselves against the people of the Lord of hosts.

Follows the judgment threatened for this sin, and confirmed by an oath, that
these enemies should be made as Sodom and Gomorrah, not for the way of their
destruction, but for Gods rooting them and their memory out, and laying their
land utterly desolate, (as a salted land, which makes it barren) to bear only
weeds; and that for a long time, if not for ever as to them, though there be a
promise of their restitution, especially spiritual, Jer. 48.47. and 49.6. And
whereas they encroached upon Judah, the Lord threatens to make Judah spoil and
possess their land, v. 9, which is to be understood as that promise, v. 7. is:
and that they may know the cause of this stroke, the Lord repeats it again,
that all this should come upon them for their proud insolency against, and
reproaching of his people, v. 10. Doct. 1. The Lord is in great earnest, that
he will mere with the Churches enemies, as having both power and reason so to
do (he being the Churches Protector in Covenant with her) though it be little
believed, either by the Church or his enemies, therefore he assures them of it
by his oath, and takes unto himself titles of power and interest: As I live
says the Lord of Hosts the God of Israel. 2. Though the Lord think is not fit
to smite every sinful Nation with immediate judgments from heaven, or to make
their countries utterly and for ever unuseful, as Sodom and Gomorrah were; yet
his displeasure is no less against the enemies of his people, then against
those he has so smitten: and he will in due time evidence it by sore
desolation, and of long continuance, being compared with the Churches lot;
therefore is the Lords wrath on these Nations compared with that which he let
forth on Sodom and Gomorrah: Surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and the Children of
Ammon as Gomorrah, even the breeding of nettles and salt pits, and a perpetual
desolation. 3. Though the Church may often times be exposed as a prey to her
enemies, yet the day may come when the Church will be employed to do that to
enemies, which they threatened to do to them, and in part attempted to do; for,
whereas Moab and Ammon magnified themselves against Isreal's border, v. 8. now
the Lord threatens, that the residue of my people shall spoil them, and the
remnant of my people shall possess them. 4. In a time of judgments upon
enemies, there will be need of frequent inculcating of Gods controversy, if
they would have a blessed use of strokes in turning to God: and that so much
the rather, as they will be ready to see many things before they see their
injuries done to the Church, as a cause of their calamity; tharefore is this
quarrel again repeated: This shall they have for their pride, etc. 5. Pride and
insolency will not miss a fall and stroke in due time, especially when pride
leads men to act sin and wrong, not out of infirmity or ignorance, but with an
high hand, and that against the Church; for, This shall they have for their
pride, because they have reproached, and magnified themselves against the
people of the Lord. 6. A chief cause of the Lords appearing for his reproached
and wronged people is, that the wrongs done to them seem to reflect on him, as
if he were not keeping Covenant with them, or not able to defend or redress
their wrongs; and therefore as he affects them even in troubles, so he will in
due time by visible acts set out his power for them, and his love to them;
therefore this stroke is threatened, because they were infolent against the
people of the Lord of hoasts; where both his power and his interest in Israel,
are asserted as rubbed upon by them, and to be cleared in the judgment to come
upon them.

Verse. 11. The LORD will be terrible unto them: for he will famish all the gods
of the earth, and men shall worship him, every one from his place, even all the
Isles of the Heathen.

This stroke is farther illustrated from an effect: that when the Lord shall
thus terribly plague enemies, and vindicate the wrongs done to his Church, he
will consume the idols of the Nations also, by blasting their reputation that
could not help their worshippers, whereas God helps his people, and shall
withdraw worship from them as useless things, (and so famish them of their food
and oblations, and make them lean) whereby way shall be made for spreading of
the knowledge of the true God, especially in the days of the Gospel, wherein
without distinction of place, John 4.21, or of Nations, Acts 10.34, 35. all the
remotest Nations lying beyond the sea to Judea, and the Iflanders shall serve
him; and yet more particularly, in the day of the saving of all Israel, which
shall be life from the dead to the generality of the Gentiles, Romans 11.15. the
fame of Gods doing for them, inviting all Nations to renounce their idols and
serve him. Doct. 1. God is a dreadful Party for weak man to provok: and albeit
he be often times little regarded of the secure siuner, yet in a day of anger he
will be found terrible; The Lord will be terrible unto them. 2. As idolatry is
a great cause of Gods anger against a people provoking him to smite them, so
people are ordinarily so addicted to idols, that they are undone before they
cease to esteem of them: so much does the conexion of these two import: The
Lord will be terrible unto them, for he will famish all the gods of the earth;
he will terribly destroy them, because he has a mind to bring down their
Idols. 3. As it is a sweet fruit of judgments, when they bring down Idols as
well as lay other things waste: so howsoever the Lord does suffer idolatry for
a time, yet at last, by judgments on idolaters, and by mercies toward his
people, he will abolish idols, and exalt himself as the only true God, to be
chosen and served by the world; for, He will famish all the gods of the earth,
and men shall worship him. 4. It is the privilege of the new Testament and a
part of the glory of Christ's Kingdom, that the Lords worship is not confined
to a Temple at Jerusalem, nor to the Nation of Israel, and such as became
Proselytes, and joined to them; but that in every place, even from the remotest
Isles, all nations have access to God through the Mediator; for, so is here
fore-prophecied: Men shall worship him, every one from his place, even all the
Isles of the Heathen. 5. It is of great concernment to all the Churches of
Christ, to mind much, and by their prayers to help forward and hasten the
conversion of Israel, as tending to the advancement of the Gospel among the
Gentiles; for then this prophecy will get a new and farther accomplishment,
Romans 11.15.

Verse. 12. Ye Ethiopians also, ye shall be slain by my sword.

The third denunciation is against the Ethiopians, who were either a Nation
commonly called so, beyond Egypt, who had served in armies employed against the
Church, as these other Southern Nations were usually employed abroad, Nahum.
3.9. Ezekiel 27.10. or rather a people in Arabia, descended also from Cush, and
lying on the other side of the red sea, over against Ethiopia commonly so
called, who are the people usually called Ethiopians in Scripture: these as
they had been destroyed by Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14.9, etc. and given into the hands of
Sennacherib, as a ransom for Judah, Isa. 43, 3. with 2 Kings 19.9. so the Lord
here threatens to cut them off by his sword in the hand of Nebuchadnezzar;
either in his conquest of Arabia, or when he subdued Egypt, and destroyed those
other Ethiopians, amongst Egypts Associates, as they were, Jer. 46.2. with 9.
Doct. 1. Though the enemies of the Church were never so many on all hands, and
never so sar remote, yet Gods hand is enough for them all; for, here he
undertakes against enemies on all quarters; and besides the Philistines, Moab
and Ammon, he threatens that the Ethiopians also (which soever of these Nations
it be) shall be slain. 2. It is a special part of right reading of judgments,
to see Gods hand in them, that his quarrel may be studied, that his love to his
people in avenging their quarrel may be seen, that his sovereign power and
providence over all the world may be adored, and the smitten may know whither to
flee for an issue; therefore it is added, Ye shall be slain by my sword.

Verse. 13. And he will stretch out his hand against the North, and destroy
Assyria, and will make Nineveh a desolation, and dry like a wilderness.

Ver. 14. And flocks shall lie down in the midst of her: all the beasts of the
Nations; both the Cormorant and the Bittern shall lodge in the upper lintels of
it: their voice shall sing in the windows: desolation shall be in their
thresholds: for he shall uncover the Cedar-work.

The last denunciation is against the Assyrians in the North, and the chief
City of that Empire, which he threatens to make desolate by his out-strerched
hand, and like a barren wilderness, to be an habitation for all kind of beasts,
and monstrous creatures of all sorts, in stead of eminent Princes, and many
people who frequented there; and that for this end, where there had been so
many stately habitations, he would cause to pull down their roofs, and leave
nothing but bare walls, fit for such guests to huant in. Doct. 1. God in
executing of judgments will not forget to reach greatest enemies saddest
strokes: therefore the Lord sets out Assyria and Ninevehs judgments, in so
dreadful and ample a way, not only to give more ample encouragement to his
people, whose faith might readily faint most in this particular: but to
testify the greatness of his displeasure against them, for leading his Israel
captive: He will stretch out his hand against the North, and destroy Assyria,
and will make Nineveh a desolation, and dry like a wilderness. 2. Howsoever God
may seem to own a prospering enemy against his people, and they may think so
because of their succesle; yet God will in due time testify the contrary, for,
they boasted of old, that they came not up without the Lord, 2 Kings 18, 25.
therefore the Lord will stretch out his hand against the North, etc. 3. Albeit
that smful ways and oppression may for a time raise up men to great power and
glory, and make cities and countries to flowrish, yet ere all be done, it will
lay them as low; yea, make them more desolate then is imaginable; so did
Assyria and Nineveh feel; when flocks lay down in the midst of her, all the
beasts of the Nations; when the Cormorant and Bittern did lodge in the upper
lintels of it, etc, And no wonder, for these creatures were no more monstrous
in men's account, then the former inhabitants were in Gods sight.

Verse. 15. This is the rejoicing City that dwelt carelessly, that said in her
heart, I am, and there is none beside me: how is she become a desolation, a
place for beasts to lie down in every one that passes by her, shall hiss and
wag his hand.

The equity of this sentence upon that City, is confirmed from the causes
thereof; where not recounting her particular sins, he takes notice of the
result of all her sins, and the common sink into which they all ran; to wit,
her security and insolency, that being blinded with the splend or of her
prosperity, she despised all other Nations, and cast off all fear of any
change; because of which it was righteous with God, by laying her so desolate
to make her an ignominious spectacle to all beholders. Doct. 1. It is not
possible for wicked m^n to guide their prosperity and success in ill courses
well, but they will swell in pride thereby, and so provoke God yet more to
anger against them: for, This is the rejoicing City that dwelt carelessly, that
said in her heart, I am, and there is none beside me. 2. Look how much, wicked
men prospering in sin, have been admired by others or have admired themselves
for their prosperity, divine indignation shall indue time make them as
remarkable for ignominious calamity; for, How is the rejoicing City become a
desolation, a place for beasts to lie down in, every one that passes by her,
shall hiss and wag his hand.

CHAP. III.
AFter these threatenings denounced against other nations, the Lord returns to
speak to the Church, and threatens Jerusalem for the many iniquities done in
her, v. 1, 2. particularly for the sins of Rulers in State, v. 3. and of
Church-guides, v. 4. and confirms the equity of this sentence from Gods
justice and their incorrigibleness, either by the Word, v, 5. or by the rod, v.
6, 7. And because the godly could not but be affrighted by these threatenings,
therefore he subjoyns many comforts to them, concerning the returning of their
captivity, and the mercies of the Gospel; exhorting them to wait on God, in
expectation that he who punished the Church, would appear and punish her
enemies, v. 8. at which time he would propagate true Religion, and make Jews
and Gentiles jointly serve him, v. 9. would gather his people from the remotest
parts of the world, v. 10. would endue them with excellent qualifications, and
give them safety, v. 11, 12, 13. and would furnish them with ample matter of
joy, v. 14, 15. and of serving God without fear, v. 16. considering his power
and love, v. 17. and what he will do for recovering their broken and desperate
estate, v. 18.19. 20.

Verse. 1. WOE to her that is filthy and polluted, to the oppressing City.

2. She obeyed not the voice: she received not correction: she trusted not in
the LORD: she drew not near to her God.

The Lord having by his Prophet, used all the former means for reclaiming his
people, but in vain; he comes now to pronounce his last sentence against the
body of that nation, and threatens Jerusalem with a woe; the general causes
whereof were her pollution, through oppression and violence, and her contempt
of warnings from the Word, her not being bettered by corrections, her not
trusting in God, but in other things, and her not entertaining communion with
him, who offered himself to her in the Covenant. Doct. 1. As Gods anger
declared against a people, portends misery enough to them, though there were no
other evidences of it; so he will not spare nor exempt his own people, when
they provoke him: especially such as being most obliged to him, yet do prove
eminent in defection; therefore as he threatens other Nations, so also his own
sinful people, and names Jerusalem for all, because she was chief in the
defection, who should have been holy, and a Sanctuary to God; and under this woe
comprehends all the evils which afterward pursued that people. 2. Injustice and
oppression is an abominable and filthy sin, especially in the Church; and the
riches gathered that way, do not give any splendour, but make men and places
vile in Gods sight, and obnoxious to his curse; for, the oppressing City is
filthy and polluted, as the crop or gorge of a ravenous bird, where all unclean
things are heaped together; or as one made a public spectacle of infamy, as
the word imports, and therefore woe to her. 3. As disobedience unto the Lord,
revealing his mind by his word, is ground sufficient for a quarrel; and as
contempt of the authority of God in his word, is the cause of men's boldness in
sin: so it will be a great aggravation against sinners, that warnings from
the Word do not reclaim them: for, Woe to her that is filthy, she obeyed not the
voice. 4. As rods sent upon the Church, will either make her better, by
instructing and humbling her under Gods hand, or ripen her yet more for Gods
woe: so obstinacy in sin under corrections, is a sad aggravation thereof: for,
Woe to her that is filthy, she received not correction, or instruction by her
correction, as the word imports. 5. God is so willing to be the stay and
confidence of his people, that it is a quarrel when they will not lean all
their weight on him: and as want of faith in God drives men to sinful and wrong
courses, so this is a great iniquity before him: for, Woe to her that is filthy
and polluted, to the oppressing City, she trusted not in the Lord: and this
also is the cause why the word or rod works so little. 6. As the neglect of
keeping communion with God, turns the heart loose to all sinful ways and
snares; so the cause of little dependence on God in straits, is, because men
cannot be at pains to keep near God, that so they may reap the fruit of faith;
for, Woe to her that is filthy, she drew not near to God, and she trusted not in
the Lord, because she could not rake pains to draw near to God. 7. The Lords
gracious condescendence and offering of himself to the visible Church, to be
approached unto in all cases, and her profession of having an interest in him,
does aggravate her sault in not making use of him, nor taking hold of such an
advantage; for it is an addition to her sin, that she drew not near to her God;
that is, to God who was hers in offer and visible covenant, and in whom she
gloried as hers.

Ver. 3. Her Princes within her are roaring lions: her Judges are evening
wolves, they gnaw not the bones till the morrow.

The Lord denounces this woe upon Jerusalem more especially; for the sins of
her State-Rulers, her Princes and superior Magistrates, who ought to have been
for the praise of welldoers, and a comfort, and Protectors to the Subjects,
were a terror, and cruel as lions, and that not against enemies, but Subjects
in the midst of the City: and her Judges or inferior Magistrates were no
better then they, but as cruel and unsatiably greedy as hungry wolves, who
coming out in the evening, (having fasted all day) do not only eat the flesh of
their prey, but so do gnaw the very bones, as they leave nothing till the
morrow. See Prove. 28.15. Doct. 1. As a land does not ordinarily degenerate, but
when Mag strates of all ranks are also corrupt: so the sins of Rulers have an
especial hand in drawing judgments on a land; for when the city is filthy and
polluted, etc. v. 1. then Princes and Judges are lions and wolves; and because
of this, woe is denounced. 2. It is a great iniquity and abuse of Gods Ordinance
of Magistracy, when the hearts of men in power are lifted up above their
brethren, and when they employ all their power for their own ends, and against
those for whose good they should employ it; this was the sin of Princes and
Judges: They are roaring lions within her, and evening wolves. 3. It is a
judgment, and a presage of ruin to come on a land, wheu their Rulers are not
men hating ^^vetousnesse; but hungry, greedy men are entrusted with affairs,
whereby they who in their private stations could not poorly bite and oppress,
are enabled by their power and place to play the lion and wolf: such was
Judahs case; Her Judges were evening wolves, they gnaw not the bones till the
morrow, or, they leave not the bones to be gnawed; or continue not to gnaw the
bones till the morrow, but presently devour up all.

Ver. 4. Her Prophets are light and treacherous persons: her Priests have
polluted the Sanctuary, they have done violence to the law.

The Lord subjoynes the sins of Church Officers, as a further cause of this
judgment, and charge their false Prophets, who pretended to an extraordinary
calling, with prophaneess and levity in their carriage, and inconstancy in
their doctrine, fitting it to all humors and parties, which was great
perfidiousnesse, and their Priests or ordinary Ministers, with profaning the
Sanctuary and holy things, in ministering unto the Lord, and with perverting the
true sense of the law in their ordinary doctrine, and teaching of the people.
Doct. 1. When God reckons with a land for sin, it is no strange thing to see
them who should be means of reclaiming people, that they may flee from the
wrath to come, accessory to the guilt of the land, and partakers in the
judgment; for both Prophets and Priests are here found guilty; See Lam. 2.14.
2. Want of gravity in carriage, and rashness, and inconstancy in doctrine,
making the Word Yea and Nay, and fitting doctrine to all humors, parties and
times, is a character of a false Minister, accessory to a lands sin, and liable
to sad judgments, whatever extraordinary or singular thing he pretend to; Her
Prophets are light, (or rash, unstable and heady) persons. 3. An unfaithful
time-serving Minister, though he may please himself and others, may like well
of his way, yet in Gods account he is but a perfidious man, betraying his
trust, and the souls of men, and men will find it so in due time; for being
light, they are also treacherous persons. 4. Every Minister that would approve
himself to God, ought to give himself, both to deal with God in behalf of the
people, and with the people on Gods behalf, for, such was the Priests charge
to minister un^o the Lord in the Sanctuary, in name of the people, and to be
ordinary teachers of the law to the people, in both which they failed here. 5.
It is a token of sins full ripeness, and of speedy approaching judgment, when
Ministers dare pollute the holy things of God, by going profanely and in a
carnal way about his worship and service; (their own familiarity and frequent
employment about it, without sensible hearts, having bred a contempt of it) and
so embolden others to do the like, or tempt them to abhor Gods service: thus
was it with Jerusalem, when woe came upon her; Her Priests have polluted the
Sanctuary. 6. The holy Scripture being the revealed will of the supreme Lord,
and the unalterable rule of men's duty, according to which they may expect
blessings or curses, it must be an high presumption in men, to wrest and force
it to applaud their fancies, and to take their light to the Word, and father it
upon it, and not come with submission of heart to receive light from it; and so
make of Scripture what they please: this is also a quarrel, They have done
violence to the Law.

Ver. 5. The just Lord is in the midst thereof: he will not do iniquity, every
morning does he bring his judgment to light, he fails not: but the unjust
knows no shame.

The equity of this threatened woe is cleared from the justice of God, who not
only dwelling amongst them, could not without impuration to his holiness,
pass over such gross abominations, but also was a just God in giving her
fair play in this process, and not pronouncing this sentence till she was
found incorrigible: which he proves from two evidences, whereof the first is,
that however he had daily and early by his Messengers held forth this law, as a
lamp whereby they might see the evil of their ways; and so failed not to give
them warning that they might be reclaimed; yet they proved obstinate, and
impudently blushed not to sin against clear light. Doct. 1. However a visible
Church persevering in sin, may bless her self and expect great things from
Gods visible presence with her; yet all these privileges speak the impenitent
sinners disadvantage, and their lying near a stroke; for, if the just Lord be
in the midst thereof, he will do no iniquity, to wit, in sparing her being so
sinful. See Amos 3.2, 3. 2. God does so much delight in mercy, and is so tender
of his people, that he never proceeds to severity, so long as there is another
way unessayed to reclaim them, or to stint the course of their sin; which does
abundantly justify him when he judges; for, in this also he is the just Lord
in the midst thereof, he will not do iniquity, in that he will not cast off
till other means be essayed, as the following purpose clears. 3. It is a
great favor from the Lord, and a testimony of his long suffering, when he does
not take every finner at his first word, but follows him with frequent
warnings of his danger if he go on; and offers of advantage if he return; for,
it is marked here as an evidence of Gods kindness in this process, that every
morning, (which was the usual time of Prophets, preaching, Jer. 7.25.) does he
bring his judgments to light, he fails not. 4. Albeit men may pretend to
acknowledge the authority of God and his Word; yet it is usual, that when they
are mad on sin, and going to ruin, this should be a presage of it, that the
Word will do nothing at them; for it is marked as their sin, and a token that
judgment must come on, when notwithstanding warnings; the unjust knows no
shame. 5. None who are within the visible Church, and do acknowledge a Deity,
and yet dare with a high hand sin against the clear light of the Word, but they
proclaim themselves to be destitute of all ingenuity, and given up to the
plague of effronted impudence, for, such know no shame.

Ver. 6. I have cut off the Nations: their towers are desolate: I made their
streets waste, that none passes by: their cities are destroyed: so that there
is no man, that there is none inhabitant.

7. I said, Surely thou will fear me: thou will receive instruction, so their
dwelling should not be cut off, howsoever I punished them: but they rose early,
and corrupted all their doings.

A second evidence of their incorrigiblenesse is, that the Lord had oftentimes
visited the Nations round about; not one, but many of them, and not with an
ordinary, but with remarkable strokes, destroying their strong holds, or
Princes, (which as corner stones, as the word imports, uphold the fabric of
the Common wealth) and making such havocke of the Nations as there were neither
traveller nor Inhabitant to be found: all which, considering out ward means,
and their duty, might have warned them to flee those sins, for which those
Nations had been punished, and instructed them to fear God, and reform their
ways, that so their afflictions might have kept within bounds of fatherly
correction, and they might have prevented the last stroke of being put out of
their land: and yet for all this, they were so far from turning to God, that
they were even worse, all their ways being not only sinful, but corrupt, and
bent, active, and headlong in going wrong, as if it had been their study: and
they were as earnest to go wrong, as he had been to reclaim them, v. 5. Doct.
1. The Church is so dear unto God, and he so tender of her well-being, that
before he ruin her, he will preach her duty, and danger to her, upon the dear
expense of others; for all these sad judgments on others, v. 6. was to inform
her, that she might prevent the like. 2. Judgments inflicted on any of the
world, is a document, and call to others to fear God, especially being guilty
of the like sins, yea, even the Church ought to take warning from judgments
on enemies; for, He cut off their Nations, laid their Towers desolate, etc. that
his Church might fear him, and receive instruction. 3. Albeit God only wise,
to whom all his works are known from the beginning, cannot be disappointed of
any expectation he has; yet this dealing with his sinful people, and the
means he uses, are such as in reason might promise, and do indeed oblige
them to bring forth the fruits of repentance, and reformation; therefore he
subjoynes to this warning, from his judgments on others, I said, Surely thou will fear me, thou will receive instruction; speaking after the manner of men,
and showing what his dealing did oblige to. 4. True godliness, and an evidence
of true turning from Apostasy; consists in an holy aw of God, and fear because
of our offending him, or to offend him again, joined with spiritual wisdom,
learned from the word, and from our experience of our selves, and our failings,
or of others, to carry on and fe^d that disposition; for so is their duty here
described, Thou will fear me, thou will receive instruction. 5. No strokes on
sinners ought to be a discouragement to them, being penitent, from coming to
God, or from expecting good at his hand, for if they should fear him, so their
dwelling should not be cut off, howsoever he punished them. 6. Albeit true
godliness, or turning to God from sinful ways, will not exempt a people from
fatherly chastisements to make them more wise, and their turning yet more
serious; yet the penitent in these will meet with favor, considering what he
deserves, and what such as go on in impenitency meet with; for so is
insinuated, so their dwelling should not be cut off, howsoever I punished them.
7. To be delivered from going into captivity, out of our own land, where we
should want the public ordinances of Gods worship, is a mercy which may
sweeten much affliction in our own land; it is a promise to the penitent, Their
dwelling shall not be cut off, howsoever I punished them. 8. Such is the
madness of men, especially where the Lord has given them over, that no
example will warn them; their security, conceit, dreaming of privileges, etc.
will hide all dangers from such, till they light upon themselves; for all these
warnings wrought not, they corrupted all their doings. 9. The more means be
essayed to reclaim a people, without success, the worse will that people grow;
where means are not blessed, they leave that curse behind them; therefore all
these means of warnings, threatenings, promises, and lesser strokes being in
vain, see what follows, They rose up early, and corrupted all their doings,
they were vigilant, active, and earnest to go wrong. 10. It is a clear proof
of incorrigiblenesse, and a presage of certain ruin, when a people are never
more mad upon sin, then when judgments are let forth for it; for by this the
Lord proves their incorrigiblenesse, and seals this woe upon them, that when
the Nations were cut off, yet They rose up early, and corrupted all their
doings.

Ver. 8. Therefore wait ye upon me, says the Lord, untll the day that I rise
up to the prey: for my determination is to gather the Nations, that I may
assemble the Kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce
anger; for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy.

The Lord having thus accused, and left the body of the Jews under his woe, he
turns now to the godly among them, who could not but be affrighted with these
threatenings, and troubled with the thoughts of dispersion of the people;
therefore he propounds diverse grounds of their encouragement, some whereof were
to be accomplished in part, at their return from the captivity, and all of them
spiritually, in the days of the Messiah, beside what may be expected yet more
fully at the conversion and saving of all Israel.

The first ground of encouragement is, that as they had God to wait and depend
upon in the time of the ensuing calamity, wherein God would consume the Jews
out of his jealousy over them; so there was ground of hope, that the Lord
having punished his Church would appear against her enemies, to take the prey
out of their teeth, and raise up the Nations to consume them, and make such
havoke of them, as might testify his zeal for his people, and glory, which had
been violated by them; and therefore the godly were patiently to expect this
day, so much the rather as all this should tend to the advance meant of the
Kingdom of Christ, as is after cleared. Doct. 1. The Lords just controversy
against the visible Church, provoking him to abandon her, does nothing diminish
his affection to any godly remnant in it, nor make him forget them in sad
times: for in the midst of all these quarrels, he has a word to them: 2. God
in his Church, is jealous of her, and of her affection toward him, and for his
Church against all that trouble her; in both which cases, his jealousy being
provoked, is terrible, and will raise up many instruments, and make a great
destruction; for this jealousy of God, first against the Jews (which is
supposed here, and first in order to be understood) and then against her
enemies (which is most expressly pointed at) will arise to the prey as a roaring
Lion, will assemble Nations and Kingdoms, to make them scourges to the Jews,
and then to be plagued themselves, Will pour out indignation, and fierce anger,
and devour all the earth or Land. 3. When the Lord is about to bring forth some
glorious piece of his Gospel-work, The Church is to expect some great shakings,
and vastations to make way for it; for in order to what follows in this
Chapter, there will be a devouring of all the earth, a casting of all into the
furnace, that he may b^ing out his pure metal. 4. When it pleases the Lord to
let judgments upon his Church arise to a captivity, and a leaving of them in
their enemies hand, the godly are to expect a time of the trial of faith, and
patience, before there be a change; as here is insinuated, that when Judah is
consumed, there will be need of waiting on God, before a day of vengeance on
enemies come about. 5. Times of greatest trouble, have matter of encouragement
to the godly, in that they have ground of present dependence on God for
strength and furniture, during the strait: and ground of future hope, that
there will be an outgate, and that vengeance will come on oppressors: they are
allowed and invited to wait on God, till that other day come. 6. Patience is
the kindly fruit of hope, and the posture wherein the godly are to expect
issue, and to find present troubles easy, Wait ye upon me, says the Lord,
till the day, etc.

Ver. 9. For then will I turn to the people a pure language, that they may all
call upon the Name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent.

10. From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, thy suppliants, even the daughter of
my dispersed, shall bring mine offering.

A second ground of encouragement is, that these calamities on the Jews and
their enemies, should ^ot make the Church to cease; but God should propagate
pure Doctrine, pure Worship, and profession unto many people, both Jews and
Gentiles; who should jointly concur to serve him, and help one another in his
obedience, v. 9. Thus a pure language seems to be understood, as Isa. 19.18.
not secluding purity of heart, amongst some of them, which it evidenced by
purity of language, as may appear from Isa. 6.5. Matthew. 12.34. Jam. 3.2. and
from what is further promised here; yea, the Lord promises that he will gather
them from the furthest parts of the world, to seek him, and offer service to
him, v. 10. This promise is accomplished, partly in his gathering together in
Christ, his dispersed elect throughout the world, and remotest corners thereof,
Joh. 11.52. and these Ethiopians, or, (as some conceive) Egyptians, among the
rest; and partly it shall be accomplished when the Lord shall call scattered
Israel from the remotest parts of the world to serve him, and they shall bring
in some Gentiles with them, as a gift to God. Doct. 1. It is matter of praise
to God, and of encouragement to the godly, that go with Nations as it will, yet
he is not to want a Church, though he should gather it from among Pagan
Gentiles, and such as there is little apparent hope of; for when the earth is
devoured, v. 8. then he will get many people, as the word is, and that from
beyond the rivers of Ethiopia. 2. Purity of Doctrine, worship and profession,
is the glory of a Gospel Church, and a glorious work of God to make it so, and
keep it so; for, says the Lord, I will turn to the people a pure language,
or, pure Doctrine and profession, instead of their Idolatrous and blasphemous
fancies, and their way following thereupon. 3. Purity of Doctrine, worship and
profession, does not consist in a lawless liberty, or toleration, to think or
say what men will, but is conjoined with, and carried on by an united
uniformity, which as it is the rich fruit and recompense of much trouble, so it
is to be expected in the Lords time and measure: for, when after their much
trouble they shall have a pure language, they will serve him with one consent,
or shoulder, even in that pure language, See Jer. 32.39. Zach. 14.9. 4. As
unanimity in the matters of God, and the free access of Jew and Gentile to
serve God, the one as well as the other, is a great mercy of the Kingdom of
Christ: so when seekers of God are of one heart, and do all put hand to the
work to help one another, without obstructing, or lying by, it is a token of
thriving service: this is also included in the promise, as a great blessing,
and a means of much good, They shall serve him with one consent. 5. The true
characters of a converted and spiritual people, are their being much in calling
on God, employing and making use of him in all things, and their giving up
themselves to be his servants at his disposal; and in testimony of their
subjection, and thankfulness, they will put hand to his work, as they are
called, will do all as service to him and bring their worship, themselves, or
others, as they are able to offer up to him: thus are they here described, They
all call on the name of the Lord, when they get the pure language, they are
suppliants, they serve him, and bring his offering. 6. As the Lord will not
lose any of his elect, how far soever scattered through the world, and will
recover his own, when their case speaks them afar off, and they are driven
to exile, without hope or probability of return, in their own apprehension; so
in particular, the Lord will in due time seek after and recover his ancient
people, now of a long time scattered, whereby there shall be a reviving of his
service in the world; for from beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, he will seek the
daughter of his dispersed, and cause them to come, at which time there will be
suppliants and offerings brought, and serving of him with one consent.

Ver. 11. In that day shall thou not be ashamed for all thy doings, wherein
thou have transgressed against me: for then I will take away out of the midst
of thee them that rejoice in thy pride, and thou shall no more be haughty
because of mine holy mountain.

A third ground of encouragement is, the promise of the Churches reconciliation
with God, through the free pardon of finne, and her renovation; the glory
whereof should rub off the shame of her former iniquities, and should be
followed with such felicity, as should take away the ignominy of her former
afflictions for sin, and particularly he promis^th to purge away their
conceit, and carnal gloriation in the Temple, and outward ceremonies, and to
make worshipping of God in spirit and truth to be only in request; these
promises are made to the Church, in relpect of the elect in her, and do hold
forth that eventually, at some times, and sp^cially at the conversion of
Israel, there may be a more general renovation of Church Members; but do
neither hold forth that they will be universally such, nor yet do proscribe
that it is the Churches duty to admit none but such. Doct. 1. Greatest promises
of outward things, will not afford matter of encouragement to the godly,
unless with these the work of reconciliation, and renovation be going on;
therefore is this promised to encourage the godly Jews. 2. Albeit the Lords
reconciled people have cause to be ashamed of themselves, and to testify their
repentance, by blushing for their backslidings, Ezekiel. 16.61. yet being
reconciled and turned to God, they may lift up their face through a Mediator,
expecting not to be eternally confounded, and that God will not charge them
with these finnes, but will bury them; and make their future conversation rub
off that reproach, and by his doing for them, will take away the ignominious
effects of their sin; so much does this promise assure us. In that day shall
thou not be ashamed for all thy doings, wherein thou have transgressed against
me. 3. As men cannot prove their sin to be really pardoned, but by their
renewed conversation; so without this there is no taking away of the ignominy
of former sinful ways; thus does the Lord prove that they shall be a pardoned
people, and not ashamed, for then I will take away out of the midst of thee,
them that rejoice in thy pride, etc. 4. The shameful sin of the visible
Church, is her boasting of external privileges, and being bold to sin,
because of them, her outward mercies of that kind becoming her snare, and
standing betwixt her and the kernel of them; for this is the sin to be
removed; rejoicing in thy pride, or, excellency, as the word signifies, and
being haughty because of my holy mountain. 5. As the Lord must be the worker
of our reconciliation, and renovation, as his making a promise about it does
teach us; so when the Lord has a mind to do good, and appear for a people,
who have lain under great ignominy and judgments for sin, he can soon
reform them, and make them shine in holiness, as here he promises to the
Church of the Jews, whose name to this day is a reproach, Thou shall not be
ashamed, I will take away them that rejoice in thy pride etc.

Verse. 12. I will also leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and pure people:
and they shall trust in the Name of the Lord.

Ver. 13. The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies: neither
shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth: for they shall feed and lie
down, and none shall make them afraid.

The sanctification of the Church is further commended, that no affliction,
paucity, nor poverty, (as when they returned from Babylon) should obstruct, but
rather help it on; the Lord emptying them of all things by affliction, that
they may learn to trust in God, and study holiness and sincerity, which are
approved in his sight; whereunto they shall be encouraged by Gods protecting of
them, and keeping them in safety from violence and fear, notwithstanding their
low estate. Doct. 1. When the Lord corrects his Church, he uses not to make a
full end, but to leave some to get good by these afflictions, and the fruit of
them from the Lord; I will also leave, says the Lord, the remnant of Israel.
2. The Lord sees it fit to exercise even a remnant of his people with many
afflictions, after he has by their deliverance taken away their reproach, that
so they may be put yet to a more serious study of holiness; for, they are
afflicted, and a poor people, that they may trust, and do no iniquity. 3. As
trust in God is a chief part, and the root of true holiness; and as the
afflicted may have yet ground of hope, and may rise the more in confidence that
trouble would lay him low, and that carnal confidences do fail: And as
afflictions do not allow us to be discouraged, but to put us to trusting and
immediate dependence, and do feed faith; so to trust in God, is ordinarily man's
last shift, which he will never essay till he be emptied of all things beside,
and led by God to this duty, who undertakes to work faith as well as to give
the reward of it; all these are imported in this promise, as it is propounded,
I will leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people: and they shall
trust in the Name of the Lord, and here their holiness begins. 4. Trust in God
will encourage and enable the believer to follow holiness and Gods way; And,
albeit perfection be not attainable in this life, yet the beliver is to prove
his integrity, by avoiding the dominion of sin, and hypocrisy, and
dissimulation; and to emplore God for attaining thereof: This is the sum of
that promise, The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies:
neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth. 5. As God is
sufficiently able to give safety and support to his own in their weakest
condition; and as the godly have the Covenant-right to temporal preservation
when it is good for them, and are always hid in the secret of Gods presence,
and may attain to peace and freedom from the slavish fear of trouble: so the
faith, or sensible experience of this protection, is a sufficient motive to
Saints, to study holiness, and keep the way of God; This imported in the
promise, They shall feed (as his flook) and lie down, and none shall make them
afraid; and in its being subjoyned, as a reason why they shall study holiness;
They shall not do iniquity, etc. for they shall feeh and lie down, etc.

Ver. 14. Sing, O daughter of Zion: shout O Israel, be glad and rejoice with
all the heart, O daughter of Jerusalem.

15. The LORD has taken away thy judgments, he has cast out thine enemy: the
King of Israel, even the LORD is in the midst of thee: thou shall not see evil
any more.

The Lord subjoynes yet further encouragements to the godly, in two
exhortations directed to the Church of the Gospel, wherein yet more of her
allowance, and privileges are held forth. The first exhortation is to full
joy, because of Gods removing of plagues and enemies, because of Gods presence
manifested in the midst of her, and her freedom from former evils; importing a
promise, that she should rejoice because of this, and that the godly of the
present time might rejoice in hope of it. Doct. 1. As the true Israel in
spirit, children of Zion, and of that Jerusalem which is from above, and who
are heirs to all the promises, have allowance, and matter of complete joy above
any other society, whose joy is still embittered with sorrow, and ought to
entertain their good condition with thankfulness and rejoicing: So when
Israel shall be converted, the Church may expect, that after their long
silence, and bitter sorrow, there will be a notable song among them; for, this
exhortation, Sing O daughter of Zion, shout Oh daughter of Israel, etc. is a
warrant and direction to all the godly, showing how short they often come; and
promise to Israel in particular. 2. Though sin and spiritual judgments,
together with outward calamities following thereupon, and enemies both outward
and inward do often times trouble the Church, yet in due time they shall not mar
her mirth, but rather furnish matter of a song, when God having quit the
process against her, and healed her spiritual judgments and plagues, shall
speedily remove them, and her enemies; Sing, etc. says he, The Lord has taken
away thy judgments, he has cast out thine enemies: whereby judgments, we are
not only to understand her outward calamities, but all her spiritual plagues
accompanying sin, and all the Lords sad sentences against her, which were the
rise of the enemies invasion and success. 3. It is matter of great joy, to have
interest in the true God of the Church, who is the Lord Jehovah, alsufficient
to make his followers happy, and maintain his and their rights, Ezekiel. 35.10.
especially when the right is made clear to believers, and that the Lord is not
to their sense standing afar off, but very near and in the midst of them; which
every one that lives by faith may expect; for this is also matter of a song,
the King of Israel, even the Lord is in the midst of thee. 4. Albeit the Church
cannot promise to her self, to be wholly and perpetually free from trouble,
while she is within time; yet Israel being converted, may expect not to meet
with those judgments they have endured since their rejection: and the godly
may expect their own competent breathing times from trouble, and that trouble
shall not hurt them, nor prove evil when it comes, and that the day shall
come, wherein they shall be for ever freed from it, which may sweeten what they
meet with, that it hinder not their joy; this is imported in that cause of the
Song; Thou shall not see evil any more.

Verse. 16. In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, Fear thou not; and to
Zion, Let not thy hand be slack.

The second exhortation (which the Lord promises shall be directed to the
Church, either by her Pastors sent out, or by way of acclimation from others,
beholding her happy estate, particularly at their return from Babylon; and at
the conversion of all Israel) is, that by faith they would put away fainting
fear, and stir up themselves to serve God cheerfully; for which end th^re are
several encouragements subjoyned in the following purpose. Doct. 1. It is an
usual infirmity in the godly, that their disposition comes far short of their
allowance; when they are allowed to be glad and rejoice with all the heart, v.
14. they need to be stirred up not to fear or faint. 2. The people of God are
many times so mistaken of their own case, that others may see more of their
good condition then themselves, and they need the Ministry of the Word to
direct their thoughts, to which they ought to submit; for, In that day it shall
be said to Jerusalem, Fear thou not, etc. 3. Faithless fainting, fear and
idleness, are usual companions, which feed and entertain one another; fear
weakening the hands from duty, and idleness feeding discouragement yet more,
therefore both are joined here, Fear not, let not thy hands be slack or faint.
4. As the reconciled people of God have no cause of harmless fear, if they
would set themselves against it; and as it becomes them to go about any duty
enjoined by God, with alacrity and cheerfulness; so our encouragements in God
are then rightly used, when they strengthen us to duty; so much also do these
exhortations, being put together, import, Fear not, let not thine hands be
slack. 5. As it is the duty of faithful Ministers, so also it is the
commendation of all the godly, to stir up one another to encouragement through
faith, and to cheerfulness in the obedience of faith, for, they are
commendably employed, who say to Jerusalem, Fear not, etc.

Ver. 17. The LORD thy God in the midst of thee is mighty: he will save, he
will rejoice over thee with joy: he will rest in his love, he will joy over
thee with singing.

The reason of the preceding exhortation, and the ground of their encouragement
is taken from Gods Covenant made with them, and his presence which was
conspicuous in the midst of them; from which grounds they might expect not only
that his power should be employed for their deliverance, but also that out of
his love, whereby he had chosen them, he would delight and acquiesce in them,
and rejoice over them, and do them good, and sweetly cherish them,
notwithstanding what might be said against them. Doct. 1. As the Lords Covenant
with his Church, is not broken off by every discord or affliction; so the Lord
manifesting himself to be in Covenant with her, by his Ordinances, as signs of
his presence, says much mercy to her, according as she needs it, for the rise
of all the following encouragements, is, the Lord thy God in the midst of thee.
2. As the Church may expect freedom from all her troubles, either by
prevention, support or deliverance; so her interest in God through the
Covenant, makes his Omnipotency forth coming to her for that end, and she may
reckon her strength by what is in him; for, the Lord thy God is mighty, and
therefore, he will save. 3. Albeit the proofs of divine power, let forth for
the Churches good, do set him out above all blessing and praise; yet his
love-embracements are above all, and the chief of the Churches encouragements;
therefore are they added as a further degree of comfort; He will rejoice over
thee, etc. 4. Albeit Christ's Bride be of no worth to him, nor does he need her,
yet having chosen her to be his Bride, he will not come behind in any duty,
which such a relation promises or engaged to among men, but will take pleasure
to be her God, will esteem, commend, cherish and delight in her, not according
to her worth, but according to the dignity he has called her unto, and as his
wife, his love putting comeliness upon her; and will express his delight by
doing for her, as if her well-being were a sufficient recompense of all his
pains; for, He will rejoice over thee with joy, which points at his inward
delight; He will joy over thee with singing, which notes the outward
expression of it; and both of them borrowed from the carriage of a Bridegroom
to his bride, Isaiah 62.5. 5. The Lords love does so acquiesce in his people
whom he has chosen, as the end of his pursuit wherein he rests, and does not
only cherish them by many expressions of love, when he takes up his rest in
and with them; but answers all objections that might be against them, with
his own free love that has chosen them: as reckoning, that having loved them,
he will love them: and having let out his affection upon the unworthy, he will
bear with their frailties, and not give a bil of divorce, nor chide
continually: Thus he will rest in his love, or her whom he loves, as having
gained his end when he obtaines her; and in his love or affection to her, which
is sufficient to make him not weary of her, nor reject her; yea as the word
signifies, He will be dumb and deaf in his love; His love (to speak after the
manner of men) will guard his ear from hearing, and his mouth from uttering
accusations against her, to wit, so as to cast her off, or deny her marriage
entertainment, though otherwise he may humble her.

Verse. 18. I will gather them that are sorrowful for the solemn Assembly, who
are of thee, to whom the reproach of it was a burden.

The Lord takes the word out of the encouragers mouths, and himself applies
that more general promise, v. 7. to the broken and afflicted estate of the
Jews, for the encouragement of the godly remnant; promising that he would
gather and bring them again to their own land, especially those, (or for their
sakes) who were mourners for the want of the solemn worship of God, as they
had it in their own land, and burdened with the reproach following thereupon,
Psalm. 137. Doct. 1. As it is the duty of all the people of God, to find God
speaking in and by his Word unto them; so is his mind to be found in his Word,
and no where else; for he does himself confirm what these exhorters had said of
him, v. 16.17. for the further strengthening of the godly; and what they said of
him from his Word, that for substance does he say of himself, when he speaks,
I will gather, etc. or employ my power and love to save, as v. 17. 2 The Lord
speaking by his word, will teach and allow his afflicted people, to apply
general promises to their own case, as if they had been only intended for them;
therefore does he apply that general promise of manifesting power and love to
the particular strait of their captivity; I will gather, etc. that is, I will
employ my power and love to help thee in thy particular distress. 3. As the
Lords people do often times provoke him justly to deprive them of public
Ordinances, and to scatter them into corners: so the want thereof will be a sad
affliction to sensible souls, as depriving them of the most lively
representation of heaven on earth, as obscuring much of Gods glory which is
seen and spoken of in the Sanctuary, and as secluding the godly from the mutual
and comfortable fellowship one of another in his ordinances, and from much
refreshment and help which they had by those means; for here they are
sorrowful for the solemn Assembly, wherein the Jews used to to meet at the
Temple to worship God 4. Such is the insolency and cruelty of the Churches
enemies, that the godly may not only look to be deprived of solemn Ordinances,
where such have power, but to have their burden and grief augmented, and to be
in peril of being crushed with insolent reproaching of their religion and
worship; for here it is added to the former, the reproach of it was a burden.
5. When the Lord has brought his people lowest for their sin, and enemies have
got most of their will in crushing them, yet they are not without the reach of
his help: he can, and in his appointed time will bring them out of all their
captivities and troubles; for notwithstanding all these afflictions, I will
gather them, says the Lord. 6. As it is the duty of the godly, in times of
calamities to be most affected with what concerns Gods honor, and seems to
suffer prejudice: so such do lie nearest promises for the public, or for
themselves either; for they that are sorrowful for the solemn assembly, are of
thee; that is, thy true and kindly children; and they get the first promise, I
will gather them, and the Church for their sake.

Ver. 19. Behold at that time I will undo all that afflict thee, and I will
save her that halteth, and gather her that was driven out, and I will get them
praise and fame in every Land, where they have been put to shame.

The Lord confirms this gracious promise of their return, and undertaketh to
remove all impediments that might arise from themselves or others, to hinder
their gathering and restitution. As for outward opposition, he promises to
ruin her oppressors; and for her self, although by her affliction and
captivity, she were so broken and crushed like a disjoynted body, that she was
not able to move; yea so scattered as the torn members of a body cast here and
there into corners, that there is no probable hope of her gathering; yet he
promises not only to make a resurrection from the dead, and to strengthen her
who halted, that she may return, and to cause the driven out to be gathered;
but that by so doing he will take away their reproach in view of all people,
among whom they had lurked with ignominy. Doct. 1. There is so much which the
afflicted Church may have in probability and to sense to object against the
truth of promises; that the performance of them will be wonderful, and to be
admired; for here we are called to admire the Lords bringing about of his
purpose, notwithstanding so many seen impediments, Behold, at that time, etc.
2. The promises made to the Church speak much woe to her opposers, and will come
to effect over the belly of all opposition they can lay in the way; I will undo
all that afflict thee, and I will save, etc. 3. The Lords people may be so
crushed by their troubles, and disabled, to do any thing for themselves or
their own help, and so cast out from all their enjoyments, and so scattered
from the society one of another, and from having the face of a people, that it
may seem impossible to sense; that they shall be recovered, although there were
no enemies against them; for its a new impediment to their faith that they
halted, which is a crush disabling from any activity or motion, and were driven
out. 4. They may be brought to a very low and desperate condition by trouble,
whom yet the Lord will not only preserve from ruin, but raise up (as it were)
from the dead, and bring them to a full fruition of what he has promised; I
will save her that halteth, and gather her that was driven out, says the Lord.
5. Albeit reproach be a great addition to trouble, yet the Lords people waiting
on him, may expect to have it rubbed off with advantage, and that by his
mercies toward them, he will make them honorable in the sight of all those who
despised them, because of their low estate; I will get them praise, and fame in
every Land, where they have been put to shame.

Verse. 20. At that time will I bring you again, even in the time that I gather
you: for I will make you a name, and a praise among all the people of the earth,
when I turn back your captivity before your eyes, says the LORD.

The Lord yet insists upon the former promise, and because it was hard to
believe so great a change, being as a resurrection from the dead after so many
years burial, and (as it were) rotting in their graves; therefore he repeats,
and by subscribing his own name, confirms the promise of gathering and
bringing them back, and of making them famous throughout the world, when he
should return their captivity visibly, and to their own satisfaction. He
mentions the turning back of captivities in the plural number (as it is in the
Original) with relation to their being led captives at several times, as under
Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33.11. under Jehojakim, 2 Chronicles. 36.6. under Jehojachin, 2
Chro. 35.10. (with every one of whom some of the people suffered) and under
Zedekiah; and with relation to their being scattered into several places in
their captivity, from which they were to be returned as so many troops of
captives; if not also to their long dispersion since the Messiah came, as well
as to the former in Babylon. Doct. 1. Greatest difficulties in the way of
performance of promises, ought not to cause the Church to doubt any thing of
the certainty of them; therefore is the promise again and again inculcated upon
these fainting-Jewes, as a most certain truth whatever they had to the contrary
whereupon to reject it: At that time will I bring you again. 2. One act of Gods
power and love manifested for his people, does but make way for another to
perfect it: and when the Lord begins a work with them they may expect he will
not leave it unperfected; so much does the way of making this promise import,
that when he gathers them in their exile, (as he did under Zerubbabel and
Ezra,) he will not leave them, till he safely bring them back; At that time
will I bring you again, even in the time that I gather you. 3. The Lords
appearing for a people, and doing for them, is their greatest honor before the
world, considering what it speaks of their interest in so great a God, what
respect he carries to them in their low estate, and how glorious he will make
them by doing for them; and the Lord will in due time do for his people, that
he may put his honor on them; therefore, it is here subjoyned as a fruit of
his work, and his end in working, I will bring you again, for I will make you a
name, and a praise among all the people of the earth, when I turn back your
captivity. 4. The infinite fullness of God is sufficiently able to answer all
his peoples wants, and will not leave his work undone to their contentment,
were their difficulties never so many; for, whereas they had been often led
captives, and scattered into diverse places, he promises, I will turn back
your captivities, and do it before your eyes, or to your full content and
satisfaction. 5. The former proofs, which God has given of his power, to give
a being to what he says in greatest extremities, is a sufficient ground for
the Churches encouragement, to lean to his promises in new difficulties:
therefore to confirm all he subscribes his name Jehovah, by which he had been
known in their deliverance from Egypt, Exodus 6.3. as a sufficient ground for
their faith in this second captivity: I will turn back your captivity says
the Lord, or Jehovah. Of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to
whom be glory for ever. Amen. Romans 11.36.

FINIS.
Mr. HUTCHESON on the Lesser Prophets.

Mr. Hutcheson's Exposition on the three last Prophets.


