The spiritual Verses and Proof of James Hunt, which shall be plainly shown,
God has lighted my Candle within his glorious Throne.

IT is written in the 18. Chapter of the Revelation, J saw an Angel come down
out of Heaven, having great power, and the earth was lightened with his glory.

And now ye Clergy, I plainly see and understand,
You say your Universities,
they are the two eyes of this Land.
Why then if your eyes be so clear that you can see,
I pray declare and show to me,
who that Angel should be.
But that deep mystery for you is yet too strong,
And for that cause,
you shall be taught by the English Tongue.
For the plain Plowman and Cavalier,
Whom God has mounted on the Throne of grace;
He says, ye Clergy, you shall be forced for to see clear,
You must give way and place.
But when I come within your Pulpit for to fly,
Ye Magistrates you say I am to proud
because I clime so high.
But Jesus Christ he has made me as bold as a Lion
for to stand up faithful on his side,
And God my Father he (...) me
a powerful Sw^ (...) down the Clergies pride;
For you do so many f^l^e Doctrines raise,
by your (...) ton^ue and Greek phrase:
That now, by Gods help, the plain English tonguea
will win the pr^ise.
It is written in the 7 h. Chapter of the Revelation, and the 17. verse; The
Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne, he shall load the people on to the
living Fountains of waters. And Father, Son, and holy Ghost, they are the
glorious and heavenly fountains, from which the waters of life does freely
spring and flow: For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father,
the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one: And now ye Clergy, I
hope ye all know, the Word does signify Christ Jesus, who is the second person
in Trinity, and Father, Son, and holy Ghost, they are one in God head and
one in Unity. And Jesus Christ he does tell you, in the one and twentieth
Chapter of the Revelation, six^h verse, I will give unto him that is a thirst,
of the fountain of the Water of life freely. Which water of life does signify
the spiritual word of life, which is made manifest in the New Testament, which
is the Book of life. And Jesus Christ he does tell you in the fourth Chapter of
John, and the 14 verse, He that drinks of the water that I shall give him, he
shall never thirst: for the water that I shall give him, says Christ, shall
be in him a Well of water springing up to everlasting life. And

Jesus Christ by the power of his Spirit,
he has made me for to see and know;
His water does spring so freely in me,
that my Well does overflow.
For Jesus Christ he does tell you plainly in the seventh Chapter of John, and
the 38 verse, He that believes in me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of
living water. And now by Gods help, I will boldly say, as it is written in the
10 Chapter to the Hebrews, and the 21 verse, And having a high Priest over the
House of God: I do most humbly beseech all ye that are athirst, that now you
will draw near to God with a true heart, and have your bodies washed with pure
water; for the washing of your bodies does signify your souls, which is the
inward man, which shall be sanctified and glorified, by drinking freely of the
water of life. For it is written in the 17 Chapter of John, Christ says,
Sanctify them through thy truth, thy Word is truth; for Christ is the Word and
the truth: and Christ does tell you, the glory which God his Father gave unto
him, he does give unto his Saints, that they may be all one in us, that the
world may believe, that thou have sent me. And now I say again, the Lamb
which is in the midst of the Throne, does signify Gods glorious Preacher;
for Jesus Christ he is called by the name of a Lamb; and Gods Word does tell
you, he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit. And now by Gods help, I shall
make it plainly appear, the Word of God which is written in the New Testamant,
does proceed from Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which is the glorious throne
of grace. It is plainly written in the 20 Chapter of John, and the 21 verse,
When Jesus was risen from the dead, he came and appeared amongst his Apostles,
and he said unto them, As my Father has sent me: even so I send you, and he
breathed on them, and said, receive ye all the Holy Ghost. Again, It is
plainly written in the first Chapter to the Ephesians, and the third verse,
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ. And Christ he is
the Mediator of the New Testament, as you may read in the ninth Chapter to the
Hebrews, and the 15 verse. And Jesus Christ he did make all his Apostles able
Ministers of the New Testament, as you may read in the third Chapter of the
second Epistle to the Corintians.

And thus by Gods help, I have proved in brief the Word of God which is
written in the New Testament, does proceed from Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
and the water of life, is the spiritual Word of life, which is revealed in the
New Testament, which is the Book of life. And now all ye that have a desire to
drink freely of the water of life, which is so glorious and pure, the same
will cause you to forsake those polluted waters, which does proceed from the
great Whore.

For now by Gods help I will show you in brief the true signification of the
great whore, which siteth upon so many waters. Revel. 17.1. And those many
waters must not, be taken for temporal waters, which is to be deserned with
the bodily eye; for the 15. verse does tell you, the waters which thou saw
where the Whore siteth, are peoples, multitudes, Nations and tongues.

And now by the divine power of Gods Command,
I must give ye high Court of Parliament to understand.
The Devil he is the great whore, and the Devil he has blinded and deceived
the Clergy, and the Clergy they have blinded and deceived all those people
which are held under their power; for the second vets does tell you the
Inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her furnication.

And ye Clergy when you are in your Pulpits,
you cry out and say, if the drunkards do not repent,
they must down to hell.
And now I say the same is a plain truth
which you do tell.
But ye Clergy I must tell you plainly
you will be found,
To be the greatest drunkards,
in City or in Country town.
But I pray understand and mark well what I say,
For you art great drunkards in a spiritual way.
For ye are always drinking,
and yet, alas, alas, you are ever dry,
But I must show what is the case,
and the reason why.
Your Fountain does proceed from the great whore,
who is the mother of your Universitie.
For she has a thousand several sorts of wine,
And waters for to please your mind.
And by her sorcerie,
ye Clergy you have made the people blind,
By drinking of your corrupted waters,
and poluted wine.
I say again ye Clergy you have blinded and deceived the people in such a
shameful manner, that there is not one man amongst a thousand which does
rightly understand for what cause Christ was crucified on the Cross, and does
believe the power thereof. I have another book to follow this, which shall
prove and justify that I speak the plain truth.

But ye deluding spirits, by that glorious light
which God has freely given to me,
You and those whom you have blinded,
you shall plainly know and see.
The same Prophecy of Scripture shall be fulfilled, which is written in the
12. Chapter of the Revelation, There appeared a great wonder in Heaven, a woman
clothed with the Son and the Moon under her feet.

And now ye Magistrates and Churchwardens
you are not yet able for to unfold this deep riddle,
And yet you say in the Church
I must not meddle.
But God will make you see,
I shall fight, and manfully hunt,
For to preach in the Pulpit, and baptize at the Funt,
For to work a true peace amongst those that cannot agree
And Parson Kentish
he has married his man and his maid,
And kindly they have kissed,
and lovinglie played.
And is that any knaverie,
but now have at the whores coat,
And some blind man may note,
that I mean bauderie.
But Parson Kentish,
the baud and the old whore,
They keep you so blind and so poor.
That my cunnie you can neither feel nor see,
for like the Owl you sit in the dark,
and cannot come to the mark,
nor get one kiss of the woman free.
For the woman clothed with the Sun*
In her ^^ce I run;
I am certain and sure:
For she has a delight, for to teach me to fight,
and conquer the great old whore,
And force ye tormenting Committee,
in Town and in City,
to yield up your hellish power.
And now ye spiritual drunkards which are so pure in outward show, and in your
blind way so precise, I pray do not scorn to learn of me to be more heavenly
wise; for whereas I have said Parson Kentish cannot feel nor see my Cunnie; I
must tell you I am a Wariner, and Parson Kentish he is not yet come to that
height of knowledge for to ferit my heaven lie berry; for the woman clothed
with the Sun, signifies the glorious and tryumphing Church of Christ, which
shall flourish by degrees over the face of the whole world, which will be to
the confounding of false power, and blind Doctrine which does arise from the
Devil and the false Church. Again I say, the woman clothed with the Sun, you
shall see and understand, she is joined unto Jesus Christ and is both God and
man, for Christ is the word, and Christ is God.

And he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit, and Gods Preacher, he his
both man and woman, in signification of Scripture. For Saint Paul does tell you
in first Epistle to the Corinthians, the 4. Chapter, and the 15. verse, Though
you have ten thousand Instructors, yet you have not many Fathers, for in Christ
Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel; and for to beget, does signify
man. And in the fourth chapter to the Galathians, there he says, My little
children, of whom I travel in birth, till Christ be formed in you. And to
travel in birth, does signify a woman: For as every natural child has a
father and mother of the flesh: so on the other side, God he is father and
mother of the Spirits. And Christ does tell you in the third Chapter of John,
Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, for that which
is borne of the flesh is flesh, and that which is borne of the Spirit is Spirit.

And to be born of the Spirit, is to be born again by the Word of God, as I
shall prove in the first Chapter of Peter, for there it is said, We are borne
again not with corruptible seed, but by the Word of God, which lives and
abides for ever: and this is the Word which by the Gospel is preached unto
you, Verse the five and twentieth.

And thus by Gods help, I have proved, in brief, Gods true Preacher, he is
man and woman in signification of Scripture: for a man is begotten and borne
again by the divine power of the Word of God which is manifest in the New
Testament, which is the Book of life.

But ye deluding Clergy, when you are in your Pulpit in your Doctering, you
join the old Law and new together, as if they were both as one; and in so
doing, you are yet almost as blind as was the Whore, Pope Joan: But the Devil
he has not so strongly blinded you, but God will make you see: the Son of the
bond woman cannot, nor shall not be heir with the free: As you may read in the
fourth Chapter to the Galatians, and the thirtieth Verse. For God my Father by
the power of

His Spirit, he will bring it so about,
that by the glory of the free Woman,
The bond Woman, and her Son,
They shall be quit cast out.
And for that cause, Parson Kentish you shall be
forced for to give way, and rome:
That the Woman clothed with the Sun,
may in your Pulpit come.
But ye Magistrates, and Churchwardens ye will not yet
suffer me, in the Pulpit, for to declare my mind;
And for that cause I must reprove you soundly,
because you are so blind.
For are not those blind hypocrites,
as I will show you by relation:
Which fight against that you pray for,
which is abomination.
For in Lords Prayer you do pray,
that Gods will may be done:
And yet you fight against that power,
which does proceed from God the Father and the Son.
For they have made me a heavenly Schoolmaster.
and they have given me a glorious crown.
And ye learned Synod, I pray, what say you, will
And ye Magistrates, I hope to draw you from the
For God has given me the key of knowledge; and Churchwardens, I pray give me
the Key of the Church door, that I may have free leave to call Gods sheep into
the true fould, and scourge out mystical Babylon that drunken and poluted
Whore, with whom the Inhabiters of the earth have been made drunk with the
spiritual wine of her fornication, which in Gods sight is very hateful and
and abomination.

But now ye Clergy, Magistrates, and Churchwardens,
I pray in time repent,
and be reconciled unto the son of the woman free,
And then you and I, shall live in love and peace,
and quickly agree.
For the Son of the free woman,
in plain and brief I must you tell,
That does signify Jesus Christ, and the Gospel.
And I pray understand the Gospel in his right place,
For it is the new Testament,
which does proceed from the throne of grace.
And now ye Lords, Knights, and Burgesses in Parliament, Committees, Captains
and Commanders, I do most humbly beseech you all, for the true love that is in
God my glorious Father, that now you will in time repent and be reconciled to
Jesus Christ, and to the ministration of the new Testament, which is my
glorious Gospel of love and peace, that by the divine power thereof, your joy
and glory may increase, and now the God of love and peace who has brought
again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep through
the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you all perfect to do his will,
working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through the divine
power of Jesus Christ our Lord. Hebrews the 13. Chapter, and the 20. verse. And
now I say again, Jesus Christ he is the great shepherd of the sheep, and that
is but one true and perfect God, and there must and shall be but one Religion,
one shepherd, and one sheep-fould, and Father, Son, and holy Ghost, they have
made me a powerful Instrument for to call and gather Gods sheep into the true
fould, that Gods love and power, and glory you may behold.

And ye high Court of Parliament, I pray take Council now of God and me, and
in true judgment seat; for Gods word does tell you, the woman clothed with the
Son, shall burn the Moon under her feet.

And ye blind Synod, you have been along time a seting forth of Christ and his
true Church, as I may boldly say; but alas, alas, you are all as men in the
moon, for you cannot find the way, and now ye Committees and Excisers, the tax
money which you force me, and the people to pay, you say the same is for the
seting forth of true and sound Religion, but I must tell you true, that sound
Religion shall not be set forth by those moon-blind Sinod whom the Parliament
hire with our money, nor yet by any other politician government or power which
does proceed from man's invention; for true peace and sound Religion, and Church
Government, the same shall be established and set forth by that divine power
and spirit which does freely proceed from Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

And now ye Excisers and tormenting Committee,
in Town and in City.
I pray mark well what I say;
For if you will not turn and repent,
Hellfire will make you lament.
For Gods power you shall obey.
For if you will not learn the way of peace,
which is unto salvation,
You shall be sure for to obey,
the torments of damnation.
But I hope there is none of you
that does desire for to burn in hell,
Why then I pray do not fight against the light,
for God will have his will.
And Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
whose light is above the brightness and glory of the Sun,
Their power does command my spirit
within their races to run.
And false power and false Doctrine which proceeds
from the Devil, which is hateful in Gods sight,
That shall be reproved and overthrown
by the glory of the light.
Which true light proceeds from above,
I say from the true God of peace and love.
Unto whom be always Honor, Glory, and Power, now, and ever more, Amen.
FINIS.

