The Copy of a LETTER FROM Duke Hamilton, TO THE MINISTERS AT LANCASTER, With
their ANSWER to the same.

Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
August 25. 1648.

FOR SUCH MINISTERS Of this Shire as are now at LANCASTER, And have lately
forsaken their own DVVELLINGS.
Reverend Gentlemen,
BEing informed that diverse of the Ministry of Lancashire, upon the causless
apprehension of receiving injury from this Army, have lately forsaken their
Charge and Benefices, and are now at Lancaster, to the inconveniences of
themselves and Parishioners, for the which I am grieved; and that they should
so far mistake our intentions in coming hither, it being for settling
Presbyterian Government according to the Covenant, liberating and
reestablishing His Majesty, and for other ends conducing to the good and Peace
of the Kingdom, according to the Declaration herewith sent, and not to harm any
(much less) the Ministers of this Country; I therefore thought good to
certify, that such as have so absented themselves, may freely and without fear
return to their several Dwellings, to exercise those duties belonging to their
Callings, without any prejudice to their Persons, Families or Goods from any in
this Army; and if any of them be pleased to repair unto me, I doubt not but to
give them that satisfaction, that they may clearly see, none shall study more
the happiness and preservation of this Church according to the Covenant, then

Your assured good Friend to serve you, HAMILTON.
Hornby, 10 August, 1648.
May it please your Excellency,
WE acknowledge our selves but weak men, and therefore subject to mistakes, but
are not satisfied of any in having our present abode at Lancaster, it being
incredible to us how we should have safety and freedom with your Army, knowing
our old Enemies of Religion and the Kingdoms peace are with your Excellency:
We have all taken the Covenant, and are zealous for reestablishing His
Majesty, and doubt not the reality of the intentions of the two Houses of
Parliament, according to their late Declarations, nor yet of the settling
Presbyterian Government, whereof we have lately had good assurance in this
county, and how much we shall own it (unto the death) is known to all the world
in our late Testimony to the Truth of Jesus Christ, subscribed by us, together
with the rest of our Brethren of this Province, unto which Truth we pray
nothing may be acted prejudicial by your Excellency, and rest

Lancaster, 10 August, 1648. Your humble Servants, Tho: Whithead. James
Schoulcroft. Io: Jacques. Pet: Atkinson. Io: Syll. Edw: Aston. Tho: Denny. Io:
Smith. Sam: Elwood. Tho: Fancet.


FINIS.

