BRAVE NEWS FROM IRELAND: OF A REMARKABLE BATTLE FOUGHT by the Trained-Band of
the City of Dublin, against six Regiments of the Rebels, Capta^n Hursey being
chief Commander, Feb. the 5, 1641. Which Battle has caused many of the Rebels
to revolt to the Protestants.

WITH, The Description of a valiant battle, performed by Captain Maggay, on the
sixth of Feb. against diverse of the Rebels in the Harbor of Dublin, with many
other Remarkable Passages, and Renowned Exploits by the English Protestants the
last two weeks. As it was taken out of a Letter sent to the Lady Knevit
dwelling in Lincolns-Inne fields. Feb. 7. 1641.

Here also is related the great Overthrow given to Captain Maggrave by the
English, with the number of them that were slain.

Brought over by the last Post, being the latest News which came from IRELAND.

Whereunto is annexed, a Petition which came from Ireland.

LONDON. Printed for I.G. 1641.

BRAVE NEWS FROM IRELAND.
Good Madam,
I Cannot do no less for the former engagements, the which I am engaged unto
your Ladyship, but to let you understand of the great dangers which I do fear
we have run our selves into; I could have wished that we had kept our selves at
London to our studies, and have followed the Law, and not the sword, but only
we were expulst from all the Innes of Court there, and having no liberty at
all, did force us to take this way in hand, to gain to our selves employments,
but I fear we have gone the wrong way to work in so doing; for if you and
others do not make some speed to send us relief, we shall be utterly ruinated
for ever; we thought when that we told your Ladyship of this design, that we
should have overcome them, and have wrought our desires in the interim; but now
I fear it will not come to pass, because we have had a great overthrow by the
English protestants, Insomuch that it has dismayed our men, and made them
revolt from us, because that we had a repulse from Dublin, after we had got
into the Town, by the help of some Catholics that lived in the Town, which
brake down an old door in the Town wall, and so we got in, and were advanced in
the streets before the alarm was given, but we were soon discovered, and lost
600, of our men in the fight, where we thought to have had the best of it, we
had the worst: but the next day being resolved to recover our selves again,
seeing an English ship strike on the ground in the harbor near unto us, so that
we fell upon her, accounting her our own; because we thought that she was not
able to help her self with her ordinance, but only with a few muskets, the
which our men seeing of it, they shot at them somewhat thick, and afterward
waded into the water to her, being not deep to board her, and apprise her, and
to take the English prisoners. But the Captain of the ship being somewhat
stout-hearted, and weighed not what our men did at him, till he saw his own
time; but after he had got so many together as he thought good of, and our men
looking when he would yield to them, suddenly he finding no ways to relieve
him, and clear himself of us, he threw out Grenades of fire upon us, and
killed a hundred of our men, and seeing that we had lost so many men, we were
forced to leave the ship with the loss of them, and venture no further that day.

But the next day, Captain Maggrave having some intelligence from a kinsman of
his, which lived in Tredath, concerning the design of the English, which did
make us draw up our forces thither the next day, in hope to recover our selves
again of our former losses, but the English did soon descrie us, and gave us a
greater overthrow then we had before, with loss of men and ammunition and
provision, so that we were driven back by force to take the Woods for our
relief, until some aid came into us.

Good Madam, I pray have me commended to my Father Jackson, and tell him that I
would not have him come over as yet, although we have a want of him and some
others, until he does hear from me again with better news, and that shall be
as soon as possible I can with all convenience, for all the Priests and Friars
that are taken here by the English, they are worse used here then there, for
the English officers have taken fifty Friars and Priests, and hanged them all
in one day, O horrid and bloody sight to see so many good and holy men cut off
in one day without mercy, or any time of repentance, the which did make us to
be amazed to see it, and could not in no ways help them. O that our holy
father would send us some relief in this our need, we do expect to have some
from Spain very suddenly, if they be not hindered by the English on the seas.

We have sent unto ^rance to desire some aid from them with all speed, for
that which was sent last unto us, was taken by the way, so that we are in great
want; for we do hear, that there is great preparation made in England, and to
be sent over against us, with the help of the Scottish men on the other side:
so that they do keep us in on every side, the which does make us to desire aid
from out brethren, to defend us in our design.

Madam, I hope when you are at your devotion, that you will think of us, which
do stand to defend you and all the rest of our brethren and sisters here, and
make way for relief for you, and all the rest which are to come over; therefore
you might have that good devotion in you, to show your forwardness above
others, to bring this work to pass, as to move the fathers to have another
collection among you the sooner for our relief; or else we shall be in want of
moneys, if it be not sent over very speedily and by some sure and private
messenger: or else it will be intercepted by the way, as other things have bin
before. So desiring you to show this Letter unto some of our trusty friends, to
move them to this good work: I do take my leave of you, and rest,

Yours to command, Roger Hursey.
From our Camp near Dublin, Feb. the 7. 1641.
TO THE HONORABLE THE House of Commons now Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of Henry Beecher Gent, who has formerly Petitioned this
House in the behalf of the Inhabitants in Baltamore, Castle-Haven, and
Crook-Haven, in Ireland.
HVMBLY SHOWS,
THat your petitioner being possessed of diverse Lands, to the clear yearly value
of 180. l. in the parish of Aphadown, within three miles of Baltamore: together
with diverse cattle and other goods, was by night suddenly assaulted in his
house by some hundreds of those fierce and bloody rebels; That your petitioner
having some maskets and other ammunition, and having by (accident) notice of
their coming, did call in his Tenants, to the number of 20, and did there
stand upon his guard, and in defense of himself and family, did kill one of the
Cartis, a Gent. the leader of those Rebels, and hurt some others, and repulst
them from his house, whereupon (...) next day they gathered together (...)
greater numbers, and vowed the revenge of their Captains blood, by the death of
your petitioner and his whole family. Of which passages, your petitioner
receiving notice and information, and the enemy being within sight of his
house, was forced wife, children, and servants, one by one, for fear of being
discovered, to depart from his said habitation, leaving his lands, goods and
estate unto the Rebels, who pursued your petitioner to Baltamore, but by the
providence of God, your Petitioner has escaped into England, but has not
wherewithal to maintain his family.

The Premises considered, your Petitioner humbly beseeches this Honorable
Assembly, that be may be employed in his Majesty's service in these parts,
being born and bred there all his life, and acquainted with the dispositions of
the people.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc.
FINIS.

