THE SPIRITUAL Verses and Prose of JAMES HUNT, CONCERNING Angels of Light, and
angels of darkness.

Now if any man shall say, that some of my Verses are not good Verse, I hope he
will acknowledge them to be good Prose, therefore I say Verses and Prose:
Dedicated to the most Honorable and High Court of PARLIAMENT.

LONDON, Printed for J.H. 1643.

The Spiritual Verses and Prose of JAMES HUNT, concerning Angels of light, and
Angels of darkness.
CHrist Jesus, who is the perfect God, says plainly, Rev. 3.5. He that
overcomes, shall be clothed in white raiment. The white raiment signifies
the righteousness of the Saints, as you may read Rev. 19.8. and the
righteousness of the Saints signifies the sanctified souls of the people,
which have their robes washed and made white in the blood of the lamb, Rev.
7.14. And their robes signify the inward man of the hearts and minds of the
people, which are washed and made white in the blood of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ: I honor and glorify his blessed name for ever.

But there is a black angel comes out of the West,
Which makes war against the white Angel that comes out of the East;
But the devil has blinded the black angel that he crnnot see far,
But the white Angel proceeds from Christ the bright morning star,
Again the black angel he wars for the beast,
But the white Angel will wound him in the breast:
For a two-edged sword proceeds out of his mouth,
Whereby he will conquer the beast and all his dark angels from East, West,
North and South:
But if the white Angel you do not know,
He is a good archer, and draws a strong bow,
To Wound the black angel that comes out of the West,
For he will place his sharp arrows deep in his breast,
So that he will wound him till he be dead,
And with his sharp sword will out off his head.
He is a good archer that still hits the mark,
For the Owl in the Ivy bush sits in the dark:
But all her Ivy will be taken away,
And then the small Birds the Owl will bewray:
For the white Angel plainly does see,
The Owls Ivy signifies her Library,
By which she has blinded all the dark angels with the black evil,
That they do not know the true God from the false devil,
But the white Angel has lighted his candle from the glory of the sun,
And therewith the Owls library will burn and consume.
Therefore all you dark angels take warning by me,
To fly from false doctrine and hypocrisy,
Which our glorious God so highly does hate,
For that cannot enter in at heaven gate.
For all those that shall be welcome to the marriage day,
They must be all clothed in white array:
I pray underst and and mark what I say,
You must cast all your old garments quite away:
I mean all your own righteousness which is of the old Law,
For S. Paul will be true, though his face you nere saw,
But his words do abide, and still shall remain,
Which says, if righteousness come by the Law Christ died in vain, Gal. 2.21.

For all the righteousness that pleases God well,
Proceeds from Jesus Christ in the Gospel:
And all those that with it shall be clothed Christ will present them complete,
Before Gods holy and glorious seat:
I do not lie, but I tell you true,
He that sits upon the throne says I make all now.
All glory be to God on high,
And to the Son eternally,
And to the Holy Ghost likewise,
Whose glory far surmounts the skies.
The Apostle S. Paul says plainly, Heb. 12.22. Ye are come to mount Sion, and
to the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels: If the
Apostle should have said, we shall come to these things, that would have
signified that which is to come; but he says plainly, we are come to them,
which does signify that which is now present: For I understand and shall prove
the heavenly Jerusalem plainly signifies Christ and his glorious Church: for
God gave Christ to be head over all things to the Church which is his body, the
fullness of him that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.22. For Christ and his Church
is as man and wife, as I prove, Ephesians. 5.31. For a man shall leave father and
mother, and be joined to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh: this is a
great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the Church; for we are members
of his body, of his flesh, and of his bone, Verse. 30. For Jerusalem which is
above is free, which is the mother of us all, Gal. 4. Thus I have proved in
brief the heavenly Jerusalem signifies Christ and his glorious Church. Again,
we are come to an innumerable company of Angels: I understand all the people in
this world are Angels of light, or angels of darkness: for all those people
that are held under the old Law, and false doctrines of carnal men, they are
held under the bondage and captivity of the devil, and are thereby made angels
of darkness. But on the other side, all those people that shall turn away from
the old law and false doctrines, and be reconciled to Christ, and to the
obedience of his word which is revealed in his Gospel, they shall be joined to
the glorious body of Christ, and thereby made all Angels of light.

For now God of his great power (all people shall see)
That he does not tie himself to the art of schollership which the Clergy
have been taught in the University.
For there is no man can be a true and sound Interpreter of Gods Word,
But God must give him a powerful two-edged sword:
That is truly for to divide
Betwixt the heavenly Bridegroom, and the hellish bride.
But will you know what Bride I mean?
The blind and false Church, which says in her heart I sit a queen.
But now all those people that in true judgment shall sit,
They may behold the King and Queen of glory and wit:
I mean Christ and his Church which is from above,
Who is King and Queen of glory and love.
For God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in
him: for the Spirit of God draws but one way, that is, to Christ, and to the
obedience of his glorious Gospel, that they may reign with him in glory for
ever. It is written Ephesians. 5.13. All things that are reproved are made manifest
by the light. Now by that glorious light God has given unto me, I understand
there are a people called Anabaptists, that will not suffer young children to
be baptized till they come to years of understanding, but by the help of God I
shall prove by humane reason, and spiritual significations of Scripture, that
they are very much deceived in their judgment; for the law having a shadow of
things to come, Heb. 10. I understand, the old Law was a type and shadow of the
new: for S. Paul says plainly, 1 Cor. 10.2. They were baptized to Moses in the
cloud: the cloud signifies the old Law, and Circumcision was a type of
Baptism: and we do know children were circumcised at eight days old. Again I
find it written Acts 2. when the Apostle told the Jews that they had killed
the Lord of life, they were pricked in their hearts, and said, Men and
brethren, What shall we do? Peter said unto them, Repent and be baptized, and
ye shall receive the gifts of the Holy Ghost: for the promise is unto you, and
to your children: Mark this point I beseech you the Apostle says plainly, the
promise is unto you, and unto your children.

This place of Scripture does plainly prove, that all children of faithful
people are to be baptized to the body of Christ; again, I find it written,
Acts 16. concerning the Jaylo and Lydia, which were converted by the Apostles:
for the jayler it is said, he and all his were baptized; again, for Lydia it
is said, she and all her househould were baptized; now what man is able to
gainesay, but that those two persons might have young children belonging to
them, again, Christ says, Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid
them not, for to such belongs the Kingdom of God, mark this point, I
beseech you, for Christ says plainly, the Kingdom of God belongs to young
children: and Christ and his Church, signifies, Christ and his Kingdom,
therefore all those that will not suffer young children to be baptized, they do
shut them out from the Kingdom of God, again, if there be any man can prove
by Scripture, that Christ or any of the Apostles have forbid, saying, young
children must not be baptized: I will be of their judgment: or if they can
prove by Scripture that it is against the word and will of God, to have young
children baptized, I will be of their minds: again, if I ask any of them if
they believe the baptism with water does belong to the body of Christ, and to
the second Covenant of grace, they will say yea, then I say plainly, those
people that will not suffer young children to be baptized, they do exclude
them from the body of Christ, and do prove, they have no right to the second
Covenant of grace, I pray God give all such people grace to turn away from
that wicked practice, for fear they draw down the wrath of God upon their
own souls: thus I praise God I have proved by humane reason and spiritual
significations of Scripture, that young children are to be baptized to the
glorious body of Jesus Christ; It is written, John 16.13. Christ says
plainly, when he the spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all
truth; he shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it
unto you: Mark I beseech you the commanding power of God: for Christ Jesus who
is the perfect God, he says plainly, the spirit of truth shall receive of
his, and shall show it unto you: wherefore by the help and power of God I will
show the right honorable and high Court of Parliament a plain and perfect way
how they may establish true and sound Religion in a short time: for here are 4.
Religions in this Land: the Protestant, the Papist, the Brownist, and the
Anabaptist, and all these differ one from another, now if the honorable high
Court of Parliament will be pleased to request the ablest men of each sort of
these 4. religions to write their judgment in brief concerning the
signification of Christ his glorious Church with the holy ordinances that
belongs to it, to show how children are to be baptized, and how the Bread and
Wine is to be administered, and for marriage man with woman, and for the burial
of the dead, and of Church Government, and I by Gods help will do the like.

If their be any Protestant, Papist, Brownist or Anabaptist, that can be able
to show and set forth the signification of Christ and his glorious Church, with
those holy Ordinances that belong unto it, in a plainer, and clearer, and
briefer way then I by Gods help shall do, my soul shall rejoice to see that
man, and I will be of his religion, if it shall appear so to be by the
judgment of the high Court of Parliament, whom God (I hope) has gathered
together for the trial of the spirits, wherefore I most humbly beseech you for
to observe the council of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, which says,
first seek the Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and then all
things shall be added unto you (now I understand there are abundance of people
that long and desire for peace: but I say plainly and truly, God has drawn
his powerful Sword that here will be no true and sound peace in England, till
true and sound religion be established agreeable to the word of God, which is
revealed in the Gospel of peace, wherefore I, James Hunt, a Minister and
Messenger of Jesus Christ, do humbly beseech all good people that love Christ
and his glorious Gospel, that you will stir up the hearts and minds of the
honorable high Court of Parliament, for to establish true and sound Religion,
and then you need not doubt but God will power down his blessings upon you,
both spiritual and temporal, wherefore I humbly beseech you prolonge not the
time with my powerful God, least you provoke him to anger, and so he may smite
you with his wrathful Rod.

For I have bin this seven years day,
Beseeching the Clergy and higher powers to hear what I would say:
But for the true love to them I bear;
To hate and punish me they do not spare;
Because that I would show them the way,
For to come unto the marriage day:
For now the Bridegroom and the Bride,
Heaven Gates they have set open wide;
I mean those Parrables so dark,
By truly sounding on the harp:
But the Devil and all his dark Angels they strive and labor with might and
maine
For to shut up the Gates again.
But my glorious God by his great power;
He will confound them in one hour.
For I praise God he has given me an understanding to know him that is true,
and I glorify the name of God I am in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus
Christ: this is the true God and eternail life, I in him, and he in me, by the
divine power of his word, in his glorious Gospel which lives in me, I honor
and glorify the name of God our glorious father for ever, and Christ Jesus our
Mediator and Redeemer, with the holy Ghost who is our loving Comforter, 3
glorious persons, yet but one God, for as they cannot be divided, no more
cannot the true Church be divided from them 3. unto whom be all praise, honor,
glory, power, might, dominion and majesty, both now and evermore, world
without end, Amen.

And so God save the King and Queen, and their royal seed, with all the
Nobility and commonalty of this Land, and give them al understanding from
above, that they may be reconciled to Christ, and to the obedience of his word,
that they may reign with him in glory here in this world, and in the world to
come, world without end, Amen.

FINIS.

