AN ANSWER To Mr. Tombs his Scepticall Examination OF INFANTS-BAPTISME:

Wherein Baptism is declared to ingraft us into Christ, before any
preparation: And the Covenant of the Gospel to Abraham and the Gentiles is
proved to be the same, extended to the Gentiles children, as well as to
Abraham's:

Together with the Reason, why Baptize children, is not so plainly set down in
the Gospel, as Circumcise children, in the Law, and yet the Gospel more plain
then the Law.

By William Hussy, Minister of Chislehurst in Kent.

HEBREWS 8.5, 6. Who serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, as
Moses was admonished of God when he was about to make the Tabernacle: For see
(says he) that thou make all things according to the pattern showed to thee in
the mount.

But now has he obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also he is the
Mediator of a better covenant, which was established upon better promises.

LONDON, Printed for John Saywell, and are to be sold at his shop at the Sign
of the Star in Little Britain, 1646.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Having read and seen the Labors of diverse learned men that have undertaken
the handling of this point; and seeing that this Doctrine of Anabaptists does
much spread, notwithstanding all the industry that has been used by men of
singular parts and piety; I did wonder that such a growing evil should spread
and prevail with men that did pretend so much to pretty; and finding that they
cried up the authority of the Scripture, as of men that did plead for baptism
of children, had nothing to countenance their doctrine, but humane authority,
and set up men's inventions contrary to the Scriptures; when I saw that these
An^^^ptists did so earnestly plead for the authority of Scriptures, and declare
themselves so devoted to the rule of Gods Word, I had compassion on the
affections of these men, willingly granting that that was indeed the rule we
ought all to be guided by, I did as unpartially sift, how truly and faithfully
they had dealt in the applying themselves to this sacred rule: I perceived,
that they did rather steal away the heats of men with the show only of
pretended respect unto the Scriptures, then that they did with d^sing aged
spirits search into the sense and meaning of the Holy Ghost, as men desirous to
be lead by the authority of God. I heard men cry up Scripture, Scripture,
nothing would prevail with them but Scripture. I resolved to concur with them
in this, that the Scripture and only Scripture ought to be our ride, in these
supernatural things of Gods worship: and if I could have found that they had
argued rightly out of Scripture, I should have most willingly joined with them;
but examining the sincerity of their dealing herein, I saw them carried on with
a spirit of pride, imagining, that because children had been baptized, and that
those men which had maintained childrens baptism, had maintained other errors;
therefore in the disaffection that they bear unto former times, they were
resolved to wrap up baptism of children among other things, and throw out it
also, together with those things that were indeed spurious and humane, out of
the worship of God: they could not endure man's inventions in Gods worship, and
therein their zeal was good, if their knowledge had been answerable: but here I
saw much pride, veiled under the cloak of piety, men carrying on their opinions
with opposition and clamor of multitudes, rather then with sobriety and
diligent enquiry into the state of the question: But whilst I saw this humor,
wandering in the lower region of the unlearned, I did not so much wonder,
though I were much moved for their sakes, because their souls were as precious
to me as other men's, yet when I heard that it soared aloft among the learned, I
thought it then high time to bestir my self, to search into the ground and
reason, why they also with others might be deceived in that point: wherein I
took some pains to search into the cause, and have for the public good given
some small account thereof: and here I will turn sceptique with Mr. Tombs, and
examine whether our books have stated up the question of Anabaptists high
enough, and have sufficiently cleared those Scriptures that are cited in the
controversies. For my part, I conceive, that the main reason that has so much
prevailed with the multitude, is, because the ceremony of circumcision being
put down, and that being required of the Jews; so as that every circumstance of
time, qualification of the person is express, he must be a male in the family
of some believer: and no such plainness is used in the matter of the Sacrameut
of baptism; for want whereof, ignorant persons have proclaimed the baptism of
Infants, will worship, because it is not said in plain terms, ye shall baptize
children; this may be an excuse to men at first sight and consideration, but
upon nearer enquiry; let it be considered, whether the different manner of the
phrase between the Gospel and the Law, has not put the difference. The service
of the Law was in shadows and types; therefore the external rise was plain:
they had not any ground at all from reason, no, not grounded upon the Word for
the use of them: the authority of God did fall upon the rise it self
immediately, without any other explication, but that it was the confirmation and
seal of the Covenant made with Abraham and his seed, whereby they were made
partakers of the blessing in Christ, the seed of Abraham: Now, the Gospel does
declare the promise to Abraham more plainly, and our ingrafting into Christ by
baptism more distinctly, according to the nature of the sacrament; and in a
more rational way, entitling us to the promise, requiring the Ministers of the
Gospel to baptize all nations, males and females: without any limitation of
years or sex, whereby the proffer of grace is made to all nations: the seal of
this proffer is baptism, whereby we are ingrafted into Christ, the promised
seed; the promise of the Gospel is plainly declared to be the promise made to
Abraham, enlarged not in it self, but by virtue of more ample dispensation: the
promise to Abraham was not only to Abraham and his seed, but to all nations of
the earth, though by providence before Christ, kept within the nation of the
jews. The ignorance, or not attendance on this different manner of
administration have caused men sorigorously to require such express direction
in point of administration of the sacrament of baptism; and by this means
brought themselves into such difficulty, that if they should stand to their
principles, they could not sinde out any way to administer the sacrament of
baptism at all, unto any person whatsoever, for want of more plain and
particular direction: And thus, while they go about to insist upon the Letter,
and require the regulation of the Ordinance of Christ, to their own fancy, they
make the Gospel more obscure then the Law, contrary to the constant declaration
of the Gospel which proclaims it more plain and full, more distinct and
clear, then the cloudy, weak, and childish manifestations of the Law: The Law
says, circumcise a child at eight days old in the family of Abraham, or any
other believer; baptize all nations, says the Gospel: circumcise males, says
the Law; males and females says the Gospel: circumcise, this is my Covenant,
says the Law most obscurely; baptize into Christ, by whom we have access by
faith into grace, Romans 5.2. most plainly says the Gospel: The Law gives the
ceremony therein most obscurely, wrapping up the promise of Christ; the Gospel
promises Christ most plainly, and most rationally drawing after it the
sacrament of baptism; children are in Christ by election of grace, before they
are born; this is plainly set down in the Gospel, but obscurely intimated in
the Law. Now, sacramentally men are ingrafted into Christ by baptism, but
personally to judge men faithful, and thereby in Christ, before they were
ingrafted into him, were a contradiction in adjecto; therefore are men
appointed to baptize and preach the Word as being able to administer externalls
only. The second delusion is, in that they interpret the histories of the Acts
of the Aposties, wherein historically is related, that persons baptized did
believe, not that confession, or profession of faith was made to the Apostles;
and that the persons baptized had their faith approved by the Apostles; and
that that was the ground upon which they baptized them, which is a plain
addition to the Scripture: But my earnest request to Mr. Thombes, and all other
Anabaptists, is, to look on the doctrine of the Gospel, in a more spiritual
way, then to subject it to such a gross and carnal apprehension, and find
out some means in a more satisfactory way to state the promise of the Gospel
according to the Word of God, then heretofore.

Yours in the Lord, William Hussy.


July 1. 1646.
I Have perused this Answer to Mr. Tombs his Book against Pedobaptisme, or the
baptizing of children; and finding it to be, in my judgment, solid and
judicious, I do allow it to be printed and published.

John Downame.

SATISFACTION TO Mr. Tombs his scepticall Exercitation Concerning
Infants-Baptisme.
THe Method that I shall take in the handling this Controversy shall be,
first, to state the Doctrine of Baptism, as it was delivered by Christ, and
understood by the Apostles, as may appear by their practice; then answer the
sophismes and fallcies of Anabaptists, and in particular, of Mr. Tombs; and
lastly, some arguments to prove the lawfulness of childrens baptism: As for
the baptism of John, it was of God; God sent him to baptize, but as the
Ministry, so the Baptism of John was personal, began and ended in him; he was
not a Minister of the Gospel, he was the greatest of the Prophets, but the
least in the kingdom of Heaven is greater then he; he was precurser, the
forerunner of Christ, of whose baptism the Scripture is so silent, (if you
consider the form and nature of it) that we may quickly affirm more of it then
we can be able to prove: As for Christ making Disciples, and his Disciples
baptizing, the Scripture likewise speaks little, only that Christ made
Disciples, and his Disciples baptized them: during the time of Christ's abode
upon earth, he did all things well, but some things he did which he was not
pleased to reveal to us, what is written, is written for our learning; and so
much is written, as by believing we may have eternal life.

In things that are liable to no difficulty, a greater liberty of words is
used: as, Go preach the Gospel to every creature; here men cannot easily
mistake, because none are capaple of the Gospel but reasonable creatures: So in
the Commission, Christ says, Make Disciples of all nations, baptising them in
the name of the Father Son and holy Ghost. Here Christ gives a Commission to
make all nations his scholars, baptizing them, and teaching them what he
commands: Here our Savior is plain in the manner and form of Baptisine that
was new and unknown: concerning the doctrine they should teach, he tells
them, he will give special command what they should teach; and for the
subject, that being before limited to Jews, is now extended to the Gentiles
also: but what should be the qualification of persons to be baptized is not
said, neither does the Apostles any where declare, or give any thing in charge
to Timothy or Titus, (to whom St. Paul wrote, as unto Ministers of the Gospel,
to acquaint them with their duty) as matter of any difficulty wherein they
might easily fail: and in 1 Cor. 1. he by occasion speaking of Baptism,
speaks of that, as of a thing consisting in form of words, and outward rite
of washing, (so as it is ministerially to be performed) wherein no such
difficulty was, or danger of mistake; and therefore he had little care thereof,
men of meaner qualifications might do that; yet were the Corinthians baptized
before he wrote to them, and a Church; In all the dogmaticall parts of
Scripture, not one word concerning any direction to the Minister whom he should
baptize, whereby it is plain, that Christ did not charge his Disciples with any
danger of mistake in baptizing, they should teach what Christ had or should
command, for matter of doctrine; and Christ does refer the commission to
future direction; but in all the Scripture no farther explanation concerning
the persons that were to be baptized: The Churches were baptized no man knows
by whom. To Churches and Saints, men received into the Church, is all the
doctrine of the Apostles directed, whereby it appears, that they had care to
teach all that Christ by his Spirit did command; but so little is spoken
concerning the persons to be baptized, or the manner of administration, more
then is in the commission; that it may plainly appear, no controversies were
raised concerning that: it was a plain case wherein they walked, without
dispute; or, it seems, suspicion of controversy, though light enough be
given to the truth; so that Antipedobaptists, without offending against plain
Scripture, can have no ground to oppose the baptism of Infants by those
inartificiall and groundless arguments which they urge against it; and
certainly, it was long ere much was said, and the strength of that which is
said, will appear. What is gathered out of the commission, Go, make Disciples
of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
teaching them, etc. we shall consider:

Nations is the subject, that is so clear, that Mr. Tombs confesses it, though
with this limitation, nations that are made Disciples; which limitation can
receive no color without apparent alteration of the words. First, make them
Disciples, and then baptize them, says Mr. Tombs: three words are added,
(first, and, then,) the words plainly import, make Disciples by baptizing them
and teaching. I have added nothing but the word by; and that is implied in the
participiall expression, as may appear to all English men that understand
their own tongue: as in the like phrase; make, or build houses, laying the
foundations on the tock, and raising the walls and roof of lasting and durable
matter, do not these participles express the manner of doing? or, may a man
gather from hence that the house must be built before the foundation must be
laid? Again, the word nations, is a Noune of multitude, and the very commission
seems to point at the nation of the Jews for the pattern, that they should
call other nations into covenant with God even after the same manner as the
Jews have been, by virtue of the same promise; and thus it is apparent, the
Apostles all understood it. Paul, both to the Romans, Rom 4 11. and Gal. 3.17.
does argue, that the promise might stand the same to us, as was to Abraham,
though circumcision be taken away, for as much as the promise was before
circumcision, even to Abraham; and there might remain the circumcision of the
heart, though the outward circumcision were taken away, and Baptism put in the
place of it; and from this promise, Acts 2.39. S. Peter argues to Baptism,
the promise belongs to you, therefore be baptized. If then Baptism may be
tendered to nations, nations may receive baptism, that is, it may be, nay, it
must be received by a national covenant, the nation of the Jews were only in
covenant with God before Christ; but all nations after Christ has broken down
the partition wall. Now principally a national covenant does consist in this,
that the most principal of the nation do covenant for the rest, the more
considerable part do receive for the rest, and require performance of others
their inferiors. God laid circumcision upon the Jews under a penalty, which is
a national way of receiving; God commands all to be circumcised by a Law,
under a penalty, that person that was not circumcised, must be cut off, Genesis
17.14. that the whole nation might be circumcised. If any shall object, that
the Jews were all to be circumcized under a penalty, but the penalty was
appointed of God. I answer, that was an especial privilege of the Jews, that
they had their civil Laws from God, but what lies upon a nation as a duty,
that it may require of all, and cut off them that refuse; and this is implied
in the commission, when nations shall covenant to be Disciples, which may be
done by a part for the whole, then are such as are in commission from Christ
commanded to baptize and teach the whole nation, such as are in authority may
covenant in a national way for the inferior sort, and justly require all
external performances from them, such as Baptism, and submission to be taught
are; as for faith, and internal performance, no creature can judge of that, or
require it of another in a judicial way.

If any object that the Apostles did not execute their commission, but upon
such parties as did believe, and would be baptized.

I answer, a commission cannot be executed in full extent, until opportunity
be gotten; he that has a commission to hang up all the thieves in the kingdom,
must execute it as he may; he must hang them as he can catch them: as soon as
they could procure a national willingness, they were ready to baptize them,
as by the many thousands baptized by them the same day of their conversion may
appear, taking them in by families, which act by a national way, the master of
the family covenanting for his servants and children: So Josh. 24.15. I and my
house will serve the Lord; he may not believe for his servant, but he may
covenant for external worship for his son, under a penalty, and for his
servant according to his condition, under penalty, or dismission of service,
that the whole family or nation might come in: And that the Gentiles should in
such a manner flow into the Church, the Prophets do fully testify, Isai. 2.2.
All nations shall flow, etc. See further what light the word Disciple does give
to this sense of the commission. Disciple is a relative, and is referred to
master, to him that gives precepts, which have sanctions of reward, and
punishment annexed; and this is the covenant that is between the master and the
scholar, that he will teach and punish the negligence of the scholar, the
scholar must be under the covenant of submission, or otherwise he can be no
scholar.

Now, note that two ways this covenant of a scholar may be put upon any
person: First, it may be put on with the consent of the scholar: or, secondly,
without, in case of a slave, his Lord may impose what covenants he pleases,
without his consent, if he will live and enjoy his being, the father may, and
that justly, by his interest that he has over his son by nature, put him to
school, and make a scholar of him, even before he be willing to consent; he
may justly carry him, and correct him, if he refuse to be put under the power
of a Schoolmaster, giving his Schoolmaster power to correct him. Now, to send
him to school to Christ, and teach him the precepts of Christ, and this imposed
on the parent of Christ, by his Apostles, Ephesians. 6.4. And ye fathers, provoke
not your children to wrath: but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of
the Lord. And what a parent can do over his child in matter of duty, that may
the parents of the country, the Magistrates, require of the nations. God
requires it of them, they may put all the nation to school to Christ: Now,
what if some of them be too young to learn, yet if they be under the discipline
of the Master, they are scholars? as may appear in many little children that
are set to school, to keep them safe, and from wantonness, before they be of
capacity to learn, many have a hornbook given, more for a play-game, then a
book, yet are they scholars, because under the discipline and correction of
the Master; is it not therefore great reason, that a Christian should dedicate
his child to Christ, to be partaker of the blessing and discipline of Christ?
surely godliness has the promise of this life, and that which is to come.
What, is the Infant capable of no good from Christ? neither in soul nor body?
has Christ nothing to do with him? Christ did bless sucking Infants, and as
he blesses, cannot he likewise punish at pleasure? Why then, if he has power
over all nations, and de jure, they are all under his discipline, may not
Christian parents put their children under the tuition of Christ, seeing,
though they cannot learn, yet he can bless, and has right, and will punish,
which we by baptizing our Infants do but acknowledge? nay, certainly he is an
Infidel that does not think that Christ can teach the Infant by his Spirit,
though we cannot by means that we can use, or that he does not qualify the
souls of the elect Infants, with gifts of grace, not given to reprobates, if
they die in infancy, which though he can, and will without baptism; yet this
is sufficient encouragement for a Christian parent to put his son to school to
Christ, if Christ can teach him, this were a vain thing to think for any
ignorant parent to refuse to put his son to school, because he understands
not Latin or Greek himself; it is sufficient that the Master understands and
knows how to teach. And certainly, words could not have been invented that
could have required the Ministers to baptize all the world, Infants and all,
willing or unwilling; so that any would see they might be taught, and submit to
the precepts and discipline of Christ, then to express it by the word Nation,
and Disciple; and this was plain to them that understood what it was for a
nation to be in covenant with God, whereof there was but one pattern at that
time, and so it does appear the Apostles did understand it as a plain thing: in
that, though often they took occasion to speak of baptism, yet never did
explain this point concerning childrens baptism, as thinking it plain enough
in the pattern: what might justly raise a scruple concerning the baptizing of
women, seeing they were not circumcised, that is, declared in plain terms, both
men and women were baptized. Baptism is in room of circumcision, as in
answering Mr. Tombs his arguments, I hope to make appear. For the further
understanding of this word Disciple, I shall endeavor to set forth the full
latitude of the word: the formal reason of a Disciple, is in relatione ad
Preceptorem, the foundation of which relation is a covenant between the Master
and the scholar, whereby the Master is engaged to deliver precepts, and the
scholar is bound to hear and undergo the penalties of his errors and contempts.

Now, this covenant is either imposed, as in case of a slave, when a Lord does
lay any covenants upon his slave; here the benefits of the covenant be mercies,
the punishments, if less then the greatest, or under any conditions avoidable,
are favors; so Naash, 1 Samuel 11.2. tendered a covenant to put out every one of
the Israelites right eyes, which if he had been able to have destroyed, as he
conceived he was, had been a favor; in this case one party makes the covenant
without mentioning the other but as patient; therefore, Genesis 15.18. God is said
to make a covenant with Abraham, and 17.9. God calls the covenant, his
covenant, God made the promise and conditions, not Abraham; but in Genesis 21.27.
there, when Abraham and Abimeleck did covenant, the Text says, they both made
a covenant, Abraham his conditions, and Abimeleck his.

If the word Disciple be taken in this sense, then it is no more, but tell all
nations, that I am that Prophet that was promised by Moses, 'Deut. 18.18, 19.
and thus Peter Acts 3. and Stephen Acts 7. did make disciples, repeating those
words of Moses, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise to you like unto me,
him shall you hear; and he that will not hear the voice of that Prophet shall
dye the death; and then these words make disciples, do signify no more then
tell all Nations that I am sent of my Father to teach them, and they that will
not hear shall dye the death. Christ without any more ado does give Precepts,
and threaten death to all the world that refuse, and so make disciples is no
more but tell them they are disciples, and under the Precepts of Christ; but if
any acceptance be required of the disciple, the natural father or father of
the Country, may covenant for their children as before.

Secondly, a Disciple may be understood in reference to the end, and that
either actively for a man that is active or diligent to get learning, he is
said to be a Scholar; or passively a man is said to be a Disciple or Scholar
that is learned; and this inchoative vel ad certum aut designatum gradum vel
perfective: if this man that is to be baptized must be taught inchoative, it
will serve turn to have learned one lesson in reference to that one lesson he
is learned, though he has learned but an A the first letter of his Alphabet.
In the second sense men are assigned a certain measure of learning as
sufficient for one calling, another measure for another calling; what degree of
knowledge men must attain to before they be baptized, no man yet has
declared: and in so great a silence of Scripture were an arrogancy
inexcusable; for want whereof, all that is said concerning a Disciple to be
made before baptized, is without any regularity and certainty; if it be
understood perfective, then a man must never be baptized, if not before he be
made perfectly learned; whereby it appears that we cannot be said to be made
learned in disposition to Baptism, but as before made Scholars in relation to
Christ our Master by Baptism in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
being taught the precepts of Christ.

Mr. Tombs 127. p. falls upon this as urged by some obscure person, but
says it is so foolish, that no man will say so but he that is out of his wit,
but he in the mean time answers it no better then by saying if this were
true, the Apostles needed to have done nothing else then to baptize them: I
think if ever a man were out of his wit, it was here; Christ says, make
Disciples by baptising them and teaching them, if he mean so, need they only
baptize them, and not teach them? or if they were made Scholars, must they not
be taught when they are scholars? in what sense does this man take scholar?
surely in such a sense that he need be taught no more: if he must be a Disciple
in such a sense before he be baptized, it were a bold adventure for any
Minister to baptize any man, or if he did, the party baptized must be taught
no more: if baptising would make Disciples, the Apostles need do no more, this
were a good excuse for not preaching Priests. It is plain Christ commands to
baptize and teach; what if a man do perform part of his duty, is he discharged
of the other part? the command is in conjunctive terms both must be performed.
But Mr. Tombs fell on that obiter, and I have vindicated it for the true sense
of the words which he so scornfully rejected: but I further prove it.

What do not (...) and (...) being active participles, express the action of
their verbes: and is not (...) the end, is not every action to an end? yes
certainly, and to make Disciples is the end, inrolling them by Baptism, and
after teaching them the means. I desire that men may not be outfaced from
principles and rules. But I hasten to try the strength of Mr. Tombs his
arguments.

He confuteth this practice, that Infants borne of Believers are universally to
be baptized; for my part I state not the question so, but Infants borne in a
Nation that are the Disciples of Christ, or have received the Gospel, are to
be baptized: of Believers much more, if presented by them; and they undertake
to instruct them by themselves or others in the precepts of Christ.

But let us see Mr. Tombs his sophismes, That which has no testimonies of
Scripture that is doubtful.

Infants baptism has no testimony of Scripture, ergo doubtful.

The minor Mr. Tombs labors to prove by an induction, but it wants form;
he should have said, and sic de ceteris, none of all these places might prove
this, and yet it might have testimony from some other place: but I will follow
him in his exceptions, and see how just they are against the testimonies
produced.

The first testimony which he pretends accurately to examine, Genesis 17.7. etc.
I pass by his jingle, he raises 14 arguments raised out of several places of
Scripture as urged in defense of Paedobaptisme, which he answers, whose
answers I shall endeavor to examine, and see how the arguments are as he
urges them, or as they may be urged from this place of Genesis: to whom the
Gospel Covenant agrees, to them the sign of the Gospel Covenant agrees; but
to Infants of Believers the Gospel Covenant agrees, therefore the sign of the
Gospel Covenant, and consequently Baptism. That Mr. Tombs might prepare for
an answer, he shows a great deal of his accurate skill, he examines four
supposita, things granted on the part of Pedobaptists, and converteth them into
questions, stateth them apart, and so endeavors to take away the strength of
the argument.

1. Whether the Covenant made with Abraham, and the Gospel Covenant be the
same? Mr. Tombs denies with this difference, that the Covenant with Abraham
was mixed, but (with respect to Mr. Tombs, his opinion of learning he has
gotten) he begins at the worng end to prove it: for a Gospel Covenant
between God and man, takes in all the Covenants that now are, or ever were
since the fall between God and man: God was never in covenant with any man or
Nation, but in Christ: Christ is the adequate subject of the Gospel: this
Gospel was preached from heaven by the Angels, Luke 2.10. (...), I preach the
Gospel, which was in these words, Unto you is borne this day in the City of
David a Savior which is Christ the Lord: Certainly whatsoever the Saints enjoy
upon earth, or shall enjoy in heaven, they enjoy it in and for Christ. Whereas
Mr. Tombs distinguishes the promises made to Abraham into Evangelicall,
Domestical and Civil promises; what had Abraham some things in Christ and
some things out of Christ? godliness has the promises of this life and that
which is to come. Now to deny the promises of this life to belong to Abraham
under Evangelicall promise, or to distinguish individualls by specificall
difference, is strange Divinity and stranger Logic, is reason of different
nature in Peter and Paul, or is Paul's reason of another nature then Peter's,
because he uses some particular arguments that Peter does not? Abraham had the
blessings of his house, and others have the blessings of their families: and
Gal. 3.9. Paul tells us, that they which believe are blessed with faithful
Abraham, they are not blessed only as the seed of Abraham, but as Abraham they
are fountains of blessing to their seed through faith in Christ; and that does
that inference clearly prove that Abraham was entitled to the blessing by his
faith, tanquam medio, as by the means, and therefore is faithful repeated in
the argument with Abraham, that those that believe are blessed not with
Abraham, but faithful Abraham; and further says, not that the faithful are
blessed with the seed of Abraham, but with Abraham, they that believe have as
full a right to the promise as Abraham himself: the same Covenant, the same
blessing, remains to us with Abraham: as for those particular differences they
are but numericall, and make no difference in the promise, no more then the
difference of Peter and Paul do in mankind: Abraham had his family blessings,
we have ours: Logica non tractat aut definit particularia: if any shall say
that his being father of Christ after the flesh puts a mixture of the
Covenant, and makes it of another nature: I deny that it does any more vary
the nature of the Covenant, then a badge of honor does the nature of man, and
this shall appear in that so much of the covenant as was sealed to Abraham by
circumcision comes down to us; and if Abraham had any blessing that came not
to us, that was not sealed to him by circumcision, forasmuch as all the benefit
that Abraham and his natural or faithful seed had of circumcision, that the
Believer has without circumcision. For though it be true that circumcision was
given to all indefinitly, yet the benefit of circumcision came only to the
faithful both before and after Christ came: and this is so plainly set down
by Saint Paul, that nothing can be more plain, that circumcision was of force
to Abraham by faith, Romans 4.9.10. Faith was reckoned to Abraham when he was
uncircumcised, and that he received circumcision as a seal of the
righteousness of faith: and in verse 12. he says, that Abraham was father of
circumcision to them that were uncircumcised; where he implied that those that
were uncircumcised were circumcised in a sense: and this is farther affirmed of
them who are in Christ Jesus by faith, Col. 2.10. that they are circumcised
with circumcision made without hands; and this circumcision with hands is
specified, Ephesians. 2.11. Ye were uncircumcised with circumcision in the flesh
made with hands, implied that they were circumcised in the heart: what other
sense can be rendered of this circumcision of heart, but that that cleanness of
heart which was signified to our fathers by circumcision, remains to us
though the seal be altered? and this is that usual setting down of
Evangelicall duties and benefits by ceremonial expressions: We under the
Gospel are circumcised in heart without hands. Now how could that be, unless
the internal part of circumcision did remain to us? And this Mr. Tombs p. 33.
does confess that the substance of the Covenant does remain; but still
helps himself with his mixed covenant, which I have formerly denied, and
shall presently evince: the different manner of administration does not alter
the Covenant: God did set forth, his promises of Heaven by Canaan: was
punctual in the ceremonies; but the ceremonies did lead those that believed to
better then the bare ceremony, without which, circumcision and all their
service was utterly without use or benefit; God did in special manner bless
those outward duties to his elect, because they were his own Ordinances,
causing them to see more in those types, then they in their own nature do
seem to manifest. And thus Mr. Tombs confesses, that the promises that were
Evangelicall in the more inner sense of the Holy Ghost, do point at the
privileges of Abraham's house in the outward face of the words: so that it may
be doubted whether this Covenant made with Abraham may be called simply
Evangelicall: and this doubt is made the more just, because Mr. Tombs, and
some of his company do not call the Covenant on Mount Sinai simply
Evangelicall: what have you distinguished between mixed and pure Gospel
Covenants, on purpose to make the Covenant with Abraham mixed, and is it now
doubtful? and therefore doubtful, because Master Tombs and others do call
the Covenant on Mount Sinai mixed: What if they miscall it? What ground then of
the doubt? away with such groundless doubts: for we call that Covenant, and
all the Covenants that God made with man since the fall, purely Evangelicall,
without any mixture at all; and let Mr. Tombs, or any of his company prove the
contrary: in the mean time, let me entreat Mr. Tombs, and all other that
meddle with controversies, to make no more distinctions nor limitations, then
laws of division and limitation will allow: For, though at first they may win
applause for their novelty, yet after ages will see their vainity, if any of
them be taken up in a tract, yet times will come that will find them out: But
all this while, Mr. Tombs does not tell us what part of the covenant was sealed
by circumcision, or whether circumcision did respect principally the
domestical part or civil, or Evangelicall part, or equally all; nor show any
reason why the Gospel covenant will not admit any such mixture as he supposes;
but I do not love to insult over a weak argument, or strike an adversary when
he is dead.

Secondly, Mr. Tombs comes to distinguish the seed of Abraham, I will not
trouble my self to repeat or take notice of what Mr. Tombs says well, but of
such passages as he lays down, upon which he purposes to raise something
against childrens baptism: He indeavoureth to prove, that the seed of
believing Gentiles, were not the seed of Abraham, the reason is, because Mr.
Tombs does not find them so called: a man may not hear himself or his
neighbor called a man in many years; nay, suppose they were never so called,
were they therefore no men? But it is most plain, that the seed of believing
Gentiles were the seed of Abraham; for that is the knot of the question, and
God himself does decide it. All that were by Gods appointment to be
circumcised, were in some sense or other the seed of Abraham: or, otherwise
there had been no need at all of calling the faithful the seed of Abraham: But
because they are partakers of the benefit of the promise, made to the seed of
Abraham: And this is made plain in the doctrine of S. Paul, he handles this
promise to Abraham and his seed, not as the words do import, but as they carry
the blessing of Abraham, without reference to circumcision or uncircumcision,
showing that circumcision was annexed to the promise but for a time, was but
accidental to the promise, and might be taken away, the promise remaining:
This the Apostle does most artificially prove, according to rules of art: For,
Romans 4.10. his purpose was to prove, that now they were not to retain
circumcision, Christ being come, and baptism being set in the place and room
of it; and that notwithstanding the promise made to Abraham did remain; now
that he might prove that, he shows that circumcision was not a proper passion
to Abraham and his seed flowing from the promise, as the cause, and therefore
may be separated from the promise; circumcision belonging rather to the
ceremonial administration then the essence of the promise; rather to the
external part of the worship then the efficacy and virtue of the promise; and
this he proves: First, because the promise was of force to Abraham through
faith, before circumcision, and therefore, prior tempore, before, in time to
circumcision, which it could not have been, if it had flowed from the promise
as the cause: For, though the immediate cause be before its effect in nature,
yet not in time; man is not rationalis before risibilis, and therefore as the
promise was before circumcision, so it may continue after.

Object. But the promise was made to Abraham's seed, which we are not. To this I
answer, the promise was made to one seed, not many, which is Christ, as Calvin
and Beza explain it, not of the person of Christ, but believers in Christ;
implying, that though there were a distinction between Jews and Gentiles, yet
by faith in Christ they were all one, and the argument in Gal. 3.28. does
clearly show this; neither Jew nor Greek, bond nor free, all one in Christ
Jesus. Abraham had but one blessed seed to whom the promise was made, which is
Christ, says the Text, verse. 16. But I have proved the promise was not made to
Christ in person as the seed of Abraham; but the seed of Abraham is reckoned in
Christ, and the word Christ is taken for the mystical body of Christ his
Church of the elect, which in reference to the promise are but one seed,
whether Jew or Gentile, so are the blessings and sufferings of the Church
reckoned the sufferings of Christ. So that this seed of Abraham in reference to
the promise, was never understood of Abraham's seed, according to the flesh, but
by faith: And here note, that this is not an univocall division; as if the
members did not coincidere, or, that some were the seed of Abraham according to
the flesh, and none of them his seed by faith, and others by faith his seed
that were none of them his seed in the flesh; nay, but this distinction is in
reference to the promise as distinct from circumcision; all those were not of
the seed according to promise, that were the seed of Abraham according to the
flesh; no, not of Isaac, but the believers, these are the seed of Abraham
according to promise, Gal. 3.29. If ye be Christ's, them are ye Abraham's seed,
and heirs according to promise, else not: And this is not to distinguish Jews
from Gentiles, but believing Jews from infidels, and to draw the whole virtue
of the promise on Believers: so the promise is belonging to Abraham through
faith, and the seed of Abraham, as the word seed is understood in the promise,
and in the estimation of God is the Believer only; so that the seed of Abraham
by faith, and the seed unto whom the promise of God to Abraham did belong are
the same, the seed of Abraham and the Believer, whether Jew or Gentile, whether
before or after Christ, are all one, in the estimation of God: So that the seed
of Abraham that were blessed were believers only, not all the seed of Abraham,
nay, nor all the seed of Isaac, but in Isaac, that is, in Christ, that was the
seed of Isaac, all that were in Isaac, that is in Christ, of whom Isaac was a
type, that is, believers only, not all the seed of Isaac; for the promise did
not belong to Esau that was the seed of Isaac; for that, though he were the
seed of Isaac, yet he was not in Isaac, that is, he was not inserted into Isaac
as a type of Christ by faith; and therefore the seed must be so understood that
the promise might belong to all the seed, Romans 4.16. not to that which is of
the Law only, but that which is of the faith of Abraham; not to them only which
were circumcised according to Law, but to believers, though not circumcised,
(that is, after circumcision was taken away by appointment of God: For, though
circumcision was not so natural and essential to the promise, that it was
enough at any time to entitle any to the promise without faith; yet, virtute
institutionis divina, was not to be omitted until God took it away;) for the
promise was not to Abraham through the Law, therefore not through circumcision,
which was a legal right, but (...) the righteousness of faith, verse. 13. to
let us know that it was not any (...) rite or sacrament that can entitle to the
promise, it does but externally (...) the virtue of Christ's blood, and by it
the circumcision of the (...) the sight of God is the only circumcision, Romans
2.29. He is a Jew (...) and circumcision is of the heart, in the Spirit, not in
the (...) not of men, but of God. All this while the Scripture treats (...)
Abraham in the estimation of God: God accounts none the seed (...) Abraham
but in Christ, none heirs of the promise but in Christ, none circum^^^^^^ (...)
them that are in Christ, and therefore says, Romans 2.28. that is not cir^ (...)
in the flesh, and this, ex regula de nullo. Again, ex (...), all that are in
Christ Jesus, that is believers, are the seed of Abraham, heirs of the promise,
circumcised in heart; but these have their estimation and praise not of m^n,
but of God, and these are equally denied and affirmed to Abraham's s^^d, and
Gent^^es according as they are believers, or not believers, (...) without any
respect a^ all to Abraham's seed according to the flesh; so that Abraham's (...)
had no right at all to any part of the promise in the estimation of (...) they
did not (...); and therefore, Romans 9.8. they that are the children of the
(...), that is, Abraham's fresh, are not the children of God, the children of
the promise a^ accounted for the seed; and therefore, in Genesis 12.3. the Lord
did make the promise not to Abraham and his seed only, but from Abraham he
derived the blessing upon all the families of the earth; all the families of
the earth were blessed in Abraham: Or, as Genesis 22.18. all nations are blessed
in the seed of Abraham; and therefore do Interpreters interpret that former by
[thee] that is, in thy seed, and all that are in Christ, are plainly the heirs
of the promise, and none but they. Abraham in honor and title, was called the
fountain of the blessing, but in de^d and truth, not Abraham, but Christ; for
Abraham himself was blessed in Christ, not in himself, as Christ was; Christ
was only blessed and justified in and for his own holiness by the works of the
Law inherent in himself; So that Mr. Tombs his division of Abraham's seed
(...), Christ's spiritual seed believers, natural seed is most inartificiall,
many of his natural seed were spiritual also: Abraham's seed must be divded
into equivocall and univocall; equivocall seed Christ, for that he was not like
Abraham he was of Abraham, but ex part, according to the flesh, Romans 1.3. He
was Abraham's Lord, as well as his son; his Savior, as well as his seed: he was
the promised seed, not the seed unto ^^^^om the promise did belong, as the seed
of Abraham, but that seed that was the fountain of blessing to Abraham and all
other his seed: and therefore Christ was the blessing it self, the promise that
was made to Abraham and his seed, was through the righteousness of faith, Romans
4.13. but the blessing came not on Christ through the righteousness of faith,
seeing the righteousness of faith is derivative from Christ to Abraham:
Christ's righteousness was primitive in himself, and that very righteousness
that became Abraham's by faith: and therefore is Christ the inheritance of
Abraham and all the faithful seed, Esaias 42.6. he is called the Covenant of the
people, and a light to the Gentiles.

Secondly, Abraham's univocall seed were like unto himself in relation to the
promise; the word seed in the promise, I will be thy God, and the God of thy
seed, is only the faithful, nothing belonging to the seed of Abraham's flesh,
but so as they are faithful, nor excluding any Nation, or family, or person in
the earth, so as faithful: as for Abraham's seed according to the flesh, if not
faithful, non est nostri instituti; it is not belonging to the doctrine of the
Promise to consider of them at all, Romans 2.29. they were not to be reckoned
among the circumcised by God. Now for the particular application of this
promise to this Nation or that, in one age to the family of Abraham according
to the flesh, in another age to the Gentiles; in one age under the seal of
circumcision, in another of Baptism; sometimes to give a Nation the means of
Grace, Word, and Sacraments, sometimes to lead them away into captivity; these
things were ordered according to the particular determination and purpose of
God, though God did in a more peculiar manner bless the seed of Abraham then
other Nations, with the enjoyment of Word and Sacraments, and other blessings,
yet they had them together with the land of Canaan, and the place of Gods
worship; only on conditions of faith and obedience, as in Deuteronomy. 28. and 29.
chapters, and by the many threatenings of removal of them by the Prophets, and
their actual captivities may appear; so that these graces of faith and
obedience come on this or that Nation or person according to the purpose of
Gods will, as likewise effectual operation of the Word, and the particular
effect of the Sacrament under the means of Word and Sacraments, wholly depend
on the mercy of God according to the election of grace. Men are to administer
the outward rite and sacrament according to the ordination of God: God by his
Spirit bestows his grace, and withholds it from whom he pleases: The
Jews were tied to the eight day to sign the flesh with circumcision; but it
was God that circumcised the heart, without which, the circumcision of the
flesh was no circumcision in the estimation of God; as Romans 2.28. which man
cannot nor ought to take notice of, it is the way of God, no man knows it; it
is God that gives the new name that no man knows but he that has it. Those
that have this inward grace of circumcision, are called and accounted by God
for the seed of Abraham, but whom must Abraham for his part in reference to
this promise, account for his seed? the covenant on Gods part is to be the God
of Abraham and his seed, which God knows how to extend to Jew and Gentile, and
limit to believers even among Abraham's family. But Abraham had laid on him that
he should circumcise, but he cannot walk by Gods rules in the estimation of
his seed, Genesis 17.10. This is my covenant that ye keep between me and you, and
thy seed after thee, every manchilde among you shall be circumcised: the former
part, I will be a God to thee and thy seed, might have served Abraham's turn, if
he had known how to estimate his seed, as God did by the believer, but that was
past Abraham's skill, therefore must Abraham have another rule set him to walk
by; and lest Abraham insisting on the word seed should debar many from
circumcision of the flesh, whom God did intend to circumcise in heart; he is
charged with his duty in plain terms, 12.13. verse, Every manchilde in your
generations, he that is borne in the house or bought with money of any stranger
that is not of thy seed. And Exodus 12.48. When a stranger shall sojourne with
thee, and will keep the Passover to the Lord, let all his males be
circumcised, and then let him come near and keep the Passover, for no
uncircumcised person shall eat thereof, one law shall be to him that is
homeborne, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among you: so you see how
Abraham was to count his seed, not only those that were indeed his seed, but
those that were of his family, not so only, but the seed of believing Gentiles,
were to be the accounted seed of the promise: one law must be to the stranger
that sojourneth, and to the natural seed of Abraham: the believing Gentile
that would keep the Passover, must be subject to the same law with Abraham: he
must circumcise not only himself, but all his males, and the reason is,
because no uncircumcised person may eat thereof: the master of the family might
not be accounted a circumcised person, unless all his males were circumcised,
because that was the law of circumcision, that he that was circumcised himself,
must circumcise all his males, because the blessing of Abraham was a family
blessing, as Genesis 12.3. In thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed;
and that which is there rendered by families, is in 18.18. rendered by Nations,
All the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him: seeing all families, and
all nations be of the same extent. Thus ye see plainly demonstrated that
Abraham and believing Gentiles were to understand the seed of Abraham in
reference to the promise of the seed of believing Gentiles, which Mr. Tombs
does not find.

You see the promise made to Abraham and all families, and all nations
performed in some families, even under the law of circumcision, the families of
strangers, the males that were borne in the house or bought with money, were
reckoned as Abraham's males; but this stranger that would keep the Passover,
must circumcise his males not under the name of Abraham's males, not as borne in
Abraham's house, nor bought with money, but under the name of the seed of such a
stranger that would keep the Passover; they could have no right to
circumcision, but as the seed of believing Gentiles. Again, you see this
promise is made to all Nations in Abraham, which must have a time of
performance in that sense also: but this was never performed in any national
capacity before Christ's time; yet God never makes a promise, but he takes a
time in some sense or other to perform: but we see notwithstanding this
promise, God had not any Nation blessed but the Jews, and therefore does St.
Paul plainly interpret that part of the promise concerning Nations in reference
to Nations after Christ, Gal. 3.8. the Scripture foreseeing that God would
justify the heathen through faith preached before the Gospel to Abraham
saying, In thee shall all the nations of the earth be blessed: see God made his
promise to Abraham, and all families, all nations; he began with Abraham and
his, and some other few Gentiles families, and after refers the performance
of the promise as it concerns all Nations to the times wherein he foresaw
that the Nations would believe.

3. Question, whether there be the same reason of Circumcision and Baptism in
signing the Gospell-covenant? To this Mr. Tombs says, that the substance of
the Gospell-covenant was the same in all ages, yet this covenant has had
diverse forms and sanctions, where after abundance of words to prove diversity
of forms and sanctions, he endeavors to prove a diversity of the form and
sanction of the covenant with Abraham, and form, sanction, and accomplishment
of the new Testament covenant: and from thence he infers his conclusion in
these words. Whence I gather that there is not the same reason of circumcision
and baptism in signing the Evangelicall covenant; nor may there be an argument
drawn from the adminstration of one, to the like manner of administration of
the other. I have heard very much of Mr. Tombs his learning, and now I see
wherein it lies, in drawing that out of premises that no man else can draw,
and making syllogisms with two conclusions, toto coelo, diverse, and yet make
them arise from the same premises: this is the learning so much magnified.

That which he principally gathers is, that there is not the same reason of
circumcision and baptism in sealing the Gospell-covenant. For my part I know
but two ways of signations or sealings, one natural, the other ex instituto
divino vel humane. Now I conceive both circumcision and baptism do sign or
seal sacramentally, and by divine institution; and therefore there is the same
reason of both their sealings. Now the different form of the covenant makes
no difference in the seal: If it be an obligation for money, or a lease under
large or ample covenants, or a conveyance of inheritance, wherein one parcel
of land of an acre, or one freehold, or more; one manor, or more, makes no
difference in the seal or signature, neither does it vary the reason of the
seal, which are ex humano instituto obligatori: neither does the difference of
the covenant with Abraham, and the Evangelicall covenant if differing, as Mr.
Tombs would have, make any difference in the reason of the signing of the
Gospell-covenant by circumcision and baptism: for grant that circumcision did
seal both Evangelicall and Political, and baptism only Evangelicall
covenants, yet they did both seal Evangelicall promises, and for the same
reason, because God had appointed them to be seals: neither does the mixture of
one promise with another alter the operation of the seal, seeing the seal
does work as strongly upon every part of the covenant, or every promise in the
covenant, as if there were but one promise in all, or as if every covenant or
promise had a single deed and single seal: but all this while what Mr. Tombs
has here assigned as differences in form and sanction, are differences in
matter, not in form or sanction: promises, the things granted in the covenant
belong to the matter of the covenant, not to either form or sanction: things
promised, whether Evangelicall or Political, past, present, or to come, belong
only to the matter of the covenant, and do not vary the reason of their
sealing, which makes the collection of Mr. Tombs seem to me very strange; and
so much the more, because it has the testimony among other things of a learned
collection.

But, lest I might be answered, that this was affirmed but barely, I shall
desire that all learned men would consider what be formal differences of
covenants, and what makes the differences of sanctions.

The formal differences of a covenant may be considered, either different i^
formis verborum, that is, when the same thing is granted in different forms of
words: as when Christ is promised under the seed of the woman and the seed of
Abraham. Secondly, covenants are said to differ formally; if one covenant be
absolute, the other conditional, one free, the other upon valuable
consideration; the one upon a condition already performed, the other upon a
remaining condition of service or rent; the one voluntary on both parties, the
other voluntary on the one part only, and on the other imposed: These, or such
like, are formal differences in the nature of a covenant; as for formality of
words, difference in them will not make an absolute covenant conditional, or
the like: And consider, I pray you, what formal differencee is there in the
covenant with Abraham, and the Evangelicall covenant in Mr. Tombs his own
sense? was not the covenant with Abraham and the Evangelicall promise upon the
same condition in Christ through faith? were not both in Christ upon the same
valuable consideration in our selves equally free? Do not we all stand bound to
faith and obedience under both covenants, as you distinguish them? Did not God
equally impose on us all the means of our salvation? Where then is the formal
difference in these covenants you talk of? unless you mean verbis formalibus,
which make no difference in law or equity. Your difference you talk of, is but
in matter, which I have formerly proved to be but imaginary; but grant there
had been a formal difference in the covenant, what had that been to the
difference of the seal that signeth only ex instituto, by the command of God,
conditional, absolute, free, or imposed under covenant performed, or to be
performed, all sealed with the same seal, unless the institution put a
difference.

But now let us consider what difference there is in the sanction: Sanctions
are the ratifications and confirmations of a covenant, upon which the verity
and bounds of the covenant are established: are ^n oath: secondly, a seal:
thirdly, a reward: fourthly, punishment: fifthly, earnest, and perhaps, some
other that my memory and skill will not reach to, but for all these they are
the same to both covenants; for the oath that he swore to Abraham, Genesis 22.16.
is performed in Christ, the substance of the Evangelicall promise in your
sense: and Zacharias* Luke 1.72, 73. does challenge that sanction as ^elonging
to him, and tell^th us plainly, that if Christ had not come to deliver us from
the hands of our enemies, God had not performed his oath to Abraham. Now, if
you look back to that oath, ye shall see that God promised in Abraham, to
bless all the nations of the earth, which was not performed, nay, not to my
one nation besides the Jews, not so much as by way of prosser, until Christ
came under the notion of a nation; but worship was restrained to Jerusalem,
ordinances to the Jews, therefore Christ gave his first commission unto the
lost sheep of the house of Israel, but after his commission was to all nations;
and therefore Saint Paul, Romans 2.10. entitles the Jews to honor, glory, and
peace first, and also to the Gentiles: And in H^^. 6.18. raises comfort after
Christ, from the oath made to Abraham, and from thence I can gather (however it
will sound in Mr. Tombs his cares) that the covenant made with Abraham did
remain after Christ, or else the consolation is but by way of analogy: For,
what comfort can we have from the sanction, if the covenant be void, unless by
way of analogy, with which kind of argument Mr. Tombs is much troubled, when
he raises them against himself, though many of his own arguments be nothing
but analogies? Besides, our Savior does use the same sanction to the
Gospel Covenant in Mr. Tombs his sense, even the covenant which he made with
the believers in the new Testament, he does confirm by an oath, John 5.24.
Verily, he that hearth my Word, and believes on him that sent me, has
everlasting life; as likewise, John 6.47. So that it is plain, this sanction of
an oath was the same unto Abraham and under the Gospel.

Secondly, the sanction of the seal is to both the same; for the difference of
the seal does not make the difference in the sanction, for the confirmation is
the same, whether the seal be a Lion or a Lamb: If a Prince should change his
se^^ from his portrayture to his arms, which he may do, if the Law forbid not,
or by act of Parliament, if it do, yet the sanction would be the same:
circumcision and baptism, though different seals, not different sanctions.

Thirdly, for the rewards, they are the same, hell and heaven are the same; for
that temporal blessing, and mixture of covenant, I have already spoken, to
which I refer my Reader. But grant that there had been several sanctions in
reference to reward and punishment, what had that been to the difference of the
reason, why circumcision and baptism should seal the Evangelicall covenant,
seeing they are both but one sanction, namely, seals? but the change of the
seal does not change that sanction. Thus you see, how weakly this conclusion
will follow from the premises, and likewise, how false it is in it self; they
are both seals, and the reasen of being such, is the same, namely, divine
institution. But for the second conclusion he draws out of the same premises,
is, that baptism and circumcision are not to be administered after the same
manner; did any man ever say that baptism and circumcision should be
adminstred after the same manner, that were a strange and unpossible thing to
imagine?

His third question, whether federate, and to be signed are convertible terms;
and why many were circumcised, to whom no promise in the covenant made with
Abraham did belong: as Ishmael, the same may be said of Esau. And why are these
the only instances, I will grant Mr. Tombs more then he desires, that half
they that were circumcised, were such, unto whom no part of the covenant do
belong: was Abraham able to know that Ishmael was a reprobate, when he
circumcised him? circumcision was administered by the appointment of God, and
was not so intrinsecall to the covenant, that it must be, Proprium quart^ mod^,
proprium tertio mod^, omni s^li non semper, will serve: the time before
Abraham, not liable to any seal, it had been sin to use a seal before God gave
it: and as for Job, Lot, and such as lived in, and after Abraham's time, and
were acquainted with this covenant with Abraham, they lost the benefit of the
blessing if they refused to be circumcised, and what they did is not plain, the
Scripture is silent.

After God had given the seal of circumcision, all that were in Abraham's house,
and all believing Gentiles and their seed ought to be circumcised: in Abraham's
house, those that were not circumcised were to be cut off from among Gods
people, and those strangers were not to be accounted believers, nor suffered to
eat the Passover; if they, and all their males were not circumcised formerly
proved out of Exodus 12. Then all that were in the covenant must be circumcised;
as for the persons that were not eight days old, they were not to be
circumcised actually, nor yet women, and yet were not uncircumcised; Privatio
non dicitur de subjecto habili ante tempus statutum: as catulus non dicitur
caecus ante nonum diem, uec infans edentulus; if he die before the eighth day,
it is all one, as if he were circumcised, being in disposition to circumcision:
and the female, she was likewise circumcised as a member of Abraham's house, in
that she was the seed of Abraham, partaker of the blessing of Abraham admitted
to the services, offering of sacrifices, eating the Passover, though in her
person she was not, yet in her parent, in her husband, in her male issue she
was, which privileges no woman that was not the seed of Abraham, or the seed
of a circumcised person might enjoy. Now, see I pray you, how this woman came
in to help Mr. Tombs in his argument, that all that were in the covenant were
not circumcised, the blessing to the family were to all the family, but some
assigned persons were to be signed, but the whole blessed; if ye come nearer to
all the persons of Abraham's family that were males must be circumcised; but
what of that? not every member of the males, but their foreskins, yet every
member of their bodies were partakers of the benefit, so were the females
partakers of the blessing of the family, the first fruits sanctifies the whole
lump, the redemption of the firstborne, Exodus 13.13. did redeem the whole
issue: why may not the circumcision of the male, serve for the female? that
which comes within our consideration is only this, whether any were refused
because unbeleevers, not because women, or such as God exempted.

But Mr. Tombs for all his abandoning of arguments, from analogy brings an
argument from the like, and perhaps a greater reason, children are baptized in
their parents. But perhaps not so great a reason, perhaps no proportion,
perhaps no reason at all, perhaps such a reason as Mr. Tombs upon second
thoughts would not insist on; what, when God shall accept of the women to
services, sacrifices, Passover include her in the blessing, nor young, nor
old, never require circumcision of her, appoint the males, ordain it in such a
manner, as without further explanation could not be executed upon her: how can
Mr. Tombs think of proportionable reason from hence? that maysuit with the
baptising Infans in their parents which must afterward be baptized in their
persons that are capable of Baptism in their persons, by no color of reason
exempt: I pray Sir, let your next analogy have better proportion. Mr. Tombs
proceeds, But it is manifest, says he, that the Jews comprehended in the
Covenant made with Abraham, and circumoised, were nevertheless not admitted to
baptism by John Baptist and Christ's disciples, till they prefessed repentance
and faith. Hence I gather that right to Evangelicall promises was not the
adequate reason of circumcision, but Gods precept, gratis affirmat: he proves
nothing, only he says, that John Baptist did not baptize circumcised persons
before they professed repentance and faith in Christ; notwithstanding Mr. Tombs
has not proved, neither can he, nor any of his opinion, ever prove, that John
did require that they should profess repentance and faith before they were
baptized: it will not serve turn to prove that John required profession of
repentance to prove he required repentance: repentance and profession of
repentance, be two things; neither will an historical narration, that this or
that person did believe, prove he professed his faith. But we shall scan this
further, when we shall come to answer Mr. Tombs his other arguments. Hence
that is from a thing not proved to a consequence that will not follow if
granted: grant John Baptist would not baptize circumcised persons until they
professed they did believe that God did take away circumcision in Christ, and
appointed baptism in the stead; does it therefore follow that circumcision
while it stood in force, was not dependent on the right to the Covenant, as the
adequate reason why this or that person might be circumcised, I shall put Mr.
Tombs in mind of this collection upon such an occasion as he will not desire
to hear.

But let us see what associate cause he will assign, to show that right to
Evangelicall promises was not the adequate cause; Gods precept and man's right
be associate reasons, causes subordinate in secundis causes, be not associate,
much less any cause or reason immediately flowing from the first cause is
associate with any second cause, cause principalis eti^^^ in secundis causas
non associatur, for then it could not be principal, minus principalis ^^ntum
associatur. Man's right is included in Gods precept, or otherwise there can be
no adequate reason taken from* topic place which is finite, nor any
demonstrative medium to prove them not associates, seeing they are all joined
with the operation of God, secunda canse (...) moventur nisi ^otis primis; an
adequate reason does not exclude the subordinanon of causes, but only parity of
society; man's right to the Covenant does not exclude the Covenant it self, God
commands that all that have right to the Covenant, and none but they shall be
circumcised; is not here right to the Covenant in su^ ge^ere, the adequate
reason when they and none but they must be circumcised? the materials of Gods
commands are Covenants, and therefore in many places of Scripture are the
commandments of God called Covenants. And Deuteronomy. 29.1. These are the covenants
which the Lord commanded Moses. From these grounds such as they are, Mr. Tombs
denies the major if universally taken, his meaning ought to be, if the
proposition be universal according to the limitation of the terms in the
proposition, the sign of the Gospell-Covenant must agree to every person to
whom the Covenant does agree; not every sign of the Gospell-covenant but some
sign, it is sufficient that notion sign in its aniversall nature be
attributed ^^^^i subject^ limitato, so ^s it is limited in the proposition. No
man can deny this to be an universal proposition, though living creature must
be in a limited sense, that every man is a living creature: though there be but
some living creatures that be men; yet this is universally true, every man is a
living creature: what should a man talk of convertibility, no such things
found in directa serie, where are many universal propositions? If Mr. Tombs
should deny it, he knew how easily it might be proved, and therefore is all
this sinffe before which I have cleared what chafe it is prefixed, and you
shall see what goodly limitations follow; but see first the proof of this, if
denied.

Those relatives that are conserved in the same subject, they are both or none
in the same subject, but the Covenant and the seal of the Covenant are
relatives conserved in the same subject, ergo the Covenant and the seal of the
Covenant are both or none in the same subject: or thus, That subject which is
capable of two such accidents as are always in the same subject, that subject
is capable of both or none; but that subject which is capable of the Covenant
and the seal of the Covenant, is capable of two such accidents as are always
in the same subject, erg^ that subject as is capable of the Covenant and the
feale of the covenant, is capable of both or none. I have not concluded the
major which Mr. Tombs has denied if universally ralten, because it is not a
proposition; the terms are not in re^t^, nor is est the (...), by means
whereof a sylogisme cannot be made to make that the conclusion; but from these
conclusions, or any one of them, an Entheneme will rise, whose consequence is
not deniable. Thus the covenant and seal of the covenant are in the same
subject; therefore, to whom the Gospel Covenant agrees, to them the sign of
the Gospel Covenant agrees also, which is the very same in terms which he
calls the Major. The argument is the Pedobaptists; but I conceive the form is
Mr. Tousbes his; but why should this be particularly true, and universally
false, I cannot understand why one should be capable of the figne of the
covenant, because he is capable of the covenant, and not another?

Now, for the manifestation of the proof, that they are always in the same
subject, the same instrument: if a covenant be written in one parchment, a seal
appendant upon another parchment will not seal that covenant, neither is that a
covenant formally ratified without a seal: Again, the truth of a sign does
depend on the connection with the thing signified; so that if the bush hang at
one house, and the wine sold at another, that is no sign, because false, ens
ver^^^ and (...), be convertible: and if it be any man's duty to set up, or any
ways give demonstrative signs they must be set where the thing signified is,
as near as he can, or otherwise they be not signs; and this were a foolish
thing in any man's apprehension, to say the land, and the deed for the land did
belong to such a man, but the seal of that deed did not belong to him, that was
appendant on some other deed, and belonged to another person.

But let us see upon what limitation he will grant the major, as he calls it;
^e tells it is true of that sign of the covenant which agrees universally in
respect of form and sinction to (...) that receive the Gospel, but it is not
true of such (...) are of particular form and sanction. This is strange logic,
what can a Proposition be universally crew in respect of some particular?
Again, Mr. Tombs limiteth the wrong term, what over man did deny a Proposition
to be universal by limitation of the predicate: the subject it self does limit
the predicate: as if I should deny this Proposition to^^ universal, every man
is a living creature, with this limitation, that it is true of such living
creatures as are (...), but of Lions and Bears it is not true, but see further
into this limitation; he says, it is not true of circumcision; it is not
affirmed of circumcision, it is affirmed only of the general nature of a
sign, and consequently baptism; circumcision is not a sign of the covenant,
it was, and then it might be applied to them that were in the covenant, but now
baptism. A man takes down an old sign, and (...) up a new, the old is no more
a sign, it is carried into sound back place of the house, or perhaps (...), it
possesses not the place no^ office of a sign; as for those juggling terms of
form and sanction, I refer my Readed to what has been said of them. But the
minor he denies universally taken, and here is all the len^t of the question,
what labor is spent about the major is lost; but that Mr. Tombs is not
willing (...) any thing true that is alled god by Pedobaptists, all the
children of believing Gentiles are not such as to whom the right of the
covenant does belong only such as were his spiritual seed; the ground of this
distinction is an opinion, that the covenant did belong to all that in any
sense were the seed of Abraham, but the Gentiles cannot be accounted the seed
of Abraham after the flesh, and therefore all the claim they have to the seed
of Abraham is (as Mr. Tombs stateth the matter) according to the election of
grace by faith; and therefore Abtaham might circumcise all his seed, because
the promise did belong to his seed. Now the seed of Abraham is to be esteemed
either by nature or by grace; they that have any way had right to be Abraham's
seed, have right to the promise, but the seed of believing Gentiles have no
right at all, the believers themselves have a spiritual right. I have formerly
showed the falsehood of this distribution, and that the seed of believing
Gentiles under the Law, were esteemed as Abraham's seed in right to
circumcision: now he tells us they have right by election, but, says he,
which is unknown to us but by profession or revelation; implying, that those
that baptize must know the election of them they do baptize, and that they can
do by profession, these fancies I leave to their just occasion to be confuted.
In the mean time, I briefly say, if no children were under the covenant of
grace, we might baptize none, for as much as some are, we may, we must baptize
all, seeing the distinct knowledge of them that are, from them that are not,
belongs to God, and not to man: and this was the rule that Abraham walked by,
and that we must all walk by, as shall, I hope, appear.

But I come to the second argument. I have the longer insisted upon the defense
of this first, because I conceive in answering what he has said against that I
have answered all.

The second argument that Mr. Tombs urges, as from the Pedobaptists from
testimony of Scripture, is from 2 Colos. 11.12. The argument he raises thus:

To whom circumcision does agree, to them baptism does agree; but to Infants
circumcision does agree, ergo, also baptism. The major proved.

If baptism succeed in the room of circumcision, then baptism belongs to
them that circumcision belonged, but the antebed^^^s true, ergo, the
consequent. The major of the Prosyllogisme is apparently false, for to them
that circumcision did belong, to them sacramental baptism does belong, the
contradictory is true, but his meaning is, that men of such condition, in
respect of Infants, and he denies, and cutteth, and divides the major of the
conditional Syllogism into such parts, that he may find out something, that
he may deny: that it does succeed baptism he cannot deny, nor readily sinde
out a reason why a man of years under the Gospel should not be able to bear as
much as an Infant under the Law. I speak this in reference to the dispensation
(under the Law) of the promises, the condition of the Church is called infancy,
the heir under age: now, how should^ child of eight days old, when the whole
Church is under age, be able to receive circumcision, and now the Church is at
age, our Infants not able to receive baptism?

He tells us, that the argument supposes baptism to succeed circumcision;
it does not suppose it, but proves it out of Colos. 2.11.12. but he prepares
for a denial so to succed; that those persons to be baptized, that by Gods
appointment were to be circumcised, it should be persons of such quality; but
because he takes no advantage of that difference, let him alone with his own
expressions. In this sense it is false, says he, females were not circumcised,
nor believers out of Abraham's family, as for believers out of Abraham's family,
if he understand it of such believers out of Abraham's family, as lived before
Abraham's time, or before the Law of circumcision, such a plea, to prove all
believers under the Law, were not circumcised, were vain: for to prove
exemption from a positive Law by some persons that lived before the Law was
made were exempt; but for persons that were out of Abraham's family; the promise
was made to all families in Abraham, and they might be circumcised, though
neither bought with money, nor born in Abraham's family, but desirous to eat the
Passover only, and so believers: they and all their males must be circumcised,
but for the females, circumcision was given in terms, that did exempt females:
baptism, to all nations, not males only, as circumcision was, but females
also: Besides, the Scripture does tell us, that the Apostles did understand all
nations, male and female, and accordingly did baptize, Acts 8.12. Now, because
God has called in females, because they are capable of the sign of baptism,
which in circumcision they were not, may you without warrant thrust out
Infants? or, does it any way follow, because some persons of some quality are
added, therefore those that were before capable are now incapable, if God had
declared infants incapable, as he has women capable, we must have been
satisfied? baptism may succeed circumcision, though with such difference as
God is pleased to make; but because God makes one difference in reference to
the persons, man may not take liberty to make another: As for Job, Lot, and
Melchisedeck, or whom soever else you can name, we know, if they lived after
the Law of circumcision was made, they might come, and be circumcised, the
extent of the promise made to Abraham did reach to them; and what those persons
you name did, you cannot tell, if they had any particular exemption, that is
nothing to the question, we know none had privilege to the ordinance but
circumcised; and in plain terms, both in the old and new Testament,
nouncircumcised person shall eat thereof, Exodus 12.48. and Romans 3.1, 2. this is
reckoned the profit of circumcision, that they had the Oracles of God, here is
every circumcised person, for that it is properly assigned to circumcision, as
the profit of circumcision, there it is no uncircumcised person; yet Mr Tombs
will tell us, all persons in covenant were not circumcised, this is the
reverence that is given to the Scripture, when it crosses their opinion,
though they would make the world believe that they were the only men that did
respect the Scriptures; he should have made his personal difference by
believers, and not believers: by Infants and men of years: and not by male and
female, in or out of Abraham's house. Two sorts of succession (which he denies)
of baptism to circumcision, is of time; because baptism began before
circumcision ended. What if circumcision did overlap a little, and baptism did
begin a while before circumcision ended? the same Gospel Christ in his person,
and by his Spirit in his Apostles, did put down one and set up another, that is
all I say to that; and surely it is so frivolous, I needed not to have said so
much.

In respect of signification, here Mr. Tombs is put to his shifts, in some
signifcations he confesses, but not in others. First, I will consider the
significations he allows, and observe, that wherein they agree, cannot hinder
their succession, they both signify the righteousness of faith, says Mr.
Tombs; but he must mean it does sacramentally confirm or seal, not
demonstratively signify, but how soever, he does agree that baptism and
circumcision have the same respect to the righteousness of faith; and yet the
hinge of all Mr. Tombs his work is on this, that Abraham's seed were
circumcised, whether they believed or no, none must be baptized but actual
believers, and yet circumcision and baptism have the same respect to faith. Me
thinks the bare acknowledgement of this is enough to dash all that any
Anabaptist can say, the controversy is at an end, if there be no difference in
respect of faith, why should faith be required more to the baptized, then the
circumcised? certainly, I would have found out some difference, or found some
other reason why Infants should not be baptized, then want of faith, or I would
never have opened my mouth in such a case. I would never have confessed them
both seals of the righteousness of faith, and yet the whole weight of the
busmesse depend on this; that one might be given in infancy to them that have
not actual faith, the other may not be given in infancy; for no other reason,
but because they want faith. What is the reason, why circumcision, the seal,
may be given where there is no faith, but baptism the seal of faith may not;
and that for no other reason, but because faith is wanting? What? may a man
make a difference of a common accident? or make a genericall form a specificall
difference, or a specificall form a numericall difference? this is all one, as
if a man should say, that a Bear were not a man, because he can see, or not a
Lion, because he can hear; and yet after confess, that both men, and Bears,
and Lions, can both hear and see: just so does Mr. Tombs, baptism does not
succeed circumcision, because baptism must be given to believers only, yet
confesses, that both baptism and circumcision have a like respect to faith;
it is true, he assigns other differences, but none of them will more disable
from baptism, then from circumcision: The first difference is, that
circumcision does signify Christ to come of Isaac, according to the flesh, but
baptism does signify incarnation, death and resurrection of Christ's: does
this make the difference? can children better understand that Christ shall come
of Isaac after the flesh, then that Christ is incamate, dead, and ris^n again?
Secondly, can Infants better understand that the Israelites were people,
separated from all nations, then they can understand that all are one in
Christ? can they better understand that the Law of Moses must be kept, then
that it is void, or the promise of the Land of Canaan, then of eternal life?
The difference that Mr. Tombs puts between circumcision and baptism,
cannot make Infants differ under the Law, and under the Gospel, and do they
differ by that which does agree to circumcision and baptism?

As for the place out of which this argument is drawn, Colos. 2.11, 12. Mr.
Tombs says, that the Text does not say we are circumcised, because we are
baptized, but we are complete in him, because we are circumcised in him, and
buried with him in baptism; I must needs suspect this man's learning, or his
honesty, else he would never abuse his ignorant Reader thus: what, Mr. Tombs,
does the Text say, ye are complete, because circumcised? Let men that can
examine the Text see, and they shall find, (...) our translators have dealt
more faithfully with us then so, that have translated it, in whom also that is,
we are not only complete in him, but we are also circumcised with the
circumcision of the heart: we have that mercy sealed unto us, though
circumcision be taken away, and we might seem to be without that confirmation
or sign of the purity of heart, which our Fathers had. Why says S. Paul?
Christ was circumcised, and that gave an efficacy to the circumcision of our:
Fathers circumcision ended in Christ, and is not descended to us, but the
effect of circumcision is in the circumcision of Christ, part of the body was
put off, in circumcision, but the body of sin was signified: now this Christ
did in circumcision, not only so, but by burial he put off that body, that
became sin for us, of both which ye are partakers, being buried with him in
baptism; so that baptism does entitle us to circumcision of the heart, by the
circumcision and burial of Christ, as the circumcision of the Jews was made
effectual by the circumcision of Christ; so we have the same grace expressed
by cicumcision of the heart, in baptism: it could not be plainer expressed, if
it had been said, that the benefit of circumcision by Christ is made yours by
baptism; Circumcision was the seal of circumcision of the heart to the Jews:
circumcision of the heart is sealed by baptism to you; For it says plainly,
in whom also ye are circumcised with circumcision made without hands, in
putting off the sins of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ, the means of
all this conveyed unto you by baptism; no man can deny that circumcision in
the flesh, did signify, and sacramentally seal the circumcision of the heart
which the Apostle here affirms of Baptism. After all this incongruous
stuff, Mr. Tombs denies that baptism does succeed circumcision, and
therefore Infants are not as capable of baptism as of circumcision; he has
confessed that faith is as requisite for one as the other, in regard they stand
both in the same relation to faith, and thereby confesses what he does deny,
and yet no more then the Scripture does affirm.

Mr. Tombs falls out with this argument, and in a metaphorical way talks
of an Egg, out of which, if not restrainedly taken, nothing can be gathered:
but that baptism and circumcision in some things signify the same; and do so
Noah's flood, and the red sea, yet do we not say that baptism succeeded into
their place, much less do we infer any right to be instituted in their
steed, respecting the same persons; I do profess I was troubled to parallel
this nonsense with any thing that might equal it: if we could get these
Anabaptists to speak sense, a man might the better deal with them. Can any man
make any thing of this after Mr. Tombs has allowed that they both signify
the righeousnesse of faith? that both signify the sanctification of the heart;
are they again turned into materiam primam, that Noah's flood might be
parallelled with baptism, as well as circumcision. You bid us take heed of
such argumentation; you might say baptism, and speaking, in some things, do
agree (in prolatione verborum;) and washing pots in some thing, in washing, in
action with whatsoever we can do. Your argument to Noah's Ark, is fallacia
consequentiae a genere ad speciem affi^mative, thus Noah's Ark agrees with
baptism in something, therefore in sacramental nature; as if a man should
say, est animal, ergo equ^s, it is a living creature, ergo, an horse.

The collection that nothing can be gathered in a restrained sense, but that
baptism in some things signify the same; yes, more then that, they agree in
some things, we may gather in what they agree; they agree in the nature of a
sacrament; in divine institution; in the ^eal of faith: they must be
administered to all to whom the tender of grace is made, not only to all that
are partakers of grace. The first, in respect of providence limited to a narrow
compass, and by the ordinance bounded within the nation of Jews, though not to
the persons of the Jews: all nations might come in and be circumcised, and
offer sacrifice, and eat the Pass^over, but they might sacrifice no where but
at Jerusalem; but now the ordinances are tendered to all nations, and baptism
must be administered to all nations, no assignation of persons by the
commission, surely the commission was not invented by man: Christ commands
his Disciples to baptize all nations; here is not men, women, nor children, we
must baptize some body; it must then be examined who they are that must be
baptized? it is no will worship to baptize, it is no will worship to baptize all
nations, to baptize whom we please, and refuse others without ground out of
Scripture, that is will worship. Now, these persons must be found a subjecto
capaci from the capacity of the subject, or from the judgment of the persons
in commission to baptize. Your part requires, that you prove Infants are
unfits subjects, and I will prove in due time, that Ministers are unfit judges:
For, arguments drawn from analogies, I willingly grant to be invalid, if you
mind analogies of proportion, to invent any part of Gods worship by; as if we
had invented baptism by rules of proportion, but being commanded to baptize
all Nations, and told that it should stand us in the same stead that
circumcision, in reference to such principles as concern us most, and did
equally concern the Jews in the same respects, and telling us now the
particular privilege of the Jews should cease, and the ordinances should
freely be communicated to all Nations; never speaks one word of the
particular qualification of the person of them that are to be baptized, he
leaves that to be understood ex natura rei under the Gospel; God deals with
the Church as fathers with their children; when they come of years tell them
the ground and reason of things, leaving circumstances, which necessity will
drive them upon unto their own discretion; whereas when they are children the
father directs them to the sensitive part not acquainting them with the
reason, but supplieth the defect of the infant with the particular direction of
the fact to be done, having a care that he take not more upon him then he is
able to bear; but when he becomes a man if he should still continue in such
simplicity as insist upon the same rule, and take no notice of any reasonable
instruction; nor by comparing his strength with infancy judge nothing of his
own power, but still look for the same direction as he had when he was a
child, when the father chooses rather to instruct him by reason, then by
sense, he could not escape the just censure of a fool. God our Father tells
us that baptism does circumcise the heart, seals faith as circumcision did,
Go baptize all Nations; this is enough for a man when he is told the nature of
baptism by comparison with circumcision; and showed the difference in case of
women and appropriation to the Jews, to direct them by a rational proportion
with what God did direct his Church in infancy: ye shall circumcise no more,
but ye shall baptize; that shall have the same operation upon the heart, and
you shall not restrain my worship to Jerusalem as of old, but go to all
Nations: If any shall further object, But what say you to Infants? I say
nothing, but that baptism in respect of my worship, and the operation it has
upon the heart, is the same with circumcision; and you know what direction I
gave to my Church when she was in infancy concerning circumcision; you are
capable of as much purity of heart as they were then* that is all I say; you
are now of years, whilst you were children I taught your sense, now I teach
your understanding; as for argument from analogy, though it does come far
short of an argument from precept; yet it is equal with an argument from
example; for indeed all that can be drawn from an example is by analogy, and
among analogies those are more certain that are drawn from a precept, then
those that are drawn barely from an example, without any shadow of a precept,
when the analogy is made by God, and we are led to the thing signified by
Gods-owne direction, and told that circumcision of the heart is the same under
baptism, as under circumcision of the flesh: how dare we say that infancy
makes men incapable of circumcision of the heart? when God sometime did
declare, that that should be no obstacle to the administration of the sign,
seeing we are trusted with administration of the sign not with the judgment
of the heart; but as for that rabblement of analogies which he talks of out
of Durands Irrationale, they are things of no analogy with this. I further
say, that it is not the proportion of the sign with the thing signified, that
makes a Sacrament but institution; I hope no man will affirm that baptism
wants institution: and as for the person, if you will have him adultus, I
make no question you shall run upon a greater necessity of will worship, then
by administering of it to Infants, as I hope upon further occasion to make
appear.

Your third argument is out of the verge of your own method, as not being
drawn from any place of Scripture, and therefore I omit that, and come to your
fourth Argument from the Acts 2.38, 39.

He frames the Argument well, if the Proposition wanted not form, it should
be they to whom the promise belongs are to be baptized; but Infants of
believers are they to whom the promise belongs, therefore Infants of
believers are to be baptized.

Mr. Tombs before he can make any answer to the argument, he must fit his
answer, that is, he must misquote and misapply two or three places of Scripture
to the intent his Reader may conceive, that the promise that was there meant
was not the promise made to Abraham, but the promise of sending Jesus Christ:
others say sending the Holy Ghost, all is one, if Christ had not been sent, the
Holy Ghost had not been sent; and the sending Christ was the promise made to
Abraham, as I have proved before out of Luke 1.73. But Mr. Tombs quoteth some
places of Scriptures, as if a man in them should find so plain a difference
from the promise made to Abraham, and there spoken of by St. Peter, as must
needs give full satisfaction to all that doubt of that: but let us view those
places, Acts 3.25. Ye are the children of the Prophets and of the Covenant
which God made with our Fathers, saying unto Abraham, And in thy seed shall all
the kindreds of the earth be blessed; that is plain enough of the promise to
Abraham, Act. 13.32, 33. And we declare unto you glad tidings, how that the
promise that was made unto the Fathers, God has fulfilled the same unto us,
Romans 15.8, 9. Now I say that Jesus Christ was the Minister of circumcision for
the truth of God to confirm the promises made unto the Fathers: read and
judge, and judge what Mr. Tombs has gotten by these places to prove any
difference from this promise here spoken of, and the promise made to Abraham:
But said Mr. Tombs, the promise was made to them he spoke to and their
children, and to them that are afar off, whether they be Gentiles who are said
to be afar off, Ephesians. 2.17. or Jews in future ages, as Beza is doubtful:
indeed Beza does argue that Peter did not then know the call of the Gentiles,
or if he had, it is not likely that he would have told the Jews of it; it
might be, Peter did not at that time know the National calling of the Gentiles
that was afterward made known to him; for then he could not properly have said
of them that they were afar off in respect of the Jews, but Peter was not
ignorant that as many of the Gentiles as the Lord should call had right to the
promise, and this was in no age offensive to the Jews: they always knew that
one law was to the homeborne and the stranger that sojourneth among them, Exodus
12, 48, that is, when and after they were called; they were put into the same
condition with the Jews in reference to the promise; it is plain that the
promise in reference to Baptism is the same that it was in reference to
circumcision: now it is true he further teaches the inner power and effect of
the Covenant which was the turning men away from their iniquity: this is the
doctrine both of circumcision and baptism, that neither circumcision which is
outward in the flesh is circumcision, Romans 2.28. neither is that baptism which
is outward, but that is circumcision which is of the heart, whose praise is not
of men, but of God. Thus baptism must be taught, it must be taught as from
God, it must be administered as by men; therefore says Mr. Tombs, the promise
is not made but on conditions of calling, and faith which may be confirmed
abundantly, Romans 4.13, 14, 16. let the proof be examined, St. Paul does handle
the promise made to Abraham in reference to the fruit and effect of it, and so
to entitle the Gentiles to the comfort and fruit of the promise, forasmuch as
the promise did always bear that sense, that never any of Abraham's posterity
had any benefit from the promise unless they were believers, and that benefit
the Gentiles always had if proselites, and now in a more free way; and this
was ground to the Romans to seek for justification by faith, because that was
always the sense and meaning of the Covenant made with Abraham; but this was
the use that the faithful ought to make of the Covenant: Abraham was justified
by faith as we are; Abraham was not justified by circumcision, nor we by
baptism; circumcision was administered in facie Ecclesiae, according to the
appointment of God, men had nothing to do to examine faith, the praise of that
was not of men, but of God: it is confessed that Abraham did circumcise without
any judgment of faith, yet had as much need of faith for benefit by the
Covenant as we, his justification and salvation the same with ours by faith in
Christ, Gal. 3.9. They which be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham: ye
see Abraham himself had his blessing by faith, God preached the Gospel to
Abraham, the seed of Abraham had the benefit of the covenant by faith: whereby
it plainly appears that circumcision was not given by the estimation of faith,
though it had its effect by faith; but every male of Abraham must be
circumcised, and that because of the promise, the conditions of faith and
repentance were not new conditions put on us which Abraham and his posterity
had not, though they are more plainly preached to us then to Abraham, God was
the judge of faith in Abraham's time, and is so now, but the promise of the land
of Canaan stood upon conditions of obedience the effect of faith,
notwithstanding circumcision: but, says Mr. Tombs, the promise was not
belonging to them simply as Jews, but as called, the promise did belong to all
men, quatenus called, but it belonged to Jews, though not quatenus ipsum, yet
it does belong to Jews to be foederati, (...), every Jew had an interest to the
promise, though not quatenus, a Jew, because Gentiles also had this right, per
accidens, as called, but it was accidental to the Gentiles, some were called,
and some were not; all Jews before Christ were called, but note, that called is
to be distinguished into outward calling, and inward or effectual calling: by
an outward calling, All the Jews were called: by an effectual, only the elect
were called; whether Jew or Gentile, both these callings had their several
respects unto the promise, and the seal of the promise: The outward call had a
right to the Oracles, Romans 3.1. the means of faith, and accordingly many had
faith by that means, though some did not believe, that does not make the faith
of God of none effect; the promise of God signified by the word faith, in that
place, is effectual, though some do not believe, though it be without effect
to them that believe not, yet it is effectual to them that believe; and though
he does not believe, yet the Holy Ghost makes circumcision an inseparable
accident to a Jew, showing, that the advantage of the Jew, and the profit of
circumcision were the same, and the chief privilege is, that unto them were
committed the Oracles of God. Now, this outward call had the promise of God
being their God, and the God of their seed, and accordingly had the seal given
to them and their seed: this is plain in case of the Jews, they had
circumcision, and the Oracles, and the promise, but all these are ineffectuall,
without faith, Heb. 4.1, 2. Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being left us
of entering into his rest, any one of us come short of it: For, unto us was the
Gospel preached, as well as unto them, but the Word preached did not profit
them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it. You see, many have the
promise left them that may come short of it, they may have the Word without
profit, the promise of God, circumcision without effect, all for want of faith,
all these external, have an external dependence one upon another: those that
were born in a believing family, had an external promise left them, had
cirumcision, had the word, though they might come short of the effect of all
for want of faith; yet the external administration must go by this outward
rule; the promise in this place is understood in this sense of outward promise
that belongs to you and your children, you are called already; and that is
implied in the opposition to these words afar off, such as are afar off is
opposed to them that are nigh. Now, they that are nigh need no calling, but
they that are afar off, them we call; so that it is plain, calling is in
reference to them that are afar off; and then the sense of the words is as
plain the promise belongs to you and your children, therefore be baptized:
and the promise likewise belongs to them that are afar off, not yet called,
as many of them as the Lord shall call: and this appears, in that the Apostle
speaks unto these Jews, and exhorts them to amend their lives, and be baptized,
for the promise belongs to them, so that the Proposition is immediately true,
they shall be baptized, because the promise did belong to them, calling of them
that are afar off, is not at all immediately referred to baptism, but to the
promise, and therefore cannot by any means be a limitation of such persons,
unto whom the promise did belong, to make fit for baptism, as if there were
some persons unto whom the promise did belong, that were not called, and some
called; those that are called might be baptized, but unto whom the promise does
belong, and are not called, they may not be baptized: but this is to alter the
form and sense of the Apostles words, though they might have a truth in them,
yet they are not the words of the Text, nor signify what is there said:
Amendment of life has not relation to baptism, but to that sin they stood
guilty of, and that they were convict that they had crucified the Lord of
glory: the immediate argument that he uses to persuade them to baptism, is,
that the promise belongs to them, it is no argument at all why they should be
baptized, because the promise belonged to their children, nor because the
promise belonged to them that are afar off, but because it belonged to them,
that only was ground, why the Apostle should persuade to be baptized: what is
further added, is to note the amplitude of the promise, to raise up their
faith, to lay hold on the promise of so bountiful a God, that extends his
promises so largely, not to them only, but to their children, nor stays his
bounty there, but reaches it out also to them that are not called, to wit,
such of them as he shall call; you and your children, sensu determinate, them
them that are afar off, sensu indeterminate; but if all had been limited by
as many as the Lord shall call, S. Peter had drawn an universal conclusion out
of particular premises: For, if that part of the verse alleged, out of which
the Apostle does infer this conclusion, or inference be limited, then the
proposition is particular, as thus: If the sense of the words be, the promise
belongs to as many of you as the Lord shall call, then it is no more but the
promise belongs to some of you, a few of you, therefore be baptized every
one, had been a very irrational argument; nay, if you restrain promise to its
strict sense, for promise with effect to the effectually called, then it can
belong to a very few of them; therefore every one of you be baptized, were very
strange: The promise therefore must be understood in such a sense, as it was
when applied to Abraham's seed, according to the flesh; as the faith of God in
his promise, is not of none effect, though some do not believe, the promise
must be understood by us, as left for all, though all attain not to it, and
this not in reference to universal grace, but universal dispensation of means
by us men; and herein God did go before us by his own direction in the infancy
of his Church, leaving us to walk by the same rule; when we have a more ample
dispensation of the means of grace committed to us. God did command all
Abraham's seed to be circumcised, and all circumcised to eat the Passover,
though they were taught always they should not possess the land of Canaan
unless they obeyed the voice of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 28. and 29. Chapters: and all
along, Moses and the Prophets preach the blessing to the believer, and though
under the form of works, not the covenant of works; it was faith that God
looked, as in Heb. 11. all the works of the Patriachs are ascribed to faith,
and Abraham's obedience is commended by his faith; and he and they justified by
faith, and not by works: faith grounded on the same truth of God, and the same
Christ; God uses the same liberty of his will, Romans 9.15. in the dispensation
of his grace, 13. An instance out of the old Testament in Esau and Jacob will
serve as well as in Peter and Judas; the grace of God did no more nor less
depend on Sacraments then now. God did not account any man circumcised but a
believer, no more does he now baptized; Moses and the Prophets did teach faith
and obedience, so do the Apostles, and that notwithstanding the promise; yet
the unbeleever and murmurer shall not enter into the land of Canaan: thus went
the doctrine, thus the estimation of God in all ages, the dispensation of Word
and Sacraments to the Jews, and them that were afar off as many as the Lord
shall call under the Law; but now to all Nations all are now called, God does
command all men every where to repent; in the sense of these words all the
world have an outward calling. St. Peter does argue with the Jews to persuade
them to Baptism, a notioribus, they knew right well the bounds and extent of
the promise; it was no new thing to them that the Gentiles called, should be
accounted among these to whom the promise did belong: nor that baptism did
legally wash away sin, nor that sinners must repent, but that the promise
should be sealed by baptism, that only was new: as for that Peter did teach
repentance with baptism both together, as says Mr. Tombs, that is not the
question; repentance and faith ought to be taught at all times, as being such
things as God does only look on most seasonably at all times to all men, Luke
13.3. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish: but out of this place it
does no way follow that repentance must go before, or is required as a
preparation to baptism, verse 38. is an answer to this question, what shall we
do? we, that have crucified the Lord of glory? if to this general question,
what shall we do? Peter had failed to instruct them to repent, he had been
wanting to his duty, but presently to argue from the promise to move them to
baptism, and baptize them presently will scarce stand with any Anabaptisticall
discipline; you would hardly have any great company of Catechumen's if you
follow the example of the Apostle, which you so much stand upon, nay the
keeping men of years, many years under the discipline of Catechumen's directly
contrary to the Apostles example. But of preparation to baptism we shall have
further occasion to consider in other arguments. Mr. Tombs tells us, that
the promise does not belong to all Infants of believers, which is the minor
universally taken: he has formerly told us of women, and believers before
Abraham. I have formerly given satisfaction to those exceptions, but the
promise is to be understood three ways, as before may appear: Either first, in
estimation of God, or, secondly, in dispensation of the inward grace of the
Sacraments, and effectual operation of the means, or, thirdly, in the outward
dispensation of the means of grace: The two former are distributed according to
the election of grace to the believer only, but the last, under the Law, to
Abraham and his seed, and in Abraham's seed, which is Christ, to all the
families of the earth: But now in a more explicit and plain way to all the
nations of the earth; and that not only in p^tentia, but by particular
dispensation, and providence unto many nations in actu exercito, actually many
nations have the Word and Sacraments, and God grant more may have: But it
seems, he grants the promise does belong to some of the Infants of
believers, but which they are, he cannot tell, and therefore will baptize none:
The way of God was to Abraham, that because he could not distinguish, he should
circumcise all: God commands baptism to be administered to all nations; it
will not serve our turns in the day of the Lord, to say, we did not know who
did believe, and who did not: it may, and will be answered again, who made thee
a judge of faith? thou art a Minister of baptism, not a judge of faith, that
is flatly denied thee: he that is a judge, is a Lord over them whom they judge,
which thou art not: it were indeed great impiety, to administer baptism to any
whom we knew God had destinated to everlasting damnation, but to take upon us
to pass that sentence on any person, were most high presumption, much more on
any Infant: we have commission to baptize all nations, but without consent we
cannot baptize any nation, and this is a good excuse: he, says the Text,
speaks not of Infants, but children indefinitely: but it speaks of children
in reference to the promise made to Abraham, which was extended not to Abraham's
children only, but the Infants of beliving Gentiles, as before: thus of the
Argument from Acts 2.

As for the first argument, taken from 1 Cor. 7.14. that the Infants of a
believer are holy, I have already proved: that Infants of a believer, though
not of the seed of Abraham, are federally holy, and that in the words of the
promise made to Abraham does appear: As for that the words in 1 Cor. 7.14. Else
were your children unholy: I say, it may well be an allusion to that federall
holiness, as I conceive, though the argument be not so clear, that among
others more plain I shall insist upon; yet not so improbable, that much may not
be said: for the present thing I affirm, that the children of believing
Gentiles are federally holy, for the argument, I neither assert it, nor
disclame it, but refer my Reader to that that has been spoken of that matter,
by other men, whose learning and judgments I honor, and come to the sixth
argument.

The sixth argument is taken from Mat. 19.14. which is repeated in Mark and
Luke: suffer little children to come to me, for of such is the kingdom of God.
The argument is, that those of whom the kingdom of heaven is, are to be
baptized, but Infants are such of whom the kingdom of heaven is; therefore
Infants are to be baptized: For, that of coming to Christ, though the reason
does plainly convince that in this place, more is meant then a corporal
coming, seeing many come to Christ corporally, of whom nothing is affirmed
concerning the kingdom of God: as for his eight circumstances, he has
gathered nothing for, or against the argument: they serve for nothing but to
make a noise of Mr. Tombs his learning, that he can observe eight
circumstances, of which he rejected diverse as not pertaining to the argument:
the other he makes nothing of, but that Christ did not baptize these children,
which no man that I know, ever affirmed: but does it follow, because they were
not baptized, therefore children may not be baptized? after Christ had given
direction to his Apostles and Ministers unto the end of the world to baptize
all nations, and now tells his Disciples that to such belongs the kingdom
of heaven: which kingdom of heaven in other places is understood of the state
of the Church, after the publication of the Gospel, which began after that
Christ rose from the dead, into which kingdom, John the Baptist never entered.
Now, these little children, Luke 18.16. were (...) little, (...), recens nati,
young ones: Secondly, they were such, unto whom the kingdom of God did belong:
Thirdly, they were such in their visible condition they were in, and these
things do all plainly appear, 1. that they were little ones, by the word (...),
the derivation, does signify, or show it: but Mr. Tombs says, words are not
be expounded by their derivation, but by their use: But how can he know how a
word is used, but by its signification: Suppose a man should call a man that is
grown a babe, for some childish condition that he perceives in him; does it
follow that a bab^e does signify a man of twenty or thirty years old? I
conceive Authors do use liberty of words, but where infirmity cannot be laid
upon the Auhour, nor penury of words upon the language, much must be ascribed
to the choice of words, with consideration of their derivation; but see what
confutation, that they were not Infants, (...), says Mr. Tombs, signifies no
more but embrace, (...), signifies so much; the Proposition (...), may add
something more then to embrace: but why must it signify to embrace a grown
person? because Mar. 9.36. he places them in the midst, as though a child that
can stand alone, might not be taken up in arms: yea, but he warns not to
scandalize them, as though a child might not be taken up in arms, that may be
taught to swear and lie, and by many evil examples, led out of the way of God,
or cause to stumble, but the word (...), says he, signifies a child capable
of teaching: it is apparent that (...), does signify an Infant in his mothers
belly, Luke 1.44. Now, how long it does continue (...), is the question. Mr.
Tombs says, (...) signifies a child capable of teaching: but see how he
proves it from the 2 Timothy 3.15. (...), whence he gathers that (...) does
signify a child capable of teaching: Mr. Tombs will put no difference
between from his childhood and in his childhood: from intimates that whilst he
was (...), then he knew not, but when he ceased to be (...), then he knew:
that is says he, ever since he was a boy, then not when he was a boy; but
when does a man ^ease to be an infant, and begin to become a boy? For my part I
understand not by what rules he walks seeing they were infants in Christ's
arms, for ought Mr. Tombs has or can say to the contrary: But says he, they
were capable of teaching, such they might be though in arms; but how does or
can he prove these children were such? he will say the proof lies on our
part, that they were not capable of instruction: true, it does if we will have
any benefit by the argument, a demonstration that they were not, I cannot give,
but probably I can, and far before any you can give to the contrary: First
those that brought them brought them not to that end that they should be
instructed, but that he should touch them and biesse them; neither does our
Savior at all teach them, or say any thing to the children: certainly if they
had been capable of instruction, he would not have omitted to have given them
some small directions, such as they were capable of, and not have blessed them,
and taught them nothing; for that derivation of (...) quasi (...) madidus, that
cannot be understood of the moisture of temperature, which in some sense is
given to young persons till they cease to grow, till a natural drith falls
upon their bones that hinders their further augmentation, but that moisture
is such as is on children newborn: what Mr. Goodwin says of it, I have not
seen.

But Mr. Tombs says, that it is doubtful whether our Savior says of them
is the Kingdom of heaven, because the word is (...), not (...), of such, not
of them. It is plain our Savior urges the relation they had to the Kingdom
of heaven to move his disciples to suffer them to come to him: now it could not
have been any reason why these should be admitted into the presence of Christ,
because others had relation to the Kingdom of God, but the truth (...), has a
further emphasis; for the words are not urged to show a reason why the children
should come to Christ, but why the disciples should suffer them, and therefore
Christ does represent these children to his disciples, not under such a
character as they did appear to him by his omniscience, but such as they were
able to judge of, and therefore he says, not (...) but (...), as if he should
say, well ye have forbidden children to come unto me, but it was out of
ignorance; now I tell you if any such as these are shall come hereafter, forbid
them not, for of such is the Kingdom of heaven: The precept is given to the
Disciples in terminis intelligibilibus, in words, and in a sense that may be
understood by them: as if Christ should have said, To many of these little ones
the Kindome of heaven does not belong, but you are excused for that, insomuch
as the Kingdom of heaven does belong to such, you are not able to discern the
difference, and therefore it cannot (...) said to your charge that you did
suffer any wilfully to enter into the Kingdom of God, that the Kingdom of God
did not belong unto. But the Apostles might have answered, nay Sir, but we can
discern these unfit for the Kingdom of heaven, they have not actual faith
and repentance, and therefore we may not admit them into the Kingdom of
heaven: to this our Saviors answer is plain; the Kingdom of heaven does
belong to such as these, therefore suffer them to come to me: Now for the
further manifestation of the sense of these words, the Kingdom of God is
understood, either of the Kingdom of grace, or the Kingdom of glory belonging
to the elect only, or of the Kingdom of the visible Church where men walk
under the means of grace. 2. The coming unto Christ may be understood of
coming to Christ motu locali, or coming to him by faith as he sits in his
Kingdom of grace and glory: or last of all coming to him as he sits in the
Kingdom of the visible Church: Christ has a residence in the Kingdom of glory
and in the Kingdom of grace. Now no man can come to Christ as he sits in the
state of grace or glory, but by faith agreed on by all parties; but Christ
likewise sits in the Kingdom of his visible Church, and teaches them as
the Prophet promised by Moses, and there inviteth all nations to the use of the
means, and commands his Ministers to baptize all nations, and suffer little
children, not those only that Christ blessed and gave especial testimony
unto; but those that were but like unto them (...), they must be permitted to
come to Christ. Now the question is, whether this coming to Christ is
understood only of corporal coming to Christ or any, or in which of those
respects this coming to Christ is here understood; though I dare not deny a
corporal coming to Christ is there intimated, yet this is not all that is
meant in the direction, Suffer little children to come to me; for the bare
coming to Christ's person could not have been inferred from this assertion,
for to them belongs the Kingdom of God. I sit in the kingdom of the visible
Church to dispense ordinances to all the world which I do by my Ministers: A
Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up to you, like me, says Moses, and him
shall you hear: according to which promise, I sit always in the visible
Church teaching the mind of God; as I thus sit ready to teach, Suffer little
children to come to me, for to such belogeth the visible Church: if thus you
understand the Kingdom of God, and the belonging of Infants thereto, to
signify their interest to the visible Church, then, come to me, signifies no
more in the direction then suffer them to be received into the visible Church,
which is no more then suffer them to be baptized, or hereafter when ye shall
have commission to baptize all Nations, baptize them: Neither will Mr. Tombs
his distinction serve turn, that those whose is the Kingdom of heaven may be
baptized, when it appears that the kingdom of heaven belongs to them, the
text is not of these but such, that is of such as have no difference from these
as far as you can judge in reference to the Kingdom of God, these are to be
permitted to come to me. Now whereas Mr. Tombs says such, that is such in
meekness, that is a liberty not to be allowed in interpreting of Scripture to
assign, or rather restrain the likeness to humility, whereas our Savior
applies the likeness only in this, that they were little children, it was not
similitudo qualitatum, but subjecti ob omnes qualitates, for a subject cannot
be said to be like another, if any notable disparity can be found: it is true
if a quality be assigned wherein they do agree, that one quality is enough to
make them alike though they differ in all other things; but for a man barely to
say such as he is fit for this or that employment, he that is fit must be such
with respect to his skill, fidelity, and all other conditions requisite for
that employment. Now if any thing were named wherein they were like, it was in
that they were little children, now that which they were a like fit for was the
Kingdom of God: and if any children can be fit for the Kingdom of God, what
unfitness can be found in one more then another by any mortal man? therefore
Christ says, Suffer all children to come to me, for they are all alike fit for
the Kingdom of God, the visible Church and the invisible too for ought you
know: neither do I know that the unfitnes of the Infidells child is in the
child, but in the parent that will not bring it, nor covenant for it that it
shall be a disciple of Christ, nor undertake to bring it up in the doctrine of
the Gospel; nor is that man that is an Infidel himself fide dignus to be
believed in that point, but if he will sell the interest of his child to a
Christian, I do not know but that Christian might bring that child to be
baptized as his upon that promise, that he will bring him up in the fear of
God; I am certain, notwithstanding the promise was made to Abraham and his
seed, yet he that was bought with money might be circumcised: all children
therefore that are brought may be baptized, so as they be brought by persons
that have interest in them, and in any charitable construction may be credited
that they will bring them up Christians: it is sufficient for us if they be
such as unto whom the Kingdom of heaven does belong, though the Kingdom of
God belong not to them, neither can that any way belong to this argument, that
Christ does teach men that are of years humility from the emblem of a child,
yet one child cannot be distinguished from another (as more or less fit to
come to Christ) by their humility: for that Mr. Tombs says Baptism does not
bring to Christ: I say, it does as Christ sits in the visible Church, into
which presence the Ministers of the Gospel have commission from Christ to
admit all Nations, baptize all Nations; as for the kingdom of grace or glory,
Ministers certainly have no power or authority to keep any out of them, or
hinder any from coming to Christ by faith.

The seventh argument is from Acts 15 32, 33. Acts 18.8. 1 Cor. 1.16.

If the Apostles baptized whole households, then Infants, etc. but etc. ergo,

This argument, says Mr. Tombs, rests on a slight conjecture, that there
were Infants in those houses, and that these Infants were baptized: but says
he, the words plainly prove under the name of the whole house, are understood
those only that heard the Word and believed. Hence he denies the consequence,
implying that many whole houses may be baptized, yet no Infants, because it is
possible they may be without children: And he further affirms, either these
were without children, or else the children were not comprehended under the
whole house, which he labors to prove out of the several circumstances of
the several Texts which I shall endeavor to examine along with Mr. Tombs,
not only as he mentions them here in this page 20. of his Exercitation, but
as in his Ex^men of Mr. Marshals Sermon, from p. 137. to 142. Mr. Marshall
says, that the Gospel took place, as the old administration by taking in those
families together. This Mr. Tombs strongly endeavors to oppose, and
endeavors to set up an assertion opposite to that for true: says he, the
administration is quite opposite to that of circumcision: the opposition which
he fancieth, he feigneth to consist in several differences: First, that
Abraham's family was singled out: the males only: whether in the covenant of
grace, or not: children, or servants: elder or younger: at eight days old in
the house, by the Master, or others in his stead.

For, his first difference was, Abraham's family only singled out for
circumcision, that is boldly affirmed, it is plain the promise in the seed of
Abraham was to all the families of the earth: Genesis 12.3. which is rendered by
nations, 18.18.22.18. there promise is made in the seed of Abraham, which in
the 3. of Galat. is applied to Christ: so that Abraham's family is not singled
out for the blessing, it is true, Abraham's family is singled out to be the line
of Christ, according to the flesh; many families could not have that
privilege, but the privilege of circumcision was not restrained to Abraham's
family, but extended to all the nations of the earth, and was actually afforded
to so many families as would dwell among them, or desired to eat the Passover,
as I have formerly proved it: it is plain as many as would be, or were
partakers of the blessing, must be circumcised: but the blessing was promised
in actu signato, to all the nations of the earth, though before Christ it was
in actu exercito performed to no nation but the Jews, yet many other families
besides Abraham were circumcised; therefore that difference is not between
baptism and circumcision, that circumcision did belong to Abraham's family
alone.

For his second diffence, that males only were circumcised, I have already
spoken to that: and the third, wherein all the knot of the question does
consist, what is here affirmed by Mr. Tombs, is but petitio principii: as
circumcision was to be administered in all the families that would eat the
Passover, whether persons that were circumcised did belong to the covenant of
grace, or not; so is baptism, there being no man on earth, that can judge of
any but himself, whether he belong to the covenant of grace or no: As for the
circumcision of children, servants, elder, younger, I know not baptism does
make any more difference then circumcision does; for that in the house, and by
the Master of the family, or some in his stead; I say, that in Abraham's time,
all the public offices of King and Priest, were in Abraham's person; Levi was
in the loins of Abraham, what hand the Priest or the Judge had in the act of
circumcision, the Scripture is silent: but certainly, whether it were to be
administered privately or publicly, there must be a public account given of
it, for as much as the person that was not circumcised must be cut off, which
could not be done, but by a public act; neither do I know a more public
dispensation under the Gospel should enforce a more particular administration:
but the agreement in the last circumstance, is that whereon the argument does
rest: that is, that whole families were brought to baptism under the Gospel:
To which Mr. Tombs says, that it was but contingent to families; that they
were baptized, no precept, no prophecy for it: contingent it is, I confess,
in respect of any causes, that any nation, family, or person in the world
should be baptized, but that nations should be baptized, is not without either
precept or prophecy: the Apostles are commanded to baptize all nations, the
blessing is promised to all nations in Abraham, and all nations are prophesied
to flow to the mountain of Gods Church, Isai. 2. but we find not infants
baptized, nor families baptized in conformity to circumcision: Mr. Tombs
says, that the conformity is not intimated: I say, that families were
baptized, the conformity arises of it self; But Mr. Tombs desires to elude
this argument, by showing that actual faith was first required in every person
before he were baptized; and therefore the Apostles did not baptize any, but
such as actually did believe, and make profession of their faith; so that they
did not baptize any family, unless upon particular cognizance of every
particular man's faith; this you shall see how fairly he will prove: as for the
examples from John, and before the commission, I know they walked by special
light, but what, we cannot tell, after they had their commission, certainly
they walked by it: The first instance after the resurrection, is Acts 2.41.
they that gladly received the Word of God were baptized, and why should they
not? did ever any deny, that such as received the Word of God should be
baptized? and these are they, says Mr. Tombs, to whom he said, verse. 39. the
promise belongs to you and to your children, added three thousand souls, yet
never a child baptized; men may as well say, never a man, or never a woman:
from the word souls, an Infant may be called a soul, as well as men or women;
but, says Mr. Tombs, the Text says, those that received the Word were
baptized; does it say, their children were not? but Mr. Tombs confesses they
were the same persons that gladly received the Word of God, unto whom Peter had
said, the promise did belong to them and their children, that was the Word they
gladly received: And Saint Peter infers from this, that the promise did
belong to them, that they should therefore be baptized, because the promise did
belong to them.

Now if this argument from the promise was good concerning them, why is it not
as good for their children? and if they received the word of the promise gladly
for themselves, it is likely if it had been denied them in respect of their
children, they would some of them have had the boldness to have asked it for
their children; and said, Peter, you told us of the promise, that it belonged
to our children to as well as us; and you told us that that was a good reason
why we should be baptized, and accordingly we are baptized: why should not
that be a ground for our children to be baptized also? we know no reason why
that should be a reason for us to be baptized and not for them: You tell us the
promise does belong to them as well as to us; as for the limitation of as many
as the Lord shall call, that is to be referred to them that are afar off, not
to us: afar off, is opposed to them that are near, Ephesians 2, 13. You that
were far off are made nigh by the blood of Christ: far off, signifies them
that are not yet called, nigh, them that are called; to look on the words in
their original sense, we do not use to call them that are nigh already, but
them that are afar off, that they may come nigh: and this appears plainly
to be the sense; by that here are several subjects of the promise, you are the
subject of the promise, and your children and they that are far off: You are
not your children, your children are not you, you nor your children are not
afar off, they that are afar off must be called, that they may be nigh,
that so the promise may belong to you all, that so ye may all be baptized. What
Mr. Goodwins fancy is, Mr. T. does not tell us, nor have I seen or heard, but
cannot be denied that the word souls do comprehend men, women and children;
for though there be some difference in their bodies, yet they agree all in this
that they be souls taken for persons; though for my part, I will not argue
from hence, that children were baptized; yet I say from hence is clearly
evinced, that children have a right and interest to baptism, because to the
promise, and that as clearly as any thing can be: for that which is a cause
producing an effect in one subject, will produce the same effect in another,
posita causa ponitur effectus rationale est risible, is as true in children, as
in men; he to whom the promise does belong, may be baptized, is as true in
children as in men, if the promise does belong to them both, as the text
plainly says it does; and the pointing of the Greek text does plainly declare
this to be the meaning of the words: for there is no point between you and your
children, but between children and them that are afar off, to show the
promise belonged to them and their children in their present condition to them
that are afar off after their call: where note that the promise is to be
understood in the external or internal consideration: according to the
external Sacraments have their administration amongst men; which terms ye
have applied to Jews and circumcision, Romans 2.29. He is a Jew which is one
inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart in Spirit, and not the Letter,
whose praise is not of men, but of God; the Letter says, God will be the God
of Abraham and his seed, but the spirit says, that he will be so to the elect
and faithful: The Letter says, every male shall be circumcised; the Spirit
says, that circumcision is no circumcision which is outward, but that which is
of the heart: the Letter looks on the family of Abraham, either by generation
or by communion; the Spirit on a remnant only, according to the election of
grace^ the Letter requires circumcision or cutteth off, some say [Goodwins
antiq. Ainsworth in locum;] the parent, some say, the child for the neglect;
thus external performance has its praise or dispraise of men, but that of the
Spirit has its praise not of men, but of God: To this latter, only faith and
repentance is required, or rather both; circumcision of the heart, and baptism
of the heart, are nothing else but faith and repentance which God can judge,
and praise not man; and thus the promise, according to the Letter, did belong
to those Jews, to whom Peter spoke, even before their effectual call; and this
Peter urges to them as a motive to move them to be baptized: as if he should
have said, upon this ground ye were circumcised, and now upon the same ground
ye may be baptized; it is true, we are not only Ministers of the Letter, but of
the Spirit, and therefore we preach faith and repentance as requisite to your
baptism of the Spirit; but you must give account of that to God, and not to
us, we can take no account of it, we are not Lords and Judges of your faith, we
preach all the duties that belong to the inward man, but administer sacraments
and guide our charity toward our brethren by outward rules, it must satisfy
us: if you will come and claim your interest to the promise, both for your
selves and your children, we must baptize you and your children; we will teach
what account ye must make to God of your faith and repentance, how you must
bring up your children in the fear of God, but we can take account of none of
these things. The next place of Scripture which he takes in to this
confutation, is Acts 8.12. by which he proves that the Apostles did not take
in whole families at once, because the whole City of Samaria: we prove a
personal account of all to be baptized, was not required, because they were
taken in by whole families in the Apostles time, and Mr. Tombs confuseth this,
by saying, they were taken in by whole cities; I like such confutations. Next,
out of Acts 8.38. and 9.18. he proves that the Eunuch and Paul; single persons
were baptized; brave arguments, therefore families were not baptized, the
Apostles had a commission to baptize all nations, and accordingly they
performed their commission with all expedition, taking in families, cities,
nations, single persons, refusing none that would enter themselves in the
School of Christ: Christ is not like a Grammar-school-master, that will receive
no scholars, unless they be entered before; he teaches from the teat to the
grave, from the ABC, to perfection; the next is of Cornelius, his household was
baptized, as may be gathered out of Acts 11.14. says Mr. Tombs, though I
conceive he mistaketh the place: the baptism of Cornelius family is 10.48. But
this household was not an ordinary household, but a garrison of Soldiers, what
matter is there in that; what did Peter cause them to be baptized, for fear,
because they were Soldiers, God told Cornelius before Peter came, that he
should tell them words by which he and all his household shall be saved? Mr.
Tombs infers that all Cornelius household were saved: good Charity, but bad
Logic; that because there was virtue in the word to save him and all his
household, therefore all his household were saved: in the 1 Cor. 1.16. Paul
baptized the household of Stephanus, but says Mr. Tombs in 16.15. the household
of Stephanus is addicted to the Ministry of the Saints; what is this to the
purpose? did ever any man say that those that were baptized should never after
be good for any thing? he says, some things of Crispus and others, that the
household is understood for them that believe in the house; but coming to
Lydia, he has nothing to say from any circumstance of that text, to prove that
any of Lydias house did believe but herself, but says it must be interpreted
by other places where they express baptizing whole households, they express
believing and receiving the word by the whole household: strange that one
history shall be expounded by another, because one household received the word
and believed, therefore another household that was baptized, did likewise
believe: an history can but infer that some that did believe were baptized:
but says Mr. Tombs, the frequent use of the word household for grown men in
the house, Mat. 10.13. if the house be worthy, certainly what portion may be
aimed at, as for whose sake the house is said to be worthy of the Apostles
abode in it is uncertain; the house there is understood of all, little and
great, your peace is no more, but your prayers: now first the worthiness may
be found in the Master of the family alone, and the Apostles may pray for the
whole family little and great.

But now Mr. Tombs will fall upon some argument, to prove that the Apostles
did not take in familes, for then says he, if it be true that the president
be an household, I demand whether we must baptize wife and servants because
they profess the faith, or because they be of the household? if because of the
household whether professing faith or not, then an unbeleeving wife or servant
should be baptized because they are of the household; unless it be supposed
that the husband or master being a believer, the wife or servant cannot be an
unbeleever; the contrary says he appears: and thus Mr. Tombs has done his
do, and then cries absurd: but where lies the force of his inferences, and
the absurdity I cannot tell; Mr. Marshall and Mr. Blake say, whole households
were taken in; but it follows all households must come in; all or none, all that
is inferred out of that, is, that the Gospel may be received by a family: and
master of the family may tender all his family to baptism, and the
commissioner to baptize all the world, need enquire no further into the
profession of the family, but may take the testimony of the Master for the
whole family; for you change a term, and say, if a wife or a servant, make not
profession of faith (you mind to the Minister) then an unbeleever may be
baptized, and so he may, though they should make profession of faith: but you
throughout your whole Discourse, make faith, and profession of faith all one,
more Anabaptistico, for lay that mistake aside which you must do, and all
Anabaptists mouths are stopped; for it is one thing to believe, and another to
make profession of faith: you much talk of this household, and that household
believing; but show me any but the Eunuch that made any profession of faith
before baptism, in which case Philip did not teach him to confess his faith,
but to believe only: it cannot be denied, that the doctrine of faith ought to be
taught to men of years, and that not as a preparation to baptism only, but
for that the doctrine of faith is necessary to all actions; whatsoever is not
of faith is sin: that which we argue from receiving of families, and from the
Apostles commission to baptize Nations, is that Nations may make Laws for
their whole Nations to be baptized; and if the major part of a Nation do
according to their duty receive baptism, and undertake for the whole Nation to
submit themselves to become scholars of Christ, they may justly compel by any
penalty to join with them in the external worship of God, Deum esse and
colendum, is the Law of Nature: all Nations have ever agreed to serve some God,
without which no humane society can be preserved: all societies are united by a
Covenant confirmed by an oath in the name of some God, and do agree upon some
public worship of their God: but may not a Christian Nation agree upon the
service of God in Christ? may they not enrole themselves the Disciples of
Christ, and submit to the public worship of God, of which baptism is the
first? this therefore is it which is drawn from the commission directed to the
Disciples for the baptizing of Nations, that Nations may act as Nations, and
families as families; that is, that the more organicall parts must act for the
residue, the Magistrates for the Nation, the Master of the family for the
family; otherwise it cannot be said to be the act of the Nation, or of the
family, though a post factum may be historically related to overspread a Nation
that is done without any National consent to show the universality of a
spreading evil: yet where a duty is charged upon a Nation, it cannot be
orderly received without a National consent: and that of the Gaolers household
does appear to be acted by his consent, as the text is plain, Act. 16.32.
Paul preached to all in the house, but in 33. it is said the the Jailer was
baptized and all his: as if the text should have said, there were diverse in the
house that heard the word that the Jailer had nothing to do with, but those
that were his he would present to Paul to be baptized. Now whereas in 34. verse
it is urged by Mr. Tombs that he rejoiced believing in God with all his house:
I confess Passor and others render (...) so; yet it is an adverbe of place,
and can reasonably signify no more but the place where he rejoiced; besides if
(...) should signify with all in the house, it must signify more then were
baptized, because none were baptized but his, and if under the name of his,
then he had an interest in presenting them. Now man can have no more interest
in any then in his children, they are his in a more especial manner; so that
if he had any children, it is apparent they were baptized, or else they were
none of his, all his were baptized: And whereas Mr. Tombs says, all the
household believed, or all that were baptized believed; it is plain that the
Master of the house only is said to believe, for the participle (...) is
referred to the nominative case, the adverbe that is (...) though it should be
translated with all his house, is to be referred to the verb, which is (...)
rejoiced, they rejoiced to see their master or father so merry: if believing
had been referred to all the house, it must have been (...) domo credente with
his house believing; whereas it is now to be rendered, he believing rejoiced
with all his household, none is said to beleeye but himself as in Lydias case,
is likewise plain: from whence it will appear that a believing master may
present his servant and children to baptism, though it does not follow that a
believing master may or will present those of his servants or children, that
are adult or of years without their consent, yet he may be his authority
require them to it as an external duty; he cannot compel them to any duty, or
restrain them from any vice without their consent, yet he may correct them,
and incline their will to any outward duty by his authority, and having wrought
upon them ^o consent and submit, the commissioner may baptize them that come so
presen^ed: the master of a family is a King, a Prophet, and a Priest, if by any
of these offices he can prevail with his household, he may bring them to the
performance of their duties: Now baptizing as a duty and precept lies on the
Minister antecedenter to the faith of the baptized; and is at least annexed to
doctrine, and not to faith, they must teach and baptize all Nations: now it is
plain they must teach as well them that believe not, as them that believe;
again baptizing is modus decandi, a manner of teaching; as I have said, and
shall further be made appear upon occasion. Now whereas Mr. Tombs further
says, that then it will follow that the whole household must necessarily
believe if the Master does, and proves that some time it falls out
otherwise: I say, that though it be the master or husbands duty to move his
family, yet he cannot always prevail; and special direction concerning the
wife is given to suffer her in regard of the bond of Matrimony and that under
some limited and restrained terms in hope of her conversion; yet nothing is
said concerning servants but that he may either force them or be rid of them if
they continue Infidels in that sense, that is refuse to list themselves among
Disciples; the public worship of some God being the bound of all humane
society, 101. Ps. 6. He that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me: he
that keeps any servant that will not be baptized, is not a good Christian; it
is true, all men of discretion ought to consent to every duty; but baptism is
a duty without consent, as all other precepts are, it is pactum impositum, as
before; and so I come to follow his arguments, lapping up two or three of them,
because he makes sleight of the arguments, we shall take occasion to show the
weakness of some of his answers, and where the arguments be weak, the
weakness is his, to bring them in.

The first argument of this sort, is taken from the general promises to the
godly and their seed, this has already been handled how they conclude for
baptism he cites, Exodus 20.6. Psalm. 112.2. he says they are for the most
part concerning temporal things, then spiritual also, as confessed, general
and indefinite; if general and indefinite it must be so by reason of the
necessity of the matter, otherwise indefinite would be particular; election
does not stop children, they are elect when children, or never; these promises
are with condition of faith and repentance, therefore not belonging to this
place, says Mr. Tombs. Well, then he was too blame to bring it.

2. Isai. 49.22. it is foretold, that Gentiles should bring their children in
their arms, therefore the Prophets foresaw the baptism of Infants: It is the
happiness of the best arguments to have the weakest answers; they might be
brought to other ends, which he proves from Mat. 19.15. but were those in that
place brought to the Church according to the prophecy? then Christ must needs
be understood as sitting in the Church, and suffer them to come to me, must be;
admit them into the Church, as I have said: it is true, that men which come to
the Church, come for other ends then to be baptized, but if baptism be the
door of the Church, as it is the sacramental door of the visible Church,
nemine contradi^ente, besides Independents, then whatsoever be their business,
they did come in by the door of baptism: And whereas Mr. Tombs says, that
was an analogy and was performed by the persuasions in which the Gentiles did
persuade their children to embrace Christ: he formerly affirms little ones in
arms are not to be baptized, because not capable of instructions, and must
bringing of little ones in arms, be interpreted by instructions? it is true
that Junius does say, cum vexill^ Evangelii quod est potentia Dei ad salutem,
haec omnia alleg^ric^ dicuntur de amplitudine regni Christi spiritualis; but he
does not say, that bringing of children in arms should be understood of grown
children, capable of instruction, when it may be literally understood.

Lastly, I shall only mention that argument, taken out of Ephesians. 5.26. where it
is said, Christ cleansed his Church with washing of water through the Word:
from whence it is argued, that the Church is washed with water of baptism, or
not partaker of the washing by the blood of Christ. To which Mr. Tombs makes
this answer: that if this argument be of force, the thief repenting on the
cross, Infants, catechumeni, martyrs, and others, dying without baptism, are
excluded out of the Church, and the benefit of Christ; he should have said, if
none of these were capable of baptism, then were they excluded from the
benefit of Christ's death, where God does prevent any by death, the party so
taken away by God, is not deprived of the benefit of Christ's death; God is not
tied to sacraments so, as that he cannot fave without them, though contempt of
sacraments be sinful and damnable.

Mr. Tombs his second argument is, That which agrees not with the Lords
institution of baptism, is deservedly doubtful, but the right of Infants
baptism agrees not with the Lords institution of baptism, Ergo.

I deny the minor, Mr. Tombs proves, because Infants cannot be Disciples of
Christ; I say they may. Mr. Tombs confesses Infants may be sanctified, but it
cannot be made known to us, that is not Mr. Tombs his argument, that it must
be known to us that they are sanctified, neither from the institution does it
appear that they must be Disciples before they are baptized, much less that
it must appear: The commission to the Apostles, and from them to all the
Ministers of the Word to the end of the world, is to make Disciples of all
nations, baptizing and teaching them what Christ shall command. The parties to
be baptized, are all nations, without any restriction at all; their commission
is, to baptize all nations, and this in reference to that national covenant
that then was among the Jews, only the public worship was limited to the
Temple then, now to no place, make Disciples, is no limitation of persons:
Their commission was to make all nations Disciples, which they were to execute,
pro viribus, to the uttermost of their power; the conjunction of baptism, and
teaching, with making Disciples, was not with respect to any personal
restriction, but it is conjunctio mediorum ad finem, make all nations
Disciples; the meaning is, by baptism and teaching: Now, the setting down of
these words, making Disciples; first is, because that was the end of their
commission first, in intention, and must first be proposed: as in all
operations is necessary, as if a man will have an house built, a city
conquered, an enemy taken; the first thing that he proposes, is the thing that
he will have done, and after directs, or consulteth about the means, though
they must use the means before they get the end, I have already spoken to this,
and shall more fully in my arguments that I intend for childrens baptisine:
For, that which Master Tombs says, then the children of Infidels might be
baptized, I have already spoken of, that it is not incapacity of the child
that disableth him from baptism, it is the fault of the parent that will not
bring his child, nor will undertake to bring up his child in Christian
doctrine; (nor is he that is an Infidel, herein to be believed) but in Christ,
Jews and Gentiles are all one, and a child as capable of Christian Religion,
(according to his education) though his father be an Heathen, as if a
Christian; the reason why the seed of Abraham had a privilege, was, the
Ordinances were only in his house, as many as came to have benefit of the
Ordinances, were circumcised, though not of Abraham's seed; they that were
bought with money, or sojourned in Abraham's house, nay, though they were
reckoned as a family distinct from Abraham's, and the males reckoned not as
Abraham's males, but their own males; yet, if they desired to eat the
Passover, their males must be circumcised, Exodus 12.48. Those that join
themselves to the Ordinances, and claim their interest in baptisime, and
relation in Christ, to be his Disciples, they must be baptized, and their
families, and as many as they can undertake for, to bring to the outward means,
if they can undertake for whole nations, the commissioners may not refuse them:
they must be suffered to come, if any will undertake to bring them, though
children. Now, that fathers by undertaking to bring their children to hearing
and to learning, what is the way of God, do no more then their duty, and what
they can readily perform, and do bring their children to Church, and take order
for their catechizing, which (were the parents as careful as they ought) were
a great means to promote Religion and Piety among men, and is often required in
the Scripture from the father. That is, by this Anabaptisticall tenet laid only
upon the Minister, which turns into a great encumbrance, and neglect of the
instruction of the people, whereby many have been enforced to fall into that
inexcusable error that all men have the office of a Minister, if baptized
themselves, and have gifts, such as the people shall approve of: But, grant
that the nations must be made Disciples, before they must be baptized, and that
all nations must believe before Disciples? does it follow, that every party
must believe that is baptized, quod convenit parti, quapars convenit toti
gratia istius partis, that which agrees to any part, agrees to the whole, by
reason of the part; but not to every part? the whole man sees with his eye (I
speak de actu videndi) but not with any other member, but having gotten the
knowledge by the eye, the soul implies other members more imperato, to do
their office: So the Magistrates that are not only the sense, but the
understanding of the nations believing may be baptized, and by the duty of
their place, require others to be baptized also: Non quicquid totius etiam
partis est, in totis integrantibus, a man must see before he go into the river
to be washed, he sees with his eye, not with his foot; but when he is washed,
his foot may be washed also: the nation believes by the Magistrate by whose
authority the whole nation is put to school to Christ, and is baptized, which
is an external duty, and may be required by the Magistrate: as for faith, we
have no Lords of faith, here every man must give an account of his faith to the
Lord of faith, Jesus Christ, upon his day. In the mean time, it is a most
insolent arrogance, and contrary to Scripture, for any man to judge of another
faith. Saint Paul says, not as having dominion over your faith, but as helpers
of your joy: 2 Cor. 1.24. and Saint Peter, not as Lords over the flock: if
therefore they are not Lords, how come they to be Judges? what do Lordship
consist in a name, or in judicature? names be but weak and childish
apprehensions of things, natures only yield distinct knowledge: Moses could no
sooner take upon him to judge of wrong done among brethren, but presently they
ask, Who made him a Prince, a Lord, a Judge, intimating that judgment
belongs to a Lord: We do much declaime against Lordship and dominion over
other men's consciences and faith, yet not only Ministers, but every man will
take upon him to judge without scruple, this man has faith, and that man has
none: it is true, charity does permit men privately to approve, but not condemn
the faith of another: Baptism is an external duty, such as man can take
notice of whether done or not: and if a man be called to an account whether he
has baptized such a person or not, or whether he went or carried an Infant to
be baptized, who baptized him? he may be able to prove these things by humane
testimony, and therefore they are of humane cognizance: but who has faith, and
who not, no man breathing can give any testimony thereto, and therefore man
cannot judge: But some man will say, the foot does not see, because not capable
for want of organs; but every man is capable of faith, that is not the
question, whether all are capable of faith, I mean men of all conditions; but
whether faith be of humane cognizance, neither is that argument of any force
that faith is necessary to make Baptism of any efficacy, therefore until the
Ministers are acquainted that the persons to be baptized have faith, they may
not baptize them by the same rule, because no humane action can be well done
without faith, no humane action can be required of any man by the Civil
Magistrate, and so at one blow al humane society is destroyed; but man must
require all duties of men that they can judge of leaving the inner part of it
to the judgment of God, who only can judge the heart: for as the neglect of a
duty is sinful, so no sin so great as to enter upon the Prerogatives of God,
who only can judge the heart, so that whatsoever is pretended from any speech
of believing before Baptism: yet no one place where the profession of faith is
required of the person to be baptized.

The third argument is taken from the practice of the Apostles and John the
Baptist, which says he, are the best Expositors of the Institution, but I deny
it, the exposition cannot go before the text, John the Baptist that never
lived to see the institution could not expound the words he never heard of: but
he affirms that baptism cannot be administered to Infants after the same
manner as the Apostles and John the Baptist did administer it; for confirmation
whereof he affirms that the Jews did confess their sins before Baptism,
and the Apostles before Baptism, did require shows of faith and repentance.

First, that they did confess sins before Baptism, he proves out of Mat.
3.6. they were baptized of John in Jordan confessing their sins: but does this
prove that every particular person did confess his sins to John the Baptist,
and that this confession was before Baptism, or that it was an orall
confession? none of all these things are necessarily drawn out of the words;
the words are, Jerusalem and all Judea, and the region round about Jordan were
baptized confessing their sins. Now I have formerly showed that a Nation, or
Country, or City may be said to do a thing, though the organicall part
principal men only do it. Again, the text says, that they were baptized
confessing their sins, implying that the act of Baptism was a confession of
sin, as a man that washes does by washing confess (though he say nothing)
that he was defiled, but if an orall confession which the words do not yield,
yet whether they made their confession before or after baptism, is not said,
nor can be proved out of the Text; neither can a precept be drawn from an
historical narration, that these men did confess their sins, it is as much as
it can prove, that it is lawful for those that can confess their sins so to
do; but all that may be baptized must confess their sins, will no way follow:
For the second place, Luke 3.10. that is, some mistaken place.

He further affirms, that the Apostles did require before baptism, shows of
faith, and repentance, and cites many places out of the Acts; whereas not one
place that he cites, proves any such thing, that the Apostles did require any
man to make any show of his faith, or repentance before baptism; it is true,
they teach men to believe and repent, but not take any account, or require
them, or any person to give any account to any Minister before they were
baptized, let that be proved, and the business is ended, to use his phrase;
but, to give a full answer to all that can be alleged of that kind from
Scripture, I say, that the Apostles did indeed preach faith, repentance, and
baptism altogether, but whatsoever was said of faith and repentance, in
reference to baptism, was either doctrinall, or historical; what was
doctrinall, was without any implication of account of it: what is historically
related of faith, and repentance, cannot imply any confession or manifestation,
otherwise then in the very act of baptism it self, seeing it was impossible
for the Apostles to baptize nations, and countries, and cities, if no credence
had been given to the doctrine of baptism; so that their declaration that they
believed and were baptized, might well be related by the Historian, though
nothing were intended but that, that they were baptized: For, when Historians
relate any fact done, they take liberty to observe the necessary motives and
circumstances of the fact, without any other implication, then that the fact
was done; nay, had not the Holy Ghost mentioned any believing at all, but only
said that they were baptized, we might have inferred from the fact, without
rashness, that if Peter, or Paul, or any of the Apostles did baptize, them
that Judea, Jerusalem, that is, the prevailing party did believe, that there
was some kind of credit given to their doctrine, that they did believe there
was some kind of good or benefit that was like to come of baptism, or
otherwise they would not have endured one or two men to have baptized them, but
that a pro^^ssion of faith in a catecheticall way, whereof the Apostles did,
and of duty ought to take account, that is not said; I hope, to make appear on
just occasion was not done.

The fourth argument is taken from the next age immediately succeding the
Apostles; what is said concerning that point, is not argumentative, it
depends only upon humane testimony, and men that give testimony thereto, are
partially related where their testimony is agreed upon, that they did say so,
as they are reported, yet their credit is questioned by him that disliketh
their saying; sometimes that part of the work, out of which any thing is
alleged, is proclaimed spurious, and that very author that we are content to
allege, with honor, when he speaks for us, him we bespatter and vilify,
when against us; so that what can be said of this kind, savoreth rather of
affection, ostentation of reading, then of argument, and yields matter of
concertation, rather then satisfaction; and therefore I leave the Reader that
desires to know more of this matter, to Dr. Holmes, and others, that may
wrestle with Mr. Tombs in this point, my resolution being only to deal with
him in such things as may carry shows of argument out of Scripture, and so I
come to the next argument.

The first argument is of the same nature with this, that the ages that did use
baptism, took it upon wrong principles, as a tradition and imitation of Jewish
circumcision, without universal practice, mixed with other errors. Among
Apostolical traditions, many were vainly reported and taken up to countenance
several errors, as delivered from the Apostles; if some have disclaimed the
proof of Scripture for childrens baptism, and held it notwithstanding lawful
from weaker grounds, that does not any way weaken the authority of Scripture,
and strength of reason taken from thence. If any one has proved baptism
lawful from Apostolical tradition, that does not hinder me, or any other from
proving it lawful by Scripture, neither does the mixing it with errors in the
same person, make the baptism of Infants erroneous, if so, all truths would
quickly be turned into errors, seeing few men have been without their slips,
which yet have not only held, but defended and propagated with admiration many
precious truths: Mr. Tombs would be loath, if his Anabaptisme be convicted
erroneous, that all that he has, or shall hereafter speak, should be therefore
reputed erroneous: by the same reason, all the truths that were taught among
Papists, are eo nomine erroneous, because they taught them: and so not only the
doctrine of the Trinity, but the incarnation of Christ, th^^ (...) of the dead,
were therefore erroneous, because those that held (...), held likewise many
other heresies, and so his tenth argument (...) ^^^wered.

His 6, 7, 8, and 9. (...) near alike, and all to little purpose, that I had
thought wholly to (...) them, but that men would have given some other
construction then (...) were weak, and therefore omitted, I shall therefore say
something of (...), le^t men willing to be deceived, should place strength,
where indeed there is none.

He tells us in his sixth argument, that Infants baptism has caused many
inventions to support it, and has occasioned defect in Church policy, but
proves none of that which he says: he only affirms, that Infants-baptisime
was supported by sureties and Episcopal confirmation: and that it brought in
Church Covenant as a preparation to the Lords Supper, for abuses that may creep
in with any duty, they do not take away the goodness or lawfulness of the
duty it self.

His seventh argument accuses baptism of Infants, with four errors: First,
that baptism conferreth grace by the work done: The second is regeneration:
The third, Infants dying are saved by the faith done: The fourth, regenerate
persons may fall from grace.

To these two arguments, I plainly say, that none of all these things are
occasioned by Infants baptism, or if so, men may not doubt of the goodness of
all such things as wicked men may, or will take occasion to be offended at: for
then Christ and the Gospel should be principally questioned, the great
stumbling stone and rock of offense; so that occasion of offense is an
argument, rather of goodness then of fault, Satan being most ready to entice
us to corrupt our best actions.

What, does baptizing Infants imply the conferring of grace by the work done?
nay, we say of Baptism, as Saint Paul of circumcision, that is, not baptism
that is outward in the ceremony, but that which is of the heart; but the praise
of that is not of man, but of God: we cannot praise men for baptism of the
heart, God baptizeth, sees, judges the heart, we baptize the body, but leave
the residue to God only; in steed of Christ, we teach those children that by
their parents are brought to be enrolled the disciples of Christ, the things
that Christ has commmanded us, and tell the baptized, when they come to be
catechized, that they must have the effect of their baptism by faith in
Christ, and not by the work done. What Mr. Tombs, are all Pedobaptists
Papists? these are strange calumnies, and why must Infants baptism necessarily
imply, that the regenerate may fall away from grace? can none of your baptized
persons that are baptized being of full years fall away from the effect and
benefit of their baptism? if that be not an heresy, that such men as are
judged believers by your Ministers, and so adjudged fit for baptism, and
baptized, cannot ever after fall away from grace, I know not what is. I hope
Religion and knowledge of God, is not brought to that outward formality that
all should consist in your humane judicature* it seems, Mr. Tombs, when he
baptizeth any he will promise the parties he baptizeth, that they shall never
fall from grace. I have heard many ignorant people use this argument, but that
Mr. Tombs, a man cried up for learning, should use such an argument, is
admirable and strange to me; and certainly, by this Mr. Tombs does plainly
confute himself guilty of that opinion, that baptism does confer grace by
the work done: For he infers, that if children may be baptized in Infancy,
then men may fall away from grace, because many, not withstanding their
baptism, become wicked afterward, does not this imply, that if they were
baptized, they were gracious? if baptism do not confer grace by the work
done, how can it be inferred, that such men, as after baptism turn wicked, do
fall away from grace? Saint Paul, speaking of false teachers, 1 John 2.19.
says of them, they went from us, because they were not of us: not that they
fell away from grace, but they deserted the profession, because they were not
gracious: but, says Mr. Tombs, if baptism be administered to Infants, and
they walk not according to their profession, they fall from grace, no such
matter unless Mr. Tombs will say, baptism cannot be administered but to the
gracious, they fall from baptism, and so will many that Mr. Tombs, or any the
most discerning of them all, notwithstanding all the caution that can be taken,
or else it were a most happy case to come under their hands which cannot be
imagined, unless it flow from the oper^tion of the work done, some of them
that pass their examination will undoubtedly be unfaithull, or at least may be
such, for ought they can do to prevent it; so that if they do deceive them and
obtain baptism, then baptism must confer the grace, or they may remain
ungracious still; and so notwithstanding their baptism, they cannot be said to
fall away from grace which they never had, though they should renounce their
baptism, muchlesse by not walking answerable to the profession into which they
are baptized, or not behaving themselves as Disciples ought to do.

The eighth Argument is taken from this, That baptism of Infants has caused
many faults and abuses in discipline, worship, and conversation; this is
likewise only said, nothing proved in it, he reckons ten of these: First,
private baptism: Secondly, baptism by women: Thirdly, of unborn Infants:
Fourthly, Baptizing Infants of uncertain progeny: Fifthly, they that are
baptized in the the name of the Lord, know not the Lord: Sixthly, it has
brought in the admission of ignorant and profane persons into the Church, and
unto the Lords Supper; for who can deny rightly the right of the Church to the
baptized? Seventhly, it p^rverteth the order of discipline; that first a man be
baptized, and after among the catechized: Eighthly, the sacrament of baptism
is turned into a profane meeting to feast together. Ninthly, men forget
baptism; so that it has the force of a carnal right, and not a spiritual
institution: Tenthly, it takes away, or at least diminishes the zeal and
industry of knowing the Gospel: But, be all these faults? and are all of these
flowing from Infants baptism?

First, I shall show, that many of these have no affinity at all with Infants
baptism. First, private baptism has nothing to do with Infants baptism; for
that Infants may be baptized publicly; nay, Laws may be made, requiring their
public baptism, though Infants; nay, the Directory is at this time so penned,
and in all times public baptism was principally aimed at and desired; and for
the most part so performed; what he means by private baptism, I do not know;
baptism in an house among so many as make a congregation, I cannot discern
how that can well be accounted any such fault: I am sure he has not proved it.

2. He tells us that baptizing of Infants has brought in the baptizing by
women, as though Ministers may not baptize children as well as women.

3. The baptizing of Infants has brought in the baptizing of children not
brought to light: for my part, I can say nothing, but wonder at such an
inference.

4. As for baptizing of children of uncertain progeny; I know nothing of it,
but that if any man that is a Christian himself will undertake to bring him up
a Disciple of Christ's, such a child may be baptized.

5. They are baptized in the name of the Lord that know not the Lord: what
inconvenience from that? It is true, St. Paul says, No man can call upon him
of whom he has not heard: It would indeed put on the form of some probablity
(if it were referred unto the person that did call on the name of the Lord)
that it were something absurd: but does it follow, because no man can call on
him of whom he has not heard; therefore he cannot call on the name of God in
the behalf of any but such as have heard of God? none can pray but those that
have faith: but may not a faithful man pray for an Infidel? may not a
Christian parent pray for his child, because the child does not know the
Lord? this were very strange: as for the child's consent, I say so far as
concerns the Covenant between God and man which is sealed in Baptism, consent
is not required on our part to the obligation: we are bound to obedience, and
are under the sanction of condemnation if we consent not: and this is the very
reason why circumcision which had as great a respect to the circumcision of the
heart as baptism, was as vain, and nothing without faith as baptism was, yet
stamped on the infants of the Jews, wherein the Scripture is not silent;
therefore this argument is not of any force that baptism is not to be
administered to Infants, because they do not consent, unless the consent of
the party to be baptized were required to the obligation: if the child were
free from those duties unto which he is tied by his baptism until he had
consented thereunto, it were a great wrong to baptize him and thereby lay a
yoke upon him without his consent, from which he were otherwise free; but
whether he consent or not, the obligation of obedience and faith lies on him,
and the sanction of wrath and condemnation attends on the Infidel and
disobedient whether they consent or not, whether they are baptized or not, so
that consent both to obedience, and faith, and baptism; whether baptism be
represented to them as already done, or to be done, is required of him that is
adultus or of years, as a duty, not as liberty; (...) ^^fusing to consent is a
sin and punishable both by God and man, though these consist much in
internalls, of which only God can judge and punish: faith and obedience of the
heart; but as for the externalls of Gods worship, such as are the external
rite of baptism that is to be performed in the sight of men, and men may
require him that is of years to consent to his baptism, laying the neglect on
him as a sin, and punishing him for it as for adultery, fornication, or any
other public offense, leaving the matter of faith which is private, to the
judgment of God: so likewise may the Nations receive baptism for the whole,
as all other externalls, requiring parents to bring their children as before: I
have thought good to speak something to this point, because it seems to
carry some show of reason with it, that no man should be tied to a Covenant
unto which he never gave any consent, which in free covenants is true, though
in public covenants we are tied by the covenants of our Ancestors, and are
bound by those laws we are borne under, made by the consent of our parents;
but in the case between God and us, he made us, and gives laws to us, under
which we must live or dye (I take Laws here in a general sense to signify
direction for faith and repentance, as well as any other rules of life) not by
virtue of our own consent, but Gods absolute right and authority.

6. Mr. Tombs tells us, that baptizing of Infants has brought the admission
of ignorant and profane persons unto the communion of the Church, and to the
Lords Supper; for who can deny rightly the rite of the Church to the baptized?
so he.

To this I answer, that the engagement of the parent, to instruct his child
(which is but his duty) will certainly be a great means to set men upon the
performance of their duty therein, when men shall solemnly in the presence of
God before a congregation be charged with the bringing up of their children in
the fear of God, that they must look to their own conversation that it be
exemplary to their children; if this be not performed by the parents, yet the
charging it upon them out of Gods word, cannot but be a means rather to keep
out ignorance and profaneness then to bring them in; can any means be used by
man more available then to instruct children in their tender years in the
knowledge of God? Certainly God has informed us, that this is the most lasting
knowledge that we learned in tender years, and our experience does abundantly
confirm this. Now what greater care can be had by the Church then in such a
solemn and sacramental manner for a man to be charged with the education of
his child as a Scholar of Christ, as soon as he is able to learn any thing?
if this be a way to introduce profaneness and ignorance, I know not what can
keep it out; but he implies as a great sin, that ignorant persons should be
admitted into communion of the Church, and the Lords Supper; for this
admittance into the communion of the Church, if any thing may be argued from
thence touching the unlawfulness of Infants baptism, a just and due tract
ought to be instituted, wherein the whole question must be stated; what is
meant by communion of the Church, whether he understand the visible or
invisible Church, whose office it is to admit, and whose to shut out of the
Churches communion? what be the rites of a visible and what of an invisible
Church? how can the Infant come and demand the Lords Supper, which he
distinguishes from the communion of the Church (but how I cannot tell) until
they be instructed to know the Lords body to remember the death of Christ, and
examine themselves, which they are commanded to do, and then eat? but where is
the Minister commanded to give the Sacrament to all that are in the Church, or
else to turn them out of the Church? these things must be proved plainly, or
else otherwise the argument drawn from hence against childrens baptism is
abignotioribus: Christ gives you a charge to baptize all Nations: you say nay:
we shall then let in ignorant and profane persons into the Church; you will
not baptize any until they be fit to receive the Sacrament: you were as good
say, you will make commissions your selves: Christ bids baptize and teach: you
say there is more in the matter then so: you will baptize when you please, and
whom you please, they that will be baptized must pass your censure, and stay
your leisure.

Christ hids you teach, and so much examination as is needful for teaching may
be deduced from thence: but did God give you in charge to admit and refuse, and
give you any rules by which ye might walk in the discharge of this duty? if
so, ye might then justly plead this right, and make that an argument to remove
all that stands in its way. But I wonder extremely at the in temperate zeal
of those that plead the duty of admitting and refusing of men ex officio from
and to Baptism, and the Lords Supper; and herein the Lords Supper is the most
cried up privilege which you here fall upon (whether out of your own opinion
as it seems by some is suspected, or to confute your adversaries) and make this
as a medium to prove that Infants may not be baptized, because none may be
admitted to the Lords Supper that are wicked; though for my part I do not
understand the consequence how baptizing infants and charging their parents to
bring them up in the fear of God would be a means to cherish and foster up
ignorance and sin. But here men cry out against liberty to come to the Lords
Supper, as if that would pollute the Sacrament, and countenance sin; as though
men might not have liberty to come to the Lords Supper upon their own
examination, and yet might justly be punished for their sins when they can be
proved against them: may not men make choice of their own habitations and
drink when they please, and yet be justly punished for adultery and
drunkenness? I do not know but the Magistrate may suppress and punish sin,
though men may be allowed their liberty to receive Sacraments: For my part, I
wish some stricter course were taken with sin.

The seventh fault laid to the charge of Infants baptism, is that, it perverts
the order of discipline, that first a man be baptized, and after among the
catechized; but who I pray you, Mr. Tombs did lay down this for an order of
Discipline? it seems Sacraments are subservient principally to Discipline: I
had thought the use of Sacraments had been for confirmation of doctrine.

But let us once hear where this discipline is, what footsteps in the doctrine
or practice of Christ and his Apostles: As for the practice of the Apostles,
there is nothing found but conversion, and baptizing, without any interposition
of time: that of Matthew. 3.5, 6. there Jerusalem, Judea, and all the region
round about Jordan, came to John the Baptist, and were baptized of him; as like
Acts 2. no catechizing either of these persons: if ever they meant to know
Christ, must be catechized after their baptism, or not at all; I understand
not any such duty of catechizing, if not comprehended in the duty of teaching;
and does this seem a thing so strange to you, that men should be taught after
they are baptized? What? may not men be taught after they have bargained to be
disciples? This is all one, as if a man should bargain with a Schoolmaster,
that his son should be his scholar, and from that day forward, the
Schoolmaster should never teach him; but this rather depends upon the use of
the Ancients, then authority of the Word.

The three last confute themselves; as for recrimination, I see the Anabaptists
so soundly paid with abuses and faults, that have been laid to their charges by
others, that I shall not meddle with them in this point, usus per se, abusus
per accidens.

The ninth Reason, that which causes unnecessary disputes, that cannot be
determined by any certain rule, that is deservedly doubtful: but the tenet of
Infants baptism is such. All these disputes are determined by a certain rule;
when the commission plainly charge the Ministers to baptize all the world, so
as they can make them disciples, if any will undertake to bring them up in the
fear of God, and instruction of the Gospel: or they of years do undertake for
themselves submission to the Gospel, they may be baptized, this is the rule of
the Word: Abraham had not only right to circumcise his own children, but he
might buy a child and circumcise it; nay, if he bought it, he must circumcise
it.

But grant that they must be taught first, tell me how will Mr. Tombs satisfy
the doubts that may arise from hence? how much they must learn first, how long
they must be catechumeni? secondly, who must judge of their sufficiency?
thirdly, what if any should baptize them before they were fit? whether that
must be accounted a void act, and the party put again among the catechumeni?
fourthly, whether, if this accounted valid, whether the party that was baptized
before he were sufficiently catechized, must for ever after remain ignorant?
together with many other of the like nature, which I shall put among my reasons
for childrens baptism.

The tenth Reason is the same with the first, only there he handles accidens
sine subjecto, here in subjecto; there he says, it was mixed with other
errors: here, that those that held Infants baptism, held other errors;
therefore I conceive that already answered.

The eleventh, Pedobaptists agree not among themselves, when Anabaptists do
this, may be an Argument, not till then; and yet answerable, that men may
sooner agree in evil then good, as arising from a more common principle.

And now I am at last come to his last Reason, and that a weighty one, says
Mr. Tombs: But it is taken only from a seeming effect of Infants baptism; if
there be any weight in an Argument, from an effect, that is, ab effectu,
proximo, and per se; but this does but seem to take away one end, and, perhaps,
the primary end of baptism; that it should be a sign the baptized shows
himself a disciple, and confesses the faith. Mr. Tombs tells us, that many
things argue, that it should be such a sign, but keeps his arguments to
himself; for my part, I know none, I know nothing charged upon the party to be
baptized, as a preparation to his baptism: as for profession of faith, that is
no where required; its true, Philip did teach the Eunuch baptism, and faith,
but profession of faith he taught him not: It is likewise true that St. Luke
does historically relate, that the Eunuch did confess his faith, but of this
before.

But Mr. Tombs does prove that men must confess their faith before baptism,
because baptism is a sign that the baptized shows himself a disciple, and
confesses himself a disciple. To this, I first say, that baptism may be a
sign of profession, but not a sacramental sign: A sacramental sign is to
signify what Christ has set it to signify, namely, food and nourishment;
this is the end of a sacrament, to lead our infirmities to the apprehension of
the great things of God; to comprehend the virtue and efficacy of the body and
blood of Christ, the participation of the fullness of Christ, to lead our faith
by the authority of God, to the apprehension of the things of God. It is true,
our duty is annexed to receiving of sacraments, whereunto we are bound by
virtue of the command of Christ; but the signification of the sacrament is not
in our duty, but in Gods mercy; were not our duty conversant about an
incomprehensible object, we should have had no need of sacraments: But, for Mr.
Tombs to deny sacraments to be visible signs of grace, without giving any
reason for it, when St. Luke does plainly tell us, that baptism does wash away
sin, Acts 22, 16. arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sin: and St. Paul
does tell us plainly, that the bread which we break, is the communion of the
body of Christ, showing that it is a distribution of the body of Christ;
communication is properly, superiorum ad inferiorae; I remember I have read in
Arist. Topic. lib. 4. cap. 1. Partic. 6. Keck. lib. 1.72. that participare est
suscipere ejus quod communicatur definitionem; and Keckerman in the quoted
place says, effective individua, multa communicant: ut ignis cal^r^^ aquae;
where you see, that communication is still rendered by giving the whole nature
and definitions as in universali, or in exciting qualitatem similarem, a like
quality in another body; whereby it must appear, that Christ in the sacrament,
does communicate or distribute some grace among us: as for our duties, that
(...) virtue of the command are annexed to the receiving of the sacrament,
those are external to the nature of the sacrament, though necessary to the
efficacy thereof unto us: This must needs be a declining cause, that enforces
the strongest patron of it in its defense, to deny the nature of a sacrament.

But see further: Mr. Tombs says, that baptism is a sign of profession.
Profession is taken popularly and materially for the Art or Trade that is
professed, and then men may be said to wear some badge or sign of his
profession; otherwise, in a proper and strict sense, Profession is nothing
else, but a sign of something in the heart or mind of him that does profess;
so that profession of our faith is but a sign of our faith, and a sign of
that profession is but a sign of a sign; nay, profession it self is more
manifest then any sacrament can be, and therefore needs no sign; but grant
it were the sign of our profession, what were that to prove that profession
must be before baptism? sure, signum and signatum be simul natura, the sign
and thing signified, are of the same continuance, one cannot be before another:
Here is in this argument another circumstance; that baptism is frequently put
for doctrine: therefore doctrine must go before baptism, nay rather, then
baptism does teach: for that which is any where translated metaphorically,
must have resemblance with the primitive signification: as if a man shall call
his son the staf^e of his age, the son must sustain his father in his feeble
condition: though I do not know how any of these places do prove any such
thing, that baptism is taken for doctrine, otherwise then materially, as in
Acts 10.37. John is said to preach baptism: so is he said to preach
repentance. As for Mr. Tombs Argument from witchcraft, which he confuteth, I
leave every judicious Reader to think what he pleases, as not being worthy the
consideration of a Divine; and thus I conceive Mr. Tombs Argument answered. I
come now at last, to mine own Arguments for Infants baptism.

Those that in man's judgment ought to be esteemed fit for the kingdom of God,
are by man to be admitted to the privileges of the kingdom, viz. baptism;
but all Infants in man's judgment are to be esteemed fit for the kingdom of
God, therefore all Infants must be admitted to the privileges of the kingdom,
Matthew. 19.13.

I have already discussed this point, Christ finds fault with his Disciples,
for not suffering little children to come, and says not, I know these are of
the kingdom of God; but tells his Disciples, not only they, that were
brought, but such as they, and that not only such as they in his estimation,
but their view, otherwise there had been no ground of a rebuke, but
commendation; rebukes be instructions for the time to come, at least, it is not
well done; do so no more; when you see any such as these are, suffer them, and
forbid them not. You see the precept for the future is general, men do not use
to reprove but to the purpose, that the thing reproved be no more done;
therefore the Disciples were to estimate not them only, but such as they were
(and that in an assigned liknesse, namely, in that they were little children)
as fit for the kingdom of God, and upon that ground suffer them to come to
Christ. If these and the like had only been fit for the kingdom of God in the
estimation of Christ by his omniscience, here had not been matter of reproof,
but commendation: Christ would then have said rather, ye did well to forbid the
little children to come to me, for you did not know whether the kingdom of God
did belong to them; neither can I give you any direction concerning other
children for the time to come, because you cannot tell to whom the kingdom of
heaven does belong; however, let these come; for I know the kingdom of heaven
does belong to them, and such elect children as these are; but ye see Christ
does rebuke them, and thereby gives them directions for the time to come,
which he could not have done, if the likeness had been in secret, and things
only known to God.

But here Mr. Tombs and Mr. Blackwell, and others, will tell me, by this rule,
Turks children, and Infidels may be brought to baptism. If any will bring
them, and assume the instruction of them in the doctrine of the Gospel, I know
not but they may: and if Turks would part with their children to Christians, I
think it were a very charitable thing so to do: For, the promise was never so
tied to Abraham's loins, neither for ought I know, to any believers, but to
education in the family of Abraham, or any other believing family.

But they will further say then, by the same reason are they to be admitted to
other benefits, namely, to hearing of the Word, and the other sacrament: Answ.
I say, they are admitted to the residue of the Oracles of God, as soon as
nature or grace do make them fit for them, they may have right before they can
use them: they are first admitted to come to Christ for a blessing, before they
are capable of instruction: and preparation for the sacrament of the Lords
Supper, is charged as a duty, which is no where charged on the parties to be
baptized.

2. That Sacrament, that requires no preparation in the subject, is to be
administered to every subject; but baptism is a sacrament to be administered
without any preparation in the subject, therefore baptism is to be adminstred
to every subject, every person, all nations.

That Sacrament that in the sign and signification, is preparative to all
other grace that is to be administered without any preparation of the subject:
but baptism in the sign and signification is preparative to all other grace,
therefore it is to be administered without any preparation: the major is true,
or otherwise there would a process in infinitum; if that which were
preparative to all other graces should have preparations to that, and that must
have other preparations; and so in infinitum. The minor I shall prove out of
Scripture, and plain reason drawn from then: Gal. 3.27. as many as are baptized
into Christ, have put on Christ: This does probably prove, that men that are
baptized, are baptized into Christ, which could not be affirmed, if they were
in Christ before baptism; they could not be said to be baptized into Chist, if
they had been in Christ before, which, if faith and repentance must be manifest
before baptism must be affirmed, he that believes and is penitent is in
Christ without doubt.

Object. But some men will say, may not man believe before baptism?

Reply. I answer no, he cannot, until Christ baptize him with the Holy Ghost.
Now, Christ baptizeth when he pleases, either before, in, or after
ministerial baptism.

Object. But, if Christ has baptized him before, what need the Minister
baptize him?

Reply. Christ's baptism is not known to the Minister, whatsoever confession of
faith is made, he must therefore baptize, in obedience to the command of
Christ, and leave the baptism of Christ to him.

How would the Anabaptists insult in the cleernesse of such a text? And here I
cannot but note a notable subtilty of the Anabaptists, I will not say how
common with other heretics, when they have cited a Text, and put a gloss
upon it without any respect to the argument of the place, they presently cry
the Scripture is all ours, crying down all the labors of the learned that is
spent, though never so truly and piously. For the clearing of the Text, that
is, Tongues, that is Art: gives us Scripture; we have the Scripture, and then
we can carry away the people, take heed that no man spoil you through
Philosophy and vain deceit, and this shall serve their turn, to answer all they
understand not. If a man tell them that Philosophy is conversant about nature,
and such things of reason as are too low for the things of faith, and therefore
have principles contrary to doctrine of faith, as out of nothing, nothing is
made; and therefore make the first matter eternal, contrary to the doctrine of
the creation, from a privation to an habit, no return, that which is dead
cannot live again, contrary to the resurrection: but Logic is without any
matter of its own, but teaches men only how to find out the truth of any
discourse, written or spoken. Oh, then Logic is nothing but falacies, and
herein many scholars concur with them to hide their own ignorance, whereas
indeed, falacies be no part of Logic, unless you will say, no reason is
reason: it is true, Logicians do mention falacies, as a man may teach a young
workman what faults he may commit, whence some ignorant man may affirm, that
the skill of such a trade was only in faults, as these do, who only count
Logic falacies; and here they have such fooleries, to make the world believe,
that reason was an Ass to their fancy, that men may wonder at them, they can
show how foolish a thing Logic is, they can prove a sheep have eight legs, two
before, and two behind; two on the right side, and two on the left. My Logic
can do more then his, and yet we shall be both fools if we want Logic, to know
this is no Logic: First, I can prove a sheep has sixteen legs, by setting him
between four men, one before the sheep, the other behind him, and on each side
one; this sheep will have four legs before one man, and four behind, etc.
which make sixteen, for relatives have no absolute nature: before and behind,
may be the same thing in different respects, the same foot is before, and on
the right or left side: this Logic can discover well enough, without the help
of a fool to flout at that he knows not. I impute not this to Mr. Tombs, but
to the ignorant, that cry, all is their own by such a wile as this, as though
none did regard Scripture but they, and all the Scriptures were clearly theirs,
what was spoken against them, was against Scripture, set by humane authority
and tradition.

First, in the sign it is preparative to all purity, it is washing so much
faith as must cause men of years to submit to baptism is necessary, without
which the Apostles could not have baptized; but faith and repentance whereby
the heart should be purged, that those must be had before the party may be
baptized, is an evacuation of the sign, and frustrateth the signification: it
cannot be denied that faith and repentance are required to the efficacy of
baptism, but subsequent to the Sacrament, the water does sacramentally wash
away sins: so Ananias Act. 22.16. says to Paul, Why tarriest thou, arise and
be baptized, and wash away thy sins? Now washing does suppose nothing in the
subject but foulness, the blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John
1.7. all the virtue of the purgation is in the blood of Christ. Now can any man
say that the blood of Christ cannot purge unless the party be purged before?
if faith and repentance were required before baptism, then baptism could not
offer the blood of Christ to purge sin, because the party were cleansed
before baptism, then Ananias could not have said, Be baptized and wash away
thy sin; but wash thy sin first, and then be baptized. Act. 15.9. St. Peter
shows that faith does purify the heart. Now it is true, faith does receive
the Word and Sacraments, and makes one and the other effectual; but both Word
and Sacrament do propose Christ, the Word to the ear, Sacrament to other
senses: Baptism does represent the blood of Christ washing, and sense does
look on the washing of water, and faith on the promise annexed. Now as the
word is proposed to the ear, so water is tendered, and the body washed with
water; whence faith does collect the purgation of the soul from the testimony
of God; water is no more the immediate object of faith then the word; it is the
authority of God in the word that is the object of faith, as likewise the blood
of Christ in baptism; they that believe, and they that believe not, hear the
word, and it is no profanation of the word to preach it to an Infidel,
neither is it any profanation of baptism to baptize an Infidel; yet it is
hard to make him hear patiently that in no measure does believe unless
miracles, or in defect of them some assistance of the Civil Magistrate do
concur; so that baptism is but an offering of the purgation by the blood of
Christ to the eye and the body, as the word does to the ear, and may be
tendered as the word to all Nations, the power of the one and the other is by
faith in Christ conveyed unto us in the sacrament of baptism or the word:
baptism cannot work as baptism till after administration, whatsoever is said
of it before is but the operation of the word; the washing of water does
sacramentally strengthen our faith: no duty of preparation charged on any, no
man ever reprehended for receiving baptism unworthily; though the Minister
has baptism charged on him as part of his duty, yet never any caution given
to Ministers in general, or to Titus or Timothy to take heed that they baptize
no unworthy persons; nor any sin or punishment charged on any Minister for
baptizing any rashly or without due examination; no precept concerning any
difference, but baptize and teach all Nations to the end that they may become
the Disciples of Christ. Now where no Law is, there is no transgression; where
God does not charge sin, how dare any mortal man say this or that is
sinful? if any preparation be required let the Scripture be showed where that
was taught, where baptism was deferred till any competent preparation were
manifest? what Scripture is directed to the catechumeni; nay what one sentence
of Scripture is applicable to them, that is not applicable to Christians at all
times, as well after as before baptism? Baptism is a religious rite which men
are easily persuaded out of principles of nature to embrace, as may be seen in
all Idolatrous worships; they have their religious rites which they are
persuaded come from the appointment of their gods, upon which ground they
receive them. Now that God did appoint baptism is no abuse, and so we must
tender it to Nations by the appointment of Christ, which though they receive
but as an Infidel does the word; yet when faith comes they make use of it.
Therefore the Apostles argue to move newness of life from baptism already
received. So Romans 6.3.4, 5. St. Paul argues what use we should make of our
baptism; namely, that we should rise with Christ; but though the most noble
way of arguing be from causes, and therefore in the Sacrament of the Lords
supper, where the worthy receiving of that does depend on an antecedent cause;
there faith is said to obtain the whole virtue of the work. Joh. 6.35. I am
the bread, he that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that believes on
me shall never thirst, v. 47. He that believes has everlasting life, 51. He
that eats of this bread shall live for ever: Whereby he plainly says, That
he that believes eats my flesh, this bread which is my flesh sacramentally,
and made such to me by faith. Never any such doctrine as this, he that
believes is baptized, because no doctrine is extant precedent to baptism in
reference to the Gentiles. See all the Epistles to the Romans Corinthians, and
the residue, all are written to Churches already baptized. Paul declared the
whole counsel of God, and yet not one word what should be the carriage of the
Catechumeni, or the Ministers toward them, as if he should suppose none under
the right of the Gospel that will not first be baptized, and received by the
commandment of Christ: so he that will teach any thing in St. Paul's Epistles,
they must teach them to the baptized to whom they are directed; as for the
Catechumeni, nothing is written or directed either to them or concerning them.
As for those histories of the Acts, the greater part were Jews in Covenant with
God already; unto whom Peter did indeed preach repentance in reference to that
blood that they were guilty of in killing the Lord of glory; not as preparation
to baptism, but repentance and baptism are both exhorted unto as precedent to
the gift of the Holy Ghost; whereas if such preparation had been needful to
baptism, Peter should have stayed for the gift of the Holy Ghost to manifest
their fitness, or at least given them some directions by which they might
manifest their fitness, or show their repentance and faith, which he never
did. St. Luke does indeed say, They that gladly received the word were
baptized; but that they manifested it any way but by receiving baptism gladly
does not appear; and this was ground enough for an Historian to say they
gladly received the word, wherein they were exhorted to be baptized when they
were gladly baptized.

As for that story of Cornelius that was indeed a pure Gentile. Though Peter
had commission enough to have gone to him by the command of Christ, Mat. 28.19.
and to have baptized him and taught him the commands of Christ, yet it is
plain Peter did not understand the Commission, therefore God for Peter's own
satisfaction, and the satisfaction of them of the circumcision, was pleased in
all that story to go before Peter in a miraculous way; Peter was so far from
baptizing of Cornelius, that he was hardly persuaded to go to him or preach to
him, but as God did go before him by miracles, which when they of the
circumcision saw, the text says, they were astonished: And of this very story
St. Peter, Act. 15. and other places makes use of to satisfy the Jews
touching the calling of the Gentiles: but this was the mercy of God during the
infancy of the Church to use such extraordinary means for the drawing off the
Jews from that ceremonial distinction that God himself had put between Jews
and Gentiles, but in the orderly administration God sent the Holy Ghost, though
by extraordinary manifestations, yet in a seasonable time when first he had
tendered the means of grace: As for the falling of the Holy Chost upon the
Apostles in cloven tongues, Act. 2. that came seasonably upon them when they
had occasion to use them, and after had been baptized; but the Holy Ghost
promised in v. 28. is promised after Peter had preached repentance and
baptism; nay on many after they were baptized, Repent and be baptized, and ye
shall receive the holy Ghost: showing that preaching and baptizing are but the
tenders of grace, neither the one nor the other of any force unless the Holy
Ghost come. Now though the manner of the giving the Holy Ghost be different,
yet the season is according to the way of Gods dispensation, God will have
outward means first tendered, and after he will bless it where he pleases,
among which outward means these are chief, if not all can or ought to be used
by way of tender baptism, and teaching, which is all that is tendered in the
commission, whatsoever is is babbled to the contrary: baptising is set before
teaching the commands of Christ, as I have formerly manifested; and indeed, it
were a strange thing for the sacrament of baptism to be tendered to men that
were already clean, and approved, declared and manifested to be clean; it is
true, it may be tendered to men that profess their faith, because man cannot
judge them faithful, notwithstanding any profession, and therefore baptize
them; but if they could know and judge them faithful, they might give them the
Lords supper, in which all Christ is communicated, and baptism should not be
needful; baptism is the seal of the tender of Christ, and of the purging
power of his blood, not of our communion or partaking of Christ, that is sealed
in the other sacrament.

Now to come to the signification, it is preparative to all other graces, it
signifies regeneration; and therefore it is called regeneration, John 3.5.
Except ye be regenerate by water and the Spirit, ye cannot enter into the
kingdom of heaven. Now, certainly the Holy Ghost would not set forth the grace
of baptism by regeneration, or newbirth, if any grace had been preparative to
it, it is not possible that any life or motion should be imagined before
regeneration: It is true, in John 3.5. Except ye be born by water and the
Spirit, unless ye be by water and the Spirit; that which we translate born, is
(...), be, and Tit. 3.5. Baptism is called (...), the laver of regeneration.
Lest men may vulgarly imagine, that men are spiritually begotten by the Word,
and were to remain some time in their mothers belly, the church, before they
were brought forth by baptism: during which time, they were to be catechumens,
and made fit to be received into the Church: that word which is translated
born, John 3. in 1 Cor. 4.15. is translated begotten, I have begotten you
through the Gospel: For, there it is (...), and indeed, there can be no
imagination of life before there is a being, before begetting; it is true,
adultus must have faith, such as it is, natural, humane: before he can be
baptized, he must be willing by some inclination or other: it were barbarous to
baptize a grown man against his will, which could not be gotten but by some
kind of credence, though it might be just with man to punish him with death
that should refuse, as it is with God to punish with eternal death, such as
despise baptism; yet that Ministers should refuse to baptize any man that
shall desire baptism, until he has saving faith, is to require actions of
life, and reason from a man before he were begotten, or cleanness and purity
before he were washed. Again, that sacrament that was administered unto all the
churches of the Gentiles in the Scripture mentioned, without any mention in the
Scripture, of any preparative grace that must it self be the symbol of the
first grace, and preparative of all other graces: But baptism is such,
therefore baptism is preparative to all other graces. Let all the Epistles of
the Apostles be searched, and ye shall find they were all written to baptized
persons, that they are full of exhortations to faith, and sometimes arguments
drawn from baptism past, to move them to repentance and newness of life, Romans
6.4. St. Paul does indeed tell them that they were buried by baptism with
Christ, but what does he collect out of that? therefore repent and believe, but
does he at any time, speaking of faith, and repentance, argue from thence to
baptism, and tell any of them, if they would believe and repent, they should
be baptized? which the right method of handling the doctrine of the Gospel
would have required, if faith and repentance had been preparatives; but I am
confident, if any man shall take on him to teach faith, and repentance, as
preparatives to baptism, he must either make his Text, or draw that out of it
that will not come: he that will teach any doctrine other then so much as may
make them willing to be baptized, and repute them disciples, and teach them as
disciples of Christ unbaptized, must follow no Apostolical Precept or Example.
That which is drawn out of the commission, is without ground, that teaching
must go before baptizing, because (...), is set first: For, first the phrase of
the words is changed, (...), whereas had there been a methodicall enumeration
of things that ought to have been performed in order one before another, the
style ought not to have been altered; it should have been, (...), Go, teach and
baptize; and therefore those that would gather any thing out of the order of
the words, must be enforced to read them so, which the Text will not permit.
Again, the word (...) is a^ ^^rist. in the Imperative mood, which stands for
a Future, whereas the words, baptizing and teaching what I command, are both
Present. Again, this (...), ye shall make disciples, is the end, and ought to
be the first set down, and declared to those that shall be employed about the
means, as I have formerly proved, and so the style does clearly manifest, ye
shall make all the world disciples, baptizing them, and teaching them
whatsoever I command, which is as much as by so doing, ye shall make them
disciples: as if a man should say sowing in season, and making good choice of
your seed and land, ye shall have a good crop; here is plainly intended, that
these Participiall expressions, this sowing and making good choice shall be
taken up for the mean, and the crop is to be expected after, as the success
and event of them: as for (...), from (...), to learn, and therefore some
collect, that it does imply a learning with profit, that is nothing to the
preparation; if there be any thing in that, it is in the success, and it has
the virtue of a promise, and is estimated by God, limited and extended
according to the good pleasure of God, Isai. 48.17. I am the Lord thy God, that
teaches thee to profit: Paul plants, Apollo waters, it is God that gives
the success; and if it should stand in that sense as a preparation to baptism
in the commission, it must contain a manifest falsehood, or prove undeniably
universal grace, if they shall teach with profit all nations, and baptize
them; or at least, an universal national acceptance of the Gospel, teaching
with profit can admit of no milder sense then that; and if every person must be
taught with profit before he be baptized, then none ought to be baptized but
the elect of God; and it were a sin for any Minister to baptize any other but
such as received profit by the word, the word works to the hurt of the
reprobate whatsoever show of profit it may seem to have.

3. Reason, That doctrine that takes away the distinction of the two
Sacraments, that is a false doctrine; but Anabaptisme does take away the
distinction of the two Sacraments, ergo, the doctrine of the Anabaptists is a
false doctrine. That doctrine that requires preparation to both Sacraments,
takes away the difference of the Sacraments; but Anabaptists require
preparation to both Sacraments, therefore Anabaptists take away the difference
of the Sacraments.

The difference does consist in this, that the Sacrament of baptism is
preparative to the Lords Supper, sacramentally giving that to us which we stand
in need of, to make us fit for the Lords Supper: I say, sacramentally, not that
God cannot or does not take his own time of calling sometime before we are
partaker of either Sacrament, sometimes after we have both Sacraments; yea and
after we have sinfully profaned the Lords Supper: but Sacraments have their
proper use and signification, and are as all other duties liable to abuse. We
must behave our selves as men under the means: we have our duties charged upon
us of God, whereof some are official, some personal belonging to every man's
person, about the performance of all which, we may sin either by omission or
misuse; but all the good that we receive by word or sacraments is of God: what
we do by way of office that lies charged on us by the rule that we receive
from God, which is to baptize all Nations and teach them; the success is of
God, and the account of faith must be given to God; we can take some account of
some works, to wit, those that are external; but of faith and of such works
as are imminent the thoughts of the heart, we can say nothing to them. Now the
communion that is between Christ and us, is set down in Scripture by Christ's
being or dwelling in us, and we in him; we must first be in Christ before he
can be in us: we were in Christ by election before the foundation of the world,
and therefore may be received into Christ before we can have faith; nay we are
said to be baptized into Christ, Romans 6.3. so many of you are baptized into
Christ Jesus, and the grace of baptism is said to be wrought by the Spirit, by
the Spirit ye are baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12.13. and Gal. 3.27. As many
as are baptized into Christ have put on Christ: Christ is never said to be
conveyed into us by baptism, but by faith. Ephesians. 3.17. That Christ may dwell
in your hearts by faith: what is instrumentally ours by faith, is sacramentally
ours by the Lords supper: he therefore that eateh Christ in the Lords supper,
Christ is in him. John. 6.56. He that eats my flesh dwells in me, and I in
him: but Christ is never laid to be in us by baptism, but we are baptized into
Christ; he is not baptized into us, but he is communicated into us in the Lords
supper, for which faith is required as a preparation, and the habitation of
Christ in us is ascribed to faith as a means as before, that Christ may dwell
in your hearts by faith; but our birth in Christ, or regeneraion is not at all
ascribed to faith, but to the Spirit and water, John 3.5. Except a man be born
by water and the Spirit: and to the Word, 1 Cor. 4.15. I have begotten you
through the Word, but never are we said, either to be born or begotten by
faith: the acts of faith, are growth, life, and fruits of sanctification, Joh.
6.35. Those that believe and come to Christ, are said to eat and drink Christ:
For, he that comes unto Christ, is promised he shall never hunger; and he that
believes in him, shall never thirst. And this virtue is ascribed to the body
and blood of Christ, from whence Divines do justly gather, that he that
believes, does eat the flesh, and drink the blood of Christ, but no intimation
in Scripture from whence any man can collect, that he that believes is
baptized, unless it be a posteriori: For, he that does believe, must first be
baptized by the Spirit, before he can believe; and thus are the graces offered
in the sacraments, kept distinct, which otherwise would be the same: that the
grace of baptism is initiall, that of the Lords supper is perfective, which
may further be manisted thus: our calling has two parts, the proffer of grace,
and the acceptance of grace proffered: The first is by the Word, the Spirit,
and Baptism; the other is by the Word, Spirit, Faith, and the Lords supper. I
have here added faith, because the Scripture does so, making faith an
instrument by which we receive Christ: but Christ must be proffered to us by
his Spirit and Word, before we can receive him, which is expressed in the word
calling, as distinct from justification, and goes before justification, in
which we have the first act of faith, Romans 8.30. Whom he predestinateth, them
he also called, whom he called, them he also justified; we are not called by
faith, but we are justified by faith, Romans 2.28. and 5.1. Baptism is the seal
and sacrament of Gods work in us, which had need to be most clearly manifested,
and confirmed unto us, as having most of God, and least of us, that we might
submit to it, whereunto we are most averse; therefore what has most of us in
it, that pleases us best: as works better then faith, and faith, as we look on
it in our selves, as a qualification is more delightful to us then as it is in
its own nature, working humiliation, teaching us to deny our selves, and rest
on God: men do use to magnify faith, but too many under a false apprehension,
even of secrecy and liberty before (...) faith is not a boasting quality, nor
to be pleaded before men, but God; and this (...), cap. 2. does handle at
large, showing, that men are very inclinable to (...) ^^o^st of faith before
men, and rely on works before God; and herein the deceitfulness of our hearts
is very great, when we conceive we deal with an (...)-power, then we find the
things of faith apprehended most weakly of any thing, we can please our selves
better in the opinion of our works then of faith, but when we come to deal with
man, we are sure we treat of colors before blind men: there we can boldly
talk, we may speak as freely as travelers, we cannot be disproved, whereby it
comes to pass, often times, that heart that is least upright, is most bold;
faith is indeed, in time of need, very heroic in her exploits, in that she
acts by the power of God, but ascribes little of her best actions to her
self; she is always conversant with God, and therefore cannot but be conscious
of much weakness and infirmity; faith is so always laden with difficulties,
that she has very little to say of her self; there must be great preparation
on Gods part, before there can be any sense or feeling in man of the things of
faith; there must be the mighty operation of the Word and Spirit, and God is
pleased to add baptism too, for faith to work upon: these things are of mighty
operation, and so they had need, considering the sloth of heart that is in us
to believe: it is well, if after the Word and sacrament of baptism, faith do
come. God lays it as a ground and foundation for faith to work upon, and
accordingly all the arguments of Scripture are to raise us to walk worthy of
amendment of life, and to rise with Christ, Romans 6. as if it should be said,
God has offered you grace in baptism, therefore accept of it; ye are born
anew in baptism, let it appear in your conversation.

Argum. 4. That which makes the admission into the Church merely arbitrary,
that is a false doctrine; but the doctrine of Anabaptists makes admission into
the Church merely arbitrary, Ergo, the major is plain; for, that nothing is
more directly contrary to the service of God then will worship, but denying any
that are tendered according to the mind of Christ in the Word, and requiring
such disposition in the party to be baptized, as the Minister pleases, without
any rule from Gods Word, is to make the public service of God, or at least a
great part of it, wholly arbytrary; and this does appear to flow from their
doctrine: not yet any man durst affirm what was the measure of faith to be
required how much he must believe that must be baptized, by means whereof the
whole matter depends on the will of the Baptizer, a thing most contrary to
the nature of Religion; it cannot be imagined that the Holy Ghost would have
been so silent in giving rules for the Ministers to walk by in the trial of
the faith of the person to be baptized, if any such charge had lain upon his
office. He must baptize believers only, says Mr. Tombs, and the Anabaptists,
but no Scripture directs what, or how much he must believe; must it be as
much as the Minister shall think fit, then some Ministers will baptize with
very small trial, others will be very hardly satisfied: some will baptize as
soon as the child can be taught to say he believes in Christ, others not till
ten or twelve, others twenty years of age; wherein no man can either satisfy
his own conscience, or any reasonable man; for that he walks without rules,
neither does this difficulty from this doctrine come from accidental
misconstructions or phansies, but inevitable necessity from the doctrine it
self, that the Minister must baptize none but believers; yet cannot tell how
much, or what he must believe before he be fit for baptism, unless he walk by
rules of man's making, without any intimation from Scripture.

5. That doctrine that gives man that power which is divine, that doctrine is
blasphemous and false; but the doctrine of the Anabaptists gives man that
power which is divine, therefore the doctrine of Anabaptists is blasphemous and
false.

That doctrine that gives man power to judge of faith in another, that
doctrine gives man that power that is divine; but the Anabaptist gives men
power to judge of faith in another; therefore the Anabaptist, that power that
is divine.

Faith is in the heart: with the heart man believes to righteousness, and
with the mouth he confesses to salvation, Romans 10.10. He therefore that
judges of faith, must judge the heart which is proper to God. I the Lord try
the heart, Jer. 17.10. Neither will it serve his turn to say, that he judges
by rules of charity if this charge lay upon his office; to judge charitably it
is one thing, another to judge ex officio; for the judgment of charity can
never pronounce the person so judged to be such as he is judged by charity to
be: judgments of charity are not always true, if it be possible we have
warrant enough to judge it so by charity: if children may possibly be such as
the Kingdom of heaven do belong too, we may in charity judge them such: but
if we are tied by our office to baptize none but believers, it will not serve
turn to say we judge them such by charity, to prove that we must baptize none
but such as are believers, seeing we may by charity judge many believers which
yet are not believers: again judgment of faith is denied to belong to the
Apostles themselves, not that we have dominion of your faith, 2 Cor. 1.24. If
God had appointed Ministers to have judged of men's faith before they had
baptized them, he would have given them some rules by which they should have
been able to walk, which he has not done; he has annexed baptism to the
Ministers calling to let men know that the grace of baptism comes immediately
from Christ; therefore he sent the seal of it by that calling that came
immediately from him, but has promised those officers of his no special
qualifications whereby they shall have abilities to discern the faith of men
more then other men have; the judgment of charity, is not a Ministerial
qualification that belongs to every man, and is no Ministerial qualification.

6. That doctrine that denies the interpretation of the promise made to
Abraham which S. Paul makes that is a false doctrine; but the doctrine of
Anabaptists denies the interpretation of the promise made to Abraham which St.
Paul makes: therefore the doctrine of the Anabaptists is false. Those that deny
the blessing of Abraham, and in him of all the Nations of the earth to be the
Gospel preached to Abraham in reference to the Gentiles after their call, deny
the interpretation that S. Paul makes of the promise made to Abraham: but the
Anabaptists deny the blessing of Abraham, and in him of all the Nations of the
earth, to be the Gospel preached to Abraham in reference to the Gentiles after
their call; therefore the Anabaptists deny the interpretation made to Abraham
which S. Paul makes; the words of S. Paul are plain, Gal. 3.8. the Scripture
foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before
the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all Nations be blessed; where ye
see plainly S. Paul affirms the promise to Abraham to be the Gospel, and the
Nations to be converted Gentiles, and that in the promise made to Abraham,
there was a Prophecy of the conversion of the Gentiles; and the Gentiles under
the Gospel had Abraham's blessing, that is a blessing to them and their seed,
as Abraham had to him and his seed: so that it is apparent that those which
deny the blessing to the seed of the Gentiles, the blessing of the promise,
deny Abraham's blessing to the Gentiles; which is directly to deny the
interpretation of St. Paul concerning Abraham's blessing, and to deny that the
blessing to Abraham was the Gospel, or that the promise was a Prophecy of the
conversion of the Gentiles under the Gospel; all which things are plainly
affirmed by St. Paul.

7. That doctrine that denies the benefit or grace of circumcision to be
offered in baptism, that doctrine is false: but the doctrine of Anabaptists is
a doctrine that denies the benefit and grace of circumcision to be offered in
baptism; therefore the doctrine of the Anabaptists is false. That doctrine
which denies what St. Paul affirms, is a false doctrine: but that doctrine
that denies the benefit or grace of circumcision to be offered in baptism,
that doctrine denies what St. Paul affirms; therefore that doctrine denies
the benefit and grace of circumcision to be offered in baptism, is a false
doctrine.

The place wherein St. Paul does affirm that we have the benefit of
circumcision by baptism, is Colloss. 2.11, 12. Let the argument be weighed, I
have spoken to it in my answer to Mr. Tombs. In the which verse St. Paul
affirms they were circumcised, that was not literally true; therefore he
affirms in a figurative or metonymicall sense, signi pro signato, the thing
signified by circumcision: and he further shows, how the benefit they were
partakers of had resemblance with circumcision; circumcision did cut off the
body by a synecdoche, part for the whole, but they put off the whole body, but
it was the body of sin. Now this is done by the circumcision of Christ; it was
this circumcision of Christ that made the circumcision of our fathers of any
virtue: this had been as true of the Patriarchs, that they were circumcised in
putting off the body of the sins of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ;
whereof their legal circumcision was but a type, and Christ's circumcision did
put an end to that circumcision; yet the Collossians were circumcised in
Christ: how could that be? the text plainly says, they put off the body of the
sins of the flesh, and that was their circumcision in the circumcision of
Christ; it was the benefit of circumcision to the Jews, which they had though
they wanted the ceremony? Now all this benefit comes unto you by being in
Christ, get but into Christ and all is done; to put off the body is to dye;
Christ dyed, if ye be in him, all that he did you did; he was circumcised, ye
are circumcised; he died, ye die; if in him; thus were your fathers in Christ
by circumcision: so are ye in Christ by baptism, buried with him in baptism:
nothing can be plainer then the grace and benefit of circumcision was offered
to the Colossians in baptism.

That doctrine that refuses to hear and obey the rational and manly phrase of
the doctrine of the Gospel, and reduce all to the sensitive and childish
delivery of the Law, that is an unfaithful and disobedient doctrine; but the
doctrine of Anabaptists refuses to hear and obey the rational and manly
phrase of the doctrine of the Gospel, and reduce all to the sensitive and
childish delivery of the Law, therefore the doctrine of the Anabaptists is an
unfaithful and disobedient doctrine; God was pleased to deliver the service,
which consisted in ceremonies and outward performances in such manner, that
every external was directed to them the length, height of their Temple, and
of every thing that was contained therein, to show that God would be the author
of all things in his worship: The color, length of the curtains, of their
altars, and every carved thing, were directed immediately by God; the place
where the Temple should stand: If we should rigorously look for particular
rules in this kind, as those Anabaptists do in point of baptism look for the
like direction for administration of baptism, as of circumcision; and for want
thereof, to neglect what the Holy Ghost has said concerning the nature of
baptism, and giving direction to have it administered to all nations, thereby
leaving the precept or duty of baptism without any lawful use, for want of
such sensitive and particular direction as they had under the Law, we might be
condemned for will worship, for building Churches without a pattern and
direction from God, how high, or how long they should be, together with many
things of the like nature; refuse to pray publicly or meet to serve God
because he had appointed no place: the truth is, what they say against
baptizing of Infants does conclude against any baptizing at all: For, if the
particular assignation of the persons to be baptized must be dinstiguished by
any qualification, for want of any such direction, we shall be enforced to
leave all unbaptized: Baptize all nations, says Christ, and Acts 2.41. three
thousand souls were added: Act. 8.12. men and women; these may comprehend all,
male and female, without necessary inference, that they were grown men and
women.

Now, if we leave this sensitive and childish way, and walk by the reasonable
sense of Scripture, how clearly does the Scripture give satisfaction in this
point, I pray you observe? First, Christ does command to baptize all nations:
Secondly, he tells, that the promise belonging to any, does entitle him to
baptism, Acts 2.39. Thirdly, that the promise is the same to Abraham, and the
Gospel preached to the Gentiles, Gal. 3.8. that the promise was to Abraham and
his seed; that baptism does circumcise us by ingrafting us into Christ, Col.
2.11, 12. By what rational excuses can we excuse our selves for disobediences
to the commands of Christ, commanding us to baptize all nations, if we refuse
any, that by a national covenant are brought unto us?

8. That doctrine, which under pretense of walking by Scripture, support all
their doctrine by falacies, and false arguments, that doctrine is erroneous and
false; but the doctrine of Anabaptists is such, I do challenge all the
Anabaptists, and in particular Mr. Tombs, to produce any argument against
Infants baptism from Scripture, or sound reason, that shall reasonably
conclude from the words without any addition or substraction, or may agree with
the sense and argument of the words produced, then I shall account Mr. Tombs
his sceptiques more tolerable; in the mean time, I wish he might receive
satisfaction, and spend his time in confirmation of his weaker brethern.

FINIS.

