A NEW DECLARATION Set forth by the Lord Genesis Hamilton

Wherein is declared, The full Resolution of the Officers and Soldiers in the
Scottish Army, to the Presbyterians of England, and their Resolution to settle
the Kings Majesty in His Royal Throne, and to make Him as glorious a Prince as
ever reigned in Europe.

LIKEWISE, The Propositions of Sir Marmaduke Langdale, to the Lord General,
concerning the uniting of the two Armies, and a Declaration touching the
Presbyterians, and the Royalists.

Presented to Duke Hamilton upon his entering into England, and the proceedings
of the Scottish Army thereupon. Also, another Army advancing out of Scotland,
under the command of Genesis Monroe.

And a great Fight near Carlisle, between the two Armies, and the number killed
and taken.

Printed at Edinburgh, And reprinted at London, for general satisfaction both
of Presbyterians, Royalists, and Independents, 1648.

THE SCOTS NEW MARTCH
And their advancing into England with 12000. Horse and Foot, for King,
Covenant, and Religion. With the Lord Generals Declaration, sent to the
Counties of Northumberland and Westmerland.
Right Honored,
THe Scots are now upon their march toward the Borders of Westmerland, with a
Resolution to advance toward the Southern Climate, the Lord Sincler with a
Regiment of Horse, and two of Foot is joined with Major General Langdale, and
the whole Army, together with the Tram of Artillery will suddenly be united;
for they are now upon the Confines of England, and upon the 12. of this instant
intends to join with Major General Langdale, their Army consisting of 12000.
Horse and Foot, besides 4000. more commanded by General Monroe, who is said to
be come out of Ireland with most of the said Forces, having ma^e a Cessation
with the Rebels, as it is reported.

These are said to be very expert in Martial affairs, the worst of them being
able to make a good Commander. But notwithstanding all their great force, and
impregnable power, our men are resolved to fight with them, being full of
courage, and willing to adventure lives and fortunes against any Foreigners
whatsoever that shall endeavor to obstruct the peace of their native Country.
And being willing to testify their fidelity both toward King, Parliament, and
Kingdom, against the enemies thereof, have made another gallant attempt
against the Longtailes, the manner thus.

On Sunday night last our Army coming to Warwick bridge four miles from
Carlisle, the enemy kept a strong Guard of Horse and Foot there, but our men
marching very silent, and the Foot keeping their matches undiscovered, we were
upon them before they were aware: Our Forlorn fell in amongst them, doing great
execution, and being unwilling to dispute the business, the enemy set fire on
their Guards and fled, our men pursued them to the Walls of Carlisle still
firing upon their Rear, and did great execution, so that after a sharp
breathing, we took about one hundred prisoners, forty Horse, and sixty Arms,
with the loss of six men.

This action happened in the night, which saved the enemy many hundreds, but we
gave them so hot an allarm, that they left all their quarters, and ran to
Carlisle.

We hear that Col. Fairfax who lies with his Forces at Fern bridge, has given
the Pomfret Forces a Defeat; occasioned by their salleying forth upon Friday
night last, a party of them being commanded out by Major Thimbleby who wheeling
about by the lower town. in the evening made their approach near the bridge,
but our Sentinels discovering them, gave the word privately back, and our men
being in a readiness to receive them, gave them a volley, ^ut notwithstanding
they cam^ within pistol shot of the bridge foot, whereupon the Captain of the
Guard, discharged a Drake laden with key shot at them, the Cunner being absent,
which made such a Rout, that they betook themselves to flight, our men pursued,
and in the pursuit took their commander in chief prisoner, with diverse others,
and killed about 20. of them, pursuing the rest into Pomfret town.

We are further advertized, that about Tuesday or Wednesday he Scots intend to
set footing into England, and have already sent their Embassage to the Northern
counties to be proclaimed and read at the respective Market towns within the
said Counties which is to this effect.

The Declaration of Duke Hamilton.
WHereas we find the long sufferings of His Royal Majesty to be great and
unexpressable, and the heavy burdens and oppressions of his liege people so
intolerable and unsupportable, to the great damage of diverse of his Majesty's
loyal subjects; therefore we do declare, that we are resolved to hazard lives
and fortunes for the redeeming of his Majesty from prison, and to make him as
glorious a King as even reigned in Europe, to settle Religion according to the
Covenant, and to establish and preserve the peace of both Kingdoms, according
to our solemn League and Protestation.

The Declarations and Propositions of Major Genesis Langdale, to Duke Hamilton,
concerning the Presbyterians of England.
UPon the second of this instant July, Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and Sir Tho:
Glenham called a general Council, where appeared most of the Field-Officers
under their present command, and after they were assembled together, they
agreed upon certain Propositions, to be sent to Duke Hamilton, and the rest of
the Scottish Peers, now in activity with the new raised Forces of Scotland,
concerning the Presbyterian parry of England; which Propositions I shall here
communicate to the public view, viz.

I. Marmaduke Langdale humbly desires, that their Lordships would be pleased
to contrive some expedient way how he may declare, that as the Presbyterian
party be encouraged to join with us, in this our Engagewenr for the King and
Covenant so the Royal party may not be lost, but that a fair correspondencie
may be kept betwixt both.

II.

III. England, to advertise their Lordships of our procedings.

IV. To certify their Lordships, that there has been nothing wanting on our
parts for the advancement of this great Work, and to keep a good correspondency
with the Inhabitants of these Northern Counties, notwithstanding the falling
off of Lancashire, and our endeavoring to engage them with us.

These propositions were agreed upon at a general Council held in Carlisle,
and sent to Duke Hamilton, Lord General of the Scots Army; who after reading
thereof, in presence of most of the chief Commanders, it was resolved,

That Orders should be forthwith sent to the Commanders in chief of each
Regiment, to march with their Regiments to the general Randezvouz at
Dumfreize, according to the day prefixed, which accordingly they did, where
several Orders were read at the head of each Regiment, concerning the
Discipline and Government of the Army, intimating the penalties which should be
executed upon those that did offend.

And after these and the like passages, each Regiment drew off, and marched
from the Randezvouz, toward Carlisle, the Lord General rode before them with
his Lifeguard, accompanied with many Noblemen, and Knights of Chivalry; and it
is believed, they will cross the Tweed tomorrow.

Edinburgh July 7. 1648.
FINIS.

