THE INFORMATION OF Sir Frederick Hammilton, Knight, and Colonel, Given to the
Committee of Both KINGDOMS, Concerning Sir William Cole, Knight, and Colonel;

WITH The Scandalous Answer of the said Sir William Cole, Knight:

TOGETHER With the Replication of Sir Frederick Hammilton, in Answer to the
said Scandalous and Recriminating Pamphlet of Sir William Cole.

With diverse Letters and Depositions, for the clearing of the said Sir
Frederick Hammilton, from the several Scandals and Aspersions in the said
Answer of Sir William Cole.

Printed, Anno Dom. 1645.

To the Impartial READER.
HE that does most Service, when he has least encouragement, shows his
principles to be Noble, and that he least intends himself; and if his more
particular employment, chance to expire with his attendance, it may weaken his
fortune, but cannot impair his credit: It is unfaithfulness that only makes a
man to be used too long, whiles he that has really done his part, need not to
repine, though men of weaker abilities have better fortune. Thus it is task
enough for great spirits to be patient, when they find themselves neglected
for doing Service, and in such a case, to keep humble and contented, well
knowing, that at a low water there is time to mend the Banks, aad whiles the
Ship is in the Harbor, it may be dressed and trimed, and made able to endure
rough Seas and Tempests: I must confess, it is not the first time I have had
to do with men of the same rank and condition, which the ensuing discourse has
brought upon the Stage, not occasioned by any desire of mine, for I am enforced
to this Vindication of my self, or must have lain under those base aspersions,
which no other then a son of him that rules in the Air, could without shame
and blushing, have published to the World; but his boldness herein, I doubt
not, but will appear to be void, both of Counsel and Religion, his dishonesty
sufficiently showing his dishonor, and pusilanimity; for a magnanimous man
will be just, but such favorites will be slaves at last, who to advance
themselves, will inthrall their posterity, betray their Country, abuse their
friends, and by an intolerable baseness, and brutish demeanor, traduce those
that stand next in the way of their preferments, whose timorousness commonly
for want of courage and judgment, makes them so suspicious, that they raise
jealousies, and preoccupate evils, never plotted any where, but in their own
Immaginations; to which they are led, by prejudicate opinions, and
unwarrantable fancies; and such Beasts as these, do usually run under great
Trees in a storm, for shelter and protection, where they leave nothing but dung
and filth behind them for their standing, when the Tempest is once over: You
may perceive, it has been my zeal (and not too much officiousness, as some
would have it) that has carried me on unto this undertaking, with which, if
you shall consider the Injunctions of State laid upon me, how could I have done
less, if not to have muzled my Conscience, and sown up my Lips, to all
relation whatsoever: I confess, he that discharges his duty, though be does
not deserve thanks, yet he meriteth encouragement, and not discountenance, for
his endeavor; but he that at any time, shall over act his part, be too forward
for his Countries good, be it never so advantageous to the Public, shall many
times be thought more precise, then wise, peradventure be accounted but a mad
man for his labor: Envy will not want ways and means to vent it self against
the innocent. I have not yet thoroughly understood it to be an offense, to use
the sword with the most keen, and sharpest edge, against a cruel and bloody
Rebel: Yet I have sometimes heard of a Milksop, set up in the stead of a
Joshua, but then it was to do the enemy a good turn; and that with more
security they might make spoil and havoc of their Adversaries: Thus some man
may with more safety steal a Horse, then another man may look over the Hedge.
And if this man's sufferings be concluded for an Argument of his guilt, or that
it be a warrantable proceeding to condemn him upon no better ground and
evidence, then his adversaries accusation, I see not who can be safe or free in
this world; but Justice lays the Gold to the Touchstone, and finds out the
counterfeit Metal, and esteems of both, according to their value: Let the
Cosk then have the Barley Kernel; let the Lapidary take the Jewel that knows
the price and value of it. And I beseech you, judge of me as you shall find
the truth for to appear in that which follows, wherein I have dealt freely and
clearly, and desire to be interpreted as the whole shall hold out unto you, the
matter to be resolved, for him to live or die in your opinion, that strives to
be yet a more lover of his Country, and to show himself zealous and faithful,
in all his undertakings, and more particularly in this Cause and Covenant.

F. H.

A COPY of the ORDER, by Virtue whereof Sir Frederick Hamilton exhibited
Articles against Sir William Cole, and others.
Die Lunae, 23. December. 1644. At the Committee of both Kingdoms, at Derby
House.
Ordered,

THat Sr Frederick Hammilton be desired, that if he has any thing that he can
inform this Committee of, concerning any miscarriage of any persons in the
Service of the Parliament in Ireland, That he will give it in to the Committee
in Writing, on Thursday next, in the Afternoon.

By Command of the Committee, Gualter Frost Secretary, to the same Committee.

To the Right Honorable, the Lords, and others, the Committee of both
Kingdoms. The Information of Sir Frederick Hammilton Knight, and Colonel,
against Sir William Cole, Knight.
Showing,

FIrst, That the said Sir William Cole had notice of the intended Plots of the
Irish, to break out into Rebellion, above a fortnight before the Rebels took up
Arms, as it is generally given out in Ireland; and yet did neither timely
inform the State, nor his Neighbors, for to prevent the mischief, and to
defend themselves.

II. That having a Commission from His Majesty to be a Colonel only of five
Companies of Foot, he notwithstanding takes on nine Companies, making them
believe, as if he had Commission for a thousand. And when he had made use of
their Service, near a year and a half; when Provisions were sent him by the
Parliament, whereof they expected a share, he cashiered four of the most
deserving Captains, and their Companies, of purpose to gain all the said
Provisions to himself, and his Son in law, Dea^ Barkley, who was his Agent to
the Parliament, for those Provisions.

III. About the beginning of the Rebellion, there were two English Papists,
whose Sirnames were Hetherington, who joined themselves with the Rebels, and
plundered one Sergeant Abrels house, a Tenant unto Sir Frederick, and
afterward burned the House, which was certified to Sir William Cole by Sir
Frederick, with the Depositions of certain witnesses, proving the same fact:
And it was desired, that Sir William Cole would make them sure for Justice,
they being then daily employed by him, which he refused to do, aleadging that
they had done good service to him, and afterward suffered them to escape.

IV. That whereas Sir Frederick Hamilton had taken one Robert Parck, one that
complied with the Rebels, and had him in custody a year and more, and had
likewise gained the Command of the Castle, which was of great advantage and
service to the Parliament: And by means whereof, the said Sir Frederick did
daily much spoil, and annoy the Rebels. The said Sir William Cole knowing the
consequence thereof, and how well affected the said Parck stood unto the
Rebels, on a time after that horrid Cessation concluded with the Rebels; and
when he knew that Sir Frederick himself, his Wife, and Children were gone for
Londonderry, some sixty miles from Manor Hammilton: The said Sir William
Cole, upon the Marquis of Ormonds commands, sends his Ensign with 40.
Musketeers unto Sir Fredericks said Garrison, and by permission of the said
Sir Fredericks Lieutenant, who commanded in his absence, and corresponded with
him, as it should seem, be took away the said Parck. And whereas he was by the
said Order to have conveyed him unto Londonderry, and so to Dublin, be first
feasted him as his Castle, and then returned him back amongst the Rebels, who
received him with all gladness, and after they had rejoiced a while together,
they go along with him to Dublin, where afterward be procures an Order of the
State for restitution of his Castle, with whatsoever Arms and Goods were in it;
which he accordingly obtained in Sir Fredericks absence: Which he, and the
Rebels, now make good against the Parliament, to the great prejudice of the
Parliaments Service, and the danger and hazard of all those parts of Conaught.
And this done, albeit, the said Sir William Cole well knew, that Sir Frederick
had refused to deliver the said Prisoner, upon several Orders, and Commands,
sent unto him by the said Marquis for that purpose, as well knowing the said
Parck to be an utter Enemy to the Parliament here, and their proceedings. And
one for whom the Lord Viscount Taaffe (that Arch-rebel) had by his Letters
solicited the said Sir Frederick for his delivery.

V. That the said Sir William Cole did in the month of February, next after
the said Cessation, apply himself unto the Marquis of Ormond, who then, and
long before, was declared an Enemy to the Parliament. And complained against
the said Sir Frederick and his Soldiers to the said Marquis, for taking of a
prey from the Rebels; which Rebels the said Sir William Cole had then
protected, and gained an Order from the said Marquis for restitution thereof,
which notwithstanding was disobeyed.

VI. That before the said Cessation, the said Sir William Cole corresponded
with the Rebels, and took 100. of them at the least into his Protection, and
formed them into a Company, consisting of a Captain and Officers; and employed
them for some time, with the rest of his Regiment, who did him service in
getting of Preys, but did great dis service unto the State, in giving
Intelligence against all the British of their proceedings; and more
particularly, did much grieve and offend Sir Fredericks Garrison at Manor
hammilton, who at the last, took their opportunity, and turned Rebels again.

The said Sir Frederick could inform many other particular Omissions and Dis
services, which the said Sir William Cole has committed in this time of his
employment, since the Rebellion began in Ireland, which because they do concern
himself in a more near relation, he shall therefore forbear to mention. And the
said Sir Frederick is ready to justify himself in whatsoever that any man can
object against him; And humbly prays, that this honorable Committee will not
think the worse of him, for discharging his duty to God, and the State, by the
informing of these Miscarriages, which in Conscience, he holds himself bound to
relate in pursuance of his solemn League and Covenant.

Frederick Hammilton.

To the Right Honorable the Lords, and others, The Committees of both
Kingdoms. The humble Answer of Sir William Cole Knight, and Colonel, to the
Information of Sir Frederick Hammilton Knight, Exhibited against him to your
Lordships, the 26. of December, 1644.
I. FOr answer to the first Article, he says; That he had no certain notice of
the intended Plots of the Irish, to break out into Rebellion, as is suggested
by the Informer; but says, That upon the eleventh of October, 1641. Bryan mac
Coconaght Magwire Esquire, and one Flartagh mac Hugh, informed him of some
jealousies of suspicions, that they then apprehended of some evil Intentions
and practices of the Lord Magwire, Sir Phelem roe O Neil, Neil mac Kennay, Hugh
oge mac Mahon, and others of the Irish Gentry of Vlster, of which he gave
advertisement by his Letter, to the then Lords Justices and Council of
Ireland, with all possible speed; also intimating his desires, That their
Lordships would be so pleased, to take that matter into their serious
consideration, as that they would strictly examine the said Lord Magwire, and
others of his Accomplices concerning the same, who he understood were shortly
after to be at Dublin; which Letter, or a Copy thereof, this Respondent
understands, was transmitted by their Lordships to the Parliament of England,
and remains with the Clerk of the Honorable House of Commons, and was one of
the chiefest evidences and motives (upon the Discovery made by Owin O
Connallie) to induce the State to be upon their Guard, and also of the
apprehension of the Lord Magwire, Hugh oge mac Mahon, Coconaght Magwire,
Redmond Magwire, Tirlagh oge mac Hugh, and others of their consorts in Dublin,
the 23. of October, 1641. or thereabouts. And for proof of this advertisement,
he can produce their Lordships letter in answer of his, which he received
before the Rebellion broke out. And further says, That upon the 21. of
October, 1641. the said Plot being more fully discovered unto him, by the said
Flartagh mac Hugh, by direction from the said Bryan Magwire, and by one Fargus
O Howen, how the Rebellion was to break out universally by the Irish on the 23.
of that Month. He not only posted away a Messenger with a second letter,
Notice was given of this Rebellion, from the Respondent to Sir Frederick
Hammilton, at Londonderry, the 22. of October, 1641. by rancis Barnaby.
to signify the same unto the said Lords Justices and Council (which was
intercepted by the way at Loghramar,) but also the same day hastened eighteen
Messengers with so many Letters, to notify the same to his Neighbors at
Monea, Castle-Balfour, Newtown, Newpurtton, Lowtherstown, Archdale, Bowssland,
Clogher, Glasslogh, and elsewhere, as far as in so short and distracted a time
he could possibly do, being fully busied to draw his Neighbors and Tenants
together, and to Arm and put them into a posture of War, for the defense of the
Castle and Town of Iniskillin, and the parts thereabouts; and amongst others,
did then direct particular advertisement thereof, to be given unto
Mannor-hammilton, (where the Rebellion broke not out in a Month after) and of
which, the Informer could not afterward be ignorant, though he himself was
then absent; and certainly, of all men, has least reason to lay this as a
crime to the Respondents charge, had he not wanted other matter.

II. To the second Article he answers, That the Commission therein mentioned
(as he has heard) was the first ground of the Informers envy, and discontent,
not only against this Respondent, but also against all the other British
Colonels then in Vlster, that received Commissions from His Majesty at that
time, for the raising of their Regiments, and prosecuting of the Rebels, taking
it in great disdain, that there was not the like Commission then sent unto him;
whereas for ought this Respondent could ever hear, none of the said Colonels
knew any certainty of the said Commissions, until they were brought unto them;
neither did this Respondent receive his said Commission, until almost a year
after the Rebellion began (at which time he gave notice thereof unto all his
Captains) for that (during the greatest part of that year) he was so enclosed
on all sides with multitudes of the enemies (being above forty miles distant
from any that were able to give him relief) that he could not receive any
intelligence, how the state of the Protestants of that Kingdom stood, in any
part thereof, though he had often used his best endeavors to gain the same to
his exceeding great charges, and the hanging of twelve or fourteen of his
Messengers, by the Rebels. And the said Informer finding this Respondent next
unto him, and conceiving him easiest to be dealt withal, has ever since used
his uttermost endeavors by invective Calumnies, to asperse and undervalue both
him and his actions, which he has ever envied, so that by extolling his own
unknown services, he labors as much as in him lies, so eclipse those well
know services performed by this Respondent, and all other the Commanders and
Officers in Ulster and Conaught: And this Respondent further says, That by
virtue of a Commission from the Lords Justices and Council of Ireland, to him
directed, at the beginning of the said Rebellion, for raising, Arming, and
Banding, all the British within the County of F^rmanaugh, he (with the help of
his friends) raised, Armed, and Banded, the nine Companies in the said second
Article specified, together with a Troop of Horse; by virtue whereof also, he
might have raised, Armed, and Banded, as many of the British as he could have
drawn together, for their own mutual defense, and prosecution of the Rebels,
by whose assistance (and Gods great blessings) sundry good services have been
performed, whereof this Respondent did often give intimation, both to the
Honorable Parliament, and to the Lords Justices and Council of Ireland,
Humbly desiring, that in reward of their good services they might be listed
into the Parliaments pay, and Regimented under his Command. But inasmuch as he
could not obtain that favor, by reason of the troubles then hear, though
earnestly solicited by his friends, and that but 500. of his Foot, and his
Troop, was inlisted and taken into the Parliaments pay, from the first of July,
1642. as appears by Order of the 21. of that Month, and Provisions of Clothes,
and Victuals, being only sent for them, upon the solicitation of his Agent,
Master Robert Barklay; this Respondent was constrained to deliver out the said
Clothes unto the Officers and Soldiers, of the said five Companies, (not being
able to divide the said 500. Suits amongst 900. men) viz. Unto his own Company,
his Lievtenant-Colonels, his Serjeant-Majors, to the Company of Captain John
Cole, and to the Company of Captain Hugh Rosse, of whom, three are Scottish
Officers, and whom without prejudice to the others merit, he conceived very
deserving of the Employment. Offering at the very same time, to the other four
Captains, and their Companies, an equal divident of all other Provisions sent
him, then by the Parliament, and of what spoils they could get from the Rebels,
if they would continue with him in the Service, promising also, to use his best
endeavors to have them taken into pay, and added to his Regiment. But the
Clothes being thus divided (which could not be otherwise) the said four
Companies were so discontented, that of their own accords they disbanded
themselves, and went to seek their fortunes elsewhere, and yet the greatest
part of their best and ablest men, were persuaded to continue in the Garrison;
so that this Respondent denies, that he did cashiere four of the said Captains
and their Companies, of purpose to gain all the said Provisions to himself, and
his son in law, Master Barklay, as is suggested by the Informer, but was so far
from doing so dishonest an act, that during the stay of the said four Captains,
and their Companies in the Garrison, they received an equal and proportionable
share of the Victuals sent by the Parliament unto his five Companies only; and
moreover, he then, and about that time did procure upon the credit and
obligations of himself, and his friends, worth 1300 l. more in Corn, and other
Provisions, for his said five Companies and Troop, besides those Provisions
before mentioned to be sent them from the Parliament, without which care and
charge, it was impossible for him to keep his Soldiers together, and to do
service for the public, in a remote Garrison, environed then with Rebels on
all sides.

III. To the third Article, this Respondent says, That one James Dunbar
Esquire, and son and heir of Sir John Dunbar Knight (whose Lands, with a good
Iron-work thereon, lies next adjoining, to part of the Lands of the Informer,
whose desire to intrude upon and gain their Rights to himself (as they often
affirmed to this Respondent) begot much contention amongst them, (as it did
between him and all others, also who were his Landed Neighbors) which bred
such malice in the heart of the Informer against the said James, that he not
only exceedingly thirsted after his life, but after the Lives also of his two
servants the Hetheringtons, in the said Article mentioned, (not Papists as
therein is surmised) but then, and now Protestants, who as well to shun the
malice of the Informer, as the fury of the Rebels, came with his said Father
unto this Respondent in December, 1641. Who entrusted the said James with the
custody of the Castle of Lissgole near Iniskillin, with 74. persons with him,
where he was assaulted the 18. of December, 1641. or thereabouts, by a
powerful party of the enemy under the conduct of Rorie Magwire, brother of the
Lord Magwire, who then took and burned the said Castle, and massacred all that
were in it, except the said James Dunbar, whom the Rebels kept in prison,
until May or June, 1642. At which time he made an escape, and came again
(accompanied with the said two Hetheringtons) unto this Respondent, where the
said Hetheringtons went to Church, and did many good and acceptable services,
behaving themselves honestly and valiantly in all that time, and as he is
informed, or both together with their Master at this time, in the service of
this Honorable Parliament, under General Major Monroe (whose Kinsman the said
James Dunbar is.) And where he and his said men, are ready to answer ought the
Informer can lay to their charge; but this Respondent says, That he never
knew, or heard, that the said Hetheringtons joined themselves with the Rebels,
or plundered the said Sergeant Abrels house, or afterward burned it; neither
was their any proof thereof made by the said Abrel, or any witnesses upon Oath,
or otherwise produced, before the Respondent; neither did he deem it requisite
upon the bare Letters of the Informer, (knowing his malice toward them for
their Masters sake) to commit them to Prison, where they might have starved for
want of sustenance; neither did he suffer them, as Fellons, or Traitors, to
escape, for that they in the Service, did destroy diverse Rebels, and Traitors,
whilst they remained at Iniskilling, under this Respondents command.

IV. To the fourth Article of the said Information, this Respondent says, That
upon the first of July 1642. or thereabouts, the said Informer having a design
upon the Town of Sligoe, about ten miles from his house, marched to the Castle
of Robert Parck Esquire, in the said Article mentioned, an English Protestant,
and a Justice of Peace; which before the Rebellion, was possessed of an estate
of about 1000 l. a year, and one that was of very good repute and esteem
amongst his Neighbors, and who (as this Respondent has been often informed by
credible persons) had (to the best of his power) opposed the Rebels in the
beginning of that Rebellion, without complying, or any way corresponding with
them. And under color of going forward with that design, procured the said
Master Parck with 30, or 40. of his Soldiers to accompany him to Sligoe; and
when they came near the said Town, both Master Parcks Soldiers, and those of
the Informers entered the Suburbs thereof; and having burned some few houses in
it, and received some British Protestants that escaped unto them from the
Rebels, they brought them unto the Informer, where he stood aloof with the said
Master Parck; two of the said rescued Protestants, namely, John Wetherspin the
father, and James Witherspin his son, both Scotchmen, were questioned by the
Informer, wherefore they were amongst the Rebels. The father answered, that by
reason of his age (being about 70 years old, or upwards) and that he was sick
and Bedridden three months before, he could not get away, but lived upon the
Alms of the people; whereupon one of the Informers servants told him, that this
old man was formerly Tenant to one John Waldrome Esquire, (a Gentleman that had
an estate near the Informers Lands in that Country) and had borne witness
upon Oath on his Landlords part, in matter of title of Land, against the
Informer, by means whereof, the cause was decreed for Master Waldrome, Note,
that this John Whetherspin, conceived to have been the Father, was not the man
the said Sir Frederick shot, as aforesaid, yet was hanged by him, but it was
another old sick Bedridden Scotchman, that was so shot, and killed by him, in
manner aforesaid.
against the Informer, or matter to that purpose. Upon which (without using any
more words) he shot, and killed the poor decreeped old man, which was the first,
and last man, the Informer killed with his own hands since the Rebellion began in
Ireland, as some of his own servants and Soldiers affirmed. Whereupon, being
informed by James Wetherspin, the son, that the Forces of the County of Sligoe,
were upon their march, to join with the O Roirkes, for to trouble
Mannor-hammilton, he together with Master Parcks, and both their Companies,
hastened back to Master Parcks house, where at the importunity of the Informer
(as this Respondent has been credibly informed) he got the said Master Parck
and his Company (for the better guard of him, and his men) to accompany him to
Mannorhammilton. And although in the way they were hard beset by the Rebels,
insomuch, as the Informer in a Bog, was unhorse't, and his Horse, with
Furniture, and Pistols, taken by the Rebels; by whom, he had been then slain,
or taken, if by the care and valor of the said Master Parck, and some of his
Soldiers, he had not been horsed again, and brought off. Note, that there were
Suites depending both in Ireland, and in England, between Sir Frederick
Hammilton, and the said James Wetherspin, some years before the Rebellion. And
that the said Wetherspin, being served in Ireland with a Command, Dated the 14.
of January, 1640. under the hand of the Speaker of the House of Commons of
England, at the instance of the said Sir Frederick, he appeared here in London,
7. April. 1641. where having attended the House to answer Sir Fredericks
complaint, until the 20 of September, 1641. And (not being able longer to
stay) he returned into Ireland, where the said Sir Frederick, became his Judge
and Executioner, as in this Answer is declared.
Yet when they had escaped that danger, and were come to the Informers house
(as this Respondent has credibly heard) he took the said James Wetherspin (for
having formerly witnessed with his Father against him, as aforesaid) and
twisted a Cord with a wrinch about his head so hard, that his blood streamed
forth of his Ears, Eyes, Nose, and Mouth; in which tortures, he continued him
during his pleasure, and then easing him of that, did cast him into a Dungeon,
where he continued him languishing for hunger, from Thursday until the
Wednesday following: And did cruelly punish a poor Scotsh-woman, which in pity
did cast him an handful of Oatmeal under the door, which the miserable man,
did lick with his Tongue from the dirt, his hands and feet, being fast tied
together with Cords or Withes; and upon the Wednesday following, caused him to
be hanged. Who at the beginning of the Rebellion, with a Horse, Sword, and
Fowling-Peace, came to him, offering his service against the Rebels, from whom,
not withstanding he took the said Horse and Arms, commanding him to be gone out
of his Garrison, and that if he did not, he would hang him, or if ever he got
him again, he would be his death; which he faithfully performed, as aforesaid.

And also upon the Informers entrance into his Castle, he made exceeding shows
of welcome to the said Master Parck, whilst in the interim, he caused all his
Soldiers to be disarmed, and they put in restraint in several lower Rooms in
his house; and then, when he perceived no danger of opposition, he arrested the
said Master Parck, charging him with Treason, and committed him close Prisoner,
where he detained him in durance, the space of a year and upwards, without
suffering any man, except Sergeant Major James Galbraith, to speak unto him,
which was but once, and that upon much importunity; whose extreme misery, was
lamentably bewailed by all the men that were in that Garrison. And then he not
only seized upon, and kept his Castle of Newtown, putting a Guard of his own
into it; but also plundered, and converted to his own use, all his Money,
Plate, Arms, Housholdstuff, Beding, Furniture, and all other his Goods
whatsoever, which he had then as well without, as within doors there, not
suffering his Soldiers to come out of restraint, or use their own Arms, until
he had unlawfully compelled them, to take an Oath to serve as Soldiers under
his only Command. By reason whereof, the said Master Parck was utterly
disabled to perform far greater, and much more advantageous Services, in every
degree, in that place, for this Honorable Parliament against the Rebels, then
ever the Informer did, or could do there, as this Respondent has been credibly
informed, as well by the Testimony of sundry other honest men, as by the said
Master Parck himself.

Whereupon Sir Edward Pavie Knight, whose daughter was the Wife of the said
Master Parck, together with others his friends (being advertised of his extreme
hard usage) Petitioned the Lords Justices and Council of Ireland, for his
removal to Dublin, to answer such matters, as the Informer had to lay to his
charge, and entered into Recognizance of 10000 l. for his appearance, upon
which their Lordships by Order dated in May 1643. or thereabouts, required the
Informer, to set the said Parck at liberty, to be sent either to Captain
Folliot to Ballyshannan, or unto this Respondent to Iniskillin, together with
the matters that he had to object against him. That so he might be conveyed
by them, or one of them to Londonderry, to be sent from thence to Dublin. But
the Informer (notwithstanding the said Order, was showed unto him) denied
obedience thereunto, and detained the said Parck still in durance, until his
said friends procured several Orders, commanding his enlargement, yet nothing
would prevail to that effect with him, until that about the beginning of
Septtmber, 1643. Captain King coming with a Troop of Horse from Conaught, into
Vlster, about some business he had with Sir William Stuart, and Sir Robert
Stuart; he came about the thirteenth of that month to Iniskillin, unto this
Respondent, who sent his Ensign with fifty Musketeers, to guard the said Troop
to the Abbey of Boil in Conaught, which is about forty miles from Iniskillin,
who were so far from knowing, or allowing of the said Cessation, mentioned in
the said fourth Article, that they fought with, and killed some Rebels in the
pass of Ballinafadd, and took a prey from thence to the Boil; whence upon
return of the said Ensign, he came to Mannor-Hammilton in his way, where he
delivered a Letter from this Respondent, to Lieutenant Lesley, the Informers
Lieutenant, it being directed to the Informer, or in his absence, to the
Officer in chief at Mannor-Hammilton, with an Order of the Copy of an Order,
which the Respondent received from the said Captain Foliot, in it directed also
as aforesaid, from the Lords Justices and Council of Ireland, for the
enlargement of the said Parck, to be sent to Iniskillin or Ballyshannon, which
this Respondent left to his choice to do, or not to do, as best pleased the
Informer, or his said Officer; who sent the said Parck along with the said
Ensign, and because he was sensible of the great misery which he had wrongfully
sustained by his Captains severitie, he delivered to the said Master Parck, two
of his own Horses, with some other little help, toward his charges, as the said
Parck, told this Respondent when he came to Iniskillin; before which time, this
Respondent was never acquainted with him, neither did this Respondent know, or
ever heard, that he was affected to the Rebels, neither did he know any manner
of certainty of the concluding of the Cessation with the said Rebels, until he
received advertisement, together with a Proclamation to that effect, from the
Lords Justices and Council of Ireland, the 23. of October, 1643. or
thereabouts, nor did he, or could he obey the said Cessation, before, or since
that day; neither did he take any notice, whether the Informer, or his Wife and
Children, were gone to Londonderry; neither was the Marquess of Ormond at
that time, Lord Justice, Lord Deputy, or Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, nor did
this Respondent receive any such commands from his Lordship, to send to the
Informer, as in the said fourth Article is surmized; neither did this
Respondent look for, or expect any indirect corresponding from the Informers
Lieutenant.

And this Respondent says, That as a Prisoner, and poor distressed Englishman,
his Countryman (being under bail and mainprize as aforesaid) he gave some
entertainment unto the said Parck, for some few weeks in his house, far short
of feasting, as the Informer terms it, and not finding safety to convey him by
the nearest way to Dublin, he sent a guard together with one Henry Langford,
and other English and Scotchmen with him, to Mannor-Hammilton again, where he
heard he was lodged for a night, and where the Informer, or his Officer, might
have detained him if they pleased: But from thence he was conveyed by the said
Langford and others, to the Abbey of Boil, whence after, he recovered of a
Fever (whereof he had almost died) he repaired to Dublin, and according to the
condition of his said friends Recognizance, appeared before the Lords Justices
and Council, at the Council Board there, where how he was proceeded withal,
this Respondent knows not, neither did this Respondent return him back
amongst the Rebels, neither does he know, whether any of them did company him
to Dublin, neither does this Respondent believe, that the state there would
grant him an Order for Restitution of his Castle, with whatsoever Arms, or
Goods, were in it, unless it appeared to them, that he was wrongfully expulsed
by the Informer. And this Respondent says, That he heard, that by virtue of
such Order of the State, the said Castle was restored unto him, and that he
keeps it, as the rest of the British Forces in Conaught does their Holds, for
the Parliament forces. For upon the 25. of March last past (as this Respondent
has been informed,) the said Parck, his Soldiers of Newtown, with the
Informers Soldiers, did spoil and prey the Rebels at Dromahear, within six
miles of Castle-hammilton, and two miles of Master Parcks Castle of Newtown, so
as the Informers allegation, that he and the Rebels, makes good that Castle
against the Parliament, to the prejudice of the Parliaments service, and the
danger and hazard of all those parts of Conaught, is merely surmized, invented,
and devised, of purpose (as this Respondent conceives) to make him odious on
the one side, that the Informer may thereby, the better work his malice against
him, and on the other side, to bring the said Master Parck into the displeasure
of the Parliament, whereby he may make way to gain his Estate.

And this Respondent further says, That he never knew, or heard of any Orders
or Commands, sent unto the Informer, by the said Marquess of Ormond, to the
said Master Parck; neither did he know, or does believe, the said Parck to be
an utter enemy to the Parliament, or their proceedings, nor does he know,
neither does it concern him, whether the Lord Viscount Taaffe, did by his
Letters solicit the Informer, for the delivery of the said Parck. But this
Respondent does believe in his conscience, That if the said Parck had but 1000
l. in the world, he would give 500 l. of it to be here now, to be a most humble
Suitor to this Honorable Parliament for remedy, against the said Informer, for
these and many other intolerable wrongs, and high oppressions done him, by the
said Informer. And this Respondent humbly craveth leave, to declare further,
the behavior of the said Informer, toward Thomas Abbercromy Esquire, a
Protestant, and principal undertaker in that Plantation, and sometimes
High Sheriff of that County, whose Estate there bordered upon the Informers,
within a mile of his Castle, whom he also Imprisoned, and kept in miserable
durance, for a long time, out of the malice, which in particular, he bore to
himself, and also unto his Father in law, Sir John Dunbar Knight, and James
Dunbar Esquire, his Brother in law, not suffering any to wash his linen, but
was necessitated, with his own hands, to wash his shirts in his own Urine: And
at length being set at liberty, the poor Gentleman with his Wife, and Children,
came (in great want of all necessaries) to Iniskillin, to this Respondent, who
used means to releeve them until he conveyed them toward his native Country
of Scotland.

And further this Respondent says, That (as he has been credily Informed by
diverse honest Protestants, who well knew the Informers evil carriages to those
that were under his command, and more especially to the Protestants that fled
from Sir John Dunbars Iron-works, to his house, for safeguard of their lives)
the Informer compelled many of them (without sending guards or convoys with
them) to depart from his Garrison, insomuch, as by their endeavoring to
travel twenty miles over Mountainous ways, toward Iniskillin, many of them
were murdered in their journey, by the Rebels. And in particular, twelve or
fourteen persons at one time, and diverse of them famished through hunger and
cold, which will be proved by sundry men and women of the same Companies, whose
Fortune it was (through Gods Providence) to escape those dangers. And are now
resident partly under this Respondent at Imskillin, and others of them
dispersedly dwelling amongst other Regiments in Vlster, and elsewhere.

V. To the fifth Article this Respondent says, That he did not know in the
Month of February, after the said Cessation, whether or no, the said Lord
Marquess of Ormond, was Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, nor whether he was
declared an Enemy to the Parliament, nor did he hear any other, then that he
was gracious and acceptable unto the Parliament, until this Respondent was now
upon his journey to London, and says, that after concluding of the said
Cessation (which how acceptable it was to the Parliament, this Respondent being
so remote, understood not,) he by virtue of a Commission, dated in November or
December, 1641. from Sir William Parsons, and Sir John Borlace, then Lords
Justices of Ireland, and the Council there, did upon the 29. of January, 1643.
or thereabouts, receive Tirlagh oge mac Gawran, and some followers of his,
being Inhabitants of the Barony of Tallaghagh in the County of Cavan, together
with their Goods into protection, appointing them some quarters to dwell and
grase upon, near Iniskillin, until directions to the contrary, should come
from the Parliament, and that upon agreement, that they should pay 70 l. in
Money or Victuals, by a time limited, toward the better subsistence of the
Soldiers of this Respondents Regiment, for the preserving of that Garrison,
whose provisions being then near spent, had no hopes to be supplied by the
State there, and as little expectation to be furnished in due time from hence,
and the said protected men having delivered in one of their Kinsmen unto this
Respondent, to remain in prison at Iniskillin in pledge as well for their
Loyalties, during their continuance upon the said Protection, as the paying of
the said Contribution, and performing other duties, conformable to their
agreement, gathered their Goods from remote parts, and upon the second of
February, 1643. or thereabouts, were coming to the quarters assigned to them by
this Respondent; but by the way, the Soldiers of the Informer, incountering
them, declared, that they were in want of Victuals in their Garrison; and
although they would forbear to kill them (for so far they agreed to the said
Protection) yet they would, and must borrow some Cows from them upon Ticket, to
be paid by the State, out of their entertainment, and thereupon took from them
three or four hundred Cows, whereof their Officers at Mannor-Hammilton (upon
the mediation of the Respondents Lieutenant Colonel) caused the greatest part
to be restored again unto the said Owners, but refused to deliver the rest. Of
which (upon the next occasion, that this Respondent had to write to Dublin) at
the request of the said Owners, he gave intimation unto the then Lords Justices
and Council; and thereupon, the said Lord Marquess being newly then, Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, did by his Warrant command, not only the restoring of
the residue of the said Goods unto the Owners; but withal, required better
correspendency to be observed for the future, between the Officers and
Soldiers of the Informer, and those of Iniskillin, and not to clash or jar
between themselves; but whether the said latter Order was obeyed, as touching
the restitution of the said Goods; this Respondent knows not, and faith, That
the Officers and Soldiers of the said Garrisons, not in obedience to that
Order, but of their own mutual accords (have ever since the Informer left
those parts) lived in better amity, then ever they did, or could do, whilst
he continued there amongst them: Nevertheless, this Respondent faith, That by
reason of that impediment, offered by the Informers Soldiers, as aforesaid,
this Respondent and his Soldiers lost the benefit of that bargain, to the
great prejudice of that Garrison.

And faith further, That the Informer or his Officers, received into his
Protection (by what authority this Respondent could never yet understand) one
Owin, or James mac Murrey, Margaret Ny Cabe, and sundry other Rebels of the
County of Letrym, and kept them and their Goods upon his own Lands of
Glanfern, near his Garrison in that County, which will be proved by
Certificate, and sundry Letters of the date of January, 1643. under the hand of
his own Lieutenant and others.

VI. To the sixth Article, this Respondent denies, that ever he corresponded
with the Rebels, as by the said Informer is therein suggested; but faith, That
by virtue of the aforesaid Commission from the Lords Justices and Council of
Ireland, he did receive into protection, one Bryan mac Coconaght mac Gwire
Esquire, with forty or fifty of his Friends, Servants, and Tenants, who had
some Goods of their own to live upon, taking Pledges from some of them, for
Assurance of their Loyalties; which Protection, this Respondent humbly
conceives was lawful for him to grant unto the said Bryan Magwire, for the
Reasons following, viz.

First, For that upon the 21. of October, 1641. he discovered unto this
Respondent by Flartagh mac Hugh aforenamed, the purpose of the Irish, to rise
into Rebellion upon Friday and Saturday, the 22. and 23. of October aforesaid,
advising him, and all the English and Scottish Protestants in the Town of
Iniskillin, and County of Farmanagh, to be carefully upon their defense; which
this Respondent acknowledges, was (by Gods mercy and providence) the
principal Motive that prevented the Murdering of this Respondent, and of all
those Protestants that escaped that bloody Massacre thereabouts.

Secondly, For that the said Bryan did refuse to join in any Action with the
Rebels, denying to enter into their Oaths of Confederacy and Association
against the Protestants, for which, he was in great danger to be cut off by
them.

Thirdly, For that he preserved under his own Protection, diverse of the
British Nation, Protestants; which together with several of their Goods he
brought safe to Iniskillin, when he was so received into Protection, as Ambrose
Carleton, Richard Irwing, Gawan Bettie, and many others.

Fourthly, For that by receiving him, being an eminent man of Vlster, and
allied unto many Noble Families, (both in Scotland and Ireland,) it exceedingly
abated the fury and courage of the Rebels, and distracted their Consultations
in those Parts; and wholly dis-joyned the Forces of the Rebels in that County,
by dividing themselves into factions; and no less disheartened those of the
next adjoining Counties, which in that interim, and for a long time after, did
abundantly advantage, and further the Public Service.

Fifthly, For that in further Evidence of his Loyalty to the English Crown and
Government, he presented a Letter unto this Respondent, which came unto him
from Owin mac Artt O Neille (Uncle of the Lord Magwire, and General of the
Rebels in Vlster,) who lately before, arived in Ireland, with Men, Arms, and
Ammunition, out of West-Flanders, which Letter is as follows, vix.

To our Loving and Dear Cousien, Bryan mac Coconaght Magwire.
Loving Cousin,
KNow that I am arived at this Harbor, nine or ten days past, whether I sent
before me, as much Ammunition as I deemed needful, to answer the necessity of
this Country: And that I have here now, Men and Provisions, such as (by the
leave of God) will give great comfort and succor unto this whole Kingdom. But
beloved Cousin, I am given to understand, that (not withstanding your
sufferance and distress) you are abundantly inclined to side with the English
Nation, which indecd does exceedingly grieve me; Wherefore, I will have you
from henceforth (as you tender your own good) to banish those thoughts out of
your mind, and not to pursue those Resolutions, which in the end, may be the
occasion of your own Destruction, as I think it will be to all those, whose
minds will appear contrary to ours: Let these suffice with the addage of many
salutes unto you, from Castle-Do, the 18. of July, 1642.

Your affectionate Kinsman, Signed, Owen O Neille.


And besides, the said Bryan gained Intelligence of great concernment, from the
enemy, and discovered it at all times, and upon all occasions unto this
Respondent, who made great use thereof, for the furtherance, and advancement of
the Public Service; whereof, this Respondent made report by his Letters unto
Sir William Parsons, and Sir John Burlace, then Lords Justices of Ireland, and
the Council there, to whom he did send the said Bryan Magwire to Dublin, who
did not only approve of this Respondents act in receiving of him and his men,
into Protection, as aforesaid, but also (as this Respondent was informed) did
further signisie unto this Honorable Parliament, the affection and service of
the said Bryan, with their desires in his behalf, that he should be rewarded
for the same. And afterward their Lordships returned the said Bryan unto this
Respondent, allowing him and his men, to be continued upon Protection at
Iniskillin: Near unto which Garrison, he remains loyal, even at this time, but
in a most miserable condition for want of necessaries. And this Respondent
denies, That ever he did form the said protected men into a Company,
consisting of a Captain and Officers, as in the said sixth Article is merely
devised and surmised, but did employ them under the leading of some of the
British Gentlemen of his Garrison, upon Service many times, with the rest of
his Regiment, against the Rebels; wherein they were of abundant use, as well
for Spies and Guides, as by killing and destroying the enemy, as effectually as
others did; and (for ought known by this Respondent) did no dis-service at any
time unto the State, in giving Intelligence against all, or any of the British
of their proceedings; and diverse of the said protected men, being taken
prisoners at several times, by the Rebels, were put to death, for taking part
with this Respondent. But this Respondent denies, That all the said protected
men did take their opportunity, to turn to the Rebels again, as is surmised;
but some few that did (leaving their Pledge which they gave for assurance of
their Loyalty, in prison at Iniskillin,) this Respondent caused him to be
hanged, when they proved disloyal. And this Respondent humbly conceives, That
as Rahab and her Parents, Family, and Friends, for her sake, were preserved in
Jericho for saving the two Spies of Joshuah, so this Honorable Parliament,
will be pleased to think, That this Respondent did no dis-service unto the
State, in protecting, and preserving of the said Bryan Magwire, and some of his
Friends for his sake; who was the Instrument of the saving of the lives of many
thousands of Protestants (even Gods people) from being utterly destroyed by the
fury of the said bloody Rebels.

ANd for answer unto that expression wherewith the said Informer seems to
conclude his Information, Note, that since this Answer was sent into the
Commons House of Parliament, Sir William Cole received a Letter of the 8. of
January, 1644. Written by one of the Captains of his Regiment from Iniskillin;
certifying that about that time, forty Horse, and 120. Foot of that Garrison,
fought with and routed 500. Foot, and 3. Troops of Horse of the Rebels,
conducted by Colonel Philip O Rely, wherein they not only rescued their own
Cattle which were Plundered by the Enemy: But also killed 140. of them in the
place, and took 55. Prisoners, whereof are Officers, one Sergeant Major, 3.
Captains, two Lievtenants, with diverse Gentlemen, and other Officers. Whereby
it appears, that neither the said Sir William, or his Soldiers, did any way
correspond with the Rebels, since the Cessation, or before.
by saying, he could inform many other particular omissions and dis-services,
which the said Respondent has committed in this time of his employment, etc.
The Respondent faith, That he conceives the Informer means it, by the
scandalous calumnies and aspersions digested in fifteen places of that
Pamphlet, Printed at London, in Anno Dom. 1643. Wherein his Services are
registered, and wherein this Respondent and his Captains, Officers, and
Soldiers, are most injuriously taxed, with often reiterations of unworthy and
mean carriage toward him, for that they did not wait upon him, upon all his
calls, which this Respondent conceives, was more then he was bound to do,
further then to this Respondent would seem fit, for the good of the Public
Service, especially, when as at the same very times (which was long before the
Cessation) he was employed about services of far greater and better concernment
in the Counties of Fermanagh, Cavan, Monaghan, Tirone, Donegall, Letrim, or
Sligoe, which has formerly been well known, both in Ireland, and else where.

And this Respondent further shows, That immediately after the said
Cessation, this Respondents Regiment destroyed 296. of the Rebels, and famished
many hundreds of them, and also took in Rory mac Gwires Castle, which is now
preserved for the Parliaments use: And as well then, as before, did rescue, or
otherwise redeem from the said Rebels, 5467 English and Scottish Protestants,
and relieved them for many Months, out of the spoils gained from the enemy,
until that in his own person, he guarded and conveied great numbers of them
toward Londonderry, where further care was taken for their relief, by the
good people there: And says also, That he this Respondent, was one of the
first Colonels of the British Regiments in Vlster, which did embrace, and take
the Solemn League and Covenant, which he humbly conceives will not be deemed to
be Omissions or Dis-services, as the Informer terms them; who since his coming
hither, has not only labored to defame the Respondent, but also has taxed
the rest of the Colonels in Vlster, for their neglects in their Service, who
(in this Respondents opinion) have done much better Service, then either of
them.

Yet did this Respondent, several times, show his desires in a most effectual
manner, to help and relieve the said Informer; for having received a pitiful
Message from him, about the 26. of July, 1642. That he, his Wife, Children, and
Soldiers, were like to be destroyed by nine hundred of the Rebels, that then
besieged him: This Respondent immediately sent a party of four hundred Horse and
Foot, for his relief, with Orders, that after they had relieved the Informer,
they should return within forty eight hours: This Respondent being then
threatened to be besieged, by the General of the Irish Forces Owin mac Art O
Neille with 6000 men; but when the Respondents Lieutenant Colonel came to the
Informer with this Party, they found him not at all besieged, not in no such
extremity as he pretended, but perceived he sent this pressing Message, only
to get some of the Respondents men with him, to take in the Castle of
Dromahear, which without Ordnance, they could not have effected, though being
come, at his importunity they attempted, in conclusion, to no other purpose,
then to destroy their men.

Whereupon his Officers and Soldiers, returned on the 29. of July from him,
having received many affronts and abuses. And on the 20. of May following, this
Respondent intending some service in the Province of Conaught, drew forth about
500. Horse and Foot, and Leaguring within two miles of the Informers Garrison,
was importuned with much earnestness to come unto him to Christen his Son,
which the Respondent (conceiving to be an act of charity and Christianity)
consented unto, expecting such civilitie, as might be answerable to so
neighbourly an Office. But both himself, and those few Officers he carried with
him, received such gross dis-respect, that he will not desile your ears with
the hearing it.

Nevertheless, God having blessed the Respondent in his journey with success
against the enemy, he gave him for the relief of his Garrison two hundred fifty
and nine Cows: There going with him in his journey of their own accord, of the
men belonging to his Garrison, only 38. Footmen, and 12. Horse.

He moreover then bestowed upon his good Lady 1000. Sheep, and what he bestowed
on those Gentlemen of his Ladies Kindred, and his Officers, who went in a
friendly manner with this Respondent, the Informer suffered them not to enjoy,
but converted to his own use.

These civilities, which this Respondent is most unwillingly drawn to mention,
he conceived might deserve more thanks, and not to be himself and his Regiment,
exclaimed against by the Informer, merely to render him and them odious, in all
places where his tongue gets him credit.

In the time of Peace, his carriage toward hie neighbors, was so full of
contention, that there was hardly any man of quality or worth near him, in the
Province of Conaught, that he had not labored to injure and oppress, either
in their Estates or Reputations, if not in both, so that before the Rebellion
began, such his carriages made him extremly distasteful to men of all
conditions, that lived within twenty or thirty miles of him, in that Province,
which will be evidenced by diverse of his Neighbors, of the best quality, now
in this City, if they may be called upon for that purpose.

And particularly this Respondent, represents to your further notice,
something of the Informers demeanor toward some of his distressed Neighbors
in the hands of the Rebels, deciphered in these two short ensuing Letters,
Printed in the latter end of that Book of his own Services, Page 57. viz.

Sir Robert Hannay's Letter, and other Protestants being Prisoners at Sligoe,
are sent to Dromahear Castle.
Honorable Sir,
WE the undernamed persons, having suffered in all our whole Estates, and being
upon our banishment, out of this Kingdom, under the safe conduct of Master
Edmond Bourk of Ragagh, and Master Walter Bourk of Ardagh, toward the North,
but most opposed at Castle-Coner; Eniscromme, Escagh-Bridge, Downeill,
Arnaglasse and Tomler, go by several Bands of Armed men, purposely to set for
our lives, were not there extreme violence suppressed by the discretion, worth,
and care of those two Gentlemen, and we taken Prisoners by the Mac Swines,
brought before O Coner-Sligo, where we now remain, and intended to be sent to
the Castle of Dromahear, to be kept until you Sir deliver such Prisoners of
the O Roirks and others, as you have in your custody, or to be dealt with, as
you do unto them: Sir you are Nobly disposed, so that in honor, we hope, the
means of relief being in your self, you will not suffer us to perish, who will
ever remain Sir

Yours truly obliged to serve you, Signed, Robert Hannay, Andrew Adare,
Alexander Mountgomery, William Liston, Thomas Fullerton.


These be the names and number of the Prisoners, Sir Robert Hannay, his Lady,
his two Daughters, two Boys, two men, and a Gentlewoman; Master Andrew Adare,
and his Wife, and Sisters Son; Master Alexander Mountgomery, his Wife, and
eldest Son; Master William Liston, his Wife, and Daughter; Master Thomas
Fullerton, and his Wife; Patrisk Deomand, Master Adares man.

Sir, after the writing of this Letter, we are brought to Dromahear Castle, and
Order left with the Captain to bring us unto the Camp at Mannor-Hammilton,
where we must suffer death, if those Prisoners with you be not delivered.

Sir Frederick Hammiltons Answer to the Letter aforementioned.
SIR, I have received your Letter, whereby I am given to understand of your
treacherous surprisall, not with standing of your safe conduct promised, for
the which I am very sorry. But such is the treacherous falsehood of those
distoyall Traitors, generally throughout this wholc Kingdom, that has made me
view and swear, in the presence of Almighty God, That I will never give or take
quarter, with them, or any of them, yea, though my own Sons that descended from
my Loins, were in your estate, I had rather they should die gloriously for the
cause of Christ, then I should so abase my self, as to deal with such Traitors
to God and His Majestic. Thus beseeching God Almighty, to strengthen and
encourage you, that you may continue constant, until it shall please God, to
give you deliverance, either by life or death. In the mean time, I am
persuaded, that they will use you with no worse measure, then their Prisoners,
who were apprehended by me in the action of Rebellion are used: So recommending
you to God, I rest,

Your very loving friend, Frederick Hammilton.
Castle-Hammilton, January the 19. 1641.

And after he delivered this Letter unto the Messenger, he hanged the chief of
the Prisoners (being brother to Colonel O Roirke, who was desired by this
exchange) in the sight of the Messenger, before he would permit him to depart,
upon whose return to the Rebels, they in revenge thereof, murdered about ten
or eleven of the said Protestants, whereof two were godly Ministers; and yet if
their mercy and compassion, in the midst of their Barbaritie, had not far
transcended Sir Frederick Hammiltons, they had likewise put Sir Robert Hannay,
and his Lady, and Children, and all the rest to death.

And that his ill disposition may the more fully appear, he has with striking,
and other ill usage, so behaved himself, toward his Officers, that his
Lieutenant, Ensign, Minister, and one of his Sergeants, have all forsaken him;
so that he has now no Officers, but one Sergeant to command his Company, at
Mannor-Hammilton, consisting of seventy men, or thereabouts.

And not withstanding all this, The said Informer is laboring for the
Government of Londonderry; and because he conceived he might prevail in that
suit, if his miscarriages were not discovered, he moved this Respondent, that
all the differences betwixt them, might be composed by the order of friends;
which motion, if this Respondent would then have accepted, he conceives this
Information had never been heard of.

And as touching the Government of Londonderry aforesaid, this Respondent
humbly desires leave to declare, that once it was conferred upon Sir George
Pawlet, a man whose temper in some things, was not much unlike this of the
Informers, whose passionate demeanor in his Office, was not only the occasion
of the loss of his own life, but of the loss also of the lives of many of
this Nation there, and the burning of that Town, with the kindling of a violent
(though as it happened) but a short Rebellion in the Country thereabouts, which
did put the State then, to much unnecessary expenses in the suppressing of it.

All which, together with the premises, this Respondent humbly represents as
pertinent instances, and reasons, to induce the honorable Parliament, not to
put the Government thereof into the power of the Informer, whose demeanor will
never be brooked, by those good people that now inhabit there, upon whom, all
the aspersions that are laid by any late reports or Printed Letters (this
Respondent believes) were invented and contrived by the Informer, or his
Instruments, of purpose to make them detestable to this Honorable Parliament,
whom this Respondent is confident, are as loyal, and wel-wishing to the
Parliament, as can be expected; and will really witness the same, by their
ready and joyful receiving and obeying of any Governor (except Sir Frederick
Hammilton) that the Parliament will be pleased to appoint over them. But his
conditions are so well known unto them, that they will quit their fortunes and
stations there, which they have hither to preserved, with so much expense and
hazard, rather then submit unto his Command.

And this Respondent most humbly desires this honorable Committee, would be
pleased to pardon him, if he have trespassed upon your Patience, in answer to
the Charge given in by the Informer, being necessitated thereunto, for his more
ample Vindication, by laying open the disposition of the Informer, which he
has most unnecessary drawn upon himself, without any provocations given to
him, by this Respondent. And humbly prays, such reparations as in your Wisdoms
shall be thought fit.

Exhibited 11. of January. 1644. Signed, William Cole.


The Replication of Sir Frederick Hammilton, Knight, and Colonel, To the
Scandalous Recriminating Answer of Sir William Cole, Given in to the
Information of the said Sir Frederick, Exhibited against him, to the Honorable
Committee of both Kingdoms, the 26. of December. 1644.
THe said Sir William Cole, confesses the first charge, and for his defense
pretends, That he gave advertisement of the said intended Rebellion, by his
Letters to the then Lords Justices and Council, with all possible speed; with
advice, That their Lordships would strictly examine the Lord Mac Gwire, and
others his Accomplices, concerning the same.

But if his notice given to the Lords Justices, had been so timely, as his
Information was seasonable, by him confessed to have been, twelve days before
the breaking out of the said Rebellion; without all peradventure, the Lords
Justices and Council, would not have neglected the opportunity, of preventing
so great a mischief; which had not been easily done, if to have understood
thereof, so long before, nor can it be credited for tructh, that the Respondent
gave them any such timely notice, when it is manifest, That the discovery
thereof, unto the Lords Justices and Council, by Captain O Connelly, was with
much difficulty to his person, very late in the night, immediately before the
same day it was to have been acted at Dublin.

And the Respondent being a Justice of the Peace and Little, and a man invested
with great power and authority in his Country, and of great credit amongst the
people, by the duty of his place, should, as very easily he might, and ought to
have apprehended the Conspirators; the said Lord Mac Gwire, and the rest of the
chief of them, being his near neighbors; whose persons, if he had secured in
so long time before the Tragedy was to have been acted, would have prevented
their wicked design, and disheartened the rest of their accomplices through the
Kingdom, to have proceeded; nor can the Respondent, pretend any want of force,
to have enabled him in this action, the Kings High Sheriff of that County
living within five miles to him; who being an active able Gentleman, could in a
very short time, have raised for his assistance, the power of the whole
British, had he been timely advertised, as properly he ought to have been: So
that for the Respondent thus to sit still in his own Castle, and to betray all
his Neighbors, until the very night before this bloody Rebellion broke out,
and then to write Letters, as he alleges, to warn his Neighbors and Tenants
of this evil to come, who should have been all in Arms, and apprehending the
Conspirators long before: Whether the Respondent performed the Office of a
faithful Magistrate, or the Duty and Courage of a Judicious Commander, or the
Care and Providence of a good Neighbor, and Faithful Subject, this Repliant
leaves it to your Judicious Considerations; And is verily persuaded, That if
the Respondent had timely delivered, but Arms to so many men, as he alleges
to have sent Letters, and to have gone in the head of them, against those
Rebels, he might have done more good service, for the safety of the Public,
his Neighbors, and Tenants, then all the Rhetoric he used in his Letters, to
warn and admonish them of this danger: But his chief care appeared, the safety
of himself at home in his Castle, to man, and secure that place; where much ado
there was, (as the Repliant has been informed) to persuade the Respondent, for
all his Regiment, in six months time, to set his Nose out of that Castle,
until the greatest sury of the Rebels was past; and afterward, for catching
of Cows, and such like plundering employment, he proved very active: And that
this Repliant, being from home, as the Respondent relates, that he was, and in
this case, should be advertised by the Respondent, That there was intended such
an Insurrection, it is much like his other assertion, That this Repliant herein
does want matter justly to accuse him, as he has informed: For certain it is,
this Repliant never received Letter, or advertisment from him, though he knew
the Repliant to command the next Garrison to him; which it pleased God,
miraculously to preserve, until this Repliant with no small hazard, returned
amongst them; at which time he did not delay venturing a Messenger, with a
kind Letter, to the Respondent, whose answer to the Repliants Letter follows.

Honorable Sir,
YOur zeal to His Majesty's service, the common good, and care of us in
particular, expressed in your Letter of the 29. of this instant October, has
added comfort and courage to us, your friends, and fellow Soldiers; who do
conceive, that our fears are greater (as you allege) then cause requires; for
if the Scots and English had unanimously united their Forces at the first, we
had been able, not only to have made head against the enemy, but also err
now, to have been Master of the Field: But their policy in giving out, that
their Commission was to destroy the English, and to spare the Scots, has so
prevailed with some of the more ignorant sort of that Nation, that they
withdraw their assistance from us, which as it could not but dishearten us a
little, so the enemy has made advantage thereof: But the Sheriff of our County
Master Adam Cathcart, and the rest of his neighbors, by giving us two visits
with a good Troop of Horse, with promise of Assistance, has removed those
jealousies, to which your worthy actions has added a greater luster; in so
much, that I make no question, that if a man of your eminency and worth, of
that nation, would but once show themselves in the Field; it would not only
turn the Council of the Achitophell into foolishness, but the Scots and
English in those, and all other parts, would resort together in such Troops,
That we should be able to bid them Battle; for we are (I thank God) above 200.
strong in the Castle, and Town of Iniskillin, which is as yet safe; and our
Scotch Neighbors are as many in Foot and Horse: Therefore I think it the best
way to find them out, and not to keep asunder thus in our strong Holds; for my
own part, I do verily believe, that they are far short of those numbers, and
Ammunition, they give out, except they reckon Boys, and Calloghes: But the
worst is, we have little intelligence, but what we have from themselves, who
questionless will make the best of all things, and the worst for us: As for
Dublin, I hope it is not taken, whither I sent a Messenger on Saturday last,
with Letters to the State, whereof I have sent you here enclosed. Cavan we hear
holds out, being strengthened with a Troop of Horse that lay at Turbbet: Captain
Atkinson, upon what promises, I know not, has yielded up his Castle to Bryan
mac Gwire, without any resistance, and is with him; and so have all the strong
holds of this County, except this of Iniskillin, Tully, Mo^ea, which we hope
with Gods help and the assistance of our friends to defend in spite of our
enemy: But they have got all the Goods and Ammunition of the whole County into
their possession. And though the Plot be General as the Irish give out, yet
there is not so much severity used in any part of the Kingdom, as in this
County: So giving you many thanks for your good intelligence; which I entreat
you upon all occasions continue, with assurance, that you shall receive the
like from me: As also the contents of your Letter conveyed to the Lords
Justices, with all convenient speed, with the tender of my Service, to your
self, and Honorable Lady. I commit you, and all of us, to the safe protection
of the Almighty, I rest

Your true friend and servant, William Cole.
Iniskillin Castle, the 2. of October, 1641.

Together with this Answer, the Repliant received a Letter, signed by the
forementioned Captain Adam Cathcart, then High Sheriff, Captain William
Acheson, now Lieutenant Colonel to the Respondent: Who by that Letter, offered
themselves with their several Companies, which they then Commanded, to put
themselves under the Command of this Repliant, refusing to take on with Sir
William Cole at all: But this Repliant otherwise advised them, for the safety
of their own Country, that they should join themselves with Sir William Cole,
hoping to have found him, a more faithful Neighbor, then he proved. Some few
days after this Letter received, Captain Hugh Rosse, having formerly been
Surgeon, for several years to the Repliants Foot Company, brought with him
to the Repliants Garrison, at Mannor-Hammilton, Captain George Greir, who had
with them, two able Companies of the Repliants Countrymen, who were come a
purpose to tender their service unto him, who had much ado to persuade them to
return, or have any meddling at all with Sir William Cole, whose baseness in
several kinds they much complained off, yet at last, the Repliant having used
them, and their men kindly, with free-quarters in his Castle for two nights,
did afterward give every one of their Soldiers Money, and every Captain, and
Officer, a proportion of Salt, whereof they were scarce at that time, and
persuaded them to return, promising to acknowledge themselves as Companies
engaged to the Repliant, when he should think fit to command them, who
afterward joined themselves in the Respondents Regiment; and without those
four Companies, could not have made up a Regiment there, though he proved very
unthankful to the Repliant afterward. And whereas the Respondent mentioned in
his Letter, Captain Roger Atkinson, an Ancient Servitour in Queen Elizabeth's
days, and a Noble Housekeeper, for many years together, living within a mile
to the Respondent; who with his Wife and Family, had in former times received
many charitable and Neighbourly helps and reliefs, from the said Atkinson and
his virtuous Bedfellow, who was a near Kinswoman, to the now Earl of Leister:
Nevertheless, did the Respondent endeavor to cast aspertions upon this worthy
Gentleman, as if had basely parted with his Castle to the Irishes; whereas the
fault shall appear in the Respondent, and his Treacherous and unneighbourly
usage of him, mentioned in this Letter, sent by Captain Atkinson to the
Repliant, in Vindication of the aspertions cast upon him by the Respondent as
follows.

Honorable Sir,
ACcording to your desire, you shall be pleased to understand the manner, how I
left my house the 22. of October, 1641. Toward night I received a note from
Sir William Cole, wherein he made mention, he had notice given him that day,
that the Irish was to make some attempt on the morrow, or soon after; and
therefore wished me to have some people about me, and to be upon my guard,
Captain William Atcheson being then within, to whom I showed my Letter;
whereupon he went presently to Sir William, to know the manner, and did promise
to come and acquaint me, how all things went that night, which he did; and
withal, I sent my man to call all my trustiest Tenants, to be with me
presently; some did come and went home again to bring some of their Goods, but
did not return back again, so that night I caused charge all the Pieces I had,
that was fixed; the next morning being Saturday, there came some Scotchmen by
me, who dwelt toward Ballibalfoor, who told me, that all the Country that way
was in fire, and that Rory mac Gwire was coming that way with a great many men
all in Arms; and that Lough, which my Lady Goure lived in, was full of Boats
and Cotts, with men and Arms, and that Rory mac Gwire, did not meddle with any
Scotchmen at all, or their Goods; whereupon, all those that were with me, went
away home, and left me, and I having no more Powder then to charge my Pieces
once again, took occasion to send my man Humphrey, to Sir William Cole, with
money, desiring him to send me twenty pound of Powder, and if not so much, to
send me twelve, in regard I had sent to Dublin a twelvemoneth before, to
Captain Pinner, to get me some Powder out of the Storehouse, which he did, but
not so much as I wrote for; who sent me word, That the Clerk of the Storehouse
promised to write to Sir William Cole, to furnish me with what I stood in need
off, because he had enough in his keeping; his answer returned me, was, That a
pound of Powder was worth a pound of Silver: So Saturday, and Sunday, none came
at me; but I perceived burning every where. On Monday morning, Sir William went
to persuade me for to leave my House, and if I would come to Iniskillin, he
would send me a guard of forty men Armed, to conduct me: Whereupon, I
acquainted these few men that were with me, who all wished me to go; and if I
would not, that they all would go, for they all knew that I had no Ammunition:
I was persuaded to write to Sir William, if he would send me the guard he
promised, I would come; and presently got Horses, and did lay all my Arms, and
sundry other things, waiting still for my guard, till toward night, but none
came; so when it was dark night, one brought me word, that Bryan mac Gwire was
at my Mill, with a great many men: Whereupon, I sent Zachery Rampion, and
Humphrey Holland, to know his intention; his answer, he was not acquainted with
the intention of the Natives, But upon a word my Wife sent him, he had gotten
these men together, and had come for my good, and sent them back, desiring me
to meet him, and another with him, at my utter Gate: I took my Wife with me,
because I durst not trust any other interpreter betwixt us, Commanding the rest
of the people to keep within; but before I come to the utter Gate, I looked
back, and saw men and women follow after me; whereupon, I put them back again:
In the mean time, my Wife was with Master Bryan at the Gate. When I met him,
and asked him the reason of his coming, his answer was, He had received word
from my Wife, to come for my good, and to preserve me, and my House, and Goods;
showing me, that three Counties, Tiron, Mannaghan, and Cavan, were gathering
together to come in these parts, and seeing that I had no men to defend my
house, if it pleased me, he would put some men of his in it, till they were
gone, with a solemn Protestation, That he would redeliver it, and all my Goods,
safe unto me back again; and in the mean time, preserve me from the Tyranny of
the enemy, that meant no good to me; and as soon as any Army came from the
King, or that I could get any competent number of men, to defend, or guard me,
and my house, that he would safely surrender it up with all my Goods; and
finding his love unto me, and of my self not able to secure it, by reason that
my people left me, and likewise, that I had no Ammunition, was contented to
give him leave to put some of his men into the House, to be a guard to preserve
me from Rory, and the rest of his Forces, being persuaded that he would not
attempt the House, it being in Master Bryans custody; he likewise, gave me
leave to make choice of the Natives, which were my own Tenants, for my guard;
he came once a week to see me, that no man wronged me: And as soon as I
perceived some of them that was my guard, to grow a little saucy, he put them
out, and put others in. About three weeks after, he and James Duffe mac Gra,
came to my house, whom I found desirous to have a protection, I told them, I
would go to Iniskillin, to speak to Sir William Cole, concerning that, who were
thankful to me for the motion; they sent six Horsemen with me to Sir William,
and told him their desire; and desired him to write to Sir William Stuart, for
Bryan and his Son, and Master Magra and his Son, which Sir William did, and
sent the Letter with me to them, to be sent to Sir William Stuart, Sir William
Cole had not then received his Commission: And likewise, at the same time,
Master Bryan willed me to get some men to guard my House, for he would not
willingly leave it; for these men he left to keep it: He was forced to pay them
then fourteen pounds for their wages, or otherwise, he desired me to get a note
under Sir Williams hand, not to besiege the Castle, or else none of his people
would stay in it for him, to preserve me, for fear of Sir William Cole: Which
he refused to give me under his hand, but past his word to my self, so long as
I was in the House he would not attempt it; then I desired him, to send some of
his men along with me, and Bryan would render it up to him; which he refused to
do, because he could spare none: So at my return again, they were pleased with
Sir Williams Letter to Sir William Stuart, likewise with Sir Williams promise,
That he would not invade my House, Bryans guard were the more willing to stay
with me: I stayed one month after that in my own House; and finding the guard
to grow a little more insolent, I sent for Master Bryan, and did show him his
men's carriage, and desired him to furnish me with some Horses, to carry
somethings to Iniskillin, which he willingly granted, and appointed me a day,
when I should go, and desired me, to procure Sir Williams License for my
Convoys safe return, which was granted by Sir William; and likewise Sir William
wrote unto me, That he had no room in his Castle, but for some little things,
being bepestered, and there was no safety in the Town for any thing; which made
me leave most of my things behind me: And when I left my House, Bryan desired
me to procure a guard from Sir William, and he would preserve my House, and all
my Goods safe, for ten or twelve days, and deliver it up upon my Letter. I
told Sir William, that my House would be delivered, if he would be pleased to
send a guard to receive it, his answer was still alike, That he could spare
none: The next morning after my coming to Iniskillin, Rory came to my House,
and fell very foul with Bryan, for giving me way to go for Iniskillin; for at
this same time, Rory was gathering of more men, and the word was to fire my
House, which moved Master Bryan to put more men in it, to preserve it. Upon the
Friday seven-night thereafter, Sir William sent his men out to attempt the
Castle, and burnt all my Office Houses: And the same night, those that was in
the House, set it on fire, leaving the House within the Bawn, and the two
Flanckers unburned, and themselves went away: And the next day, Sir William
sent to fetch such things, as were found there; and upon relation of those that
was sent, that the House and Flanckers stood unfired; he sent the next week,
and caused to fire the same, together with the Mills. So Sir, this is the true
manner, with the whole passages of my leaving of my House; and to affirm all
this to be true, one Bryan mac Gwires part of his love, for my safety, he has
acknowledged it since, before Master Smith, Parson of Iniskillin, my Cousin,
Captain William Atcheson, Ambrose Carleton, Torlaugh mac Gra, and Owen mac Gra,
that he had no other design, but for the preservation of me, my Wife, and
Goods, in regard he knew that Rory aimed otherwise for me, and did acknowledge,
that he would have caused me to give up the House without assaulting, if it had
been demanded: and those that were in it, did set it on fire, after they were
assaulted by Sir Williams people, before he knew of it; since which, he did
never look upon his Nephew, whom he left in charge with the House, for burning
of it: And moreover, That same day that I left my House with Bryan, he gave the
Warders fourteen pound more, and sent a guard with those small Goods that I
brought with me; and came himself to see me safely at the Waters-side. This
with remembrance of my service, and my wifes, to your self, and to my Lady,
beseeching God to grant you victory over your enemies, still I rest,

Yours ever to Command, Roger Atkinson.
Iniskillin, the 10. of October, 1642.

I did hear Master Bryan acknowledge, before these forenamed persons, that his
only aim was, in keeping of my Cousins House, to preserve it for his use, from
all others that intended no goodness to him; and would have sure rendered it
at my Cousins pleasure.

Will. Atcheson.


The Original of this Letter, the Repliant can produce, whereby does appear,
what an unthankful, and unnatural Neighbor, the Respondent proved to this
distressed old Gentleman, and his virtuous Wife, who suffered much misery by
the Respondents cruel neglect of them, and had suffered much more, had not the
Repliant made means diverse times to relieve them, as they lay miserable at the
Respondents Garrison, until they were by the Respondent disgracefully sent
away, amongst several hundreds of poor Robbed people; who were sent to the
Derry, without getting any share of the 1200. Suites of old apparel, and five
hundred pound in Money and Victuals, sent in charity, by the Parliament; for
the comfort and relief of the poor Protestants of that County.

II. To the Respondents Answer, to this Repliants second Charge, this Repliant
says; Forasmuch, as upon the matter, the Respondent denies not, what therein
is alleged against him: This Repliant might acquiesse therein, without more
ado, and submit that unto judgment: But forasmuch, as the same is also stuffed
with calumnies, and aspertions, cast upon this Repliant, by way of
Recrimination, this Repliant craveth leave to Vindicate himself therein, and
says, For his part, he has been so far from the envying the Respondent in his
Commands, or any other, the British Colonels in Vlster, as that if it were
pertinent to the question, he is well able to make it appear, That he has
contributed much to their assistance, and the Cause in hand; so far, as the
force he had was able, and was not wanting unto the Respondent, in all good
Offices, That to his power might advance the War against the Rebels, or further
his proceedings in any particular; yet this Repliant must confess, That he
understanding the Respondents Forces, to be very considerable, as is confessed
in his Answer, and able to have done greater service at the beginning against
the Rebels, if he had been active; but many times, the Ronspondent lay still
about his own Town and Castle, while as his Officers and Soldiers were most
desirous to have been in action; and did many times solicit the Respondent, to
relieve the Repliant, whilst he was in great danger with multitudes of Rebels
to be destroyed, being several times blockt up in his Castle: But to this
service, the Respondent was found both slow, and backward; which much troubled
this Repliant, That such a man professing so much Neighbourly love, and being
so well provided for the Service, should thus delay and forbear, relieving so
many British souls, in such eminent danger, as then they were in; which was a
Just cause to raise a Jealousy in this Repliant, That either the Respondent
did it out of a careless disrespect to this Repliant, and his Charge, or to
the Cause it self, or for some other private ends; which did minister an
occasion, for this Repliant to be more watchful over himself, and that poor
handful of men, which he commanded; setting before his eyes, no other ends,
but the King and Parliaments Service, and the rooting out of those bloody
Rebels, who would have destroyed us all.

This Repliant cannot but admire the Respondents weakness, alleged in his
Answer, That he should think to persuade any rational man, that in case the
Respondent should justly suffer for his miscarriages in the matters charged
against him; and should be therefore set by all employment in that Army, that
it could not in the least, add any thing to this Repliant in his preferment;
and since the Respondent administereth the occasion, this Repliant craveth
leave, to let him know, That he was so far from envying the Respondents Honor,
and greatness, in the Commissions he received from His Majesty, for that
employment, that it was neither in thoughts or expectation, to believe, that
His Majesty would join him in the same Commands with the Respondent, and the
rest of the Vlster Colonels, the Repliant being at that time (as was thought)
in some disfavour with His Majesty, for prosecuting the late Earl of
Strafford. And this Repliant further says, That as the Respondent never did
any such actions, to the knowledge of this Repliant, that deserved to be
envied: So has this Repliant been as far from extolling any thing, done by
himself, by Gods assistance, that yet may better pretend to merit: Surely, he
has learned better things, then from any vainglorious Honor, to expect the
admiration of any thing, but folly; from which, the Respondent himself is not
altogether then free, whiles he indeavoureth by such petty, and vain
assumptions, to raise an opinion of popularitie, and that so great honor was
conferred upon him, and laid down at his own doors without acquisition, or
other endeavors of his own; and nothing more then what fame has raised him
unto before. And this Repliant further says, That since of his own showing, it
does appear, that of the nine Companies raised, Armed, and Banded by him, as he
alleges, he only gained five hundred of them, to be inlisted, and his Troop
of Horse; and if but Victual and Clothing for so many was alloted him, yet it
had been the least, to have rewarded the four Companies (which he cashiered)
with the rest, for the good service they had done him then formerly, in
defending his Castle and Town: And their discontent, which he confesses, and
the disbanding themselves, does clearly manifest his course usage of them, and
that the truth is as has been charged against him; for it is not to be
credited, That if they might have shared, and pertaken of those Provisions,
that they would have parted in discontent, or disbanded themselves, and leave
their kindly possessions and interest, in that Country, where many of them had
been bred and born: Nor is it likely, that needy and necessitous men, would
have refused his offer, to have pertaken of those Supplies sent them, if they
might have had a proportion thereof for their relief: And surely, it had been
but equal, that the Respondent had shared and divided, the twelve hundred
Suites of old Clothes, sent from this City of London, by his said Son in law,
with these four cashiered Companies: Albeit, he would not let them have any
part of the new, he keeping and disposing of which, and of five hundred pound
worth more of Contribution Money, sent for the relief of the distressed
Protestants in those parts, as pleased himself, and his said Son in law, Master
Dean Barkley; they have not dealt so heartily and conscionably in this, as men
of their profession should, and ought to have done: But if it be true, which is
commonly reported there, That Master Dean Barkley sold such Corn, and other
Provisions, as was bought with that Money, for relief of the distressed
Protestant British, in those parts, and sent from hence, and therewith has
made himself a stock, where withal, he now drives a great Trade, by Tanning of
Leather, at the Respondents Town of Iniskillin, and cannot be done without the
Respondents privity and allowance: This Repliant submiteth it to judgment, if
it be well done, thus to rob the Spittle; and what blessing can attend such
proceedings: And for the thirteen hundred pound worth of Corn, and Provisions,
which he alleges to have procured, upon his own credit, for the more supply
of himself, and his Soldiers: This Repliant is certainly informed, That he
has put it to the Parliaments account, which those his creditors have taken
for satisfaction, and are, and must be contented with such payment, when it may
be well spared.

III. To the Respondents Answer to the third Charge, this Repliant says, That
it consists only of invectives, fabulous inventions, and scandalous
calumnies, made, and contrived, by the Respondent of purpose, to asperse this
Repliant, without ground or color; which appears, in that there is nothing
therein material that concerns himself, but suppositions of things done to
others, merely framed and hatched out of the inventions of his own vindictive
brain; and yet of that consequence and concernment to this Repliant, That if
the Respondent shall not make good his allegations, which he shall be never
able to do, this Repliant prays, that repair from him, as shall be fit, and
craveth leave, to let the Respondent know, That he understands better, what
the danger is by Law, for any man to conspire the taking away of another man's
life, where with he accuses this Repliant, then to attempt it, and what such a
false malicious accusation intends, and deserves, this Repliant is assured,
is understood by those that are their Judges; and it seems strange to this
Repliant, That the Respondent should thus impudently overshoot himself, and his
reason, as that he should imagine his vain and idle words, could possess any
man with a belief, That the malice of an adversary could so charge the frame of
the Law, as by that means he could inherit and possess his Estate. Say it were
in a peaceable time, and how unlikely it is, That such a cruel and covetous
disposition, should possess the Repliant, who at that time had his thoughts
taken up with other kind of cares, then by such means, to purchase his
Neighbors Lands, while as he daily looked to be devoured by multitudes of
bloody Rebels; and how black those drops are, which has fallen from his Lips, by
which he has charged this Repliant, That he can endure no Neighborhood, is
plain to all that hears it, and that understands the carriage, and conversation
of this Repliant, for many years past, besides the incredibilitie thereof, that
this Repliant should be so irregular, as not to submit unto Order and
Government; to which, he must have been compelled: And denies, that there was
ever any such contestation, betwixt the said Dunbar, or the Hetheringtons, and
this Repliant, as is most falsely pretended by the Respondent. But it appears,
the said Dunbar was his creature, whom he so trusted with the keeping of a
Castle at the beginning of this Rebellion; wherein it is credibly reported, the
said Dunbar so basely behaved himself, as he made his own conditions with the
Rebels, for himself and his Wife, sacrificing above fourscore of British souls
to the Rebels cruelty, who were all burned to death in an instant: As to the
Hetheringtons having done that spoil upon this Repliants Tenants, and their
said Estates and Goods as aforesaid; and the said Hetheringtons having lived
amongst the Rebels with the said Dunbar, for a long time, it must needs be,
that they were Papists, as is well known, or otherwise, they should not have
been suffered to have lived amongst them, as they did; and for such services as
they did for the Respondent, for which he gives them so great commendations; it
is only known unto himself, and not believed or understood of any other that
knew them formerly; nor does it (under favor) any ways excuse the Respondent
of his miscarriages of entertaining, and making use of them, being Papists and
Rebels, for they were no better; and in refusing to bring them unto a Legal
trial, when required for such offenses, which was Treason by the Law of that
Kingdom, let the Religion be what it will: And whereof they were so accused by
His Majesty's good Subjects; and the Respondent being a minister of Justice,
that upon such complaint, ought to have secured their persons, until trial of
the matters objected; and if it be a sufficient excuse to free him from the
accusation, because as he says, no proof of the crime laid against them,
appeared, proved, unto him, who (by his leave) was not a competent Judge of
himself, to determine the facts and offenses, charged against them: And this
Repliant cannot forbear to tell him further, That besides it was unneighbourly,
thus to set them free, after this intimation against them, made from this
Repliant: So it argues, how little he understood himself, and the Office of a
Justice, that will voluntarily suffer a Prisoner to go at large, though but
verbally at first accused, before he had examined the matter, and that they
were legally acquitted; and from all that he has said in his defense, from the
guilt of this third Charge, informed against him, appears to be nothing, but
mere matter of Recrimination, and without weight, that so he is still
unexcusable of the crime objected.

IV. As to the Respondents Answer to the fourth Charge, given in against him by
this Repliant: This Repliant says, That the Respondent in the preceding parts
of his Answer, having made shipwreck of a good conscience, and not spared the
telling of many untruths, to serve his own turn; casting much dirt in the
Repliants face, thereby hoping, that some will stick, and so to employ this
Repliant in washing himself; that in the mean time, the Respondents foul
offenses may be forgotten, or he escape the hands of Justice for the same, have
therefore left nothing unattempted, which may any wise, scandalize this
Repliant, and bring him into disrepute, and disesteem, with the Parliament, or
such as knows him not, hoping thereby to work out his own ends the better; but
that his malice and impudence may the more clearly appear in his defense to
this Charge, as in all the rest of his Answers. This Repliant further says,
That howsoever the Respondent from the relation of others, as he conceives, is
pleased to magnify the said Parck, both for his estate, and qualities, yet
those that were his Neighbors for many years before this Rebellion broke out,
(and therefore have more reason to know, and understand him better, then the
Respondent) are able to say and prove otherwise: And that the Respondent only
makes those many flourishes, concerning his reputation, as an insinuation to
win credit, that he was an honest man, and so to weaken the belief of that
which is objected against him, and the Respondent, concerning him; and yet it
has been found true by experience, That since this Rebellion began, many men,
who in the time of Peace, lived orderly, and in good repute, and were employed
in Offices and affairs, of great concernment, concerning that Kingdom; yet some
such men out of covetous desires, to save their Estates, and for other byends
of their own, have basely betrayed their Religion, and their Country, and
joined with the Rebels against the Parliament, and their Forces there, of which
sort, this Repliant doubts not, but he shall make Master Parck, appear to be
one; and that if this Repliant had not upon intimation of his purposes and
resolutions, taken and settled to go this way, as to secure his person and
Castle, he had been out in action amongst the thickest of them, and so would
have done much hurt unto the Protestant party there; and without peradventure
they are Birds of the same Feather, from whom, the Respondent has had his
Intelligence to the contrary, if they be not merely fictious, and imaginations
of his own; which the Repliant the rather believes, for besides the certain
Information which the Repliant had of Parcks resolutions to join with the
Rebels, and of his daily compliance with, and intercourse between them, he
being then ordered by the State to observe this Repliants Commands, and to join
with him in all things against them; the said Parck not withstanding, had
contemned several times to obey this Repliants Directions and Orders, and
altogether declined whatsoever service he thought, might provoke or prejudice
the Rebels; and yet this Repliant was so far from desiring the said Parcks
Estate, (which the Respondent has most falsely, and scandalously alleged) as
that only for the King and Parliaments Service, put in an Officer of his own,
to command that Castle of Importance, being far from that base condition of
coveting other men's Lands, having so much (by Gods Providence of his own) as he
had small hopes at that time to our live the danger he was in, much less to
enjoy other men's Lands. But as it seems, the Respondent judges other men by
his own known covetous humor, witness his barbarous usage of his worthy
Neighbor, Captain Roger Atkinson, whose house and Land lay within a mile to
the Respondent, which now he holds as his own, having in a manner banished the
old Gentleman, and his Wife, whom he grudged a little charitable relief in his
house, they having many times bountifully and freely supplied, and entertained
the Respondent, with his Wife, and children, while as the Respondent was held a
much inferior man in qualitic and condition to Captain Atkinson, whom the
Respondent sent away amongst a Company of poor distressed Beggars, with his
Convoy to Londonderry, where the Gentleman, and his distressed Wife, might
have starved, if upon the Repliants credit, they had not been there relieved
with five pounds to convoy them to Dublin, where they hoped to have met with me
Lord Lyle, who was a near Kinsman to this Gentlewoman; and missing of him
there, this Repliant is informed, That those two virtuous souls live still in
great misery at Dublin, by reason of the cruel, barbarous, and unneighbourly
usage of the Respondent, who might at first, conveniently have enabled them to
have made good their own house, or otherwise to have helped them off with a
great deal of their best Goods, and Household Stuff, which the Respondent for
other base ends of his own, exposed all to ruin, much invying in time of Peace,
the worthy and good esteem, which both the State and Neighbors in the Country
had of Captain Atkinson, and his virtuous Bedfellow, for the free and
charitable way of living, to the comfort of all sorts of good people, both of
great, and mean condition, who used to travel in that Country.

As concerning the two Witherspins, both father and son, that they were
Scotchmen; it is confessed, But so much the more unworthy to be of that Nation,
as they proved Traitors and Rebels against the King and Parliament; concerning
whose carriage, it was in manner following, That these men whom the Respondent
pleases himself to give so much commendation, as if naming such two Scotchmen,
should engage the Nation to adhere to his poor Recriminating way of vindicating
himself.

James Witherspin, the Son being married to a mere Irish woman, and known to be
of a most wicked base disposition from his childhood, and one who had been
accused of Felony, and found guilty before the Rebellion; and upon the first
breaking out thereof, soon after himself and his Wife, joined themselves with
the Rebels, leaving his Father and Mother (two old people) in the Repliants
Garrison, which the Repliant had just reason to suspect, as Spies, many times
advising them to keep by themselves, since their Son and Daughter had joined
themselves with the Rebels. And about the month of February, before the
supposed first of July, mentioned in the Respondents Answer, alledgeing that
old Witherspin to be taken in Sligoe, and shot to death by this Repliants own
hand; in which month of February, the said James Witherspin the son, was then
(in actual service and rebellion, against the King and Parliament) a
Muskettier with the Rebels, under the Command of Bryan Ballagh O Roirk, who
then lay incampt, with a many others, about this Repliants Castle, and
Garrison; whereof this Respondent well knew, and had strength enough to have
relieved this Repliant, and was many times importuned by Captain Cathcart, and
others of his Officers, to have endeavored the Repliants relief; but the
Respondent with frivolous excuses, being desirous (as since, and now it does
appear) to have the Repliant rather to be cut off, did suffer him with his
handful of men, to take their hazards, envying the Repliants activenesse with
so poor a handful, as may appear by his vindictive humor, against this
Repliant, whom God Almighty prospered so well, as with his own handful, one
morning the rogues were surprised in their Camp, their siege raised, and a many
of the Rebels killed; the foresaid old John Wither spin, taken prisoner amongst
the Rebels, who the night before had stolen out of the Repliants Garrison, to
meet with his son James Witherspin; where that night, he confessed to be much
made off by the Colonel Bryan Ballagh O Roirk, to whom he delivered twelve
pounds sterlin, in ready money, which he intended for his son James Witherspin:
So that for this Treason, upon his own confession, the Father was undoubtedly
hanged in February, which the Repliant is ready to prove with sufficient
witnesses, now in Town: How the Respondent shall prove, that in July after, the
Repliant should meet with a man so many months dead before, and ten miles
distant from the place of his burial; let him prove his being there, and the
Repliant hopes to be excused for shooting such a one with his own hand.
Therefore desires no further vindication of his own honor, from this
scurrilous, base, Libelling way of recrimination of the Respondents, then what
credit this history brings him, amongst all indifferent, and impartial
readers. And as for the said James Witherspin the son, it is confessed, that
the first of July, being the night, the Repliant with his small handful,
attempted the burning of that Town of Sligoe, which then sheltered a many
bloody Rebels, who had murdered and massacred many poor British in it, which
stuck much in the Repliants stomach, whom God made his weak Instrument, to
revenge that night that innocent blood; where amongst the rest of the Rebels,
the foresaid James Witherspin was taken prisoner, and brought home to the
Repliants Garrison; where upon his own confession, That he had served as a
Muskettier amongst the Rebels, and had done his best at several times, to
endeavor the ruin and destruction of the Repliants Garrison; upon which
confession of the said Wither spin, he was justly hanged as this Repliant
concerveth, and for no such cause, as is falsely and scandalously alleged by
the Respondent; and how apt this Respondent is to take up any thing upon trust,
and credit of others, that may vent his spleen against this Repliant, does
easily appear, though it be nothing material to this purpose, for the
vindicating of himself, but rather of the Rebels, and their treacherous
adherents.

And this Repliant further says, That the Respondent fails mightily in his
Answers, wherein he attributes it to the information of Witherspin, and the
assistance of Parck and his men, That in this Repliants return from burning of
Sligoe, he escaped the surprise of the Rebels, who was lying in wait for him,
with a great Body of men in his way homeward, which was easily perceived by our
Scouts, that went before us, to which we gave better credit, then to
Witherspins information: And for Parck, it is true, This Repliant carried him
along with him as a Prisoner, and not to guard his person; neither is it
altogether unlikely, but the said Parck had a hand in that meeting of the
Rebels that day, which was thought should have been the day, the said Parck
should have put himself and his Castle, in the hands of the Rebels, had not God
put it in the heart and head of this Repliant, to do as he did the night
before, in seizing upon the said Parck and his Castle, and burning of the said
Town of Sligoe, which were the first actions that ever gave comfort or probable
security, to the Repliant, and his handful. As for the Respondents other
expressions, and scurvy scandalous aspertions in his Answer to this fourth
Article, more proper to come from the mouths of Carmen and Oyster-wives, then
from the head and hand of so courageous a Colonel, as the Respondent would
seem to be at his years, being past date before his preferment came upon him;
and had not this Repliant received a Copy of the Respondents Answer, under his
own hand, he should not have believed there had been a man in the world, having
any drop of a Gentleman's blood in him, that could have invented so many gross
slovenly falsehoods, much less to have presumed to publish such untruths to
such an Honorable Committee, and Assembly, whom the Repliant holds more
wronged, then he dare presume to express; for in many of his Allegations, his
malice rages without limit or moderation: And it behooves him (we say) that
tells untruths, to have a good memory. The Respondent seems very week this way,
That either through the infirmity of doting age, or through some other
weakness, forgets so much, as that he says, and unsaith the same thing again,
first he would have it believed that this Repliant plundered Master Parck, and
then afterward confesses, That both his Castle and Goods were (by Order of
the Council Board in Ireland, where the Marquess of Ormond sits as chief,
executed by the Respondents Commands, and his Soldiers in the time of the
Cessation made with the Rebels, and in this Repliants absence from home)
restored to him again; and howsoever, he would mince the matter, and set a fair
gloss herein upon his proceedings; he does not deny his guiltiness of the
crime objected, and so to be a complier with the Rebels, as to that Cessation,
and by obeying their Orders, who holds it with them: And as this Repliants
compelling the said Parcks Soldiers to obey his commands; why should the
Respondent think it an offense, when both Parck himself, and they (before the
Cessation) were enjoined to it by the Council Table in Ireland. And this
Repliant further says, That the Respondent is pleased to lessen and extenuate
the Repliants services, which for want of his assistance, this Repliant was not
able to do, what he might have done, and in doing what he did with that
handful of men he had; he can approve, that he did more by much, then the
Respondent who had ten times the Repliants number, under his command, by the
Respondents own confession. And this Repliant humbly prays, it may be
understood, That the Respondent indeavoureth to blemish this Repliant in the
opinion of the Parliament; for that he refused to set Parck at liberty, by
command of the Orders of the Council Board in Ireland, having then concluded a
Cessation of Arms with the Rebels; and being therefore declared enemies to the
Parliament of England, by which tacitly, and by consequence, he himself
approves thereof; and by executing their Orders and Commands, in this
particular, declares himself obedient to their directions; which he cannot
shift from his shoulders by carrying two faces in one hood, and pleasing
himself as free, by (holding a detestable neutrality at the best) that he can
say for himself; And as for that information of the Respondents, in his Answer
concerning Abbercroomy, this Repliant says, That therein he also follows the
same tract, as concerning Master Parck, endeavoring first to raise him high in
opinion for his Abilities in time of Peace, which to be true, as it is not so,
as the Respondent sets forth, yet if Abbercroomy, or any man snall in such
time, be never so just, and serviceable to the state wherein he lives, if in
such a time of Rebellion as this, he shall fall away from his dut^, and the
obedience he owes to God and his Country, as a subject, and shall join with,
aid, or adhere to Idolatrous Rebels, against his King and Parliament, either
unworthily to save his estate, or upon any pretext whatsoever, he has thus
(under favor) forfeited the Remembrance of whatsoever was good and commendable
in him before, and is to be looked upon in the present condition wherein he so
remains. Then the said Abbercroemy refused to join with this Repliant against
these Rebels, forsook his own house, and willingly joined himself with the
Rebels, and was afterward taken by this Repliant amongst them; and what the
said Abbercroomy deserved in this case, this Repliant submiteth to judgment;
yet did not the Repliant use him after that fashion, as the Respondent is
pleased to inform, but gave him better entertainment, then he was worthy off
that had so behaved himself, and commanded, that he should not want any thing
that was sufficient for him, being himself straightened, and in a hard condition
in an enemies Country, and without hope of other help, then what he could get
from the Rebels by his Sword, having no expectation to be relieved, but by the
Respondent; Whose affection toward him, and care to preserve him, and his
family, from destruction (in so great danger and extremity) is well understood
by this Respondents relations, in his answers set forth, this Repliant is
confident, is but a mere suggestion of the Respondent; for if the said
Abbercroomy had any cause of complaint, against the Repliant in the least, he
was in Scotland a long time together with this Repliant, where he should have
been sure to have had justice done him; and if he were so ingrate toward this
Repliant, as to inform any such thing to the Respondent, it had been greater
wisdom in him, by much (under favor) not to have believed the report of a
discontented man in his own cause, but to have buried it in silence rather,
being altogether without proof, and not thus to have shown his weakness in the
publishing thereof, which he can never be able to make good; and if to have
been so (as it is not) are without consideration at all: the Respondent might
with more discretion also, have spared to proclaim his charity toward him,
which makes the verity thereof more suspected; but having seldom done so
before, if so he did, he could not forbear to tell it as a thing unusual, and
rare in him, to have been performed to nearer Neighbors. And this Repliant
further says, That he does not believe the Respondent did, or was able to
receive Cloth, and feed all the Protestants of that Country where he lived;
and doubts not to prove, that he sent hundreds away also from himself, whom
he was no ways able to harbor and maintain, and that some of them also by
accident, perished in their journey; and yet this Repliant will be more
charitable toward him, then for to believe he did it of any other intent, then
that he might the better preserve himself, and those under his Command; for
charity has never before this time, been blamed to begin at home; and yet the
Respondent had in this case, means, and hopes of succors, and supplies, which
this Repliant neither had, nor could hope for, or expect, if not by the
Respondents means, whom this Repliant had by his experience found to be
otherwise minded toward him, as is herein sufficiently discovered, which shall
be all this Repliants answer to that particular: more then that he utterly
denies, That ever he did send any poor Protestant away succourlesse, that fled
to him for relief, without some supplies, and with such convoy and protection
in their passages, as he could safely spare, and leave wherewith to maintain
his Garrison; nor was there any such differences between the said Sir John
Dunbar, and his Son, as is alleged by the Respondent, merely to make out the
matter, and to raise the untruth unto a higher pitch, nor can this great
clamor be possibly believed, That whiles there was Peace in that Kingdom, and
the Law was open for every man's complaint of any injury done him, that any man
would suffer wrong by this Repliant, and not right himself, being well known
what favor the Repliant might expect from the late Earl of Strafford, and the
then Viscount Rannellagh, which two commanded both the Kingdom and Province,
where this Repliant lived.

V. To the Respondents Answer to the fifth Charge, this Repliant says, That
forasmuch as this Respondent has fully confessed the same, there needs no
reply to be made unto it (under favor and correction) yet in as much as the
Respondent indeavoureth to extenuate the same offense, by his ignorance, and
want of knowledge, of the affairs of that State, and how things then moved at
Dublin, or in the Parliament here, at that time: This Repliant says, That
before the Cessation concluded at Dublin, and whiles it was in agitation, and
in Order to the same, the Lord Marquess of Ormond, and Council there, made
the same known unto all the Colonels and Commanders in Vlster, as this Repliant
has heard; and so doubts not to prove; and that the Respondent had
intimation thereof, amongst the rest, and his approbation therein was desired;
and likewise after the same was so unhappily concluded, the said Lord
Marquess, and Council, immediately afterward intimated the same again unto
them all, and to the Respondent amongst the rest, Commanding their obedience,
and observation thereof, which was in time made, and done, the (...) of
September, 1643. above four months before the Respondent, by his own showing,
received the said Rebels into protection; and it is without all peradventure,
and so this Repliant doubts not to prove, that even those Rebels themselves
moved it unto the Respondent, as a great persuasive to obtain that favor at
his hands; and from whom also, he had perfect notice of the Lord Marquess of
Ormond, his being then made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and that he was
declared an enemy to the Parliament, and the welfare of that Kingdom; the
Respondent also, before this time, was certainl^ informed by those Letters,
sent from the Parliament of England into Vlster, by Captain O Connelly, and
otherwise, how that they had declared themselves against the said Cessation,
and moving the British Regiments to receive the solemn League and Covenant of
the Kingdoms; nor was the Respondent so straightened in his Quarters, but that he
had continual Intelligences from Londonderry, and other parts of Vlster, and
could not be ignorant of the passages of the State, and how things moved at
that time there, and in the Parliament here, and therefore inexecusable; and it
is so far from lessening, as it does rather aggravate his offense, that he
would receive those Rebels into protection without Order, and without being
first informed of all these passages of State, and things, in case he had been
then ignorant thereof, as he was not; besides his fears to be supplied by the
State there, and his little expectation to be furnished in due time from hence,
clearly informs his knowledge of these proceedings, and that he rested then in
doubt, and in a detestable neutrality, to which side he should adhere; and
therefore upon the matter, was resolved to keep both sides his friends, if
possibly he could, and would make use of the Rebels also, to serve his own
turn, and that so he might stand well affected in the opinions of them also:
But as it was not an Act warrantable, and justifieable, under the power of any
Commission he had; so was it indiscreetly done, and of great disservice unto
the Parliament, That this Repliant, and those who were environed by the enemy,
and in a great strait, and in much harder condition, then the Respondent, and
yet both understanding off, and opposing the said Cessation, were much
discouraged and disheartened, to see those Rebels under the Respondents
protection, to enter their Quarters, and places thereabouts; and to rob and
spoil them of that, whereby they had hope of subsistence: For the Cows
mentioned in the Respondents Answer to the fifth Article, were not the proper
Goods of the Respondents protected Rebels, but prey which they had taken from
the good subjects; and therefore, more fit for to have been possessed by thie
Repliants Soldiers, when they had once gotten them, then by those Rebels; and
yet such was the Respondents zeal and care for them, that by his own
confession, he sent afterward unto the State of Dublin, then in Cessation of
Arms with the Rebels, complaining thereof against this Repliants Soldiers, and
gaining Orders from thence, for restitution. And in the absence of this
Repliant, procured the same to be restored even to the Parliaments enemies, and
to be taken from the Parliaments friends, and servants; besides, his further
inclination to that Government, is observable, Wherein he charges it as a crime
against the Repliant, That he should not observe the Lord Maquesse of Ormond,
and the Commands of that State, even by a compliance with Rebels, his protected
crew, before mentioned; Besides, that he applauds it as an Act of conformity to
those Commands, that now in this Repliants absence, he has persuaded the
Repliants Soldiers to a near conjunction with him therein, and deplores it as
a great prejudice to his benefit: That as he says by this Repliant and his
Soldiers means, he has thus lost this bargain, and yet afterward confesses
a many of them to be still within his quarters, faithfully holding the said
agreement. And this Repliant further says, That for his part, he disclaimeth
his knowledge of any such persons, as are named in the Respondents answer, to
be by him, and his Officers protected, much more the protecting of them upon
his Land; and if the Respondents Acts of like nature, has now drawn it into
example, and made the Repliants Officers in his absence, to fall into such an
error and mistake, he hops it cannot be imputed unto this Repliant for a
transgression, yet cannot believe, that any such thing has been done;
howsoever, that takes nothing from the Respondents offenses, but further
shows the extent of his malice, and what hurt he would do unto this Repliant,
if he were able.

VI. To the Respondents Answer to the sixth Article, or Charge given in against
him by this Repliant, he says, That it is possible that the said Bryan mac
Coconaught mac Gwire, in his answer named, might do the Respondent those
services also, mentioned in his answer, to this Charge: But it is very
improbable and unlikely to him, that understands him not, or that any Papist so
allied to the very prime and chief of the Rebels, especially where the
Rebellion is pretended to be raised, to gain the free exercise of their
idolatrous Religion, and to regain their Lands formerly forfeited, and disposed
of from them to the British, by the State, should do these services for the
State: But to admit it to be so in his person, and that for those reasons
given, the Respondent may be, and was well dispensed with, for receiving him
into protection; yet to receive all those, together with him, if no more then
is confessed, is not so justifiable (under favor) especially, when he that is
acquainted with the quality and nature of those Irish people, the meaner sort
of them, to wholly addicted unto treacheries, and perfidiousnesse: Besides,
that the principals of their Religion teaches them to be so, and no longer, to
hold, and keep Faith with us, whom they call Heretics, then it serves their
own turns: That he which is verst and read in the Histories, the Irish Wars, in
former ages, or that has had his conversation there amongst them, can justify
all this for truth; and what a great deal of Protestant blood they have their
shed, by breaches of that trust which have been reposed in them, by the
English, from time to time, being naturally merciless, and cruel upon
advantages; that it has never been accounted safe in the undertakings of any
great designs, to have them joined, either in Counsel or Action, being also
base and cowardly spirited, where they are subjected, and have not been
observed to perform any great services; but where by treachery or power, they
have in an instant gotten first the mastery, and then no Salvages have been so
bloody and butcherly minded, as they; that albeit, this Bryan mac Coconaught
mac Gwire may be one black Swan amongst the rest; yet upon what ground he
received such a crew, of his followers into protection with him, and employed
them, whose treacheries and revolt, is by himself confessed, this Repliant must
say, that as yet he neither sees ground, nor good discretion for it; and yet
this Repliant craveth leave, to tell the Respondent this much, That it was a
little preposterous, and out of order, first to do an unlawful Act, and then
to justify it with an allowance afterward, which is the very best of the
Respondents case in this particular: And albeit, some times for money and
reward, and to save their own lives, they have been known to have betrayed
their own parents unto destruction; yet it has been seldom seen, that they
have been drawn to do such service in a Military way, and under a Protestant
Commander, whilst they have continued to be Papists; nor was the hanging of
one man (left for a pledge) a sufficient recompense for the great hurt, and
prejudice, they did unto the cause, whiles they remained in service with the
Respondent; and afterward, being with the enemy, to whom no doubt, they
related and discovered, whatsoever they understood, that might be any ways
disadvantagious to this side, and knows now the better how to take the
opportunities to put them in execution. And as to that Printed relation of the
Repliants services performed, and done against those Rebels, which the
Respondent is pleased to term scandalous calumnies in several places thereof,
which concerns himself and Officers, this Repliant says, and must so far
excuse himself, That it was not a thing done immediately by his direction and
appointment, or that he desired it, but was done in a time, when he was then in
his Garrison at Mannor-Hammilton, and far remote from this City, the same being
sent to a friend of his at Londonderry, who afterward coming hither, and by
him that is now the Respondents, or Colonel Meevins Secretary; Tarlton
tendering it to the public view, it was directed to be Printed; of which, the
Respondent may also be pleased upon a better review, to observe thus much
concerning it, That it is not a relation of this Repliants own, but of one of
his Clerks, who as it should seem, kept a Diary of the passages and proceeding
done by them in that time, which he was desirous to communicate, for the
publishing of Gods great mercy toward that handful, and the Respondents
arrogance, and unneighbourly neglect of them: So that if any thing therein
contained, is troublesome and grievous to the Respondent, he has no reason to
except against this Repliant for the same; And yet since the Respondent has
therefore brought him upon the stage, he must do his Clerk that wrote it, that
right, as to justify, and maintain, whatsoever is therein contained to be
true; nor was there any such waiting upon this Repliant, by this Respondent and
his Soldiers required, as is imagined; it was for the King and Parliaments
Service, the relief of the Repliant, and his distressed Garrison, and
destruction of the Rebels, that this Repliant so often importuned the
Respondent to join with him; nor can this Repliant conceive, what should be the
cause or reason of his backwardness, if not that by such delays, the Repliant
might be destroyed and cut off; and it had been well, if at this time, the
Respondent had also forborne the relation of his great Services, set forth in
his answer, because he has upbraided this Repliant of vainglory for the like,
nay, for not so much, if not for nothing, as may be understood, by that which
has been said before, and herein, because he confesses the destroying of two
hundred ninety and six of the Rebels, and the famishing, and starving of many
hundreds of them more, by Preys of Cows, and other spoil, which he took from
them since the Cessation, and by rescuing and redeeming of five thousand four
hundred sixty and nine English and Scots, Protestants, from the hands of the
Enemy; for the latter, it follows, to be done in performance of the Articles of
the said Cessation, and may be verily believed, it being done in time after the
said Cessation, as may be inferred from the Respondents Answer; and for which,
not withstanding the Respondent does well merit, for the relieving of so many
distressed souls: But how this, and the killing of so many Rebels in this time,
being Acts so opposite, and of so differing a nature, one unto the other, as to
keep, and not to keep, the said Cessation, is the thing which strikes most with
this Repliant to believe; howsoever, the Preys of Cows, and spoil taken, may
well be so, for this made for the profit and benefit of the said Respondent,
and his Companies; and who were far enough from the fear, to answer any
complaint at Dublin, for the same.

And as the Respondent being one of the first Colonells of the British in
Ulster, that took the solemn League and Covenant: This insinuation is as true
as the rest; for it is well known, That all those of the Scottish Army had
taken it before, and had not the Repliant been the best means of taking it at
the Derry, it had been hardly taken by the Respondent there for all his brags,
which suites with his other policy; yet he forbears to mention the place where
he took it, or in what COMPANY, not having taken it in the properest place for
the Respondent, to have given good example to his Officers and Soldiers in his
own Garrison at Iniskillin, whether the Reverend Ministers went to tender the
said Covenant; and having Preached to the Respondent, with his Officers and
Soldiers, the Sermon being ended, and the Ministers about to explain and
tender the Covenant; the Respondent in a disrespective manner, and to the ill
example of his Officers and Soldiers, went immediately out of the Church,
thinking a many would have followed him, which doubtless they had, if their
minds had not been better inclining to that solemn League and Covenant, and to
the King and Parliaments Service, then their Colonel was known to be; who
perceiving himself in that condition, fearing what esteem he might be in
amongst his Officers and Soldiers, and how his carriage might be informed off
to the Parliament, did (it may be out of those earthly ends) take the Covenant,
before he ventured to apply himself to the Parliament. Now what thanks this man
deserves in this passage and carriage of his, let any indifferent man be Judge.

And this Repliant further says, That he is not able to judge of the
Respondents desires, which he pretends he had several times, to have
relieved this Repliant; But of this he is sure, he never expressed the same in
any real manner, while as the Repliant and his poor handful, many times were
in great distress, and therewith did advertize the Respondent, who was always
ready, rather to weaken the Repliant, by debishing his Messengers, persuading
them to encourage the Repliants Soldiers to run away, as many of them did, and
were afterward distributed and sheltered under the Respondents several
Companies, as may appear by this Copy of a Petition, directed to the Repliant,
by one of his runaway Soldiers, as follows.

The Humble Petition of John Brooks, To his Honorable Col. Sir Frederick
Hammilton, Knight.
ACknowledging, that notwithstanding your Petitioners several kind usages
under your Command, far beyond his merit, yet being seduced by the base
persuasions, and intisements of John Jeyns, William Vinton, and diverse others
of your Soldiers, your Petitioner was at last persuaded, contrary to his Oath,
to run from his Colors, toward Sir William Cole, offering our selves to be
disposed off by him; who immediately sent for all his Captains, with whom he
advised how to dispose of us, who resolved, we should be divided amongst their
several Companies; and to that purpose, did immediately cast lots for us, your
Petitioner falling to Lieutenant Colonel Acheson, Thomas Vinton to the
Sergeant Major Graham, John Jeyns to Captain Cole, Michael Kent to Captain
Goodfellow, William Vinton to Captain Roff^. And this being your Petitioners
first fault, Humbly prays, it may be forgiving, promising never to offend any
more in the like kind, etc.

By this may appear, the neighbourly carriage of the Respondent toward the
Repliant; as likewise by these Depositions following, taken upon the discovery
of a Treacherous Plot, contrived at Sir William Coals Garrison in Iniskillin.

The Depositions of William Wagh, James Wagh, And diverse others of Sir Fred.
Hammiltons Soldiers.
THe Deponants being duly sworn, does prove, That William Jenison being lately
returned from Sir William Coals Garrison at Iniskillin, the said Jenison told
the Deponants, that he was desired by a prime Officer of Sir William Coals, to
try if he could prevail with ten or twelve of Mannor-Hammilton Soldiers to
come overwith him to Iniskillin, and there to Petition Sir William Cole against
their hard usage, and strict Discipline at Mannor-Hammilton: The said Officer
promising, That if so many of them would come over in this manner, that Sir
William should presently, either take them on in his own Troop, or otherwise
divide them amongst his Captains, as the former run-awayes, who were disposed
off, so as they came not under the number of ten, and what above he could
prevail with; for if they came fewer, they would be committed, and returned
back again: Upon which encouragements, the Deponants do confess, to have
conditioned with diverse others to have run away with them, had not their Plot
the night been discovered.

The Depositions of Robert Urwine.
WHo deposes, that upon Tuesday the 22. of December last, as the Deponant
stood Centery on the Rock, William Wagh, and his Brother James, came to this
Deponant, telling him, that night, that themselves, and diverse others of their
Colonels Soldiers, were to run away to Sir William Cole, where they should
have greater liberty for plundering, or what else they had a mind to, then
they had where they were, desiring the Deponant to go along with them, who
replied, he knew not how conveniently so many of them could get away together,
they replied, that the Plot was laid so, That some Firelocks, which were agreed
to go with them, should (after the Parade was set, and Castle Gate shut in)
plant themselves behind the Rocks, and give an Alarm to the Castle in the
night, as if the Rebels had surprised them, which would put some confusion
amongst them in the Castle at that time of the night, as they might easily be
gone far enough out of the reach of being catched before day.

By these Depositions it may be easily gessed, what comfortable Neighborhood
the Repliant had with the Respondent, who in July following, being in great
distress for want of Corn and Cattle, in his own Garrison, and not to be had
in that Country near him; the Repliant having by this time, (through the great
power and merciful providence of God) with his small handful, so beaten the
Rebels from about him, as he brought preys daily from amongst them, where with
he acquainted the Respondents then distressed Garrison, being desirous the
Respondent would have spared this Repliant a Party of his men, having no great
employment at that time near himself for them; whereupon, the Respondent did at
that time, send his Lieutenant Colonel with a Party of Horse and Foot, and a
Letter to this Repliant, mentioning, that he had now sent by his Lieutenant
Colonel, such a Party to be made use of by the Repliant, in scouring of the
County, or in whatsoever other kind of service this Repliant should think fit
to employ them in, without limitation of any time mentioned in his Letter, or
of any such thing, as is most falsely suggested in the Respondents answer, That
he had sent them to relieve the Repliant, or that he heard of any siege or
leagure to be then about him, though at the Repliants meeting with his
Officers, and his unfortunate Son in law, Dean Barkley, he was told by them,
that at their parting with the Respondent, they were limited by his Orders from
his own mouth, not to be aosent from their Garrison above forty eight hours,
quite contrary to the contents of his Letter: Whereupon the Repliant told them,
it was an impossibility, in so short a time, to engage them in any service, or
for the Repliant to make any use of them, therefore advised them to march back
again; which all of them seemed most unwilling, to retreat to their Garrison,
until they were once commanded upon some service by the Repliant in the
fields; who was persuaded by their importunities, to march out with them
toward a Castle called Dromahear, being within six miles to the Repliants
Castle: Which said Castle of Dromahear (at that time) had diverse Rebels of
great consequence in it, as likewise Sir Robert Hannay, and his Lady,
prisoners, the Repliant having most probable hopes to have taken, both the
Castle and Rebels, and relieved the prisoners, had the Respondents officers and
Soldiers, stuck to this Repliant and his small handful but one night longer,
which all of the Officers had resolved to have done, if it had not been the
base, and imperiousness, of that profane Son in law Dean Barkley, who
peremptorily took upon him, to command the Officers of that party of the
Respondents, to march away, and forsake the Repliant and his Soldiers, whereof
he lost two, being shot dead in working at the Walls, having past all the
difficulties in carrying of the Castle; and if we had but lien by it that night
(as was confessed by Sir Robert Hannay himself, and diverse others that were
then in it, which the Repliant can prove by credible Witnesses that heard them
speak it) we had got it. So that the Respondents information of the Repliants
sending for his Party, in manner as is alleged, by the Respondent in this
particular, is notoriously known to be most false: As likewise, there was not
any use or need at all of Ordnance, for the taking in of that Castle of
Dromahear, the Repliant having sufficient intelligence of the condition and
posture of that Castle, before he attempted it; where the Respondents Soldiers
were never engaged in any dangerous passage of that Service, only what his
Lieutenant Colonel Acheson pleased to offer, and venture himself to go on with
the Repliant, to see his Soldiers set a work at the Walls, most of the
Respondents Party having dispersed themselves in plundering of the Country,
not being subject to Discipline, scarce owning the Orders of an Officer: Such
was the neglect and carelessenesse of the Respondent, to have his men
Disciplined, which was known to be the loss of a many good men, which he
commanded when they pleased. As to the Repliants usage of the Respondents
Officers and Soldiers, it is well known to be far more bountiful and
honorable, then ever the Respondent used them himself, the Officers having
well deserved it; having behaved themselves civilly, with much regrate, to
observe the Repliant and themselves, both so abused by the private Orders,
which their Colonel had given to his indiscreet Son in law, Dean Barkley, who
so unworthily behaved himself, as if he had been sent a purpose with that Party
to pick a quarrel, and to put an affront upon the Repliant, not sparing
publicly to threaten all the Officers, who were unwilling to leave that Castle
of Dromahear, being engaged before it, and seeing such probability to have
carried it that night: Nevertheless, did the Repliant entertain all the
Officers in his Castle, as also the Soldiers, every man of them, who many
times confessed, they never expected the like entertainment of meat and drink
from their Colonel: This being the greatest affront, and abuse the Respondents
Officers and Soldiers met withal at hat time, all of them acknowledging most
thankfully their kind entertainment, thinking fit with one consent of the
Officers, to leave three or four men out of each Company, for a small supply to
the Repliants number, who were daily a wasting upon service: As likewise, the
Lieutenant Colonel knowing the great necessity and want, the Repliant was in
for Powder, did think fit to spare him ten or twelve pounds weight, which was
no great matter for one Garrison, in such extremity, to relieve another:
Nevertheless, did Dean Barkley in a malicious vindictive railing humor,
except against the Officers, for that small courtesy the Repliant had of them;
alleging, the power of that Party to have been committed to his charge and
trust, by his Father in law, and that he would give no consent, for leaving any
Men, or Ammunition, for the Repliants safety or relief, and so incenst the
Respondent against his Officers for that Act, as if they had relieved the
Rebels, forcing them very shortly after, to write for their men, which some of
them would not do, telling him, they had rather loose their Companies, then to
be accessory to the danger and destruction of the Repliant, for want of so few
men, who had deserved better of them all. Now let any man judge of the impudent
boldness of this Respondents information in this particular: There being
nothing material as an Answer to any part of the Charge against him.

And this Repliant confesses, That the Respondent about the said month of May
following, came with certain Companies of Horse and Foot toward this Repliant,
but denies, That the Respondent came upon any design or intention of his own
head, to do service in the Province of Conaught, as is most untruely suggested
in his scandalous answer: But the Repliant shall truly inform the cause and
encouragement the Respondent had for that march, which does more clearly
appear, by this Copy of a Letter, this Repliant sent him.

SIR,
IT has pleased God so to bless my small Party, this morning, as they have
burnt off a great many Houses and Villages in the County of Sligoe, and Barony
of Caroury, and have killed a many more of your Uster Rogues, in and about the
Castle of the Grange, near sixteen miles from hence, where Hugh mac Towell O
Gailachour, with diverse others, chaste out of Vlster, has maned this Castle of
the Grange: From whence, we brought a good Prey of Cows. And as we marched
homewards with our Prey an Ambush of of 400. or 500, Ulster Rebels, was laid
for us, which men belonged to Mannus mac Neal, Garve O Donnel, Torilagh Roe O
Boil, Torilagh mac Caffry O Donnel, with a many of the O Gallachours, who
thought th^mselves so strong, as some of their prisoners did report, That when
they saw my Party marching, they said, they would be but a breakfast to them:
But God in his wontedmercy has so blessed my men, as for all their hard march
last night and sore service about the Castle. As I believe, these Ulster Rogues
find but a poor reckoning of the most of their best men, our Party having left
stripped upon the Fields, above threescore of naked Bodies, of which number, was
one Marcusse O Clery, who had long served the King of Spain, in whose Poceats
were found diverse Passes written in Spanish, mentioning several Services he
had performed there. Thus did we beat them; bringing home abundance of their
Arms, most of them new Muskets, and Calivers, marked with the sign of the
Cross on their Priming Pans: We likewise took prisoner, he that had charge of
the Ammunition, with whom we found a great Bag of Powder, a most welcome
commodity for us; which (as he tells me) was all the Powder that was amongst
them. Now Sir, in discharge of my duty to God, and His Majesty's Service, I
have thought sit, (not withstanding your many great neglects and unkindnesses
toward me) to acquaint you with these passages. My men being few, and sorely
wearied out, some of them deadly wounded, so as I am unable without help, to
lay hold on this brave opportunity so suddenly as is requisite to perform the
rest of this Service, being credible informed by diverse prisoners, that there
is 10000. of their Cows, within ten miles to this Castle, driven hither from
Boylagh and Bannagh, assuring you, were my men as fresh now, as they were
yesterday morning, knowing the Rogues Posture as we have now left them, we
would grudge you, or any man else, a share of the second part of this Service,
who was not at the first. But now as it is, an offer is made you of welcome to
the purpose, where you shall find (if you will be advised) worth your pains to
fetch it: So as we may have but your help for killing of the Rogues, you shall
be your own Carvers for all the Cows; What you do, do it quickly; for this
Service can brook no delay, least the Rogues having met with no better welcome
into Conaught, endeavor to hasten from whence they came. Thus expecting your
speedy Answer, as you tender Gods glory, the Kings service, and Common Cause, I
rest

Yours, ready to join with you, for God, and His Majesty's Service, Fred.
Hammilton.
Castle Hammilton, the 15. of May. 1643.

By this Letter may appear, the main grounds of the Respondents mentioned
service, intended for the Province of Conaught; to wit, for catching of Cows,
being promised to be his own Carver, as the Repliants Letter mentioned; never
formerly having made any such have for the Repliants relief, while as he stoed
in danger of being destroyed. And since the Respondent has thus engaged the
Repliant to answer the several base, unworthy, and most impudent untruthes
alleged by the Respondent in this passage, the Repliant craves leave to inform
the truth, That hearing the Respondent was in person with his party within a
mile or two, to this Repliants Garrison, and being informed, the Respondent
intended to come no nearer, the Repliant thought fit (being at that time sick
in Bed) to command the Gentleman, who then commanded the Repliants Horse, to
take with him a party of Horse to attend the Respondent, and to let him know,
the desire the Repliant had (being so near other) that they might speak
together, and withal, to inform the Respondent of the Repliants sickness at
that time: But it seems, the guiltiness of the Respondents conscience, did
possess him with some base jealousies, that the Repliant had some design upon
him, so that he absolutely refused to come near the Repliant, but sent his
Lieutenant Colonel Acheson, and Captain Adam Catheart, with orders to go back
to the Repliants Castle, with his party of Horse, and that they should deliver
from the Respondent, a Paper to the Repliant, which contained as follows.

May 20. 1643.
HUgh oge mac Gwily informed, that Hester Edwards tells him, That her Brother.
Richard Edwards, a Soldier of Mannor-Hammilton, charged her to notify unto
Sir William Cole, That Sir Frederick Hammilton did purpose to lay hold, and
imprison the said Sir William Cole, if ever he could get him within the Castle
of Mannor-Hammilton, wishing, that this may be a Caveat unto the said Sir
William Cole to prevent him.

Upon reading this Paper, which this Repliant received, being in Bed, he asked
the Lieutenant Colonel, and Captain Cathcart, if Sir William Col^ had
commanded them to deliver that Paper, which it seemed, put some fear in him,
and scared his coming nearer: The Repliant telling them, That he was very sorry
to see Sir William Cole, s^ fir abused, as to wrong himself upon the
information of a poor simple Women, in harboring so base and treacherous a
thought of the Repliant, he having so many good fellows at that time about him,
to witness his usage: The Lieutenant Colonel telling the Repliant, That Sir
William Cole needed not to have made any such use of that Paper; for before
they left their Garrison, he had told Sir William Cole, that he had heard her
Brother Richard Edwards to have spoken the like; whereupon this Repliant took a
Copy of this Paper, attested under the hands of the Lieutenant Colonel, and
Captain Cathcart, returning the principal with them to the Respondent; and
withal, sent the Soldier Richard Edwards along with them, for the Respondents
better satisfaction: As likewise, the Repliant sent his Minister, Master John
Long, to inform and satissie the Respondent of the Repliants sickness, and
unability, to go to the Respondent; and the great necessity there was, that the
Respondent and the Repliant, should speak together, since they were so near,
for ordering, and concluding the course they meant to take for marching with
that party, the Respondent and his men, being but strangers in that Province,
were to be guided by the Repliants party, the Minister having Commission from
the Repliant, to make offer to the Respondent for his safe conduct; if his sear
still continued, that the Repliants Wise and Children should be sent as pledges
to the Respondents party; whereupon, this motion of the Ministers, the
Respondent was pleased to venture himself with a many of his Officers, who (the
Repliant dare say) were both kindly, and courteously received, by the Repliant
and his Wife, though he ill deserved it; howsoever, for the service sake, the
Repliant thought sit to strain himself, and upon their meetings, the Rupliant
gave Orders to his Officers, both Horse and Foot, what party they should draw
out, and what course they should take, being joined with the Respondents party;
which course, God blessed with success, as the Respondents expectation, and
the Repliants undertakings were, both well answered, the party returning within
two days, with a Prey of near 2000. Cows, and very near so many Sheep, besides
abundance of Plundering, which the Respondents Soldiers knew well how to go
about, though the main thing the Repliant most desired, they came short off,
the rogues not daring to face or fight such a great party; The Repliants small
handful having many times made greater execution upon the Rebels, then was
performed in that march; upon their return, the Respondent made no such
ceremony as formerly, in taking up his Quarters at the Repliants Castle, where
be and some of his Officers were better entertained, then his thankfulness by
his expressions has deserved, though it was not so good as the Repliant could
have wished: Howsoever, the next morning, the Resoondent sent betimes for
several of his Officers to his Chamber, where they being together, sent for
the Repliant, to desire him to speak with them; who coming amongst them, the
Respondent told the Repliant, that his desire to speak with him, was, That he
would join with him and his Officers, in the dividing, and distributing of the
Prey, to which motion, the Repliant answered the Respondent, That it having
pleased God so to bless them in this march, that he hoped the Respondent would
not be so long a stranger hereafter; and as for the Prey he well remembered the
words of his Letter, which was the encouragement the Respondent had, that he
should be his own Carver for the Cows, which he meant to make good, desiring
him to take all if he pleased; but if there were any wearied Cows, or what was
not like to drive much farther, that rather then the Rebels should dog them,
and get those wearied Beasts, he might leave what he pleased of such kind of
Cattle in the Repliants Garrison, which the Respondents Officers held too much
courtesy, and would fain have pressed the Repliant, and his Officers, to have
joined with them in a divident, which by no means the Repliant would do:
Hereupon, the Respondent and his Officers, thought fit, to leave in the
Repliants Garrison, near that number of a hundred and fifty of those, weak
Cows, they carrying and driving, with their own party, near one thousand and
seven hundred Cows more, besides a many Horses and Mares, loaded with plunder.

And whereas the Respondent most uncivilly, and clownnishly, does mention, that
he bestowed upon this Repliants good Lady, a thousand Sheep; which gift of his
(if it be fit to be called his gift) was a number of poor Sheep, which his
party had left uneaten, and could not drive with them, they having killed
abundance for their skins, to carry with them, besides what they eat: As also,
he mentions his gift to some Gentlemen, the Repliants Ladies Kinsmen, and to
his Officers, alleging, they went with the Respondent in a friendly manner, as
not having relation to any Charge under the Repliants Command; whereas these
two Gentlemen, Lieutenant Vaughan, and Coronet Sidney, being Cousin Germans to
the Repliants Wife, did mock and jeer, when they heard the Respondent (having
the whole Prey, bestowed upon him and his party) to name, three Cows for one of
them, and two Cows for another, which they valued not so much, as two groats.
And thus does the simple old man, think to abuse Gentlemen.

Now let any man judge, what censure this Respondent deserves for his false,
and malicious relation of this passage; who being upon his parting that morning
from the Repliants Castle, it having pleased God amongst the rest of his
blessings, to send this Repliant a young son some weeks before that time, whom
he thought fit to Christen, before the good Company parted; where the
Respondent amongst other Gentlemen, were witnesses to that charitable Act,
assuring him, it was none of the Repliants meaning, ever to invite the
Respondent as a Godfather, though at that time in civility, being in the
Repliants own House, he was named to stand as a Cipher, for another man, which
is confessed was more honor, then the Respondent deserved in his own person,
little thinking he would have made this use of it, in bragging, as if he had
been invited to that purpose, whereas his invitation, and the manner of it,
appears by the Repliants Letter.

By this true relation, let any man judge, of what unworthy disposition this
Respondent is, and how unfit to get credit, in whatsoever he says; whose heart
is wholly set upon greid and covetousness, which is not unknown to such as are
acquainted with his humor, and condition. As to this Repliants civilties, and
merit of better thanks, then to have himself and his Regiment exclaimed
against, where the Repliants tongue may get any credit: This Repliant hops,
that for all the Respondents endeavors to traduce him, his tongue shall still
get credit, and rather more then less, in making discoveries to the
Parliament, of those, which seemingly pretend to do great Services for the
State, whilst they only serve themselves with pay and pillage, so long as
they can make means to deceive the Parliament, and to waste the Publiques
means, and to cast Aspersions upon such, who are about to discover their
double-dealings, while as apparently they play on both sides, to serve their
own turn: Of which number, I pray God the Respondent may prove none, if his
power were answerable to his mind.

And this Repliant would be glad to know those Neighbors of his, which are of
such quality and account with the Respondent, which will affirm such falsities
and untruths, as to charge this Repliant with loving contentions in the time of
Peace, or War; or that this Repliant ever labored to oppress, or injure, any
man in that Province where he lived, or elsewhere: But if to defend a man's self
against violence, and oppressions, strong confederacies, and conspiracies to
ruin him, and his Estate, be accounted so, then this Repliant must confess the
action: For the truth is, That this Repliant being a stranger born, and living
amongst men, that partly for that reason, could not endure his Neighborhood,
and acquaintance; And therefore, endeavoring by all means possible to weary
and ruin him out of his Estate, and to blemish him in his good name and
reputation; did so multiply suits and vexations against him, and made such
protences and encroachments upon his Lands, as that he was enforced to defend
himself against them, and because he would not be so tame as to lay down the
Buc lers, and to yield that which was his own, to every man's desires and
demands of what they would have had from him, without right or reason; and for
that it has been his good hap ever more yet to tree and acquit himself from
the fury and fierce prosecution of his adversaries; which have not been of the
meanest rank and condition and to support his credit and estate, by protection
of the Law against all opposition whatsoever, if this has been any miscarriage
in him toward his neighbors or any others, he might confess the Respondent
and his worthies may have therefore cause to complain of him: But that he has
willingly injuried or done wrong to any man, he utterly denies, and shall be
always ready to answer the particular complaints of any persons grieved by him
whatsoever; And therefore hops that by such general accusations as these, he
shall not be concluded guilty in the opinion of those before whom he now
stands in Judgment, who well knows it be the usual road wherein such
detractors do commonly walk the better to obscure their deceipts and frauds,
intended for the ruin of those they would thus destroy.

And since the Respondant proceeds yet further for to arraine this Replyants
exceptions concerning Sir Robert Hannay and others, then prisoners by the
Rebels, he does acknowledge both the receipt of that letter and his answer
returned unto it, and shall give this account thereof: That this Replyant
having then near twenty four prisoners in his Castle, many of them of the
Chief and Prime Rebels in those parts, diverse of them the most activest and
dangerous men, of the O Roirks who claimed to be Lords of that Country, the
Replyant endeavoring what he could to suppress the rebellion there, in hopes
that aid or relief should have come to his assistance, as was daily promised
him by the then Lord President of Connaught, thinking till then those prisoners
would have been a Curb to the rest of the Country; but observing at last the
desperateness of the Rebels resolutions, after their taking in of Sligoe, and
murdering of so many British souls there, and this Replyant hopeless of any
relief, well understanding that to let these men loose again upon any
conditions whatsoever, would prove fatal and destructive to this Repliant, and
all the rest of the British then under his care and charge; and having made
such a protestation to himself, as is mentioned in his Letter, which he has
inviolably kept and observed unto this day; and the Replyant does utterly deny
that most malicious, wicked, and devilish invention of the Respondent,
alleging that in presence of the Messenger, who brought him Sir Robert
Hannayes letter, that the Replyant should then in a most provoking and
unchristian like manner hang up the said Colonel O Roerkes Brother, and that
thereupon the Respondant most falsely alleges that the Rebels, in a
revengefull manner, did murder ten or eleven Protestants, whereof two were
Godly Ministers. Whereas the Replyant did not hang a prisoner of his in many
days after; until such time as the said Colonel Owen O Roerke, with diverse
regiments from other Counties fell into the Replyants Garrison with near two
thousand men, and burnt up his Town and all about it close to the Castle walls,
after which Act the Replyant held it time to dispatch his prisoners by hanging
of them, which was their entertainment after that service done by their
friends, this Replyant hoping that it was no disservice, but rather a piece of
good service to rid so many of that viperous brood of idolatrous Rebels out of
the way upon all occasions, for the poison will remain until the beast be
killed, and he hops that herein he shall not undergo the Censure of being
uncharitable, amongst those that understand and tender the welfare and safety
of these three Kingdoms, it being rather an Act of folly and indiscretion,
than of pity and charity, not timely to remove such blocks out of the way,
against which otherwise himself and all he commanded must be sure not only to
stumble, but to fall; and this Repliant is confident that the said Sir Robert
Hannay himself nor his wife and children will complain of this as any injury
done unto them, knowing the condition and estate of the Repliant, who heartily
wished well unto them, so far as it might stand with the safety of him and
his, so that nothing appears but malice in this relation; it being a thing
that nothing concerned the Respondant to have taken into his mouth.

And it seems strange to this Repliant, that the Respondant should so
bitterly mention the Repliants evil dispositions, which in former times he
has held in better esteem: And how this Respondent should come to understand
more of this Repliants own business then himself, and that his Livetenant and
Officers have been forced to forsake their Garrison, by reason of the Repliants
beating of them, which is more (as the Repliant believes) then the Respondant
durst allege in the presence of any of the said Officers, though it is
possible the Respondant has been endeavoring to seduce and draw away the said
Officers for the destruction of that Garrison, as he did formerly the Soldiers;
and this Repliant craveth that favor to tell the Respondant without
ostentation, That he is not to learn from him how to carry himself in his
commands toward his Officers and Soldiers, having never as yet been chaste by
any of them, as the Repliant is informed, the Respondant has been by his,
which was held no great matter for others his neighbors to do while as the
Respondant was of a younger and abler years to defend himself, though his
courage was not observed to be then as now, which draws these unexpected
preferments upon the Respondant, and makes him fare so much better than other,
who have been thought to have deserved informer times as well, if not better,
than the Respondant.

And seeing the Respondant cannot yet hide the fire he had so long kept close
in the straw, the venom and malice is apparently in his heart, he endeavors
yet further to meddle in that, in which he has nothing to do, and to
calumniate this Repliant in a matter he understands not, concerning the
Government of Londonderry; and represents this Repliant, as a Petitioner for
that employment, which is but his own fancy, purposely moved by him and his
Confederates (if he may) to forestale all recommendations, which have or might
be given of this Repliant for any command whatsoever amongst them. Least the
Repliant should be able to discover the rest of their intended juglings: Nay by
his good will he would not that the Repliant should be Governor of his own
family, a strange prosecution of a man's good name and parts, that would make
him unworthy of remembrance, and of a being in the world: But this Repliant
conceives that this proceeds from an opinion, which the Respondant holds
with a Gentleman of a deeper reach than his own, who lately declared his
exceptions to this Repliants being made Governor of Sligo, because he was of
the Scottish Nation; which the Repliant hopes shall ever be found more
faithful to the King and Parliament, than any that have Irish blood in them;
the Repliant being long incorporated with the English, both by marriage and
otherwise, always hating and abhorring national difference betwixt these two
Kingdoms, yet has this Repliant never sought this Government by himself, nor
any other employment, of which the Parliament shall not think him worthy; but
to do them service, this Repliant shall think no hazard, or other undertakings
whatsoever too much or too hard, wherein he may serve and obey their commands,
in the like kind; and thus it does appear that the Respondants greatest aim
is to stop (if he can) the Parliaments favor to this Repliants preferment in
any thing whatsoever, which has caused his pen by Generals to let fall those
manifold untruths.

And surely, if this Repliant had been informer times so foul, criminous, and
unneighbourly, as the Respondent and his accomplices has labored with their
scandalous tongue and pen, to make him appear, the late Earl of Strafford, and
the late Lord Viscount Rannellagh, and then Lord Precedent of the Province of
Conaught, this Repliants mortal enemies, and who had then, both the means and
power in their hands, to have discovered and punished this Repliant to the
outmost, and who put forth all their strength, to have crushed, and undone him,
if they could, must in all this time, assuredly have brought to light, the
particulars of the Repliants misdemeanors, with which, the Respondent makes
so great a noise, which is a mere sound, and nothing else: And this Repliant
faith, That until he found the Respondents intentions, so maliciously
declared, in those his answers toward him, he never apprehended, That the
Respondent intended any complaint against him, as having no cause; And it had
been strange, That this Repliant should have desired (as is most untruely
suggested) a reconciliation, with one whom he never offended, and who had been
many times solicited by diverse Gentlemen of worth, both in Scotland, and since
he came into England for a reconciliation with the Repliant, as is well known
to these several Gentlemen still in Town, much wondering how the seared
conscience of the Respondent, can serve him to allege such notorious known
untruths: But this his assertion, That the Repliant should desire the
Respondent to have concealed that which was never thought or acted, is so
palpable gross, and imaginary; that in it self, it appears to any impartial
Reader but mere recrimination, which had never been heard off, if not
occasioned by this Repliants Charge put in against him, for his several
misdemeanors, which this Repliant professes, was not done out of any hurt
intended to his person, but in zeal to the Public safety; and the desires he
has, and ever shall have to serve this Cause and Commonwealth, and to the
discovery whereof, he finds himself more particularly obliged by the late
solemn League and Covenant.

And as touching the Respondents comparison, and likening of this Repliant unto
Sir George Pawlet, mentioned in his Answer, being a man dead many years ago;
which argues much base bitterness, to proceed from the mouth or pen of one in
the Respondents years: So as comparisons are odious in themselves, and that it
is both uncharitable and unworthily done, to knock at a dead man's grave, who in
his life time, was esteemed a man of eminency and worth, and of another kind
of degree and quality, then the Respondent; who dares thus kick at him, being
dead? which shows more weakness, malice, and spleen, then otherwise could
have been imagined in the man called Sir William Cole; so much blazed through
the City for his Hypocritical goodness, hoping after this, whosoever shall
read this passage, in his famous vindicating History, will alter their opinion
of the man hereafter; and because it has received a satisfactory Answer herein
before, this Repliant will pass it by, and impute it, to the infirmity of his
doting days, or as misled to it, by other like minded, that dare not appear in
it themselves.

And as to that his impudent, and shameful close of all his malicious
invectives, which he terms pertinent instances, and reasons, for to induce the
Parliament, not to put the Government of Londonderry upon this Repliant;
wherein he pleases himself, to term those certain informations given in
against Colonel Mervin, the Major of Londonderry, and the rest to be
aspersions, and invented, and contrived by this Repliant and his instruments,
of purpose to make them detestable to the Parliament. This Repliant faith, That
forasmuch as all the same matter, and much more, and worse, then has yet been
alleged against them, is well known, and manifest unto the Honorable
Committee of both Kingdoms, to be proved under their own hand writings, and
further, to be attested against them upon all occasions this Repliant will be
further silent in it, and will not weary out your patience with making any
further reply unto it; But all that has gone before, does humbly pray you to
observe, that the Respondent upon the matter has confessed all the Charges
given in against him by this Repliant, and have made no manner of defense
(under correction) that does in the least clear him of the crimes and
misdemeanors laid unto his charge. That he has through his whole Answer,
infinitely abused, and traduced, this Repliant, with unsufferable scandals and
reproaches, the most of them couched under generals, which imply nothing but
abuses; some of them also, being matters concerning his own personal behavior
in the Government of his own Family and Commands; some concerning his
Neighborhood, and in the mannaging of his own Estate, and in nothing that
concerns the Public; nor in any thing that has relation to the damage or
detriment of the Commonwealth, in case they had been true, as they are most
notoriously false: And therefore this Repliant humbly craveth, repair against
him, for these intolerable wrongs and injuries done him, in these his
relations; it being (under favor) against the common course and practice of
inferior Judicatories, That an offender once accused, and charged with any
wrong done to the Commonwealth, should be admitted to recriminate any thing in
his Answer against the prosecutor, until he has first purged himself of
things, whereof he stands accused, much less to Print and Publish the same by
way of Anticipation of Justice, while as the matter depends unheard, by the
Honorable House of Commons.

And he humbly prays, it may be remembered, though one Micaiah suffered for
prophesying the truth against some hundreds of the Court Parasits of the King
of Israel: Yet when he was smote between the Joints of his Harness, in Ramoth
Gilead, that he died, The Prophet was found to have told the truth; albeit, it
was too late for the King to repent him of his unbelief.

A Copy of the Lord Lieutenant and Council of Ireland; Their Letter procured
by Sir William Cole, against the Garrison at Castle-Hammilton, for breaking of
the CESSATION.
AFter our hearty commendations, We the Lord Lieutenant, and Council, have
lately understood by Letters from Sir William Cole, Knight. The Soldiers
Garrisoned at Castle-Hammilton in Conaught, came out of that Province, and went
to the Largin in the Province of Ulster, and there in hostile manner, preyed,
and took away on the first of February, four or five hundred Cows in the day
time from Torilagh oge mac Gawran, and other protected by Sir William Cole,
upon composition made by them, to contribute toward the support of the
Regiment, commanded by the said Sir William, That by that spoil so committed on
these men, the Garrison of Iniskillin, is exceedingly injured, and are like to
suffer much prejudice: That albeit, he sent his Lieutenant Colonel with his
Letters, to require restitution of these Cattle to the owners, from you the
Lieutenant of Sir Frederick Hammiltons Company, to whom he also sent the
Letters of this Board, of the 15. of December, directed to him, inabling him to
agree with such of the Natives, as would come under protection, for
contribution to be paid toward support of the said Garrison of Iniskillin,
yet no restitution is made.

Upon consideration, whereof at this Board, We have just reason to be highly
displeased, not only in that we find such want of due and friendly
correspondence, rendered by that Garrison of Castle-Hammilton, to the said
Garrison of Iniskillin, as in wisdom and reason, ought to be expected: But also
in that, we find that unadvisednesse, accomompanied with so high and manifest
contempt against His Majesty's Autheritie, entrusted with this Board: And
therefore in favor of you, before we proceed any other way, to punish that
contempt. We think fit hereby, to admonish you, and require you, immediately
upon sight hereof, to cause such due restitution, and satisfaction to be made
herein, as Sir William Cole may have no further cause of complaint: And we do
let you know. That we are so sencible, not only of this unfriendlinesse,
happened between His Majesty's own Garrisons, who ought to be equally careful of
each other; but also of the contempt therein offered to the Honor and Dignity
of this Board: As if due and present restitution be not made immediately: We
will take such other course herein, as may not only be penal to the
contemners, but also examplary for others, to take warning by. And so we bid
you farewell.

From His Majesty's Castle of Dublin, 26. of February, 1643. R. Bolton, Canc la
Dublyn.
Your Loving Friends John Borlasse. Ormonds. Cha. Lambard. Ja. Ware. Fr.
Willouchby. Edw. Brabaron. Geo. Wentworth.


The Copy of Sir William Coals Letter, which he sent in the absence of Sir
Frederick Hammilton, to his Castle and Garrison; with the Copy of an old
Petition, in the name of Master Robert Parck, then Prisoner at Mannor-Hammilton
Castle; by which Petition, and the Lords Justices and Council, their Order
thereupon may appear, how little Warrant or Reason, Sir William Cole had to
meddle in that business, which he forbore, till after the Cessation was
concluded; and that he knew Sir Frederick to be gone with a Resolution not to
submit to that dishonorable Cessation.
To his Honorable Neighbor, Sir Frederick Hammilton Knight, or in his
absence, to the chief Officer, Commanding his Company in Mannor-Hammilton
Castle.
SIR,
BY the enclosed, which is the Copy of Master Parks Petition, and the Order of
the Lords Justices and Council, including the Lord Ma^quesse of Ormond, Lord
Lieutenant General of His Majesty's Army. You may perceive, that Master Parck,
with such matters as are to be objected against him, was to be left at the
Garrison at Ballishanny in the County of Dunnegall, to be thence sent with the
next Convoy to Londonderry, and so from thence to Dublin, to be there
proceeded with, as shall be fit.

And seeing the poor Gentleman is restrained, and not sent accordingly; least
you cannot spare a Guard of yours to convoy him, not yet Ballishanny in this
busy time of Harvest to send for him: I have now sent the Bearer Charles Cokis
my Ensign, Sergeant Graham, and forty Musketeers for him; to whose hands, I
desire he may be now delivered, with the matters to be objected against him, to
be guarded, and safely conveyed to the Garrison of Ballishanny, and thence to
Derry, and so to Dublin, as by the said Order is required: Whereunto I doubt
not, but you will give all due Obedience. Which leaving to your consideration,
I commit you, and us all, to the protection and direction of the Almighty, I
will rest,

Your loving friend, William Cole.
Iniskillin, 18. of September. 1643.
The humble Petition of Robert Parck Equire. To the Right Honorable the Lords
Justices.
HUmbly showing, That your Petitioner being an English man, a constant
Professor of the Religion established in the Church of England, and from the
beginning of the present troubles zealously affected to the service of his
Majesty and the State of this Kingdom, was in July last called upon by Sir
Frederick Hamilton Knight, to go with him to his Majesty's service, which the
Petitioner most willingly assented unto; and having with his Soldiers and
Servants given the best assistance for the effecting of the said service, the
said Sir Frederick Hamilton entreated your Petitioner and his men for his safer
Convoy, to go with him to Mannor-Hamilton, which your Petitioner did, thinking
to return the next day to his Castle; but ever since the said Sir Frederick
has keept your Petitioner closse Prisoner, not permitting him to go to Divine
service, or to hear the Word of God for the comfort of his soul, neither will
yield any reason to the Petitioner nor to any other for his detaining.

In tender consideration whereof, and forasmuch as your Petitioner obtained
former directions from the Honorable Lords Justices and Council to the said
Sir Frederick to send the Petitioner to the Lord President of Conaught to be
convoyed hither, to answer what could be alleged against him. May it therefore
please your Honors once more by your Letters or otherwise, as in your grave
wisdoms you shall think fit, to send directions to the said Sir Frederick for
the Petitioners enlargement, upon such sufficient Bail as your Honors shall
think fit to take for his appearance, to answer to what Objections shall be
laid to his charge.

And he shall pray, etc.

25. of May 1643.
BY Order of this Board of the 24. of January last, we required Sir Frederick
Hamilton to cause the Petitioner with such matters as are objected against him,
to be delivered to the Lord President of Conaught, to be sent with the then
next Convoy to the City of Dublin, to be here proceeded with as shall be fit.
Which Order it seems was not convoyed to the said Sir Frederick. And now we
require the said Sir Frederick to cause the Petitioner with such matters as are
to be objected against him, to be left at the Garrison of Bellishanny in the
County of Dunnegall, to be thence sent with the next Convoy to Londonderry,
and from thence hither to be here proceeded with as shall be fit.

Copia vera. Signed, John Borl^sse. Hen. Titchborne. Ormond. Roscomen. Ad.
Loftus. Will. Parsons. Gerard Lowther. J^. Temple.

The Copy of Sir Frederick Hammiltons Letter to the Lords Justices and Council
of Ireland, upon the receipt of this Petition and Order thereupon, together with
the Copy of a Letter written by the Prisoner Master Parck to his Father in Law
Sir Edward Povy, then in Dublin, who procured the said Order, as also the Copy
of a Letter from the Lord Taaffe that Arch-Rebell and wicked Incendiary.
Right Honorable,
I Received your Lordships Order the sixth of July, dated the 25. of May,
grounded upon a scandalous and seditious Petition, presented in the name of
Robert Parck Equire, now my Prisoner. That he being an English man, a constant
Professor of the established Religion, and zealously affected to the service of
his Majesty, should have been by me surprised and imprisoned without any
warrant or reason; the aspertion of this scandal, as it has moved your
Lordships to conceive an Order in the Prisoners behalf, so it may make me most
odious to all men that shall give credit to the said scandalous Petition; and
to be held most unworthy of the manifold mercies and favors God has
wonderfully showed me and mine, near this two years past, without any aid or
relief, if I prove not able to justify my proccedings against that man, to be
not only loyal and conscientious in this distressed desperate condition I
have long lived in, but also thanks worthy from your Lordships being better
informed, his great zeal consisting in such service as did most tend to the
utter ruin and subversion of us, his Majesty's loyal Subjects, and furtherance
of the Rebels, if their treacherous plots by daily correspondance, and
circumstances had not been prevented; Which was likely shortly to have drawn
utter destruction upon me, mine, and all others, his Majesty's distressed
British Subjects, who has this long sheltered themselves within my Castle,
from the butcherous cruelty of the bloody Rebels, at last I was constrained,
for all our safeties, observing the danger we were in, upon intelligence from
his own Servants and Soldiers, to cease upon his person and Castle, as well
for preventing all our distructions (which much consisted therein) as that he
should be liable hereafter to answer his disloyal and treasonable carriages,
which appears by the depositions of diverse witnesses his own Servants and
others taken upon oath; which your Lordships taking into consideration and
reserving the care of indifference to me, by whom his disloyalty and trading
with the Rebels shall be made appear, if ever it please God to send us relief,
that we may both be indifferently brought to the bar of Justice, In the mean
time depending upon his Divine providence and appointed time, who can ease me
of this and other burdens, which necessity in this miserable extremity has
laid upon my shoulders, entreating your Lordships to consider my miserable and
weak estate, not 300. strong to maintain this Castle and Garrison, living in
the bozom of the Rebels betwixt two Provinces, and what danger it were for me
with such a Prisoner and the evidence against him to be ventured with a small
party of my handful, for the conveying of him to the Garrison of Ballishannay
being a dangerous long way in another Province, wherein almost two years time
the strength of the King and Parliaments whole forces that are in this Kingdom,
has held it a difficulty to adventure to comfort and relieve this Castle and
Garrison. So that your Lordships may judge of my condition, who am daily
threatened by Owen Roerke O Neale, and most of the rest of the Vlster Rebels,
who are driven into this County and Province, and are too near my Neighbors at
this instant, all of us apprehending much danger daily, and not a little
troubled to see means made that I shall receive such Orders in favors of such
as adhered to the Rebels, and can receive no encouragement by the like means,
when we may expect comfort or relief, others our nearest Neighbors receiving
supplies from you, as is mentioned in my last Letters to your Lordships of the
7. of April last, much fearing the desperatnesse of my present estate, has
encouraged hard hearted and ill natured Neighbors to traduce me with more
seditious informations as Parckes Petition does mention. But when God shall
provide for my enlargement, I doubt not to justify my self and my zealous
endeavors to their greater shame, who are more inclining to envy than pity
toward my distressed condition; Thus humbly craving pardon that I cannot part
with my Prisoner as your Lordships Order does require, until God provids
otherwise for us all, till which time and ever I rest,

Your Lordships humblest servant, Fred. Hammilton.
Castle Hammilton 6. July 1643.
A Copy of Master Parcks Letter to his Father in Law.
Worthy Sir,
IT has not been my happiness since the beginning of these troubles, to have
heard from you, the first week only I received a Letter, until this morning,
it pleased Sir Frederick Hammilton to show me a Letter of yours with a Petition
therein closed, in my name, directed to the Lords Justices; mentioning that I
being an English man, and a constant Professor of the Religion established in
the Church of England, was by him kept close Prisoner without yiedling any
reason; wherein he finds himself much grieved, as unfit aspersions to be cast
upon him; for either of these reasons mentioned in the Petition, I cannot say
that I found them any ways or motives that induced him to detain me as
Prisoner, and would have been glad they had been omitted in the Petition, and
for the rest of the Petition, That evening I came to his Castle having taken me
the night before out of my Castle for disobeying to come to him upon a Warrant
he had from the Lords Justices to command me and other of that County, the Copy
whereof he had sent me the night before by a party with his Lieutenant Lesly,
and having carried me along with him to the burning of Sligo, at his return to
his Castle, after supper I was that night by him committed and had liberty for
three Sabbath days together to hear Sermons, and afterward I was committed
close Prisoner upon diverse informations and depositions against me, charging me
with several unbeseeming carriages during these troubles, which is the very
truth of these particulars; I have not much more to write, but that God has
undoubtedly, in his special providence, wonderfully preserved and blessed this
handful of men here in a more than ordinary manner, and let Col. Hammilton use
me as he pleases, I am bound to say the truth of him, that such service as he
has done here, even with a very few men and with so small loss of them, is
not to be parallelled (as I verily believe) in any Kingdom, but it is Gods
doings and is most miraculous in all our eyes, the whole relation whereof would
take up a volum to be written.

Although the absence of me from my wife and your self has bred me much
discontent, yet I cannot but rejoice that in my absence your are not forgetful
of me, My unfaigned duty attend you, my Mother, and all yours, and my true
constant affection to my poor Wife; and so the King of Heaven keep you and us
all in his protection.

Your faithful Servant and Son in Law To. Parck.
Castle Hammilton, 6. July 1643.
A Copy of the Lord Taaffes Letter, after I had hanged and killed, diverse of
his Kindred, and Friends, who had robbed me, and my Tenants, and had beleagured
me diverse times in my Castle.
SIR,
I Came some two nights ago into this Country, where I shall not remain longer
then Saturday next, being engaged to be at Dublin, on the Tuesday following,
where (if I may do you any service) I shall faithfully perform your Commands: I
believe Sir, the most welcome news I can give you a relation off, is the good
success and prosperity of His Majesty, which with confidence, I give you an
assurance off, having of late, infinitely prevailed against his most malicious,
and disloyal enemies, in that high degree; as I am confident, they will very
suddenly submit, and render themselves to his most merciful protection.

Sir, I understand that most of the Irish of this Nation, pretend the having of
a Commission from our King, to countenance their actions, which is a most false
surmise, he being so far from encouraging them in their proceedings, as he
deemed them Rebellious, and solely intended to the destruction of the English
Nation, and Government. There is since my coming into this Country, an Army of
theirs, came into the County of Rescommen, what their number is, I cannot
advertise you, but their intention is to take all the Garrisons in that County,
and to destroy such of the Kings Army, as reside there; the prevention whereof,
must be labored by all such as has, either power or authority. Sir, a great
number of my Tenants complain unto me, how you have destroyed them, which I am
confident they deserved, being erroneously blinded by such, as for their own
particular interest, would destroy the General: I have labored in some
measure to reform some, and seeing I cannot reside here, I must refer them to
your protection, being confident, that for the future, they will neither
misbehave themselves, nor labor to hinder any of your designs.

Sir, I herewith send you a Petition of Master Parcks, with the Lords Justices
and Councels Order thereupon: And though my Lord Precedent be not in the
Province to receive him, I will under take (if you will trust him to my care)
to convey him safe to Dublin, with what examinations of his you send: I shall
expect to receive your Commands, and in the interim remain,

Your humble servant Taaffe.
Bellimote, the 12. of July, 1643.
A Copy of the several Depositions of Witnesses, taken by Sir Frederick
Hammilton Knight, and Colonel, concerning Master Robert Park, and his Brother
William Parck, their carriage since the beginning of this Rebellion.
THomas Powell Mason, being duly sworn, deposes, that some three or four
days after the news came to the Castle of Dromahear, that the Rebels had
burned the Iron-works, called the Garrison, Master William Parck living at that
time in the said Castle of Dromahear, did upon the news, transport most of the
Goods he had within that Castle, and delivered them a keeping, to the Friars,
then dwelling at Crimley, not half a mile from the said Castle of Dromahear: At
which time, the Deponant heard Owen O Roirk, desire Walter Harrison of Crimley,
to speak to William Parck, that he would leave him the said Owen O Roirk in the
possession of the said Castle, upon condition, That if came peace, the said
Castle should be surrendered unto the said William; and if it continued wars,
That as the said Owen O Roirk said, was more more kindly unto him, then to any
other of his name: To which motion, William Parck in the Deponants hearing,
answered, He had already disposed of the Charge of that Castle, to one Teage
oge mac Quin, who to the Deponants knowledge was, and is, for any thing the
Deponant knows, the chief servant and follower of Owen O Roirk.

And further, this Deponant says, That William Parck having delivered in his
Goods to the Friars, locked in the Castle Gates of Dromahear, not leaving one
man in it; and that very day transported himself and his Wife, to his Brother
Robert Parcks Castle at the Newtown; From whence the said William Parck
returned to the said Castle of Dromahear the next morning, and with a Ladder,
went over the Band-Walls, and stayed some short time within the Castle,
returning by the said Ladder as he went, leaving the Castle without men, and
the Gate barred in the inner side, and so returns back to his Brother at the
Newtown; the next night one Hugh O Roirk, Grandchild to Mac Naw, with many
Rogues in his Company, possessed himself of Dromahear Castle, who the next
morning, was dispossessed by Owen O Roirk, who alleged to the Deponant, and
others living there at that time, that the Keys of the Castle Gate was
delivered him by William Parck.

This Deponant further says, That he the Deponant remained at Dromahear, near
to that Castle, almost five weeks after Owen O Roirk had possessed himself
thereof, his Soldiers daily robbing him, and some few British more, whose
lives were daily threatened, till at last, the Deponant was forced to beg leave
to be gone; which was granted him upon condition, that he should neither go to
Mannor-Hammilton, nor to the Boil, but to Master Robert Parcks of the Newtown;
the said Owen O Roirk seizing upon all the Deponants Cows that were left him,
only allowing him one Cow for the relief of his children: the Deponant being
come to Newtown, acquainted Master Park with the manner of his parting with
Owen O Roirk; and within a week after, this Deponant procured Master Parcks
Letter to Owen O Roirk, in favor of the Deponant, That the said Owen then
called Colonel O Roirk, would grant this Deponant two more of his own Beefs,
for the maintenance of the Deponant, his Wife, and Children, at Master Parcks
Castle: Upon which Letter of Master Robert Parcks, the two Beefs were
delivered, and the Deponant returned with a courteous kind answer to Master
Parcks Letter: And further says, That he has many times heard Owen O Roirks
Soldiers brag, that the Newtown they held it their own, for they could have it
at their pleasure, having got Mannor-Hammilton Castle.

This Deponant being further questioned, what Irish servants Master Robert
Parck kept in his Castle, and how many of them went to Church; to this he
deposes, he kept diverse Irish servants, but he knew none of them that went to
Church. Also Owen mac o Bryan being questioned, if he heard of a quarrel
betwixt Loghlan o Diggennan, Master Parcks footman, and one Englishman, called
Roger Guise; The Deponant to this says, He was by when the quarrel began, and
helped to part them, the quarrel beginning upon a report, that Sir Frederick
Hammilton had killed Colonel Owen o Roirk, whilst he beat his Regiment being
encamped about Mannor-Hammilton: The said Guise wishing a thousand more of the
like kind were hanged or killed, whereunto the said Loghlan replied, in the
Deponants and others hearing. That it were better, that the said Guise, and a
thousand the like of him were hanged, then that the said Owen o Roirk should be
killed in that manner by Sir Frederick Hammilton; and with these words, the
said Loghlan in the Deponants sight, and others, struck the said Roger Guise
over the mouth with his first, the Deponant and others parting them; the said
Guise with diverse others of the English in the Castle, much discontented at the
said Loghlans boldness, complained to Master Parck of what had passed, but no
reparation was made the said Guise, neither was there any punishment inflicted
upon the said Loghlan.

The Deponant being further asked, if he knew one Mullmory o Digg^nnan, or if
he had heard of any words that had passed between Sergeant Heath, and the said
Mullmory, concerning Sir Frederick Hammilton; if he was by, when the words were
spoken, or if he heard what words they were: To this the Deponant answers,
That Mullmory o Diggennan, he knows to be Master Parcks Husbandman, and
father to the said Loghlan o Diggennan; and did hear that Sergeant Heath being
one day in the Forge, within Master Parcks Bawn, Mullmory o Diggennan brought
into the said Forge some Plow-Irons; which Sergeant Heath perceiving, was said
to have told the said Mullmory, it was a good sight to see him provide for
plowing, or words to this purpose; to the which speech of Sergeant Heaths,
Mullmory was said to reply; it was to no purpose for any man in this Country,
to Plough or Sow, until Sir Frederick Hammilton were cut off: These words the
Dep^nant did not hear spoken by Mullmory himself, but did hear it from Sergeant
Heath, to whom it was spoken, and heard diverse others talking of it within the
Castle, admiring that fellow should be suffered to live: And further, this
Deponant says, That many Irish were daily coming and going to Master Parcks
Castle, and Ploughing near about it, such as the three Brothers, Torilagh,
Donnell, and another of the o Boylands, with one James o Gallocher, Son in law
to the said Mullmory o Diggennan, having been a Soldier to the Arch-Rebell,
Torilagh mac Caffry o Donnell: This o Gallacher going several times from the
Newtown Castle, to Sligoe and Dromahear to Mass, and other times would be
abroad two or three days, and so return, pretending to have been looking for
Mares or Cattle of his Father in laws, and his own; when no good Subject of
greater strength then they, durst wander abroad, or had any Cattle left them.

The Depositions of George Heath Sergeant, taken the 23. July, 1643.
WHo being duly sworn, deposes, That about the 24. of February last, Sir
Frederick Hammilton hearing that Master Robert Parck of Newtown, (whose
Sergeant, the Deponant then was) was besieged, or blockt up in his Castle of
Newtown, by the Rebels of the County of Sligoe and Letrim; for whose relief,
the said Sir Frederick sent his two Lievtenants, Lieutenant Lesly, and
Lieutenant Vaughan, with a party of Horse and Foot, with Orders, as the
Deponant was told, to view in what Posture the Rebels lay about us, and to
endeavor to speak with Master Parck, and to bring him and his men off, if he
found himself unable with those men, or feared his Provisions; for the making
good of that Castle: At the parties coming to us, Lieutenant Lesley found our
Castle free, and delivered his Message to Master Parck from his Colonel,
withal, desiring Master Parcks answer, which was, That he would not leave his
Castle, and that he much feared the parties danger upon their retreat,
observing the Fields foul, and the Rebels gathering on every Hill round about
us; whereupon Lieutenant Lesly desired Master Parck, for the better guard and
strengthening of that party, which his Colonel had so ventured for his relief,
that therefore he might be supplied with twenty or thirty of his men, he having
sufficient besides to guard him in his Castle; which request of Lieutenant
Leslies, was altogether denied by Master Parck, though it was seconded, and
much urged by the Deponant, and most of Master Parcks Soldiers, who told him,
it would be a great shame for them all, to see those men in danger to be
destroyed, who had so engaged themselves for his relief: Master Parcks answer
was, That he would not spare a man, neither would he do any thing to provoke
the Country against himself.

The Deponant further says, That shortly after this parting of Lieutenant
Lesly, with Master Parck, news was brought us by Mullumry O Diggennan, who then
served Master Parck as his Bailiff, or Husbandman, that he had seen Sir
Frederick Hammiltons party, sore put to it, upon their retreat homewards,
having been charged by near six or seven hundred of the Rebels, having
incountered them, and fought with them, as they were mid way, betwixt Master
Parcks and their Garrison; which news, made the Deponant, and most of Master
Parcks Soldiers much ashamed of themselves, and began to mistrust their own
safeties in that Castle.

Some few days after, this Deponant standing and mourning upon the Castle-Wals
of Newtown, did perceive four or five Horsemen riding from toward Sligoe; which
Horsemen, the Deponant was told, was Captain Mac Donnaghy, and Colonel Taaffe,
riding toward Mannor-Ham^lton, to meet their Troops, having encamped about
that Castle, they sending a Horseman before them, with a compliment (as this
Deponant was told) to Master Parck, and to ask leave freely to pass by his
Castle, as they did to this Deponant, and others of the Soldiers great grief,
if they durst have followed this Colonel and Captain, being not above five or
six Horsemen in Company.

W^ f^rther deposes, That Mannor-Hammilton Castle being besieged by ^onell
Owen O Roirk, and his brother Bryan Ballagh O Roirk, with the assistance of the
County of Sligoe; the said Bryan Ballagh had his Cows brought close to the
Castle of the Newtown, where they daily and peaceably grazed, with a small
guard of three or four herds, during the time the Camp lay about
Mannor-Hammilton, not a Soldier daring from Newtown Castle to meddle with a
Cow of of them, though they were sometimes in great distress for victuals;
this Deponant many times telling Master Parck what a shame it was to him, and
how he might one day be put to answer it, for suffering the Rebels to graze
their Cows so meanly guarded so near his Castle, and so many of His Majesty's
Subjects within his Castle in such distress, being ab^ to supply themselves
and him both, if under the Deponants care and charge, he would suffer the men
to venture for them; but the Deponant could never prevail with Master Parck to
meddle with a Cow of them. Further the Deponant says, That one night some of
the Soldiers being in great distress for victuals, John Powel and others,
ventured with a Rope, to go over the Walls, and that night brought in thirteen
Cows from the Rebels; wherewith one Walter Harrison being acquainted, that so
many Cows were brought by in two Soldiers, the said Harrison did allege those
Cows to belong to his Foster-Father swearing many oaths, that who should meddle
with those Cows, he would have their hearts blood, and with this, acquaints
Master Parck; who no sooner heard of it, but in great anger, threatening, and
checking the Soldiers, caused them to turn back all the Cows, not suffering a
Soldier to kill a Beast of them: The next night, the same Soldiers being sore
pinched with wants, for the relief of their Wives and Children, ventured as the
night before, over the Walls, by the help of a Rope, and brought home that night
some sheep with them, which they speedily killed the next morning they were
challenged by a woman from the Rebels, who complained to Master Parck, that his
Soldiers had that night brought away some of their Muttons; For the which,
Master Parck gave her present satisfaction, threatening the Soldiers to stop it
in their allowances.

The Deponant further says, That near about Candlemas last, he being in Master
Parcks Forge, within the Castle Bawn of Newtown; one morning Mullmory o
Diggennan came into the said Forge with some Plough Irons in his hand, to whom
this Deponant said, it was a good sight to see the said Mullmory provide for
Plowing; to whom the said Mullmory replied in the presence of Thomas Witticomb,
Smith, that he the said Mullmory might provide what he pleased, but that he
held it to no purpose, for any man in that Country, to provide either for
Ploughing or Harrowing, until Sir Frederick Hammilton were cut off; whereunto
the Deponant replied, It were better the said Mullmory, and a thousand, the
like of him, were cut off: With which speeches, Master Parck was acquainted,
who sent for the Smith, Thomas Witticomb, asking if he heard those speeches of
Mullmory o Diggennans to Sergeant Heath, which the Smith justified, That he did
hear them, this Deponant being present then; yet was not the said Mullmory
questioned at all for those speeches, to this Deponants knowledge.

And further says, That about the time that Bryan Ballagh o Roirk was encamped
about Mannor-Hammilton Castle, this Deponant was informed, That the said Bryan
Ballagh had sent a Web of near forty yards of Broad-Cloath, to be Woven by
Master Parcks Weaver William Bryan; upon report, this Deponant went into the
Workhouse, where the said Cloth was a working, and meeting with William
Bryan, told him, that he would one day be hanged for working of Bryan Ballagh o
Roirks Cloth, then in Rebellion; whereunto the Weaver replied, That he did
nothing in that, without the leave and orders of his Master.

And further says, That the news being brought to Newtown on Good Friday
morning, that Sir Frederick Hammiltons Soldiers had beaten Owen o Roirks men,
and all those who were encamped about Mannor-Hammilton Castle; upon which news,
all Bryan Ballaghes Cows, which during the Camp about Mannor-Hammilton had so
peaceably grazed about Newtown Castle, were that morning, all driven away; and
a servant of Bryan Ballaghes, sent to the Weaver to demand the Cloth, which at
that time was not altogether finished; the Messenger being most impatient (as
the Deponant was afterward told by the Weaver) to attend one hour for
finishing of it; which Web of Cloth was delivered to the Messenger by Master
Parcks command, as the Weaver said.

The Deponant further says, That shortly after the Camp was broke up, toward
the latter end of April last, this Deponant was sent, and one Roger Smith in
his Company, with a Letter to Sir Frederick Hammilton, from Master Parck; and
in our Companies went along, one Loghlan o Diggennan, son to the aforesaid
Mullmory o Diggennan; this Deponant acquainting Sir Frederick Hammilton what
had passed betwixt the Father and the Deponant; at which time, one Master
Huthersall acquainted Sir Frederick, that a Footboy of Master Parcks, had come
to him the said Huthersall, who was sitting upon the Hill, looking upon the
Lieutenant as he was exercising of the Company; The said Footboy of Master
Parcks, telling Master Huthersall, that his Master remembered him kindly to him,
and entreated him by all means to write unto him, the true state of
Mannor-Hammilton Castle, and in what condition the Soldiers were in; how they
were paid, and as they were pleased; and what other news the said Huthersall
could inform himself besides, and that this Letter must be delivered to the
said Loghlan with all secrecy, not to be known to Sergeant Heath, or Roger
Smith, assuring Master Huthersall of his Masters thankfulness: This curiosity
of the Foot-boyes, Master Huthersall thought not fit to be concealed from Sir
Frederick; upon discovery whereof, Loghlan o Diggennan is apprehended, the
Deponant, and Roger Smith, are returned to Master Parck without any other
Answer to his Letter, but that we should tell Master Parck, that his Footboy
was taken upon strong presumption, that he was a Spy for the Rebels; and that
it was reported, Master Parcks had made his own conditions with them; upon
which reports, Sir Frederick was jealous of him, wishing us to tell Master
Parck, That if he would have Sir Frederick trust to his Loyalty, and had a
mind to save his Footman from hanging, that betwixt, and the Friday following,
he would send unto Sir Frederick, the Father Mullmory o Diggennan, to answer
and justify himself and his son, both of them being Traitors, kept in by the O
Roirks, about Master Parck (as Sir Frederick was informed) for their
intelligence for our destructions. And that if Master Parck did not send the
said Mullmory as was desired, then would Sir Frederick hold Master Parck
himself no good Subject afterward: Which message and information from Sir
Frederick, was accordingly delivered by Roger Smith, and the Deponant, to
Master Parck; who gave no other answer at that time, but seemed to be much
vexed, for the leaving of his Footman behind: Saying, he knew not where to
find Mullmory; yet the Deponant was informed afterward, that whilst he and
Roger Smith went to sleep, having marched that night, that Master Parck sent
one Rice Jones privately to Mullmory o Diggennan, who was come to the Castle
that morning, to advise the said Mullmory to shift for himself, for he durst
not longer keep him Sir Frederick Hammilton having caused to apprehend his son,
and sent for himself that morning; and further this Deponant says not.

The Depositions of Roger Smith taken ut supra.
WHo deposes, That toward the latter end of April last, being sent with
Sergeant Heath from Master Robert Parck, with a Letter to Sir Frederick
Hammilton; Sir Frederick having a little before this, beaten the Rebels of the
County of Letrim and Sligoe, which had long encamped about Mannor-Hammilton
Castle: during which time Bryan Ballagh O Roirk, and diverse others of the
Rebels, grazed their Cattle near, within a Musket shot, to Master Parcks Castle
of the Newtown; and upon the Deponants return from Mannor-Hammilton, Master
Parck asked, if he had brought no answer to his Letter, who said he had none
but a Message, That Sir Frederick being informed, that he had made his own
conditions with the Rebels, who had promised to spare Master Parck, until they
had got their will of Sir Frederick Hammiltons Castle, and that Master Parck
had promised not any way to interrupt the Rebels, being daily so bold about
Master Parcks, as not only to graze their Cattle so near his Gate, but in
suffering them to make their daily passage through his Land with victuals and
other relief for their Camp, whilst they lay five weeks about Mannor-Hammilton
Castle, without the interruption of Master Parck, or any in his Castle, having
at that time near threescore of able men in it, wishing the Deponant, to tell
Master Parck, that unless he would send him Mullmory O Diggennan (who as Sir
Frederick was informed, had been fighting against the Kings Soldiers) he would
hold the said Master Parck as a Traitor himself: Which message, this Deponant
in presence of Sergeant Heath, delivered to Master Parck, he being in Bed,
showing a great deal of anger against the Deponant, for leaving of his Footman
Loghlan O Diggennan behind him: The Deponant being weary with the nights
march, went to sleep, and as he awaked, he was told, that Mullmory O Diggennan
was run away; but afterward, the Deponant heard Rice Jones say, that Master
Parck had sent him to advise the said Mullmory to shift for himself; shortly
after, the Deponant and Sergeant Heath, had delivered their message, that
morning they came from Mannor-Hammilton.

And further deposes, That he did see a Cow which one Norman a poor Englishman
had taken, while as Bryan Ballaghs Cows grazed near the Newtown Castle, during
the Camp about Mannor-Hammilton, and did see Bryan Ballaghes, Herdsman Thomas
Carvell, complain to Master Parck, giving order to his Bailiff, Mullmory O
Diggennan, to make search for the same, who found the Cow killed by the
Englishman, Norman and his Wife, whereat, Master Parck was very angry: Saying,
That was the way to bring trouble enough, and bring the Country upon their
backs, wishing Mullmory O Diggennan, to tell Bryan Ballagh, that the Englishman
should no more come within his Gates, for meddling with Bryan Ballaghes Cows.
And further says, That the Newtown Castle was daily relieved with Milk from
Bryan Ballaghes Bolly, during the Camp about MANNOR-HAMMILTON, the Herds Wife
bringing of it freely.

The Depositions of Dermond O Ferry Harper, taken the 12. of January, 1642.
WHo deposes, That upon Friday the 28. of January, 1641. this Deponant coming
to the Church of Clanclare within half a mile to Mannor-Hammilton Castle, where
he found that night Colonel O Roirk with diverse other Colonels and Captains,
gathered together, with intention, the next morning to burn off the Town and
Garrison of Mannor-Hammilton, with both the Water-Mills there; which
accordingly was performed in this Deponants sight, who afterward got leave of
Owen O Roirk, to go back to the Castle of Dromahear, where the said Owen O
Roirks Wife, and family lived, living himself with his Brother Bryan Ballagh O
Roirk, with five or six hundred more of the Rebels, encamped near unto the
Castle of Mannor-Hammilton, where they lay till Friday, the fourth of February
following; which day, they were beaten from the Camp, where the said Colonel
Owen o Roirk told the Deponant, he escaped narrowly himself, diverse of his
Regiment being killed, and the rest chased.

The Deponant further faith, That about the 20. of February following, he this
Deponant obtained leave, that he might go visit Master Parck at Newtown, whom
he had formerly served as his Harper; which granted him, conditionally, that he
should stay but one night with Master Parck, and that this Deponant should tell
Master Parck, That Colonel O Roirk, and the rest of their Army, were informed,
that Master Parck had supplied Sir Frederick Hammilton, with what Powder was
spent upon them, the last day they were beaten from their Camp; which if Master
Parck had done so, it was more then they expected from his hands: For whosoever
should lend Arms or Ammunition against them, was to be held, as much an enemy,
as those that fought against them.

And withal, Colonel O Roirk, bid this Deponant tell Master Parck, that he
with his Brother Bryan Ballagh o Roirk, had been desired by several Letters
from the Gentlemen of the County of Sligoe, to join with them in laying a Camp
about Master Parck and his Castle, at the Newtown, which they both refused,
advising the County of Sligoe Gentlemen, rather to join with them in camping
about Mannor-Hammilton Castle, who had done them much hurt, Master Parck having
done them none; and being able to destroy Sir Frederick Hammiltons, Master
Parck and his, would be easily their own. This Deponant having delivered his
message to Master Parck, letting him know withal, That he could stay no longer
then that night, being engaged by his promise to Colonel O Roirk, to return
the next morning; whereupon Master Parck wished the Deponant to tell Owen o
Roirk, that whosoever informed, that Sir Frederick Hammilton was supplied by
him with any Powder, wronged him much, for he was not stored, as to have spared
his Father any: And further, the said Parck told this Deponant, That though he
was desirous to have enjoyed his Company longer, yet since he was engaged by
his promise to Colonel O Roirk, to return the next day, he would by no means
to have him break his word; Master Parck likewise telling the Deponant, That it
was reported amongst them, that Colonel O Roirk was likewise killed by Sir
Frederick Hammilton, at the breaking up of the Camp, till the Deponant assured
him of the contrary; and that he was an eyewitness that day the Town and
Garrison of Mannor-Hammilton was burned: Master Parck afterward asking this
Deponant, what the Country said was the reason for this Rebellion, they
alleged the King to have encouraged them to it; which if he did said Master
Parck, we must all do as the King will have us to do; but until the truth of
this appear, I will keep my self quiet, and meddle as little as I can.

The Deposition of Thomas Jones Clerk, taken the 14. of July, 1642.
WHo being duly sworn, deposes, That in June last coming from Newtown to
Mannor-Hammilton, Master Robert Parck desired the Deponant, to advertise him
privately, if at any time he observed Sir Fred. Hammilton displeased toward
him; or that the said Sir Frederick had any intention to take away his men from
him; or any other matter that the Deponant thought fit to advertise him with
privately, showing the Deponant a piece of paper, cut in such a manner, as a
man might write by it to his friend, and none could read it, or make sense of
what they read, but by the like paper, which Master Parck called a mask for a
Letter: And shortly after this Deponant being at Mannor-Hammilton, had one of
the masks cut in Parchment, and sent from Master Parck by Rober Slixton, to the
Deponant, which he presently showed to Rice Jones, who told this Deponant, That
he the said Rice Jones, was sent by Mascer Robert Parck (at such a time, as
Sergeant Heath, and Roger Smith, came from Mannor-Hammilton) to give warning to
Mullmory o Diggennan to shift for himself, for he could no longer protect him,
Sir Fred. Hammilton having sent for him, and committed his Son in law.

This Deponant further says, That after the taking in of Sligoe by the Rebels,
and the great murders there committed upon the British, the Deponants Son in
law, Humphrey Jones, told this Deponant, That he was sent by Master Parck in
the night time, with two pieces of Plate to Andrew Crean, to a place called the
Armagh, where he borrowed from the said Andrew, for the use of Master Parck,
eight pounds sterlin. The said Andrew Creans two sons, John and William o
Crean, being at that time in open Rebellion.

The Depositions of Rice Jones Gentleman taken ut supra.
THe Deponant by virtue of his oath, does acknowledge to have seen the mask for
a Letter, cut in Parchment, and sent (as Parson Jones told this Deponant) from
Master Parck to Parson Jones from Newtown.

And further this Deponant does confess, That morning after Sergeant Heath and
Roger Smith returned from Mannor-Hammilton to Newtown, Master Robert Parck sent
this Deponant to Mullmory o Diggennan, to acquaint him, that Sir Frederick
Hammilton had caused to apprehend his son Loghlan Oge, and had sent for the
said Mullmory to be sent him likewise; and therefore Master Parck wished the
Deponant to advertise him, and to advise him to shift for himself, for he durst
no longer protect him.

The Depositions of William Parkenson of Newtown Butler, taken the 12. Jan.
1642.
WHo deposes, that he was told by Mullmory o Diggennan, that he had procured
for his Master, Mr. Robert Parck eight pound sterlin, of one of the Creans near
Sligoe, upon three pieces of Plate, which was sent from his Master by Humphrey
Jones, who received the Money and brought it to Master Parck.

And further deposes, That since this Rebellion, one Irishman called Owen mac
Bryan, told this Deponant one day in a great passion, that he hoped ere long,
all the English Rogues or English Dogs, should be cut in pieces and destroyed,
or words to this purpose; with which words, this Deponant acquainted Master
Parck.

And further deposes, That while as Bryan Ballaghes Cows grazed near Newtown,
during the Camp about Mannor-Hammilton Castle, this Deponant observed a Woman
and a Wench, once or twice a week, to bring in Milk to the Castle of the
Newtown, from Bryan Ballaghes Bolly, which was spent at Master Parcks Table;
but whether or not, this Woman was Bryan Ballaghes Cow-heards Wife, as by
others is alleged, this Deponant knows not.

The Depositions of Thomas Witticomb Smith, taken the 10. of August. 1642.
Deposes, That about Candlemas last, one Mullmory o Diggennan, servant to
Master Robert Parck, coming to this Deponants shop with Plough-Irons in his
hand. Sergeant Heath meeting him there, told him, it was a good sight to see
him in these troublesome times provide Ploughing; whereunto this Deponant heard
the said Mullmory reply, That they might provide what they pleased, but none of
this Country would do any more good with Ploughing, until Sir Fred. Hammilton
were cut off, whereunto Sergeant Heath replied it were better a 1000. the like
of Mullmory were hanged, than that Sir Frederick should be cut off; And further
this Deponant says, that he was sent for by Master Parck to his own Chamber,
and examined upon these words in presence of Sergeant Heath, both of us
justifying to Master Pa r that we heard Mullmory speak these words.

The Depositions of William Bryan of Newtown Weaver, taken ut supra.
WHo being duly sworn and examined deposes, that having served Master Parck
in his Town of Newtown, since May was a year, until the beginning of this
rebellion, that he got leave from Master Parck to put his Loomes in the Castle
of Newtown, where he wrought for his Master and others as would pay him; and
further deposes that about Shrovetide last, whiles the camp lay about
Mannor-Hammilton Castle, a servant of Bryan Ballagh O Roirke, whose name the
Deponant knows not, (who many times used to come to Master Parcks house) did
ask the Deponant if he would work a piece of cloth for his Master Bryan
Ballagh, who answered if Master Parck would give him leave; the Deponant
shortly finding Master Parck without the Castle-gate, told him that Bryan
Ballaghs man desired him to work a piece of cloth for his Master, This
Deponant asking Master Parck if he thought it would be any hurt for him to work
it, whereunto Master Parck replied, that he hoped it would be no hurt for him
at all; Some weeks after this Bryan Ballaghs man coming again to the house,
this Deponant advised him to bring his Masters yearn, which accordingly the man
did toward the middle of Lent, the Deponant at that time having some of Master
Parcks own cloth in hand, Master Parck coming into the workhouse, asked this
Deponant if Bryan Ballagh had not as yet sent his yearn to be woven, which so
soon as it came, employed one William Morray a Scots man of his own Trade, to
work the cloth for him, this Deponant during that time only providing of the
pernes, which cloth was a weaving until good Friday, which was the day after
the camp was beaten and broken up from about Mannor-Hammilton Castle, which
morning very early before Sun rising Bryan Ballaghs man came for the cloth,
the Deponant telling him it was not quit ready, wishing him to come in the
afternoon, and he should have it, but the messenger replied that he could not
go without it, the cloth being shortly afterward finished Master Parck sends
one Anthony Collecarway a servant of his own, commanding speedily to deliver
the cloth to Bryan Ballaghs man, this Deponant receiving for his work six
shillings wanting two pence, the cloth amounting to so much, after the rate of
two pence the yard weaving, this Deponant further deposes. Whiles the Cloth
was in the Loome a working, that Sergeant Heath diverse times came into the
Workhouse, telling this Deponent that he would be hanged for working of Bryan
Ballaghs Cloth then in Rebellion; the Deponant answering him, that he did
nothing, but he was commanded and warranted by Master Park.

The Deposition of Willam Morray Weaver, taken ut supra.
Who Deposes, that about New Years day last, being kept at Kilkenny Castle,
in the County of Mayo, and coming in that case toward Manor Hamilton, and
passing by Master Parkes mill, near the New-town, one of the Rogues laid hand
on this Deponant, not suffering him and one Edward Maxwell in his company, to
pass toward Enniskillin as they pretended, but advised this Deponant to go
toward New-town, one of the Rogues speaking good English; whom this Deponent
has diverse times since seen at New-town Castle; where the Deponant being come
he was employed by Mr. Park as other soldiers were, in standing Centry, and
doing duty about the Castle, and sometimes working in his Trade; and at such
time as Bryan Ballagh O Roirks yearn was sent to be wrought by William Bryan,
Mr. Park at that time commanded the Deponant to leave all other work, and to
fall about Bryan Ballagh O Roirks cloth, promissing the Deponant he should be
exempted of all other work and duty, until it were finished.

The Deposition of Owen Mac O Bryan, Sergeant to Master Robert Park taken the
15th. of July, 1642.
Who deposes, that about the 20th. of January last in the morning, being at
New-town brushing his Masters Cloths; the Butler William Parkinson came to the
Deponant, telling him there was a Horseman at the Gate desirous to speak with
him, and as the Deponant went down the stairs he perceived Sergeant Heath, and
a many of the soldiers upon the Bawn-Walls, gazing upon some Horsemen riding
by the Castle; and as the Deponant came to the Gate he did see ^ Kinsman of his
own called Maurice mac O Bryan sitting on Horseback, who had formerly served
Mr. George Craston, and was now in service as he told the Deponant with Captain
Bryan Mac Donaghie, who was riding by the Castle with Colonel Lucas Taffe, who
had sent him the said Maurice to present both their services to Mr. Robert
Parck, and withal told the Deponant they were riding toward Mannor-Hammilton,
where their Regiment lay with the Camp near that Castle: whiles the Deponant
was thus in discourse with his Kinsman, William Parkinson, the Butler called
the Deponant to come in, that the Gate might be shut; but before the Deponant
entered the Gate, Captain Mac Donaghie called to him Owen mac O Bryan how do
you; but the Deponant being in haste to shut the Gate made no answer, but
presently went to his Master being in Bed, acquainting him that Colonel Taffe,
and Captain Bryan mac Donaghy were with four or five Horse riding so near the
Castle toward Mannor-Hammilton thinking Mr. Parck (they being so few) would
have commanded men to have followed after them; but Mr. Parck being in Bed,
observing so many come in unto him with these news, angerly bid them, let them
Ride where they would for him, what had he to do with them; Mr. Parck at that
time commanding near sixty or seventy able men within that Castle, most
willingly to have been employed.

The Deponant further faith; that about Candlemasse last, one Cormick mac
Robert MacTernan, then in Rebellion with Bryan Ballagh O Roirk, the said
Cormick being Foster-father to Walter Harrison, being then in the Castle with
Mr. Parck, did send three Beeves about midnight to the said Walter Harrison,
Mr. Parck causing the Gate to be opened and received them, one of the Beeves
being bestowed upon Mr. Parck, another was sold for ten shillings to John
Darrington, and the third sold too, to Rice Jones, as this Deponant heard; and
faith, that shortly after John Powell and others of the soldiers being not
suffered by Mr. Parck to meddle with any of Bryan Ballaghs and the Rebels Cows
which grazed daily near to the Castle; in the nightime the said John Powell
and and others conveyed themselves over the Bawn-walls with Ropes, and brought
in some Cows with them that same night, which Walter Harrison alleged to be
his Foster-fathers Cormick mac Roberts Cows, and therefore would not suffer one
of them to be touched but turned back to the Rebels. The next night the same
soldiers ventured as before with Ropes over the Walls, bringing whom with them
eight Cows, and thirty Sheep, wherewith Mr. Parck being acquainted got out of
his Bed, clapping his hands, and crying out, that they should be all undone,
causing them presently to drive back, both the Cows and the Sheep, not
suffering the Soldiers to kill one Beast of them. And further says, that he
did see Bryan Ballagh O Roirks herd brought to Master Parck by one Mullmory O
Diggennan, complaining to Master Parck, that they had found one of Bryan
Ballaghes Cows, which had been taken and killed by a poor Englishman, Thomas
Normand, and his Wife, who were by Master Parck turned out of the Castle a
little before that; upon which complaint, Master Parck in a great anger, bid
the said Mullmory, and the Cowherd, do with the said Normand, and the killed
Cow, what they pleased, for he had before that, turned him and his Wife and
Children, out of the Castle; and since had nothing to do with them: The Cowherd
many times threatening the poor Englishman in Master Parcks presence, that since
it was so, he would have the said Normands head for the Cow.

This Deponant further faith, That he being in company with Walter Harrison and
Thomas Lambard, near to the Castle of the Newtown, they all three went toward
Torilagh O Boyland, and his Brother Donnell O Boyland, where they were a
Ploughing within less then Musket shot to the Castle; where the said Donnell O
Boyland showed this Deponant several stobs and cuts which he had received in
his Jerkin, that day Mullmory mac Ternan, and diverse others of the Country
Gentlemen were killed by Sir Fredericks party, as they retreated from the
Newtown. The Deponant asked the said Donnell, how he durst fight against any of
the Kings Soldiers, who answered, That neither he, nor any of his Fathers
Children would fight against any other, but such as were commanded by Sir
Frederick Hammilton, who daily destroyed so many of them; the Deponant being
asked, why they did not upon that confession, apprehend the said Donnell, and
carry him to Master Parck, the Deponant replied, That none of them durst meddle
with any of these O Boylands, nor any other of those Irish that used daily
about the Castle, and allowed by their Master to Plough, which he might easily
see out of his Chamber Window; as also, the Deponant does acknowledge, several
times, to have seen the Cloth while it was a Weaving within the Castle, by
Master Parcks directions, for Bryan Ballagh O Roirk at that time, whiles the
said Bryan Ballagh O Roirk was encamped about Mannor-Hammilton Castle.

The Depositions of Walter Harrison, taken the 13. of January, 1642.
WHo acknowledges, That he the Deponant being in the Castle of the Newtown
with Master Robert Parck, the Deponants Foster-Father called Cornick mac Robert
mac Ternan, did one night since this Rebellion, send by a Boy of the Deponants,
called Teag mac Ternan, three Beefs, which this Deponant received about
midnight, Master Parck causing the Castle-Gate to be opened and to put them
into the Bawn: Which three Beefs, as the Deponant alleges, were for the use
of the Castle. The next night after, the Soldiers brought in five Cows more,
which the Deponant believed, did belong to his Foster-Father, telling them, if
they were his, it was shame for them to bring in a poor man's Cows, who had
supplied them the night before, there being so many of Bryan Ballaghes O
Roirks, and others of the Rebels Cows, daily grazing so near that Castle, and
that it were better to seize upon them, then upon his poor Foster-Fathers;
whereupon by order, were commanded to forsake those Cows: And the next night
the same Soldiers brought eight Cows, and thirty Sheep from the Rebels,
wherewith Master Parck being acquainted, got out of his Bed in a great passion,
clapping his hands, coming to the Gate, and many times crying out, now we are
all undone, causing the Gate to opened, and to drive the Cows and Sheep toward
the Rebels again.

The Depositions of Benjamin Alexander, Clerk, taken the 10. of August. 1642.
WHo deposes, That upon the rumor of this Rebellion, the Deponant being then
at Sligoe, went to Master Parcks, with whom he remained in his Castle: and
being there about the 20. of January last, being in Bed, This Deponant heard,
that there was three or four Captains riding in haste by the Castle, and that
they had a compliment to Master Parck of their love and service, and that they
were going to Camp at Mannor-Hammilton; the Deponant being asked, what men as
he thought was then in the Castle, the Deponant thinks near betwixt fifty and
sixty, and denies to have heard of any motion for stoping, or following of
them, which pretended to go to the Camp at Mannor-Hammilton: And further
deposes, That at the same time, as Lieutenant Lesly was sent with a party to
have relieved Master Parck, being then as was reported beset with the Rebels,
the Country being observed to be gathering together, to prevent the
Lieutenant, and the parties return: This Deponant heard it mentioned to Master
Parck, (but by whom he cannot tell) that the Drum should beat, and that twenty
or thirty of his men should go along, as a guard to help the Lieutenant, and
the party; which motion was pressed by diverse, but Master Parck would not yield
to it: And further deposes, That one Roger Guise told this Deponant, that he
had received a Box on the ear from an Irish footman of Master Parcks, for
speaking against Owen O Roirk, who was said to be killed, when they were
camping near the Church of Clanclare. And further deposes, He heard that
Sergeant Heath and Roger Smith, upon their return from Mannor-Hammilton,
delivered a message to Master Parck, that he should apprehend Mullmory O
Diggennan, and send him to Mannor-Hammilton, otherwise Sir Frederick would hold
him as a Traitor.

The Depositions of Connor O Fynny, taken the 13. of January. 1642.
WHo deposes, That upon the Tuesday or Wednesday before Easter last, the
Rogues of the County of Sligoe and Letrim, lying their incampt near
Mannor-Hammilton Castle, the Deponant was sent for by his Master, Master Parck
of Newtown, and commanded him to carry a Linen Bag with him, with some things
in it along in his Company, with one Teage Reagh O Gillgan, a Tenant to Andrew
Crean, dwelling at a Village called Curvulagh, on the way near Sligoe; and as
he went from his Master, he met the party Teage O Gillgan at the Gate, with
whom the Deponant was commanded to go to his house, and there to have left the
Bag, and to have brought to his Master from thence, an example of some Malt;
but as the Deponant was going, he was commanded, within less then a quarter of
a mile to the Newtown, the Deponant was taken by half a score of Rogues,
calling themselves Soldiers to Donnell O Connor, they taking the Bag from the
Deponant, threatening to carry him to Mannor-Hammilton Camp, to their Colonels,
where he should be hanged; but by the persuasion of Teage O Gillgan, they
meddled not with the Bag, but carried this Deponant a little way off, where
they met with the two Captains, Captain John O Crean, and Captain Donnell O
Connor, who by the persuasion of Teage O Gillgan, suffered this Deponant to
return to his Master, after promise made by him, that he should return to them
the next day, having got his Clothes, and that he should bring a piece with
him: being demanded whether there was Money or Plate in the Bag, by the virtue
of his oath deposes, That he could not say what was in it, for he never opened
it; but faith, so soon as the Captains came, the Bag was delivered to the party
in his Company, as Master Parck had appointed, and that by the command of the
two Captains, and the Deponant sent home to his Master without further harm;
who when he came to his Master, telling what had befaln him, his Master asked
how he escaped, saying, that he was glad he so escaped, without any more harm;
the Deponant not being from him above three or four hours, and asking what
became of the Bag, the Deponant told him, the party had received it, by the
Captains command whom he sent it to: And further says, That he was told that
day by the Rogues, that the Sunday before they had carried away fifteen or
sixteen of Sir Frederick Hammiltons Horses; and that before Sunday next, they
were sure to have his Castle, Bidding the Deponant tell Master Parck, to yield
his Castle, otherwise they had a Piece of Ordnance, and would beat it about his
ears, when they came from Mannor-Hammilton; whether that day the Deponant saw
the Rogues flocking toward the Camp in several numbers, as if they had been
going to a Fair; being asked, whether or not to the Deponants knowledge Teage
Reagh O Gillgan had spoken with his Master, that morning he received the Bag or
not, to which question, the Deponant faith, He does not know, he meeting him at
the Gate.

The Copy of a Certificate given under the hands of several Gentlemen, at the
desire of Sir Frederick Hammilton. Dated 14. of January. 1642.
WE the undernamed persons, do hereby acknowledge to have been present, by the
desire of Sir Frederick Hammilton, Knight and Colonel, while as he read the
several Depositions of Benjamin Alexander, Rice Jones, Thomas Jones, Roger
Smith, William Parkenson, William Morray, William Bryan, Dermond Offerry, and
George Heath, concerning Master Robert Parck of Newtown, being personally
present there himself, at the reading of the foresaid Depositions; where the
several Deponants did in all our hearings, acknowledge the Depositions to be
the same, which upon oath they had deponed formerly, before the said Sir
Frederick. And thus much we have thought fit to certify under our hands, being
desired so to do, least hereafter any of the said former Witnesses should
miscarry, to the prejudice of His Majesty's future Service; which accordingly
we have done, As witness our several hands hereunto set, the day and year
aforesaid.

William Lesly, Lieutenant. John Long, Preacher. John Cunningham, Preacher.
Alex. Mountgumery, Preacher. Robert Sidney. James Vaughan, Lieutenant. David
Greere. John Baxton.


The Copy of a Letter from the Lords Justices and Council of Ireland.
AFter our very hearty Commendations, on the 21. of this Month, We received
your Letters of the 19. of November, and second of December, and do acknowledge
to you, with special thanks, your good endeavors in those parts; and although
we cannot yet send you relief, as we desire, yet we are assured, that in short
time, we shall be enabled to do it.

There are arrived here this day, fourteen hundred men, sent us forth of
England; and further, powerful succors are in the way a coming, whom we
expect to arrive ere long, and with them will come plentiful store of Arms,
whereby we shall be the better enabled to supply those parts, as we much desire
to do.

In the mean time, we think fit, that you reinforce the Foot-Company under your
Command, so as they may consist of a hundred men, and to Arm them the best way
you can, until by the coming of the supply of Arms, we expect, we may be
enabled to send. Arms for them, which yet we cannot do with safety, if we had
Arms here, until by the strength of His Majesty's Army, we shall clear the
passages thither, which by Gods help we doubt not in short time to do: And so
we bid you heartily farewell.

From His Majesty's Castle of Dublin, 30. December. 1641.

We send you here enclosed, a Commission for prosecution of the Rebels, with
power of Martial Law.

Ormond Assery, Will. Parsons, Joh. Borlasse. Cha. Lambard, Adam Loftus, Joh.
Temple.


William Parsons, Joh. Borlasse.
By the Lords Justices and Council.
TRusty and Welbeloved, We greet you well, We having entered into a serious
consideration of the most Rebellious Insurrections of diverse false Traitors in
the Province of Vlster, and elsewhere in this Kingdom, and of the most wicked
inclination of many unnatural men, inhabiting upon the several Borders of
Vlster, and elsewhere; who have already begun in the action of the most
Rebellious conspiracies now on foot, threatening a general destruction to all
His Majesty's good Subjects of this Kingdom. To cut off the said detestable
offenders, and to prevent the devastation and spoil of His Majesty's good
People, We therefore thought fit, and so do Ordain, Require, and Authorize you,
to make diligent search and inquiry throughout the Counties of Letrim and
Sligoe, and the Borders adjoining thereunto, for all Traitors and Traitorous
persons above mentioned, and their adherents; And them to apprehend, and duly
examine, concerning their Traitorous actions: And if you shall find any person
or persons, that have committed or joined, in any of the said actions, to
proceed with him or them, in the course of Martial Law, by hanging him or
them, till he or they be dead, as has been accustomed in time of open
Rebellion, as your conscience and discretion shall guide you therein. And for
the better execution of this Our Commission, We do hereby Authorize you, to
raise such numbers of men of those Counties, for your assistance, as you shall
think fit; and to take Meat and Drink, not exceeding the value of six pence per
diem each man, during the service only. And we straightly Command the Sheriffs
of the said Counties, for the time being, and all other Officers, Ministers and
loving Subjects, to whom it may appertain, To be unto you in the due execution
hereof, always ayding, helping, and assisting, whenever they shall be
required by you, as they shall answer the contrary, at their uttermost perils;
And that this Our Commission shall continue, during Our pleasure only. As for
your so doing as aforesaid, This shall be your sufficient Warrant. Given at His
Majesty's Castle of Dublin, 30. December. 1641.

To Our Trusty and Welbeloved Sir Frederick Hammilton, Knight. Ormond Assery.
Cha. Lambard. Ada. Loftus. Joh. Temple.


FINIS.

