THE ARMY -- ARMED, AND Their just Powers stated: OR ARGUMENTS UNANSVVERABLE;
Proving them just and lawful Powers, and Governors, and so not Usurpers.

Likewise a justification of this present Parliament, and Council of State
chosen, and constituted by them for Authentic and lawful Powers, and
Governors also, against all Opposers whatsoever, conceived useful for
satisfying any one of the said Powers scrupulous amongst themselves, so any
other conscientious people whatsoever.

And lastly, to be even with all sorts of cunning and politic pretenders
against any of them, as not lawful Powers and Governors, on purpose to
countenance disobedience and rebellion, and so raise Factions, to the
disturbance and endangering of our COUNTRY.

It Is against the Law of the Romans, of Heathens and Pagans, to condemn any man
before he is heard, read therefore advisedly before thou judge.

Written immediately upon the dissolution of the late Parliament, and the
creation of our new one, but occasionally reserved till now.

By S. H. Senior.

London: Printed for William Leaty Paul's-Chain. 1653.

To his Excellency the Lord Cromwell, Captain General of all the Forces of
England, Scotland, and Jreland, etc.
Right Honorable Lord,
SO sensible am I of the Exceptions and Clamours of diverse people, who some of
weakness, others of wickedness, cry out against our present Powers in
general, as Usurpers, or however, as unlawful or unjust, wanting (as they say)
warrantable grounds, and foundations, viz. the Peoples free choice, which
should they pass without answering, would confirm and imbolden them in their
Clamours as just, and render your Honor, with the rest of our worthy
Governors, and Soldiery, of all sorts, as unjust Usurpers, and wrong doers,
and so may in time hearten to Factioning and Rebellion, even to hostility, to
the disturbance and endangering of our Nation; all which to remedy, I the
meanest of all, am enforced through the silence of all, to undertake, which I
will assure your Honor, I do with remissness and fear, by reason of diverse
Tenets held and handled therein, contrary to what is held at this time, and that
by those accounted both good and wise. But I forbear to be further offensive
to your Honor by enlargement, I therefore only make bold humbly to entreat your
Honors fairest construction of my well-meant endeavors, and so I rest

Your Honors most humble servant, and great Admirer of your high perfections of
faithfulness and fortitude, Samuel Hunton.
Aug. 1653.
Courteous Reader.
WEre I Innocence it self, yet may I not expect to be quit from censure; but
sure, if thou understandest me rightly, thou will find that I deserve none; I
am at peace then in my own heart, say, and think what thou will: Again, I am
not for the aforesaids, nor any Powers farther then is just, and generally
conducing to Justice, Peace, and Safety; as for their actions, good, or bad, I
at this time meddle not with, nor judge not of, only I make them lawful
Powers, though in error they should act some unlawfulness, as the best will
do, yea thy self, if once empowered. The main end of my writing this Tract,
appears in the Title, so I spare here to enlarge, I rest then

I entreat the Reader to read the Margent also, else may he come short of our
intention.


My Countries, and thy servant, as thou art its, S. H.

The Army armed, etc.
1. ITs a received Principle on all sides, that Salus Populi is (of temporalls)
the highest Law, and Supremest Principle, and I add, of spiritualls also in
just competition, for Mercy is before Sacrifice, 'cause God cannot need, and
man cannot but need; the Sabbath also Gods own day, is in competition man's day,
for the Sabbath is for man, and that in humanities, etc.

2. This Principle standing good against all Arguments and oppositions
whatsoever, we did formerly, and do now thereby support all present Powers in
being (though bad, yea though Usurpers) provided not destroyers, much more our
late Parliament, which though faulty, yet not to that degree; and so now our
present Army, (who hitherto are faultlesse) rather then allow of the
dissolution of them or any Powers without our Of self-security, so the Nations,
and bettering us with better men
cautions, in likelihood to the destruction of our Nation, by involving it into
Factions and Parties, and so into oppositions and contests, even to blood, and
so in likelihood to ruin; but with our cautions, as with securing our Nation
from the Dangers etc. so also the good and innocent of the late Parliament.
aforesaids, and bettering us with better men in points of abilities and
faithfulness, I did, do, and will give way to the dissolution of all
destructive Powers, rather then to the destruction or sufferings of the People
in their Rights, Liberties, and Safeties by them.

3. But since the writing of that Tract, the Act is done, and our said
Parliament undone, or dissolved, and in likelihood, as near as can be, with our
Cautions every way, as without endangering our Nation, or the innocent of them,
etc. yea far beyond our conceptions, as without the least crack of thunder, or
flash of lightning, and the said Power is now conveyed to and upon the Army,
and so our Principles and Cautions hold for the Army now, so any As public
conducings shall cause to change, and create
succeeding Powers, as they did before for the Parliament, and no otherwise, so
I partialize not for any Powers amongst themselves, nor yet against my Country,
but am for the best conducings to our Country, all things considered.

4. Besides the aforesaid Arguments, these following second the Army also, viz.
Religion, Reason, Nature, and Necessity; these I say do now not only
constitute, but fortify and confirm them also, and so forbids any, yea
themselves from dispowring themselves, by laying down their powers, or
impowring any above them, either in name or nature, without our cautions of
self-security every way, so their country also, except prudence advise to some
wise colors and Shadowings.
covertures for just conducings sake, they may then create powers to second
them, but not to first them every As not in power.
way as Moses his 70. Elders, who yet held the priority of name, place, and
power, but to constitute a power in power above themselves, quaere, if not
treachery to themselves, so to the public, as to the hazard of our Nation, as
before, both which are now in their powers to provide for, and secure, but if
out of their powers, they hazard all, and themselves also, to be called to
account even for the good they have done, under Notions rendered evil, as
Rebels, Traitors, Sectarists, Independents, etc. so also, as enemies to
Kinghood, Priesthood, Prelacy, and Presbyterye, and so our Nation may in
likelihood be circularly factioned to ruin, yea they may be called to account
for bad things they would not do, as if good things left undone, as for not
establishing the Is not the Sabbath for man? is not mercy before Sacrifice? but
oh weakness. See Sect. 21. the Margent.
Gospel above the Law, and Rites for Religion, and Regiment for Righteousness,
so for not sacrificing Justice and Mercy to Religion, as called, for many Its
the treacherous, and not the true, I except against.
Priests are great prevaricators, in their great is Diana and Dagon, and oh
Darius live for ever!

5. Thus much in justification of them, for assuming, and retaining, or holding
the power, which our principles of a just necessity to preserve their own, and
the peoples rights, welfares, and safeties thereby, and so improved, makes
good, else not.

6. Next let us reason it out amongst our selves, and that righteously, some
Governors we must have, and adventure on, these we know, so know in likelihood
what to trust to, all others (let us do our best) are more uncertain and
hazzardable, also hard, yea dangerous to invest, for how shall we out these if
we would? Again, why, or for what should we, if we could, what reason also is
there that they should give way thereto, all things considered, as before at
Sect. 4. by all arguments then they are our right Governors. Next, also their
own, so public necessity inrights them; for admit they would resign the
Government, sure we should destroy our selves about a King, or
Governor, or Parliament.
Governors: be it they are bad also, yet its a degree of happiness that we are
better then we were, if so, or not worse, seeing changes are dangerous; also by
holding the Government or Power, they prevent dangers that might happen, by
changing and rechanging, as before. Weaklings compresse then, and comply for the
unprincipled, know not what to have, or hold, trust to, or forego; if you say
they may prevaricate, I say so too, and so may all, yea so will all, more or
less; Angels have not perfection, what will thou then have in Man.
imperfection?

7. Considered then according to our premises, they are lawful powers, and so
we ought to obey them, and they may justly enforce, conducing obedience, else
infer, and so inter Salus thy Sovereign, we are then for the aforesaid reasons,
justly in their powers, whether they will selfely rule, or whether a
Parliament, or no Parliament, or what kind of Government and Governors, both
for numbers, names, and natures, we shall have, in all which they are free to
take, or leave, as was Moses, so to order, as they see best, and are not bound
to Law, customs, Rites, or Ceremonies, of any kind, but only to There are no
other right ties but these.
righteousness, and general conducings.

8. Object. 1. But it may be objected against them, as Usurpers, not being
rightly chosen by the people, so it is a breach of the peoples Liberties.

Object. 2. That we are ruled by the Sword, or Swordmen.

Answ. Just necessitated usurpation (as called) though for self-safety only,
much more for the public, as to preserve it in its rights, and deliver it from
wrong, so from endangerings to ruin, and so Note, if so improproved, else not.
improved, our principle allows of as just, commendable, and honorable also,
for that in such cases, forms, customs, and liberty of Of new Powers, as a new
Parliament.
free choice, are but ceremonies to safety, which kept to, might loose us all,
by factioning us, for forms and ceremonies only, as for Kinghood, Priesthood,
and Prelacy again, which suppose better, yet its better to be without them,
then to destroy our selves for them, how then seeing they will destroy us; know
then, that lose Freedoms licentiate us, and so bind us, and that its only fit
bindings, renders us freemen.

9. On the premises, the Army are not In opposition to free choice
Usurpers, as is not a servant over his Master upon terms of just necessitated
defense, self, or public, if he disarm his said Master, So they the public.
and arm himself therewith, for his own, so his Masters, so any ones just
defense, and happy is his Master to be so over-mastered, and so is our
giddy-brain'd Nation also, were they Masters of their Sense and Senses.

Object. 2. We are governed by the Sword, or Swordmen.

10. The Sword has already given thee an answer sufficient, yet out of its
nobleness it will further descend in compliance to give thee content, the
Sword says then, as its a just Governor, why exceptest thou? and if it rule
justly, what would thou more? and if it have some failings, so will all, even
the Excepter himself; know friend thou art always ruled by the Sword, for if
the Sword attend not the Magistrate, the Magistrate must attend it, for he
bears not the Sword for naught, nor ought the Sword to be set at naught, -- nor
Will.

11. The Magistrates sheathed sword, as not scene, is more surprising, this is
visible, and as bare and naked as truth it self, so not so treacherous or
surprising, as is the surreptitious Sword, but always warning, and so arming
thee against thy self and it. It was the visible, the bright, and brandisht
blades, that warned, and so awed Adam and Balaams Ass, both which by a
sheathed, or hidden swords ambushments, might have been surprised and cut to
pieces.

12. Sure though they govern by th Sword, yet also by the words of Reason, Or
God and Law.
man, legal, or rational, what matters it then for the name Sword, which is
but a word, except a blow follow for thy deserting thy duty, and so will it
from the latent Sword, which is but a word, yet a blow also as thy pravities
are patent: Remember then I say, that all Magistrates are men, not Angels, and
were they, yet its said he found folly in his Angels; in short, certainties are
uncertain, and uncertainties are certain, so we run hazzards whoever governes,
but if likelyhoods be preferrable, as they are, then this Army, these Swordmen,
these Governors, are by all out arguments before, therefore be satisfied and
contented with what is said, for thou art answered, past thy answering.

A digression in relation to the Scots King, that he has not any right to the
Crown. Note all this all sorts.
13. I only add for a conclusion the following considerable caution also, let
all all sorts know then, that selfe-rights not forfeited, are yet not
pleadable, nor to be sided with against our principle, viz. the peoples
welfare, and safeties, for its better that one, yea many innocents perish in
their self-rigts, then that the Universal be endangered to inright them, if so
as before, for self-rights not forfeited, much more then for forfeited
deputatives; where then by this are the Scots King (as called) his forfeited
deputative rights to his own King, the people, whose originally they were, and
his only for its sake, not his own; for he having forsaken his King, is justly
unkinged, and forsaken by him. What also can his pretending seconders and
siders with say to this, are not such seconders for their own sinister ends
sake, seducers and traitors that will side with themselves against their Salus.
Lord, and yet pretend its for their King, against both their The people.
Kings, are not these Fellows finely principled, that will side with the
servants forfeited deputative rights, against their and his The people.
Lords selfe-rights; sure such seducers and siders with, are murderers and
thieves; of all killed or taken from, on each side, as enforced thereto.

14. Suppose yet higher, that the King is innocent, and absolutely wronged of
his rights, what then? yea further, suppose they were his self-rights, as they
are not, and not forfeited, as they are, what then? where does any one find it
in the Law of Religion and Reason, All this concerns every individual. Note
also the end of this Section.
that to inright one, they may hazard the ruin of millions; if the wronged
could right themselves the right way, as on the wrongers only, I dispute not
against it; but to wrong infinite innocents to right one nocent, or admit
innocent, of which yet they may fail, is unspeakable madness, folly, and
injustice: by this, why may not Clients clearly injured by their Lawyer, or
their Adversary, hostile it, Note, that the innocent, if good, will not desire
relief to the hazard of any ones blood, much less of many ones, and the
endangering of their country also.
and gather an army of men, Esau like, and so enforce his Adversary to do as
much for his defense; so these two Murderers must meet with their multitudes,
and the innocent fools on both sides must murder each other, under the notion
of siding with for rights, and yet may this be much better done for known
self-rights, then for known forfeited deputatives, not to the ruin of a
multitude only, but of a Nation, to whom they were bound by oath, honor, trust,
and tribute, and so owe duty and service answerable.

15. How also can foreign religious Princes and States then in honor and
honesty answer it, to murder and thieve it, in pretending to help such to
their rights; but the truth is, they help them only to be helped in the like
cases; so we are like to have a mad world of it, when religious Princes and
States, as called, shall help to support one another in tyrannies, thefts, and
murders, under the notion of rights; but woe to those that call good evil,
and evil good; I marvel exceedingly that such just, religious, and honorable
Princes and States do not send over their Armies now and then to help each
innocent individual wronged of his self-rights by his Adversary or his Lawyer:
for its a much fairer, goodlier, and juster ground and pretense then the other,
though both be naught, as teaching both sides naughtiness, as to invade each
others rights, under pretense of righteousness.

I have now done, only I make bold for a conclusion, to add the conclusion of
my other Tract, as its suiting in its nature, and end with this, which is as
follows in behalf of the Army.

16. Its then considerable also, that all care be taken against the dissolution
of this Army, as of the Parliament, except with our cautions, of securing the
good and innocent of them, so our Nation from hazzardables of dangers and
troubles to ruin; also to secure us of better men, else, why change these?
which a new Parliament might chance to attempt, to the hazard of all, as
before; for we have experience of this Army, both of its faithfulness,
fortitude, and good fortune also in our defense; and that it has not any way
offended us, or done us any wrong, but contrarily defended us, and done us much
good, but of the next Army we know nothing at all, so must run the adventure of
all, as of their evil, and their good, which I conceive is not good to do,
for, certain goods are better then uncertain, and no Evils are better then to
adventure for them.

Our aforesaid Arguments in behalf of all our present powers (as just and
lawful, and so obeyable) contracted.
1. OUr former Parliament, who constituted this Army, were lawful powers, as
being themselves constituted by the people, the originalls of right power, who
empowered them for all conducing to our Country, and they by virtue of this
power formed this Army for our Countries sake, viz. for its rights, peace, and
safety, etc.

2. But suppose all or most of our former Parliament were not lawful powers,
but Yet its not so.
Usurpers, as not chosen by the people, yet it matters not to this point, for
usurpers and unlawful powers are (by our principle) obeyable in lawfulls and
As in constituting this Army for our Nations defense.
conducings, and right and lawful powers are not obeyable in unlawfuls and
destructives, yet as necessitated, compliance may be for conducings sake, and
to prevent greater mischiefs; however, we do by this, say, that its rather
conducing commands we are to obey, then the Commanders, whether right or wrong,
good or bad, except necessitated, as before. Thus the Army, admit by an usurping
power, yet being constituted for conducings, are lawful powers, how then being
by a right Parliament, and so every way right.

3. The Scribes and Pharisees, a crew of hypocrites, and For who invested them?
usurpers of Moses Seat, yet commanding according to Moses were obeyable; or
rather the doctrine then the Doctors, and yet the Doctors also, and not the
doctrine, as just necessities invite to wink at some sufferings, to prevent
insufferables, or destructives, positives pose us all, but wise respectives
remedy all, for we must, and must not, may, and may not, according to
respective considerations, for answerably things are good and bad.

4. Suppose the Army also, all or most of them Yet its not so.
Usurpers, as not chosen by Parliament or People, it matters not to this point,
for I answer for them as for an unlawful or usurping Parliament, as before at
Sect. 2. I answer further as formerly, that if their own, so our Countries
rights, safeties, and necessities necessitated them thereto, and they have
improved their power thereafter, they are then essentially right, though not
ceremoniously so, how then when circularly right, as by a right Parliament?

5. Consider yet further, that our whole Nation at times petitioned for, and
endeavored a dissolution of our former Parliament, whether right or wrong I
judge not, nor can; this they know not how to bring about, for to attempt it by
Arms, without the Army had been to disarm themselves by Arms and Armies, and
so in likelihood to ruin, for the Army had no reason to allow of Armies,
self-rights, and safety; so the Universalls forbidding them, so they are
enforced by universal implicit importunities, wishes, desires, and commands to
undertake it, for done the people would have it, and otherwise it could not be
done; so then they are necessitated to do it, which they do with cautions far
beyond our conceptions, as before; and thus they are authorized by the whole
Nation in general, and so inclusively by each individual; therefore let none
except, for its, as before, inclusively their act, as what most of the
Parliament vote, is inclusively the vote of the dissenters, who consent, by
consenting that the major part shall carry it, nor can the Army see or mind
individualls, but the general, which is always Lord General.

5. Our former Parliament thus dissolved by Universal, so Individual consent,
as before, the Army then by Universal consent also are left alone sole Powers
and Governors, and so are a lawful authority by this also, as thus
consequently chosen, none other being in esse provided, nor in posse
provideable by the people at this time, for our reasons before, and after; nor
had the Army reason to give way thereto, without self, so public rights and
safeties, which how that could be I see not, nor my wisers, if they see
Consider all things.
well to it, so necessity public and particular establishes them lawful
Governors, and so our present Parliament and Council of State constituted by
them for our Countries accommodation, are just, right, and lawful powers also,
and so honorable and obeyable, without exception, as such, and for such ends.

By making sure work with both.
6. Last of all, as they have saved our Nation from the enemy, its good reason
they save themselves, both from their enemies and their friends, etc. which
they cannot do, if they undo themselves.

7. If I now have reasoned rightly and truly, and that for right ends, as to do
each one right, but especially to make the aforesaids lawful powers, for the
peace, safety, and welfare of our Country, which by conceiving and holding them
unlawful, might faction and party us against them, or one against another in
clandestines and rebellions to our ruin; who can or will except against me,
but such as must say we are enemies to our friends, so to reason, rights,
justice, and our Countries peace and safety, and so in truth Traitors, etc. As
for my self I am not an enemy to any, no not to my enemies, yet will I oppose
both my friends and enemies for my Countries sake; and so let them do as much
by me and spare not; for whilst particular or partial ends of any nature
fight against, or are preferred before the general, it renders both
Individualls and the General in a dangerous condition.

Oh all you worthy Powers of all kinds, I have done you all the right I may,
more I will not, nor yet less, see you retaliate us as rightly, for know its
proportion rightly compensates. Remember the wise man's principle, that Justice
establishes Thrones, and I add, so does it their Inthroners; by the Law of
contraries then, injustice demolisheth both, and we find it does so; would you
continue powers, you see the way thereto, overpower not then your impowrers,
except conducingly: Says not the same wise man also, and our experience
likewise, that oppressions or extremites make wise men mad, what then may be
expected from madmen and fools: It lies much in your powers by wisdom to cure
the maladies of both these Malignants, either by prevention, privation, or a
qualification of their sufferings, or by satisfying reasons why, or why not,
for a thorough convincement is a Conquest, so their hearts, thoughts, tongues
and hands will be out of heart to oppose you, and so themselves for
self-divideds, do as good as subdue themselves, and so save their friends a
labor.

Postscript.
17. SInce the writing of the aforesaids, I have met with little Tract,
entitled; Englands Fundamental Laws and Liberties claimed, and asserted; I do
claim them as well as he, but not clamourously; our friend is not rightly
principled, for admit checked of his claim, then he conceives he may clamor;
and he may, so it may be; and he may not, so it may be also, and so it is; had
he thus distinguished, he had not extinguished his claim, which I now soberly
declaime against: he infers that no Parliaments or powers are right, except by
free choice of the people; and so infers also, that our other Parliament, so
this, so this Army, so many of them as are not chosen originally by the peoples
free choice, are not right powers, I both grant and deny, by distinction, which
he uses not, so being absolute, he is desolute, and destroys all: I grant the
right is in the people, were they right; but being wrong, will you allow them
their rights to wrong themselves, so each one to the ruin of all? We have
fully answered this before at Sect. 2.4.6. so need not enlarge; but yet to
contract understandings we stand not upon it; give then according to his
doctrine to giddy brains, madmen and drunkards; so to the angry, furious and
rageing their swords and pistolls; also light them candles, that so they may go
into their gunpowder rooms, cellars and houses, for all these are their
rights, and attend the issue, and see if it be not issues of blood: can you do
such as these greater right then to wrong them by withholding their rights? can
you do such greater wrong, then to do them right? judge wise men of what I say.

18. Give then to a factious, a furious, and giddy brained Nation or people at
this time, their Liberties and Rights to choose their Parliaments; and it may
be they shall never choose more, if any at all, as not that which they go
about to choose; for may not such Libertines licenciate it into factions, for
Kinghood, Priesthood, and Presbytery, with the rest, etc. and so ruin all; I
grant it, and many more things our rights, if we could handle them rightly.

19. Its well, wisely, and prudently done then of some Governors, not to let
us know our rights, or withhold them, till we know how to use them without
hurting our selves and others; and did they no farther abuse us, nor make use
of the power in their hands and our ignorance, then to preserve us, and prevent
us from abusing our selves, we were in a happy condition; but to take advantage
of our ignorance and impotence, and their powers over us, and so contrary to
their ends and betrusts, wrong us, or contract us in our rights any way further
then a just necessity enforces to, is very hard and inhumane, and often
indangers and disestablisheth Governors, who else might enjoy themselves in
their powers and places, with some petty sufferings by the people, provided
such as were not too sensible to incense them; for a little nip offends not,
but hard pinchings, stayings, or treadings on do, and worms trod on will turn
again, but wise men will not, except with our cautions, but rather turn the
other ear; but who is so wise? therefore Ex^^^ms of any kind.
oppressions (as says Solomon) makes wise men mad.

20. Times are not now as they formerly were, for in choosing former Parliaments
there was no such danger of factioning, cause each faction or party had and
enjoyed their places, so need not faction for them, but now out, they will
faction it to get in, Kings, Peers, Prelates, Priests, and Lawyers, all then
reigned in their Regions, and now they are arraigned, from whence they would
feign return to take their Turns again.

21. Faction it not then, oh noble Soldiers, so nor any one for rights or
wrongs, no nor for love, pity, nor affection to any individual party
whatsoever, no though he were innocent, nor yet for Religion, Gods honor,
worship, and service, as called, and conceived to be; nor for the Gospel,
faith, or truth so notioned, as to Hostile it one against another, to the
endangering of our Sovereign Salus, the Nation peace to the sword again, and
so in likelihood to ruin, for our Principle is above them all, and safety is
before Rites, or Rights, etc. and Universalls before Individualls, though never
so righteous.

22. As for Vows, Covenants, Oaths, Promises and Protestations, with heaved up
eyes, and erected hands, and dejected minds to heaven; so with Invocations,
Appeals, and Applications to God, as a witness of our integrities and
sincerities, not to lay down Arms, nor forsake one another, till we had
gained our Rights, Liberties and Freedoms, and then also to cleave together in
the support of them: Know, that the aforesaids bind not to rights so called,
which rightly rendered and understood are wrongs, nor to right our selves with
our ruin; its disputeable then what are our rights, all things considered,
for, as before, if our true rights will wrong us, they are not then our rights;
therefore wisely consider the issue of enjoying our rights, which if dangerous
or destructive, we are not bound by our Covenants to enjoy, till we can joy in
them: Oh you wise and good men, bind us Note these Notions, names, and occulers
endanger whole Nations: But if the Sabbath be for man? and mercy before
Sacrifice, then man's necessities is before them all, etc.
well therefore before you free us, Fixingly
least in our liberties we licentiate, yet take no advantage in binding us, to
keep us bound, otherwise then to our good behaviors, as to Justice, to Laws,
to Rights, and Civilities, to which also its good our binders were bound. In
short, give us out rights when we are ready for them, find a way to make us
ready for them, and then inright us in them so far, and not much farther, least
we wrong our selves, and like Aesops Dog, The shadow is not the Dogs due.
invade for what is not our rights, and so lose our rights.

We have now done, only we entreat our Candid Readers to excuse our trivial
slips of pointing and Orthography, for that we could not well attend the Press.

FINIS.

