THE DECLARATION and Engagement of the Marquess of Huntley, the Earl of
Atholl, General Midletou, and many of the Nobility of Scotland that have
lately taken up Arms for the defense of his MAJESTY Person and just Authority.
WE Under scribers, being touched with a deep sense of the sad condition this
our Native Kingdom of Scotland is in, by a prevailing Army of Sectaries, who
having murdered our Sovereign the late KING, and overturned Religion, and
Government in our Neighbor Kingdoms of England and Ireland, have invaded this
Kingdom, and are in a way (having so considerable a part thereof under Foot)
to reduce the whole to a Province, except the Lord in his mercy prevent it, by
joining his MAJESTY'S Subjects in the Band of Unity, which is the only means
(in our judgment) to preserve Religion, King and Kingdom; but to the grief of
our hearts we find in the place of Union the breach proving Wider, and that not
only in Church and Estate, but likewise in the remnant of our Army: Our
Resolutions therefore are, firmly and faithfully to join our selves together,
and neither for fear, threatening, allurement, nor advantage to relinquish so
good a Cause, or lay down Arms without General Consent; And what shall be
done to the least of us in prosecuting of the said Union, shall be taken as
done to all. And seeing the best undertakings are under the mercy and favor of
malice, we cannot but apprehend our selfs to be subject to that lawless
Inquisition; Therefore, and for the satisfaction of all who are satisfiable, We
do promise and swear, that we shall maintain the true Religion as it is
established in Scotland, the Covenant, League and Covenant, the Kings MAJESTY'S
Person, power, Greatness, and Authority, the Privileges of Parliament, and
Liberty of the Subject. So help us God.

This Declaration and Engagement was Signed by the above named Persons the 20.
of October 1650. And was brought over by a Person of Reputation that came out
of Scotland upon the 25. who assures that it was resolved His MAJESTY'S
Coronation should be a^ St. Johnstons the 30. following; and the Parliament at
that time to begin and sit there also.



HAGAE, Printed by SAMUEL BROUN English Bookseller, 1650.


