THE SERMON and Prophecy of JAMES HVNT: Concerning the Marriage of the Lamb,
and of the confounding of the Whore of Babylon, and to show by what means she
shall be brought to confusion.

Wherefore I James Hunt humbly beseech the Honorable House of PARLIAMENT, for
the mercies of God, that you will read this book with observation, for to see
and prove whether it be agreeable to the honor and glory of God, and the
confounding of the Devil.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1642.

THE SERMON AND Prophecy of James Hunt, concerning the marriage of the Lamb,
and of the confounding of the Whore of Babylon.
CHristian brethren and sisters, it is written in the 21. Chapter of the
Revelation, verse. 6. Christ Jesus who is the perfect God, he says plainly, I
am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, I will give to him that is
athirst, of the fountain of the water of life freely. Which water of life I
shall plainly prove signifies the spiritual Word of God in the doctrine of
the new Testament, which proceeds from the holy Unity, Father, Son, and holy
Ghost. For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word,
and the holy Ghost, and these three are one. In 1. Joh. Chap. 5. ver. 7. the
Word signifies Christ Jesus, who is the second person in unity, and I shall
plainly prove that those people that shall be reconciled to Christ by drinking
freely of the water of life, they shall be joined to the holy Unity. My first
proof is in 2. Cori^t. 13.5. Examine your selves whether you be in the faith.
Know ye not that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? How is Christ
in his people, I say, by the venue and divine power of his Word, which is
revealed in his glorious Gospel. Again in 1. Cor. 6.19. What know you not that
your body is the temple of the holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of
God: and ye are not your own, for you are all bought with a price, even with
the precious water and blood of Jesus Christ, for this is he which came by
water and blood, not by water only, but by water and blood: 1. Joh. 5.6.
Therefore I say again, we are all bought with the precious water and blood of
Jesus Christ, therefore glorify God in your bodies and in your spirits which
are Gods. Again Ephesians. 4. v. 4. There is one body, and one spirit, one Lord,
one faith, one God and Father of all: who is above all, and in you all. These
phrases of Scripture do plainly prove, that all those people which are and
shall be reconciled unto Christ, and to his glorious Gospel, they shall be
joined to the glorious unity, Father, Son, and holy Ghost. Again I can prove
that Christ and his Church is as man and wife; Christ is the Bridegroom, and
the Church they are the Bride, so they shall be in number thousands of
thousands: For a man shall leave father and mother and be joined to his wife,
and they two shall be one flesh. This is a great mystery, but I speak
concerning Christ and the Church, for we are members of his body, of his flesh,
and of his bones, Ephesians. 5. Therefore let us be glad and rejoice, and give
honor to God, for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made
her self ready; his Minister has made her self ready, Revel. 9. v. 7. And to
her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen clean and white, for
the fine linen is the righteousness of the Saints, which have their robes
washed and made white in the blood of the Lamb. Revel. 7.14. Their robes
signifies the inward man of the hearts of the people which is washed and made
white in the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ; for if we walk in the light, as
God our glorious Father is in the light, We have fellowship one with another,
and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. 1. Joh. 7.
Thus I have showed you in brief the true signification of the marriage of the
Lamb. Now I come to my Text again, Christ says, I will give to him that is
athirst of the fountain of the water of life freely, Joh. 4.13. Christ said
unto the woman which came to draw water out of Jacobs Well. He that drinks of
this water shall thirst again, but whosoever drinks of the water that I shall
give him, shall never thirst for the water that I shall give him will be in him
a well of water springing up to everlasting life. Which water of life plainly
signifies for to be the spiritual word of God. In the Gospel of Christ which
shall spring and multiply in the hearts of the faithful, that they shall be
thoroughly filled and satisfied therewith. Again Ephesians. 5.15. Christ so loved his
Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with
the washing of the water by the word, which is by the powerful preaching of
the Word. Again Hebr. 10.21. And having a high Priest over the house of God,
let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our
hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure
water. Our bodies signifies the inward man of the hearts of the people, which
is washed, justified, and glorified by the divine power of the Word of God: for
whom he calls, them he justifies; and whom he justifies, them he also
glorifieth. Romans 8.30. And the Spirit and the Bride say come: Christ and his
Ministry say come, and let him that is athirst come, and take the water of
life freely. Freely I have received, and freely I declare it unto all the
people that they may drink freely thereof, for to rain with Christ in glory for
ever, Revel. 22. Now on the other side, I will show you in brief the true
signification of the great Whore that sits upon so many waters, with whom
the Kings of the earth have committed fornication, and the inhabitants of the
earth have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication. Revel. 17. Now I
shall prove these many waters must not be taken for temporal waters, which is
to be disdained with the bodily eye, for he says plainly in the 15. verse of
the same chap. The waters which thou saw where the Whore sits, are
peoples, and multitudes, and nations and tongues. Hereby I understand and
prove, that this great Whore that sits upon so many waters, signifies the
Devil, and all his carnal Ministers, which have gathered to themselves so
many false and corruptible doctrines. And as they have corrupted their own
minds, so in like manner, they have blinded and corrupted the minds of the
people, which are as yet held under their power. For upon her forehead was her
name written, Mystery, Babylon, the great Mother of Harlots, and all
abominations of the earth, Verse. 5. Now I say again, this Babylon must not be
taken for atemporall building, for he says plainly in the last verse of the
same chap. The woman which thou saw, the great whore which thou saw, is
that great City, which reigns over the Kings of the earth, for their
Merchants were the great men of the earth, Revel. 18.23. which signifies the
carnal Ministers of the earth; for by their falsiry all Nations were deceived,
and by whom I my self once was deceived. This word sawsery, signifies so many
false and corruptible doctrines, whereby the Devil and all his carnal
Ministers have blinded, and as it were bewitched the minds of the people, which
are as yet held under their power. And a mighty Angel took up a stone like a
great Millstone, and cast it into the Sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that
great City Babylon be thrown down, Revel. 18.21. For by faith the walls of
Jericho fell down, Heb. 11.30. So by the sound of the Trumpet, which is by the
powerful preaching of the Word of God in the doctrine of the New Testament,
which is the lively and justifying faith, shall sound so powerfully against all
false doctrine and false worship, which belongs to the Devil and his
Kingdom of darkness, that the spiritual buildings of Babylon shall fall
down to the ground.

Thus I have showed you the signification of the water of life: again, I have
showed you the signification of the great Whore that sits upon so many waters,
which I have proved does signify the Devil and all his carnal Ministers,
which have gathered to themselves so many false and corruptible doctrines,
which proceeds from the wisdom of the flesh. But now I trust in God, the
waters of life, I mean the children of God, which shall have a delight to
drink freely thereof, they will fight so powerfully against the devil and all
his carnal Ministers, that their hellish power will be broken quite down; for
now I make no doubt but that saying will be brought to pass that is written in
the first Epistle to the Corinthians, the 15. chap, verse. 54. Death shall be
swallowed up into victory, death shall be swallowed up of life; O death where
is thy sting, O grave where is thy victory, so thou, where now is thy victory;
the sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law, but thanks
be unto God, who gives us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. So I
thank God, he has given me the victory through the virtue and divine power of
his Word in his glorious Gospel, for the strength of sin is the Law;
Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world; sin entered into Adam,
and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned,
Romans 5.12.

Again, By the offense of one, Judgment came upon all men to condemnation.
Moreover, the Law entered that the offense might abound, verse. 20. This word
Moreover, signifies moreover and above the fall of Adam, the Law entered that
the offense might abound, but where sin abounded, grace did much more abound
by one Jesus Christ; for he was delivered for our offenses, and was raised
again for our Justification, Romans 4.25. Therefore being justified by faith, we
have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. But the enemies and people
say, that Christ has redeemed us from the Ceremonial Law: some again say
from the Judicial Law; others say from the Leviticall Law; so they have
divided the old Testament into two or three parts: but if I ask any of them,
if there be any more then two Testaments, they will say no; then my answer to
them again is in the ninth Chapter to the Hebrews, verse. 15. For this cause
Christ is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of death, for the
redemption of the transgression that were under the first Testament. This verse
of Scripture does plainly prove of two Testaments. The first signifies the old
Law and Testament, which Christ has redeemed us from, which I have proved to
be unto death and condemnation. The second is the ministration of the blood of
the New Testament, which is the power of God to everlasting life and
justification; therefore being saved and justified freely by grace, we all have
peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Apostle exhorts saying, Let there be supplications and prayers for Kings
and for all that are in authority, 1 Timothy 2. chap. Again, he says, Let the
word of Christ dwell in you richly, teaching and admonishing one another in
Psalms and spiritual songs. Hereby I plainly prove that godly prayers
according to the true worship and honor of God, and David Psalms shall abide
in the Church of Christ for ever. But for the old Law and Testament, which
Christ has redeemed us from, and the Common Service Book, they must be laid
aside, for they do not belong to the glorious body of Christ, which I can
prove to be the glorious and triumphing Church.

Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
make you all perfect to do his will. He says, the Great Shepherd of the
sheep, wherefore I acknowledge there is but one God, and there must and shall
be but one Religion, one Shepherd, one Sheepfold, and the means which God
has ordained to gather the Sheep into one fold, is by the powerful preaching
of his Word, which is revealed in his Gospel. And we know that the Son of
God is come, and has given us understanding, that we may know him that is
true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is
the true God, and eternal life, to whom be all praise, honor, glory, power,
might, dominion and majesty, both now and evermore, world without end, Amen.

FINIS.

